A DISCOVRSE UPON THE MEANS OF WELL GOVERNING AND MAINTAINING IN GOOD PEACE, A
KINGDOM, OR OTHER PRINCIPALITY.

Divided into three parts, namely, The Counsel, the Religion, and the Policy,
which a Prince ought to hold and follow.

Against Nicholas Machiavell the Florentine.

Translated into English by Simon Patericke.

printer's or publisher's device OVIBVS RESPVBLICA CONSERVETVR



LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip. 1602.

TO THE MOST FAMOVS YOUNG GENTLEMEN, AS WELL FOR RELIGION, MODESTY, AND OTHER
VERTVES, AS ALso for kindred, Francis Hastings, and Edward Bacon, most hearty
salutations.
AFter Solon (right Worshipful young men) had seen Thespis his first edition
and action of a Tragoedie, and meeting with him before the play, demanded,
If he were not ashamed to publish such feigned fables under so noble, yet a
counterfeit personage: Thespis answered, That it was no disgrace upon a stage
(merrily and in sport) to say and do any thing. Then Solon (striking hard upon
the earth with his staff) replied thus: Yea but shortly, we that now like
and embrace this play, shall find it practiced in our contracts and common
affairs. This man of deep understanding, saw that public discipline and
reformation of manners affected and attempted once in sport and jest, would
soon quail: and corruption, at the beginning passing in play, would fall and
end in earnest. Therefore Tacitus vvorthily does extol the manners of the
Germans of his time, amongst whom, vices were not laughed at. For laughters
begun of some public shame and dishonestie, will assuredly procure him some
miserable calamity. Hereof France is unto all ages and nations a woeful view,
yet a profitable instruction at this day. For when the clear light of the
Gospel began first to spring and appear, Satan (to occupy and busy men's
minds with toyish plays and trifles, that they might give no attendance unto
true wisdom) devised this policy, to raise up jeasters and fools in
Courts, which creeping in, by quipping and pretty conceits, first in words,
and after by books, uttering their pleasant ieasts in the Courts and banquets
of kings and princes, labored to root up all the true principles of Religion
and Policy. And some there were whom the resemblance of nature, or vanity
of wit had so deceived, that they derided the everlasting verity of the true
God, as if it were but a fable. Rabelaysus amongst the French, and Agrippa
amongst the Germans, were the standerd bearers of that train: which with
their skoffing taunts, inveighed not only against the Gospel, but all good
arts whatsoever. Those mockers did not as yet openly undermine the ground work
of humane society, but only they derided it: But such Cyclopian laughters, in
the end prooved to be only signs and tokens of future evils. For by little
and little, that which was taken in the beginning for iestes, turned to
earnest, and words into deeds. In the neck of these came new Poets, very
eloquent for their own profit, which incensed unto lust and lightness, such
minds as were already inclined to wantonness, by quickening their appetites
with the delectable sause of unchaste hearing; and pricking them forward with
the sharp spurs of pleasure. Who could then bridle vices and iniquities,
which are fed with much wealth, and no less liberty? seeing them not only
in play, mirth, and laughter entertained; but also earnestly accepted and
commended, as being very excellent. Yet some troad the steps of honesty, which
now lay a dying, and practiced the old manners and fashions, which were almost
forgotten. For although the secret faults of the Court were evil spoken of,
yet shame stood in open view; heinous and infamous crimes kept secret corners;
princes were of some credit and faith; laws were in reasonable good use;
magistrates had their due authority and reverence; all things only for
ostentation and outward show, but none would then have feared an utter
destruction: For than Satan being a disguised person amongst the French, in
the likeness of a merry ieaster, acted a Comaedie, but shortly ensued a woeful
Tragoedie. When our country men's minds were sick, and corrupted with these
pestilent diseases, and that discipline waxed stale; then came forth the books
of Machiavell, a most pernicious writer, which began not in secret and
stealing manner (as did those former vices) but by open means, and as it were
a continual assault, utterly destroyed, not this or that virtue, but even all
virtues at once: Insomuch as it took Faith from the princes; authority and
majesty, from laws; liberty from the people; and peace and concord from all
persons, which are the only remedies for present malladies. For what shall I
speak of Religion, whereof the Machiavellians had none, as already plainly
appears; yet they greatly labored also, to deprive us of the same. And
although they have wrongfully bannished us our native country, yet fight we
still for the Churches defense. Moreover Satan uses strangers of France, as
his fittest instruments, to infect us still with this deadly poison sent out of
Italy, who have so highly promoted their Machivellian books, that he is of
no reputation in the Court of France, which has not Machiavels vvritings at
the fingers ends, and that both in the Italian and French tongues, and can
apply his precepts to all purposes, as the Oracles of Apollo. Truly it is a
wonderful thing to consider how fast that evil weed has grown within these
few years, seeing there is almost none that striveth to excel in virtue or
knowledge: as though the only way to obtain honor and riches were by this
deceivers direction. But now to turn mine eyes from beholding so many miseries
of poor afflicted France, as often as I see or remember our neighbor
countries (which thing I do daily) so often do I bewail our miseries: Yet
am I right joyful for your felicity; chiefly because God of his great
bounty, has given you a most renowned Queen, as well in deed, as title, even
in the midst of so many troubles: For she coming to the crown, even when
England was tossed with tempestuous storms, so dispersed those clouds, with
the brightness of her counsel and countenance, that no civil dissension, nor
external invasion, has disturbed your peace and tranquillity, these many
years, especially so many vvarres sounding on every side: For she by
maintaining wholesome unity amongst all degrees, has hitherto preserved the
State of her realm, not only safe but flourishing* not by Machiavelian arts,
as Guile, Perfidie, and other Villainies practicing: but by true virtues, as
Clemency, Justice, Faith. Therefore goes she her progress through her realm
of England, entertained in all places with happy applause, rejoicing, and
prosperity of all her subjects, she being a princess, of both Nobles and
commons, by dew desert most entirely beloved: Whereas we against our wills,
behold our country svvimming in blood, and disfigured by subversion, which is
a joyful object to the eyes of strangers, yea and those labor most to work
her destruction, who should be most careful to rescue and deliver poor
France, out of her long calamities: but the Lord will at length behold our
miseries. But O how happy are ye, both because you have so gracious a Queen,
and also for that the infectious Machiavelian doctrine, has not breathed nor
penetrated the intrails of most happy England. But that it might not so do, I
have done my endeavor, to provide an Antidote and present remedy, to expel
the force of so deadly poison, if at any time it chance to infect you. For
when I thought it meet and right (especially in such a confused disorder of
matters and times) to impart as well to our Frenchmen, as to other nations
these discourses, first written by a man of most singular learning and
wisdom, I willingly undertook this labor, which I have performed to the
uttermost of my power, and now I wholy refer my self and my travail, to
serve for the benefit of public utilitie: Yet I properly dedicated and
inscribed it in your names; both because although I never savv England, yet it
might serve as a pledge, to testify my thankful mind toward your
countrymen, whose singular courtesy and kindness shevved to my brethren,
when they were banished for the profession of the Gospel, has generally
bound me to all Englishmen, but privately to you: as also that by way of
exhortation, I might inflame you (being most virtuous Gentlemen) to study and
follovv the contents of this book, but especially the arts and virtues
therein published, and almost in every word thereof so highly commended; which
indeed is no other thing, than you do already. For the beholding of your
ancestors monuments of their virtues (which are both many and famous) does
move you thereunto, more than the directions drawn from all ages and examples
here delivered. Therefore my dear friend Francis, amongst so many notable
examples of your realm, tread the steps of your uncle, the right honorable
earl of Huntington, a man most admirable and ilustrious, as well for
godliness and other noble virtues, as for noble parentage and honor, rhat you
mayshew your self vvorthie of your place and kindred. And you good Edward,
imitate the wisdom, sanctimonie, and integrity of your Father, the right
Honorable Lord Nicholas Bacon, keeper of broad Seal of England, a man right
renowned; that you may lively express the image of your Fathers virtues, in
the excellent tovvardnesse, which you naturally have from your most virtuous
Father: If you both, do daily ruminate and remember the familiar and best known
examples of your ancestors, you cannot have more forcible persuasions to moove
you to that which is good and honest: But I will continually pray God to
prosper that good hope, which your parents and kinsfolks have of you, your
good studies also, and that he will plentifully bless and beautify you, with
all the gifts of his spirit, that you may become profitable members of the
Church, your country, and commonweal, and may live long and happy days.

Kalends Augusti. Anno 1577.
Greek, Latin, and French Authors, out of which, are extracted the Hystories
and other things alleged in these Discourses against Machiavell.
Ammianus Marcellinus. Annals of France. Aristotle. The Bible. Capitolinus.
Cicero. Comines. Dion. Dionysius Halicarnasseus. Du Bellay. Aeschylus.
Eurypides. Florus. Froissart. Herodianus. Homerus. Horatius. Josephus.
Iuvenall. Ius Civil and Canonicum. Lampridius. Molineus. Monstrelet.
Munsterus. Papon. Paulus Aemylius. Plinius Junior. Platina. Plutarchus.
Pomponius Laetus. Sabellicus. Salustius. Sleidanus. Sophocles. Spartianus.
Suetonius. Tacitus. Titus Livius. Thucydides. Trebellius Pollio. Virgil.
Vopiscus. Xenephon.
A Preface to the first Part, entreating what Counsel a Prince should use.
ARistotle and other Philosophers teach us, and experience confirms

In the Politic Art then (whereof Plato, Aristotle, and other Philosophers
have written books) men may well use both these ways. For from the effects
and particulars of a civil government, men may come to the knowledge of
Maxims and rules: and by the contrary, by the rules and Maxims, men may have
the knowledge of effects. So that when we see the effects of a politic
government, which is of no value, and which is pernicious and evil, men are
hereby brought to the knowledge of the Maxims and rules which are of the same
sort: and by the good and profitable effects, men are also led to the notice of
good rules and Maxims. And on the other side, good or evil rules and Maxims
do lead to the knowledge of like effects. Yet although the Maxims and general
rules the most part diverse and contrary: insomuch, that although two affairs
be like, yet must

We must not then think, that all sorts of people are fit to deal with
affairs of public The scope of the Author.
estate; nor that every one which speaks and writes thereof, can say that
which belongs thereunto. But it may be, some will enqu^re if I dare presume
so much of my self, as to take upon me effectually to handle this matter.
Hereunto I answer, that nothing less and that it is not properly my purpose
whereunto I tend, or for which cause I enterprise this Work: But my intent and
purpose is only to show, That Nicholas Machiavell, not long ago a Secretary
of the Florentine commonweal (which is now a Duchy) understood nothing or
little in this Politic science whereof we speak: and that he has taken
Maxims and rules altogether wicked, and has builded upon them, not a
Politic, but a Tyrannical science. Behold here then the end and scope which
I have proposed unto my self, Machiavell; and not exactly to handle the
Politic science; although I hope to touch some good points thereof in some
places, when occasion shall offer it self. Unto my aforesaid purpose I hope to
come (by the help of God) with so prosperous a good wind and full sails, as
all they which read my writings, shall give their judgment, and acknowledge,
that Machiavell was altogether ignorant in that science, and that his scope and
intent in his writings, is nothing else, but to frame a very true and perfect
tyranny. Machiavell also never had parts requisite to know that science. For,
as for expertence in managing of affairs, he could have none; since during his
time he saw nothing but the brabblings and contentions of certain Potentates
of Italy, and certain practices and policies of some citizens of Florence.
Neither had he any or very little Machiavell also wanted, as is plainly seen
by his absurd and foolish reasons, wherewith for the most part he confirms his
propositions and Maxims which he sets down: only he has a certain subtlety
(such as it is) Machiavell; whose books rightly may be called, The French
Courtiers Alcoran, they have them in so great estimation; imitating and
observing his principles and Maxims, no more nor less than the Turks do the
Alcoran of their great Prophet Mahomet. But yet I beseech them not to be
offended, that I speak in this manner of a man, whom I will plainly show to
be full of all wickedness, impiety, and ignorance, and to suspend their
judgment, whether I say true

But to open and make easy the intelligence of that should here be handled,
we must Of Machiavell and his writings.
first search out, what that Machiavell was, and his writings. Machiavell then
was in his time the Secretary or common Notarie of the Commonweal of
Florence, during the kingdom of Charles the eight, and Lewis the twelfth,
kings of France; Alexander the sixth, and Julius the eleventh, Popes of Rome;
and of Henry the seventh, and Henry the eight, kings of England: in which time
he writ his books in the Italian language, Francis the first, king of
France, as may be gathered by his own writings. Of his life and death I can
say nothing, neither did I, or vouchsafed I once to enquire thereof: because
his memory deserved better to be buried in perpetual oblivion, than to be
renewed amongst men. Yet I may well say, that if his life were like his
doctrine (as is to be presumed) there was never man in the world more
contaminated and defiled with vices and wickedness, than he was. By the
Praefaci he made unto his book entitled De Principe, Of the Prince, it
seems he was banished and chased from Florence: For he there complains unto
his Magnificall Lawrence de Medicis (unto whom he dedicated his Work) of that
he endured injuriously and uniustly, as he said. And in certain other places
he recites, That one Lawrence de Medicis, to teach him the reasons and means
to invade and obtain a principality: which book for the most part contains
nothing but tyrannical precepts, as shall appear in the prosecution and
progress of this Work. But I know not if they de Medicis have made their
profit and taken use of Machiavels precepts, contained in his said book: yet
this appears plainly, that they (since that time) occupied the principality
of Florence, and changed that Aristocraticall free estate of that city, into
a Duchy, or rather into a manifest tyranny, as will easily appear unto
them, Machiavell has also written three books, of discoursing upon the first
Decade of Titus Livius, with (ilustrating the other book of Principality) is
instead of a Commentary thereunto. Through all which discourses he disperseth
here and there a few words out of Titus Livius, neither rehearsing the whole
deed, nor history of the matter, for which he fisheth these words, and
applies them preposterously, after his own fantasy, for the most part
forcing them to serve Machiavels discourses, I have extracted and gathered,
that which is properly his own, and have reduced and brought it to certain
Maxims, which I have distinguished into three parts, as may be seen
hereafter. And I have been as it were constrained so to do, that I might
revocate and gather every matter to his certain head and place, Machiavell
has not handled every matter in one same place, but a little here, and a
little there, enterlacing and mixing some good things amongst them, doing
therein as poysoners do, which never cast lumpes of porson upon an heap, least
it be perceived, but do most subtillie incorporate it as they can, with some
other delicate and dainty morsells: For if I had followed the order that he
houlds in his books, I must needs have handled one same point many times, yea
confusedly and not wholly: I have then drawn the greatest part of his doctrine
and of his documents, into certain propositions and Maxims, and withal added
the reasons, wbereby he muntaineth them: I have also set down the places of
his books, to lead them thereunto, which desire to try what fidelity I have
used, either in not attributing unto him any thing Titus Livius, or some other
authors, but besides that they are not his, they are not by him handled fully,
nor as they should. For as I have abovesaid, he only has dispersed
Machiavell, we have no cause to attribute honor unto him, nor to thank him,
for that which is not his, and which we possess and retain from a better
shop than his. And as for his precepts concerning the military art, wherewith
he deals in his books, which seem to be new, and of his own invention, I
will say nothing but that men do not now practice them, neither are they
thought worthy of observation, by them which are well seen in that art, as
we may see in that which he maintains, That a prince ought not to have in
his service any strange soldiors, nor to have any fortresses against
Machiavell, that he dare speak and write of the affairs of war, and
prescribe precepts and rules unto them which are of that profession, seeing he
had nothing but by hearsay, and was himself but a simple Secrethrie or
Towne-clarke, which is a trade as far different from the profession of war,
as an harquebush differs from a pen and inckhorne. Herein it falls out to
Machiavell, as it did once to the philosopher Phormio, who one day reading in
the Peripateti^e school of Greece, and seeing arrive and Ci^ero de Orator.
Plutarch in Anniball.
enter thither Anniball of Carthage (who was brought thither by some of his
friends, to hear the eloquence of the philosopher) he began to speak and
dispute (with much babbling) of the laws of war and the duty of a good
captain, before this most famous captain, which had forgotten more, than ever
that proud philosopher knew or had learned. When he had thus ended his lecture
and goodly disputation, as Anniball went from the auditorie, one of his
friends which brought him thither, demanded what he thought of the
philosophers eloquence and gallant speech? He said; Truly I have seen in my
life many old dottards, but I never saw so great an one as this Phormio. So I
do not doubt but such as have knowledge in the military art, will give the
like judgment of Machiavell, Machiavell has handled of the military art, nor
such precepts as concern the leading of an army.

By this which we have before spoken, That Machiavell was, during the reign
of Charles the eight, and Lewis the twelfth, kings of France, and attained the
beginning of At what time, and wherefore Machiavell was received into France.
the reign of Francis the first: It follows that there has not been past
fifty or threescore years since his writings came to light; whereupon some
may mervaile, why he was not spoken of at all in France, during the reign of
king Henry the second, and that after Machiavell, did but begin to be known
on this side the mountains, and his writings into some reputation. The answer
heereunto, is not very obscure to such as know how the affairs of France have
been governed, since the decease of king Henry the second of happy memory.
For during his reign, and before the kingdom was governed after the mere
French manner, that is to say, following the traces and documents of our French
ancestors. But since, it has governed by the rules of Machiavell the
Florentine, as shall be seen hereafter. Insomuch that since that time,
until this present, the name of Machiavell has been celebrated and esteemed,
as of the wisest person of the world, and most cunning in the affairs of
Estate, and his books held dearest and most precious, by our Italian and
Italionized courtiers, as if they were the books of Sibilla, Mahumets Alcaron,
as we have said above.

And we need not be abashed if they of Machiavells nation (which hold the
principal estates in the government of France) have forsaken the ancient
manner of our French ancestors government, to introduct and bring France in
use, with a new form of managing and ruling their country, taught by
Machiavell. For on the one side every man esteems and priseth always the
manners, fashions, customs, and other things of his own country more than
them of an others. On the other side, Machiavell their great doctor, Cap. 3. De
Princ. Discourse lib. 2. cap. 30. lib. 3. cap. 43. Machiavells slanders against
the kings and the people of France.
describes so well France and the government thereof in his time, blaming and
reprehending Machiavell vaunteth, that being once at Nantes, and talking with
the Cardinal of Amboise (which was a very wise man) in the time of king Lewis
the twelfth, of public and State affairs, he plainly told him, that the
Frenchmen had no knowledge in affairs of Estate. And in many places speaking
of French causes, he reprehendeth the government of our abovenamed kings,
Charles the eight, and Lewis the twelfth; yea he has been so impudent,
Lewis, and rebuking him for giving succors unto Pope Alexander the sixth, that
he gives him the plain lie, saying he belyes himself, having passed Italy
at the Venetians request, and yet succored the Pope against his intention: And
in other places he calls our kings, Tributaries of the Suisses, and of the
English men. And often when he speaks of the Frenchmen, he calls them
Barbarous, and says, they are full of covetousness and disloyalty. So also
he taxes the Almaignes of the same vices. Now I beseech you, is it not good
reason, to make so great account of Machiavell in France? who so does defame
and reproove the honor of our good kings, and of all our whole nation, calling
them Ignorant of the affairs of Estate, Barbarous, Covetous, Disloyal: But
all this might be borne withal, and passed away in silence, if there were not
another Machiavell by his doctrine and documents, has changed the good and
ancient government of France, into a kind of Florentine government, whereupon
we see with our eyes, the total ruin of all France: It infallibly follows
(if God by his grace do not remedy it soon) that now it should be time, if
ever, to lay hand to the work, to remit and bring France again, unto the
government of our ancestors.

Hereupon I humbly pray the Princes and great lords of France, to consider what
is their duties in this case. Seems it (most Ilustrious Lords) seeing at this
time poor France (which is your country and mother) so desolate and torn in
sunder by strangers, that you ought to suffer it to be lost and ruinated? Ought
you to permit them to sow Atheism and Impiety in your country, and to set
up schools thereof? Seeing Machiavell, and his government?

Here if any man will inquire, how it appears, that France is at this day*
governed by the doctrine of Machiavell, the resolution hereof is easy and
clear. For the effects which France governed by the doctrine of Machiavell.
we see with our eyes, and the provisions and executions of the affairs, which
are put in practice, may easily bring us to the causes and Maxims, as we have
abovesaid: which is one way to know things, by ascending from effects and
consequences, to the knowledge of Machiavell, which we shall handle hereafter,
and descend from thence into the particularities of the French government, he
shall see that the precepts and Maxims of Machiavell, are for the most part,
at this day practiced and put in effect and execution, from point to point:
Insomuch that by both the two ways, from the Maxims to the effects, and from
the effects to the Maxims, men may clearly know, that France is at this day
governed by the doctrine of Machiavell. For are they not Machiavelists,
Italians or Italianized, which do handle Machiavels books were as familiar and

And as for the diversity of ancient government (which was ruled in following
the traces, fashions, and customs of our ancestors) from the modern and
present government, which is founded upon the doctrine of Machiavell, it is
easily and apparently seen by the fruits and effects which does proceed
therefrom. For by the ancient French government, the kingdom was maintained
and governed in peace and tranquillity under the observation of ancient laws,
without any domesticke or civil war, flourishing and enioyning a free
traffic: and subjects were maintained in the possessing and enjoying of their
goods, estates, franchises, and liberties. But now by the Machiavels precepts.

Yet I mean not to authorize my sayings by the allegation of examples of small
potentates From whence these discourses are taken.
and tyrannizers borne in one night like toad-stooles (as Machiavell does) but
by the allegations of gallant and notable examples of our kings of France,
confirmed and fortified, yea by other examples of good and ancient emperors,
princes, and Roman captains, and of the Senate of Rome. For I have chosen
those two Monarchies, the Roman and the French, as the fairest and most
excellent, from whence to draw true and good examples which are worthy for a
prince to imitate, borrowing but few from other precedent Monarchies, as Medes,
Assyrians, and Grecians, as less known Froissart, Monstrelet, de Comines, du
Bellay: and of Romans, Salustius, Tacitus, Suetonius, Dion, Herodian,
Lamptidius, Capitolinus, Josephus, and certain, which shall be alleged
hereafter in their places. I also have drawn out some part of my allegations
out of our Annals of France, out of Paulus Aemylius, Thucidides, Xenophon, and
many other authors, all which are both authenticke and approoved, and that
also, by prescript of ancient time and long continuance have gained that
praise and reputation, to be good witnesses, and that without reproach or
diffamation. And for as much as Machiavell dare say, That the Frenchmen have no
understanding or knowledge in matters or causes of Estate, I hope it shall
appear clean contrary, not only by the good government which I shall show
to have been kept and observed by our ancestors in public causes, but also
by the only places and examples which I shall bring forth and allege out of
M. Philip de Comines, Knight and Chamberlain of king Lewis the eleventh: who
lived even in Machiavels time, who also understood better how the affairs of a
kingdom or Commonwealth should be ruled or governed, than ever Machiavell knew
how to guide and rule a simple town. Yet I cannot but confess, that for the
governing and guiding of a tyrannous Estate, Machiavell has more cunning, than
any other of whom I have read; he so well knew all the points and precepts
which were meet and convenient for the establishing of it, as hereafter shall
be seen in the handling of his Maxims.

Moreover, if in certain places where the matter does require it, I speak a
little Answers to the slanders of Machiavell.
too hardly of Machiavels Italian nation, I hope, that the good men of that
country Machiavell gives me just occasion, having villanously and
opprobriously slaundered in many sorts our French nation, but also for that I
intend not any thing to blame or reproove the good Italian people. And I will
not deny, but that amongst the Italian and Florentine nation, there are
diverse virtuous people, which are nothing less than mere Machiavelists, and
that detest and abhor his wicked doctrine: For there is not so bad a ground,
which amongst diverse and sundry evil plants, brings not out some good. Yet
will I give a particular praise and commendation unto such Italians as be
virtuous, which better appertains unto them, than unto the virtuous and
goodly men of other nations: namely, that as precious stones and some other
drougs and spices are esteemed to be most singular, Machiavell, even that he
says, That there is no nation or people in Christendom, that is more vicious
and corrupted than the Italian nation; and that there is no province nor
kingdom, where there is less care of God and of all Religion, than in Italy.
Although as to this last point of Religion, Machiavell (which in all his books
shows himself a very Atheist, and a contemner of all piety and godliness)
meant not to tax nor blame them of his nation, of impiety nor of Atheism,
but only

But from whence comes this impudency unto Machiavell, to tax and blame the
Frenchmen of disloyalty and perfidie, seeing, that he himself also teaches,
That a Prince ought not to keep and hold his faith, but for his profit and
commodity; and that the observation of faith is pernicious and hurtful. I
will not deny, but that at Machiavels doctrine: but I deny, that in the time
of Machiavell, (during the reigns and government of Charles the eight, Lewis
the twelfth, and Francis the first, or before or long time after) the French
nation was contaminated with that vice: as yet there are many good and natural
Frenchmen (thanks be to God) which detest all perfidie and disloyalty, and
are in no way affected to those exploits, which the Italians and Italianized
do in France; but rather do sobbe and sigh in their hearts, for to see the
French nation to be diffamed with that infamous and abominable vice, detested
and hated amongst all countries and nations. And I hope also, that the good and
loyal Frenchmen will endeavor themselves to recover Machiavell so diffame and
disgrace the French nation for covetousness? I do much merveile at it: For
until this present time, the Frenchmen have always had this reputation, to
be Liberal, Courteous, and ready to do any pleasure even unto strangers,
and such as are unknown unto them. And would to God, that the French nation
had never been of that nature and condition, to do well unto strangers,
without first knowing and trying their behaviors and manner of life: we should
not then see France to be governed and ruled by strangers, as it is: We should
not feel the calamities and troubles of civil wars and dissentions, which
they do enterprise there, to maintain their Machiavels time, France was not
fallen into that extreme evil and great calamity, as it is now at this
present; yet since that time have we sufficiently felt the covetousness of
the Italians, in the wars which our kings of France have made in Italy and
Piedmont. For the great store of treasure and money that must needs have been
sent beyond the Alps, for to satisfy the insatiable and greedy lusts of the
Italians, was the cause oftentimes of increasing and raising imposts and
tallages upon the people, which by little and little did rise so high, that
they exceeded Machiavell and the other Italians does tax the Frenchmen of
Covetousness and Avarice. Unless a man will say, that Machiavell blaming us
of Passive Covetousness, which we do suffer, shows us breefely, that we are
beasts, which will suffer our selves so to be bereaved and weakened of our
wool and our blood (with patience) by strangers. For it may well one day come
to pass, that they may be made to disgorge their booties and rapines, and
that their great heaps of money, gotten by extortions in France, may turn
them unto damage: Sophocles says:

Men must not seek, nor love, of all things to get gain,
For he that draws gain out of that which is naught,
Before he profit gets, shall sooner loss sustain:
For evil gotten goods are often dearly bought.
And whereas Machiavell taxes and charge the Almaignes with Covetousness in
his Faith, contract, and promise, although but in small things and of no great
Machiavell dare so impudentlie lie upon the Almaignes, for he has brought
forth more strange things than this slander, as we shall show hereafter, both
to the good of all others that shall read his writings, and to the manifest
and plain laying open of him in his true and perfect colors: For the
effecting whereof, let us then now enter into the matter.



THE FIRST PART, ENTREAting what Counsel a Prince should use.
1. Maxim.
A Princes good Council ought to proceed from his own wisdom: otherwise, he
cannot be well counseled.
IT is a Maxim and general rule (says Machiavell) that good counsel ought
to proceed from the vvisdome of the

AT the first show this Maxim seems to have some appearance of truth: but
when it shall be well examined, a man shall Of a wise Prince of himself.
more profitable thing to a people and Commonweal, than to have a Prince wise
of himself: therefore, said Plato, That men may call that an happy
Commonweal, when either the Prince that raineth there, can play the
Philosopher, or else when a Philosopher comes to reign there: that is to say,
in one word, when the Prince is of himself wise and prudent. Marcus Antonius,
who in truth was a good and a wise Prince. But to verify that which I say, it
is not needful to allege many reasons: for it is evident enough, That the
felicity of a public estate, lies wholly in well commanding, and well
obeying; whereupon resulteth and arises an harmony and concordance so
melodious and excellent, that as well he that commands, as he that obeieth,
do both receive contentment, pleasure, and utilitie. But to obey well,
depends wholly of well commanding, and it cannot be without it. So, well
commanding depends of the prudence Seuerus being Spartianus in Seuero.
in wars, and his son Bassianus with him, and being carried in a Litter
(because he had the Gout) as he saw his soldiors discontented and mutinous, and
would needs have Bassianus his son, their Cheefetaine; he caused all the
Army, but especially his Colonels, Captains, and Corporals to be called, and
to assemble in one place: and after having made unto them some Remonstrance and
Oration, he caused straight to be executed to death all the heads of that
mutiny. After, he spoke thus to all the Army, Now know ye, that it is the
head and not the feet which commands you. And indeed and truth, the good
commanding proceeds from the prudence and wisdom of him that commands: which
remains and has his being not in the Solomon was a King most wise, and a
great Philosopher: for he asked wisdom of God, and he gave it him in such
abundance, that besides that he was 1. Kings. 4. 10. 1. Chron 9.
ignorant of nothing which a Prince should know, well to govern his subjects;
yet knew he the natures of Plants and living creatures, and was so cunning in
all kind of Philosophy, that his knowledge was admired through the world. This
his prudence and wisdom, made him so respected of all the great Kings, his
neighbors,

Charles the wise, king of France, coming to the Crown, found the kingdom
Frossard, lib. 1. cap. 132.
in great confusion and calamity: For all Guienne, part of Normandy, and
Picardie, Edward of England (the third of that name) his adversary, who was
one of the most happy and most valiant princes that ever was in England; and
who certain years before had obtained two great victories in France, the one,
at the journey of Crecy, against K. Philip de Valoys, where France lost eleven
Princes, twelve hundred Gentlemen, Knights, and thirty thousand other people
of war; the other victory was at the journey of Poitiers, which also the
said K. Edward gained, by the conduction of the Prince of Wales his son, and
lieutenant General, against John King of France, who was there taken
prisoner, with a son of his called Philip, after Duke of Bourgogne, and many
other Princes and great Lords: all which were conducted into England: there was
made Charles le Sage, was so wise and prudent in the conduction and government
of the affairs of the realm, as well in the time that he was Dolphin and
Regent of France (his Father being prisoner) as after when he was king, that by
little and little he laid to sleep all civil stirs and discords: after he
did so much, that he recovered upon the Englishmen almost all which they
occupied: and although he was not so brave a warrior as his father king John,
nor as his Philip, yet was he wiser and better advised in his deliberations,
not hazarding his affairs as they did (fearing to be reputed cowards) nor did
any thing rashly, without due consideration. He took not arms in hand, but he
knew well how and when to employ them to his good. Insomuch, that K. Edward of
England seeing the wisdom of that king made his Arms rebound and become dull,
and his victories and conquests to be lost and annihilated: Truly (said he) I
never knew king that less uses Arms, yet troubles me so much; he is all the
day enditing letters, and hurts me more with his missives, than ever did his
Father or Grandfather with their great forces and Arms. Behold the witness
which king Edward gave of the wisdom of his enemy king Charles: which was yet
of so great efficacy, that he Solomon and Charles, shall suffice: which two
for their great wisdom, have acquired the name of Wife: they both were rich in
great treasures, both of them maintained their subjects in peace, both left
their kingdoms opulent and abundant, and placed the estates of their
Commonwealths in great felicity.

It is a thing then plain and confessed, That it is an exceeding great good to
a people, Prudence is more requisite in a Princes Counsel, than in himself.
when they have a Prince that is wise of himself: but thereupon to infer and
say (as Machiavell does) That the government of Prince ought to depend upon his
own proper wisdom, and that he cannot be well counseled but by himself; is
evil concluded, and such a conclusion is false, and of pernicious consequence.
For a Prince, how prudent soever he be, ought not so much to esteem of his
own wisdom, as to despise the counsel of other wise men. Solomon despised
them not, and Charles the wise always conferred of his affairs with the wise
men of his Counsel. And so far is it off, that the Prince ought to despise
another Counsel, that even he ought to conform his opinion to that of the men
of his Counsel, which are wise, and ought not stubbornely to resist their
advise, but to follow it, and hold his own for suspected: And therefore that
wise and cunning Emperor Marcus Antonius, the Philosopher, being in his privy
Counsel house (where was that great Lawyer Scaevola, Maetianus, Volusianus,
and many other great persons, excellent in knowledge, and honesty) after
having well debated with them the matters they handled, when sometimes he took
in hand to sustain opinions contrary to theirs. Well (said he) masters, The
thing then must be done according to your advise: For it is much more Unto this
opinion of the Emperor Antonius agrees also the common Proverb, That many
eyes see clearer than one eye alone. Experience also teaches us, That things
determined and resolved by many brains, are always wiser, safer, and better
ordered, than the resolutions of one alone. And we see also, that the ancient
Dionis. Halic. lib. 2.
Romans, and all Commonweales, well governed, as well in times past, as at
this day, have always followed and observed that which by plurality of wise
men's voices was concluded and determined. And truly, so much the wiser a Prince
is, so much the more will he suspect his own opinion. For the same wisdom
which is in him, Machiavell, That he ought to govern himself by his own
wisdom and Counsel, and that he cannot be better counseled than by himself;
you shall straight find inconveniences: For then shall you see, that he will
believe neither counsel nor advise, but that comes out of his own head; and
he will say to them that will give him any, That he understands Machiavell,
which wills, That a Prince should govern himself by his own wisdom; and
that maintains, That a prince cannot be well counseled, but by his own
wisdom. The consequence then of this Maxim, is not small, seeing the
public state of a country may stagger and be overthrown thereby. Better
then it is, that contrary, the Prince hold this resolution, To govern himself
by good counsel, and believe it, and have in suspicion his own wisdom. For
if the Prince be wise, and his opinion found to be founded upon Reason, they
of his Counsel will having this resolution to govern himself by Counsel,
his affairs will carry themselves

And therefore have the Elders held this Maxim (clean contrary to that of
Machiavel) That it is more expedient to the Commonweal, that the Prince be
wicked and his Counsel good, than that the Prince be good, and his Counselors
wicked. But for because the Hystoriographer Lampridius has touched that point
very clearly and breefely, I will here recite and translate his own words: he
says then, in the life of the Emperor Alexander Severus, addressing his
speech unto the Emperor Constantine the Great, in this manner. Thou
accustomest (Constantine the Great) to demand, What was the cause that
Alexander Severus, borne in Syria, has been so excellent a Prince, seeing that
even from the very Roman nation, and from Alexander was a good Prince by
fear, for that Heliogabalus his predecessor (which was a most wicked Prince)
was massacred and slain. And to touch the very truth, may it please thy piety
to remember that which thou have read in the Historiographer Marius Maximus,
That the estate of the Commonwealth is better and more assured, wherein the
Prince is wicked, than that wherein the Princes Counselors are wicked. For one
wicked man may be well corrected by many good men; but many wicked Alexander
had Counselors, which were venerable and holy persons, not malicious, not
thieves, not partial, not cautelous, not consenting to evil, not enemies to
good men, not voluptuous, not cruel, not deceivers of their Prince, not
mockers nor abusers of him as a fool: but contrary, persons honorable,
continent, religious, loving their Prince, which would not mock him, nor be
mocked of him, which in their estate were no sellers, liars, dissemblers, and
which defrauded not their prince of his honor, but loved him. They entertained
not Eunuchs and flatterers, which serving for newes-carriers, oftentimes report
otherwise than is said unto them: and which hold their master shut up,
providing above all things, that he shall know nothing of his own affairs. I
know (Constantine Emperor) that he brings himself into great danger, which
talks to a Prince, that is a servant and a slave unto such people: but thou
which have experience of the great mischeefs that such pestilent flatterers
bring, and how they deceive Princes, thou know how to debase and humble
them, namely to force them only to deal with the affairs of the house, and
not of the Commonweal. Above all, this is most memorable in Alexander, that
he would never receive any alone into his chamber, but the great master of his
household, and the great Lawyer Vlpian: Euxinus, who often had sold him as a
senseless fool. There is more yet, that Alexander spared not his own parents
and friends when they deserved punishment, or at the least put them from him
when they offended, saying, That he loved better the Commonwealth, than his
parents and friends. And that thou may know what people he had of his privy
Counsel, these were they, Fabius Sabinus, the son of Sabinus, an excellent
man, a second Cato in his time; Domitius Vlpianus, a learned man and a Lawyer;
Elius Gordianus, father of that Gordianus, which was after Emperor, a man very
excellent; Julius Paulus, a great person in the Law; Claudius Venatus, a great
and worthy Orator; Pomponius, a very Alfenus, Africanus, Florentinus,
Martianus, Callistratus, Hermogenianus, Venuleius, Trifonius, Melianus, Celsus,
Proculus, Modestinus, all excellent Doctors of Law, and disciples of that great
Lawyer Papinian: all which were great familiers, and very private with
Alexander. More also he had of his privy Counsel, Catilius Severus, his
Parent, as learned as any; Aelius Severianus, a person above all others, of
greatest sanctity; Quintilius Marcellus, of whom there is not found in
history a better man. Alexander then having all those and many other like of
his privy Counsel, all which agreed to do well, how could he then either do
or think evil? These Counselors at the beginning were put from him out of
credit, by evil Counselors which abused Alexander, but afterward having
wisely Alexander a good Prince: as contrary, wicked Counselors have made many
Roman Emperors as wicked as they. Behold then what Lampridius says touching
this question, Whether it is better to have a wicked Prince, which has good
Counselors, or a good Prince which has evil Counselors: and he resolves
that the Elders have held, That it is much better to have a wicked Prince,
which has good Counselors: which is contrary unto the new opinion of
Machiavell, who makes no account of a Princes good Counselors, if so be it the
Prince himself be good and prudent: who also says, That the affairs of a
Prince cannot be well conducted, unless he guide them Maxim is false by the
alleged reasons of Lampridius, namely, That many good Counselors may well
supply the want of wisdom that is in a Prince, and moderat his unbrideled
and undiscreet appetites; but a good Prince cannot correct so many evil
Counselors, which will feed their Prince with smoke and lies, and will hide
from him such things as he ought to know for the Commonweal.

This may yet be better showed by the examples of many Princes, which have been
Princes of little wisdom have been well governed by good Couns^ll. Capitol.
in Go^d. Iun.
of small wisdom and virtue, and yet notwithstanding have well ruled the
Commonwealth by the good and wise Counsel of prudent and loyal Counselors,
wherewith they were served: as did the Emperor Gordian the young, who was
created Emperor Gordian espoused the daughter of a wise man, called Misitheus,
whom he made the high Steward of his household, and governed himself by his
Counsel, in all his affairs, so that the Roman Empire was well ruled so long
as Misitheus lived.

Likewise Ioas king of Israel, came to the Crown a young child, of the age
only 2. Kings. 11. and 12. and 2. Chro. 23.
Ioiada his uncle, a very wise man: Insomuch, that whilst that good Counselor
lived, the kingdom was well and rightly administered.

Charles the sixth king of France, was but thirteen years old when he came to
the Crown, and was of small understanding: yet during his minority, the
kingdom was well and wisely governed by his three uncles, the Dukes of Anjou,
of Berry, and Bourgoigne. There was nothing in their government to be spoken
against, but only that they were a little drawing unto themselves the kings
treasure, all other affairs were administered well and prudently. Yet true it
is, that after the kings majoritie, they yet entered into the government of the
kingdom (because of a frenzy

The kings of France, Clotharie the fourth of that name, and Chilperic the
second, Annals of France upon the year 716, and the three following.
were both Princes of small understanding, and indeed had no wisdom to conduct
the affairs of the realm: but they had for a Counselor and Conductor of
their affairs, that valiant Lord Charles Martell, that during their reign the
realm was well ruled, yea, with many great and excellent victories.

In our time we know that the Emperor Charles the fifth was left very young by
his father and grandfather, in such sort, as during his minority he could
never have Du Bellay, lib. 1. de se Memoires.
Lewis the twelfth, praying him to accept that charge, knowing well the
sincerity and loyalty of that good king, which for nothing would wound his
conscience (as he did not) although he might, for thereby he had offered him
great occasions of enlarging his limits. The king then loyally to acquit
himself of that charge, gave unto that young Prince for Governor, a good man,
faithful, and of good understanding, called the Lord de Chieures: by the
counsel of whom, and of certain other good Counselors, the affairs of that
young Prince were much better managed

The Emperor Domitian, besides he was not wise, he was wicked and exceeding
cruel: yet he, during his reign, had so good hap to encounter and light upon
such Suetonius in Domit. cap. 3. 4. 8. 10.
Governors and Magistrates for the Provinces of his Empire, being good and wise
men, that whilst he reigned, the Roman Empire was well governed, and there
was none but certain particular persons of Rome, which felt the evil of his
vices and cruelty.

Charles the eight king of France, came to his Crown at the age of thirteen
years, and was a very good Prince, but of no great understanding nor wisdom:
Annals of France upon the year 1484.
yet the Estates that were assembled at Tours, gave him a good Counsel, which
they did choose of fit and capable persons; by which Counsel, the affairs of
the kingdom were well governed during the kings minority, although there fell
out some emotions and stirs of some revolters.

I will not here repeat the example of the Emperor Alexander Severus, who very

I may also here add many other examples of our kings of France, which were
not too spiritual, and yet governed well by their good Counsel. As also there
were many Emperors of the Roman Empire, some ignorant and brutish, others
voluptuous and effeminate, others cruel, and knowing nothing but to handle
iron. As were Philipus, Licinius, Dioclesianus, Maximianus, Carus, Carinus,
Gallus, Constantius, Aurelianus, Galienus, Leon, Macrinus, Zeno, Iustintanus,
and many others, which yet made very good Laws, as well for distributive
justice, as for the policy of the Empire, as is seen by the Code of
Justinian; which laws we must needs attribute Macrinus) how to make good
Laws. Therefore I conclude this point against the Maxim of Machiavell, That a
Prince may well govern wisely the Commonweal by the good counsel of good and
faithful Counselors, although he be evil provided of wisdom.

But here remains a difficulty, which is not small, How an unwise Prince may
Of the election of good Cou^sellors and Magistrates.
provide good and loyal Counselors, seeing that Princes that are wise and
well advised, are therein often deceived. And upon this point I confess there
is nothing harder nor of greater consequence to a Prince, than to guide
himself well in the election of such persons, whereof he should compose his
Counsel. For there are Honors change manners. You may see how the most
gracious and courteous in all the world, the most affable and officious to
every one (that is possible) whilst they are in base degree; after they be
mounted into some high degree of honor and dignity, they become rough and
haughty, and so much, that to whom before they showed themselves facile and
serviceable, they even seem now not to know them, yea, which before were their
private friends and familiars: Such people have no good souls, but deserve that
their fierceness Agamemnon taxed and reprehended by Menelaus his brother, in a
Tragoedie of Euripides, where he says thus:

Most humble wast thou in times past, and kissed each man's hand,
Most human, gentle, affable, to none thy gates did stand
Shut up, to highest Honor thou (by such means) soughtst to rise:
But now thou Honor have supreme, why proov'st thou so unwise,
Another man straight to become, and change thy manners all?
Yea humane duty even to friends, by thee does not befall.
To good men that esteems good fame, this is not covenable,
Chamoelion like thy manners changed, thou to be so mutable.
This mutabilitie then, of manners which is seen in many natures of men, is
the Machiavell.

Upon this I first find, that our ancient Frenchmen have observed three rules,
which I think good enough. The first, that the princes of the blood are
always of the kings Counsel: for although it may well come to pass, that
some one of them is not the most resolute nor best garnished with parts
requisite to know well to counsel and govern the affairs of the Commonwealth;
yet seeing they have that honor to be princes of the blood, they may not be
excluded, unless it be for some great Charles the sixth, Ie bien aim. Which
aforesaid rules, as I hope ^one can deny but they are good, and introducted
with good reason by our ancestors, so I must needs confess that they are not
sufficient in all cases to provide

And upon that point it seems unto me, that the manner of proceeding, which
Lampri. in Alexandro.
Alexander Severus the Emperor used to choose as well his Counselors as his
Magistrates, is very good, and meriteth well to be imitated and drawn into
consequence. For first, he never provided any persons for an Office, in
consideration of any favor of kindred or amity, nor in recompense of any
service, but only in consideration of For (said this Paynim Emperor) seeing
the Christians use (well) this form, to renounce publicly in their assemblies
the names of such as they will promote unto the order of Priesthood, why should
not we use it also in the election of our Officers and Magistrates, into the
hands of whom we commit the lives and goods of our subjects. Moreover, he never
suffered Offices and estates of Magistrates, which had Besides all this, in the
election of Counselors and Magistrates, he did ever suspect such as fought for
Offices, and held them for ambitious and dangerous people for the Commonweal.
But they which he could know to be good men, and worthy of public charge, and
never sought it, these were they which he esteemed most sufficient: and the
more they excused themselves from accepting of Offices, so much the more were
they constrained unto them. Insomuch, that one day there was one Alexander
constrained him, and commanded him to accept and exercise it, and that he would
have it so, being contented with his sufficiency. The other, which in no case
would accept that estate, found some light occasion to get from the Emperors
presence for that time, and so fled. When the Emperor knew he was fled, he
caused him to be searched diligently, and found him, caused him to be brought
unto him, then he constrained him whether he would or no to accept that Office.

We find in our hystories of France, that our kings have sometimes imitated
this manner of proceeding of the Emperor Alexander, in his manner of election
of Counselors and Magistrates: For by ancient ordinances which lately were
fresh in the public Counsel of Estates of Orleance (but since evil
observed,) Offices ought to be conferred upon such as were named to the king,
by the other Officers and Magistrates, and by the Consuls and Presidents of
Towns and Provinces, which were to make true report of the life, good manners,
and sufficiency of such as they named. As for the vent and selling of Offices,
it seems that it has been long time tolerated in France. For M. Philip de
Comines in his History which he writ of Comines, li. 1. cap. 12.
the life of king Lewis the eleventh, says, That already in the time of that
king (when that de Comines touches not the white, when he speaks of the cause
why the Parisians Comines adds, That even in the time of king Lewis the
eleventh, the parliament of Paris maintained, that such a commerce and
traffic was lawful. But he speaks not of what Offices Annals upon An. 1499.
our Annals, that king Lewis the twelfth (who was called the Father of the
people) to spare his people, and to pay the debts of king Charles the eight,
his predecessor, and to help other great affairs which he had on his Arm for
the recoverment of the Duchy of Millaine, he was the first king that began to
sell Offices Royal, excepting Alexander, that they have reason: for that which
may be bought, may be sold. As for the manner of election of the said Emperor,
whereby he preferred to estates such as demanded them not, before such as
sought them, our kings have sometimes used that also: as king Charles le Sage,
when he gave the Office of Constable to that generous and valiant Knight
Bertrand de Guesclin. For de Guesclin Froisart, lib. 1. chap. 290. lib. 2. cap.
49. Annals upon An. 1402.
excused himself the most that he could in the world from accepting that
estate, showing him that he was a simple knight, and that the Office of
Constable is so great, M. Bertrand, by this means excuse not your self; for I
have neither Brother, Cousin, Nephew, County, nor Barron, in my kingdom,
which shall not obey you with a good heart: and if any one do otherwise, I
will cause him to know that it displeases me: So that in the end de Guesclyn
accepted the Office, as Charles the sixth, son of the said Charles le Sage,
minding to give that Office to the Lord de Coucy, who was a brave and wise
knight, and of a great house, and had performed great services unto the Crown
of France, but he refused it, saying, that he was not capable for an Office of
so great a burden, and that M. Oliver de Clysson was more sufficient than he
to exercise that Estate, for he was valiant, bold, wise, and well beloved of the
people of war. M. Oliver made the like refuse, saying that the Lord de Coucy
was much more worthy and capable than he. But after great strife thereabouts,
in the end, Oliver was constrained to accept that Office, wherein he acquitted
himself well and like a wise and virtuous man. Likewise, after the death of
this M. Lewis de Sancerre, Constable M. Charles de Albret, Count de Dreux, but
he refused it many times, until he was compelled to accept it. Where is now
that modesty, to refuse estates, and to defer them unto his companion? Where
is that time, that men esteemed not of honors, but such as were gotten by true
virtue? Where is that happy world, when ambition was so banished from great
men? Where are now those good, virtuous, and wise Princes, which gave no
Estates and Offices, but to them which only by virtue deserved them; and that
could make so good choice of fit persons? Surely, we are come into the time of
the Emperor Aurelian (when the Empire began already to decay) wherein Offices
were not for Men, but for Riches: and to the time of Caesar and Pompey (when
the Commonweal was Alexander Severus, who never gave Offices, as is said, to
importunat ambitious men, which sought them, but to such as were modest, and
desired them not; such as de Guesclyn, de Coucy, de Clisson, and de Albret: For
they which accept them most hardly, are they which will acquit themselves of
them most valiantly and wisely.

Now after I have touched the election of a good Council and Magistrates, Good
Counsel keeps a Prince in his estate. Plutarke in Phocion.
I would a little speak of the necessity and utilitie that comes to a
Prince, to have good and wise Counselors. And upon this point, it seems unto
me, that Plato and the other Philosophers have a very proper and fit
comparison, when they compared the sovereign authority of a Prince, to the
course and motion of the Sun, whereby he accomplisheth the natural days;
and the wisdom of Princes Counselors, unto the motion and course of the
Sun, whereby he accomplisheth the year. For this diurnall motion, whereby
the Sun makes an end of a natural day from one morning to another, is
admirable, swift, fearful, and violent: and so is a sovereign authority of
it self, under which men tremble, and are dismayed with fear and trouble. But
as we see, that the annual motion of the Sun, whereby he makes an end the
prudence and wisdom of Princes Counselors, opposing themselves pleasantly

Behold then a very great effect of good Counsel, that is, That it maintains
the Good Counsel makes the Prince honored.
De Comines, lib. 1. cap. 32 and 34.
capacity, yet he shall be accounted wise, if he provide himself good
Counselors. For it is commonly seen, that men attribute always the effects
of all things unto Princes, whether they be victories in war which was
conducted by wise Captains, or they be good rules, ordinances, and provisions,
which have been laid and builded by wise Pollititians, his Counselors:
insomuch, that the qualities and conditions of Princes Counselors are always
attributed unto him, because of the effects which M. Philip de Comines, who
says, That God has not established the office of a Prince to be exercised
upon brute beasts, and to mock and scorn them which speak to them of any
affair; answering, I am no Clarke, I leave all to my

Moreover, it is certain, that the Prince which shall have the reputation and
renown, Good Counsel makes the Prince feared and redouted. Titus Livius lib.
2. Dec. 3.
to govern himself by good Counsel, shall always be the more feared and
redouted both of his enemies and strangers, and they shall not easily get any
advantage upon him. Thereupon it was, that Anniball, a prudent and valiant
Captain, feared more the wise Captains that were sent against him by the
Romans, than he did such as were hardy and hazardous. And that the Roman
forces were more feared and doubted of him, under the conduction of that wise
Captain Fabius Maximus, than under the other hardy and valiant Captains. For
when the Romans sent against him the Captains Flaminius and Sempronius, the
one after the other, both of them generous and forward, and such as desired
nothing more than the sight, Anniball rejoiced thereat. And as he was prudent
and hardy withal, he suffered them to take upon him some small advantages,
seeking still to draw them unto some place of advantage, to fight with them, as
indeed he did: They being swelled, for that in some light skirmishes they had
overthrown some few of Annibals Anniball, Fabius Maximus, who was not so
forward (and it may be not so hardy) in enterprizing as Flaminius or
Sempronius were; but he was more wise and careful, as he showed himself. For
at the first arrival, as the other did, he did not aboard and set upon
Anniball (who desired no other thing) but began to coast him a far off,
seeking always advantageous places. And when Anniball approached him, then
would he show him a countenance fully determined to fight, yet always seeking
Anniball, which was not so rash as to join with his enemy to his own
disadvantage, made a show to recoile and fly, to draw him after him: Fabius
followed him, but it was upon coasts and hills, seeking always not the shortest
way, but that way which was most for his advantage: insomuch, as Anniball saw
him always upon some hill or coast nigh him, as it were a cloud over his head:
so that after Anniball had many times assaied to draw Fabius into a place fit
for himself, and where he might give battle for his own good, and yet could
not thereunto draw him, said: I see well now, that the Romans also have gotten
an Anniball: and I fear that this cloud, which approaching us, still hovers
upon those hills, will some of these mornings pour out some shoure on our
heads. Breefely, the prudencie Fabius brought more fear and gave more ado
unto Anniball, than all the Roman forces, which yet was not small.

I have above recited another example, witnessed of king Edward of England, who
said, That he feared more the missives and letters of king Charles le Sage,
than he feared the great and puissant armies of 40 and 100000 men of his Father
and Grandfather: and that wrought him more trouble, and broke more of his
purposes and enterprises, in enditing of letters, than they ever did with their
great forces. Which is another witness made for prudence and good Counsel,
like unto the example of Anniball: which witnesses are so much the more worthy
of credit, as the one proceeded from a most valiant king, and the other from a
most noble and Varro, (as by a common proverb received in his time) That the
Romans vanquished, sitting: as if he would say: As they sit in their chairs in
their Senate, they provide so for their affairs by good Counsel and wisdom,
that they get and obtain the upper hand in all their enterprises. Yea, and we
see that at this day the Venetians maintain very well their estate, yea, do
augment and make it greater, although they understand no thing how to handle
arms: and indeed than many puissant princes by their forces and arms.

Hitherto we have spoken of a princes Counsel, which in the time of the Roman
A Senate, and the Estates, are things corresponde^t.
emperors men called, The princes Consistory; and our French, The kings
Privy Counsel. But now we must know, that as well the Roman emperors as the
kings of France of old, have yet had another Counsel whereunto they had
recourse in all their weighty affairs which were of great consequence: as,
when they stood in need to make laws, ordinances, and rules, concerning the
universal estate: the Romans called this Counsel, the Senate; and the French
call it, the Parliament. But this name of Parliament, aunciently signifies an
assembly of the three estates, as Philip de Comines says, and as is seen by
all our French hystories. Our kings also De Comines. lib. 1. cap. 64.
convocated sometimes with their ordinary and privy Counsel, some good
number Julius Caesar, when the commonwealth was changed into a Monarchy, the
authority of the Senate was much abated and weakened; yet there was never
emperor found that durst enterprise altogether to abolish it: but contrary,
the good and wise emperors rather helped Senatus consulta, as the laws of the
People, which they called Plebiscita. And therefore the emperors which by the
Law Royal succeeded in the place of the People only (for the Senate did never
despoile themselves of their authority to invest the emperor therewith) had
never power to decay the Senate, neither durst they ever enterprise it, although
some had a will thereunto, as Nero, Caligula, and their like. But as for the
good emperors, besides that they had no power to abolish the Senate, they never
had any desire thereof, but maintained and conserved it, and governed
themselves by it, and by it were they better obeyed. For we Alexander Severus
never made Lamp. in Alexand.
law nor edict, but he had on his Counsel twenty great and excellent Lawyers,
and fifty other great and excellent persons, wise and well experienced. And
yet to the end that they might give their opinions more assuredly, he first
made them understand the matter upon which they must give their advise, and
after give time to consider thereof, that their opinions might be better
digested and resolved. Therefore also the Theodosius ordained, that no law
should be availeable, unless it were first L. humanum C. de Leg.
concluded and determined with good and assured resolution of all the princes
Consistory, and afterward received and approved by the Senate of Rome. For
(says he) we know well, that the ordinance of good Laws and Edicts concluded
with good Counsel and deliberation, is the establishment of the assuredness
and glory of our Empire. Therefore was it also, that that great and wise
Emperor Augustus Caesar, did so communicate all the affairs of his
Commonwealth with the Roman Senate, Dion in August.
that as Dion says, he made a sweet and pleasant mingled harmony of the
Monarchical estate, with the estate of the Commonwealth. And he not only
contented not himself to confer with the Senate all affairs of importance,
and to take Trebatius, and that good and prudent Agrippa his son in law, with
that so learned and good a pillar of learned men Mecoenas. Therefore also
Tiberius the Emperor, the successor of Augustus, although he was a Prince more
abundant in vices than in virtues, not daring wholly to stray out of his
predecessors traces (that good Augustus,) made nor ordained any thing of weight
without the Counsel and advise of the Senate. For this cause also (breefely)
all the good Emperors, as Vespatian, Titus, Traian, Adrian, the Antonines, and
others like, communicated always with the Senate Caligula, Nero, Comodus,
Bassianus, Maximinus, Heliogabalus, and other like, hated extremely the
Senate, esteeming of it as their pedegoge and corrector; and have caused many
Senators to die, thinking the more easily to command as they would, having no
controulers to withstand their wicked actions. But the end was always this,
that such as despised and would have annihilated the Senate, have ever had an
unluckie end, and reigned not long time, but have all glory, and their
subjects under them enjoyed good handling, and good repose and Prove. 18. Eccle.
37.
certain it is, that in the end he shall be well chastised.

Our kings of France of old, used the same course that these good Emperors did:
For they often convocated the three Estates of the kingdom, to have their
advise and Counsel in affairs of great consequence, which touched the
interest of the Commonwealth. And it is seen by our Hystories, that the
general assembly of the Estates was commonly done for three causes: One, when
there was a question In old time the general Estates were held for three causes.
to provide for the kingdom, a Governor or Regent; as when kings were young,
or Charles le Sage, to provide for the government as well of king Charles the
sixth, being under Annal. upon An 1380 and Fross. li 2. cap. 58. and 60.
de Aniou: the remainder of all the realm, and the rule of the young kings
person was committed to the said Dukes of Berry and Bourgoigne. So was there
ordained during the said kings life, another ordinance?

In like manner the general Estates were held at Tours after the decease of
king Lewis the eleventh, to purvey for the government of king Charles the
eighth, under Annal. upon An. 148. and Co^^n. ^ib. 1. ca. 109.
age, and of the kingdom. And by the same Estates was established a Counsel
of twelve persons, good men and of good calling, to dispatch the affairs of
the kingdom; yet in the kings name, and under his authority. And the rule of
the young Madame de Beavien his sister.

When king Charles the sixth le bien aim, was come to the age of one and
twenty years, his uncles were discharged from the government of the kingdom,
by the Froiss. lib 1. cap. 134. and lib. 4. cap. 44.
advise and deliberation of the kings great Counsel. But this good prince by
an accident of sickness fell a certain time after into a frenzy, which
sometimes bereaved him of his senses; insomuch that the Estates assembled at
Paris, gave the government of the kingdom during the kings indisposition, to
his two uncles, the dukes of

The year 1356. that king John was taken prisoner nie Poictres at the journey
of Annal. upon An. 1356 and Fross. li. 1. cap. 170. 171.
Maupertins with his son Philip (after Duke of Burgoigne) and that they were
led into England, there remained in France three of the said king John's
children, namely, Charles Dauphin and duke of Normandy, Lewis duke de Aniou,
and John duke of Berrie: There was a question about the providing for the
government of the kingdom, because of the kings captivity, but none of them
would enterprise the mannaging thereof of himself: insomuch, that the general
Estates were assembled at Paris, whereby were elected thirty six persons (some
say fifty) to govern the affairs of the kingdom with Monsieur le Dauphin,
who at the beginning called himself

The year 1409. during the reign of Charles the sixth king of France, were
held Monstrelet. lib. 1. ca. 59.
the general Estates at Paris, for the reformation of abuses in the kingdom.
And there it was ordained, that all accountants for the kings revenues and
rents should make their accounts. By the means of which reformation, great
sums of money were recovered upon the same accountants, and there were also
made some good laws and ordinances. In other conventions of Estates, the money
and coin has been reformed from weak and light, unto thick and of good
weight and goodness. Also of late at the general Estates held at Orleans,
were made many

As for the last cause for which we have said the general Estates in old time
were called, namely for the grant of Helps and Subsidies; there are many
examples in our Histories. As in the time of king John, wherein the Estates
accorded great subventions Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 155. Annal. upon An 1354 58. 59.
or subsidies to make war against the English men, which then held a great
Monsieur le Dauphin his soune, great sums of money to pay for the said kings
ransom, and for Philip his son, being also a prisoner. And well to be
marked it is, that our histories do witness, that all the people of France
generally, were meruailously anguished and grieved with the prisonment and
captivity which they saw their king suffer, but especially the people of the
country of Languedoc: For the Estates of the said country ordained, that if
the king were not delivered within a year, that every one, both men and women,
should lay by all colored garments, such also as were jagged and cut, and such
as were enriched with gold, silver, or other strange and costly fashion:
Likewise, to make Charles the seventh called le Victorieux, no Subsidies were
imposed, without assembling the general Estates. And

But because Aids and Subsidies were customably granted for the making of De
Com. lib. 5. cap. 18.
M. Philip de Comin. says, That kings should also communicate and consult with
their Estates, whether the causes of such wars be just and reasonable; and
that the Prince cannot nor ought not otherwise to enterprise a war: For it is
reason that they which defray the charges and expenses, should know something.
But yet he passes further, and says: There is no Prince in the world which
has power to lay one penny upon his subjects without their grant and consent,
unless he will use tyranny and violence. But because at the first they which
read this place of Commines, may peradventure think that he seems too much
to limit and restrain a Princes power, I will here as it were by an
interpretation of his saying, a little clear this point.

You must then understand and presuppose, that in a sovereign Prince, there A
Prince has a double power, an absolute and a civil.
are two powers: the one is called an absolute power, and the other a civil
power. The absolute power, is that which cannot nor ought not to be any thing
limited, but stretches it self to all things whatsoever they be, unless it
be to the laws of God and of nature, and of those laws which are the
foundation of the principality and estate: For a Prince has not power over
God, no more than the vassal has over his liege Lord, but ought himself to
obey his commandments and ordinances: So much there wants that he can any
thing abolish or derogate from them.

The Prince also cannot abolish the fundamental laws of his principality,
whereupon

The first point then, which is, that the Absolute power of a Prince stretches
not above God, is a matter of all confessed: And there were never found any
Princes Caligula and Domitian are blamed and detested by the Paynim hystories,
which had no true knowledge of God, for that they durst enterprise upon God,
and upon that which appertained unto him. Also it is a Maxim in Theology,
That we must rather obey God than men: which Maxim has at all times ben
practiced by all good people and holy persons (which are praised even with the
mouth of God in the holy Scriptures) as by Daniell and his companions, the
Apostles, the Christians of the primitive Church, and many of our time.

As for the other point, which is, that the Prince cannot abolish the
foundamentall The Prince cannot abolish the fou^damentall laws of his
principality
Philip^le long, Charles le bell, and Lewis the twelfth) had been easily
inclined upon natural affection toward their daughters, to have broken that
Salicke law (if they so could) to cause the Crown to have fallen unto their
said daughters; by the means whereof, the kingdom after should have Tiberius
they began to kick, and be greeved with the rule of Princes of another nation
than their own: and finally, they rid themselves of the Romans yoke, and
Gaul was the first Province that cut it self from the Empire. Neither was
there ever found king that durst enterprise to break the Salicke law. True it
is, that king Charles the sixth, at the instigation of Philip duke of
Bourgoigne, gave the kingdom of France in dowry with his daughter Katherine,
which he married to the king John, father of the said Philip duke of Bourgoigne,
was by him slain. But this donation held not, as being made against the
Salicke law: insomuch, that the said duke Philip himself (which had procured
and caused to declare the said Dauphin unable to be king of France) after the
death of king Charles the sixth, acknowledged him for king and lawful successor
to the Crown of France. For as for incapacitie, it was known there was none,
because that duke John, which the Dauphin had slain, deserved it well, having
before caused to be slain the duke of Orleance the kings only brother. Yet
because the manner of the execution which the said Dauphin caused to be made
John, was not by lawful means, he acknowledged his fault in that case, and
made a great satisfaction to the said duke Philip, as shall hereafter be more
at large set forth. So then the Salicke law has always remained firm, as one
of the three pillars of the kingdom and royalty of France, our ancestors
neverbeing willing to suffer women to reign and rule over them.

As much is to be said of the Estates general, the authority of which has
always remained whole, until this present, even from the foundation of the
kingdom, as Individuis and certain particular persons, but it stands in
Specie, being a body immortal (as all the French

The like may we say of the Law, whereby the lands and provinces united to the
Charles le sage, king of France, and the other in the time of king Francis the
first, of happy and late memory: By which two examples may appear, not only
that this law of, Not alienating the lands of the Crown, is a pillar of the
kingdom: but also that the Estates are as the very and true basse and
foundation thereof.

King John having been taken prisoner at the battle of Poiters, was conducted
Froiss. lib. 1. ca. 201, 211, 212, 214, 246, 247, 310.
into England: where he made treaty of peace with king Edward of England. But
the estates of the kingdom which were assembled, would not agree unto that
treaty, as too prejudicial, and to the diminution of the Crown of France.
King Edward was so angry and despited thereat, that he made a great oath that he
would end the ruinating of France. And indeed whilst king John was his
prisoner, he passed over the sea, and made great war in France, and much
wasted the flat Country, but he made no great conquest of the Towns. In the
end the Duke of Lancaster counseled him to make peace with the French, showing
him that he did but leese time so to run over the fields, and spoil the
champion country, and soldiers only Charlemaine, John (who upon good hostages
was returned into France) sent into his countries M. James de Bourbon his
cousin, and a Prince of his blood, to make them obey the English: insomuch,
that whether they would or no, those good French subjects should forsake the
French obedience, and be under the English government. This could not be
without great grief of heart, sadness, and incredible displeasure. But above
all others, most remarkable for great constancy, were they of Rochell, to
remain French: for they many times excused themselves unto the king, and stood
stiff more than a Rochellois good Frenchmen.
year, before they would let the Englishmen into the town. And thinking that
Most dear sir, your poor and desolate subjects of your town of Rochell, have
sent us hither to beseech your Majesty in all humility, and with joined
hands, that it would please you to have pity and compassion upon them. They
are your natural subjects, and they and their ancestors have ever been under
the obedience of your majesty and The king having heard the piteous
supplication of these poor Rochellois, mourned and pitied them greatly: but he
made them answer, That there was no remedy, that which he had accorded, must
needs be executed. This answer being reported at Rochell, it is impossible to
speak what lamentations there were through all the Town; this news was so
hard, that they which were born and nourished French, should be no more French,
but become English. Finally, they being pressed and constrained by the kings
Commissaries Well (said the most notable townsmen) seeing we are forced to bow
under the yoke, and that it pleases the king our sovereign lord, that we
should obey the English, we will with our lips, but our hearts shall remain
always French. After that the English had been peaceable possessors of
Rochell, and all the other countries abovenamed, king Edward invested his
eldest son the prince of Wales, in that government, (a valiant and very
humble Prince toward greater than himself, but haughty and proud toward his
d' Armignac, de Perigourd, de Albret, de Commenges, and many others, all which
went to Paris to offer in their appeals against the Prince of Wales: Arriving
there, they dealt with king Charles le Sage (for king John was then dead) about
their appeal; who answered them, That by the peace of Britain, which he
himself had sworn the dead king his father for him and his successors to the
Crown, had acquitted and renounced all the soveraignetie of the said countries,
and that he could not with a good conscience Charles was nothing offended to
hear them so speak of a kings power (much unlike our Machiavelistes at this
day which call them culpable of treason, which speak of Estates) neither
replied unto them, that the power of a sovereign Prince ought not to be
limited, neither that they spoke evil to revoke into doubt that which his dead
father had done: but contrary, rejoicing at that limitation, referred the cause
to the debating and resolution of the wise men of his Counsel. And after he
was resolved, that it was true which they said, he accorded unto these Counties
and Barons their demand, and sent to adjorne in case of appeal to the Court
of Paris, the Prince of Wales: which done, the said Counties and Barons easily
revolted from the English obedience: so did Privileges of Rochell.
them certain privileges. The king demanded, what privileges. First, said
they, a true French heart, accorded their requests: and so the Rochellois
returned merrily

King Francis the first of that name, being prisoner at Madril in Spain, in
power of Charles the fist, there was made a traitie and an accord betwixt the
two great princes; whereby amongst other things, the king promised the emperor,
to grant him all his right and possession of the Duchy of Burgoigne, and that
he would employ himself to cause the Estates of the country to condescend
thereunto. This accord being concluded, the emperor caused the king to be
conducted to Bayonne, and there by his ambassadors summoned him to ratify the
accord which he had made at Madril when he was prisoner, to the end to make
more valeable and that it might the rather appear to be made without
constraint; unto which ambassadors the king answered; that he could do
nothing in that article concerning the Duchy of Burgoigne without first
knowing the intent and will of his subjects, Elenor the said emperors sister,
unto whom he was then espoused: so that, that law (That the king cannot
alienate the Crowne-land) was then very profitable unto the king and the
kingdom. And unto this agree the doctors of the Civil law, which hold; that
the Augustus, saying: The Emperors are called Augusti, for that they ought to
increase, and cannot diminish the Empire: as much say they of other kings and
monarchs, for there is therein the like reason.

For a conclusion, no man of perfect judgment can deny, but these three laws
of the kingdom of France, namely, the law Salicke; the law of the Estates
general; and the law of not alienating the lands and provinces of the crown,
are the very true pillars, bases, and foundations of the kingdom and the
royalty, which none can or ought to abolish. I doubt not but there will be
found many, which will be want of power in a prince, to ruinate himself and
his estate. And by consequent it

As for the law Natural, it cannot be abolished: For if a Prince will
authorize, The law natural cannot be abolished by the king, or any other.
adulteries, incests, thefts, murders, and massacres, and other like crimes,
which natural reason and common sense causes us to abhor and detest:
certain and evident it is, that such authorizing is of no value, and that the
Prince cannot do this. When the emperor Claudius would espouse Agrippina, his
niece, his brothers daughter, he made a Law, whereby he authorized the marriage
of the uncle with the niece, which was published all over: but says Suetonius,
no man would imitate and follow the Emperors example (but a bad servant newly
enfranchised, and a soldier,) Sueto. in Claudio. cap. 26. Tacitus Annal. lib.
12.
him: For Agrippina his niece and wife, poisoned him to bring to the Empire
Nero her son (whom she had had by another husband) and had caused him to be
adopted for his son; although he had by his first wife Messalina another
natural son, called Britanicus, whom Nero (when he came to the Empire)
empoysoned to death: so that by the incestuous marriage, wherewith Claudius had
contaminated and poisoned his house, he and his natural son (who by reason
should have been his successor) were killed with poison. We read likewise, that
the Emperor Bassianus Carracalla Spartian. in Carac.
beholding one day Iulia his mother in law with an eye of incestuous
concupiscence. Si tu le veux, tu le peux. If thou will, thou may; Know
thou not that it belongs unto thee to give the law, not to receive it? which
talk so enflamed him yet more with lust, that he took her to wife in
marriage. Hereupon Hystoriographers note, that if Bassianus had known well,
what it was to give a law, he would have detested and prohibited such
incestuous and abominable copulations, and not to have authorized them. For
breefely, a Prince may well give laws unto his subjects, but it must not be
contrary to nature and natural reason. This was the cause why Papinian the
great Lawyer (who well understood both natural and civil law) loved better to
die, than to obey the said Emperor Bassianus, who had commanded him to excuse
before the Senate his parricide, committed in the person of Geta his brother.
For Papinian knowing, that such a crime was against natural right, so much
there wanted, that he would have obeyed the Emperor, if he had commanded him to
have perpetrated and committed it, that he would not obey him so far therein,
as to excuse it. Wherein the Paynim Lawyer may serve for a goodly example to
condemn many Magistrate Lawyers of our time, which not only excuse, but also
cause to be executed unnatural murders and massacres against all law divine
and humane. But now we have spoken of a Princes absolute power, let us come to

The other power, which we call Civil, is that which is governed and as it
were The Civil power temperateth the Absolute.
limited within the bounds of Reason, of right, and equity, and which we must
presume, that the Prince will use, and uses ordinarily in all his commands:
unless expressly he show and declare, that he wills and ordains this or
that of his absolute power and of his certain knowledge. This is that second
power, which is guided by prudence and good Counsel: and which gives a sweet
temperature and counterpoise to that absolute power, no more nor no less, than
the second motion of the Sun tempereth the course of the first, as we have
abovesaid. This is that power which establishes and conserveth in
assuredness, kingdoms and empiers, Theodosius L. digna Vox. C. de Lege.
made an express law for it, which is so good to be marked, that I thought
good to translate it word by word. It is the majesty of him that governs, to
confess himself to be bound unto laws, so much does our authority depend
upon law. And assuredly, it is a far greater thing than the Empire it self,
to submit his Empire and power unto laws. And that which we will not to be
lawful unto us, we show it unto others by the oracle of this our present
Edict. Given at Ravenna the eleventh day of June, the year of the Consulship
of Florentius and Dionisius.

To come then to our purpose, you must understand, that de Comines spoke of
this second power in the place above alleged, and not of the absolute power of
a Prince: for by that power it is certain, that the Prince has good authority
to enterprise wars, and to levy imposts upon his subjects without their
consent. Because that by the royal law above mentioned, the Roman people gave
all the like power unto the Prince, as Dion de August. ^. I. D. de Constit.
Princ.
they had themselves, to use it toward the people, and against the people; and
gave him absolute power without any astriction or bond to laws, to do what he
would. We see also by the law of God the same absolute power is given unto
kings and sovereign Princes. For it is written, that they shall have full power
over the goods and persons of their subjects. And although God have given them
that absolute power, as to his ministers 1. Sam. 8.
Naboth. For most unlikely is it, that God 1. King. 22.
the great Dominator and Governor of al Princes, would have Princes to abuse
their powers with cruelties, rapines, injustices, or any other unreasonable way
of absolute

To conclude then now our talk, concerning the place of Comines, certain it
is, that a Prince may well make war, and impose tallies without the consent
of his subjects, by an absolute power: but better it is for him to use his
civil power, so should he be better obeyed. And as for Aids and Subsidies,
whereof Comines speaks, some say they are not at this day levied by an
absolute power, but by the peoples consent. Because in the time of Charles the
seventh (who had great and long wars Charles the eight, the Estates general
at Tours, were convocated, as well to provide for the government of the king
and of the kingdom (for his majesty was under age) as also for Aids and
Subsidies; which were Comines shows one thing that is very true, That the
holding of the said Estates is very good and profitable for a king of France,
whereby he is both stronger and better obeyed: but he complains, That in his
time there were men (as there are at this day) unworthie to possess those
offices which they held, who all they could hindered the holding of the
Estates, least their evil behaviors and incapacities should be espied and
known. Such men are of like humors, as the unworthie Emperors Caligula,
Maximinius, Commodus, and others, whereof we have spoken above: which hated the
Senate of Rome, because they would not have such correctors and controulers.

Let us now come to Machiavell, to prove his Maxim, which we have above The
counsel of many is better than the counsel of o^e alone.
confuted by good reasons and examples. He alleges two reasons: The one is,
that if a Prince govern himself by one Counsel alone, it would prove
dangerous, for fear that the Counselor seek to occupy the Estate. Whereunto
I answer, that that were considerable, if principalities were at this day
given by tumultuarie elections of soldiers, as in times past the Roman Empire
was given: for he that could obtain the favor of the men of war either by
love or money, carried it away. But in our time, principalities are
hereditarie, or are given by grave and deliberate election of more staid and
discreet people, than were the Praetorian soldiers of Rome. Yet do not I
approove that a Prince should be governed by one Solomon approves the counsel
which is compounded of many.

The other second reason of Machiavell is, that he says, That in a Counsel
compounded Discordant opinions coming to one end, is not to be feared.
of many, there are always discordances and contrarieties of opinions that
they cannot accord. Whereunto I answer, That if a Counsel be compounded of
good and fit men, they will always sufficiently agree in their opinions (as
experience shows it in the Counsels of many Princes, and in the body of
Commonweales) although they disagree in motives, reasons, allegations, and in
other circumstances. These discordances are often very profitable and
necessary, if so be they all look to one end, which is the good of the
Commonwealth. As happened in the Counsel of the Senate, which was held at Rome
about that horrible and strange conspiration of Catiline, who with his
companions went about to destroy his country with fire and sword: For in that
Counsel, Caesar reasoned so gently, as it seemed Catiline and his partakers
were in a good way to have been absolved. But when it came to Cato his rank,
he reasoned in another sort, yea, even plainly to rebuke such as spoke before
him. Great pity it is (says he) that we are in such a time, when men
attribute the name of wicked things to such as are good. Now is it accounted
liberality to give the goods of another man, it is magnanimity to use
violence and boldness, it is mercy and clemency to pluck criminal and
condemned persons out of a Justices hands: And I pray you, is it so small a
thing to have conspired our destruction, and the effusion of our blood? Another
crime might be punished after it should be committed: but Catiline after the
execution of his conspiration, and that we shall be all dead? They which before
have delivered their opinions, seem to be very liberal of our bloods, and of
the blood of so many good men within Rome, to spare that of a sort of wicked
conspirators. If they be not afraid of this conspiration, so much the more (my
masters) have we cause to fear, to watch, and hold us upon our guards, without
too much trusting them which are in such assurance. For our ancestors have
made themselves great, by diligence, justice, and by good counsel, free from
all covetousness and viciousness. Unto them which are vigilant, take pains
and use good counsel, all things succeed well; but sluggards and cowards had
need implore aid of the gods, for no doubt they are both contrary and angry
with them. And Cato in this manner reasoning against the advice of others which
had been before him, greatly to his commendation, drew the rest at the last to
his opinion; yet not more to his honor, than to the dishonor of Caesar. So
then it is not ever evil, that in a Counsel there should be sometimes Catoes
and Appius Caludius and such like persons, which often hold strong against
others: for affairs and businesses are so much the better cleared and boulted
out. It also holds other better in order, which otherwise by too great
facility and fear to contradict, suffer themselves to be carried after the
first opinion, without debate or due consideration. And truly, in all Counsels
there are but too many such as were Valerius Publicola, Maenenius Agrippa,
Servilius, Pompeius, Caesar, and such like, which always reasoned gently and
mildly in all things: but too few Catons, Appius Claudius, Quintus Cincinnatus,
and such like, which in Senates hold rigorous opinions. For although for the
most part such rigorous opinions ought not to be followed, yet they being
mingled and dispersed amongst others, their serve well to bring to pass a good
resolution, and so do make a good and sweet harmony in a Counsel or Senate,
as Titus Livius shows in many places. And therefore contradictions of
opinions, whereof Machiavell Horace:

A Supreme power, devoid of Counsel good,
Falls of it self, as though it never stood. Carm. lib. 1. Ode 4.

A Temperat power by God exalted is:
The Intemperat his hatred does not miss.
2. Maxim.
The Prince, to shun and not to be circumvented of Flatterers, ought to forbid
Chap. 23 of the Prince.
his friends and Counselors, that they speak not to him, nor to counsel him
any thing, but only of those things whereof he freely begins to speak, or
asks their advise.
THe means to shun Flatterers, which do nothing else but make lies, and report
leasings, pleasing Princes ears (says Machiavell) is, that he make known
that he takes no pleasure in hearing of lies: but that it is more

MAchiavell making a countenance by this Maxim to counsel a The Prince knows
not what is done but by the mouth of his people.
And to attend whilst the Prince himself begin the matter first to his
Counsel, that should be in vain: for he cannot propose, that which he knows
not: and it is a Dioclesian complained so much of the flatterers of his Court,
which keeping close the truth of things, fed him with smoke, and so by that
means made him commit many great faults in the administration of the empire.
But because that history is worthy the marking, I will recite it at length.

The Emperor Dioclesian was borne in a little village, of a base and obscure
race Pompo. Laetus in Diocl. Vopis. in Aureliano.
at Salon in Esclavonia: yet in his youth, and naturally, he was so ambitious
and covetous of honor, that from a young soldier, he aspired still more
higher, that he became a Captain, and from a Captain to be a Colonel, and
from a Colonel to Constantius, Chlorus, and Galerius, and retired unto his
house at Salon in Sclavonia, Flavius Vopiscus, who places flatterers amongst
the principal causes A man may ask (says he) What is it that makes Princes
so wicked and corrupt? First, their great liberty and abundance of all things
they have: Secondly, their wicked friends, their detestable attendants, their
covetous Eunuchs, their foolish and uncivile courtiers, and too plain
ignorance of the affairs of their Commonwealth. I have heard my father tell
this, that the Emperor Dioclesian returning unto a private life, was wont to
say, that there is nothing harder, than to know well how to Dioclesian, A good,
wise, and virtuous Prince is bought and sold by such people. Behold the very
words of Vopiscus, who evidently shows, that Dioclesian was discontented to
be Emperor, because he was governed Dioclesian change his imperial estate
with a rusticke life, for the displeasure he took at his flattering Courtiers:
for by the contrary we commonly see, that Princes rather please themselves
marvellously to see flatterers, and they cannot go three paces, but they have
them at their tails, and more willingly do they give their ears unto them
than to good people which will tell them the truth of affairs that import
their Estate. And he that will tell them this history of Dioclesian, a man
need not doubt but they will straight say he was a sot and a beast to forsake
his dignity of an Emperor for such a cause, and that he better deserved to be
a gardener than an Emperor. But Galba, of Commodus, of Bassianus, and of many
other Roman Emperous, which by means of flatterers have had fearful deaths,
they will not esteem Dioclesian such a fool to withdraw himself to a private
habitation, there to finish his days otherwise than by the hands of murderers.
Yet I must confess, that he might have done better, to have put away from him
all those pestilent flatterers: and if to rid so many at once from the court,
there had been great peril in so great a change; yet no doubt it was not
impossible for him to have dispatched them by little and little one after
another, and then to have placed good people about him, thereby to have
strengthened himself.

It is then seen by the saying of Dioclesian, that the Maxim of Machiavell is
a It is a pernicious thing to hold the truth from the Prince.
true precept of flattery; and that there are no greater flatterers, nor more
pernicious, than they that keep close from Princes the truth of things as they
pass. And truly, if the Prince have good Counselors and servants, by whom he
may be well advertised of all truths which may concern his estate, and where
he ought to provide and give rules; although some lies by flatterers besowne
amongst them, yet can they not corrupt the good government of the Prince: for
truth has al^aies of her self so great force, as she causes lies to vanish
away, as mists before the ^un, so that always they convert to smoke, without
effect, if so be the truth be not hid in the Prince. And withal, flatterers
and liers dare not open their mouths, fearing to be discovered in their evil
purposes, when they know that the Prince has nigh him

By the Civil laws, he that knows any enterprise which tends to the damage
L. quisquis. C. ad Leg. Iul. May.
of his Prince, is bound to reveal it unto him, upon pain himself to be held
culpable of treason. They then which are Counselors and most especial
servants of a Prince, which are in a more particular obligation unto their
masters service than other Subjects are, ought not they to be reputed for
traitors when they conceal the

Here may be damaunded, Seeing the good Counselors of a Prince are so
necessary, Princes love flatterers, and wherefore.
and flatterers and evil Counselors are so domigeable, from whence comes it
that yet Princes are well attended on and garnished with flatterers, and have
few good Counselors about them? It seems that Master Philip de Comines has
De Comines, lib. 1. cap. 21.
well hit this mark: Saying that this comes to pass, because Princes always
seek such as feeds their own humors and please them best, and contemn such
as are contrary, although they may be more profitable unto them. For (says
he) such as have been nourished with a Prince, or which are of his age, or
which can best order and dispose his pleasures, or such as apply themselves
unto his will, are always de Charoloies and king Edward of England.

But upon this point rises yet another doubt, Wherefore it is that flatterers
do rather please Princes, than wise men? Plutarch seems unto me well to
resolve this question: when he says, That it proceeds from this, that
naturally men, but Plutar. de discr. adul. and^ amici.
especially Princes, do too much love themselves: And love of ones self
obfuscateth and blinds judgment, so that we can never truly judge that
which we love. Dionis. Hali. ^ib. 9.
persuasion, that the flatterer always takes for the subject of his praises,
such vices as are in alliance and neighborhood with their virtues. For if the
Prince be Saint in Catel.
cruel and violent, he will persuade him that he is Magnanimious and Generous,
and such an one as will not put up an injury or despite. If he be prodigal,
he will make him believe that he is liberal, and magnificall, that he
maintains an estate truly Royal, and one that well recompenceth his servants.
If the Prince be over gone in lubricities and lusts, he will say, he is of an
humane and manly nature, of his part, will not forget to cover his own faults
and vices with the visage and likeness Obsequium amicos, veritatem odium
parere: To follow a man's pleasure and desire, gets friends, but the truth,
hatred. And this is seen, not only in Princes, but also in particular and
private men. For say to a covetous man, or to a wicked usurer who eats up his
Paul's commandment, who wills every man to have care of his family, and if not
care to gather together goods for his children, he is worse than an Infidel;
certainly you should be accounted his great friend, and he would take great
pleasure to be so tickled in his vice. But if you say unto him, There is no
charity in him so to destroy and eat up his brother Christian whom he ought to
love as himself, and that true charity is joined unto faith, pity, and all
other virtues (as S. Paul says) and that he that is without love, is without
faith, without virtue, and is a very Infidel; then have you lost him for
ever, and he will be no more your friend; you have obtained his hatred for
telling him the truth.

But good people ought not to desist for that cause, to say the truth both to
The duty of a good friend and servant toward his Prince.
Princes and to private persons. For truly, Truth is so goodly and expedient of
her self (as Plato says,) that not only we ought to prefer her before the
good grace favor and amity of men, but also before all things of the world. A
good man then which loves Truth, will imitate the example of Quintius
Capitolinus, who one day making an Oration to the Roman people, after he had
lively showed them their Titus Livius lib 3.
faults, in that they ceased not to tumultuate and disobey their Superiors,
whereby some great disorder and confusion might fall to the common weal, added
in the end these words: Masters, I know well, that a man may utter more
pleasant talk, and tell you of things more plausible; but as for me, my nature
is not to flatter, and the present These remonstrances and words of this good
man, were of such efficacy by the pure and native truth, which he showed unto
the people without any flattery, that he appeased the tumults and
discontentments of the city. And as to Princes men ought not to spare to
speak truth: and that they may not take delight to be praised by flatterers,
Alexander Severus, who took pleasure in hearing the praises of great Lampri.
in Alex. Spart. in Nigro.
Princes which had been before him, but would never hear his own. And greatly
praised that saying of the valiant Roman captain Pescentius Niger, who as one
day a certain Orator would needs have pronounced an Oration called Panegerica,
in his praise, Go thy way (says he) and write the praises of Marius and
Anniball, and of other old and valiant Captains, that we may imitate them: for
it is a pure mockery to praise such as do yet live, and especially great
Princes, of whom there is hope and fear, and which may bereave a man of both
life goods and liberty: as for The Emperor Alexander then alleged this
notable sentence of captain Niger, and would by no means be praised in his
own presence. So likewise when men used to salute him, he would not suffer
them to use titles and salutations of flattery: As, God conserve thy
Divinity, thy sacred Majesty, thy Clemency, (which since have been in use,)
but they must say only, God keep thee Alexander: And they which did
otherwise, or which would use too many ceremonies in their salutations, were
straight mocked and hissed at, yea, forced out of the Emperors chamber. But
indeed willingly he would be saluted of none but of good men, and of good
reputation. Insomuch, as he caused an edict to be published, whereby he

Moreover, as it is very requisite and necessary, that wise men which are nigh
the Prince, should use a free liberty, to tell him the truth of all things
which concern him: so must they do it with all modesty, accompanied with the
honor and reverence that God has commanded us to bear unto Princes, as to
his lieutenants. For that Cynicke liberty of some Philosophers, which knew not
how to reprehend and show men's faults, but by taunts and bitter biting
speeches, are not to be approoved; as did that fool Diogenes, who ridiculously
and triflingly talked with king Alexander the Great, as if he had spoken to
some simple burgess of Athens. And Calisthenes, Plutarke in Alex.
whom Alexander led with him in his voyage unto Asia, to instruct him in good
above all, men ought well to engrave in princes minds, that notable answer
which The difference of a friend and a flatterer.
captain Phocion made unto the king Antipater, who had required some thing of
him which was not reasonable: I would (Sir) do for your service all that is
possible for me, but you cannot have me both for a friend and a flatterer: as
if he would say, That they be two things far different, to be a friend and to
be a flatterer, as in truth they are. For the true friend and servant of the
prince, orders and frames all his actions Plutarke de discri. adul and amici.
to the good of the prince, and the flatterer tends and bends all his actions
to his own proper good: the true friend loves with a true love his prince,
and the flatterer loves himself: the true friend modestly shows his vices in
his presence, and praises his virtues in his absence; but the flatterer
always exalts the prince in his presence, rather for his vices, than for his
virtues, and behind his back he blames and defameth him, vaunting and saying,
that he governes him at his pleasure,

Moreover, when we say that flatterers are pernicious to a prince, that is not
meant of all them which dedicate and give themselves to please the prince: for
there may Alexander the great, king of Macedon: When he departed from his
country to pass into Asia, to make war upon that great Dominator, king
Darius, he had with him most chief in his love amongst others, Craterus
Hephaestion, two gentlemen, his especiallest friends and servants, yet far
Plutarke in Alex.
different the one from the other: for Craterus was of an hard and sharp wit,
severe, stoicall, and melancholicke, who altogether gave himself unto affairs
of Counsel, and indeed was one of the kings chief Counselors: but
Hephaestion was a young gentleman, well complexioned and conditioned in his
manners and behavior, of a good and quick wit, yet free of all care but this,
to content and please the king in his sports and pastimes; insomuch, as men
called Craterus the kings friend, and Hephaestion the friend of Alexander, as
one that gave himself to maintain the person of his prince in mirths and
pastimes, which were good to the maintenance of his health. When Alexander had
conquered Persia and Media, he begun to apparel Hephaestion to please the
king, did the like, leaving the Macedonike manner, to apparel himself, as
the Persians and Medes did, for which the king liked him the better: but
Craterus kept always his old fashions of Macedonie, and much blamed that
change of fashions in their apparel, and said it was but even to barbarize,
and begun to taunt and gibe at Hephestion for it. This their contrariety of
manners, was a cause that they entered far into enmity and quarrels;
Hephaestion, calling him fool and mad man; he took also privately aside
Craterus, and told him; he greatly marvelled, that he being a wise man, would
so hate Hephaestion for so small a thing. Afterward, he agreed them, and
publickely delared unto them, that they were the two Gentlemen which most he
loved in the world, but if any more they fell to quarrel again, he swore by
Jupiter Amon, that with his own hands he would slay him that begun. But after
that, they did nothing one against other. Hereupon I say: That it is necessary
Craterus, for his counsel, and it also becomes him well to have such as
Hephaestion, to keep him company in his honest pastimes.

But to the end men may better discern such as are good friends and servants
from flatterers, I will now (God willing) discover the examples of many sorts
of flatterers, which for the most part have had in singular observation, that
Maxim of Machiavell, namely: To hold close from the Prince the truth of
things: and the better to distinguish them, I will call them with such names as
our ancestors have called them, which are very proper and covenable unto them.
First, there are a sort of flatterers, which our ancient Frenchmen called
janglers, which signifies as much Ianglers.
as a skoffer, a trifler, a man full of words, or (as we call them) long
tongues, which by Philip Augustus, Annal. upon the year 1104.
as persons serving for nothing but to vanities and corruptions of manners;
unto which, Princes and great Lords gave gifts, which might better have been
employed upon Gods poor. And therefore that good king made a vow; that he would
from thenceforth give to the poor, all that which before he and his ancestors
had

Such flatterers in truth are very pernicious; for seeking too much to exalt
and lift up Princes by praises, they are causes to mount them into pride and
unmeasurable fierceness, which after brings their destruction. So came it to
Julius Caesar. For Dion and Plutar. in Caesar. and Sueto. in Caes. cap. 78, 79.
Lucius Cotta, Coruelius Balbus, and such like janglers, being nigh and about
him, ever persuaded him, first to name the month (which then was called
Quintilis) with and by his name, Julius, which he did, and ever since was it
called July. After that, they would needs make him a Temple, to make him be
worshipped as a god, and they Jupiter in his presence; they also persuaded him
to take the name and crown of a king, which he was determined to do, if he
had not been prevented by death. When the Senators came to speak with him in
his house, he would not arise to meet them, but those flatterers hindered him;
neither would they permit him to rise out of his chair to salute them, saying
he was Caesar, the sovereign Prince of the Commonwealth, and that all others
ought to honor him, and not he them. These things which Caesar did against his
will by the persuasions and constraint of janglers,

Caius Caligula a certain time was a good Prince, but the janglers he had
about Suet. in Calig. cap. 22. 51. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 15.
him, by their unmeasurable praises made him become (as says Suetonius) a
monster: they caused him to take titles of Pitions, The Son of Camps or
Hoasts, Most good, and Most great Caesar: and in the mean while they made him
become the most cruel, the most coward, and the most wicked tyrant in the
world. He took a desire after all those goodly names and titles, yea to take
the name of a King, and to wear a crown: but his flatterers showed him, that
the name of an Emperor was much more than a King: therefore from thence
forward he attributed to himself Petronius, would have placed an image of
Caligula in the great temple of Jerusalem, but the Jews would not suffer him,
which extremely detested images, whereby there had like to have been a great
sedition: but in all other provinces of the Empire it was executed without
contradiction. Yet not contented that his images should be in all places
adored, this detestable monster would many times go and place himself in
person betwixt the two images of Castor and Pollux, in the Temple which was
consecrated to them at Rome, and there made himself to be worshipped in the
midst Jupiters Temple, and there would come unto the image of Jupiter, and
make a countenance to talk with him, and speak in his ear, and then would
lay his own ear to Jupiters mouth, as it were to hear his answer: sometimes
would he lift up his voice, and taunt and rebuke Jupiter: and after he was
departed from thence, Jupiter, and had obtained that he asked. I pray you what
will you here say? Is it possible in the world to dream or imagine a more
extreme folly, or a pride and arrogancy more abominable and enraged. Behold
to what point janglers brought him. But this was not all: for seeing himself
thus adored, he fell persuaded, that no man durst ever enterprise any thing
against him, and so committed he a thousand cruelties, and strange and horrible
wickednesses, such as easily a sovereign prince might do, which spends his
time and power in all excesses, wantonness, and riotousnesse; wherein he never
cea^ed to wallow and tumble himself, till he was suddenly massacred and
slain: which was a just and merited recompense unto him, because he so lightly
believed

You must think, that whilst these janglers handled thus their master,
leading him to such follies, that they themselves were merry and joyful, to
see him so governed after their fancy: yet was there not laughter for them
all, and to speak of them which did not laugh, is so much the better fit to
make others laugh. First then was Dion in Caio Caligu.
one Macro, who seeking to come in favor and good grace with Caligula, not
only he employed himself to praise and exalt the Emperor; but also he set on
his wife, Ennea, to make her fit and handsome to gain the good grace of that
young Prince, commanding her to refuse him nothing. For such people, to come
to the end they purpose, care not therein to employ their honor and that of
their wives, even so far as themselves, to be very bauds. She then obeying
Macro her husband, did so much by her journeies, that she entered into Caligula
his amity, and her self discovered unto him, how well her husband loved him,
and what commandment he gave her. Insomuch, that Macro, as well by the
means of his wife, as by his own jangling, was a good time in credit. But one
day he had done something that pleased not Caligula (as to break a glass, or
some other like fault) and this foolish Emperor caused him to be called. When
he came he said: Come hither Gallant, did

There are yet two others, which received no less, and I will tell you how.
The Emperor Caligula, being one day sick in his bed, these janglers came to
visit him. The first was one Afracanus Potitus, who being nie the Emperors
bed, seemed to be very sad and sorrowful for the Emperors disease, and
amongst other adulatorie talk, he said unto him: I would (Sir) it would please
the gods that I might die for the recoverment of your health; for I make a vow
to the gods, that I would die with as good an heart, as ever I did any thing.
The other called Afracanus Secundus, Caligula answered them nothing at that
time; but when he was whole, he sent for them both: and being come, he said
unto them. Masters, my good friends, I am made to know, that you are very
devout to the gods: For since the other day that you came to visit me, and that
you vowed your lives to the gods for my health, I have soon recovered it, as
you vowed unto me: But fearing a relaps, and again to fall into my disease, if
you accomplish not your vow, I have sent for you to make you die, praying you
not to take it in evil part. And withal, without attending their

But certain it is, that this sort of flatterers which are so prodigal of
praises, will not spare all honorable titles toward the Princes unto whom
they addict themselves, whilst they are in their presence; but behind their
backs, they mock them, Dion in Neron.
and speak a thousand evils upon them. Teridates, brother of Vologaesus king
of the Parthians, in the time of the Emperor Nero, came to Rome with a great
retinue. Nero, his hands together tending toward heaven, said in this manner.
Sir, I, which am the Nephew of the great king Arsaces, and brother of the king
Vologaesus and Pacorus, am thy humble servant and slave, and am come hither to
worship thee as my god: for I can be nothing but what it pleases thee. Thou
have done well (answered the Emperor Nero) to come unto me to enjoy and have
fruition of my sight, and of my presence: For that which thy predecessors did
not leave thee, I give it thee, and make thee at this After this word, he put a
crown on his head, and invested him with the kingdom of Armenia. After (for a
pastime and sport for this new king) plays were appointed, wherein Nero would
needs make it appear, how well he could play upon the citharon, and indeed
played amongst the common plaiers. Also he thrust himself amongst carters
clothed in green as they were, to show, that in Lists he could also tell how
to handle chariot horses. After this Teredates the new king of Amenia, being
retired into his lodging, mocked Nero, and spoke infinite evils of him, calling
him Carter, Citternier: and further said, he mervailed how they could suffer at
Rome such a master and Lord. When he was before Nero, Nero his hand, such a
present as a kingdom.

Prusias king of Bithynia, was a flatterer like Teridates. For one day coming
to Titus Livius lib. 5. Dec. 5. Florus lib. 50.
Rome, a little after that Paulus Aemilius had vanquished king Perseus of
Macedon, he made certain Senators understand, that he had a desire to enter
into the Senate, to know his masters and superiors, whose enfranchised slave he
said he was, and to congratulate with them their victory. To enter the Senate
was granted him. When he approached the palace where the Senate assembled, he
fell on his knees at the door, and kissed the door lintell; after, rose up
and entered into the hall where the Perseus. This also was granted him. But he
was mocked and despised of all the company, for this so great and exorbitant
humility and flattering which he made unto virtuous people, which took no
pleasure in flattery. This was a king of no worth, a coward and man full of
vices (as commonly all such people are, which cover their adulations with so
extreme humility) and in the end was slain by Nichomedes his son, who made
himself king.

Lucius Vitellius (father of the monstrous Emperor Vitellius) was such a
flatterer Sueto. in Vite. lio, cap. 2.
as Prusias: for knowing that the Emperor Claudius, suffered himself to be
much governed by Messaline his wife; to come to his good grace and favor, he
came unto this Madame his wife, and prayed her for the honor of the gods, that
it would please her to grant him a gift, whereby he should for ever feel
himself bound to do her most humble service, as her humble slave. The
Empress demanded, what gift he desired: It is Madame (said he) that it would
please you to put out your feet, that I may pull off your shoes. It may be
supplied in the history, that this was at some hour when Messaline meant to
put off her shoes either to go lie down in her bed, or to wash her feet (as
the Elders used much to do,) Messaline could not refuse him this so honorable
and excellent a demand, proceeding from so generous and kissed it every day
for her honor. What should a man say unto this filthy

I will yet set down one other example of janglers, from a gowned man or
Senator, and then we pass on: for Senators and Lawyers may as well be
flatterers as others; although they should show better example, because
commonly they are wiser. You must then understand, that in the time of the
Emperor Tiberius, many were accused for light matters, said or done toward
the Emperor; because they knew he took pleasure in such accusations. Amongst
others, one day there was accused Vitellio Sueton. in Top. 5.
in a full Senate, of treason, a Roman Knight called Lucius Ennius, because he
had melted a silver image of his own, which represented the Emperors image,
to make some other work for his own use; you may think what an huge crime
Tiberius seeing that this accusation had no color in it, and that it was but a
mockery, to call it a crime, much less a crime of treason, he forbad that the
Knight should be criminalized for it. Yet Atteius Capito a Senator and a great
Lawyer, but a very flatterer, rose up, and as upon a free liberty of speech,
he used these words to the Emperor. Sir, we are here assembled in the Senate,
where every one has liberty, freely to utter his opinion, for the good and
utilitie of the commonwealth; we beseech you, not to take from us the power
that we have, to punish such as commit crimes against the commonwealth; and
pardon not you alone, that injury, which is done to all. For what a despite
and contempt Ennius, that he dare found and cast into the fire, a Princes
image? ought not he, rather to have kept it by him, as an holy and sacred
thing, and to have reverenced it, for the honor of him, whose representation it
was: this shows, what heart and affection he bears toward his Prince, and
that if he could, he would do as much unto him, as he does to his Image. For he
that reverenceth the gods, reverenceth also their images. Had he not otherwise
enough, whereof to make his silver vessel, but to melt for it this sacred
Image? he would not do so much with the images of Brutus and Cassius; for he
honors them in his heart, and would well at this day find the like, which
might enterprise the like disloyalty against our good Prince, as they did
against Caesar. Our Laws will, that in crimes of treason, the least apparent
Ennius, as a man attainted and culpable of treason. The Emperor Tiberius,
although he was cruel in such matters, knew well, that this fair opinion of
the Lawyer Capito, was but a mere flattery, which he understood better then
he uttered: therefore notwithstanding the said Capito his remonstrance and
opinion, he persisted in the Inhibitions before made, that the knight Ennius
should be no more vexed nor endangered about that matter. And the abovesaid
Tacitus Capito by this his goodly opinion, acquired a great infamy and evil
reputation to himself, greatly dishonouring both the knowledge of the civil
Law, humane and good letters, wherewith he was excellently endowed. Upon this
point I note that which master Philip de Comines well says: That Lawyers and
great learned Comines, lib. 1. cap. 24.
men are very fit to be about a Prince, and of his Counsel, if they be good
men; but being otherwise, they are very dangerous: For they can so well paint
and set out their language, alleging laws and histories, which every man
understands not, Titus Livius and other Hystoriographers: which I will not
here accumulate, because it is from our determined purpose.

In the rank of janglers, may well be placed the Poets of our time; which by
their Poesies full of flatteries and lies, seek to hook in some abbotship or
priorship, or Poets, janglers.
some other such gift, in recompense of their adulations. I confess, that a
Poet may and should take more liberty to write the praises of some one man,
than an Orator or an Hystoriographer: but when praises are so hyperbolicall,
as they rather fall out Charles the ninth: There, those goodly Poets say, That
the king before he died, overthrew more monsters than ever did Hercules, in
shedding so much blood of his rebellious subjects: That he died like Sampson,
who at his death pulled down and overthrew the pillars which he had in his
arms, and the house, upon himself; so in France, justice, piety, and
religion died with him: That France had been his stepmother: That there was in
him an exceeding great cunning in all arts and sciences, and that he was also
very expert in diverse handicrafts: That the king (Henry his brother) that now
reigns, succeeded Castor to Pollux, as one god to another god: That king
Charles died a martyr of Jesus Christ, and that from thenceforth he ought to be
invocated as a Saint. I pray you is there any man of sober judgment, which
does not plainly see, that such speeches become rather men void of wit and
understanding, by some extreme affection of flattery, than these gallant
Poets, which are drawn on and led with a generous and right Poetical spirit?
for meaning unmeasurably to praise, there escapes from them, that they speak
things redounding to their dispraise: and if the dead king were alive, he would
not thank them for such praises. For a good Prince (as Horace says of
Augustus) ever rejects such foolish praises.

To purpose ill, shall never go my verse
To Caesar's ear: for as his deeds appear,
So would he, I his praises should rehearse:
Too much his praise detesteth h^ to hear.
And indeed it is common to all good and virtuous people, not only to reject
excessive praises, but also to hate, as flatterers and liers, all such as use
them: as Euripides witnesses, saying:

A good man, praise too great cannot abide:
But hates that thing, which puffes him so with pride.
If those goodly Poets before they had made their Epitaphs, had well read
Virgil and Horace, they should have found, that these two excellent Poets writ
in many Aenead. 6. Hora. lib. 4. Carm. Ode 5. 15.
places the praises of Augustus. But wherefore do they praise him? For that he
established a good peace in all the Roman Empire, he caused justice to
flourish, he brought the people into a good repose and assurance, and reduced
again the golden Cassius and Brutus, do they either praise or despraise him.
And indeed (as Plutarch says,) They are pitious triumphs which are made upon
civil blood. These Plutarch in Caesar.
Epitaphers then should learn to praise a Prince, as they ought to do, and as
the elders have done. But when they say that our dead king died like Sampson,
and that with him died also piety and justice, which he carried in the devise
of his two pillars; do they not plainly blame the kingdom at this present of
impiety and injustice? as if justice were not now so good, nor religion in so
good estate, as in the time of the dead king; or as if they were or could be
made worse: yea contrary, every Adrian was mocked) or to make some such like
things. But contrary, the Poet Virgil describing Aeneid. 6.
what kind of Princes the Roman Princes should be, he wills they should have no
knowledge in the mechanical arts: only they should learn (says he) the
Science well to command, to govern, to vanquish, to pardon, to make laws and
edicts, and to establish good manners and customs upon the nations under their
governance. In like manner, the profane comparison of Castor and Pollux, where
one god succeeds another god, how unfit a speech it is for a Christian? If
Princes at this day Caligula betwixt Castor and Pollux. But enough is spoken of
janglers, and of their janglings, and of their too too impudent and strange
praises.

Let us now come unto Marmosets. A Marmoset, according to the language of
Marmosets.
our elders, is as much to say, as a reporter, murmurer, whisperer of tales
behind ones back in Princes and great men's ears, against one or other, which
be false, or else ought not to be reiterated or reported. And it seems unto
me, that this name of Marmoset is very proper and fit for such people, and
that it meriteth well to be again called back in use. And I believe it is
drawn from hence that such people, and carriages of their secret enemies, to
the end he may not unawares be surprised Comines) Comines, lib. 1. cap. 9. 56.
Princes are almost all suspicious (for doubts and fears that are put into
their heads by advertisements) they easily believe Marmosets and reporters. Yea
some Princes (says he) promise them that they will say nothing nor discover
any thing, which is one of the greatest faults that a Prince can commit. For
besides that, in all men (be they princes or private persons) the ancient
proverb has place (which says) That the sinews of Wisdom is, not to
believe lightly: yet is it a thing as particularly required in a Prince, to
stop his ears to all reports, unless the reporter will be well known, and
sustain the punishment of a slander, in case his report be not found true.
And thereupon the Prince ought to make diligent inquisition to have the
Augustus Caesar: for one day as one pleaded a criminal cause before him
against Aemilius Aelianus, the accuser amongst other crimes maintained, that
Aelianus accustomed to speak Sueton. in Aug. cap. 5.
evil of Augustus, and to detract and slander his Majesty. Augustus then
making a countenance to be angry, returned toward the accuser, saying. Is it
true that thou say that Aelianus has spoken evil of me, I would well thou
could prove it, for I would then cause him to know, that I have a tongue as
well as he, and would say as This poor accuser seeing Augustus make no more
account of it, was much ashamed, and wished after, that he Capitolinus in Marco.
had never advaunced such an accusation. Such was also the Emperor Antonius
Pius, with whom, the murmurations which Marmosets blew in his ears, could not
take place, and he made no account of them. As one day, Lucilla, the mother of
Marcus Antonius, the Philosopher (which Pius had adopted for his son) being
in a chapel upon her knees before the image of Apollo, Valerius Omulus, who
was a Marmoset, addressing his speech to the Emperor Pius: Behold (says he)
Lucilla makes her prayers to Apollo, that thou might quickly finish thy days,
that her son might reign: But the Emperor Pius reprooved him for such
talk, and told him, Lucilla and Marcus Antonius his son, were too good to
think such a thought. So generally we read, That all good emperors, such as
the abovesaid, and Traian, Adrian, Nerva, Alexander Severus, and others like,
have not only hated and detested, but also chased and banished far from the
court, reporters and relators of false tales.

But as I before said, It becomes not a Prince to make account, but rather to
contemn A word spoken in have ought not to be regarded. Froiss. lib. 4. cap. 6.
words not spoken by good deliberation. And to that purpose will I rehearse a
Judgment which was given and recorded in full counsel of king Charles the
sixth, whereat were his Uncle the Duke of Burgoigne, the Conestable, the
Mareschals of France, and many other great Lords of the Kings privy Counsel.
Master Peter de Courtnay an English Knight, being one day at the Court of the
King of France, offered a challenge unto a French knight, called Guy de la
Tremouille, by deeds of arms to try, who was the stronger knight and best in
arms: la Tremouille had no desire to refuse him: so that by the consent of the
King, and of his Uncle the Duke of Burgoigne, and in their presence, and before
many other great Lords, they ran a lance one against the other and no more,
for the King would not suffer them to go any further: the English knight was
evil content thereat, but yet without making other countenance, desired leave
of the King to return into England, which the King granted, and gave him for
his conduction, and guide for his assurance unto Calais, the Lord de Clary a
french gentleman, one renowned and of great valor. Clary his conductor marked
well his words, but he spoke not one word whilst he came to Calais: being
there, Clary angerly said unto Courtnay; Messira de Courtnay, I have acquitted
my self of the charge which the King my Lord gave me for your conduction to
this town; now that I have no more charge of you, I think good and place was
granted, and they so fought that Clary wounded M. Courtenay in diverse Clary was
sent for, who for his defense said, that that which he had done, was to
maintain the honor of France, and alleged many fair reasons: whereby it
seemed, that not only he ought not to have been blamed for that he did in that
case, but that rather he merited to be allowed and praised. The matter was
handled in the kings Counsel, and by judgment and decree Clary was condemned
to prison for a certain time, and in the mean while his goods were seized
into the kings hand, and little there wanted he was not banished France: but a
certain time after, the king pardoned him, at the intercession of the Duke of
Bourbon, and of the said Countess of S. Paul. And at his deliverance, was
made known unto him the morive of the kings Counsel, which was Augustus
Caesar, and many other, ignorant, what were the points of honor? yet were they
most magnanimous, and had their hearts so noble and generous, as they never
took footing upon any words spoken, without good consideration, but despised
and held them at nothing.

The sentence of the wise man is very true: That slaunderers or false
reporters, Prove. 18.
are like secret wounds which go down into the bowels. For as we see that
wounds and impostumes which arise within man's body, are almost all mortal, and
blows

The Emperor Claudius was much ruled by Messaline his wife (which was one
Sueton. in Claudio, cap. 37. Dion in Claudio.
of the most intemperate women of her time) and by the high Steward of his
household (whom he had enfranchised) called Narcissus, who had too good
intelligence with Messaline. This good Lady was amorous upon a fair young
Roman Gentleman, called Appius Sillanus; but he fearing the Emperor, would
not any thing yield unto the petulancy and wantonness of the Empress. What
did she? seeing his refusal; she and Narcissus plotted together seperatly, and
one after another, to tell the Emperor, that they had dreamed sleeping: That
there entered a man into Sillanus. And they resolved to tell him this dream in
a morning when they came to salute him; at that time also they took order that
Sillanus at the same hour should enter, to the end the Emperor (who was
fearful) upon his fear he should have of the rehearsal of the dream, and of
the present sight of Sillanus, might command to slay him. This enterprise
being thus made, Messaline sent to Sillanus (as from the Emperor) that he
should not fail to come unto him the next morning at his arising, for a
certain affair whereof he had to speak with him. The next morning came
Narcissus before day, and knocked at the Emperors chamber door, and it was
opened unto him; being entered and counterfaiting a great astonishment
approached the Appius Sillanus had slain you about this hour, and awaking upon
it, I straight come to tell you; for sometimes dreams are images of true
things, and are not to be despised. The Emperor, who was naturally fearful,
begun to be troubled: the aforesaid Madame also, took her course to the
Emperors bedside, faining also a great amasement, who incontinent told her,
Narcissus his dream; she withal making admirations at it: Oye gods, behold a
strange thing! all this night I have done nothing but dream, that I saw a man
very like Sillanus, which would needs have entered hither for some wicked
enterprise. The Messaline told him, that that was the only cause of her rising
so timely: for that this vision was ever before her eyes, that she could not
rest at her ease. Upon that talk, Sillanus came and knocked at the door: the
Usher which kept the chamber door, came to tell the Emperor, that Sillanus was
there, and would speak with him. Messaline and Narcissus then made a show of
fear and great wonderment, and told the Emperor, that it were good to command
straight to slay him, least he were slain himself. The Emperor Claudius,
which trembled for fear, and was exceedingly troubled in his mind, believed
them, and commanded to slay that honest gentleman. Behold how by false reports,
yea, by the report of a dream maliciously

The Emperor Severus had two sons, Bassianus and Geta, which he caused to
Sparti. in Anto. Carac. Herod. lib. 3 and 4.
be instructed the best he could possibly, and equally loved them both, and
ordained them both to be Emperors together after him: for already they had
experience, that Marcus Antonius and Lucius Verus were together Emperors in
good concord, and after then Dioclesian and Maximian, Maximus and Balbinus,
Theodosius and Honorius, Constantius and Galerius, Valentinianus and Valens,
and many others: Severus then being in this purpose to leave the government of
the Empire to his two sons together; flatterers about them disposed it
otherwise: for they ceased not daily to make false reports of the one against
the other, making one understand, that his brother had such and such talk of
him, and that he aspired to be alone Emperor after his father, and that it were
good to provide betimes, and that it were better to prevent, than to be
prevented: and Severus their father was dead, Laetus, which was one of the
Marmosets of Bassianus, persuaded him to slay his brother Geta, and to feine
that he was assailed by him. This counsel was found good of Bassianus, who was
audacious enough, and ready with his hand to give the blow: so that one
morning he entered into Iulia the Empress her chamber, mother of Geta, whom
he found there, and slew him betwixt his mothers arms, who was all bloody
with the blood of her son. Incontinently Bassianus got him out, and went to
find the soldiers of the guard, seeming Geta had so enterprised upon him.
Being in the camp, he gave them all great sums of money (for Severus had
left great treasure) and made them swear they would be faithful unto him. So
that when after they knew the deed done, and found themselves all gained and
corrupted with silver, they obeyed him without contradiction, as to one sole
emperor. And what Bassianus not ignorant, that the Senate of Rome would find
this murder very strange that he had committed of his brother, desired that
great lawyer Papinian, who was his kinsman, and had been as the Chancellor or
great master under the Emperor Severus, that he would go to the Senate, and
make his excuses by an Oration well set out: That he had done well to slay his
brother, and that he had reason and occasion to do it. Papinian (who was a
good man) answered him, That it was not so easy to excuse a parricide, as it
was to commit it. Bassianus greeved at this refusal, caused one of his
attendants straight to cut off his head. After this, willing to show to the
Senate and to the people, that he greeved because he had slain his brother,
and that they might see it was done by evil counsel, he caused also Laetus
his head to be cut off, who had counseled him to do that murder: he caused
also to die all them which helped him in that business, and which were
culpable thereof, saying, that they were cause thereof. This notwithstanding to
the end Geta his friends should enterprise nothing against him, he made die as
many as he could catch of them. So that under that title of being a friend,
servant, or favourer of Geta his brother, he made die many great and noble
persons: yea, he slew all such as carried themselves betwixt them two, as neuter
and reconciliators. I pray you what was the cause of all this great and
horrible butcherie? was it not the mortal enmity which these Marmosets had
sown betwixt the brethren.

In the time of the Emperor Commodus there happened a like thing: and because
Dion and Lamprid. in Commod. Herod. lib. 1.
the history is memorable, I would rehearse it a little at length. Marcus
Antonius the Emperor was surnamed the Philosopher, because he was a prince,
wise and studious, and a lover of good letters. In his time there were great
plenty of wise and learned men, because commonly (says Herodian) men do
imitate their prince, and give themselves to such things as the Prince loves.
There was always about him a great number of good and learned people for his
privy Counsel, which he called his faithful friends, as the king of France
also at this day does call his privy Commodus his son, fell into a disease,
whereof he died. But before his death he caused his Counsel to assemble, and
to recommend his son unto them, and made a little remonstrance, worthy of
such a Prince, in this manner. I doubt not (my good friends) that you are not
anguished and sorrowful, to see me of this disposition. For humanity causes,
that easily we have compassion of men's adversities, but especially when we see
them with our eyes. But yet in my regard, there is a more special reason: for
I doubt not but you bear me alike good will, to that which I have ever borne
you. But now is the time for me to thank you, that you have always been unto
me good and faithful Friends and Counselors. And I Upon this speech, his
heart and his word failed with languishment, and then all his Counselors which
were there, begun to weep and lament, yea some could not contain from crying,
for great sadness and bitterness of heart that they had, to see so good a
prince fail. After his death Commodus his son and successor in the empire,
governed himself some little time by the good people and ancient Counselors
of his father: but this continued not long: for there were straight, Marmosets,
which found subtle means and entries to get into him, which when they saw
their time, begun to say unto him: What mean you to tarry in this base and
barraine country of Hungary, better it were for you to be at Rome, to have
all the pleasures in the world: you have no cause to believe these tutors which
Commodus, who was a fair young prince, and one that desired nothing but his
pleasures, and who yet had no great resolution (although his father had taken
great pains to instruct him well) begun to let himself to be led with
Marmosets, which never spoke anything unto him but of merry and pleasant
things. So made he a shameful and dishonorable peace with the Barbarians,
against whom his father had commenced war, and retired to Rome: being there,
he begun to become cruel, especially against the Perennis, which persuaded him
to care for nothing, to take his pleasures, and to let him alone with the
charge of his affairs. Commodus was glad thereof; and to plunge him into all
lubricitie and wantonness; Perennis provided for him three hundred concubines
and harlots, and as many slaves. Having cast him into this gulf and
destruction, he took upon him the affairs of the empire, and begun to make
stay, and confiscate the goods of all such as he bore no good will unto, and
unto such as contradicted his doings, and Perennis in pieces, as an enemy of
the commonwealth. Cleander was another Marmoset, who succeeded in his place,
who at the beginning made some show, that he would do better, but incontinent
he did worse: for practicing many cruelties; he sold the estates and
governments of provinces to them which would offer most. There happened at Rome
a great famine and a pestilence withal. The people (which always lay the
Cleander was the cause of this plague and famine, and that therefore there was
cause he should die. Cleander to stop this brute and fame, and to cause the
people to hold their peace, caused all the emperors horsemen to be armed, and
in both the suburbs and town to rush through the people, slaying and wounding
innumerable. But the people begun to take houses and fight from the windows so
well, that the said horsemen were constrained to retire. Fadilla, (the Emperor
Commodus his sister, seeing this civil war commensed and raised by Cleander
within the town) went to find her brother, whom she found in the brothelhouse
amongst his harlots, where he took his pastimes: and all bewept, she fell on
her knees before him, saying: Sir, my brother, Cleander has raised in the
town: He has armed your forces, and has made them rush against the people,
and has brought them unto a slaughter more than barbarous, filling the streets
with Roman blood. If you do not soon put to death the author of this evil,
the people will fall upon you and us, and rive us in pieces. Saying these
words, she tore her garments, and was very sad, yea, as it were desperate: many
also which were present, increased the fear of Commodus by their persuasions,
insomuch, that he fearing greatly some great danger to himself, sent in have
for Cleander, who knew nothing of this complaint. Commodus (who had acquired
infinite enemies by the means of his Marmosets) determined with himself at
once to cause a goodly execution to be made, because he would not often
return thereunto (which is one of Machiavels precepts, whereof we shall
speak in his place) and for that purpose made two rowles of the names of such
as he would La dagne, the dagger: and the other L'espee, the sword. These two
rowles by hap fell into the hands of Laetus who was one of his Marmosets, and
of Martia, one of his courtizans, which found themselves first in a roll. They
then seeing the danger nigh and evident wherein they both were, conferred
together, and resolved rather to slay than be slain. Martia took the charge
to poison him, which she did; but Commodus, who had eaten and drunken too much,
was provoked to vomit, and with all that cast up his poison: which Laetus and
Martia seeing, caused him to be strangled in his bed. Behold here the end
whereunto Perennis, Cleander, and other Marmosets brought their masters, and the
end they made themselves, and the great evils, and slaughters of good people,
whereof they were Commodus was one of the most noble and illustrious raze in
the world, a goodly and personable prince as was possible, who was neither
subtle nor malicious of his nature, the son of the best prince that ever
was, who brought him well up, and left him a great number of wise and prudent
men, well to govern him, and toward him had gotten the favor and good will of
all the world. Yet these Marmosets and flatterers brought him to a miserable
end, and reigned but a while, and died young.

The emperor Severus had on his Counsel, one Vetronius Turinus, whom he
Lampri. in Alex.
Alexander Severus at his pleasure; and that he caused in the Counsell-chamber,
such resolutions as he thought good of. The solicitors of the court which had
businesses in the princes consistory, understanding that Turinus said he had
there so great credit, failed not to wait upon him, to recommend unto him their
affairs. What does he then? he marchandiseth with all the parties contending,
and every one promises a good sum, upon condition to make him obtain that
which he seeks for, as he promises to al, yet none knows any thing one of
another. Turinus notwithstanding never speaks for the Turinus had a certain
time used this occupation, To sell the hopes and decrees of the princes privy
Counsel, his dealings were discovered. Alexander incontinently sent him to
prison, caused his process or indictment to be made; which found against him,
he was condemned, as a seller of smoke, to be tied to a pillar, and there to
be stifled with the stench and smoke of dung and karion, heaped up and kindled
nigh the said pillar. Behold the reward that this Marmoset Turinus received,
for the false reports he

Enough is spoken of the Marmosets of the Roman emperors: let us now speak of
our French Marmosets. In the time of king Charles the sixth, le bien aim, by
Marmosets Annal. upon Anno 140^. Monstre. lib. 1, cap. 22.
and Reporters, a great enmity arose betwixt Lewis duke of Orleans the kings
brother, and John duke of Burgoigne, conte of Flanders, of Artois, and lord of
many other lands and territories. Our hystories name not these Marmosets, but
simply say, that their household servants incited them to band one against
another: the le Doy en des Pairs; that he was more mighty and more rich than
the duke of Orleans; and although he was not so near of the blood Royal as
he, yet was he more near by alliance; (for the Dauphin, who was yet very
young, had espoused his daughter) and therefore he ought in nothing to give
Philip duke of Burgoigne (his deceassed father) did, who whilst his father
lived, governed the king and the kingdom at his will. Briefly, these tatlers
and reporters caused this duke of Burgoigne so to mount into ambition and
covetousness to reign, that he enterprised to cause the duke of Orleans to
be slain, who hindered his deseignes and purposes: and indeed he caused him
to be most villanously massacred and slain at Paris, nie the gate Barbette, by
a sort of murdering thieves which he had hired, as the duke of Orleans went to
see the queen (who had lately been brought to rest of a child.) Great damage
there was for that good prince, for he was valiant and wise as possible one
might be. Of him descended king Henry the second, Francis his father was son
of Charles, duke of Angolesme, who was son also of John, duke of Angolesme, who
was son of the duke of that Orleance, and Madame Claude, queen of France,
mother of the said king Henry, and was daughter of king Lewis the twelfth, who
was son of Charles, duke of Orleance, who was the son of this duke Lewis,
whereof we speak. I would to God princes his descendants would well mark the
example of this massacre, most horrible, which was committed upon the person of
that good duke, their great grandfather, and the great evil haps and
calamities which came thereof, to shun the like miseries which ordinarily
happen, when such murders go unpunished. For (because the duke John of
Burgoine was not punished for this fault, John of Burgoigne, were they which
stroke the iron against the flint, out of which came that spark of fire (a
device fatally taken by the duke of Burgoigne) which brought into combustion
and into a burning

Francis, duke of Bretaigne (a prince that was a good Frenchman, and
affectionate Monstre. lib. 3. cap. 4 and 33.
to the king of France his sovereign) had a brother called Gills, who gave
himself to the English, in the time that they made war in France, and
accepted of the king of England the order of the Garter, and the office of high
Constable of England. The duke and his brother much greeved hereat, found
means to take him prisoner, Giles of Bretaigne had remained within the castle
a certain time, and that he had considered well his doings, that he was borne
the kings vassale of France, and that he ought never to have disunited himself
from his brother; he then prayed his brothers people, that came to see him, to
tell him from him, that he greatly repented what he had done, and that if it
pleased him to pardon him, that from thence forward he would follow with a good
heart the part of the king of France and his; and that if it pleased them, he
would straight send to the king of England his Order, and Constables sword.
What Giles his brother was still obstinate, and so perfect English, that no
reasons they could make, could turn him unto that side. The duke sent still
many times the same men unto him, but always they made the like or worse
report of him: insomuch, that this good duke, fearing that his brother was
invincible in his obstination, fearing also, that if he should let him loose,
he would cause the English to come into Bretaigne to avenge himself, commanded
the same reporters to strangle him in prison: which they did. Afterward (as God
when he sees his time, brings the most hid things to light) these murdering
reporters could not hold, but discover the truth of the matter, and that Giles
of Bretaigne would have done any thing that the duke his brother would have had
Giles of Bretaign, and the reward which such Marmosets received, which were
cause of his death. Hereof Princes may note a rule; Not to believe too easily
reports made of men, without hearing them, but especially when it touches life.

One day before the emperor Adrian, there was one Alexander, which accused I.
3. 9. idem. Diu. D. de Testi. 6.
of certain crimes one Aper, and for proof of those crimes, he produced
certain informations in writing against Aper, which he had caused to be taken
in Macedon. Adrian mocked at it, and said to Alexander the accuser, that these
informations Iunius Rufus, Governor of Macedonie, commanding him to examine
diligently the witnesses, and take good advisement, whether they were good men,
and worthy of credit: and if Alexander the accuser could not prove well his
accusation, that he should banish him to some place. This commandment of the
emperor Adrian has since been marked by the Lawyers, which since made a law
thereof. Behold how men must proceed, when it lies on men's lives, and not to
believe Marmosets and reporters, neither believe papers, without seeing or
hearing Froissart, lib. 2. cap. 173. and lib. 3. cap. 63, 68. and other
following, and lib. 4. cap. 92. etc.


I would now rehearse an example truly tragical, of king Richard of England,
who was son of that valiant and victorious prince of Wales. This king came to
the crown very young, and had three good uncles about him, the duke of
Lancaster, York, and Gloucester, by whose counsel for a certain time he
governed well his evil lucks, caused to be taken and seized into his hands all
his lands and goods, because Richard in his castle unprovided, whom he took
and imprisoned, and caused him to resign unto him the Realm and Crown of
England. King Richard was put to death in prison, after he had reigned two and
twenty years: a thing very strange, rigorous, and unheard of in England or in
any kingdoms nigh unto it. And so the earl of Darbie, who had been banished
from England, remained a Harry the fourth of that name. This earl Marshall,
who kept at Venise, knowing these news, died ragingly. This was the end of
this Marmoset, and the tragical evil hap whereunto he brought his master, and
that upon words reported, which were never spoken, as any evil speech of the
king: but only for the grief he had, that they of his Counsel governed so
evil the kingdoms affairs. Which words should nor ought not to have been
taken up nor reported to the king, and being reported unto him, he should have
made no account of them, and to have always presumed rather well than evil of
his cousin Germane.

Herodes, borne of a low and base race, was created king of Judea, Galalie,
Samaria Joseph. Antiq. ^ib. 14. cap 23. and lib. 15. cap. 9. and li. 16. cap.
3, 4, 13. and lib. 17.
and Idumia, for the favor of Marcus Antonine a Roman captain, and by
Mariamme, by whom he had two children, Alexander, and Aristobulus: but Herodes
had a sister called Salome, who was a very Tisiphone, and served for nothing
but to kindle and light fires in the kings court, by false reports which she
invented; and this infernal fury did so much, as she persuaded the king her
brother that Mariamme sought to poison him by his cup bearer, and brought out
certain false witnesses to prove it: so that the king believed it, and put to
death his wife, one of the fairest princes of the world, and of whose death
there was after, infinite griefs and repentances. But as one sin draws
after it another, Salome fearing that those two aforesaid children would feel
afterward, Herodes the father, that these two children Alexander and
Aristobulus spoke already of revenging the death of their mother, and by the
same means to usurp the kingdom. Herodes suffering himself to be persuaded
by the calumniations and slanders of his sister Salome^, took his journey to
Rome, having his two children with him, where he accused them to have fought
his death, before Augustus Caesar, he began to descipher his accusatorie
oration, and to deduct and set out the means, whereby he pretended that his two
children should go about his death. When it came to their turn to speak for
Caesar knew well thereby that the poor children were full of innocence. So he
exhorted them from thence forward to carry themselves in such sort toward
their father, that not only they should not do against him any thing unworthy
or greevous, but also should do so much as to bring themselves far from all
suspicion. He exhorted also Herodes, to use his sons well, and to keep them
in his favor. Then fell the children on their knees before their father with
great effusion of tears, crying him mercy, by which Herodes and his children,
this fury Salome (not contented with this reconciliation which Caesar had
made) began to lay new ambushes by false reports that she made to Herodes,
wherein she mixed some truth, to give the better taste: Herodes who was very
credulous in such matters, made Augustus understand, that his children had
again conspired his death. Augustus answered him, That if his children had
done against him the thing which merited punishment, that he should chastise
them as he thought good, and that he himself gave him power and permission so
to do. The abovesaid Herodes joyful to have received this power, being led with
an irreconcilable rage, by the means of Salome, caused the two poor children
Alexander and Aristobulus to Salome aided her self in all this business, with
one other son of Herodes, borne of another woman called Antipater. God would
that Herod should discover, that the accusations against his two dead children
were but slanders, and that Antipater (who had aided to forge them) had
himself conspired to poison his father. Whereupon he caused him to be called
before Guintius Varius, the governor of Syria for the emperor. The cause being
long pleaded and debated, Antipater could not purge himself of the sayings and
proofs against him: and did no other thing but make great exclamations, nothing
appertaining to the matter, holding on, that God knew all, unto whom he
recommended his innocence. Varus seeing that he could not well justify
himself, wished Herodes to imprison him, and so Herodes fell sick, which
coming to the notice of Antipater in prison, he rejoiced greatly. Herodes
advertised that Antipater wished his death, and rejoiced at his sickness, sent
one of his guard into prison to slay him, which he did. Five days after,
Herodes died like a mad man, for the evil haps he had in his children, and
this rage lighted a fire in his entrails, which rotted him by little and
little, whereupon engendered worms, which eat him alive, with horrible
languishments before his death. And who was the cause that Herodes thus
contaminated his hands and all his house with the blood of his own children?
Even that most wicked reporter Salome, who devised false accusations and
slanders which she blew in the king her brothers ears.

Besides those kind of flatterers, whereof we have spoken above, which are
janglers Cou^sellors flatterers.
and Marmosets, there is yet a third kind, which under the name and title of
principal Counselors, and under the pretext and color of conducting the
affairs by good counsel, they abuse the princes authority, who are greatly to
be feared. To shun the mischief that may come thereupon, there is nothing
better than to follow the precept of Comines, namely; That the king have many
Counselors, and that he Comines, lib. 1. cap. 27. and lib. 2. cap. 44.
never commit the conducting of his affairs to one alone, and that he hold as
nigh as he can well, his Counselors equal. For if he commit much more to one
than to another, he will be master, and the others dare not reason against him
freely, or else knowing his inclination, dare not contradict him. Therefore in a
criminal cause Lepida, accused of treason; the emperor Tiberius (although he
were very rude in Cornel. Tacitus, annal. lib. 3. and li. 5.
such cases) would not suffer his adoptive son Drusus to reason first, least
(says Tacitus) thereby had been laid and imposed a necessity for others to
have consented unto his opinion. And in another cause of like matter, where
Granius Marcellus was accused in a certain place to have set his own image
above the emperors. When the cause came to handling; Piso (whose opinion the
Emperor desired first) began And you (Sir) in what place will you reason? for
if you reason last, I fear that by imprudencie I shall not dissent from you.
For that cause Tiberius declared, that he would not reason at all: and indeed
the accuser was absolved, although the Emperor had showed a countenance to be
angry against him, as he heard the accusation rehearsed. And there is no doubt,
but that the counsel of one alone is Counsel of one alone dangerous.
perilous to the prince, because naturally men are diverse ways passionate,
and that which shall be governed by one alone, is often by passion guided. Also
the indisposition of men's persons causes, that every one has not always his
head well made, (as they say) nor are wise at all seasons; and men's spirits, as
well as their bodies are journals, and have their viscicitudes and changes: for
from the wisest sometimes do Charles, duke of Burgoigne then earl of
Charolois: he having made a peace with the town Com. lib. 1. cap. 27 and 20.
of Liege, went soon after to besiege Dinant, a town nigh the other. They of
Liege going against the treaty of peace, made ready an army to go succor
Dinant, but they there arrived after the town was taken. The duke fierce of
his victory, would needs have rushed upon the^ of Liege as peace breakers, but
an agreement was made; That they should observe the said form of peace, and
that for effect that they should give three hundred men for hostages (which
were named) the next morning at eight of the clock. The next morning came, and
eight of the clock, yea noone, but no hostages were delivered; so that the
duke would gladly have run upon the town of Paul was of a contrary mind,
saying; That a multitude could not be so soon accorded, and that men must not
so measure affairs of importance, by hours and minutes, but that it were yet
good to summon them by an harrold. This opinion of the earl of S. Paul was
followed of the most of the Counsel: so that a Trumpet was sent to summon
them, who met the hostages by the way coming to the duke. Here note; if the
duke had had of his M. de Imbercourt, a wise knight, was of the contrary mind,
saying: It were best to take God on our side, and not to sley so many innocents
for the fault of their concitizens: and for their yielding king fever into an
hot ague, as the French proverb is. For the same reason the Otho (Galba his
successor) was evil beloved of all the people, which Dion. in Othon.
were in an exceeding fear to see about him, them which had been the
ministers and Counselors to Nero. For although Otho after he was created
Emperor, made a reasonable good entry, and showed himself very kind, and
courteous, and moderate in all things, seeking by liberality and such other
means to obtain every man's good will: yet men could not trust him in any
manner, nor hope from him any good as long as he was served with Nero his
servants. So that being so evil beloved, he endured not long, but being
overcome of Vitellius, he slew himself.

Contrarily, king Lewis the twelfth coming to the crown of France, governed
himself evil, by leaving and forsaking the old and ancient Counselors and
servants of king Charles the seventh, his father, such as the County de
Dunois, the Marshall de Loheac, the County de Dampmartin, M. Charles de
Ambois, the Lords de Chaumont, du Bueil, and other like. For he ought to have
considered, that he succeeded a king which was wise, and who had very well
managed and ruled his realm, and by consequent, who had good Counselors and
servants, which the rather he should have reserved and retained in his service,
as indeed he did a good time after he was made king, when he knew by
experience the fault he had made. For amongst other good parts which were in
the said Lewis the twelfth, he was not proud, but humble, and could well
acknowledge his faults, and amend them: insomuch, that the fault that he made
in disappointing the good servants of his father, ought no more Sophocles:

To fail and fall a common thing it is
To all mankind; but he that has the skill,
Salve to provide to heal that is amiss,
Astray goes not, as he that stands in ill.
Which never happens to a proud man, who always persevers in his evils: and
if a man will show him any thing for his good, he takes it in evil part, and
in place Galba was of that nature: For when a man required anything of him, or
that any showed him any faults in the government of the Commonwealth, he would
provide no remedy for it, fearing to be seen to obtemperate and obey his
subjects.

But as for that I have said concerning the change, which sometimes ought by a
Cou^sellors of a Prince disl^ked of great men* and o^ the people ought to be
put off.
prince to be made of the Counselors and servants of his predecessors; this
has often happened in France: That the king has been forced to change new
Counselors, to appease the Nobility and the malcontent people. This
happened to king Chilperic, the first of that name, the son of valiant king
Merovee: for he governed himself Charles the wise, being Dolphin; to king
Charles the sixth, his son; to king Charles the seventh, and Lewis the
eleventh, and to many others, Annal. upon An. 1458.
which is not needful here to insert. But I must needs say, That sometimes
such changes have been procured rather upon envy, than upon just complaint,
they have Charles the seventh had Counselors both wise and loiall, as M.
Tanguy du Chastell, M. John Lowet president de Provence, the Bishop of
Cleremont, Annal. upon An. 1426.
and certain others of mean quality, which had done him great services in
great affairs he had had, as well when he was Dolphin, as after he was king.
At that time this king had civil war against the duke of Burgoigne, whom
secretly the duke of Bretaigne favored: which war the king would gladly have
had extinguished. Therefore he himself openly spoke to the said lords and
dukes, which made him answer: That they were content to come to some good
accord, provided, that he

To come again to our purpose, certain it is, That a prince which commits
the government of his affairs to one alone, brings himself in great danger,
and hardly can such government be without great mischeefes and disorders. For
this commonly men hold, That being lifted up unto great honor and dignity,
they cannot Severus so high advaunced Plautianus, that being great master of
his household, the people thought (seeing his dealings in his office) that he
was the emperor himself, and that Severus was but his great master. He Dion
and Spartian Severo.
slew, robbed, banished, confiscated the goods of all such as he would, in the
sight and knowledge of Severus, who contradicted him in nothing. So far
mounted this great and immoderate license; that Plautianus durst well attempt
to cause Severus to be slain, and his two sons. But his wickedness was
disclosed by a captain, unto whom he had discovered it: insomuch, that Severus
caused him to come before him, and although by nature he were a cruel Prince,
yet was he so firmly affected to Plautianus, that he never spoke sharp or
rigorous word unto him; but only I am abashed, Plautianus, how it came in
thine heart to enterprise this against me, who have so much loved and exalted
thee, and against my children, whereof Bassianus my eldest son has married
your daughter, and so is your son in law. Truly the condition of men is very
miserable, that cannot maintain themselves in such honor and dignity, as I
have placed you in. I pray you tell me your reasons and defenses to purge you
of this act. The abovesaid Bassianus (seeing that the emperor his father would
receive Plautianus to his justification, fearing he should have escaped) caused
one of his men to slay him in the presence of his father, adding to the saying
of Severus: Certain it is, that great honors attributed

In the time of Philip le Bell, king of France, M. Enguerrant de Marigni,
County Annal. upon An. 1314 and 1326.
de Longuevile, a valiant and wise knight, governed almost all the affairs of
the king and his kingdom, and especially of his common treasure, which was
distributed by his ordinance. Amongst other things he caused to build that
great Palace at Paris, where the court of parliament is held. After the death
of king Philip; Charles Count de Valois, his brother, begun criminally to
pursue M. Enguerrant before certain commissionaries of the said court,
delegated for that purpose. And so far did de Valois (being a great lord,
prince of the blood, and in great credit with king Lewis le Hutin, his nephew,
and son of the said Philip) pursue the cause against M. Enguerrant (who was
then out of credit after the death of king Philip his master) that he was
condemned to be hanged and strangled on a gibbet at Paris, as he was indeed.
This happened only unto him by the envy he had procured by his great place
and too great credit. For true it is, that he was accused of many things, but
he was not condemned of any punishable thing. But our hystories say, That he
was not received unto his justifications and defenses, he was so fiercely
pursued by the said County de Valois, who after he had caused him to be
hanged, and that the hatred he bore him was extinct by his death, from thence
forward he M. Enguerrant. Then begun he to cause many Masses to be said, and
great alms to be given for the soul of M. Enguerrant, and his own health.
But in the end he died of the palsy. So it appears by M. Enguerrant, that
he was overthrown by his own greatness. We may also well note, what a
perilous thing it is, to wound our conscience, for to please our affections.
For that is to offend the

3. Maxim.
A Prince ought not to trust in Strangers.
HE that is driven from his Country (says Machiavell) draws Discourse,
lib. 2. cap. 31.
to that prince which will receive him, not for any good

I Place not here this Maxim, to the end to confute or reprove it: for it is
true, in such manner as he deducteth and understands Machiavell would say,
That a Prince ought not to serve himself, nor trust in them which are
strangers unto him, which are not of his nation, although they be of his
countries, and under

The reason is evident, because naturally every man loves his own country and
nation, and by consequent, a governor or magistrate of the same nation, and of
that country, shall be better beloved than a stranger. And being better
beloved, he shall also be better obeyed, and shall so bring a better obedience
to his prince: for true and assured obedience must proceed more from love, than
from force or fear, as shall be showed more at large in another place. The
other reason people thereof are angry, and do greeve, that they have not
whereupon and wherein Hesiodius and Aristotle shoot not far from the white of
truth: when they say, That by right of nature he ought to dominier and rule,
who has the more able spirit to know how to command well, and he that has the
lesseable ought to obey. And although sovereign principalities are not ruled by
that natural law, because of the difficulty which falls ordinarily in the
execution

The year 1158, William king of Sicilie (by his original was a Frenchman)
gave Annale 1168.
the estate of the Chancellor of his kingdom to a person very capable and fit,
but he was not that countreyman, but a Frenchman. The lords of the kingdom
greeved A strange Chancellor cause of a great massacre in Sicilie.
the greatest magistracy of justice must needs be exercised by strange hands,
a very cruel conspiration. For not only they conspired the death of that
chancellor, a Frenchman, but also of all them of the French nation, which were
dispersed in the kingdom of Sicilie, Calabria and Apuleia. For that purpose
sent they secret letters through all the towns and places of the said
countries, whereby they advertised their friends and adherents (which were
already prepared all over) that they should massacre and slay (each one
respectively) the Frenchmen of their places and towns, on the day and hour that
they would assign them. Which was executed, and there was made in the said
countries an horrible butcherie and exceeding great effusion Sicilia^ Eve^song.
imitation hereof, the same race complotted and executed not in Sicilie (but in
France it self) and through all the best towns of the kingdom, the horrible
and general massacre of the year 1572, which will ever bleed, and whereof
their hands and swords are yet bloody. Of which exploit, they have since
incessantly vaunted and braved, calling it The Parisien Matines. M. Martin du
Bellay, rehearses also in Paritien Matin^.
his Memories, how the same race murdered a great number of poor soldiers
(after the journey of Pavie coming toward France) lame, wounded and unarmed,
slaying them in their high ways. But such is this peoples generositie of
heart, always to be ten or twenty against one, and to brave such as are
wounded or unarmed, which have no means to resist. This Messeresque
generositie is at this day called in France, Coyonnerie and Poltromerie. But
let us come to our purpose touching the disorders that come by strange
magistrates.

By the peace of Bretaigne made betwixt John king of France and Edward king
Froissart, lib. 1. cap. 216. 246, etc. Pla. in Martin 4.
of England, the country of Aquitaine was acquitted purely and in all
soveraigntie by the said king John, to the said king Edward. This king Edward
from the first possession

John duke of Bretaigne, in regard that he had taken a wife in England, was
marvellously Froiss. lib. 1. cap 311 and ^14.
affected to the English party, yea against the king of France his sovereign
lord. The nobility of Bretaigne were much grieved thereat: insomuch, that one
day the three greatest lords of the country (that is to say, the lord de
Clisson, de Laval, and de Rohan) went to him, and after salutations, said to
him in this manner: Sir, we know not upon what thought you show your self so
enclinable and favorable unto the English; you know that the king of France is
our sovereign lord, and the duchy of Bretaigne holds also of the crown of
France: We pray you to despoile and The duke hereat was much troubled, and
could not so much cover his courage, but he said, That the king of France did
wrong the king of England, to despoile him of Aquitaine. Certain time after,
distrusting his subjects, he sent into England to have Englishmen for his
service, and to give them captainships

The king Charles the eight, in the voyage of Naples, which he made in his own
Comines, lib. 1. cap. 20.
person, conquered the realm of Naples almost without stroke striking; and was
received Alphonsus and Ferrand of Arragon, usurpers of that kingdom upon the
house of Anjou, whereunto Charles succeeded. Every one may judge, if it had not
been easy for the king (if he had enjoyed a good Counsel) to have kept that
goodly kingdom in his perpetual obedience. For when a people has been
tyrannized by an usurper, and that he comes to recover his natural prince,
which deals with them like a good prince, there is nothing to induce the
people to deny him obeisance, or to revolt. Because on the one side they
acknowledge, that after God, and reason, they ought to obey Charles? Thus
having conquered that kingdom, he gave all the estates and offices of the
country unto Frenchmen, which he had with him in that voyage: whereof the
gentlemen of the country, (and especially such as had always either secretly
or openly held to the part of the house of Anjou) were so discontented and
spighted, that they straight cast off all amity and good affection to the
king, and incontinent entered into practices and complots, to make all the
country to revolt, which they straight did, and so made void that voyage, and
(for nothing) the

By the aforesaid example it appears, That the Frenchmen gained nothing by
getting into their hands all the offices and estates of the kingdom of Naples:
yet gained they much less in the fact I come now to speak of, seeking to take
away the honor of the war from the Spaniards in Spain at the battle of
Iuberoth. You Froiss. lib. 3. cap. 12, 31, 14, 15, 16.
must then understand, that the king John of Castile, being an allie with the
king of France, demanded succors of him and aid to make war against king
Denis of Portingale. The king of France sent him gallant succors, as well of
footmen as John of Castile: our French desired the point of the battle, to
show both what they could do in war, as also their good affection to do him
service. The Castilians contradicted this, being greeved and envious against
the French, that so vaunted and preferred themselves before them.
Notwithstanding all that the Spaniards could do, the king granted them their
request, where of they were very glad, and the Castilians as sad. What did the
Castilians? Upon despite and envy they complotted

Ochozias king of Judah was son of Athalia, a woman stranger, daughter of a king
2. Kings, cap. 10. 2. Chron. cap. 22.
of Samaria. This king governed himself by Samaritans, (which were much hated
of the people of Judah,) unto whom he gave the principal charges and offices of
his kingdom, at the persuasion of his mother a Samaritane also, despising and
casting behind, the wisest and most virtuous of his kingdom, by which he should
have been governed, after the example of his predecessors. This was the cause
of that kings destruction: for as Iehu was in destroying the house of Achab
brother of Athalia, he slew also Ochozias, and extermined almost all his race,
as a partner and friend which maintained Achab. If Ochozias had governed
himself rather by people of his own kingdom, than by strangers, that evil
hap had not come unto

That great king Asseuerus which held the empire of the Medes and Persians, and
Ester, cap. 6, 7, 8, etc.
governed over 127. countries, a great while governed himself by a stranger
called Aman who was a Macedonian: this Aman seeing himself in credit, durst
enterprise unjustlie to make die Mardocheus (who had always been the kings
good and faithful servant,) under the pretext and color, that he was not of
the kings religion. and to cover the particular enmity which he had against
Mardocheus, and to the end to make it see me that he would not this harm to
him alone, he found means to the king, to cause a general commandment for
the massacring and murdering of all such as were of Mardocheus his religion.
But the king having been advertised that Mardocheus had done him good
services, and that that which Aman did was but upon envy, revoked the
commandment, and would not have that massacre to be executed, but caused to
hang and strangle the Macedonian, which would have had him brought his
kingdoms and countries into combustion by so horrible an effusion of blood as
he had caused to be enterprised, and gave his estate to Mardocheus.

Alexander king of Epirotes had drawn and gathered into his country a great
Alexander, and to be afterward established in their goods and in authority
(under him) in the said country. But as it ordinarily comes (says Titus
Livius) that such people have Alexander into a place nigh the flood Acheron,
from drowning in which he could not save

Charles the last duke of Bourgoine, not being able any way to get his will of
the De Comines, lib. 1. cap. 83, 92.
town of Nus, entered into distrust and coffeehouse with his own subjects,
although in truth they had done all their duties in the besiege of the town:
yet a prince must do what he will. Upon this mistrust and coffeehouse of
his subjects, he resolved with himself to be served with strangers, and
amongst all other strange nations, he made choice of Italians. But I leave you
to think how good his choice was likely to be: for every one knows well
enough, what account Italians make of the observation of their faith, and how
Machiavell teaches, That faith is not to be observed but to a man's profit,
which they of that nation do always well practice. And if sometimes there be
found any loyal and good observers of their Campobache was entered into credit
with the duke, he begun to govern him at his pleasure, so that the duke
trusted more in him than in any man in the world. Campobache having gained this
point, straight begun to practice to betray Lewis the eleventh, then reigning,
if he would promise him in recompense 20000 crowns, and a good earldom. But
the king (doing as Fabricius did toward the king Pyrrhus) would not enter into
that composition, but advertised the duke of Burgoigne; to the end he might
take heed of that traitor, and rid himself of him. The duke took this
advertisement in evil part (his senses were so troubled) imagining, that the
king sent him this word to make him leese his good servants, and therefore
trusted more than ever, Campobache. When Campobache saw he could not bargain
with the king, he sought a merchant other where: for he was resolved,
whatsoever became of his credit, to draw out a profit, if he could. Amongst
these actions, the duke thought good to besiege Nancy, the principal town of
Lorraine. The duke of Lorraine was not so scrupulous to enter Campobache, by
the means of a gentleman of his, named Cyfron, and they concluded and agreed
betwixt them secretly. Finally, before Nancy was a battle given by the advice
of Campobache, who councelled the duke of Lorraine, to levy the siege of the
duke of Burgoigne, who was there slain, and his army defeated by the means
and treason of Campobache. The king after this, took a part of the country of
the said duke of Burgoigne, which died in the foresaid battle, because they
ought duly for

The emperor Gordian the young, prospered greatly whilst his affairs were
governed Capito^inus in Gordiano.
by Misitheus his father in law, and who was his great master of his household,
and his lieutenant general. Gordian made war against Sapor, king of Persia,
whom he drove out of Thracia, and from the countries of Syria, and recovered
Antioche, Gordian was feared and redoubted through all Persia, whereas before
Italy it self begun to fear the Persians. But upon the course of his
victories and prosperities, arrived by evil hap the death of that good and
wise man Misitheus, and withal, fell another yet greater, which was this: That
that young emperor went to give the estate of his father in law to a stranger,
an Arabian, called Phillippus, who straight begun to practice against his
master (as we have abovesaid of Campobache.) For the first thing he did was
this: That he took order, that victuals should want in the camp, to make a
mutiny of the soldiers against the emperor, and he himself did sow
diffamatorie words through the camp against his master, as that he Gordian,
for the want of victuals; and the principal captains thereof being corrupted
by this Arabian stranger, he did so much, as he got himself to be Gordian his
master die. Which this young prince seeing, he besought him humbly, that he
would receive him into the participation of the empire, and that they two might
be together emperors: as but a few years before had been Maximus and
Balbinus. But Philippus would not agree to that, perceiving himself strong of
captains, which he had gained and corrupted. Then Gordian demanded of him yet
the office which he had given him of the Great master of his household, and
Lieutenant general, and that in the place of a master he might so be his
servant. But the fierce Arabian denied it him, he was so villainous and ingrate.
Finally, he desired him but to save his life, which likewise Philippus was of a
vile and unknown race. Breefely, this cruel Barbarian and stranger, made
forcibly to be brought before his face that young prince, his master, who had
advanced him, and there caused him to be unclothed naked, and so to be
massacred and slain. Would any say, there could be imagined a barbarousnesse,
disloyalty, or cruelty, more strange? so a stranger committed it. Trust such
people who list.

The ancient Romans which were wise, took good heed of granting charges and
offices unto strangers, nay not to their associates of the same tongue that
they were. Marcus Aemilius, Praetor, that there should be new Senators chosen
to supply and increase the ancient number. And upon this proposition, he as
president of the Senate, demanded first the advice of Spurius Carvilius,
Senator. Carvilius thought best to choose some good number of the most notable
and wise men of the Latins, their associates; as well for that there was want
of men within Rome, as to hold the Latins more united and obedient; by the
means of which union he said, the Commonwealth should be much more fortified
and increased. But Manlius, which reasoned after him, was of another advice:
for he declared Manlius, reasoned that wise lord Quintus Fabius Maximus, who
said, he never heard nor saw any man argue in the Senate so grossly and evil
to purpose as Carvilius had done, especially (said he) in this time wherein we
are brought to such extremity, and that it is more needful than ever, to have
in the Senate, faithful and loyal persons: and every one may well know, that
there can never be good trust and assurance in strangers, which measure faith
and loyalty, by their profit and loss. We had need also to take good heed
there be no brute or fame of this foolish opinion of Carvilius, but to let it
be trodden under Carvilius was much despited, that he would have advanced
strangers into the offices of Senators.

We must not be abashed if the ancient Romans have used this: for even at this

The Salicke law (which is observed in France, and through all Almaigne) was
not only made to fore-close and bar women from the succession of the crown,

There is also an ancient example of Queen Brunehant, or Brunechile, who
advanced Annal. upon Anno 607.
to the estate of Maire du Palais de France, (which was as much as governor of
all the kingdom) a Lumbard, called Proclaide, who was much in her good grace
and amity. This stranger seeing himself lifted up so high, became so fierce
and so proud, that he made no estimate of the princes of the kingdom, but put
them to many troubles and vexations. He became also very rapinous and
covetous, as (says the history) is the nature of the Lumbards: insomuch, that
he did eat up and ruinated the subjects of France. Breefely, his behaviors
and dealings were such, that he got the evil wills of all men, from the
nobleman to the carter. At that time was there war amongst the children of
the queen Brunehant, Theodoric king of Orleans, and Theodebert king of Metz.
The barons and great lords, their vassales, desirous to make a peace betwixt
the two kings brothers, but this great Maire Proclaide hindered it withal his
power: which the said lords seeing, resolved amongst them; That it were better
that strangers died, than that so many gentlemen and subjects of the two kings
should sley one another; and so indeed they did slay him as an enemy to peace
and concord. The example of this Lombard should be well marked in this time, by
the Lombards which govern in

Lewis le Debonance, son of Charlemaigne, king of France, and emperor
Annal. An. 829. Maire du Palais, a stranger, cause of civil war.
of the West, altogether gave the Estate of Maire du Palais de France, to a
Spaniard called Berard, who incontinent mounted into great pride. The king had
three sons, Lotharie, Lewis, and Pepin, who could not support the arrogancy
and fierceness of this stranger, who (as it were) would parragon them. This
was the cause of an evil enterprise of these three young princes against their
own father. For they seized upon his person, and brought him into the town of
Soissons, and there caused him to forsake his crown of France, and the Estate
of the empire, and to take the habit of a monk in the Abbey of S. Mark in the
said

For a conclusion of this matter, I will here place the witness of M. Martin
du Bellay, knight of the kings order, a man of quality, of virtue, and of
great experience, who says: That he has seen in his time more evil happen
unto the affairs of king Francis, the first of that name, by the means of
strangers, Strangers inclined to commit treasons.
he places the Bishop de Liege, the Prince of Orange, the Marquess of
Mantua, the Lord Andrew Doria, M. Jerome Moron of Millaine, (who caused
Millaine to revolt) and certain others. But because these things are not of
very ancient memory, but happened in our world, I will make no longer
discourse thereof. Seeing also the examples and reasons which we have above
rehearsed, are sufficient to show (against the opinion of Machiavell his
disciples:) That a Prince cannot do better, than to serve himself (in offices
and public charges of the country of his domination) with his own subjects
of the same countries, as being more fit and agreeing to the nature of the
people of that M. Comines says) than when they see great offices, benefices,
and dignities conferred upon strangers. And as for offices, it has not been
seen aunciently and commonly, that they have been bestowed upon strangers:
but that within this little space of time they have found means to obtain the
greatest and best. For of old there was committed unto them, but offices of
Captaineships, to the end, that under that title they might the better draw
people of their own country to serve the king. But as for benefices, of a
long time it has been, that the Italians have held and possessed the best in
France, which the Pope bestowed upon them, and our kings durst not well
contradict. Yet notwithstanding Charles the sixth, to make an edict in the year
1356, whereby he forbad, That any benefices of the kingdom of France should
be conferred upon strangers; which both before and since, by many royal
Edicts, has often been renewed and reiterated. Which Edicts merit well to be
brought into use; but it shall not be yet, since that they only are they
which yet do govern all.

But I pray here all them which are good Frenchmen, that they will consider a
little Machiavell: That men should not trust in strangers, as it is true: and
this is because they would not advance any other but men only of their own
nation, and certain bastardly and degenerous Frenchmen, which are fashioned,
both to their humor and their fashions, and which may serve them as slaves and
most vile ministers of their trecheries, cruelties, rapines, and other vices.
For as for good and natural Frenchmen, they will never advaunce them, because
they are strangers unto them, and by

Where is now then the generositie of our ancient Frenchmen, who made
themselves redoubted amongst strange nations? Where are now our ancestors
virtues, who have caused the Levant to tremble, and have sent out their
reputation into Asia, and has repulsed and driven back the Goths and
Sarracens out of France, Spain and Italy? For it seems that at this day the
Frenchmen hold no more any thing of their ancestors valor, seeing they suffer
(in comparison to them) so few strangers to dominiere so imperiously over them,
and so to debase themselves, and to carry on their backs such insupportable
burdens, and to suffer themselves to be driven from

The Frenchmen were wont to be reputed frank and liberal, far from all
servitude; but now our stupiditie, carelessness and cowardice do make us
servants and slaves to the most dastardly and cowardly nation of Christendom.
Our ancestors have vanquished and subjugated in battle, and by arms, great
Italian armies; but we suffer our selves to be over come by a small number of
Italians armed with a rock, a spindle, and a pen honors, and reputation of
loyalty, integrity, and valiancie of our French nation,

Here ends the first Part, entreating of such Counsel as a Prince should use.
THE SECOND PART, TREAting of the Religion which a Prince ought to hold.
The Praeface.
AFter having before discoursed largely enough, What Counsel a prince should
have and take; it will not be to any evil purpose to handle, What Religion he
ought to hold and cause to be observed in his dominions: For it is the first
and principal thing wherein he Machiavell in this case (as a very Atheist and
contemner of God) gives another document to a prince: for he would, That a
prince should not care, whether the Religion that he holds be true or false;
but says, That he ought to support and favor such falsities as are found
therein: And he comes even to this point (as an abominable and wicked
blasphemer) that he prefers the Religion of the Paynims before the
Christian: and yet his book is not condemned as heretical by our Sorbonists.
But before we enter to confute his detestable Maxims, I will in manner of a
Preface, demonstrat in few words the true resolution that a prince ought to
have in Antiquity of Christian Religion.
that ever were: because it takes his foundation upon the books of Moses, and
the promises of God, of Christ and Messiah, contained in them books, which
were made to our first Fathers, from the beginning of the world. But there is
no author, Greek or Latin, which was not long after Moses: and it is a thing
confessed and held amongst all learned men, That Moses writ his books many
hundred years before Homer, Berosus, Hesiodus, Manethon, Metasthenes, and
others like, which many men hold for the most ancient Writers. Moreover, when
Moses describes unto us the generation of Noe, and Moses begun at the worlds
beginning? Of Madens came the Medians, of Ianus the Ionians, of Iobel the
Iberians, of Riphat the Riphaeans, of Tigran the Tigranians, of Tharsis the
Tharsians, of Cithin the Cyprians, of Canaan the Cananites, of Sidon the
Sidonians, of Elam the Elamites, of Assure the Assyrians; of Lud the Lydians and
others: all these were the children, nephews, or Not, from whence the said
nations have taken their names: it follows therefore, that they were the
first stocks and roots of them. Again, if we look to the ceremonies that in
times past the Paynims used in their sacrifices, men shall easily know, that
they are but apish imitations of such sacrifices as were ordained of God, which
are described by Moses: For the sacrifice of Iphigenia which the Graecians made
in Aulide to prosper them in the war they enterprised against Troy; what other
thing is it than an imitation of Iepthe his sacrifice? who made a vow of a
sacrifice; to prosper him in the war he enterprised; which sacrifice fell after
by the divine will, upon his own daughter. The custom which the Gaulois and
many other people had, to immolat and offer criminal men when they had an
opinion that God was angry with them; what other thing was it but a Abraham,
and of the sacrifices that God had commanded for the expiation of sins? The
Paynims also imitated this of Moses his sacrifices, that they immolated the
like beasts, and reserved also a part of the beast sacrificed, to eat. So that
thereby also it is clearly seen, That the Religion of Moses is the primitive
and first, and that the other religions are but foul and lazy pourtratures
and imitations thereof. From hence follows it, That our Christian Religion
(which draws his principles from the promises of Messiah, contained in Moses)
is the most ancient of the world, yea as ancient as the world it self. For I
will not vouchsafe to stay upon the refutation of the strange opinion of
Machiavell and other ancient Philosophers Paynims; which have maintained, That
the world had no beginning: but I send them to Empedocles, Plato, and other
ancient Paynim Philosophers which have maintained the contrary. I think that
Moses, and in a thing so difficile and hard to comprehend, the spirits of men
might easily fail. But the impiety of Machiavel is no way excusable, who has
seen the books of Moses, and yet follows that wicked opinion, like a mocker
and contemner of the holy Scripture, thinking to show, that he knows more than
others, he I say, who is ignorant and full of brutish beastliness, as (God
willing) I shall make known.

As for the simplicity of the Christian Religion, herein it is seen, That the
Christians Simplicity of the Christian Religion.
will know God, as he will that we should know him; and as he has manifested
himself

And touching the excellency of the doctrine of true Religion, herein is it
first seen; The excellency of the Christian Religion.
that it is founded upon the promises of God made to the first fathers from the
beginning of the world: whereby all they that embrace that Religion, are
assured, That God is their father, and that he loves them, and that he will
give them eternal life by the means of Messiah. Can there then be any thing
more excellent than this? Is there any thing in the world that can give more
contentment or repose to the spirit of man, than this doctrine? For when man
considers the brevitie of his days, the languishments and miseries of this
world, full of envies, enemities, all vices and calamities, will he not judge
himself more unhappie than the beasts, if he hoped not for an eternal
happiness after this life? The poor Paynims having this consideration,
aspired to an eternity, some in doing worthy acts, whereof there should be a
perpetual memory after them; Cice. in Somn. Scipi. Plato in Phaedo.
That the souls of generous and valiant men after death, go to heaven. All
these opinions and persuasions of men, were but to give rest to their minds,
which judged man of all creatures most unhappie, without an eternal life after
this. But what assurance had they of these opinions, which they gave to
themselves? These poor people had none, neither founded they themselves, but
upon some weak and feeble reasons. For thus they argued: That it was not
credible, that God, who is all good, would create man (who is the most
excellent creature in the world) to make him most unhappie, which he should
do, if Messiah, which he has since accomplished, and that in him he has
promised to give eternal life to all them which lay hold of that Messiah, and
use his means to come unto it. These promises have been many times reiterated
to our said fathers, and in ages well distant one from another, that they might
not be forgotten, but that they might be so much the more clear, and known of
every one: insomuch, that the Paynims themselves (which never read our fathers
writings) have had some knowledge of the promises of God touching Messiah, they
were so clear, not orious and well known, as we shall say more at full in
another place. Hear the^ for a resolution, a great excellency in this
doctrine of Christian Religion, viz. what it brings us to a certain knowledge
and a firm assurance of an eternal life after this; which knowledge and
assurance is not founded upon

And as for the doctrine of manners, I confess that the Paynims and
Philosophers which have held other religions, have spoken and reasoned in
reasonable good terms; but yet their doctrine comes nothing nigh to that
which the Christian Religion teaches us thereof. True it is that the Paynims
have spoken something well of Justice, Temperance, Clemency, Prudence,
Loyalty, Fidelity, Amity, Gentleness, Magnanimity, Liberality, Plato:
That we are not only borne for our selves, but that our birth is partly for
our country, partly for our parents, and partly for our friends: behold a
goodly sentence we can say no other: but if we come to confer it with the
doctrine of Christians, Plato make of the poor? where and in what place of
this notable sentence does he set them? he speaks not at all of them: breefly,
he would that our charity should be first employed toward our selves: which
they have well marked and followed, which say; That a well ordered charity
begins at himself. But this is far from the doctrine which S. Paul teaches
the Christians, when he says: That Charity seeks not her own; and also that
which Christ himself commands us; To love our neighbor as our selves.
Secondly, Plato places our love toward our country: Thirdly, our love
toward our parents: and lastly, our friends. And what becomes of the poor?
Let them do as they can: for Plato his Charity stretches not to them. And
indeed a poor person, in the time of the Paynims, which had Romulus, whereby
he Dionis. Halicar. lib. 2.
commanded to expose and stifle the children which were borne disformed; which
not only Vedius Dion in Augusto.
Polio a Roman gentleman in the time of Augustus Caesar, ordinarily caused to
sley his servants and slaves (whereof he had a great number (in choosing always
the most profitable, to cast the other bodies into his ponds which he had nigh
his house, to feed Lampreis which he had in those ponds. In the Paynims time
(to offer pleasure and pastime to the people) they caused to make Theaters for
combats to vttrance of poor slaves, which they caused to band in two parts
one against an other, and after that, furiously set one upon an other with
naked swords, and none of them armed with any defensive thing. And (this that
they ever established any good policy to help them. Yet notwithstanding this
agrees Alexander Severus carried for his poesy or devise: What thou would
not should Lampri. in Alex.
be done unto thee, do it not to another, agrees well with the common sense,
and seems well to be a principle of nature, not only in the negative, Not to
do, but also in the affirmative, To do to another, as we would he should do
unto us. Yet although natural light lead us hereunto, the Paynims have not
yet come to this point. The hystoriagrapher Lampridius says: That the Emperor
Alexander learned this excellent device of the Christians or of the Jews in
his time. Therefore it appears by the abovesaid reasons, That the doctrine of
manners, which is taught us by the Christian Religion, is much more excellent
than that which the Religions of the Paynims and Philosophers teach, seeing
they

But I do not doubt but some will here make a question in this time wherein
we are, The Catholic religion and the Reformed are all one.
that is, What Religion ought to be accounted Christian, whether the Catholic
or reformed. Hereunto I answer: That we ought not to make two of them, and
that it is but one same Religion, and as the names Catholic, and Evangelicke,
and Reformed, are all one name; so is the thing it self: for the one and the
other acknowledges Christ, which is the foundation; and hold the articles of
the faith of the Apostles Symbol; approve the Trinity, and the Sacraments of
Baptism, and the holy Supper: although there be some to understand that point.
He begun then in this manner (after he had prayed all the company Masters
(says he) I see well, that all this company casts their eyes upon me,
attending to hear of me the proof of the proposition which I uttered. To
satisfy then your desires, although I have not premeditated all the reasons
which might be spoken to maintain that I say: yet I will allege some, which I
hope you will not judge impertinent. I will then here repeat my proposition,
that is, That the Catholics hold the same points of Christian Religion that we
of the Reformed or Evangelike do. True it is, that the sophisters will needs
persuade the Catholics, that we hold another doctrine than they do,
especially touching the Sacrament of the Altar, or the Supper (for all is one)
and touching good works and certain other points: and in verity, the doctrine
of our Religion differs far from that

First, if you ask of a good Catholic, if when he receives the Sacrament on
Easter day, he crusheth and bruseth with his teeth the very flesh and bones of
our Lord Jesus Christ: he will answer you, he believes it not, and that he
detesteth and abhors that talk of crushing and brusing with the teeth, the
flesh and bones of our Savior. If you demand which begins, Ego Beringarius.
Where there is this in proper terms. I Beringer, unworthy Ego. Ber. de Conse.
d^st. 2.
Maurice of Angiers, knowing the true Catholic and Apostolic faith, detest
and anathematize all heresy, and even that whereof I have been before diffamed.
Therefore I confess with heart and mouth, that the bread and the wine, which
are set on the altar after the consecration, are not only the Sacrament, but
are changed into the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ: and that the
priest touches not only sensually the Sacrament, but that also he handles
with his hands the very body of our Lord, and that he breaks it, and that
the faithful break and bruise it betwixt their teeth. Behold the goodly
doctrine of this Cannon, which the Sophists would make the Catholics believe:
but of five hundred you shall not find one that will believe it. And verily,
this Cannon makes me remember what Achaemenides says in Virgil of the great
Polyphemus, who did eat the companions of Ulysses.

"Poor humane creatures he did eat, the body, blood, and all: Ae^^i, ^i. 3.

"My self did see him claspe and gripe in his so deep a den,
"Two men of ours in his huge hands, their heads on door Lintall
"He knocked so, that blood gusht out, and in my sight those men
"He tore and bruised betwixt his teeth, yet dead they were not clean.
And how should Catholics believe this Canon, seeing the priests themselves
believe it not? I prove it. For if they believed it, they would never say mass
upon fridaies, nor in Poliphaemus den their mass, yea, though but for a time
to see and prove, whether they might well and commodiously spare it or no. As
we read Pope Clement the sixth did, who excommunicated all the people of the
country of Flanders, for a certain rebellion that they had made against the
king of France their sovereign; who also interdicted all the priests of the
country upon pain of eternal damnation, to say no masses, nor to administer
any Sacraments to the Flemmings, til they had obtained absolution of his
fatherhood. The poor Flemmings seeing themselves without masses (for in no
sort their priests would say any) they writ to the king of England, making unto
him great complaints. The king of England sent them word not to be dismayed nor
troubled for want of Scotland, and Denmark, and the most part of Almaign. I
believe also, if men did assay it in David, and the Prophets: for we shall
always find that in our Bible; yea, far more faithfully enregistred than in
the Missall: all the remainder is not worth the holding. For as for their
massing garments, men of good judgment know well, That apparel adds no
holiness to the mass; seeing also that Frenchmen naturally stay not long in
one fashion of apparel, but easily change from one to another. I confess in
regard of the common people, which only stay upon that they see, that they will
take no great lust in a mass, without the mass garments: as if the Curate
said it, in his doublet and hose without more, or in his ierkin, it is
certain; that commonly the David; and we also. They go thither to keep their
Easter; and we also. For it is all one to celebrate the Easter and the Supper.
Breefly, all our exercises of Religion are alike. I know well you will say
there is a difference, because the Catholics pray and sing psalms in Latin;
and we in French. But I answer you, that that is nothing, so that men
understand what they say. For God understands well all languages. You will
say unto me also, that the Thomas of Aquin, Bonaventure, Scot, Bricot, or other
like doctors of Theology, that therefore we must needs be damned. It were a
very strange thing to believe, that God would have his holy Religion so
obscure, that none but Sophists should think to understand any thing of it. But
contrary, we must believe, That God has given it unto us, simple, clear, and
intelligible, that even plain people might comprehend and we do well accord in
the Sacrament of the Altar, or the Supper; so do we in the principal Ego Beren
garius? Must men make all that stir, to rore out all the Canons and artillery
of France, and thunder at all the towns and castles of the kingdom, to fill
all places with arms, soldiors, and all the towns with the blood of
Christians, and to make red the rivers, for such a quarrel as this? Must brother
arm himself against his brother, the father against his son? must needs the
Nobility ruin at it self? must all the people be trodden under make any great
contention of. Our ancestors in times past have well passed their time without
Charles the sixth, le bien aim, there were two popes in Christendom, the one
at Rome called pope Vrbane, and the other at Avignon, who was called Clement.
The Christian princes and commonweales at this time knew not which was the
better of them, yet some followed the pope of Rome, and they were called
Vrbanists; and others the Pope of Avignon, and they were called Clementines:
and when that the pope died at Rome or in Avignon, men elected always another
in his place: so that it appeared, that this plurality of popes would ever
endure. The king of France and his Counsel were occasioned to exhort both of
them to submit themselves to a Counsel, which might advise and ordain, which
of the^ two should be Pope, or if the one or the other ought not to be. The
king could never John de Gigenconet, who maintained, That the Catholic church
might well for a time be without a Pope, yea, for ever; and alleged many good
reasons, which for times sake I will not here recite. Breefly, the University
was congregated, and thereby it was resolved, that the king ought to withdraw
himself and all his kingdom from the obedience of both the Popes, until
there were another legitimately elected. And that there were good means to be
dispatched of the pope, viz. to leave the collations of benefices to the
Alexander the fifth, under whose obedience the king and his kingdom After that,
that good parson had made us the said discourse, truly every one of us thanked
him, but especially the Catholic gentleman, saying: That as for him he never
believed otherwise A pleasant discourse of Friars habits.
the points which he had delivered, but even as he had said: and that he would
never have thought, that they of the Evangelike Religion had accorded so well
with the Catholics, as he saw they did. But said he (my masters) after so
serious a discourse, it should not be impertinent to add another, to make us
laugh. All the company prayed him to do it: Francis, amongst other articles of
his rule, he had placed one, whereby he ordained, That all that were of his
Order, for apparel, should cloth themselves with the basest, vilest, and of
the lowest price that could be; that they should only have one coat with an
hood, and another without an hood; and that they should Francis had spoken
nothing of the color in his rule: but only ordained, That they of his order
should wear habites of a low price. Then fell out a great question: What
color was of least price, and thought to be Francis did so understand it, they
should wear the color of the beast in token of humility and patience; saying
further: That all other colors cost something, and if it were but labor; but
the color of the beast cost nothing. Therefore they concluded, That all the
order of Friars ought to wear their garments either of white or black color,
and not of green, smokie, or any other colors, and that this was their
opinion. Assuredly these reasons of the first disputers were so pregnant, that
they shaked all the rest of the company: yet notwithstanding they which had
disputed for Green, Lucifer fell from heaven into hell: for the world may say
of them, that they cover themselves with the color of the Augustine, S.
Bernard, and blessed S. Benet, and others were all monks, either white, or
black. And that it should not be well done to take from them their colors, or
to enterprise upon them: for so they might oppose themselves against them, and
that, that was not the way to draw unto them the devotion of the world.
Finally, they showed, Francis, That bids them wear clothes of the vilest and
cheapest price; this should also be to go against their liberties and
privileges, To pay the least they can: for by their rule they are forbidden to
handle any silver. And by the contrary, if the Order choose a white color,
there are other countries, where there are no white sheep, or few: as in
Tuscane, and many other places, so that the Friars there must have their white
clothes out of far countries, which will be to their great cost, and so will
be directly against the said rule, and their liberties. And therefore these
disputers persisted

After this, the senior Fathers caused to propose the second question of the
three, for which the Chapter was assembled, touching the quantity of habits,
that is, if they should be long, or short, wide, or strait. The first disputers
(in great number) were all of advice, That their garments of Order ought to be
short and strait for many good reasons, which Frauncis our founder, would and
ordained that we should wear habits of vile and little price, we can not
better observe that holy rule (wherein consists the estate of perfection)
than in making our habits as short and as strait as is possible. Moreover (said
they) our father and good founder S. Francis, has he not appointed we should
be Mendicants, and livers upon the alms of good people? therefore we must make
account to gather our alms to live, and to seek it sometimes far off, upon
pain to endure hunger and want; for we shall have little brought into our
covent: then must we trot hither and thither at all times, rain it or hail
it, be it hot, cold, dry, or wet, yea in Lent and Advents, Francis rightly
understood) they should wear long habits: for in the said article he uses
the word Tunike, which signifies a long robe or garment. Moreover, long habits
are more seemly for religious men, and short garments for lay men: and that a
long garment makes Religious men the most reverenced and honored Francis
should take a short habit. Likewise (said they) when we go into the pulpit to
preach, or when we go to say Mass, o it is a goodly sight to have our garments
like Millers. Therefore they concluded, That their habits should be long and
large. But the first reasoners replied to this, saying to the first point, That
the good saint Francis had taught them the way of humility, and that therefore
they ought not to seek to wear long garments, to be therefore honored and
reverenced of the world; for that tasted of pride, and not of his humility:
and that they which are mocked and despised of the world, are esteemed of God;
because the wisdom of the world is folly before God: and so contrary. As
for the Tunike in S. Benet his rule, signifies not a long robe, but a little
cloak or cassocke; and so is it found in friar Ambrose Calepin his dictionarie
(who was of our Order) not a long robe, but Toga; and that therefore the rule
makes for them in that point. So is it best that Friars wear short habits, as
little clokes, and cassoks, or jerkins. And as for their objection, That other
Monks do wear long and wide garments; so much the better said they, and the
rather should we wear short and strait, that there may be a distinction
betwixt us and others. As for their reason, That to wear short and strait
garments, would make us like lay men: we answer to that (say they) That the
hood will make a difference betwixt us and lay men; for the length of garments
can not distinguish us from lay people, for they also wear long robes, as
Proctors,

The chief and ancient fathers, rulers of this disputation, seeing their
friars (who came in place to accord) to enter and grow further into contention
and contrariety of opinions, imposed them silence as they had done before upon
the first question, and said unto them,

So they began to demand voices, for to know whether their habits ought to be
single or double; if it be lawful to have some fine and goodly fashion on
them, or not; if they should have collars, or none; or skirts, or none; or
sleeves, or no sleeves; or if sleeves, whether hanging sleeves; if there must
be an hood, whether it were not best to be pointed and sharp, as the
Carthusian Friars have, or round, as they of other Religions have. Upon all
those points there was great disputation, and all matters were well and
subtly disputed Francis has commanded us to beg and live of alms; and that
by an article of his holy rule, he has forbidden us to carry with us, poke,
bag, or scrip; as also is forbidden us in the Gospel, it follows well, that
he would have us to understand, that we should have great and wide sleeves for
to put our alms in. To this some answered, That wide sleeves were dearer than
strait; for that they had more matter and stuff in them, and therefore such
sleeves are contrary to their rule. And as for the difficulty found out upon
the forbidding of bags and scrips, and of the inconvenience that might follow
thereof, for want of something to put in their alms: they

Yet were there made many other great arguments and subtle allegations upon
this question of the fashion of habites: and some thought it best, That that
fashion of hoods which the Charter house Friars used, to be well, and best to
be imitated. For that that sharp point above might allegorically signify, that
they had sharp and quick spirits; and having a fame and reputation to be so,
their sermons would be more accounted of. But the good Fathers considering,
That nothing could be resolved in that Chapter; and that it was as expedient
to send to Rome for three questions, as for two; they made the company privy
to their advice, namely, That it were best to send to Rome, to have the holy
fathers

Certain time after, delegates of their Order took their journey to Rome,
unto Pope Nicholas, the third of that name, who reigned in the year 1280,
which made him understand all the said disputation, and the great disorder that
was in their Order about the said three points. The Pope and his Cardinals were
as much troubled to resolve those high and subtle questions, as the said
Friars had been in their Chapter. Yet the Pope by the advice of the said
Cardinals, made them upon this matter this resolution, That he ordained and
commanded, that upon all those questions, that should be straightly kept and
observed, which should be concluded and determined in a Chapter general, or
else in Provincial one and thirty years after the former time, during which
time they held many Chapiters

Coming then to no end in their Chapiters, they again sent delegates to Rome,
to pope Clement the fifth, who then held the Counsel at Vienna, anno Dom. 1311;
who gave him to understand, How according to the ordinance of Pope Nicholas,
his predecessor, they had done all that which possible they could, to overcome
the aforesaid difficulties; which at length they recited unto him, but they
could not accord upon any resolution. But contrary, that as they disputed,
there arose always new difficulties and doubts in the friars spirits, and that
therefore they came to him, as to a very oracle of truth, who could and knew
how to resolve all those doubts, and many others. The Pope having heard them,
put the matter unto the determination of the Cardinals, Prelates, Doctors, and
others assembled in that Counsel; you must think, that this whole Counsel
was greatly troubled, as Nicholas and his Cardinals had been. Yet that the said
Friars might not go away as they came, without having answer from the Popes
Oracle: there was delivered unto them indeed, a true Oracle, that is to say, an
ambiguous and obscure answer, whereby the Pope by che advice of the said
Counsel, commanded the gardiens and other chief ministers of that Order, to
judge of the vilitie, color, length, wideness, and fashion of their said
Order: the consciences of which commissaries and gardians he burdened; and
commanded all the Friars, That they should obey what their said gardians and
ministers should resolve, without seeking out so many scruples and doubts, and
without desire to know more than needed, by inventing so many subtilties. These
delegates returned home Francis, and that they were but beasts. In this
contestation of Friars against their gardians and superiors, remained their
affairs by a long and great space of years.

Finally, in the year 1323, in the time of Pope John, the two and twentieth of
that name, who held his seat in Avignon, the gardians and superiors of that
Order went to complain to his Fatherhood, showing him, That they could not be
obeyed, upon the resolution they had made in virtue of the power which had been
given them by the said Bull of Clement. So they humbly prayed his said
Fatherhood, That he would vouchsafe to do some good therein. The Pope to
proceed in this matter more iuridically, or rather iudicially would hear the
party; and therefore sent to those Friars which refused to obey their gardians
and superiors, That they should either come and make their reasons, or send the
cause in writing, why they refused obedience. They sent them. The abovesaid
Pope caused to assemble his Cardinals: and being in the Conclave, the
allegations of the Friars pretended disobedience, were read, and no doubt found
so great and admirable, so subtle and sharp, that a fly could not there have
placed her foot, and indeed they could never give a resolution thereof. True it
is, that the Pope could do no less for his honor, than to ordain something.
Therefore caused he to expediate a Bull, wherein Nicholas and Clement, and
says, That he marvelleth how men cannot be contented with the resolution
contained in them. After he makes declaration, That the vilitie of habits
should be measured, according to the custom of every country. After that, he
gives commission to the gardians and superiors of every Order (as did Pope
Clement) to make a rule for the longitude, latitude, thickness, color,
fashion, and vilitie, as well of the Tunikes, as of the hood, and upon all
other accidences, circumstances, and dependances; willing and

Behold in substance the content of Pope John's Bull; whereby it appears, That
neither he nor all the Papal Consistory could ever give a law or a well
determined resolution upon the matter of the dispute of Friars habits. I know
not how since, they are accorded; but they have taken unto them the white and
black color, as it comes from off the beast, and of those two intermingled
colors they have made a third color, which, of them has taken the name, and
at this day are called Gray-friers. They have also chosen great side gowns and
great hoods, as we see them wear at this day. Breefely, we see them accorded
now of all their differences which they had touching the

This is the discourse touching the Friars contentions, and the three
Decretals, made by three Popes, upon that matter, whereof the last is called an
Extravagant, as in truth it is, and may well be called Extravagant, and the
other two also: Praying you (masters) to take in good part this history; for I
have not told it, to displease any man; but to pass away the time whilst our
horses eat their provender; I believe it will be now soon time to leap on
horseback, every man to draw to his way. Upon this, each man rose up from the
table, every one contented to hear this discourse, which they never had heard
before, as they all confessed. Then each man Machiavell.

1. Maxim.
A Prince above all things ought to wish and desire to be esteemed devout,
though he be not so indeed.
THe World (says Machiavell) looks but to the exterior, and Cap. 18. of the
Prince.
to that which is in appearance; and judges of al actions not by the causes,
but by the issue and end: So that it suffices, if that the Prince seem
outwardly religious and devout, although he be not so at all. For let it be so,
that some, which most narrowly frequent his company, do discover that feined
devotion, yet he or they dare not oppugn the multitude, who believe, the
Prince to be truly devout.

THis Maxim is a precept, whereby this Atheist Machiavell teaches the Prince
to be a true contemner of God and of Religion, and only to make a show and a
fair countenance outwardly before the world, to be esteemed religious and
devout, although he be not. For divine punishment, for such hypocrisy and
dissimulation, Machiavell fears not, because he believes not there is a God;
but thinks that the course of the Sun, of the Moon, of the Stars, the
distinction of the Spring time, Summer, Autumn, and Winter, the polliticke
government of men, the production that the earth makes of fruits, plants,
living creatures, Epicurus, (the doctor of Atheists, and master of Ignorance)
who esteems, that all things are done and come to pass by Fortune, and the
meeting and encountering of atoms. But if Machiavell believed, that those
things came by the disposition and establishment of a sovereign cause (as
common sense has constrained Plato, Aristotle, Theophrastus, and all the other
Philosophers which have had any knowledge, to The order which is in nature,
shows us, that there is one God.
confess it) he would believe there is one God, who rules and governs the
world, and all things within it. And if he believe there is one God, he would
also believe, that men ought to honor him as the sovereign governor; and
that he will not be mocked of his creatures: And therefore will not he give
such precepts, to make Cicero says) even nature it self teaches the most
barbarous nations, That there is a God which governs all things; let them (I
say) know, that if they will not know God well, God will well know them, and
will make them well feel, that such as spit against heaven, shall spit against
themselves; when they shall feel how heavy Atheists esteemed serviceable men.
even they, which have no religion, are best esteemed, and are called in the
court-language, people of service: because being fraughted with all impiety
and Atheism, and having well studied their Machiavell, which they know upon
their fingers, they Atheists inventors of imposts.
or compassion upon them, no more than upon brute beasts. Not many years ago,
did not they invent the impost of processes, and contentions of law in people
never like of (for they fish always in a troubled water) gathering riches and
Machiavell, to empeach and hinder a good peace. A prince (say they) must cause
himself to be feared, rather than loved: and this must be held as a resolved
point. But if a peace be accorded to these rebels, such as they desire, then
would it seem that the king were afraid of his subjects, whereas he should
make himself to be feared. True it is, that if such a peace could be made with
them, as it might again procure another S. Bartholmewes journey, nothing were
so good and pleasant as that. For that is another resolved point and Maxim,
That a prince ought not to hold any faith or promise, but so far, as
concerns his profit: and that he ought to know how to counterfeit the Caesar
Borgia, who in our country could so well counterfeit the said two beasts.
Behold here the language and dealings of our Machiavelistes, which at this day
men call people of Service: for that there is no wickedness in the world so
strange and detestable, but they will enterprise, invent, and put it in
execution, if they can. From whence comes it, that they be thus inclined to all
wickedness? It is because they are Atheists, contemners of God, neither
believing there is a God which Atheists incline to all wickedness, because they
fear not the punishment of God.
sees what they do, nor that ought to punish them. It is that goodly doctrine
of Machiavell, which amongst other things complains so much, that men cannot
Machiavell: and others which should resist such impieties, least they should
take root, do suffer them to increase and augment. So that indeed all men are
culpable of Atheism, impiety, of the despite of God and Religion, which at
this day reigns. Therefore most righteously does God punish us all. For
Atheism and impiety is so detestable and abominable before Impiety punished
of God.
God, that it never remains unpunished.

The Emperor Caius Caligula was a great Atheist and contemner of God. He
Machiavell his Maxims. For, to counterfeit his Suet. in Call. cap. 51. Dion in
Calig.
devotion, he caused to be bruted, That he often spoke with Jupiter; and that
he had great familiarity with Castor and Pollux, which he said were his
brethren; and that he had good acquaintance with the Moon: by this means he
not only persuaded the people that he was very devout, but also that (by the
means of that privitie with the gods) he participated even the divinity with
the^: and yet never man more boldly despised all divinity than he. But
consider what such kind of people are: there was Suetonius) he would cover and
quickly wrap his head, and hide him in and under his bed. I pray you what other
thing was this but an extreme fear of conscience, when he hears the
thundering and resounding voice of him whom he contemns? One day being beyond
the Rhine, with a great and puissaut army, as he passed over a little strait
on foot, one that was nigh him began to say unto him; Sir if now the enemy
should appear and show himself, we could not be without fear? What then did
this cowardly Atheist? at that word he straight mounted on horseback, and fled
as fast as he could. But as he was cowardly, so was he very cruel, and so
shall you almost ordinarily find in these Atheists, both cruelty and
cowardice Cassius Chaerea and Cornelius Sabinus, captains of his guarde,
whereby this wicked contemner of God, felt the just divine vengeance, and so
knew he, that he was a mortal man, and not God, that caused himself to be
worshipped as a God. Dion writes, That after his death some did eat of his
flesh, to prove if the flesh of the gods were of a good taste.

The emperor Phillipus (who reigned in the primitive Christian church) was a
wicked Arabian, who had no fear of God, but was the most cruel and wicked of
the Pompo. Laetus in Philli.
world, as commonly Arabians are: yet to cover his vices and wickedness, he
did that which Machiavell commands a Prince here; for he fained to be a
Christian, and Verone.

The emperor Julian (who was called the Apostata) all the time of his youth,
in the time of Constantine the Great his uncle, was instructed in the Christian
Religion: Pompo. Laetus in Iuli. Am. Marel, lib, 21 and 2^.
but upon a foolish curiosity, he gave himself to diviners and sorcerers, to
know things to come, which made him forsake the Christian Religion: yet he
always feigned himself to be a Christian, because for the most part, the
nobility and the men of war were so; therefore to please them, he often went
unto the Christians Churches, and there used the exercises of their Religion.
After he was created emperor Constantine the Great had suppressed, and to
establish their sacrifices: and although he durst not prohibit the exercise of
Christian Religion, yet under hand he sought by all means to destroy it: for
he forbad that any should receive any Christians to be regents, and
balemaisters, and caused to be sown all manner of partialities and divisions
(that he could) amongst Christians. Finally after he had reigned by the space
of a year and seven months, he was slain of the age of two and thirty
years, making war against the Persians. Some write, That as he died, he
blasphemed despightfully against Christ,

It is commonly seen, That such men as have no God, do give themselves to
sorcerers and diviners: for of necessity they must have a master, and after
they have forsaken God, they must needs take the devil for their master and
governor. The emperor Bassianus Caracalla being a true contemner of God, fell
to delight in magic and witcherie: insomuch, that by the art of necromancie
he would needs Dion in Anto. Caracalla. Herod. lib. 4.
cause to come unto him the soul of his father Severus, and the emperor
Commodus, to know of them if he should recover of the disease whereof he was
sick. The soul of his father (or rather some evil spirit) appeared to him,
holding a naked sword in his hand, but spoke not a word unto him: but that of
Commodus appearing also, said unto him these words: Get thee to the gallows.
Being in warfare in Mesopotamia, he had two lieutenants general, Audentius and
Macrinus, which he incessantly outraged and mocked, so that neither of them
greatly trusted him: he had also at Rome one Maternianus, who executed all his
affairs, whom he much trusted: therefore he sent unto him a command, to
assemble all the diviners, sorcerers, and negromancers, that could be found, to
consult together, and so search out, Maternianus executed his commandment, and
upon a consultation of them, they made answer that Macrinus had determined to
slay the emperor Bassianus. Maternianus (which before loved not Macrinus)
failed not to advertise the emperor hereof: but the packet of letters was
presented unto him at a certain hour, when he was very attentive, and given
to take his pastime: insomuch, as he commanded Macrinus his lieutenant, who
was by, to take the packet, and open it, to tell him the substance of them
after, at some hour of Counsel. Macrinus took the packet, and opened it,
within which he found many letters, speaking of many of his affairs: and
amongst others, one was found, containing there solution of the said
consultation. Macrinus Maternianus should write again of the same cause.
Macrinus then suborned a captain of certain footmen called Martialis (which
also had himself a quarrel to the emperor) to slay him: who espying one day
the emperor going out of the way to empty his body, he slew him with many
pricks of a dagger. So that a man Macrinus was brought in peril of his life,
he durst never have enterprised that which he did. But necessity makes men
enterprise, yea even the most cowards.

The year 1411 the lord de Rays in Bretaigne, marshall of France, to come
unto Monstr. lib. 2. cap. 248.
great estate and honors, gave himself to sorcerie and negromancie, and
caused many little children to be slain for their blood, wherewith he writ his
divelish invocations. The devil brought him to that greatness and height,
that he was taken prisoner by the command of the duke of Bretaigne, who
caused his indictment to be made, and he was publicly burned at Nantes.

There may be alleged infinite examples of the judgments of God excercised
against Atheists, contemners of God and of all religion, yea even in our time,
as of that tragical Poet Iodellius, whose end was truly tragical, having like
an Epicurean eaten and drunken his patrimony, he miserably died through
hunger. Lignerolles also, the courtier, who to make it appear that he was a man
of service, in court made an open profession of Atheism: and what was his end?
Certain it is, that from whence he looked for his advancement, he received his
merited ruin and destruction. la Land, Bissy Gaiscon, and others (which I
will not name for the respect I have of their parents) had they not unluckie
ends, after they had emptied and spoiled themselves of all piety and Religion?
But I will not stay here to make plain so clear a thing of it self: yet
would I set down one example very notable for hypocrites which make themselves
great Zelators of the holy mother church, and under False Zelators of the
ancient Religion* spoiless and wicked.
that pretext and color, they bring into ruin and combustion their own
country, saying, That men ought inviolably to keep the Religion of his
predecessors: and in the mean while, their hearts tend to no other purpose
but to spoil, saccage, and enrich themselves with the public ruin.

Josephus rehearses: That in the time of the emperor Claudius, and the
emperor Nero, the Jews raised up many civil wars in Judea and Samaria, and
that so customablie, Joseph. de bello. Judaico. lib. 4. cap. 5. and lib. 7.
that they made no account of any other occupation, but to live by booties and
rapines; so that Vespasian, lieftenant general for the emperor Nero, was sent
against them with a great army: all the wickedest men of the country which
were worth nothing, and which could not live but of the good men, gathered
themselves together, and called themselves Zelators; saying, they would fight
for the Temple of Jerusalem, and for the conservation of that Religion, which
they had received and learned of their forefathers; and that (to die for it)
they would not permit any other Religion to be received and exercised in their
countries, but their own that was auncientlie used from hand to hand, of their
ancestors, since Moses and Abraham. Under the Vespasian many times cavsed it
to be told them (even by Josephus who writ this history, and was of their
own nation, and had been a captain) that he would change nothing of their
Religion, but maintain them therein, and in all their liberties and
franchizes: but (like very hypocrites and liers) they thinking one thing with
their hearts, and saying another with their mouths, would never hearken unto
peace in any sort, nor upon any condition whatsoever. Vespasian seeing their
stubbornness, was constreined to war upon them in all extremity, which endured
long, yea until he came Nero, Galba, Otho and Vitellius, which reigned not
long. Finally these goodly Zelators, which would never hearken unto peace, by
their obstinacy came to such an extremity, that they themselves set their
temple on fire in Jerusalem (for the conservation whereof they said they
fought) and burnt it wholly; they overthrew also both themselves and their
Religion, for which they bore arms, and committed a thousand sorts of
cruelties and impieties, saying they fought for piety. Briefly, this devoute
zeal which they bragged they had to the ancient Religion of their fathers
(although they had but a masking and false countenance thereof) was cause of
the ruin of Jerusalem, and of all the country, and of the death of a million
of men.

A prince then must take an other manner of resolution, than that whereof
Machiavell speaks; namely, That he resolve himself to fear God, and to
serve him with an heart, pure, and without dissimulation, according to his holy
commandments, in doing the exercises of the true and pure Religion of God,
which is the Christian: if he do this, God will bless him, and make him prosper
in his affairs. Hereof there may be alleged many examples; I will content my
self with a few of the most notable. Godliness blessed of God.


The emperor Marcus Antonius the philosopher, a prince both good and wise,
Xiphil. apud Dionin Marco. Anto. Capitol. in Mar.
though a Painim, making war against the Marcomanes and Quadiens, people of
Alemaigne, was once with all his army in a uery great danger and peril, being
enclosed in a withered and dry country, where his soldiers for lack of water
died of drought: insomuch as his enemies keeping the passage, intended to
vanquish them without any stroke striking. By hap (or rather by Gods
providence) the emperor had in his army a legion of Christians, and it was
told him by his lieutenant general, That he had heard say, that those
Christians by their prayers, obtained of God whatsoever they demanded: which
the emperor understanding, addressed himself to them of that legion (which
was a good zeal in the Painim, though without knowledge, and prayed them that
they would pray unto their God for the salvation of his army: Which presently
they did with a good heart; desiring God, in the

Constantine the Great, the first Christian emperor, besides that he overcame
Licinius and Maxentius, great enemies of the Christian Religion, he also
obtained Pomp. Laetus in Licinio and Constantino.
many goodly and triumphant victories against the Sarmats, Goths, and
Scythians, happy he was and victorious, because he had the fear of God and the
Christian Religion, in exceeding great honor and reverence. As much may we say
of the emperor Theodosius, Justinian, and other Christians. As much may we say
of our kings of Paul. Aemil. lib. 1. and 2. Egninartus in Carolo magno.
France, Charles Martell, and Charlemaine, which prospered in the wars they had
against the high Almans, Saxons, Frisons, and against the Goths, Huns,
Visegoths, Lombards, and Sarasens, al which were then Painims and infidels; of
which they obtained great victories, and brought them to be subject unto their
obedience. This Caligula, Caracalla, or such other monsters full of impiety
and Atheism, till lately some few have been found, not much inferior unto them.

David was mavelous happy in war, and always victorious over his enemies,
because he was a good prince, fearing God, and honoring his holy Religion.
Solomon his son, as long as he, served God sincerely, without feigning and
hypocrisy, he prospered very well and mervailously in a great and happy
peace, and none durst stir him. But as soon as he begun to practice the
doctrine which Machiavell teaches, namely, To have a feigned and dissembled
Religion and devotion, straight had he enemies on his head, which rose up
against him: as Adad the 2. Kin. ca. 11.
Edomite, and Razin, which made war upon him. So, generally may be said of
all the kings of Judah and of Israel, one after another. That God has always
caused to

But I pray you consider a little, the reason wherewith Machiavell proves his
Maxim. Because (says he) the people looks but at the exterior and outward
show of things, it is sufficient, that the prince show himself outwardly
devout, although he be not devout at all. Ought Religion then to serve for
nothing but to please and be agreeable unto the people? or ought it not rather
to serve, to make men agreeable to God? But how would thou that God should
like and take pleasure in thy Religion (he that sees the bottom of thy heart,
and sounds the deepest of thy Machiavell, nor the Machiavelistes (that is to
say, the Atheists of our time) think men so senseless and gross, as they
cannot soon discover their hypocrisies and dissimulations. Many there are in
the world, which think by their subtilties and dissemblings to be covered and
hid, yet are sufficiently known: and how craftily soever they do it, all the
world knows, there is nothing but impiety and wickedness in their hearts.
Suppose therefore these simulations and hypocrisies come to be discovered in a
prince, I pray you into what honor and reputation will he fall? Shall he not
be mocked, blamed, and despised of his subjects. If seeing himself discovered,
he make an open profession of impiety and of Atheism (as we see

2. Maxim.
A Prince ought to sustain and confirm that which is false in Religion,
SAge and prudent princes (says Machiavell) do countenance Discourse, lib. 1.
cap. 12, 13, 14.
and allow false miracles; because always they are means to augment the
peoples devotion. For when the people sees, that the prince approoveth them,
none makes any difficulty to believe them after him. Christian princes also
should therein imitate the old Romans, which by deceitful miracles, feigned
false revelations to encourage their soldiers to execute some enterprise,
Sibyls, or that they had consulted with the Oracle of Apollo, or that they had
had such or such a revelation, or else that the flight of birds, or other like
tokens, had signified unto them a good augure or divination: insomuch, that the
people being persuaded, they were true, and denounced of their gods, they
obeyed with great good will, that which was commanded them by their
captains and magistrates, as if the

THis Atheist after he has given the prince a document, To hold all Religion
in his heart as a mockery, and only to show outwardly a fair semblant and
countenance of devotion; now passes he further, and desires, That the prince
should maintain falsenesse in Religion. I pray you, can there be found in the
world a greater impiety Falsenesse incompatible with Religion.
things is very commendable, but most especially, when it deals in causes and
matters of Religion. For since that Religion is the thing, which (according to
the ancients definition) binds us with God, how can falsenesse, her
contrary, Reg. 1. de Reg. Iuris in VI.
disciples, which believe neither God nor Religion: wherefore, before I pass
any

They then took for a foundation, humane reason, and profane and Paynim
authors: but in truth both the one and the other foundation, are so much
against them, as even by them I will prove our Christian Religion. For first,
if we consider the least creature in the world, and sound the causes of his
essence and nature, it will Every creature leads man to God.
you see the mind and understanding of man, which is as the king that is set
Machiavell and the Machiavelists come, which are well enough known to be all
very Epicureans in their lives, caring for nothing

Touching the doctrine of the Trinity which we hold, it must be confessed,
that the philosophers understood nothing thereof: and that by humane reason we
can not well be lead to the knowledge thereof: but this knowledge is manifested
unto us by the witnesses of God himself, which are so clear and evident in
the holy scripture, as nothing can be more: but I have no purpose here to
recite them; yet will I say: That the doctrine which I hold in this place; is
not repugnant nor contrary unto The d^ct^in of the T^initie is not repugnant to
human reason.
humane reason, but consonant enough, although the ancient philosophers have
not penitrated so far. For by their own Maxims a very true thing it is, That
God (who Intelligens (understanding) and Intelligentia (the understanding)
ought to be distinguished. This Intelligence is the third person of the
Trinity, which the scripture calls the holy Spirit. Behold then, how man's
brain may something comprehend by natural reason, the doctrine which we hold
of the Trinity, by a rude and gross description, which is like to that which
the Geographers take to pourtray all the earth; namely, in five or

Natural reason, and common sense teaches us, That there is one God, and that
he is perfect in all perfection, for otherwise he could not be God: this is a
point resolved. Hereof necessarily follows it, That God is perfect just, and
perfect merciful. Being perfectly just, by the rule of Justice, he must needs
condemn and reject all mankind: for all men generally are vicious, and vice
meriteth condemnation: but if God should condemn and reject all mankind, it
should be repugnant to his mercy, which also ought to be perfect with effect.
How then? shall we say, that God cannot be perfectly just and merciful
together, because it seems that his mercy repugneth his justice? God forbid
that such blasphemy should proceed out Euclide nor Archimedes ever made more
certainer demonstrations.

But this mediator which the creator has given to men, to make manifest his
perfect justice and perfect mercy, is his eternal Son, the wisdom of the
father; in favor of whom, as well before he came into the world, and had taken
our nature, as since, men have enjoyed the mercy and clemency of God, in
employing that mediator, to satisfy the justice of God. This mediator was
promised and established to men from the beginning of the world, and since
that, his promises have been so often reiterated, that not only they have
been notoriovs to the particular people of Suetonius (a Paynim, who never read
any part of holy Scripture) speaking of Vespasian, as though it were a vulgar
and common thing, says thus: Through all the East countries always there has
been a constant and ancient opinion, as a thing certain, that it was so
ordained and foretold of God, That from Judea should come the dominator and
ruler of the world. As much says the Historian Tacitus (a Paynim also that
never saw holy letters) when he said (speaking Vespasian:) Many have this
persuasion, that within the spirits and writings of the ancient priests was
contained, that at that time the East should be in great power, and that from
Judea should come the dominator of the world. By which witnesses of these two
Historigraphers, is clearlie seen, that the promise of Messiah the dominator
of the world, was known to every one: but not only the Paynims, but the
Jews also themselves understand this of a temporal domination: and indeed
these two former historiographers, and Josephus himself Joseph. lib. 7. cap.
12. de bell Juda.
(who was a Jew interpreted this prophecy of Messiah) of Vespasian, who was
created emperor of the Roman empire, being in Iewrie in war against the
Jews. But this foolish and rash interpretation, is nothing excusable in
Josephus, who vaunteth Moses, and of the other Prophets: for all the Prophets
do all clearlie say, That Messiah ought to be borne of the race of Abraham, of
Judah, and of David: yea especially and plainly, the place it self where he
should be borne, that is to say, in Bethlem, a little town of the tribe of
Judah. But Josephus knew well that Vespasian was neither of that race, nor borne
in the town of Bethlem: but we must believe that Josephus understood better
than he writ, and that falsely he attributed that prophecy of Messiah, to the
emperor Vespasian, upon a flattering humor, because he had received so many
great favors and benefits of him.

And as for that which Tacitus and Suetonius, have attributed unto the emperor
Miracles of Christ a^^^ibuted unto Princes.
Vespasian that prophecy, rather then to Christ, men must not mervaile
thereat, for they were great enemies of Christ, as is seen by many other
places of their history. With the same faith Tacitus says, That the emperor
Vespasian being in Iewry, healed a blind man which saw nothing, with his
spittle: and another which had a dry Tacit. annal. ^ib. 20.
hand, wherewith he could not help himself: for these indeed were the
miracles of Christ, which these profane historians would steal from him, to
attribute unto Dion in Vesp.
their emperors. And the better to discover their theft, by their own
writings, we must first mark, that Tacitus himself says, That the blind man
coming to Vespasian, and falling on his knees before him, said, and declared
unto him, that he had had a revelation from the god Serapis, to address
himself unto him: of which god, Tacitus himself says, that even in his time
none knew his original at Rome. But these painims (which knew not Christ nor
any Christian religion, but a little by hearsay) did think that the Christians
adored that pretended god Serapis, as is seen by a missive which the emperor
Adrian writ to Servianus consul, recited by Vopiscus, Vopis^us in Saturnina.
by whom it is said expressly, That in the town of Alexandria, they which
worshipped Serapis were Christians. So that hereby we may know, even by Tacitus
his own confession, that the author of that miracle to heal the blind man,
was that God which the Christians adored, which was Christ, and not Serapis.
But as ordinarily it happens, things that are done in far countries, are
disguised by such as tell them; so must we understand, that men spoke well all
over the world of the miracles which Suetonius writes, saying that Vespasian
healed one which was lame and impotent in his thigh; Sueton. in Vesp. cap, 7.
and a blind man also who had a revelation of Serapis, to go for his help to
Vespasian. That also which Spartianus writes in the life of the emperor
Adrian, That a blind woman recovered her sight in kissing his knees; and one
blind-borne, recovered his Adrian lost a fever, which he then had. For we may
easily see, that these were Christ's miracles, or his Apostles, which the
Paynims would feign steal from them, to and for their princes, as also to
persuade the world, that there was no divinity in them. For a resolution then
of this point, the promises of Messiah have been known through the world, as
also his coming, even to the Paynims. For profane authors do often make
mention of Christ, even Tacitus, who says, That Christ was put to death in the
time of the emperor Tacit. Annal. lib. 15.
Tiberius, by Pontius Pilate, his lieutenant in Iudaea. Behold then how the
principal points of our Christian Religion may be proved by humane reason and
profane authors, so great and resplendent was, and is that light. For our
religion To believe in God, and in him which he has sent, Jesus Christ our
Savior. If these Atheists then, will put out their own eyes, to the end they
may not know God and the Christian Religion, neither by holy Scriptures nor by
humane reason, nor by the witness of profane authors, which speak thereof,
as of a thing divulged and notorious through all the world; we know not how to
do any other thing, but to leave them as desperate persons to welter in their
ignorance, brutalitie and darkness, till God by his just judgment have sunk
them into the bottomless pit.

Now to come to our Maxim: We say, That to maintain falsenesse in Religion,
is to tread God and his Religion under their feet. Yet true it is, that the
ancient Romans Bacchus was first brought into Rome by a Grecian priest, who
made sacrifices and ceremonies in the night time, and at the beginning, women
only assisted, and were present there, who after Bacchus. Even natural
reason, made those poor Paynims, which were ignorant of Religion, to
understand, that, that Religion could not be true, but is false and rejectable,
which contains in it any punishable crime. And if they could also have known
the other falsities of their Religion, as well as this, I believe they would
have cut them of, whatsoever Machiavell says. But in points of Religion, we
may not any thing stay our selves upon that which the ancient Romans have done,
or said, unless we will seek light in the darkness.

In the year 1509 (about twenty years before the Canton of Berne had
forsaken Munst. lib. 3. d^ Geograpsis
the Papal Religion) the Iacobins of Berne would have introducted certain new
miracles, devised by Apostata persons, to draw unto them the devotion and
offerings of people. But that seignorie would not follow the doctrine of
Machiavell, to approve such false miracles, but by burning, executed good
justice upon the authors thereof.

In the year 1534, the parliament of Paris condemned certain Friars of
Orleans, Sledan, lib. 9.
which would falsely have made men believe the app^rition of a spirit, who
desired (as they said) that there might be good store of Masses said, to
deliver him from Purgatory: for it was found out to be but an imposture,
deceit, and invention, which

There were many judgments of the said court of parliament, whereby the
falsenesse Papon in his collections. lib. 1.
of relics was condemned and prohibited. As of the image of our Lady, which
was painted in an old Table, that had many years remained in a painters shop
for a show: which Table, a Curate nigh unto Paris, bought good cheap, and
boring two holes, where the two eyes were of that noble Lady, and at the time
when vines weep, placed behind in them two sprigs of the vine tree, so that
pitiful Lady wept in the church where she stood, which drew great numbers of
pilgrims to that parish: insomuch, that the painter himself and his wife came
thither also in great devotion, who had sold it. But this marred all, that they
at last knew it to be

But another time the said Court of parliament of Paris did another thing that
seemed something to hold of Machiavels opinion. For upon a controversy of law
which happened betwixt the Clergy men of our Lady in Paris, which said, That
they had S. Denis his head, and the Abbots and religious men of S. Denis, which
said, That they had the whole body of S. Denis. The Court there gave judgment,
That they of S. Denis had the whole body of S. Denis the Athenian, and they of
our Lady, the head of S. Denis the Corinthian. So that they both were content,
although Denis the Corinthian. But that was all one, they provided, that their
practice diminished not. If they of Ratisbone in Almaigne had intermedled with
this strife, it would have been hard to have agreed them, or else there must
have been supposed a third S. Denis: for they say also, that they have the
whole body of S. Denis, and have a declarative sentence of a Pope and his
Cardinals, to confirm it (as they say.) But my purpose here, is not to agree
them, I only conclude, That it is a damnable and detestable thing to sustain
lies and falsenesse, in whatsoever things, but especially in Religion: for that
is to follow the religion of the devil,

3. Maxim.
The Painim Religion holds and lifts up their hearts, and so makes them hardy
to enterprise great things; but the Christian Religion, persuading
Entering into consideration, what should be the cause, that Discourse, lib. 2.
cap. 5.
the force and power of Christians is less than that of the Gentiles, such as
were the ancient Grecians and Romans: It seems (says this Atheist
Machiavell) that it was the difference of Religion. For that the Christian
Religion makes the

BEhold the Maxim and the reasons, which this most unhappie Atheist

True it is, that our Christian Religion teaches us, humility toward God.
For we ought to acknowledge before his face, that we are poor sinners, and to
demand pardon of him, as criminal persons do, which fall on their knees
before a prince, begging grace and pardon. We ought also to acknowledge, that
the graces we have, proceed from God, and that we ought not to be proud of
any good thing in us. Moreover, we ought to be modest and gentle toward our
neighbor, and to detest all fierceness and cruelty. But do those things
debase and unable the hearts Machiavell his own nation, which heretofore have
come into France, to make war against the Evangelickes. For they have well
felt, if the humility of Christians have so much abated the Frenchmens hearts,
that they durst not well handle them (as they say) both backs and bellies: yet
if they will not confess it; the fields, which are white with their bones,
will always give good witness thereof. It is strange, that this villainous
Atheist durst utter and send abroad so absurd things, which are so far from
all experience and truth. If that which he says were truth, it should follow,
That no Christian prince Constantine the great was a very humble Christian
prince, yea of that humility (as some write) as he held the stirrup of the
Pope of Rome, till he got on horseback; yet he vanquished Licinius, Emperors
and kings Christians victorious of Painims.
who was a Paynim emperor with him, and made him forsake the empire, and
besides overcame many Paynim nations, as we have said in an other place. The
emperor Theodosius was so humble, that being reprehended for a certain fault
he had committed, by S. Ambrose bishop of Milan, he debased himself so much
to acknowledge his sin, as he went trailing himself upon the ground upon his
four feet, from the Church door, unto the place where S. Ambrose administered
the Sacrament, Valentinian, who was a Christian, vanquished the Goths in Gall:
and the emperor Justinian, overcame them in Italy, and in Africa.
Charlamaine, and many other kings of France, which were both Christians, and
very humble, have notwithstanding gained and obtained goodly victories against
the Paynims, as we have otherwhere said. Charles the fifth of late memory,
obtained also in his time goodly victories in Africa against the Turk.
Breefely, this point needs no further to be debated upon. For it is clearly
seen, That Machiavell is a filthy lier to say: That the Christian Religion is
the cause, that Christians fall to be a prey unto the Paynims. For contrary, a
small number of Christians have often beaten a great number of Goths, Turks,
and other Infidels. And it is no more true that which the Machiavelists say:
That such as do horribly swear and blaspheme, with Mortdieu, Sangdieu, and
such like, do fight better, than they that say Surely and Truly: because (say
they) Surely and Truly do effeeblish and weaken men's hearts, for experience
shows in many places, that this is false.

When I think upon and consider where Machiavell has fished this goodly
Maxim, I can hardly be persuaded but he learned it out of the history of
Aygolant Annals of the life of Charlemaine.
a Paynim king of Africa, of Mahumets religion: this king was a great and
puissant ruler, who demeaned and maintained great wars with Charlemaine king
of France, but he was always vanquished, and Charlemaine victorious; so that
to escape from the hands of Charlemaine by the cheapest and best means, he
could devise none better, than one day to make Charlemaine understand, that he
the said Aygolant, would become a Christian, and be baptized: Charlemaine
rejoiced thereat, and caused him to come into his lodging, with intent to feast
him, and give him good enterteinment. When he came in to Charlemaine his
lodging, he did see thirteen poor men, beggarly Charlemaine did, to have
always before his eyes an image of poverty, to remember Christ and his
Apostles, and their humility: Aygolant at the sight of these poor men,
desired to know what they were; Charlemaine answered him; These be the
servants of God: yea said Aygolant, has thy God his servants in so evil
order, and are thy servants so brave; truly I will never be baptized, to
become the servant of thy God, for I will never yield to so base an estate, as
I see thy Gods servants hold: so Aygolant would not be christened, for the
humility he saw in the estate of God his servants. So Machiavell rejects the
Christian Religion, because that thereby humility is recommended unto us: but
loves much better the Paynim Religion of Aygolant, because (says he) it
maintains the heart, haughty and fierce.

And as for that that he says, That the Christian Religion promises not
Paradise Christian Religion allows not an idle and contemplative life.
but to idle and contemplative people, he shows well that he never knew what
Christian Religion meant; for it commands us to travail, and not to be idle,
and every man loyally to exercise his vocation. Very true it is, that
amongst Christians there must be some contemplatives, that is to say, studious
people, which give themselves to holy letters, for to teach others: but we
find not by the documents of that Religion, That there is allowed any idle
contemplation of dreamers, which do no other thing but imagine dreams, and
toys, in their brains: but a contemplative life of laboring studious people,
is only approoved, which give themselves to letters,

Touching that which he says; That the Christian Religion disposes rather men
to receive blows, than to vengeance. I confess that it is true, that our
Religion forbids us to take vengeance of our own enmities and particular
quarrels, by our Men that are not quarellous, are not the less generous.
is there one point in Christians, more then in Paynims, that is; That a
Christian being well resolved in his conscience, that he bears arms for a
good and just cause, as for the good of his prince, or of his country, or some
such like good cause, he Caesar writes, That our ancient Gauls were very
generous and warlike, because they held as resolute the immortality of souls,
and that they that die, die not at all. How much more then ought Christians to
be generous, which not only are resolved of the immortality of souls, but
do also know, that God has prepared for them an eternal rest, an immortal
glory, and a perdurable beatitude, with him and his angels? Surely, as the
life and eternal felicity are more excellent, than this frail life full of
miseries and calamities: so the Christian Machiavell and all his school of
Atheists, which have nothing, that so much fears their conscience, as to think
of God, have no such mind. They show themselves generous and valiant to execute
some massacre, to sley men unarmed, which have no means to defend themselves:
but otherwise they are resolute people to hold themselves far from blows.

Finally, when Machiavell says, That the Christian Religion teaches us to
despise A Christian may desire honor by lawful means.
honor, he shows himself a stinking lier. True it is, that a man must
distinguish the virtue, and that which is good, from that which is the vice,
and the evil which resembles

M. Philip de Comines, king Lewis the eleventh his chamberlain, writes, That
this king was very humble in habits, in words, and in all other things, and
that he could well acknowledge his faults, and amend them, and that these
virtues were the means whereby he dispatched great affairs, which he had on
his arms at his first Machiavell his Maxim. When Pride marches before, Shame
with damage follows.

So must we say, That humility, kindness, gentleness, patience, easiness to
pardon, clemency, and all other virtues, which accord and agree with an humane
and benign nature, are not contrary to the true magnanimity, but very
covenable and agreeing thereunto. For magnanimity is no other thing but a
constant and perpetual will, to employ himself courageously in all good and
virtuous things, and to fly, abate, and chase away all vices and vicious
things. It is then magnamitie, to be humble, soft, gentle, patient, inclined to
pardon, to be far from vengeance, Scipio the African, than Julius Caesar,
than Alexander the great, than great Pompeius? Yet were there never in the
world, men, which were more magnanimous than they.

As much may we say of Charlemaine, Philip, Augustus the Conqueror, saint
Lewis, Charles le Sage, Charles the seventh, Lewis the twelfth, and many other
kings of France, which were very magnanimous, yet very soft and gentle. But I
shall in another place handle this point more at large, and show, That
magnanimity has always been joined with humanity, gentleness, and
clemency: and contrary, pusillanimitie has always been accompanied with
cruelty, pride, and vengeance.

4. Maxim.
The great Doctors of the Christian Religion, by a great ostentation and
stiffenesse, have sought to abolish the remembrance of all good letters and
antiquity.
THe Christian Religion (says this Atheist) has held this practice,
Discourse, lib. 2.
to abolish the Paynim Religion, first to deface the memory of all order, and
the ceremonies thereof, and of all old Theology. After that, it sought to
abolish also the Poets and Historiographers, and to extinguish the total
knowledge of the deeds and ieasts of excellent persons, and of all antiquity,
destroying all old images, Gregory and other Doctors of that Religion, which
so obstinately persecuted the letters and writings of the Gentiles, were
constrained themselves to write them in the Latin Diodorus the Sicilian, who
begins a narration of things done forty or fifty thousand years before.

MAchiavell, (desirous to show himself a very Atheist, without religion, and a
man full of ignorance and beastliness) advances now this Maxim, the very
contrary, whereof is plainly seen in the writings of them of our Religion,
which this impostor and deceiver blames, as altogether false, and against
truth. For so much does there want, that the writers of the books of our
Religion, would abolish good letters, as the liberal arts, the knowledge of
tongues, hystories, poesies, and other of the Elders sciences, that clean
contrary they have with them aided and helped The Christian doctors have
confuted the Painims by their own books.
use them against the Painims, to vanquish them, either with natural reason,
or with allegations and authorities out of their own books; because they
received not the authority of the Bible. And whosoever reads the ancient
Doctors, will witness that it is true, That they have filled their books with
allegations of profane and Painim authors: and he that will see this more at
large, let him read S. Augustine of the city of God, and the Christian
institutions of Lactantius Firmian. For he shall see, that the purpose of those
two authors in the said books, is no other, but to confute and overthrow the
Painims Religion, with the falsenesse thereof, by their own books, and to
approove and set out ours. True it is, that often they mark the faults A
Christian ought not to be too much give^ to profane authors.
and ignorances of Painim authors, and admonish Christians to read them with a
spirit of sobriety, and not to give themselves so much unto them, as to leave
the holy Scriptures. Which admonitions are good and holy, and also are
necessary even in our time. For there are at this day infinite persons, which so
much please themselves in profane authors, some in Poets, some in
Hystoriographers, some in Philosophy, some in Physic, or in Law; that they
care nothing to read or else to know any thing for the salvation and comfort of
their souls. Some care not at all for it, others Martial, or in Catullus or
Tibullus, or in certain books of Ovid? And therefore, although we never read
any of these poets, and so our youth gave themselves only to Virgil to learn
all Latin poesy, it were enough: and that alone author (out of whom all
others are but small rivers) might learn them all the poesy that need be
known. Yet I will not say, but there are many other good poets very worthy to
be read, as Horace, Lucane, Claudian, and others; but he that well understands
Virgil, he needs not have to do with others, for the understanding of poesy.
And in every science it seems to be the best (that men may well employ
Machiavell is a shameless lier, in that he dare affirm, That the doctors of
the Christian Religion would or sought to abolish good letters, I will here set
down the advice and counsel that they have given touching the study of
humane letters of the Gentiles. Doctor Beda (as Gratian recites in his decree)
says; That they which will forbid the reading of the Gentiles books, do
hinder men from having ^7 Did. Turbat.
apt spirits to comprehend and understand the holy writings: because humane
sciences do fashion our minds and understandings to the better ability, to
understand holy letters: and that Moses and Daniel, which were learned in the
letters of Beda. He troubles (says he) and causes to fail the vivacitie of
readers spirits, who esteems, that men ought altogether to forbid the reading
of secular books, wherein we ought to take that which is good, as our own.
Otherwise, Moses and Daniel would not have learned the wisdom and letters of
the Egyptians and Chaldeans, the superstition of which people they abhorred.
S. Paul also doctor of the Gentiles, would not have alleged certain verses
out of the Gentiles books in his writings. Why then should we forbid men to
read that which by good reason ought to be read? But some read secular letters
for their pleasure only, being tickled and Gregory reprehended a certain
bishop, not because he had learned humane letters, but because he expounded
them unto the people against the duty of a Bishop, whereas he should have
expounded Behold what was the opinion of this Theologian doctor, touching the
study and reading of the writings and sciences of the Paynims. S. Ambrose upon
S. Luke, speaking of the same matter, says, That we read the books of the
Paynims to diverse ends; namely, for not to be ignorant of that they handle, and
to follow the good things in them, and to reject the evil. S. Jerome upon the
Epistle to Titus, says, That Grammar and Logic are profitable sciences to
know to speak well, and to distinguish the true from the false, and that
sciences humane may serve Christians, to apply them to good uses: and therefore
(says he) it is necessary of necessity to know them, to the end, that we
might show, That the things which have been said by the Prophets many hundredth
of years before, are since come to pass, Augustine also against the
Manicheans, says, That if the Sibils, or Orpheus, or that other poets of the
Gentiles, or the philosophers have written any true thing of God, men must and
may serve themselves therewith, to vanquish the vanity of the Paynims, but yet
ought we not therefore to give authority to such authors. By which words he
well shows, that he approoveth the reading and study of the Gentiles books,
as well poets, philosophers, as others. S. Basile also in his treatise he writ
of the manner of reading the Gentiles books, not only reprehendeth not the
reading thereof, but contrary exhorts Christians to read them, and to
apply the reading of those books to his true end and purpose, which is the
piety and edification in the faith The article of the said Counsel, recited
by Gratian in his Decretall, De quibusdam, 37 Did.
is this: Report is made unto us of certain places, where they have no care to
have schoolemasters for the study of letters: therefore let all bishops,
subjects, and people, in place where need shall be, perform their duties in
placing masters and doctors, which may daily teach letters and liberal arts,
for by their means the writings and commandments of God are declared and
manifested. What now then will this slanderer Machiavell say? Can he yet say,
that the doctors of the Christian Religion have or would have abolished good
letters, and the writings of the Jerome, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Gregory,
Baeda, and S. Basile, which are the principal doctors of the Christian Church,
and the authority of the Counsel (which is as an approbation of the
universal Church?) shall not all this be sufficient to show the impudency of
this Florentine?

But now am I desirous to know of this Atheist Machiavell, what was the cause
that so many good books of the Paynim authors were lost, since the time of
the ancient doctors of our Christian Religion? was it not by the Goths which
were Paynims? For at their so many irruptions and breaking out of their
countries, upon Gaul, Italy, Spain, they wasted and burned so many books as
they could find, tongues in other countries, have been brought in by others;
but into our Francis the first of happy memory: and since the restoration of
tongues and humane sciences, men have well experimented, that they are very
requisite and profitable, well to understand the Scriptures of our Christian
Religion, so far are we off from rejecting them.

And as for that which Machiavell says; That our Christian Religion has
sought to abolish the memory of all antiquity; how dare he openly oppugn
the manifest truth? for none is ignorant, that the true and primative
antiquity is of the Hebrews, whose books have been conserved, translated, and
expounded by the Christians. And as for the antiquity of the Paynims, does any
man find that the Christians Homer, Hesiodus, Berosus, or any other authors of
antiquity? nay they they are which have conserved them, which have aided
themselves with them, and which have interpreted them: Eustachius the great
commentor of Homer, was not he a Christian, yea a bishop? But I shame to stay
in the confutation of the impudent lies of this Atheist; for young and mean
scholars may easily impugn his impudent lies.

Machiavell says; That it succeeded not so well with our Christian Religion,
as it would, when it went about to abolish good letters, because it was
constreined to use the Latin tongue, wherein all humane sciences were written.
Herein does he manifestly show his beastliness and ignorance; for who
constreined our Christian doctors Chrysostom, S. Athanasius, S. Basile, S.
Cirill, Eusebius, and many others: yet if writers had used these languages,
men would nor have ceased to preach in Latin to the Latins; in the French to
the French; in the Allemaigne to the Allemaignes, and to other nations, to
every one in his language: for it has been seen not past threescore years
ago, that in Italy, France, Alemaigne, Spain, and other where, the Christian
Religion was not written in the mothers tongue; yet men left not to hold the
said Religion in the said countries: but since it has been brought into
every of those languages, for the commodity of the people; as it was brought
Augustine, S. Ambrose, S. Jerome, S. Gregory, and other Latin doctors of the
primitive Church of their time: yet if they had written in Hebrew, or Greek,
the Christian Religion had not left and ceased to subsist and stand for that.
And although the Latin profane books had perished, the Latin language which
then was vulgar, had not therefore perished: therefore does Machiavell well
show his beastliness, to say, that the Christian Religion has been
constrained to use the Latin language, and that by that means, the profane
Latin authors have been conserved. But what means he when he says; That if
the Christian Religion could have formed a new tongue, it had abolished the
memory of all antiquity? has there been at any time, in any country, any
Religion, which has formed a new Machiavell: and therefore take it which way
you will; if the Christian Religion had invented a new tongue, or that it had
used the Machiavell knows not what he says.

As little knows he what he says, when he holds, That sects and Religions
have varied twice or thrice, in five or six thousand years, and that the last
causes always the remembrance of the first to perish; for who has revealed
unto him this secret? who has told him news of things done before Moses time,
if it were not Moses himself? Briefly, there is neither reason, nor history,
whereupon he may found that impudent lie. But hereby he would show, that if any
doubt whether he be not a very Atheist, that he has no more cause to doubt:
for, for a proof hereof, he makes a declaration, that he believes nothing of
that which is written in the holy Scripture, of Moses. For by the holy
Scripture it is seen, that there are not yet six thousand years since the
creation of the world. It is also seen, that the Christian Religion of Messiah
and Christ, changed not since the said creation, but has always endured, and
shall endure till the consumation of the world. And as for Painim Religions,
they have changed from one into an other, in a little time, and in one same
country, as histories do show. At Rome, in the time of Romulus, there was a
Religion such as it was, which Numa changed, and devised an other more
cerimonious. After, the religion of Numa changed, and strange Religions of the
Grecians and others were received at Rome: insomuch that about five hundredth
years after Numa, when his books were found Caine, who began to follow the
false Religion: for whatsoever outward change there was, within it was always
divelish Religion, having for his author, the father of lies and of falsenesse:
and therefore Machiavell knows not what he says, but that he is an Atheist, and
so would manifest himself to be one, by discovering that he believed not the
holy Scriptures. He thought to have immortalized his name, by making himself
known to posterity, that he was a perfect Atheist, replenished with all
impiety, like as Nero did, who soughr means to make Suet. in Neron, cap. 55.
in Calig. cap. 31.
men speak of him after his death, in sleying his mother, his brother, master,
and many good men of his time, and in burning Rome, and such other wicked and
detestable cases. As also Caligula wished (to the end there might be a memory
of his kingdom in time to come) that in his time there might happen some great
pestilence and notable mortality, or some exceeding great famine, ruins,
earthquakes, and burnings of towns: Because, says he, if my reign do pass
in peace and tranquillity without some great and notable evil luck, none will
speak of me in time to come. There be men of such wicked and divelish natures,
which are of this humor, which desire to make their renown immortal, by vices
and wickednesses; as Machiavell has done, who has so well played his part,
that he has obtained the Aretine his companion, who lives in his time, and
has written the praise of Sodomie, to immortalize his name.

5. Maxim.
When men left the Paynim Religion, they became altogether corrupted, so that
they neither believed in God nor the Devil.
THe Paynim Religion (says Machiavell) consists principally in the answers
of Oracles and of Augures. And to Discourse, lib. 1. cap. 12.
have good answers of those Oracles and Augures, they builded to the gods
goodly temples, and with great ceremonies offered sacrifices unto them. And
the world was kept in a mavelous devotion by the Oracle of Jupiter Ammon,
of Apollo in Delos, and in Delphos, and other like. But incontinent as their
trumperie

MAchiavell still continuing to teach his doctrine of Atheism, and the
despite of our Christian Religion, goes about to persuade by this Maxim, That
there was a great loss to men, when they lost the Painim Religion. But
certainly, it was the light of the Christian Religion, which caused the
darkness of the Paynim Religion to vanish away, because that Religion only
depended upon Oracles, Augures, and other divellish illusions. So that in
brief, Machiavell his mind is, That a man should do well to set a packing the
Christian Religion, and that it were a goodly Atheist, that teaches all
impiety, to take his course, and sow his venom amongst: for although it
displeases me much to do so, yet I dare not but lay abroad the impiety of
this poisoner. He then says, That it was a goodly thing in the time of the
Paynims, to see the

Machiavell then must note by his own confession, That men then became most
Atheism brings men to perfection of all wickedness.
wicked in all wickedness, as soon as they began to be of the Heathen
Religion, that is, without all Religion. What means Machiavell then openly to
teach Atheism, and the despite of the Christian Religion? yet this he speaks
not, to bring us unto Paganism, which he confesses to be false: but to make
men, especially

But to come to the truth of that which Machiavell says, certain it is, That
as soon as Christian Religion came into light and knowledge, the Paynim
Religion vanished away by little and little, as the light also by little and
little spread it self. True it is also, that as soon as the falsenesse of the
Paynim Religion was discovered,

And as for that that Machiavell presupposes, That Oracles were certain
answers, Apollo, of Jupiter Ammon, or of any other of the Paynim gods, he
shows himself to be very ignorant, and to have read little: yet I will not
deny, but sometimes the priests entermedled somewhat of their own many times:
but it is certain, that the said Oracles, were diabolical answers, which the
devil made himself, or caused to be made by some he or she priest, which
he brought into ecstasies, and out of their senses, and so caused them to say
what he would: and most often he answered in verses, but commonly ambiguous,
in two senses. For how could those he or she priests, which commonly were
unlearned, and knew nothing, give an answer in verse. It was also impossible,
that they could have advertisements from Religions so Apollo, of Jupiter, and
other like gods.

Plutarke in a treatise he made of the defect of Oracles, shows, That the
Oracles were not things invented by priests; but concerning the failing of
Oracles, he is found very much distracted and troubled, not knowing how to
resolve that question. For there must be presupposed, that in his time (which
was during the kingdom Traianus) and before a good while, there were no more
Oracles: insomuch, that that good philosopher was much abashed and perplexed,
from whence it should come. But because that point is well worth the
knowledge, and does come well for our purpose in this place, I will handle the
same more at large.

You must then understand, that Plutarke, who was a great Paynim philosopher,
Of the defailance of Oracles.
to find out the cause of the failing and decay of Oracles, enters into a
question, whereof he (like a Paynim) resolves himself: but to prove his
opinion, he uses certain narrations, which may well bring us to the truth of
the cause of the defailancie and ceasing of Oracles. He then enters into
disputation of the nature of the gods; Plutarke then, would hereof infer,
that it might be, those gods which answered at Delphos and Delos, and other
places, were but half gods, and so might be dead, and that therefore might
happen the said ceasing of Oracles. Yet he held not this opinion nor any other
very resolutely; An history of the death of the god Pan.
He says then, that in the time of the emperor Tiberius, one Epitherses, a
schoolmasters in a town of Greece, embarked himself upon the sea, to sail
into Italy, Thamus, Thamus. This Thamus was the master of the ship, whose name
the most part of the passengers knew not. This voice cried twice, before the
master would answer. At the third time he answered, unto which the voice yet
cried with an higher sound, That as soon as he should be come against the
Palodes, he should make known unto the inhabitants Pan was dead. Epitherses
said, That at that word, all the company which were within the ship, were
exceedingly afraid and astonished. So it came into a consultation amongst that
people, if the shipmaster Thamus should do that which was commanded him by
that voice. And this resolution was taken, That if when they came against the
Palodes, the winds were strong and good for them, they should pass on without
stay, or saying any thing; but if the sea were calm, and had no wind, that
then Thamus should signify unto the inhabitants of Palodes that which the
voice had commanded him. Being then there arrived, and having the sea calm
without wind* Thamus got him into the hind-decke or stern of the ship, and
turning his face toward land right against Palodes, he begun to cry with an
The great Pan is dead. He had no sooner achieved and ended this speech, but
all the whole company in the ship heard a great crying and lamentation of
many, mixed with a great admiration. Finally, when they were arrived at Rome,
each of them within the ship spread abroad the fame of this thing, insomuch,
that it came to the notice of Tiberius the emperor; who sent for the captain
or master of the ship, Thamus, who told him al at length. Tiberius believing it
was true, that the great god Pan was dead, desired to know what god that was.
Some learned people which he had about him, told him: That that Pan was the
son of god Mercury, and of Penelope. Behold here the account which Plutarke
makes of god Pan his death, and further says, That in his time many heard this
history rehearsed by one Aemilianus, Epitherses. But if we consider the
circumstances of this history, we shall find, That this voice was a
signification of the death of Christ, which caused Oracles to fail, and
overthrew the power of the devil. And it is credible, that those lamentations
which were heard at Palodes, were the complaints of evil spirits, to which
were delivered the signification of their kingdoms destruction. And to prove
that this history should be so understood. First we must consider, that it
is reported to be in the time of Tiberius, under whom our Lord Jesus suffered
death and passion. Certain also it is, That Tiberius enquired of Jesus Christ,
and understanding of his miracles, he required of the Senate, that they would
cause him to be enrolled in the Letanie of their gods at Rome; but the Senate
would not. Moreover, and gather, that it must needs be the god Pan, which they
said to be the god of Mercury, whom they said to be the messenger and
deliverer of the will of the great god Jupiter. This may be gathered by Dion,
the hystoriographer, who says: That the emperor Antoninus making war
against the Marcommans, obtained rain from heaven of the Dion and Capitol. in
Marco Antonino.
god Mercury. And Capitolinus speaking of the same matter, says, That the
Emperor Antoninus, to obtain rain, had recourse to a strange Religion: but
Mercury was no strange god to those Paynims, so that we must needs understand
that saying of Dion, of another Mercury than they knew; yet gave they him that
name (as it is likely) because they had heard say he was sent from God, to
signify and preach Tiberius the emperor, hearing it spoken, that so many
miracles were done by Jesus Christ, they easily resolved, that he was a god;
understanding he called himself the great shepherd, they concluded thereof,
that he was Pan; hearing also, that he said he was sent to deliver out the
will of God, and that he was borne of a virgin, they made this illation (as is
to be presumed) that he must then needs be the son of Mercury, messenger of
the great Jupiter, and of some chaste woman, such as was Penelope: for as is
likely, they could never believe, that he was a virgins son, because it
repugned the order of nature, that a virgin should bring forth a child. And
therefore of all those conjectures laid together, those wise men (or rather
ignorant) Pan, which died at that time, was the son of Mercury and of
Penelope; applying that to their gods, which they had heard spoken of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Behold then, how this history, drawn from the Paynims, is a
perfect witness, that by the death of Christ came the defailancie and ceasing
of Oracles: and indeed we find in no hystories, that since his death Oracles
have been of any account or fame, as they were before. True it is, that the men
and women priests of those gods, which answered by Oracles, seeing that their
master abandoned and forsook them, yet delivered answers themselves of their
own devices; but their trumperies, deceits, and fictions, were soon discovered
by the divulgement and dispersion Nero himself discovering the abuse,
overthrew one Dion in Nerone.
of the temples of Apollo, wherein were delivered Oracles, and slew all the
priests belonging thereunto.

For a resolution then I hold; That at the coming of our Savior Jesus Christ,
Oracles failed, as the coming of the Sun causes darkness to depart from
the At the coming of Christ the world was amended.
earth: at his coming he preached the true and pure heavenly doctrine to men,
and after him his Apostles and Disciples preached it also: so that by the
doctrine of Jesus Christ, and of his Apostles and Disciples, all Christians
were instructed to fear, love, and honor God above all things, and to serve
him according to his commandments were taught in all true virtue, whereas
before the Paynims did teach nothing The virtue of the Paynims in outward
appearance.
be, to obtain honor, glory, and advauncement unto greatness, which was the
mark and end, for which commonly they desired virtue, and not for conscience
sake, nor to please God. The examples of Caesar, of Pompey, of Cicero, and
generally of all the old Romans (which have had any great reputation of
virtue) do prove, that this is true, and that they never aspired to verrue,
but to obtain honor, and to Cato likewise of Vtica, which seemed in all his
behaviors to despise honor, wherefore slew he himself? Was it to please God,
or to satisfy his conscience? It is very certain that no: for he was not so
ignorant, but he knew well, that murder displeased God, and that no man should
murder himself, more than another. Nothing could move his conscience, to
incite him to slay himself: for he felt not himself culpable of any thing
that deserved it. How then? Wherefore should he murder himself? For this, not
to receive that dishonor, to fall alive into the hands of Caesar: although he
knew well enough, that there needed no more but a little humiliation, to have
his life, goods, and dignities saved, (as he himself confessed and declared
to his son and to his friends a little before he slew himself;) Caesar. Here
behold, how those Paynims aspired, not to have virtue, but for honor and an
outward show: whereas the doctrine of Christ teaches us, To desire and to lust
after virtues, not only to bring them unto outward appearance, but also to
adorn our hearts and our consciences inwardly therewith, and so to please God.
Moreover, also we have heretofore showed, That the Christian doctrine
comprehends much more perfectly, the virtues of good manners, than the Paynims
doctrine does. How then dare that filthy Machiavell say, That men become
wicked, like unchained slaves, when Oracles failed? where found he this? where
ever read he, that men were worse, and more evil conditioned in Seneca,
Plutarke, Pliny the Second, and of many In the primitive Church, the Paynims
learned of the Christians.
other Paynim authors, which were in the time of the primitive Church, and he
shall find infinite godly and Christian sentences, which the Paynims learned of
the Christians of their time, as may be necessarily supposed. For such
sentences were never borrowed of Plato, Aristotle, or of other Philosophers
which were before the coming Plutarke disputerh of the tranquillity of the
soul; to fly anger; to shun usurie; of the profit that a man may draw from an
enemy; of such as God punishes slowly, and of many other points, he utters
many sentences, which are truly Christian, and do hold nothing of the
Philosophers doctrine, which were before Christ our Savior. And all the works
of Seneca are full of Christian sentences: insomuch, that many have esteemed,
That Seneca himself was a Christian, yea, that he was well known of S. Paul:
which (it may Seneca (who was in the time of Nero, and was a learned man, and a
lover of the learned) might well have heard Paul speak, who at the said time
was a prisoner at Rome for the doctrine which he preached, and might well have
been so curious as to talk with him, to understand what was that doctrine,
whereof all the world spoke. But whatsoever it was, none can deny, that the
writings of Seneca in many places do not demonstrate, that he learned many
things of the Christians. We may then conclude, That in the time when Oracles
failed, and that Christian doctrine began to be published and divulged through
the world, men became better, and not more wicked, like unchained slaves (as
this mocker Machiavell says.) For although even in that time, there were found
Machiavell uttered this opinion, as having read it in any good author, but only
thereby to blame the Christian Religion, as the cause of the corruption of
manners. But he impudently lies, like a shameless slaunderer, which dare be
so bold, as to deliver such talk, without any proof, and the contrary
whereof is already clearly proved.

6. Maxim.
The Roman Church is cause of all the calamities in Italy.
THe Roman Church (says Machiavell) is cause that Italy

ALthough the Roman Church be contaminated with many The papal seat does
evil, rather far off than nigh.
vices, yet does Machiavell show himself here a notable slanderer against it:
for experience has made us long time know, That it rather does mischief far
off than nigh hand, and that she ordinarily enricheth the place where she
abides. We read, That she has held her seat at Avignon, by the space of
seventie years; so that by the affluence and plenty of gold and silver, which
ordinarily arrived there, the town became so opulent and rich, that it yet
tastes thereof, and gladly desires it might be always there. As for the
Suiffes, of whom Machiavell speaks, I am assured, that there are they who
would, it cost Machiavell says, That if the Roman seat were there placed,
there would be no good peace, for sowing divisions amongst Machiavell says; It
sows divisions and partialities in Italy; that rather happens by the humor
of that country people, which are naturally subject to nourish divisions and
partialities amongst both themselves and other nations, where they have credit;
as experience is in France. Moreover, the Romans themselves are not of
Machiavels opinion, neither do they complain, that the Roman seat brings
them any damage. At the beginning of that great schism of Popes, they showed
well, how greatly they feared to loose their seat. For so much were they
afraid, that the Cardinals should again have a French Pope, which might again
dwell at Avignon, where the said seat had so long before remained, We will
have a Roman, or at the least Froiss. lib, 2. cap. 12.
an Italian. This was the cause that the Cardinals gave them a Roman, whereof
the Roman inhabitants were so joyous, that they took him on their shoulders
to honor him the more, and so long and so far carried him through Rome, that
they stifled him and smothered him with the great prease amongst their arms.
When they saw their terrestrial god dead, they straight returned to the
Cardinals, saying their Pope was dead, and they must needs give them another.
So by their cries and

I have before said, and it is true, That the holy seat does more harm far off
than nigh, and it is easy to prove by examples. For by tithes, croisadoes,
bulls of benefices,

Yet we read in our hystories, That our kings of France have many times
hindered Popes to draw silver out of the realm, by Annates, Tenthes, Bulls,
and other means; as in the time of Boniface the eight, Benit the eleventh,
Tulius the second and third. But concerning this matter, it is good to mark
the determination made in Anno 1410 by our masters of the faculty of Sorbone,
and by all the University of Paris, which resolved in a general congregation
held at the Bernardines, That the French Church was not bound to pay any silver
to the Pope in any manner whatsoever, unless it be by the way of a charitable
subsidy, and that in three cases only; namely, to employ the said silver to
the conquest of the holy land; for the reunion of Three cases into which the
Sorbonists do limit the popes power to levy silver in France.
John of Rochetaillade preached in his time against the Pope. And because his
sermon will not be far from our purpose, I will here breefely rehearse it.

In the time that the holy seat was at Avignon, about the year 1360, there was
a Friar minor, called Friar John de Rochetaillade, which set himself to preach
against the pride, gourmandizes, and superfluitles of the Pope and his
Cardinals, which then were at Avignon, and generally against all the prelates
and clergy people, also against princes, which too sore oppressed their
subjects. He always took for his text or theme some part of the Apocalipse,
and properly applied it to the Pope, Cardinals, and Prelates. Our
hystoriographers say, he was a great clearke, and that he foretold the
captivity of king John, and that Pope Innocent the sixth, being much greeved at
his sermons, caused him to be imprisoned, fearing (said he) that by his great
knowledge he caused all the world to err: for that good S. Peter was of
opinion, A sermon of friar John de Rochetailiade against the Pope.
Friar John amongst other his sermons, he preached one, which was the chief
cause of his imprisonment, and this was the substance thereof. Masters and
ladies, I will tell you a strange case, which in time past of old happened
amongst birds, and it is very like that now we see, and hereafter shall see,
the like happen to our holy Father, the Pope. You must then understand, that in
old time a bird was engendered in the John to the Pope and Cardinals) shall it
happen to you, and doubt not thereof. For when the emperors, kings, and
Christian princes have taken from you the goods and riches that in former times
they have given you, which you bestow in extreme pride and superfluity, then
shall you remain all naked. Where find you, That S. Peter or S. Silvester rid
with two hundred or three hundred horses? yea, contrary, their estate was very
simple, enclosed and hid within Rome. Thus Friar John preaching, spoke but the
truth: yet this truth (which is so odious to the world) brought him to prison,
where they caused him to finish his days. I will then conclude this recital,
That if all Christian princes would practice the Magistrall determination of
our masters of Sorbonne and of the Peter, which fell unto Friar John his bird.

Yet is it not only by the change of lead into gold, that his Holiness does
Froisart, lib. 2. chap. 132, 133. 135. 140.
much evil to provinces far from Rome, but also by his interdicts and
excommunications. In the time of the aforesaid schism of Popes, he of Rome,
who was called Urban, sent Bulls unto king Richard of England (who took his
part, and was an Vrbanist) by which he commanded him to make war upon the
king of France, who was a Clementine, and gave him power to levy silver upon
the War for the Pope of Rome.
English Clergy. Moreover, he gave so great quantity of pardons to all them
which with a good heart did furnish silver for that war, that it seemed he
meant stray out of their way by purgatory and the Limbo, but to go right to
paradise.

In the year 1513 happened great damage and hurt unto the kings of France,
Annals upon the said year. Du Bellay, lib. 1. of his Memories.
and of Navarre, by the means of an interdict and excommunication which Pope
Julius the second of that name, cast against all the princes which had sent
their ambassadors to the counsel of Pise, whose lands and seignories he
exposed and gave as a prey to all men that would take and invade them. For
under color of those wicked and detestable bulls, the emperor Maximilian and
the Switzers, constrained king Lewis the twelfth to abandon and forsake
Millaine, and almost all that he held in Italy. And on the other side, the
king of England fell upon France (which by the Pope was exposed as a prey)
with an army of 3000 English, assaying to conquer part thereof. But God
suffered it not: for in the mean time this wicked Pope died, Ferdinand of
Arragon feigning he would come to prey upon France, entered into the kingdom of
Navarre, and got and usurped it upon king John d' Albert, The Pope cause of the
loss of the kingdom of Navarre from the right heirs.
who was disseased thereof, without being defied, yea, before he knew the king
of Arragon his purpose: whose successors have always since detained and
usurped the said kingdom of Navarre, upon the said king John d' Albret, and
upon his lawful successors, as they do yet by this title only of usurpation,
prey, and booty; yet notwithstanding the said unjust usurpers call themselves
most Catholic.

I could here accumulate many other examples, of many great domages and losses
committed by Popes in strange countries, and even in Almaigne, where they have
Machiavell says, is true, and that the Pope and his holy seat do much good in
the place where they are, and many evils and mischeefes in far countries.

And as for that which Machiavell says, That Italy is the province of
Christendom, where there is least Religion, he says very true: but what would
he now say, if he were alive: he should then find, that if in his time they
had so well profited in his school, as to be very great Atheists and
contemners of God and of all Religion, M. Comines rehearses? He says, That in
the time of king Lewis the twelfth, there were two houses at Florence, which
were principal, that is to say, of Medicis and of Pacis, which were in quarrel
and enmity together. They of the house de Pacis favored the Pope, and the
king of Naples, and by their counsel and advice did they enterprise to slay
Lawrence de Medicis (who was chief of his house) and all his race: and to
surprise him the better, unprovided and without heed taking, they resolved to
sley and massacre him with all his race and sequel, upon a solemn feast day,
at the hour that the great Mass was sung, and that when the priest begun to
sing Sanctus, Sanctus, it should be the watch word to rush upon them. And
indeed they executed their enterprise, except that they slew not Lawrence de
Medicis (who saved himself in the revestrie) but Julian his brother, and
certain others of his race, were slain. I demand of you, if they which
enterprised and gave counsel to attempt such an act, believed in the Mass? we
need not doubt but they were very Atheists. But if in that time (some hundred
years ago) Italy were so furnished with Atheists and contemners

In conclusion, Italy, Rome, the Pope, and his seat, are truly the spring and
fountain of all despite of Religion, and the school of all impiety: and as
they already were in Machiavels time (as he confesses) so are they far more
in this time. For although the papal Church of Rome both heretofore made (and
yet does) certain demonstrations to sustain a Religion, yet in effect it
maintains it no otherwise, but by subtilties and words: for it commands
indeed to fast the vigils and Lent; but is there any place in the world, where
they careless for fasting vigils and Lent, than at Rome? It commands
chastity to priests; but is there any place in the world, where priests,
Cardinals, and others, are more furnished with whoores Machiavell himself
confesses. Let Christians then make their profit of this confession of
Machiavell, and so let them fly the spring of impiety, of Atheism, of
corruption of manners, and of the contempt of all Religion, least God punish
them and make them perish with such wicked men, as make open profession
thereof.

7. Maxim.
Moses could never have caused his laws and ordinances to be observed, if
force and arms had wanted.
THe most excellent men, mentioned in books (says our Florentine) which
became princes by their own virtue, and not by fortune, were Moses, Cyrus,
Romulus, Theseus, and such like: for fortune only gave them the occasion, and
the matter to execute their virtue. As Moses found the people of Israel in
captivity and servitude in Egypt. Cirus also found the Persians malecontent
of the proud government of the Medes. And Romulus Theseus found the town of
Athens full of troubles and confusions. Without which occasions, coming by
fortune, the virtue of their courage had not appeared, as also without their
virtue, such occasions had served the^ nothing. All those occasions then made
these persons happy, and their excellent virtue knew well how to make profit
of occasions.

THis Atheist willing always more strongly to show, That he believed Moses by
his own virtue and by arms was made the prince of the Hebrews. We see by the
books of Moses, that he was as it were constrained of God, to take the charge
to draw the Hebrew people out of Egypt, to bring them into the land of Canaan,
a place of the primitive of spring of this people. And after he had accepted
that charge: we read, That God gave him power to do many miracles before
Pharaoh, and all the people of Egypt, that he might suffer the Hebrew people
to return in peace into the country, from whence they first came. After,
having obtained permission Moses did nothing but by the counsel and power of
God alone. With what boldness then dare this stinking Atheist disgorge this
talk, to say that Moses was made the prince of the Hebrew people by his own
virtue, and by arms. Could he by any other means than by the Bible, know how
and what way Moses came to be governor of the Hebrew people: for all Paynim
authors speak little thereof, and that which they speak, is but as they read
in the said books of Moses, or by hearesay of such as read them, seeing it is
certain, that we have no profane author in light, that were not many worlds
after Moses. If then Machiavell can say nothing of Moses his doings, but by his
own books? with what impudency dare he deliver out a contrariety from that
is there written? For, to say he was made prince of the Hebrew people by his
own virtue, and by arms, that is as much as to deny straight, that God
constrained him to accept that charge, to conduct the Hebrew people, and that
the said people came out of Egypt by the miracles of God, and that they were
conducted by the cloud and pillar of fire, and that Moses. Assuredly, there is
no man of so heavy and dull a judgment, but he may well know, that this most
wicked Atheist has taken pleasure, to search out the most savage Maxims that
could be devised; assuring himself, That he should ever find monsters of men,
which also would delight in absurd and bestiall opinions, and would give
passage and way to his doctrine. And yet the better to show his beastliness,
this doctrine may be overthrown even by the writings of the Paynims
themselves. Trebellius Pollio writes, That Moses was only familiar Treb.
Pollio in Clau. Cor. Tacit. annal. lib. 21.
with God. Cornelius Tacitus (going about to calumniate and blame the Jewish
Religion contained in the books of Moses) confesses, That the king of Egypt
made Moses doctrine, they call it sacred Oracles, showing thereby, that they
confess, That the deeds and writings of Moses came from God, and not from his
own virtue.

But with what impudency dare Machiavell compare Moses to these idolaters,
Romulus and Theseus? What similitude had they with Moses in their life or in
their death? Romulus and Theseus were two bastards, rude and violent men in
their youth, whereof the one slew his brother, and the other his son; the one
finished his days slain and massacred by his citizens, and the other was
banished and chased from his Moses? But this Maxim of Machiavell has no need
of a more ample confutation; for the truth is so clear and apparent to the
contrary, that a man may manifestly see, that this Florentine is a most wicked
slaunderer and impudent lier.

Yet think I good to mark another beastliness and ignorance, in that he
says, That Theseus came to the domination of Athens, because he found the
estate of Plutarke in These.
the Athenians in confusion: for clean contrary he came unto it, because he
was avowed and acknowledged for the son of Egeus, king of Athens, and was
exceedingly well liked of the Athenians, because he had acquired the
reputation of a magnanimous and valiant man, in that he slew and overcame many
thieves, which Machiavels invention. And in that he says, That the occasion
and means that Romulus had to make himself a prince, was because he found
himself dejected from his birth place, the town of Alba, does he not show
himself a man of good judgment? For can a man say in good sense and reason,
that to be dejected from his country, disavowed of his parents, as a bastard,
to be put to nourishment amongst shepherds and beasts, to be Romulus became a
prince and founder of a town, were, That he was a man, strong and violent,
cunning in arms, who gathered together many vagabonds and people of execution,
whereof he made captains; after, he and Remus his brother founded Rome, and to
besole ruler, he slew his brother Remus, and made himself king.

8. Maxim.

WHen people are oppressed (says M. Nicholas) with famine, Discourse, lib. 2.
cap. 9.
war, or servitude in their country, oftentimes they go to conquer other
countries, wherein they change their name. As the people of Israel, being
oppressed with servitude in Egypt, under the conduct of Moses, occupied a
part of Syria, which he called Judea: even as the Goths and Vandales occupied
also the West Empire. Procopius, who writ in the life of Bellisarius, That he
read letters in certain pillars written, in the country of Maures in
Affricke, which contained this inscription: Nos Maurisci, qui fugimus a facie
Josu latronis filij Nave: Josue, the chief son of Nave.

THis Atheist having heretofore said, That Moses was made prince Joseph. lib.
1. Antiq. cap. 13. 14.
we know, that the land of Judea was first called the land of Canaan, having
taken that name of Canaan, the son of Noe, which dwelt there after the
deluge, and was the first stock of the Canaanites in that country: one part
of that land was called Palestine or Philistine, which name it took of
Philistines (a people coming from Philistim, Noe his rerenephew) which were a
mighty and strong people of that land, which had the government of the other
people of the country: one part also of that land of Canaan was called Judea,
of the name of Judah, who was a prince (even the chief) of the twelve
patriarchs of the children of Jacob, Moses this country was called Syria,
neither that it was comprehended under the name of Syria; for from that time
the country, which after men called Syria, was called the land of Aram, who
was the son of Sem, the son of Noe: although such as came after, under that
name of Syria, comprised the country of Assyria also, which in Moses his time
was called the land of Assure, who was also the son of Sem, the son of Noe.
And therefore is manifestly seen the beastliness and ignorance of Machiavell,
when he says, That Moses usurped a part of Syria, seeing the name of Syria was
not yet invented, much less comprised the land of Canaan. But Titus Livius,
but to so little purpose as may be. Moreover, it is known, That the land of
Canaan was of God many times promised to Abraham and to his seed (as is seen
in Genesis) and that Abraham dwelt there, and his race after him, after he
departed from his nephew Lot, unto the time that Jacob and his family were by
famine constrained to retire

And as for that which he alleged of the Maurusianz, it is a very fable, for
the The Maurusians came from Media, not from Siria nor Phaenicia.
Moses and Joshua are plainly set down in their books, but there is found no
name of Maurusians, neither is there found written in any good author, that in
the land of Canaan there ever dwelt any nation called Maurusians: and as for
that nation of Africa called Maures, Mauritanians, or Maurusians, it never came
out of the country of Palestine, but out of Media; insomuch as by the tongues
corruption these people were called Maures of Medes as Salust says, who is a
more credible author than this beast Machiavel, who says, Salust bello
Iugurthi.
that the Maurisians of Afric came ancientlie from Siria.

And as for that inscription Nos Maurusi etc. alleged by Machiavel, out of
Procopius, true it is that Procopius says; that in Numidia in Afric, the
Maurisians Procopius. lib 4. de bello Vandal.
Procopius says not, that he either saw or read (as Machiavel says) the said
inscription graved in the pillars. And it is not likely to be true, that they
could have endured from the time of Joshua till the time of Procopius, (which
were 2500 years and more,) entier and whole being of white stone, no not
although they had been of Rock stone, which will endure longer than the white
stone which is soft, seeing the wars and devastations ariving during that space
of time, in Africa, and all the parts of the world. Also other authors (far
more authentike and ancient than Procopius) which speak of the affairs of
Afric, do nothing touch the said inscription: absurd also it is to say, that
Procopius, who was a Rethorician a Sophister and a Grecian, which are three
qualities yielding presumption, that he might (as too light and forward in his
accounts) feign too much touching that inscription. For in the same place he
says, that the Maurusians a people of Phoenicia, abandoned their country, and
went to dwell in Africa, flying before Joshua, and the people of Israel; and
father, Machiavel not Procopius (his great author) is therein more to be
credited than the Rabbines dreams, which hold; That the Romans sprung from
the Idumaeans, and the Germans from the Canaanites. Yet let this be said,
not any way to diminish the credit, and authority of Procopius, who
notwithstanding I confess is well to be believed in the history, which he
has written touching the gests and wars made in his time, Justinian and his
lieutenants Belisarius, Narces, and others.

9. Maxim.
The Religion of Numa, was the chief cause of Romes felicity.
ROmulus (says Machiavell) all the time of his kingdom, used Discourse. lib.
1. cap. 12.
the Roman people to make war, which made them martial,: But Numa Pompilius
succeeding Romulus in the crown, perceiving he had to do with a people very
hard to govern, and to bring under policy without softening and mitigating
of their minds, thought it best to devise some goodly Religion, well adorned
and decked with beautiful ceremonies: because without Religion he thought it
impossible to maintain any policy amongst men. Wherefore as soon as he came
to the crown, he began to make diverse goodly ordinances touching Priests, and
the ceremonies of Religion, making the people believe, that he had them
revealed from the goddess Egeria. And this fell out so well for him, that
after his opinion (says Machiavell) the Religion which he instituted, was one
of the principal causes of Romes felicity. For it served to give heart and
hope to soldiers, to cause them range in battle, to hold them quiet in the
field, to maintain good men, and to overthrow the wicked, to appease mutinies
in the people, and in all things to make them obedient. But a Prince ought not
to think it impossible for him, which Numa, nor to be any thing discouraged,
if the subjects he has to deal with, be any thing witty, that they will
not suffer themselves to be carried to a new faith. For I may well say (says
he) that the Florentine people are not very beastly and rude, yet Friar Jerome
Savanarola preaching at Florence, made ten thousand Florentines believe, that
he prively had conference and spoke with God, who revealed unto him such
things as he preached in the pulpit*

MAchiavell having assayed to instruct a prince to reject all Religion Numa his
religion was; yet not to believe therein, but for his subjects to believe: that
with the fear of religion they might the better be detained in their offices
and duties; and that the prince might be Numa was, he says; it is no difficult
thing to do; alleging the example of the Florentines, whom Jerome Savanarola
made believe what he would, by fayning he had a revelation from God. But it is
no mervaile if this Atheist, who has no religion, does thus play with
Religions deriding all, willing also to persuade a prince to forge a new one:
for out of a vessel full of poison, what other thing can come but poison? But
it is strange he will propose Numa, for a prince to imitate in the making of a
new Religion, for the greatest thing Numa invented in his Religion, was the
temple Dionis. Halic. lib. 1.
of Faith, where he established many ceremonies to induce people to reverence
their Faith, and to fear perjurie; he ordained also, that upon controversies
happening Machiavell teach the plain contrary? does not he say, That a
prince, nor any other ought to observe his faith but for his profit? does he
not also say, That a prince should know the art of trompery and deceit, and
that he should make no scruple to be perjured? shows he not also, That a
prince in a conquered country, ought to plant colonies and chase away the
ancient natural inhabitants from their goods and possessions. All which things
are Numa, which he commends so much, but it is likely, that this ignorant
beast praises Numa his Religion, without knowing that it contained the points
which we now speak of.

I doubt not but some will judge at the first sight, That this religion of Numa
could not be evil, which taught so good things; as to observe Faith; not to
be perjured, nor to usurp others goods and possessions; but it must not be
approved therefore: for one must not by an evil and false, introduce a good
thing. This was good, to bring the people to an observation of Faith; but to
build a temple to Faith, to imagine it was a god, or goddess, and to do
service and ceremonies unto her, these were damnable and against Gods honor,
from whom they steal the glory that belongs Monsier Capel, the kings advocate
in the court of Parliament at Paris, in Anno 1535? whereby praising the dead
king Francis the second of that name of happy memory, because he had care of
Religion, he showed, That realms, and commonweales of the ancient Paynims,
which had good care well to observe their Religion, obtained prosperity in all
felicity. For that (says he) although their Religion was false, and that they
lived in error and darkness, yet they prospered, because esteeming it good
and true, they had it in a singular reverence and observation. This oration of
Capel, had truly a little of Machiavell his doctrine, to say, that a false
Religion

But to show, that Machiavell knows not what he says, I will here recite an
history Tit. Livius, lib. 10. Dec. 4.
to this purpose. In the year 574 after the foundation of Rome, in the time of
the consulship of Lucius Manlius, and Fulvius Flaccus as men dug the earth
in a certain place in Rome, they found the sepulcher of king Numa, where there
were two arches of hewn stone, in the one of which Numa was buried, and in the
other were the books found which he had written, wrapped in wax, in such sort
as they seemed Numa were found touching Religion, insomuch as every man
attended, that they should be divulged, and that by their means all abuses in
the Roman Religion should always be reformed. Yet to do nothing rashly, the
consuls gave charge to Quintus Petilius lieutenant of justice, well to turn
over, and peruse those books, and to report the truth of them unto the Senate.
Petilius read them from the one end unto the other, and of them certified his
opinion unto the Senate: and it was found, that the Religion which was handled
in those books, was of no account, and that it should be a pernicious and
damageable thing to the common wealth, to bring that Machiavell, who so much
esteems the Religion of Numa, without ever having seen his books, if he
can yield a better jugdment of them than the Lieutenant Petilius, who read
them, and than all the Roman Senate. Is not this as a blind man to judge of
colors, who speaks of a thing he knows not.

As for Friar Jerome Savanarola the Florentins showed well, that he was no
such De com. lib. 2. cap. 25. 53. 54.
man as would lead them to any new Religion, neither preached he unto them
any other Religion, but the old Romish Religion, only denouncing unto them
sometime the vengeances and punishments of God, which from heaven should fall
upon them, Charles the eight made a voyage unto Naples, who as soon as he was
seen in Italy, all the world began to say, and believe that Friar Jerome was
a true prophet, and that he had well foretold, that which they see come to
pass. The worst was, that the said king did nothing worthy of account in the
voyage, insomuch Ieromes prophecy (which was to purge Italy of so many
tyranizers) remained yet to accomplish. Then the reputation of this good Friar
Jerome, began not only to diminish, but also men began to say and believe that
he was an abuser; so that in the end he was accused at Florence, to be a most
wicked heretic; and his enemies said, he were worthy to be put into a sack
and to be cast into the river: and because he still continued to preach his
first theme; That the king of France should yet again come into Italy, to
perform that which he had not executed in that first voyage, and that the will
of God was so, and if he did not accomplish it, yet God himself would punish
it: the Pope and the Duke of Millan, which were hereat troubled, for they
thought this was but a bait to cause the king of

Amongst others which took Jerome in hand there was found a Friar (for there
never was love betwixt the Friars, and the Iacobines) which would needs
mainetaine A disputation by Fire.
against him, that he was an heretic, and to prove his so saying, he
presented unto Jerome the combat, to commit themselves both into the fire, and
that he Jerome was sore abashed to hear speak of such a manner of
disputation, and indeed would not accept it: for he was not so learned not so
far a student in Logic, that he had learned such a kind of argumentation,
to prove his doctrine by fire: yet was there found another young Iacobin, a
familiar friend of Ieromes, which accepted the combat, to maintain his friends
quarrel. Then was the day and place assigned in the town of Florence, for
those two valiant combattants, both of them to place themselves upon a great
heap of faggots, which were laid to that end, for to set fire thereunto as
soon as they came upon them. The day assigned being come, behold the two
Iacobin had about him (as they call it) the precious body of the Host for his
defense, which he took betwixt both his hands: the Friar and the Seignorie
showed, That that was no reasonable defense for the Iacobin, and therefore
urged him to let go the Host: but he would not for any thing depart from it:
insomuch, as by that means the combat ended, and each one which came to that
place to see those valiant combattants go to the fire, returned to their
houses. But not long after they were all three endighted, and I know not how
nor wherefore, they were accused and condemned (for I find nothing written
thereof) but they were all three burnt. Here behold how the Florentines handled
this poor Friar Jerome, whom Machiavell reports to have spoken with God. It
may be, some Numa, or to any other Religion: for the most part of them cared
for neither the one nor the other.

10. Maxim.
A man is happy, so long as Fortune agrees unto his nature and humor.
FOrtune may be compared (says M. Machiavell) to a great Cha. 25. De Prince.
Discourse. lib 2. cap. 29.
banks with great inundations. But when it remains in his ordinary course,
or when it overfloweth not without measure, the force thereof may easily be
resisted, by levies, ditches, rampires, and other like obstacles: so Fortune is
sometimes so unmeasurable in violence, that no virtue can resist her; yet
virtue may Julius in all his actions proceeded with extreme fierceness and
hastiness, yet his actions succeeded well, but many others have fared evil,
by using too precipitate promptitude and have: Whereof I conclude (says he)
that men are happy, so long as fortune accords to their humor and
complexion: but as soon as she begins to vary and dissent, then go they

BY this description of Machiavell is evidently seen, that he thinks
Machiavell would make men believe, that this is true, hearts a despite and
utter contempt of God and his providence. For let man have

But against this we have good preservatives drawn out of the holy Scriptures,
Machiavell, even by the Paynims themselves.

And first I oppose against him almost all the ancient Philosophers, which
have maintained, That nothing happens, nor is done, without some efficient
cause, although God is the first cause of all things.
which they call Second, and makes them work their effects: and although
oftentimes in this distinction of causes, they attribute some things to second
causes, which they should attribute to the first alone, yet notwithstanding,
they refer all things to God mediately or immediately. Very true it is, that
sometimes they use that name of Fortune, applying themselves to the manner of
speech used amongst the people; but there was never Philosopher so beastly,
that ever thought her to be any goddess: but when the ancient Philosophers
say any thing comes by fortune, or by adventure, or contingencie; they mean,
that the efficient cause of such a thing

Learnedly speaks Plutarke to this purpose, when he says; That the poets have
Plutarke in libello de Fortuna.
done great wrong to Fortune, to say, she is blind, and that she gives her
gifts to men rashly without knowing them: for (says he) it is we which know it
not: for Fortune is no other thing but the cause (whereof we are ignorant) of
things which we see come to pass. And therefore the Stoicke philosophers,
although they knew not the second causes of all things, no more than other
philosophers, yet used they another manner of speech than they, and attributed
the haps and chances of all things unto Fatum: yet indeed the Fatum differs
much from the providence of God, which the Christians hold. For the Stoickes
held, That God could work no otherwise than the order of second causes would
bear and lead him unto: but we hold, That God is free in operation, and not
tied to second causes, without which he can do that which he does by them, and
can change them at his pleasure.

Timotheus an Athenian captain, coming one day from the war, where his
affairs Plu. in Silla.
was very happy and fortunate: so that one day in a public assembly of all
the people of Athens, he made an oration, wherein he discoursed all his
gestes and victories, uttering by the way, the means and counsel which he
had used in the conduction of his affairs: and after all this discourse,
Masters said he, Fortune has had no part in all this that I have accounted
unto you; as if he would say, That it was by his own wisdom, that these
things had so well succeeded to him. The gods says Plutarke, were offended at
this foolish ambition of Timotheus, insomuch, that he did never after, any
thing of account, but all things he did, turned against the hair, till he
came to be hated much of the Athenian people, that in the end he was
banished,

When Messiere de Commines speaks of the constable of S. Pol, who was so
great and puissant a lord, yet in the end such evil luck befell him, that his
hand was De Com. lib. 1. cap. 18.
cut off. Hereof he makes a question, and wisely, and religiously absolveth
it: What shall we say (says he) of Fortune? This man that was so great a
lord, that by the space of twelve years, he had handled and governed king
Lewis the eleventh, and the Duke Charles of Bourgoigne; he was a wise knight,
and had heaped together great treasures, and in the end fell into her net. We
may then well say, that this deceitful Commines, speaking of Fortune, which
senteth as much of a good man, and a good Christian, as the Maxim of
Machiavell tastes of a most wicked

And as for that which Machiavell says, That Fortune favors such as are most
hazardous, and rash: Titus Livius is of a farther opinion, who speaking of the
victory, Tit. Livi. lib. 2. Dec. 3.
which Anniball obtained, nigh the lake Trasimene, against the consul C.
Flamminius, says; That evil luck came by the temeritie of Flamminius, which
was nourished and maintained in him, by fortune: whereas before, things had
well succeeded with him; but now, he which neither took counsel of the gods,
nor of men, it was no mervaile, if suddenly he fell into ruin. This loss of
the battle, was the cause that Fabius Maximus was elected Dictator to go
against Anniball, as indeed after his election, he took the field with a new
army: and certain time after, being sent for of the Senate, to assist at Rome
certain sacrifices and ceremonies, he left in the camp Minutius Minutius take
heed you do not as Flamminius did, but trust you more in good counsel than in
fortune, better it were to be assured, not to be vanquished, than to hazard
your self to be vanquisher. In another place Titus Livius rehearses, That
Caius Sempronius captain of the Roman Army, against the Volsques, trusting in
Fortune as a thing Lib. 4. Dec, 1.
constant and perdurable, because always before, the Romans had it in custom
to Livie, fortune and good success follows and abandoneth rashness, and
this happens most commonly. Here you see the opinion of Fabius Maximus, and
of Titus Livius, much better than that of Machiavell, who would persuade us,
that we had better be rash, than prudent to have fortune favorable unto us:
for certain it is that the haps which men call of Fortune, proceed from God,
who rather blesses prudence, which he has recommended unto us, than
temeritie: and although sometimes it happen, that he bless not our counsels
and wisdoms, it is because we take them not from the true spring and
fountain, namely from him of whom

Here ends the second part, entreating of such Religion as a Prince should
use.
THE THIRD PART, TREATING of such Policy, as a Prince ought to hold in his
Commonweal.
The Praeface.
I Have before in order disposed all Machiavels Maxims, touching Counsel and
Religion; and at large I have showed, That Machiavell handles in such sort, as
it is easy to know, that his only purpose was to instruct a prince to be a
true tyrant, and to teach him the art of tyranny. In Bartolus: for Bartolus,
(who was a renowned doctor in the civil law) in his treatise written of
tyranny, wades no thing so deep in the matter as Machiavell does, although
reading the treatise of Bartolus, it seems that Machiavell has learned a
great deal of his knowledge: but Machiavell applies it contrary, seeking,
that men should hold it for good, whereas Bartolus speaks of it as of a
damnable thing, which men ought to repulse and shun with all their power: and
to confer a little thereupon, I will here summarily recite certain points of
doctor Bartolus, touching this matter of tyranny, to show that which
Machiavell has stolen, yet would apply it to the duty of a prince, whereas
Bartolus attributes it to the iniquity and malice of a tyrant. First
Bartolus constituteth two kinds against his tyranny. The second, when he
troubles and afflicts good and wise men of Bartolus proves by reasons of
law to be truly tyrannical, by which a tyrant in exercise is known and
manifested to be a tyrant, and especially (says he) by these three kinds; when
he maintains division amongst his subjects; when he empoverisheth them; and
when he afflicts them in their persons and goods, insomuch, that the most
part of the people are miscontented. And finally, he concludes, That to such
tyrants by right and reason men ought not to obey nor appear before the^, but
that they ought to be dispossessed of their estates. But in all this doctrine
of Bartolus can you find one only point, that Machiavell would Bartolus, are
they not so many Maxims of Machiavell his doctrine taught to a prince? Says
he not? That a prince ought to take away all virtuous people, lovers of their
commonwealth, to maintain partialities and divisions, to impoverish his
subjects, to nourish wars, and to do all other the aforesaid things, which
Bartolus says to be the works of tyrants. We need then no more to doubt, that
the purpose of Machiavell, was not to form a true tyrant; and that he has
not stolen from Bartolus, one part of his tyrannical doctrine which he
teaches, which yet he has much augmented and enriched. For he has added,
That a prince ought to govern himself by his own counsel; and he ought not
to suffer any to discover unto him the truth of things; and that he Machiavell
is a far greater doctor in the art of tyranny, than Bartolus; yet I compare
them not together: For that which Bartolus has written of tyranny, was to
discover and condemn it: but that which Machiavell has written, was to cause
princes to practice and observe it, and to sow in their hearts a true
tyrannical poison, under the pretext and name of a princes duty and office.
Finally, there is no cause nor reason to compare this beastly Machiavell, a
simple burne-paper-scribe of the towne-house of Florence, with this great
Doctor Bartolus, who was one of the excellentest Lawyers of his time, and for
one such is yet acknowledged. But now let us enter into the matter.

1. Maxim.
That War is just, which is necessary, and those Arms reasonable, when men
can have no hope by any other way, but by Arms.
MAchiavell exhorting the magnificent Lawrence de Medicis, to get all Italy,
persuadeth him by this Maxim. He shows him, that Italy is fit and ready to
receive a new prince, because it is now fallen into extreme desolation, more
than ever the Jews were in the servitude Hebrews.
of Egypt. And that this miserable province has attended to be delivered from
her servitude by a prince (meaning king Charles the eight) Medicis, which
might well enterprise to make it self chief of that redemption, with the
Churches help, whereupon she ruled, (meaning of Pope Leo x.) with the aid also
of his own virtue and his own fortune, favored of God. And that the
magnificent Lawrence might well bring it to pass, in proposing to Caesar
Bourgia and Agathocles: And that Italy delights in nothing so much as
novelties, and the Italians surpass other nations in force, agilitie of body
and spirit. True it is (says he) that when it comes to battles, they
will never appear, but men must lay the fault thereof upon the cowardice and
little heart of their captains, because they that have knowledge, will not
willingly obey, and every man presumes to know much. He shows moreover, That
the magnificent Lawrence had good occasion to enterprise the taking of Italy,
to deliver it from the slavish servitude,

THis Maxim of Machiavell, is a true means to sow both civil and Laurence de
Medicis, had just occasion to get Italy, to deliver it from the evil handling
of the potentates thereof, which there dominiered and ruled, this in no sort
could be called a just cause of war; but it rather may be called an evil
against an evil, and tyranny against tyranny, because they de Medicis cannot
say, that they have any right or title unto Italy. Caligula, Nero, Commodus,
and other like; but also such as handled well and kindly their subjects, when
without title they usurped domination upon them, as Julius Caesar, Hieron of
Siracuse, the governors which the Lacedaemonians set over Athens, and other
like. And therefore a prince which has no title over a country, cannot
lawfully invade it to get dominion there, but by tyranny, whatsoever good
intent he surmise or have, to use the inhabitants friendly when he has
conquered it: yet he may well aid another prince, having lawful title to
oppose against a tyranny: because that is a common duty, whereby all good
princes are obliged to Macbiavell, without lawful title under a veil, to
deliver that country from tyranny) this cannot be well and justly done,
unles a man will say, that one tyrant may justly expulse an other tyrant.

The Romans have many times by example, showed this to be true, and never
Titus Liviu^ lib. 7. Dec. 1
would they deal in war against any man without just title. The Samnites
(which were a mighty people, made one war against the Campani neighbors
unto the Romans, which sent to Rome to demand succors. They showed, that they
were the None may move war without just title and cause.
Romans neighbors, and that it well became the Roman generositie and virtue
to succor their neighbors, seeing also that by marriages there were infinite
alliances betwixt the Romans and the Campanians; and the Romans might always
draw great commodities and profits from Campania, which was a fertile and
plentiful country. But they could never obtain other thing, at the Roman
Senates hand for these allegations, but that the Senate sent ambassadors to
the Samnites, to pray them to cease making war upon the Campanians, the
Romans neighbors: Then the Campanians deputies said: Well (my masters) seeing
you will not now defend us, against an unjust and tyrannous invasion, yet at
the least defend that which is your own, for we yield and give our selves to
you, yea us and all that is ours: Then the Senate, taking title and foundation
of this dedition, enterprised the defense of

And truly the saying of the emperor Martian, is very memorable and deserves
good observation, That a prince ought never to move war, whilst he could
Pomp. Laetus in Martian.
maintain peace: as if he would say, That Arms ought not to be employed by a
prince, but in the defense of his country, and not to assail another. And
indeed, a man had need look about him more than once before he moove war,
and well consider and examine, if therein there be just cause, or no: for
wars are easy to M. Comines says) but very uneasy to appease and finish.
And upon this we read, That in the Senate of Rome there was once a very
notable disputation between Cato (one esteemed the wisest of Rome) and Scipio
Nasica (who was reputed the best man of Rome.) The matter was this: After the
first Punicke war, the Romans made peace with the Carthaginians, by which
peace was accorded, That the Carthaginians might not rig any ship of war, nor
moove war against the Romans or their allies. It came to pass a certain
time after this peace, that the Carthaginians gathered together many ships:
which being reported at Rome, and the matter propounded in counsel in the
Senate, Cato and many others reasoned, That war should be made upon the
Carthaginians, because they had gone from the treaty of peace, and that war
might justly be offered unto them, as breakers of Scipio Nasica was of a
contrary opinion, That there was yet no sufficient cause to make war: for
although the Carthaginians had gone against the peace, and violated their faith
and promise; yet the Romans received no offense or damage as yet: and
therefore he was of advice, That the Carthaginians should be summoned to lay
down their arms, and untackle their ships, and observe peace, even in the
articles which they had broken. The plurality of voices were of Nasica his
opinion, and accordingly, men were sent to Carthage to summon them to
obtemperate and obey the treaty of peace, and to repair contraventions. They
would do nothing therein, but prepared themselves more to set upon Massinissa
their allie Massinissa, their allie and friend: but there also were diverse
opinions, whether they should altogether ruinate from the top to the bottom
the town of Carthage, after they had taken it, or to let it still remain a
town. Cato was of opinion, totally to ruinate and destroy it; because it could
not be kept in any fidelity, but would break her faith and promise at the
first occasion that offered it self. Nasica was of a contrary advice, saying,
It was good that Rome had always an enemy, upon whom to make war, that the
Roman people might not be corrupt, and become cowards by too great peace and
prosperity, for want upon

Very memorable also to this purpose is the advice of the Chancellor de
Rochefort, Annals upon the year 1488.
who was in the time of king Charles the eight. For many counselling this young
king to make war against Francis, duke of Bretaigne, to lay hold of his
duchy: this good Chancellor showed, That the rights the king pretended to
that duke, were not Francis died, and the king espoused Madame Anne, his
daughter and heir, and so the controversy ended.

The same king enterprising his voyage of Naples, caused to assemble all his
presidents Annal. upon Anno 149^.
of his courts of Parliaments, with his Chancellor, his privy Counsel, and
the princes of his blood, to resolve upon his title and right to Naples and
Sicilie. These lords being assembled, visited the genealogy and descent of the
kings of Sicilie and Naples, and they found, that the king was the right heir
of these kingdoms: so that upon that resolution this voyage was enterprised.
Hereby is seen the vanity of Machiavell, who presupposes, That king Charles
had enterprised that voyage to get all Italy, but that Fortune was not
favorable unto him: for that was never his deseigne nor purpose; neither
assayed he to seize upon any thing in Italy, but of certain towns necessary
for his passage, in determination to yield them up again Lawrence de Medicis,
seeing all Italy was once by just title possessed by Charlemaine, king of
France his predecessor. But this has been always a property in our kings,
not to run over others grounds, nor to appropriate to themselves any seignorie,
which appertained not unto them by just title.

We read also of Charles the fifth, called the Sage, That being incited by his
nobility Frois. lib. 1. cap. 245. 25.
and people of Guienne, to seize again, that country, which was occupied by
the English: he would not enterprise it without great and good deliberation of
good Counsel. And therefore he caused well to be viewed by wise and
experienced people,

This then is a resolved point, That a prince ought not to enterprise to
obtain a If by war any can be constrained to be of any Religion.
country, where he has no title under color to deliver the inhabitants
thereof from tyranny. But here may arise a question, if it be lawful for a
prince to make war for religion, and to constrain men to be of his religion?
hereupon to take the thing by reason, the resolution is very easy: For seeing
that all religion consists in an approbation of certain points that concern
the service of God, certain it is, that such an approbation depends upon the
persuasion which is given to men thereof: but the means to persuade a thing to
any man, is not to take weapons, to bear him, nor to menace him, but to
demonstrate unto him by good reasons and allegations, which may induce him to a
persuasion. But he that will decide this question Clowis the first,
Charlemaine, and some other kings of France, it seems that their study was
altogether bent upon war Annals upon Anno 718.
against Paynims, for nothing, but to make them become Christians, with
handblowes and force of arms. But what Christians? That is when the Paynims
were vanquished, and that they could no more resist, they were acquitted upon
condition to be baptized without other instruction. And most commonly, as soon
as they Rabbod, duke of Fricse, who being upon the point to be baptized, and
his clothes off, and having one foot in the font, he demanded of the
archbishop of Sens, which should have baptized him, Whether there were more of
his parents in hell or in paradise? The archbishop answered him, that the most
must needs be in hell, because his predecessors were never baptized. Then the
duke drawing his foot out of the water: Well, said he then, I will go to hell
with my parents and friends, and I will not be baptized, to be separated from
them, and so he withdrew himself, denying to be baptized. Here I leave you to
think if this man were well instructed in the Christian doctrine. It seems,
that at that

We read also, That our ancient kings of France made many voyages into
Turkey and into Africa for the augmentation of the Christian Religion, and to
revenge (as they said) the death of our Lord Jesus Christ upon the Paynims and
Infidels. But one time the Paynims themselves showed them well, that they
enterprised such wars by an inconsiderate zeal. For the army of France
(whereof the duke of Bourbon was chief) being in Africa, making war against
the Infidels, in the time of king Charles the sixth, the captain general of
the Turks and Saracens sent an herald to the duke of Bourbon, to know
wherefore he descended into Africa to

Likewise, in the year 1453 the Pope having proclaimed a Croisado in
Christendom, to run over Turkey, to avenge the death of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to constrain the Turks to be christened: the Turk writ letters unto him;
wherein he signified, that they were the Jews which crucified Christ. And as
for him, he descended not of the Jews, but of the Trojans blood, whereof he
understood the Italians were likewise descended. And that their duty were
rather, both one of us, and the other to restore rather the great Troy, and to
revenge the death of Hector their Mahomet. Behold the substance of the Turks
letter to the Pope, which seemed to be as well, yea, better founded upon
reasons than the Popes bulls. For verily Jesus Christ

In the time when Christendom was divided into Clementines and Vrbanists, by
reason of a schism of Popes, we may well presuppose, that the one thought the
Froisar. lib. 2 cap. 132. 133 lib. 3. cap 24.
other to be altogether out of the way of salvation: and our hystorians say,
That the one part called the other dogs, miscreants, infidels, etc. Their
reason was, because they said, that as there was but one God in heaven, so
there ought to be but one on earth: and the aforesaid Clementines held
assuredly, That Pope Clement was the true god on earth, and Pope Vrbane the
false god, and that the Vrbanists believed in a false god, and by consequent
that they all strayed from the faith. For as no religion Vrbane himself, whom
they besieged in the town of Peronse, where he was in great danger to have
Sigismund, and there a conclusion was made to exhort the two Popes to submit
themselves to the new election of a Pope, wherein their right should be
conserved unto them: and if they would not submit themselves thereunto, that
the Christian princes and their subjects should withdraw themselves from the
obedience both of the one and the other. After this subtraction was made
(because the said Popes would not obey the exhortation that Alexander the fifth,
a Friar minor, and the other two Antipopes were cursed, as is said in another
place. And thus ceased the wars for Religion in all Christendom.

To this purpose also you must know, That during the said schism of the
Clementines Froisar. lib. 4 cap. 33.
and Vrbanists, the duke of Bretaigne had peace with the king of France, and a
great assembly was made betwixt them in the town of Tours. The duke appearing
there, some of the kings Counsel showed him, that he was disobedient to the
king, being of another religion than the king was (for the king was a
Clementine, and the duke an Vrbanist) and it was not meet that the vassale
should be of another Urban, because his election was before Pope Clements. Some
of the kings Counsel, of the meanest sort, made a great matter of this
diversity of religion: but the dukes of Berry and Bourgoigne, the kings
uncles, were opinioned, that it was not a sufficient point to stand upon, to
put by, an

This example and advice of these two good dukes, me thinks all Christian
princes should follow, and not cease to agree together for diversity of
Religion, but to remit the judgment thereof unto God, who alone can compound
and agree the differences of the same. And not only amongst princes the bond
of amity ought not to be broken, for difference of Religion: but also princes
ought not to use arms against their subjects, to force them unto a Religion,
but they ought to assay all other means, to demonstrate unto them by lively
reasons their errors, and Lewis the twelfth, who was called the Father of the
people. For in his time certain Cardinals and Prelates persuaded him to
exterminate and utterly to root out all the people of Cabriers and Merindol in
Provence (which were the relics of the Christians, called Albi, then sore
persecuted for Christ) telling him, That they were sorcerers, incestuous
Molinaeus de la Monarchia de^ Francois. Anno. 155.
persons, and heretics. They of Merindol and Cabriers having some sent of
the aforesaid accusation, sent certain of their wisest men to remonstrate to
the king their justice and innocence. As soon as these men were arrived at
the Lewis then hearing the said messengers of Cabriers and Merindol, they
showed him in all humility, that their people received the Gospel, the Bible,
and the Apostles Creed, the commandments of God, and the Sacraments, but they
believed not in the M. Adam Fumee, his master of Requests, and one M. Parvi, a
Iacobin, his Confessor, to go to Cabriers and Merindol, to enquire of the life
and religion of the inhabitants in those places; which they did: and after they
had seen and known all, they made their report unto the king, That in those
places their children were baptized, they taught them the articles of the
Faith, and the commandments of God; that they well observed their Sabboths,
always preaching thereon the word of God: and as for sorceries and whoredoms,
there were none amongst them: moreover, they

But leaving this question, and again taking our purpose: certain it is, That
a Machiavell persuadeth) and upon A prince ought to seek all means to put out
war by a peace.
some necessity, having war in hand, he ought to search out and accept all
honest conditions to get out of it. For sometimes the prince which refuses
honest and reasonable conditions, upon hope that his forces are great, falls
oftentimes into great distress: and it has been many times seen, that petty
captains have made head against great and strong powers of mighty princes.

In the time of the battle of Poictiers, where king John was taken, the
prince of Wales before the battle, offered the king to yield him all that
both he and his Froisar. lib. 1 cap 161. Annals upon Anno 1356 Annals upon
Anno 1433.
people, had conquered since his departure from Bourdeaux, and also to yield
him all the pillage: but the king would not accept this offer, but withal
asked, that the prince John, king Charles the seventh, reconquering

The Roman hystories are full of such like examples: For that which overthrew
the Carthaginians, the king Perseus, the king Mithridates; that which abated
the pride of Philip king of Macedon, of that great king Antiochus, and of many
others, was, they could never accept the good and reasonable conditions, of
peace which was offered unto them by the Romans, but would rather experiment,
what force, founded upon a good right could do; I say founded upon good right,
because a small force which has right with it, oftentimes abateth a great
force, which is not founded

Above all, the prince ought to appease the wars in his own country,
whether A prince ought to appease war in his own country.
they be raised by strangers, or by his own subjects, for, as for such wars,
as he may have in a strange land, against strangers it may happen they will not
prove so evil, Salust says in these words, If (says he) the virtue and
generositie of princes, captains, and men of war, might so well be employed,
and show it self of such estimate in peace as in war, humane Homer:

Right wicked are those men which love not parents dear.
Sottish no less are they which family does hate: Iliad. 9.

But most ungodly they their country which does fear,
With civil wars: so direful to a quiet state.
The prince also ought to consider, that by civil wars, he more weakeneth
himself and his subjects in one year, than by a strange war he can do in
thirty years: civil wars also are without comparison, more ruinous and
dangerous than strange wars are.

To this purpose is there in Titus Livius, a notable oration made by the Roman
deputies, unto Marcius Coriolanus, which was unjustly banished from Rome, and
Lib. 2. Dec. 1 Dionis. Halic. lib. S.
who yielded himself to the Volsques, enemies of the Romans, and was elected
captain Marcus Minutius spoke thus for them all: We are not ignorant dear
lord and friend, that great wrong has been done unto you at Rome, to banish
and drive you from your country, for which you have done so much, and so many
times, so well fought for it, that you may be accounted as a second father or
founder: we know well also that by good right, you are greived and despited
against us, for so unjust a judgment, and wrong as is done you. For naturally
he that is injured, is watchful against him that injureth him; yet we cease
not to mervaile, that with reason you discern not them, upon whom you may
slain, pilled and saccaged, that have done you no wrong, but rather favored
you. After these ambassadors had thus spoken, there was yet sent to Coriolanus,
Veturia, his mother, and Volumnia his wife, carrying in their arms his little
children, accompanied with a great number of noble women. When Coriolanus see
arive in his camp these ambassadors, and after his mother and wife, houlding
his little children in their arms, were fallen down on their knees weeping,
then nature forced, and burst that hard and obstinate courage of his, so that
straight a peace was made, and he ceased to war upon his country.

If we know not what mischiefs and calamities, comes of civil wars, there
might be many examples set down thereof, but alas we Frenchmen know too much
thereof; and yet many are enhardened to persever therein, and they cannot bow
their hard courage to desist from ruinating, and warring against their mother
and country. This Paynim Coriolanus, may make them ashamed, who did not
persever in making war upon his country, although his courage were rude and
full of vengeance, but suffered himself to be vanquished by reason: but they
make war in a contrary course, not making any account either of reason, love
or piety, that they ought all to have toward their country, parents and
friends, letting loose the bridle to their passions and vengeances, bursting,
ruinating, massacring, sleying, pilling demands but their own, and that the
kingdom be reformed by their own laws, Machiavels religion, that is to say,
to be without religion, without piety, without the power of a frank and free
conscience to serve God? Call you it liberty of conscience

Although the horrors and calamities of civil wars are sufficiently known
in this time, yet will I breefely rehearse two most notable examples. The
civil war Marius and Silla, was an horrible and fearful butcherie, which
filled Rome and all Italy with blood. For both of them were masters of Rome
and all Italy, one after another; and so being, they did not cease all they
could to kill and massacre one another friends and partakers: insomuch, that
in a manner all men of quality and all good people were slain: for there was
no notable man, but he held of the one or the other. Amongst other memorable
things happening in this war, this especially concerns our cause in hand,
which fell in the battle that Pompeius the lieutenant of Silla, obtained
against Florus. lib. 79
Cinna the partener of Marius: for one of Pompeius soldiers having stricken
dead to the ground one of Cinna his soldiers, he disarmed him, thinking to
Pompeius and Caesar, and it endured and continued all the time of the
Triumvirate of Octavius, Antonius, and Lepidus, against Cassius and Brutus, and
ended betwixt Antonius Flor. lib. 120.
and Octavius. This war endured two and thirty years, and spread it self
almost through all the world, which then was in subjection to the Roman
Plutarch in Caesar.
empire; yea, even the people of the East, West, North, and South, felt their
greevous part of this civil war. It was verefied, That in this unnatural
civil war from the beginning, till the fourth Consulship of Caesar only,
there died of the citizens of Rome, the number of one hundred and seventie
thousand. And you Octavius, Antonius, and Lepidus, was a most detestable union,
which accorded to take unto them, all the government of the commonweal, and
to slay all their enemies. But because it often came to pass, that he which
was friend of one of the three, was the others enemy, when one would have him
slain as an enemy, the other would lay hold of him to defend him as his
friend; yet the abovesaid cruelty so surmounted all humanity, and the desire
of vengeance so vanquished all amity, that these aforesaid captains entered
into this detestable complot, that they sold their friends one to another,
Anthonius to have Cicero his enemy (whom Octavius favored as his friend) was
content in exchange to deliver his own uncle by the mothers side, called
Lucius Caesar, to Octavius his enemy; so that the one was exchanged for the
other, and they both died. Can there possibly in the world be conspired a more
barbarous disloyalty? Is it not a strange thing to hear, that a friend should
be betrayed to death, to have that cruel pleasure to slay his enemy? Yet by
this course and complot died an hundred and thirty Senators, besides many
other persons of other quality. Antonius also the deviser of this barbarous
exchange, received his due reward even by Octavius himself, whom he had
induced to commit such cruelties. For in the end they were enemies, and
Antonius being vanquished in the navall battle at Actium, slew himself, so
turning upon and against himself that barbarous cruelty which he had
exercised against Cicero and others.

And it needs not seem strange, if these civil wars of Rome endured so long
time, as two and thirty years: for the civil wars betwixt the houses of
Burgoigne Monstr. lib. 1. ca. 79. 80, 81, 159, 191 and 198.
and Orleance in France, endured threescore years, being continued from father
to son for two generatious. And as for cruelties, me thinks greater cannot
be imagined, than them which the Parisians (the duke of Bourgoignes parteners)
committed within the town of Paris. For they massacred the Constable and
Chancellor of France, whom they drew and trayled through the town most
filthily, and murdered Cappeluche the executioner or hangman of Paris. Those
comparteners of the house of Burgoigne, not contented to suscitate such popular
commotions and stirs in France, but brought also the English men into France,
which were like to have been masters thereof: yet not herewith content, they
caused king Charles the sixth to war against his own son, who after was called
Charles the seventh, and one moietie of the kingdom against another. And not
to leave behind any kind of cruelty, no not toward of all barbarousnesse and
cruelty? Behold what fruits civil wars do

The prince then that is wise, will leave nothing behind, to appease civil
wars under his own government, but will spend all his care, power, and
diligence, to hinder it, after the example of that good and wise king Charles
the seventh, and king Lewis the eleventh, his son. Charles the seventh being
yet Daulphin (the duke John Monstr. lib. 2. ca. 175. 180, 181, 182, 183 186,
187.
of Bourgoigne, a man very ambitious and vindicative) after by secret practice
he had caused to be slain Lewis duke of Orleance, the only brother of king
Charles the sixth, and after he had filled the kingdom with wars both civil
and strange, Monsieur le Daulphin, he was compassed in and straight slain, and
withal also certain gentlemen of his train. Philip son and John, took
greatly to heart this most villainous death of his father, and sought all the
means he could to be revenged, which still continued the civil wars. This
mean while the English did what they could in France, and conquered Normandy,
Paris, the most part of Picardie, and marched even unto Orleance, which they
besieged. The abovesaid king Charles the sixth, died, so that Monsieur le
Daulphin his son (who was called Charles the seventh) coming to the crown, and
finding himself despoiled of the most part of his kingdom, insomuch, as in
mockery he was generally called the king of Bourges. This wise king well
considered, That if civil wars endured, he was in the way to loose all, one
piece after another: he therefore laid all his care, power, and diligence, to
obtain a peace and an John to be slain at Monterean, and that if he had been
then as advised and resolute as he was at that present, he would never have
committed such an act, nor have permitted it to have been done, but he was
young, and evil counseled: and therefore in that regard he offered to make
him such amends and reparation thereof, as he should be contented therewith;
yea, that he would demand pardon (although not in person) yet by his ambassadors
(which should have express charge thereof) and prayed him to forgive that
fault in the name of our Lord Jesus ought him as vassale of France, and yet
made many other fair offers unto him. This Philip seeing his sovereign prince
thus humiliate himself to him, bowed his courage justly exasperated for his
fathers death, and harkened unto peace, which was made at Arras, where there
was held an assembly of the ambassadors of all Christian princes, of the
counsel of Basil, and of the Pope; insomuch, as there were there above 4000
horses. All or the most part of those ambassadors came thither for the good of
the king and his kingdom, but there was not one there which found not the
kings offers good and reasonable, as also did all the great princes and lords
of the kingdom, and all the kings counsel: so that his majesty's ambassadors
(which were the duke of Bourbon, the county of Richemont, constable of France,
the archbishop of Rhemes chancellor, the lord de Fayette, marshall and many
other great lords) in a full assembly in the Charles 6 appeased the civil wars
of his kingdom by humility and acknowledgement of his faults: and from thence
forward he prospered so well, that after he had ended his civil wars, he also
overcame his foreign wars against the English. And this came of God, who
ordinarily exalts the humble, and overthrows the insolent and proud. For
assuredly it does not evil become a great prince to temperat his majesty by a
gracious humility, softnes, and affability: but (says Plutarch) it is a very
harmonious and consonant temperation, yea, so excellent, as there cannot be a
more perfect than this. But if the said king had then had such Counselors as
many kings now adays have, what counsel would they hereupon have given him;
Charles 7 his Counsel, all the princes of his blood, all the great lords of
his kingdom, all strange princes ambassadors, Machiavell.

Likewise king Lewis the eleventh, as soon as he came to the crown, removed
De Com. lib. 1. cap. 3. 5. and others.
from charges and offices, many great lords, and good servants, of the dead
king Charles the seventh his father, which had virtuously employed themselves,
in chasing the English out of the kingdom of France; and in lieu of such
persons, he placed and advanced men of mean and base condition. Hereupon
straight arose civil discention against the king, (which was called the wars
of the common weal) and these men complained, that the kingdom was not
politikelie governed, because the king had put from him good men, and of high
calling, to advance such as were of small estimation, and of no virtue. It was
not long before the king acknowledged his great fault, and confessed it, not
only in general, but also in particular to every of them, which he had
recoyled and disapointed: and to repair this fault, he got again to him all
the said lords, and ancient servants of the dead king his father, delivering
Messier de Commines his chamberlain, says; That his humility, and the
acknowledgment of his faults, saved his kingdom, which was in great danger to
be lost, if he had stayed upon such impertinent and foolish reasons, as those
Machiavelists allege: for all things may not be judged by the final cause.
What dishonor then can it be to a prince, to use petty and base means, if
so be thereby he make his country peaceable, his estate assured, and his
subjects contented and obedient? what makes it matter, for him that is to
ascend into an high place, whether he mount by degrees and stairs of wood, or
of stone, so that he ascend.

But this is not all, to say; That a prince ought to be vigilant and careful
to make Peace ought to be well observed.
no purpose made; unles men will say, that one ought to make peace, for (after
in breaking it) to trap and ensnare them which trust therein. But they which
hold this opinion, are people which make no account of the observation of
faith, as are the Machiavelists, of whom we will speak upon this point, in
another Maxim. But indeed, that a peace may be well observed, it must be
profitable and commodious to them with whom it is made, to the end by that
means it may be agreeable unto them, and that they may observe it with a good
will, and without constraint: for if it be domageable and disadvantageous,
making the condition of them, to whom it is given, worse than of other subjects
and neighbors? certain it is, it cannot long

Heereunto serves the advice of that noble and sage company, of the ancient
Senators of Rome. There was a neighbor unto the Romans, which were called the
Titus Livi. lib. 8. Dec. 1.
Privernates, upon which the Romans made war, and many times vanquished
them. They seeing it was impossible any more to make head against the Roman
forces, sent ambassadors to Rome for peace: they were caused to enter into the
place, For, say they, there is the peace loyal and assured, where men do
willingly appease themselves, and a man need not look or hope for an assured
peace, where men are brought to a slavish subjection.

Here is also to be marked, the advice and opinion of Titus Livius dictator,
which he spoke in a full Senate, upon that which the Latins demanded, that the
treaty Dionisius Halic. lib. 6.
of peace, that they had with the Romans, might be confirmed unto them, which
Masters (said he) my advice is, that we ought to use kindly and moderarelie,
the victory which we have had against the Latins: for it is the most
excellent praise that can come, either to public or private persons, not to
suffer themselves to be corrupted by prosperity; but to know how to use that
is good, with a modest and equal courage; because all prosperities are
accompained with envy, yea although they come to oppress the vanquished, that
make no resistance. Moreover we ought not, so much to trust in fortune, which
is too inconstant and mutable (as we have many times experimented) and
therefore ought not to constrain our adversaries to come to the last remedy,
that is despair, which often elevateth the heart, yea and often the fortune:
we have cause also to fear the evil grace a desire of liberty, insomuch as
the faults which men commit, being drawn on with This opinion of dictator
Largius, was followed by Servius Sulpitius, who reasoned next after him, and
generally by all the Senate, as full of all reason and equity: and if at this
day, men be governed by reason, certain it is that that opinion of Largius,
should be sufficient to show to any prince, that to have a good and durable
peace, he ought to grant such a one, as men will willingly observe, which
will be done, when thereby shall be accorded a reasonable liberty under a
good assurance.

And as for assurances of peace, the elders in strange wars, were wont to use
hostages, Assurances of peace.
but the principal bonds there, was public faith and oath, whereof we shall
speak in another place: as for civil wars, they had some other particular
means Brutus is well to be marked (for such as were of the third Estate in
Rome) to the delegates and ambassadors of the nobles and Patricians. Masters
(says he) they of the third Estate in Rome, know well that you lords
Patricians are indeed men of our word, and that for nothing you will
contradict your promises, Dionisius Halic. lib. 6.
as we never knew you did; and that you will very well observe toward them,
all that you promise, without any need of other assurance, than your faith and
oath: but to execute. After that Brutus had uttered this speech to the
ambassadors, the

To demonstrate, that men cannot keep a peace, when thereby they are handled
like slaves, the example of the Saguntines is very notable and admirable. The
Saguntines Titus Livi. lib. 1. Dec. 3.
a people of Spain, were besieged by Anniball of Carthage, who held them so
straightly in their city, that they had no mean left to escape or resist. They
being reduced Anniball sent them word by one of his nation called Alorcus, to
yield themselves to save their lives: For courages (said he) must needs be
vanquished, when forces failed; and Anniball would save their lives, if they
would yield to him, and of his grace would deal well with them. These poor
people well considered the extreme danger wherein they were, and that they had
no mean to escape Anniball his hands, but with yielding unto him: and to yield
they should change their free, into a servile condition, which they feared so
much, as they loved better to lose their lives; therefore resolved so to deal,
as neither their bodies nor their goods, should ever come into the power of
Anniball. So they took choice of certain young men of the town, which they
caused to swear, to defend the gates Anniballs hands, others shut themselves
up in their houses, with their wives and children, after putting fire
thereunto, burnt the said houses, themselves, and their goods; and the said
young men, which were trusted with the gates, made an end of fighting and
living together. Was not here (think you) an admirable love of liberty? for
if they would but a while have lived under Anniball his yoke, there had been
Anniball.

But as it is rare and unlikely, that a servile peace should be long and well
observed; so it is a very great fault, to break a peace, when it is
sufficiently commodious A tolerable peace ought not to be broken.
and tolerable. This was the only cause, of the total ruin, of that great
and flourishing commonwealth of the Carthaginians: for after they had many
times broken the treaty of peace, which they had with the Romans, and had
been many times vanquished; in the end they were altogether destroyed, and
their towns rased: and the cause that moved the Romans thus to do, was, for
that they considered that the Titus livi. lib. 3. Dec. 4. and lib. 4. Dec. 5.
and Plutarch in P. Aemil.


But the example of king Philip of Macedon, and of Perseus his son, is very
notable in this matter. This king Philip, about some light occasion,
enterprised war against the Aetolians, a people of Greece the Romans allies.
The Aetolians called to their aid the Romans, and sent an army into Greece
against Philip, under the charge Sulpitius, as well to succor the Aetolians,
as also the Athenians, which Philip would have destroyed, and lastly to revenge
themselves of the king, who covertly had aided with silver, Anniball, to make
war upon them: after certain conflicts, this king fearing the forces, and
virtue of the Romans, did so much as he wrought a peace with them: after that
they had made this peace, he observed it very well, all the rest of his life;
and the better to keep it from point to point, he had ordinarily in his
hands, the articles of that peace, which he ever read twice a day, that he
might not break any point of it. When he was dead, Perseus his son
succeeded him, unto whom a Macedonian gentleman, called Onesimus (a faithful
friend and councellor of his father Philip) gave this advice to have ever in
his hands, and Perseus at the beginning did but despise the admonitions of that
good servant Onesimus, but in the end, he had him in suspicion, and put him
out of credit, insomuch as the good person, fearing worse unto himself, fled
to Rome; After this, Perseus gathering great store of money, and esteeming
himself strong enough to war against the Romans, by little and little,
broke the articles of peace, one after another, altogether contrarying the
contents of the articles, and in the mean time covertly prepared for war:
finally the Romans sent against him the consul Paulus Aemilius, with a Roman
army, which in less than a month seized upon all Macedonia, and Perseus and
his son, which he carried to Rome in a triumph, where they miserably dyed in
a prison: behold the evil haps of Perseus, for not imitating the example of
his father, in the observation of the treatise of peace.

Verily the prince which well considers the good that comes by living in
peace, will always seek to maintain it, but at the least within his own
domination, for in peace all things do flourish, and in war all things are in
ruin and devastation: we read, that in the time of Antonius Pius, all the
Roman empire was in good peace, and that by the same means all the provinces
were rich and flourishing, not only Capitol. in Antonio. Pio. Plinius in
epist. ad Traianum.
in goods, but in virtues and sciences: for at that time, good letters
flourished al over, les Arenes) the temple of Adrian, his sepulcher, and
another Amphitheater at Rome, and many other goodly houses and public
buildings most sumptuous to behold; he also caused to be repaired, bridges,
gates, ways, and to furnish many towns with store of money, as well to make
new buildings in them, as to renew the old; herein imitating the example of
the emperor Trajan his predecessor, who immortalized his name by his public
works and buildings which he made, even in building new towns, and joining
rivers one war to have victories and triumphs. We see that the restoration
of good letters, Francis, the first of that name (of happy memory) brought
into France in his time, did more celebrate and make it immortal, in the
memory of all Christian nations, than all the great wars and victories,
which his predecessors had. And truly, princes which love and advance letters,
do well merit, that learned people should send their honorable memory to all
posterity: and such as despise them, and hold them under feet, are not worthy
that hystoriographers, and men of learning, should bring their words and
victories into honor and reputation, much less to immortalize them in the
memory of men. For as lawyers say, that they ought not to enjoy the benefit
of laws, which offend and despise them; so the prince, which makes no account
of learning, ought not to enjoy the benefit thereof, which is to

But if we make comparison of the magnificence, and Estate that a prince should
Froisar. lib. 7 cap. 353. 4.
hold in the time of peace and prosperity, with that he should hold during war
and poverty, there is such difference as betwixt the day and the night: for
proof hereof, I will allege but the time of Philip de Valois. For we read,
that in that time (which was a time of long peace) that king had almost
ordinary in his court, four or five kings which resided with him, in regard of
his magnificence, as the king of Boheme, the king of Scotland, the king of
Arragon, the king of Navarre, the king of Maiorque, and many great dukes,
counties, barons, prelates, the greatest part of whose charges he defraied,
that it might appear, that the king of France was a king of kings. It Philip,
for the duchy of Guienne, which the English had long time held of the crown
of France: when the English king, saw the train of the court of France, he
was ravished in admiration, to see so many kings, dukes, counties, barons,
princes, peers of France, constable, admiral, chancellor, marshall, and many
other great lords, which reputed themselves happy to obtain the good grace of
king Philip. This moved the king of England far more

By this which we have above handled, this Maxim of war is sufficiently
understoode, I will add no more thereunto, but that Machiavell shows himself a
man of very good grace, when he says, That the Italians are a people of nimble
and light spirits and bodies; for he cannot more properly note them of
inconstancy and infidelity; and when afterward he says, That willingly they
never go to battails, he can not they any better tax them of cowardice and
pusillanimitie? but the reason, whereby Machiavell bears them witness.

2. Maxim.
To cause a Prince to withdraw his mind altogether from peace and agreement
BEcause (says Machiavell) men are naturally vindicative and desirous
Discourse, lib. 3. cap. 32.
to take vengeance of such as offend them, it consequently falls out, that they
which have outraged or injured any, but especially if the injury be great,
they can never trust him they have so injured. For every man fears and
distrusteth his reconciled enemy. And

BEhold here, the very counsel that Achitophel gave to Absalon, to make him
irreconcilable with David his father, and to place a division Samuel. lib. 2.
cap. 26.
and perdurable confusion in all his kingdom. For he advised Absalon to
cohabitate and dwell even with his father David's wives, which was the greatest
and most villainous injury that he could have done unto him: and to this end he
did it, that Absalon and all they which followed him, might be utterlie out of
hope to make peace with David, and by that means: playing upon the desperado,
they might gather double courage, and make themselves possessors of the
kingdom. For necessity and despair make men hardy and valiant, but what was
the issue thereof? even this, that Achitophell, the author of this counsel,
hanged and strangled himself, either with despair or fear, that he had,
that David would have punished him: Absalon also soon after miserably
perished, as a reward for his adherence and cleaving to so bad counsel.

The like happened to Tolumnius, king of the Veians, which had caused the
Fidenates to revolt from the Romans: for as the Romans had sent ambassadors
to the Titus Livi. lib. 4. Dec. 1.
Fidenates, to know the reason of their revoltment, Tolumnius counseled them
to slay (as indeed they did) the ambassadors; to the end (says Titus Livius)
that the Fidenates might be to him the more faithful, and out of hope to be
reconciled with the Romans, perceiving themselves guilty of so strange a
crime. So the Romans Tolumnius, and as he was in the battle, Cornelius
Cossus a Roman, espying him said, Behold the breaker of humane leagues, the
violator of peoples right, now shall thou be sacrificed, for the death of our
ambassadors: and couching his spear against Tolumnius, ran at him, and
carried him to the earth, where he slew him, cut of his head, and showed it,
in the front of a number of the enemies, who as soon as they saw the kings
head, turned their backs and fled.

The Capuans, after they had received many good turns, and succors of the
Romans, against their enemies, even when they yet had in their town a Roman
Titus Livi. lib. 3. and 6. Dec. 3.
garrison, enterprised to make their profit of the Romans calamity, received
in the Anniball, had much enfebled the Roman forces, revolted from them, and
joined to Anniball: they also sent ambassadors to Rome, to make the Senate
understand, That if they would receive the Capuans in the same degrees of
equality, with the Romans, in matters of government of the commonweal, by
according, that from thence forward one of the consuls of Rome, should be a
Capuan, and the other a Roman, that should be a good and an assured mean, for
the town of Rome, to be succored by the Capuans, against Anniball. The
Roman Senators, perceiving the foolish and proud demand of these effeminate
Capuans, which were no better warriors than common strumpets, yea so delicate
and cowardly, with luxury and lubricitie, vouchsafed not Anniball, to have
massacred all the Roman garrison, which they had in their town of Capua; and
as they enterprised, so they executed it. The Roman garrison being thus
massacred, the Romans incontinent sent to besiege Capua. Anniball not being
able without his great peril, to leave the siege of Capua, besieged Rome,
hoping thereby to draw their siege from Capua: but he was no sooner removed,
Quintus Fulvius lieutenant general of the Roman army, caused a proclamation
to be made, in the hearing of the Capuans, whereby they made known to all the
inhabitants of Capua, That all such of the town, as would resort to his camp
within certain days, should be held inculpable, and not consenting to the
revolt and massacre made by the Capuans: but none durst enterprise to trust
this proclamation; not that they knew not well, (says Titus Livius) that the
Romans Virius, the principal author of the said revoltment and massacre, was
not of that opinion to have recourse, nor any hope in the Senate, judging his
crime to be so great, as it was impossible to obtain pardon: and therefore he
and 27 other Senators of Capua of his opinion, resolved thus to sley
themselves. They caused a great banquet to be prepared, furnished with viands
and wine, the most exquisit that could be gotten: and there at their last
banquet they thought it good to Machiavell, to seek means to be
irreconcilable? Is there any prince in the world, unto whom a necessity may
not sometimes come to be reconciled with his inferior adversary? And if
reconciliation may always come in good time and for good purpose, how durst
this wicked Atheist lay down this Maxim? Reconciliation may alwais come in
good time.


Lucius Catilina (a man devoid of all virtue, and a bundle of all vice)
resolving in his brain to practice a conspiration against his country (to
assay either to be an exceeding great man, or altogether nothing) drew to his
league many Roman gentlemen, such like as himself* and considering, that he
could not bring to effect his conjuration, without declaring and communicating
it to the cheefetaines of his aid, and yet fearing that some of them would
discover it; he thought good to make them all take a most execrable oath, that
thereby might be foreclosed from them all hope Salust in Catilin.
of retiring from his side. So he caused wine to be mixed with humane blood in
pots, and made all his companions drink of it, and withal procured them to
swear with an execration, that they would never disclose the enterprise, he
would tell them, but Fulvia (being greeved, that Curious her ruffian, who was
one of the conspirators, came not so often to lie with her, as he accustomed)
to draw certain words out of his mouth, as she demanded of him where he laythe
precedent nights. Which Curious being drunk, to enjoy his courtizan, discovered
unto her, that the former nights he had been in a company, with whom he should
make an enterprise, which would make him rich for ever. As soon as Fulvia knew
all the conjuration, she discovered it to the Consul Cicero. Cicero did what
he could truly to open all the enterprise: Cicero found means to know all, by
the declaration which the Allobroges made, which Catiline had appointed to
furnish him with people for the execution. But the end of Catiline was such,
that he was slain fighting, with a great number of others, and the chief of
his accomplices were executed by justice. Breefely, all they which have practiced
that wicked doctrine of Machiavell, to commit outrageous acts to be
irreconcilable, their ends and lives have

3. Maxim.
A Prince in a conquered country must place colonies and garrisons,
THe best remedy (says M. Nicholas) to conserve a country or Cap. 3. of ^
Prince.
a province newly conquered, is to erect colonies, placing strangers there, and
from thence banishing all the princes ancient and natural inhabitants: For by
that means the prince should keep that

THe distinction of the propriety of the goods of this world, whereby The
propriety of goods is from the right of nature.
amongst men, it entertaineth buyings and sellings, permutations, loanes, and
such like, which are the bonds of all humane society: and if the distinction
of propriety of goods, be not maintained in the world, all commerce is
destroyed, and all consocietie decayed and resolved. For although some poets
and philosophers praise the community of goods, remembering us of that old
golden world of Saturn, yet Aristotle demonstrateth in his Pollitiques.
Therefore very necessary it is, that the natural right therein be observed,
and every man maintained in the enjoyance of his own good, and that to every
man be rendered that which is his own: yea, this right ought to be so
observed, that it is not lawful for the prince to break or violate it:
because by reason of natural right it is inviolable, and none can derogate
from it. And hereunto agrees the divine right, whereby it is showed unto us,
that Achab, a king, ought not to take away the vineyard from Naboth his
subject:

Hereby therefore is seen the absurdity and manifest iniquity of this Maxim
of Machiavell, who counsels a prince, as soon as he has conquered a new
country, to dispossess the masters and right owners, of their goods, in
towns and places where he shall know it to be expedient to make himself
strong; and to place there other new masters and possessors of his own nation,
in their places who are dispossessed and banished. For if the prince use this
Maxim, certain it is: first that he violateth the right and law of nature,
which he ought not to do: secondly, he Machiavell) as remain in the
country, will be satisfied, because they abide still: but (as I say) it is
folly to think so: For certainly, always every one fears that which he
sees happen to his neighbors; and further, not only our own losses engender
in us miscontentment, but also others losses, as of our parents, friends,
allies, yea, of such as are not joined unto us with other bond, than to be of
our country, of our tongue, or of our religion, although that in all these
there is a distinction of more and less. Thirdly, they whom Sertorius arise?
He was but a simple Roman gentleman, without authority and means: yet Pl^^.
in Sertorio and Crass^ Florus. lib. 52 55, 56.
part of Spain: The Romans sent against him Metellus, with a great host,
which could do nothing to him; insomuch, as they were yet forced to send
Pompeius with an army, whom Sertorius braved, calling him the little prentice
of Silla: and it appeared, that if Sertorius had not been slain of his own
people, he had sooner overcome Pompeius, than he him: Yet Sertorius was but a
simple soldier, who had neither silver nor treasure; he had no authority to
command, neither did any obey him against their wills. Spartacus also was but a
poor slave, which escaping from his master, gathered together a great number
of people, and made strong war upon the Romans, whom he many times
vanquished: And but that Pompeius and Crassus with Cleon another poor slave;
yet gathered under his conduction an army of 70 thousand other slaves,
wherewith he had like to have gotten all Sicilie? And Viriatus was but a
shepherd on the mountains of Spain, and gathering together a great number of
shepherds and thieves, he made infinite work for the Romans: yet in the end
certain Roman captains sent against him, not being able otherwise to overcome
him, caused him traitorously to be slain: This the Senate found not good, but
greatly blamed those captains, which overcame by so villainous a mean: After
Viriatus was slain, his people disbanded not, but still made war upon the
Romans; insomuch, as the Romans were constrained to give unto Philibert de
Chaton Prince of Orange, Antonie de Leva, Andrew Doria, the Marquis of Mantua,
and many others, whereof we have spoken in other places, which revolted against
king Francis the first, and did him more hutt, than all the forces of the
emperor Charles the fifth: yet were they no great lords, in comparison of the
king. Therefore he which is a wise prince, will estimate no enemy to be petty
and little, but will guard himself from justly offending any man, fearing
least by that means he procure enemies: For enmities will come too fast on a
man, before he looks for them.

As for that he says, That the Romans had colonies in countries which they
Titus Livi. lib. 10. Dec. 1. and lib 7. Dec. 3. and lib. 8. Dec. 4.
conquered, they did it not to serve their turns as fortresses in that
country (as Machiavell says) but to disburden the city of Rome of their too
great a multitude of people, which were still stirring up rebellions and
seditions in their town; as in the time of the consulship of Marcus Valerius,
and Quintus Apuleius: The town (says Titus Livius) was brought to a great
quiet and tranquillity, by discharging it of a great part of the common people,
by deduction of colonies: which when they were sent into any country, that the
Romans had conquered, the public and common fields were divided amongst them;
yet the old inhabitants were not chased away, neither were their goods taken
from them, but only mingled with the Romans no more faithful unto them, than
the other subjects, but often rebelled, as well as others, Anniball: for then
twelve Roman colonies revolted from them, and entered league with Anniball. And
it is commonly seen, that citizens transported into other countries do
incontinent degenerate, taking the manners and conditions of the country; as
came to pass in the towns of Alexandria in Aegipt, Seleucia in Siria, Babylon
in Parthia, which were colonies of the Macedonians, and to the town of
Tarentum, a colonie of the Lacedaemonians: for all these foresaid towns, were
straight despoiled of the manners, natures, and the original generositie of
their nation, and became soft, effeminate, and cowardly, as they were, into
whose countries they were removed.

A great and memorable calamity, fell to Philip king of Macedonie, by removing
Titus Livi. lib. 10. Dec. 4.
Theoxena the widow of a great lord (which was slain by the king) called
Herodicus, resolved rather to make die the children of her and her dead
husband, than that they should come into the hands and power of the king: So
she resolved to save her-selfe Lo (said she my childen) you have now no other
means to shun the tyranny of king Philip but death, which you may see
(showing the swords and the poison) choose which you had rather die on, either
on sharp whetted swords, or to swallow this poison, on (my children) let the
eldest show themselves most hardy and courageous: This exhortation persuaded so
much, that they slew themselves, some with swords, some with poison; then she
caused them all to fall into the water, even when they yet had breath, and cast
her-selfe after them. Straight the kings people joined to the bark, but they
found it empty or die; so Philip made to dye by poison, his lawful son
Demetrius (a prince of exceeding Perseus, his bastard-sonne. After certain
time, this king having discovered, that by a false accufation he had murdered
his own son, he would needs disinherite the bastard Perseus; and being
continually tormented with the shadow and resemblance of his son Demetruis,
which his conscience always brought before his eyes, he dyed desperately,
detesting and execrating that wicked Perseus. This Perseus, then his only son
which remained to succeed him in his kingdom, after a few years reign, was
taken prisoner by the Romans, and led in a triumph to Rome, where he
miserably dyed in a prison: So the imprecations and curses, which the poor
people (chased from their country and goods by the king) had poured out
against him and his race, fell upon him and

4. Maxim.
A Prince in a country newly conquered, must subvert and destroy all such as
suffer great loss in that conquest, and altogether root out the blood and the
race of such as before governed there.
MEn (says Machiavell) do willingly change their lords, thinking Cap. 3. of
a Prince.
to amend themselves; and this opinion commonly makes them revolt; but most
commonly they find themselves deceived, seeing by experience themselves in
worse case than before: Wherefore (to such such kinds of revoltings) a prince
ought to take out of the way all such as he thinks are displeased with the
change, by any enormious Lewis the twelfth, king of France, dealt not vvisely;
therefore in as little time lost he the duchy of Millane, as before he had
conquered it: For the Milanois found themselves deceived in opinion, and
frustrated of the advantages and commodities which they looked for at his
hands, Sforces. But Caesar Borgia did not thus: for having occupied Romania, of
all the lords that he had dispossessed, he left not one alive that he could
catch, and very few escaped. Therefore it is better to follow the example of
Borgia, than of king Lewis: For sometimes it succeeds not well to imitate the
best men: For it was Pertinax and Alexander Severus, to imitate the mildness
and bounty of Marcus Antonius: and to Caracalla, Commodus, and Maximine, that
they desired to resemble Severus.

MAchiavell meaning to show, that his purpose tends and aims only to
instruct a prince, in all sorts of tyranny, gives Dionisius Halic. lib. 4.
him here a precept, which in old time Thrasibulus the Milesian, gave to
Periander a tyrant of Corinth, and by Tarquine the proud king of Rome, to
Sextus his son. For Periander having Thrasibulus his great friend, to desire
his counsel and advice, how to be assured master and lord of Corinth:
Thrasibulus made him no answer by mouth, but commanding the messenger to
follow him, he went into a field full of ripe corn, and taking of the highest
ears there, and the most eminent he bruised them betwixt his hands, and wished
the messenger to return to Periander his master, saying no more unto him. As
soon as Periander heard speak of brusing of the most ancient ears of corn,
he presently conceived the meaning thereof, to wit, to overthrow and take out
of the way, all the great men Sextus Tarquinius, the son of Tarquinius the
proud: for he making a countenance of some great coffeehouse with his
father, for his great cruelty toward him, purposely caused a fame, secretly
to run to the Gabinians (then his fathers enemies) that for his safeguard he
would fly unto them (if it pleased them to receive him) and would bring with
him a good troop of his servants and friends: These poor Gabinians, not
suspecting the intelligence Tarquin led the messenger into a garden, where
amongst many other herbs, then grown up to seed, there were great store of
poppie, whose highest heads he struck of a pace, with a little staff, he had
in his hand, and made no other answer to the messenger, who returning to
Gabium, Sextus, his fathers actions; so as he well understood, what he should
do: Then made he the people understand, That Antistius Petra (the chief
lord, and magistrate of the Gabinians) with certain of his accomplices, had
conspired to deliver him to Tarquin his father, either dead or alive; and he
showed letters found in the house of Antistius, written by Tarquin, and sealed
with his seal, directed to Antistius, which were found about him (where Sextus
had secretly put them) which he caused to be read before all the Gabinians: as
soon as they had heard them, they were so angered and moved against good
Antistius (who knew not what to say of this thing he never thought) that
straight they stoned him, and suffered Sextus himself to punish the
compartners of Antistius: Then Sextus having the bridle loose, caused
Machiavell.

If we look into the manner of government, practiced by all great conquerors,
(not such petie and tyrannous governors as Borgia) and generous monarchs,
which became the greatest and noblest of the world, as Caesar, Alexander the
great, Cyrus, Charlemaine, etc. we shall find, that they used most contrary
means to Machiavells Lewis, to imitate the kindness and gentleness of those
great Monarchs, when he conquered Millan: For although he after again lost
it, yet it follows Sforces: but rather here of proceeded that loss by the
inconstancy of the Millanois, and the machinations of pope Julius the second,
with the Venetians, which thought it not good to have so great a master so nigh
them; as the French and Italian hystories do evidently demonstrate.

And whereas Machiavell maintains, That it succeeds not well, for a prince to
imitate sometimes the virtuous actions of generous princes, and that therefore
he Machiavell and all his favorites would judge of the success of all things
by their end (as they ought to judge) they should find, that those glorious and
goodly successes that happen to the wicked, are but means, wherewith God
serves himself to bring them into ruin and utter overthrow, which they
merited, as amply I have otherwhere showed by many examples. And as for the
examples he alleges, he shows himself by the application Commodus,
Caracalla Spartian and Dion in Severo and Caracalla.
and Maximinus, in that they would imitate and resemble Severus: o bravely
applied and to good purpose spoken! for Pertinax succeeded Commodus and
Severus, Pertinax; so that Commodus did never see nor know Severus, who in his
time was yet unknown, being a simple waged soldier, of a base and unknown
race: how should Capitol. in Maximino.
then Commodus propose him for an example to imitate? and as for Caracalla his
son, and Maximin, they were never imitators of Severus, but in his vices;
namely, in cruelty; and therefore we need not mervaile, if it succeeded not
well unto them. Lamprid. in Alexan. Herod. lib. 6. Capitol. in Marco.
The emperor Severus had very good virtues; for he was very well learned, and
advanced to estates learned people; he maintained a very good policy in the
Roman empire; he made good and holy laws, which are yet in use; he caused
good justice Caracalla his son had none of those virtues, although Machiavell
being very ignorant of histories, says he was endued with excellent virtues:
for histories attribute no virtue unto him, but that from his youth he was
accustomed to live a la Souldarde, like a soldier; that he was not delicate,
but patient of labor; but otherwise the most wicked man in the world in all
things. And as for Maximin, he in all things resembled Caracalla, but that he
was issued from a vile and base race, and a barbarous nation; and Caracalla was
an emperors son: and as for that which Machiavell says, That it succeeded
not well to Pertinax and Alexander Severus by their imitation Antonius the
philosopher, he still shows more his beastliness, and that he has not read
the hystories of their lives. For hystories show, that Pertinax was slain of
his soldiers, because he appeared to them more covetous than he should have
been: So likewise was Alexander slain for the covetousness of Mammea his
mother toward the soldiers. But we never read, that Marcus Antonius was ever
spotted with that vice of covetousness: but contrary, that he was a very
liberal prince, nothing holding less than a covetous mind: and that herein,
as in all other virtues, he was a true philosopher, that is to say, loving
good, and hating evil. And therefore Machiavell knows not what he says, when
he says it succeeded not well with Pertinax and Alexander Severus, to have a
mind to imitate Marcus Antonius:

5. Maxim.
To be revenged of a city or a country, without striking any blow, they must
be filled with wicked manners.
VAnquished cities or provinces (says this Florentine) do mervellously
Discourse, lib. 1. cap. 35. and lib. 2. cap. 19.
well revenge themselves of the vanquishers, in receiving them gently, and
filling them with wicked manners: for so do they easily prepare and dispose
them to be vanquished, by vvhomsoever assaulteth them: as it happened to
Annibals soldiers at Capua. For having a long time soiourned there at their
ease in all delights and pleasures, they became all, so effeminate, that they
were never after good for any thing. This corruption of manners comes
ordinarily

I Have not here set down this Maxim, to say it is not very true. For besides
the examples we read in hystories, we know it by experience and sight of eye;
seeing we see at this day all France fashioned after the manners, conditions,
and vices of strangers that govern it, and have the principal charges and
Estates: and not only many Frenchmen are such beasts to conform themselves to
strangers complections, Machiavell in this Maxim, we shall find it is a most
detestable doctrine, as well for them which practice it, as for them against
whom it is practiced. The example even of Capua, which Machiavell alleges,
prooveth it. For the Capuans in receiving into their town Annibals army,
corrupted Tit. Livius, lib. 3. Dec. 3.
rupted and infected the soldiers of Anniball with all excess and effeminate
wantonness; Alexander the Great, did nothing to their own advauntage: Plu.
in. Alex.
For Alexander becoming vicious, they got the evil will of the Macedonians,
which took displeasure to see their king corrupted: and finally, after the
death of Alexander (which came unto him by his dissoluteness, learned of the
Persians) these lords had part of the evil luck, whereof they were cause: And
generally we may see, that the corrupters of princes and people, take part
always in the evil, whereof they are cause, as in other places we have
showed, by many examples of flatterers, which have corrupted their princes. We
Frenchmen may yield Charles the eight: for from thence brought they this
disease, which at this day is now called the French pox, and that we have ever
since kept: but yet so, as the Italians and Neopolitanes are not exempt
therefrom, but both the one and the other have part of that corruption.
Breefely, we ought to detest and hate this wicked doctrine of Machiavell, and
reject all vengeance, and follow S. Paul's lesson; who commands us to converse
with good people and of good manners, because the conversation of the wicked,
not only corrupts good manners, but also sows those that are wicked.

And as for that which Machiavell says of the Almaignes, we know and see the
frequentation of the Almaignes in France, and yet till this present we have not
seen, that they have yet gathered corruption of manners. And whereas he sets
down the French nation amongst such as are most corrupted; we cannot deny it:
but we may well say, That the doctrine of Machiavell, and the frequentation of
them of his nation, are cause of the greatest and most detestable corruption,
which is at this day in France: For of whom have the Frenchmen learned and
known atheism, sodomie, treachery, cruelty, usurie, and such other like
vices, but of Machiavell and of them of his nation: So that they may brag, that
they are well revenged of the wars which our ancestors have made in Italy.

6. Maxim.
It is folly to think, that with princes and great lords, new pleasures will
CAEsar Borgia (says Machiavel) during the life of Pope Alexander Cap. 7. Of
Princes, Discourse lib. 3. cap. 4.
the sixth, his father, usurped the domination of Romania (which is a land
belonging to the Church) and was called duke de Valentinois. Peter ad vincula:
yet after he consented, that he should be elected Pope, after the death of
Alexander his father, whereof he soon repented. For this new Pope, called
Julius the eleventh, straight be took himself to arms to recover that which
Borgia had usurped, although he had favored him in his election, which he
should never have done, nor suffered any election of a Pope, which was his
enemy: For (says he) new pleasures never makes men forget old injuries
Borgia, which in all other things had governed well, committed a foul fault
in the creation of Julius, and himself delivered the mean of his final
destruction. The same fault committed Servius Tullius, king of the Romans, in
giving his two daughters in marriage to two Tarquins, which quarrelled for the
crown, and which thought that Tullius would usurp it upon them. For not
only this alliance extinguished the envy and rancour which they had to
Servius, but that which is more, it caused one of the daughters to enterprise

IF seems that this which Machiavell tells of Borgia, boweth something from
the truth of the history. For Sabellicus writes, That during the election of
Pope Julius the eleventh, Borgia was shut up in the Popes tower to be safe and
guarded by his enemies: So there was no likelihood, that a man brought into
such an extremity, as to hide himself, and be shut up in prison, for the
great multitude of enemies which he had procured, should have such great
credit in the Popes election. But suppose it was true, that Borgia helped Pope
Julius to the Julius was unthankful for that benefit, for the remembrance that
he had of the old and ancient injuries that Borgia had sometimes done him: what
follows hereof? That all great lords will always do the like, will some
Machiavelist answer; and that therefore they ought not to be trusted: Is not
here a goodly doctrine for a prince? Breefely, it is Machiavels mind to teach a
prince to trust in no lord, which he has once offended, and again, that none
which has made a fault, or offended him, shall any more trust him, whatsoever
reconciliation, peace, concord, amity, pleasure, and good offices may happen
since the offense. Here, behold a most wicked and detestable doctrine, to say,
That an offense ought to take so deep root in the heart of the offended, that
by no pleasures, services, or other Machiavell seems something excusable to
maintain this Maxim: for according to the honor of his nation, vengeances,
and enmities are perpetual and irreconcilable: and indeed, there is nothing
wherein they take greater delectation, pleasure, and contentment, than to
execute a vengeance; insomuch as, whenever they can have their enemy at
their pleasure, to be revenged upon him, they murder him after some strange and
barbarous fashion, and in murdering him, they put him in remembrance of the
offense done unto them, with Machiavell teaches, and which they of his nation
practice) that they be not soiled and infected with that immortal and
irreconcilable vengeance. For how should it be possible, that any man should be
without infinite quarrels, and continual, and ordinary batteries and murders,
yea, with parents and friends, and with all other persons, with whom he has any
frequentation; if offenses may never be blotted out Irreconcilable vengeance
contrary to natural right.
for a dog which we have offended, will be appeased with a piece of bread, yea,
will fawn upon him which beat him, and as much will an horse do and an ox
which Machiavell speaks, which he says, cannot be defaced nor forgotten by
new pleasures. But I do well know, that some Machiavelist will reply upon
this doctrine, that Machiavell speaks only of princes and great lords, unto
whom he says; That new pleasures cannot extinguish old injuries, and that
hereunto accords that which Homer says:

A mighty king that angry is against one less than he, Hom. Iliad. lib. 1.

Can hide full deep in spightfull heart, that hard it is to see
His fierce and angry wrathful mood, till he espies his time,
Revenge to take, according to the greatness of the crime.
But let the case be so, that the wrath and irritations of great princes and
lords, Homer seems to be: hereof it follows not, that a prince is
implacable, and that he cannot be appeased by any pleasures or services. It
seems that Homer noted no other thing in the particular natures of kings and
great lords, but that they know how for a time to dissemble despights and
offenses perpetrated against them, and can attend opportunity to revenge them
(a thing very true, and that we see often practiced:) But it is far from
Homer to say, that kings and princes cannot be appeased by pleasures and good
services that may be done unto them after the offense, yea, in humiliating and
reconciling themselves to them. Homer speaks here of choleric kings, which
are not masters of themselves, not being able to command their passions
Agamemnon, of whom he especially spoke in the place above alleged. For many
good and wise kings and princes are seen, which Good princes incline to pardon.
can so well make their passions and affections obey reason, that not only
their wise judgment never suffers, that a desire after perpetual vengeance
shall take root in their hearts; but rather will not leave in their memory the
offenses that are done them, but will forget and pardon them of their own
motion, before any pardon be demanded: for their wisdom judges, that those
passions of vengeance, besides that they do but torment and make lean the
heart of a prince, are altogether contrary to the principal virtue, which
ought to shine in a prince as clemency, gentleness,

To this purpose is very regardable the opinion, that in the Senate, that great
and Titus Livi. lib. 4. Dec. 3.
wise person Quintus Fabius Maximus held. When the Romans begun to get up and
reprosper, after their ruin at Cannas, many of their allies, which had
revolted to Anniball, proffered to come to them again: Amongst others there was
one Classius Altinius Arpinus, who came to Rome, and made the Senate understand,
That he Altinius, nor in any other Arpinois, seeing they had violated their
faith by revolting unto Anniball, and that it were folly to make account of
such people, which have their faith as variable as fortune: and as for his
offer, to deliver the town of Arpos, he did it for no good affection he bore
to the Roman commonwealth, but because he saw the affairs thereof dissolve
and decay. But Fabius reasoned in another sort: Masters (said he) they which
have spoken before, seem to give their opinion, as if we were already in good
peace, forgetting the time lately passed and not considering that we are yet in
the heat of war: As for me, I think we stand faithful adherence unto us. The
opinion of Fabius was followed by all the Senate, Altinius the Romans reseased
the town of Arpos.

But it seems, that the persuasion which Quintus Metellus used in the name of
all the Senate, unto Aemylius Lepidus and Fulvius Nobilior, censors of Rome, is
very worthy the marking, to show, that vengeances and enmities ought not to
be perdurable in great lords, but ought to appease themselves, and be
reconciled one to another. The said two censors being two of the greatest
princes and lords of Rome, which had been consuls, and endued with other great
offices and estates, and at that time were censors, which was the greatest
office of all: For censors took cognizance of all the abuses of magistrates
and senators, and might put them out: These two being enemies (although
companions in one charge) the Senate determined to seek means to agree them:
so they sent unto them a great number of the Quintus Metellus, who had the
charge to speak for all, in a temple where the censors were, begun to
remonstrate and tell unto them, as follows: We know (right honorable
censors) that you are now in an estate to reprehend and correct the manners and
faults even of senators, yea, it is in you to govern and correct us, and not
in us to reprehend you: Yet have we one thing from the Senate to say unto you,
whereat all good men in you are offended and scandalized: When we consider of
you apart, we know you to be such, as in all the town there cannot be found
men more capable and fit to be censors and correctors, than you: but when we
look on you together, we fear you are not well Titus Tatius, and Romulus
warred one against another, yet after governed in this city together in good
concord and amity: When wars are finished, it is often seen, that men
become good friends and faithful allies, which before were mortal enemies:
There is a common Amities ought to be immortal, and enmities mortal.
proverb worthy of observation, That amities ought to be immortal, and
enmities mortal: Therefore good masters censors, we beseech you be reconciled
together, Titus Livius) praised

It is then an act of a good man and of an honorable nature, to be facile and
prompt to reconcilation, and not to engrave in our hearts perpetual enmities
and rancours, as Machiavell teaches: and good men ought not only to be facile
in reconcilation, but they ought also to contemn and disdain all revenges by
way of action and violence, as being a course unlawful, unfitting and
unbecomming him, that would conserve in himself the reputation of an
honorable and good man. Salust notably says: A good man (says he) loves
better to be vanquished, than by evil means to do injury: and to vanquish,
in what sort soever it be, if on the vanquished there be practiced too bitter a
revenge, it is an evil and damageable thing, which often brings the total
ruin of Commonweales.

Moreover generous and virtuous princes, ought not only to bury and blot out
all old injuries, with new benefits; but also even recent and new offenses
(which do more nigh than old touch the heart) ought to be forgotten, in
consideration of ancient pleasures and merits. The Caerites the Romans allies
and neighbors, breaking their faith and treaty of confederation, aided and
succored the Tarquinian Masters (said they) may it please you to remember, how
in the time of your callamitie, when the Gauls took, pilled, and burnt the
city of Rome, that you sent into our town of Caeres, all your priests,
Vestall nuns, and all the sacred images of your gods; insomuch as then Caeres
was as your holy revestrie, yea the only refuge and safeguard for all your
holy things, which there were well received and conserved: We therefore pray
you, in favor of the gods, whose sacred Images we have preserved, in the
ruin and combustion The people (says Titus Livius) were much moved by the
ancient merit of the Caerites, rather to forget the new fault, than the old
benefit, and a An old pleasure puts out a new offense.
peace, and remission of their offenses, was accorded unto them.

The same moderation of mind, used Francis the first of that name of good
memory, Anno 1541. The Rochelois falling to mutunie, against certain of the
kings officers, about the impost of Salt, but acknowledging Du Bello. lib 9. of
his Coment.
their fault, they humbled themselves before that good king, demanding pardon,
which he granted in an oration, with a grave and discreet admonishment, very
worthy such a king and Christian prince in these words: My good subjects and
friends (for such may I well call you, since you acknowledge your faults) the
office and duty of subjects is so great toward their prince, that they which
fail in that duty, commit so great a crime as they cannot perpetrate a
greater, nor more punishable, for the inconveniences which may thereupon
follow: For every estate of The public estate lies in well commanding and well
obeying
a well instituted monarch, and commonweal, consists in two points: namely,
in thing whereof I must make account unto him: and although according to that
which having committed them under the slavish servitude of a citadell, defiled
his hands with their blood: My hands (thanks be to God) are Cruelty takes
love from subjects to their princes,
clear from the blood of my subjects; and indeed he lost the hearts and
amity, I pray you forget this offense which is happened, and for my part, I
will not remember it at any time of my life: I pray you also be as good
subjects, as you have heretofore been, and I hope God will give me grace to
be better toward you, than I have been. God our Lord and creator, pardon
you, and I do heartely forgive you, all you have done without excepting any
thing. At this word, proceeding from so magnificall Vive le Roy, they prayed
God to conserve in all prosperity so good a king, so kind and merciful. Then
upon the kings commandment, all the bells of Rochell were rung, all their
gunnes were shot off, and bonefires made, in sign of great rejoicing.

And so much there wants, that good princes have been inclined to vengeance,
that contrary, the principallitie it self, makes them forget all affection of
vengeance, Spartian in Adrian.
that they had before: as we read of the emperor Adrian, who being come to
the empire, forgot all his former enmities; insomuch as one day soon after he
Ascending unto honor is descending from vengeance.
came to the empire, encountering a capital enemy of his, he said unto him:
Thou art escaped.

King Lewis the twelfth, before he was king, being but duke of Orleance, had
many troubles: For, in the time of king Charles the eight his predecessor, his
enemies Annals upon Anno 1488.
thought to have taken him prisoner, but he saved himself in Bretaigne,
whither he was persecuted with an army, and battle was given him, and the
duke of Bretaigne, who took his part at S. Aubin (where the kings army got
the victory) and the said duke of Orleance, were taken prisoners, led to the
castle Luzignen, and from thence brought to the great tower of Bourges: After
all this, there was a concord amongst them, and the said duke came to the
crown: Being king, they which followed him into Bretaigne, and to other places
during his adversity, persuaded him to be revenged, of such as had made war
upon him, at the kings command: and they showed unto him, that the cause of his
then persecution, came not by king Charles his motion, who was then within age
but by his principallest Counselors and governors, such as was Messire Lewis
de la Trimonille, and others. But that good king Lewis shaped them this
answer, worthy of so gentle and christian a king, that could command his
choler and passions: Nay (says he) a king of France, may not revenge injuries
done to the duke of Orleance.

King Phillip the hardy a gentle prince, a lover of peace, and very easy to
grant Annal. upon the year 1272.
Machiavell teaches.

But here might I accumulate and heap up many other examples, of Caesar,
Augustus, Traian, Marcus Antonius, Constantine, Charlemaine, S. Lewis, Charles
le sage, Alexander the great, of Sirus, and generally of all the good princes,
which ever have been, all which were endowed with that excellent virtue of
clemency, and were far from all vengeance. But these I have recited, I hope
may serve sufficiently,

And as for the examples, wherewith Machiavell serves himself, they be but
examples of tyrants, and such as were of no account: and of such people I know
men had need take heed: for although for a time, they dissemble their choler
and their appetite to vengeance, yet will they not fail to discover it, as
soon as they see a commodious time, to be revenged with advantage. But all
Princes resemble little, the Tarquines, or Pope Julius whereof Machiavell
speaks: For Tarquin who enterprised to sley king Servius Tullius his father
in law, to obtain the kingdom of Rome, showed well by that act and many
other, that he was a very tyrant: His Julius, he was known for a true and
disloyal tyrant, who greatly abused the bounty of king Lewis the twelfth:
For that good king took from the Bentivolians, Boloigne, and many other towns
from such petty lords as occupied them, and delivered them into the popes
hands, because they were lands belonging to the Roman church: Yet in
recompense, this good Pope, by published bulls, exposed the whole kingdom of
France for a prey, to whomsoever would take it, together with all the
countries and lands of the allies of John de Albert king of Navarre, lost his
kingdom, and king Lewis lost Millaine, and almost all that he held beyond the
mountains, as we have said in another place. And this was the recompense, the
king received for all his benefits, of this disloyal and wicked Pope, of whom
in his time was made a Pasquil at Rome, and registered in our annals, which in
this sort speaks to his holiness:

Of Gennua thy father was, from Greece thy mother came,
A child then borne upon the sea, what good in thee can be.
Genuais deceivers are, Greeks huge liars are by fame.
No faith in sea, thou hold'st these points most fully all in thee.
7. Maxim.
A Prince ought to propound unto himself, to imitate Caesar Borgia the son
of Pope Alexander the sixth.
IT is not possible for me (says M. Nicholas) to give better Cap. 14. Of the
Prince.
precepts to a new prince, than to lay before his eyes for an example the acts
of Caesar Borgia, duke de Valentinois, son of Pope Alexander the sixth: And
although his affairs little prospered, yet it was not wholy his fault, but
rather the malignitie of an extraordinary Fortune. First then by the means of
the Pope his father, he troubled all the Estates of Italy, that he might the
more assuredly Lewis the twelfth, passed into Italy, and so soon as he
arrived at Millaine, he gave succors to the Pope to subiugate Romania, which
straight was reduced under the hands of Borgia, for the reputation of the
French puissance. Secondly, because at Rome there were two mighty factions,
the Colonoise and the Vrsine, against whose enterprises he feared they would
oppose themselves; he got on his side the Vrsine faction by fair words and
promises, by the means whereof, Messiere Remiro Dorco (a severe and cruel man)
unto whom he gave full power: Who exercising his cruelty, committed many
executions, Borgia? To make the world believe, that such cruel executions
were not done by his command nor by his consent, suddenly he caused
publickely the head of Messier Romiro to be cut off: after this, being afraid
of the Frenchmen, he refused any more to be served with the French forces; so
he put them away, and to assure himself against them, he sought alliance with
the Spaniards, which then made war in the kingdom of Naples, and so were
farther off to hurt him, than the French which Pise and Sienna, and Luca
inclined unto him. But Pope Alexander his father dyed, and failed him at his
need, so that his domination being yet as a thing hanging in the air, which
was nothing solid, Pope Julius the eleventh easily dispoyled him. Borgia
seeing that fortune (which before had showed him so good a countenance) turned
her back, and prooved so malign and contrary unto him, fell sick and dyed;
and upon his death bed he said; He had prevented and thought upon all
inconveniences that might happen unto him but death, which he never supposed
would

IS not here a gallant life, and a goodly history to propose, for princes to
imitate, or rather a mark of Gods just judgment, Caesar Borgia an example of
Gods judgment.
which we see, he ordinarily exercises against such detestable tyrants,
which by all manner of cruelties and disloyalties seek to dominier: For God in
the end, brings all their desseignes and goodly enterprises into smoke, and
makes them die in languishment persevering in their vices, the reward of their
merit. Is not this wicked Borgia a fair Horace himself an heathen poet,
teaches us to make no assurance upon the time to come, neither to set our care
and hope thereon, when he says:

God covers, as with night obscure,
Always the end of life future; Hor. lib. 3. Car. Ode. 29.

And laughes to see afraid the man,
Of that which no ways see he can:
Of time present be careful then;
All other things do flit from men,
As water in the river.
But to understand the goodly pattern, which this Atheist proposes here for
a prince to imitate, I think it good, a little more amply to discourse the
life and genealogy Sabellicus Ennead. 10. lib. 9. and Enne. 11. lib. 2.
of Caesar Borgia: He was a bastard son of Pope Alexander the sixth, but it
is likely he legitimated him: for according to the cannon law, the Pope may
legitimate the bastards of other priests, and by consequent also his own: This
Pope by nation was a Spaniard, and before he was Pope, called himself Roderic
Borgia: but coming to the Popedom, he took the name of Alexander; that he
and his son, carrying the names of two of the most victorious monarchs that
ever were (that Alexander the great, and Julius Caesar) they might make all the
world tremble under them: He came to the Popedom, by the art of Nigromancie,
as some have written, which say he made a composition with the devil, which
appeared to him in the form of a protonotarie; but others write, he came to
it by silver, in bying cardinals voices. Philip de Comines (one of that time)
says, that he came to it by silver; as also Iovinianus Pontanus, who writ
this Epigramme:

Christ, Sacraments, altars are sold by Alexander Pope
He bought them very dear, he dear then may sell them I hope,
But it is not much respective I hope, whether he came to the Popedom by
Nigromancie, or by silver; for, it is not impossible but he might come to it by
both. This Roderic besides the said Caesar, had many other bastards, and
especially one, which in the night time, during his lascivious whoring in the
town of Rome, was massacred, and the next morning his body was found in a
sack, cast into Tiber, and it was never known who did it: He had also a
bastard daughter called Lucrece, which (either for that he avowed her not for
his, or otherwise) was married to one of his bastards, yet entertained by him,
as Pontanus writes:

Here lyeih she that Lucrece is by name,
But Thais is indeed, also by Fame:
Pope Alexanders daughter in law she is,
His wife most vile, his daughter eke iwis.
But above all his other bastards, he most singularly loved that Caesar
Borgia, insomuch that as soon as he came to his papacy, he gave him his
bishopric of Great and vain desseignes of Caesar Borgia
belonged unto the empire, in the time of Julius Caesar: so indeed he
forsook his red cap, and in steed of cardinal of Valence, he was called
duke of Valentinois, and incontinent, by deceits and disloyalties, he
adventured upon great enterptises. He took for his device, Ou Caesar ou rien;
as willing to say, that he made no account to be a less lord than Julius
Caesar was; which device in the end fitted him better Caesar, or altogether
nothing, he prooved to be both: Caesar by name, and nothing in deed.
Moreover, as for the means he took to effect his disseines and imaginations,
Machiavell has discoursed them before: but hystoriographers say, that his
subtle deceits and devices, were at the first suspected and discovered, and
that all the potentats of Italy knew straight, the intention of him and his
father, to tend unto the usurpation and domination of all Italy; and therefore
prepared they to hinder them in all they could: and after that the pope his
father was dead, he was incontinent left and abandoned of every man, and had
much to do, to find where to hide himself; for all his enemies, which he
had offended, arose against Fabius Vrsin the son of Paul (whom Borgia had
caused to be slain) sought him every where, and encountering one of Borgia his
familiars slew him, cut him in pieces, and washed his hands and mouth with his
blood: hereupon says Sabellicus: I do not think, that there can be found a
more notable example than this of Caesar Borgia, to admonish us to govern our
lives with moderation: He might have been the second after the Pope his
father, in the ecclesiastical order, and have had rich and good benefices, as
many as he would, but forgetting himself too much, and importuning fortune
too much as a mother, he straight experimented her, a most cruel stepmother:
he refused to maintain himself in a right high and honorable degree, Behold
the censure of this learned Sabellicus, touching the life and carriage of this
Caesar Borgia, which is full contrary to the mind of Machiavell: For where as
Machiavell counsels a prince, to imitate the actions of Borgia, Sabellicus
discounselleth it, and faith, That his life ought to serve

To dispute here of the disloyalty, cruelty, and other vices, which Borgia
used in all his negotiations; and to prove, that his life ought not to be
imitated, but rather detested, were a superfluous thing: For the common senses
of all men, which have never so little judgment, do sufficiently show to all
the world, that the said vices are so detestable, that the users of them cannot
but light on the like end, that Borgia did. First, because God customably does
so reward such wicked tyrants: Secondly, because it ordinarily comes to
pass, that they are greatly hated of every one; insomuch as every man guards
himself from them, as from a furious beast, and the first that can get him at
advantage, thinks he does good to the common weal, when he riddeth him from
the world; yea, each man watches to catch him in his snare: Therefore no man
will give a prince, so dangerous and so detestable counsel, as to use Borgia
for a pattern of imitation; unles he would carry him unto the top and fullness
of all wickedness and cruel tyranny, which seems to be the end whereat
Machiavell aims, as we shall see more at large hereafter.

But whereas Borgea (says he) caused the head to be taken from Messier
Romiro Dorco, the executioner of his cruelty; I confess it was true, and
avow, that he did well therein: For if Messier Romiro, would excuse himself
and say, that his master Borgia commanded him to do such cruel executions;
that were no good excuse, because he should rather have forsaken his estate
and government, than to commit cruelties, without any form of justice, against
the law of God and reason: The civil laws themselves wills, that none
should obey his prince, when he commands any massacre or unjust slaughter,
till thirty days be past after the command; that in the mean time either
their friends, or the magistrate, may persuade the prince, to pacify his
choler, and to hearken unto reason. And because the law hereupon made by the
emperors Gratian, Thesiodus, and Valentinian, is worthy to be marked, I do
thus translate it: If it happen that hereafter (say they) we command Antonius
and Syagrius. It is then seen by this law, that Messier Romiro was justly
punished, as a man too prompt and forward to execute cruelty: And if this law
had been well observed in France, there had not been found so many, and such
rash massacres, but the commonwealth had been in far better estate, and the
means of peace, more facile

Moreover, the prince which will propose one man alone as his pattern, and
exemplar True patterns which a prince ought to propose to imitate.
to imitate, he shall find many, which have been as virtuous as Caesar
Borgia was vicious: But seeing the greatest and most excellent persons at all
times, were ever men, that is to say, not every way absolute, but defectuous
and vicious some way; it is best therefore that a prince do adict himself to
imitate all virtuous men in general, and each of them in their particular
virtues: As if we speak of heathen princes, he may propose to imitate the
clemency of Julius Caesar in using his victory: for he ever simply contented
himself to vanquish, without cruelty, and with out bloodshed, as far as he
could: He may propose to follow the moderation of Augustus Caesar in the
government of the commonweal, and his diligence to establish peace, in the
whole Roman empire: For he never omitted any thing, which might be a mean to
bring all the world to peace and tranquillity, after the civil wars, and he
managed the commonweal with such moderation, as it seemed rather a civil
government, than a monarchy: He had also another virtue, well worthy of
imitation; for he was a good justicer, and himself not only dealt in making
laws and ordinances according to the rules of justice, but also he himself
often heard men's Augustus, were fit for a prince to imitate. The bounty and
lenity of Traianus; the love of peace in Pius; the deep wisdom, the
humanity and facility to pardon, and the love and study of good letters in
Marcus Antonine, are also worthy virtues for a prince to follow. But without
any longer stay upon Paynim princes, which had not the knowledge of Christian
religion, a prince shall find sufficient to imitate, yea, and not to go
farther than the kings of France. Charlemaine was as generous and victorious,
as ever was Caesar; yet besides this; he was very liberal toward good
people, a prince continent, gentle, facile to pardon enemies, and endowed with
a singular piety and fear Augustine to be read unto him; and nourished poor
people in his palace, which sometimes served himself at the table. Saint
Lewis was a good and wise king, fearing God, and a good justicer; for he often
sent into all his provinces commissaries, to be informed of the abuses,
covetousness, and rapines of magistrates, and caused them which were found
faulty, to be well punished. We read one thing of him, not unworthie to be
remembered, That one day as he was praying unto God, reciting certain
petitions of the psalms of David, fit for that action, one comes suddenly
unto him, to desire a pardon for one that had committed a fault, which was
death by law; he as suddenly granted it; but straight falling into a verse
of the psalm, which says: Beati qui faciunt Iustitiam in omni tempore.
Blessed are they which do justice at all times: he immediately called him
again, unto whom he had granted the said pardon, and revoked it, with this
notable sentence: That the prince which may punish a crime, and does it not, is
as culpable himself, as he that committed it; and that it is a work of
piety, and not of cruelty to do justice: Besides he was very chaste, far from
all lubricitie, and never thirsted after revenge. Charles le Sage was a very
benign and humble prince, who did nothing but by well digested counsel
without rashness, loving the good and safety of his subjects; he was also a
prince that very much feared God, he took great delight in reading the Bible,
and would his people should read it, and to that end, he caused it to be
translated into French. The Prince then Question, if the pope can legitimate
his own children.
and the reason of the doubt is, because the doctors of law hold, That
legitimation is an act and exercise of jurisdiction: But it is an undoubted
Maxim, that none can Cato says amongst serious things, joyous and merry things
would be sometimes mixed.

Upon this question then, namely; Whether the Pope can legitimate his own
bastards? Joan did. But out of this doctrine of the cannons, which imports,
That all Popes ought to be furnished reduced under the first form of the first
figure of Syllogismes in Barbara; which (as

They which hold the negative part of our question, have other contrary
arguments. The Pope (say they) is bound, as other Ecclesiastical people are,
to the general vow of the church, and therefore he ought to observe the vow as
well as others; especially, that he may be a good example to other priests:
For if the Pope (who commonly is an old man) dispense with himself to have
bastards, and do break chastity and continency required in the priestly
order; what an example should that be for a company of young priests, which
are idle and at their case? To say that nature has given men genitories for
procreation, it is true (say they;) but they must be used in marriage: And if
that be a good reason, we may then say, that it is lawful for all priests to
break the vow of chastity: But the truth is contrary: For none Of the power
of the pope and of their counsels.


We must then presuppose and understand, that there is an old and ancient
question, which is not yet decided for want of a judge, that is, Which is the
great master, the Counsel or the Pope. This question has been many times
disputed upon, but C. quanto. and sim. ex de tra^slat. epis^o.
and resolve it in proper terms: These Cannonist doctors also hold upon this
point, Peter, who after left them unto the Popes his successors, not to the
Counsel: So that (say they) if the Pope would rigorously deal with them of
the Counsel, he would not suffer them to enter into Paradise; for, to enter
into it, we must only speak unto him, seeing he only carries the

The doctors of the faculty of Theology (to sustain the contrary, and to
make appear, that the Counsel is greater than the Pope) use many subtle and
speculative arguments, into which every man cannot enter, for their great
subtlety: for when they speak of this matter, they seem to beat, into as small
dust as Epicures Atoms, the subtilties of S. Thomas de Aquin, and Scotus: For
they destinguish the Pope from the papalitie, and say, that there is a
spiritual papalitie, and a potestative papalitie, and that both of them are
not always concurrent in one papal subject. For the spiritual papalitie may
be deficient in the subject, by a defectuositie of science, the Counsel is
greater than the Pope: for he that has power over another, to Peter alone,
and he speaks also of many keys, which can be in no less number than two,
seeing there is a plural number: but these two keys, are the keys of
knowledge, and the key of power, whereof the first belongs to the Counsel
properly, yet the Pope bears them both in his arms: without the key of
knowledge; they say the other is not to be accounted of, neither can in any
Philip le bell, the fourth of that name, Pope Boniface the eight Annal. upon
Anno 12^6. Monst. lib. 1. cap. 67.
made a Decretall, whereby he generally forbad all emperors, kings, and
princes of Christendom to levy any tribute upon the clergy, upon pain of a
present excommunication, Alexander the fifth, who would needs levy tenthes upon
the French clergy, it was resolved by all the universitie of Paris likewise,
to appeal from him and his bull to the first general Counsel. And to be
short, appellations have been common from the Pope as inferior, to the Counsel
as superior: And indeed, the doctors in Theology hold all determinately this
Theorique, That the Counsel is greater than the Pope: yea, some Theologians
have gone so far, as to say, that men may well be without the

By the abovesaid discourse is seen, that our masters of Theology have
desired to circumscribe the infinite plenitude of the Popes power, by giving
him a master, and a superior; namely, the Counsel, to keep him within his
limits. But I find his power cut much shorter by other means: and first, upon
this general rule, The Pope 1. Limit. of the Popes power.
may do all: they add a condition and moderation thus: Clave non errante,
Provided, that the key do not err. This is a moderation right pleasant, which
comprehends Clave non errante. Likewise, by the same moderation and
restriction it may be said, that a great part of the Cannons and Decretals are
nothing worth, because they are derogatorie from the divine law, or equity,
and natural reason; or else, because by these Cannons and Decretals, there is
added to the holy Scripture, which God has forbidden: The key then of Popes
being thus

There is yet another restriction or exception from the foresaid rule, which
Saint 2. Limitation.
Thomas de Aquin maintains firmly and stoutly, that is: He says, That the
Pope may do all things, but except that he can make no new articles of the
Faith: This is an exception, which stretches far and wide, and much
diminishes the infinite power of the Pope: For if it be true, that he can make
no new articles of faith, it follows, that we ought not to believe nor give
credit to any thing the Pope has invented himself: Thomas his limitation,
what precepts soever are added to the Decalogue, as this: Dominicis diebus
missas audito, On Sundaies hear Masses, and such like, are utterly to be
rejected: And generally, all that the Popes have ordained, which is contrary,
or in any manner repugnant from any place of holy Scripture, must be cast off
as a new article of the faith. For we must as well in deed as with the mouth,
confess and believe all that is contained in the old and new Testament, and
all the verses generally of the whole Bible ought to be unto us so many
articles of the Faith; although there are some more principal and necessary
than others: insomuch, as all the Popes doctrine, Thomas.

Besides the two foresaid limitations, there is yet another very common amongst
3. Limitation.
the Theologians and Cannonists: For herein do they agree, That an heretic
Pope has no power, nor ought to have any obedience yielded unto him. This has
often served for a mean to cut off and to limit the Popes power: For ever when
he waxed too wild, furious, and troublesome to the world, then would they cast
him this bone to know on, to say, Thou art an heretic: and so was he often
abandoned, so that none made any account of him: as it happened to Pope
Benedict of Avignon, successor of Clement the sixth: For this Benedict sent bulls
to the king of France, whereby Benedict was an heretic unworthie the name of a
Pope, and that men ought not to obey him, his bulls being of no value, as
granted by one without all power: and therefore according to that resolution,
the said bulls were rent and torn in pieces, and all obedience denied the
Boniface, of whom we have before spoken, was declared an heretic by the
said University and faculty Julius the second, was not declared an heretic
by the University, because they thought it better so to prove him in Italy
at a Counsel there, that so Italy it self might also withdraw from his
obedience: And indeed (do the Pope what he could) a Counsel was held at Pise,
where he was endighted for an heretic, but he died before the sentence was
given. Breefely, of old it was a good and gentle means to bridle the
unmeasurable power of the Pope, to declare and descrie him for an heretic:
Our masters also of that time (I know not what they do now) defined

You have heretofore understood the controversy betwixt the Pope and the
Counsel, Monstrel. lib. 2. cap. 231, 237. lib. 3. cap. 5. 103. 112.
and how the Counsels favorers and partakers have often beaten down the Popes
horns, and cut his comb: Now will I recite, how that the Pope got a good
revenge once: It was in the year 1437, when Pope Eugenius the fourth held the
Roman seat: At that time a Counsel was kept at Basil, by which amongst other
things, it Eugenius should loose his Popedom, and in his place should come Ame
de Savoy, called Pope Foelix, who a little before had resigned to his son Lewis
his duchy, lands, and seignories to become an hermit at Ripaille, a
solitary place in Chablais. This Pope being chosen, Eugenius begun straight
to cause very rigorous bulls to be published against him, and anathematized
him, if he continued to call himself Pope. Foelix the new Pope stood stiff,
and all the Counsel for him, which was translated from Basil into the town of
Geneva, where this Pope held Pope Foelix sat at Geneva.
his seat, and from thence dispatched as forcible bulls against Eugenius, and
made no account of his anathematizations; but hoped well that he should
remain master and head of the Church (at the least on this side the mounts) if
once he could place Eugenius Pope of Rome, although he something inclined to
the Counsel of Basil, and approved the resolutions made there. Moreover, he
did so much, that in the end he agreed Pope Foelix with Pope Nicholas,
successor of Eugenius, in the year 1447: And Pope Foelix contented himself to
be the Popes perpetual vicar in Savoy, after he had enjoyed ten years the
Popedom; having always his seat at Geneva, as well of Foelix acknowledged
Pope Nicholas for true Pope, as also did all they which had elected Foelix, and
remained with him at Geneva: Therefore from that time forward was there Felix
sat Pope at Geneva.
no Pope at Geneva, neither would they of Geneva receive any into their city
again as I hear. And for as much as the Pragmaticke sanction (which were
certain articles touching the matter of benefices, which were resolved upon in
the said Counsel) greatly diminished the Popes revenues, and the Bullists and
Datances at Rome; the Pope never ceased, till he had abolished it in France,
by the means of a bishop of Arras, a great favorite of the kings, whom the
Pope made cardinal, giving him a red hat in recompense of his pains. So from
that time was abolished Charles the seventh: And a certain time after, Pope
Pius the second (who in poesy had before been another Ronsard, and was called
also Aeneas Silvius) utterly condemned to all reproach, that poor pragmaticke
sanction, namely, to be publickely trailed and drawn through the streets of
the town of Rome, in token and sign of irrision, ignominy, and infamy
thereof, and of the Counsel that made it, which so durst fasten himself unto
the Popes sanctity: After sentence was pronounced, this poor Pragmaticke was
Occham, Gingencourt, and Gerson have said, written and maintained to the
contrary, and whatsoever all the faculty of Theology have resolved, that the
Counsel is greater than the Pope.

The Pope not only says he is greater than the Counsel, but also, than all
the Innocent the third, and of an emperor of Constantinople, which reigned
about the year 1200. This Pope had written certain letters unto that
emperor, whereby he rebuked, and spoke to him as to his varlet: The emperor
made him a modest answer, sending him word, That he was much abashed, that
he should write unto him in so lofty and imperious a style, and that therein
he observed not the commandment of Saint Peter his predecessor, who wills and
enjoynes all persons to obey and be subject unto the king, as to the most
excellent, and unto magistrates under him, his deputies: concluding by this
place, That the Pope Innocent failed not to frame him this answer: Thy
imperial sublimitie marvelleth that we durst rebuke thee, because thou have
read in S. Peter, prince of the Apostles, That every man ought to be subject
unto the king, as to the most excellent, and to magistrates, by him
established: But thou have not well considered the person of him that speaks:
For the Apostle writes to his subjects, That in all humility they will yield
him obedience: and when he says, To the king, as the most excellent; it must
be understood of the temporaltie: for without doubt, the Pope in spiritual
things is the more excellent, and is so much the more to be preferred before
kings and emperors, as Behold in sum Pope Innocents answer unto the
emperor of Constantinople; which contains a profound Theological
exposition, to make flies laugh. About this time there were also erected and
set up in the Church two strong pillars of the Papal power and doctrine;
namely, the orders of the begging Friars, and the

For the last point which we will touch of the Popes power, shall be that
which the learned Poet George Buchanan says, who speaking of this matter,
touches the white: for he says, That the ancient governors of Rome (which
were kings, consuls, and emperors (have subjugated and vanquished both earth
and sea; but that this was nothing, or small in regard of the modern
dominators of Rome, which are the Roman bishops: For the first bishops of
Rome, as S. Peter, S. Clement, and certain others by their good and holy life
gained heaven and paradise, which is already more than the earth and the sea,
which the old Romans conquered: But what have the last bishops done, as Pope
Gregory the seventh, Boniface the eight, Silvester the second, Julius the
second, John the two and twentieth, Alexander the sixth the father of Caesar
Borgia above mentioned, and other Popes their like, they have done more than
their predecessor bishops, or the ancient kings, emperors, or consuls of Rome:
for they have valiantly conquered hell (says Buchanan) and have Popes have
conquered hell.
made themselves masters and peaceable possessors thereof, notwithstanding all
the forces and resistance of Pluto and all his sequel, which would not suffer,
that Popes should dominier in hell, but would only receive them as his
vassales: But the chance has happened contrary; for the Pope is at this day,
and has been long time, a peaceable dominator and lord of hell, and Pluto is
no more but his vassale, and the simple executioner of his commandments, and
as it were the jailer of the Popes Leo the tenth in his time) he commands the
angels of paradise to go seek the souls of prisoners in hell (after once their
ransom be paid) and Pluto and his officers to open their gates, and set them
at liberty without contradiction, upon pain to loose their charges and
estates: And think you that Pluto durst disobey one only word of the Pope his
sovereign? It is very certain, that he durst not once grunt nor contradict
him in any thing, but (all he can possible) maintain his amity, and to do
him all the services he can. Here is the substance of that which Buchanan
speaks of the Popes power, in these verses:

In alder time with iron sharp, and by their navall war,
Old Rome subdued sea and land, though nigh it were, or far:
But after that, the Roman bishops soared to heaven on hie,
By knowledge, bounty, patience eke, and their humility:
No more remains to their succeeding Popes, but only hell,
Whereof possessors are they sure, they have it conquered well.
8. Maxim.
A prince need not care to be accounted cruel, if so be that he can make
himself be obeyed thereby.
Caesar Borgia (says Messier Nicholas) was reputed cruel, yet by his cruelty
he brought into order, and into his obedience the Cap. 17 of the Prince.
whole country of Romania: Wherefore the prince need take no great care, to
see himself in reputation to be cruel, so that thereby he maintain his
people in a faithful union and obedience. For the cruel and rigorous
executions of a prince, do but privately hurt certain particulars, which
ought not to be feared; and the two great lenity of Severus may serve us for
proof hereof, for he was very cruel, and by his cruelty overcame Albinus
and Niger, and the most part of their friends, and so wrought himself a
peaceable empire, which he long time held, being well obeyed, and reverenced
of all the world.

I Have heretofore showed, how Caesar Borgia, by his cruelty obtained for
enemies, almost all the potentates of Italy, and thereby so well assured his
estate, that incontinent as his father was dead, he was environed with enemies,
destitute of friends, despoiled of the lands he had usurped, and constrained to
hide himself to save his life. This tragical issue accords not very well,
with that which Machiavell here maintains, saying B^rgia was erected by the
credit of his father and not by his cruelty.
That the cruelty of Borgia, was the cause that he got the peaceable
domination of Romania: For to say truth, it was not his cruelty (which easily
might have been resisted, Borgia of himself being without power) but it was
the favor and fear of Peter, or the sword of S. Paul (which he said he had)
or all his fulminations, excommunications, agravations, reagravations,
interdicts, anathematizations, or all the forces and means he can make. And
who would make account of all those at this day? seeing even the Romans
themselves Alexander Borgia, yea in the time of Pope Julius the eleaventh his
successor, all that the Pope would and ordained, was held of christian princes
for an ordinance as from the mouth of God, yea, even when the Pope ordained
things manifestly wicked: as when Julius delivered as a prey, the whole
kingdom of France, and the lands of the kings allies. For the king of England,
of Arragon, and the emperor Maximilian, believed all, that it was a sufficient
cause to set upon the king and his allies, and that it was even as an express
commandment of God. The world then, and even princes, being then overtaken
with that beastly superstition and folly, we need not be abashed, that
Caesar Borgia, had the means to possess Romania, under the shadow and favor
of the Machiavell says) because as soon as that favor ceased, all his case
was overthrown, and it was straight seen, that his utter ruin arived, as is
said. I do then maintain clean contrary from the Maxim of Machiavell, and
say, That cruelty is a vice which ordinarily brings ^o princes the ruin of
them, and their estates, and that clemency and gentleness is the true means,
to maintain and establish a prince firm and assured in his estate.

For proof hereof reasons are clear and manifest: for we call cruelty, all
executions which are committed upon men, their lands and goods, without any
form No violent thing can endure; So it follows, that an estate founded upon
cruelty, cannot long endure. Moreover cruelty is always hated of every one;
for although it be not practiced upon all particulars, but upon some only;
yet they upon whom it is not exercised, cease not to fear, when they see it
executed upon their parents, friends allies and neighbors: But the fear of
pain and punishment, engenders hatred; for one can never love that, whereof
he fears to receive evil, especially when there is a fear of life, loss
of goods and honors, which are the things we hold most Cruel people are
commonly cowards.


This vice of cruelty, proceeding from the weakness of such as can not
command their choler and passions of vengeance, and suffer themselves to be
governed by them, never happened in a generous and valiant heart, but rather
always in Mauricius, that the captain Phocas intended and wrought evil
against him; and another maintained that he was but a coward, and too fearful
to bring any thing to pass: the emperor Mauricius answered, So much the more
ought I to take heed: for those cowardly and fearful people, when they
enterprise a cruelty, and that they have advantage, they can never hold any
measure therein. And this vice of cruelty (says Marcellinus) may be called
the ulcer of the soul, proceeding of Amian. Mar. lib. 27.
feebleness of the mind, and cowardice of the heart: And therefore sick and
diseased people are more chollericke than they that are in health, and
miserable and desperate men, more than they which are at their ease and
contented. And hereupon Marcellinus) that the cause why Valentinian was a
cruel man, came because of the choler, which so ruled in him, that as soon
as any spoke unto him any word that displeased him, he changed color, voice,
and gate, and could not command himself, nor keep from committing many
cruelties and injustices, his judgment was so with choler oppressed. Finally,
it was the cause of his death: For one day the Quadians demanded peace of him,
and by their ambassadors excusing themselves of a rebellion, he began to speak
to those ambassadors in so great anger, rehearsing his kindness and humanity
before used unto them, that at once his voice and words failed him, as if he
had been stricken with a deadly blow, and withal begun to send out a mortal
sweat: he was incontinent carried to a chamber, and laid upon a bed,

There was never a more cruel nor a more cowardly man, than Caligula the
emperor: for he quaked and trembled as he went to war to hear speak only
of his Sueton in Calig. cap. 45. 46. 47. ^2 58 59.
enemies, without seeing them. Making war in Almaigne, in a forest nigh unto
him, he caused certain Apostata Almaignes to lie in ambush, and commanded one
of them when he was at dinner, to declare unto him that the enemy was
discovered in the said forest: As soon as he heard this, he incontinent
sounded the trumpet, and placing his battle in array, he caused them to
assault that poor forest, Redoubles, when they all fell upon him, and
massacred him with thirty blows in his age of 29 years, after he had reigned
three years and ten months.

The cruelty of Nero, which caused to be slain Agrippine his mother,
Britannicus his brother, Octavia his wife, Seneca his master, and all the most
virtuous and good people of Rome, even of the Senate, are notorious enough, and
should be too long to recite: And never man was more feminine and cowardly,
than he: for he was never found in any war: But he had good and valiant
lieutenants, which acquitted Phaon, one whom he had enfranchised: being there,
his men pressed him to slay himself quickly, least he fell alive into the
hands of his enemies: for none of them would do him the pleasure, as to slay
him: Then he commanded them to make for him a grave, and laid him down upon
the earth for a measure thereof: but whilst they were making of the grave,
behold a lacquey of Phaons came, who brought a decree from the Senate, whereby
Nero was declared an enemy of the Commonwealth, with commandment to seek him
out, dagger in the throat, with the help of Secretary Epaphroditus: and he
being yet alive Voila la foy; See what faith: He died at the age of 30 years:
And it was an admirable thing, that he which had caused so many others to be
slain in his time, could never find a person, that in a need would sley him,
but was forced to do it himself. A thing also worthy it is to be marked,
that at his last sigh he complained, that none kept faith with him, with him I
say, that was full of all disloyalty: And wherefore should they? do tyrants
think, that men will keep faith with them, seeing they themselves break it
with every one: If they so think, they are deceived: For to abandon a tyrant,
and not any way to support him, is to observe faith to his country and to the
Commonweal.

We have before in another place discovered the cruelties and unhappie ends of
Commodus and of Bassianus Caracalla, both which were faint-hearted and cowardly
princes, never performing any warlike act, or which tasted of any generositie
or courage. We may number with them Didius Iulianus, Heliogabalus, Gallienus,
Maxentius, Philippus, Phocas, Carinus, Zeno, and many other sluggish and
faint-hearted princes, that never did any good thing, which also by their
cruelty have brought themselves to miserable ends; for they died violent
deaths, and reigned not long. We may also add to those examples of princes (or
rather tyrants, which were very cruel and of little generositie) the example of
Herodes cruelty toward his children, whereof we have spoken before: The
example also of the emperor Tiberius, who constrained men to Sueto. in Tib.
cap. 6.
they prayed him; and he took from them their sollace, to study, read, or to
talk with any person. The examples also of the emperors, Otho, Vitellius,
Domitianus, Macrinus, and other like, all which were very cruel, and little
generositie in them; they all in small time finished their lives, and by the
sword. But for as much as the death of Domitian is worthy the noting, to show
That tyrants cannot shun the divine justice, I will here recite how he was
massacred. First we must understand, that this cruel tyrant Sueto. in
Domitian, cap. 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, etc.
caused many great lords to die, which were the principal senators of Rome,
and even some which had had the consularie dignity, yet had they done nothing
that merited so much as a reprehension: as Cerecalis, Salvidienus, Glabrio,
which he caused Aelius Lamia (whose wife Domitia Longina he had taken from him)
only because he spoke these words: Alas I say not a word: and Salvius
Cocceanus, because he celebrated the day of the nativitie of the emperor Otho
his uncle: and Metius Pomposianus, because there was a brute, that he was born
in a royal constellation; and going to a certain place, he carried with him a
figure of the world, and the orations of kings and captains, which he found in
Titus Livius, and because he imposed those names, Mago and Anniball to certain
his slaves: He also caused to die Salustius Lucullus, because he had invented a
new form of halberds, which he called Lucullienes: and Iunin Rusticus,
because he had written the praises of two very Taetus Trasea and Elvidius
Priscus, whom Rusticus had called most holy persons; and therefore were all
philosophers banished both Rome and Italy: He caused his cousin Flavius Sabinus
to die, because the trumpeter or common criet, had (according to custom)
openly proclaimed, That he was chosen new emperor, and he should have said,
new consul: he put to death also Flavius Clemens, another cousin, for a light
matter of suspicion: and many other great cruelties toward good people and men
of quality, which for prolixitie I rehearse not: yet will I say; Your Lord and
God commands it so to be done: In the end seeing himself evil beloved of all
the world; he would needs Admirable means of Domitians death.
know of the divines and astrologers, what should be his end: he sent for a
very famous astrologer, called Ascletarion, of whom he demanded when and how
he should die? Ascletarion answered him: Sir, not to hide any thing, I know by
art, and I find that you shall be soon slain: And thou, said Domitian, of
what death shall thou die? Sir, answered he, I find by art, I shall be eaten
with dogs: Well (replied Domitian) I will keep thee well from that adventure:
and straight to convince him of a lie, he commanded him to be slain, and to be
buried, and after, his body to be burnt into ashes, Domitian, he was much
afraid of this hap: So that as well, for that Ascletarion had said unto him, as
for that other diviners had told him the day and hour he should be slain, he
thought it good to stand upon his guard: and the better to see them which came
behind him, he caused to floor all his gallerie (where he most often walked)
with a kind of shining stone, from which Stephanus his chamberlain (who was
one of the conspirators against him) his left arm hanging in a scarf, as if
it had been hurt, signifying to him that he would declare the conjuration
intended against him. This was the cause that Domitian suffered him to enter:
who straight after his entry, after reverence, presented unto him a request,
containing the discourse of the conjuration, whereof he let him read a good
part; at which, seeing him astonished, he stabbed Domitian: I answer, that we
must believe, that this said prediction was not by art or science: but the
evil spirit would give boldness of enterprising, unto Domitians enemies, in
making them know by frivolous divinations his fatal hour, that they might
believe, the stars and heaven, to aid their enterprise. And God above (who
serves himself with such means as pleases him, to exercise his justice)
gives efficacy to the spirit of error. The same effect came of the Caracalla:
for it was the cause that Macrinus enterprised to sley him, although he never
before thought of it, till the astrologers declared their divination; nay he
would never have done that enterprise, if that divination had not constrained
and drawn him unto it.

Master Philip de Comines recites to this purpose a very memorable history,
that happened in his time: He says there was at Naples a king called
Alphonsus, a Arragon, who was mavelous cruel, a traitor and dangerous: for
none could know when he was angry, he could so well manage his countenance,
yea, and often betray men, as he made them good cheer: and he was a man
wherein there was neither grace nor mercy, neither had he any compassion of
the poor people: This king Alphonsus had a son also as wicked as he, called
Ferrand, who had found means to bring before him (under his fathers assurance)
many princes and barons of the country, to the number of four and twenty;
and amongst them the prince de Rosane his brother in law, having married his
sister; all which he caused to be imprisoned, notwithstanding the faith and
assurance which he had given them, insomuch, as some remained four or five and
twenty years prisoners. Alphonsus was dead, and Ferrand his son was king;
the first thing he did at his coming to the crown, was to massacre all those
said great princes and barons (which he himself had imprisoned, during his
fathers life) by a Moorean slave of Africa, which he rewarded, and straight
after the execution sent him into his country. This king Ferrand, or
Ferdinand, having news of the said murder, (as the king of France Charles the
eight, enterprised the conquest of Naples) judging himself unworthie to be
king, because of his great and abominable cruelties, sent ambassadors to the
king to agree and to be at an accord with him, offering to yield himself
tributarie to the crown of France, to hold the kingdom of Naples of him, and
to pay him 50000 crowns yearly: But the king, who knew Arragonian race of
Naples, would enter into no treaty with the king Ferdinand, who being in
despair to be ever able to hold that kingdom against the king of France,
having his own subjects his enemies, died for sorrow and despair, and left
his son Alphonsus his successor. This Alphonsus the new king was as wicked as
his father, and had always showed himself pitiless and cruel, without
faith, without religion, and without all humanity; insomuch, as perceiving
that king Charles approached Rome, his conscience also judging himself to be an
unworthy king, he resolved to fly into Spain, and to profess himself a monk
in some monastery: But before he fled, he caused to be crowned king at
Naples a young son of his, called Ferdinand, who was not yet hated in the
country, his Comines says) never cruel man was hardy: And when one desired
him only to stay three days to pack up his goods: No no (said he) let us
quickly depart from hence, hear you not all the world cry France, France?
Men may see how an evil conscience leaves a man never in quiet: This wicked
man (knowing, that by his cruelty he Ferdinand son of the said Alphonsus,
died of a fever and a flux: So that within the space of two years, God did
justice on four kings of Naples, two Alfonses, and two Ferdinands, because

A like punishment happened by the conduction and judgment of God, to that
Comines lib. 1 cap. 132. 133. and Bellay lib. 1. of his memories.
cruel king Richard of England, king Edward the fourth his brother. This king
Edward deceasing, left two sons and two daughters all young, and in the
tutelage and government of Richard duke of Gloucester his brother: This duke
desiring for himself the crown of England, caused his two nephews cruelly to
be slain, and made a report to go, that by chance they fell of a bridge, and
so were slain; His two nieces he put into a religion of Nuns, saying they
were bastards: because (says he) the dead king Edvard their father, could not
lawfully espouse their mother, for that before Richard the third) made to die
of sundry deaths, all such as he knew had murmured against him or his
tyranny: After all this, when he thought he had a sure estate in the
kingdom, it was not long before God raised him up for enemy, the earl of
Richmond, of the house of Lancaster, who was but a petty lord in power,
without silver and without force, who but a little before was detained prisoner
in Bretaigne: To whom certain lords of England, sent secretly, that if he
could come into Charles the eight then reigning in France, by whose permission
he levied people in Normandy, to the number of about 3000 men; after, he
embarked with the troop, and took his course to Dover, where king Richard
attended him, with 4000 men; but God conducted that business, sending a contrary
wind, which landed the said earl in the northern parts of England; where
without all interruption landing, they which sent for him met him, and by
consent marched toward London: King Richard met him on the way with 40000 or
50000: as they came nigh one another to give battle, the most part Richards
people turned to the earl of Richmonds side: Yet that king (who despaired
otherwise to be maintained in his estate, than by a victory upon his enemy)
gave battle to the earl, and was slain fighting, after he had reigned
about a year: And the earl of Richmond went right to London with his victory,
and the slaying of that tirant: Then took he out of the monastery, king
Edwards two daughters, whereof he espoused the elder, and was straight made
king of England, called Henry the seventh, grandfather of the most ilustrious
Queen Elizabeth, at this present reigning.

Alfonsus king of Castile, the 11 of that name, who began his reign Anno 1310,
and Fr^isar. lib. 1. cap. 230. 231 241. 242 243.
reigned 40 years, left after him Peter and Henry his bastard sons. This king
Peter was Blanch his wife, daughter of duke Peter of Bourbon, sister of the
queen of France, and of the duchess of Sauoy: He made also to die, the mother
of the said Henry, his bastard brother, also banished and slew many lords and
barons of Castile: Insomuch as by his cruelty, he acquired the hatred of all
his subjects, yea of strangers his neighbors; so that his bastard brother,
being legitimated by the Pope, at the earnest suit of the nobility of Castile,
and the help of the king of France Charles le Sage (who sent him a good army
under the conduction of master John of Bourbon, county of March, and of
Messier Bertrand of Guesclin, after constable of France) he enterprised to
eject king Peter out of his kingdom of Castile, and to make himself king, and
did according to his enterprise: For, as soon as he was entered with forces
into Castile, all the country of all sorts, abandoned that cruel king Peter,
who fled and retired to Bourdeaux, toward the prince of Wales, praying him to
give him succors, against his bastard brother: This prince who was generous
and magnanimous, granted his demand, under color that the said Don Peter was
a little of his parentage (but in truth, moved with desire of glory, and to
acquire the reputation to have established a lawful king in his kingdom,
against a bastard which Peter in his kingdom: All succeeded so well unto him,
that he got a battle at Naverret against king Henry, who fled into France,
and king Peter was established in his kingdom: The prince of Wales exhorted
him to pardon all such as before had borne arms against him, and from thence
forward to become gentle and kind toward all his subjects, which he
faithfully promised to be: But he did no such thing, but again exercised his
cruelties and vengeances, as well upon the one as the other. In the mean
while, Henry the bastard, gathered a new army with the help of the king of
France, which was conducted by the said Messier Bertrand of Guesclin, and
unlooked for, they gave an assault (nigh unto Montiell in Castile) to Peter and
put him to flight, with a great overthrow of his people: King Peter saved
himself in a castle, which was incontinent besieged, and seeing himself evil
provided within it, he by stealth sought to save himself with a few people,
but he was encountered by the said Henry his bastard brother, who slew him with
his own hand: By which means the said Henry with his race remained peaceable
kings, in the kingdom of Castile, and king Peter finished his life unhappie by
reason of his great cruelty whereof he could never be chastised.

By the abovesaid examples it seems unto me, That a prince may easily judge
(if he be of any judgment) how pernicious and damnable the doctrine of
Machiavell is, to enstruct a prince to be cruel: for it is impossible that a
cruel prince should Machiavell for confirmation of his doctrine alleges the
example of the emperor Severus, who indeed was a man very cruel and
sanguinarie, yet reigned eighteen years, or there abouts, and dyed in his
bed. But unto this I answer that the cruelties of Severus seem to be
something excusable, because that he had for competitors in the empire Albinus
and Niger, two of greater nobility than he, and which had more friends:
Insomuch as it seemed necessary for him (to weaken the two competitors, and to
withstand their friends from hurting him) to use that cruelty to kill them;
Yet he pardoned many Albinians, and reconciled himself unto them: moreover
he exercised part of his cruelties, in the Pertinax, which was a lawful
cause; yet withal had he in himself many goodly and laudable virtues, as we
have in other places rehearsed: so that, as his cruelty made him much hated,
his other virtues wrought some mitigation thereof. Lastly, he made no other
end, than other cruel princes: for he dyed with sorrow (as says Herodian who
was in his time) for that he saw his children Dion in Seve. Herod. lib. 3.
such mortal enemies one against another, and that Bassianus the eldest, had
enterprised to kill his father, who yet did pardon him: But Bassianus pardoned
not Severus, that having exercised all these cruelties and slaughters, well to
establish the empire in his house, he was frustrated of his intention: For of
those two sons Bassianus and Geta, one slew the other; and Bassianus after he
had slain Geta, endured not long, but was slain by Macrinus, and left behind
him no children. Therefore although it seemed that God spared to punish Severus
cruelty, for his other good virtues, yet remained not he unpunished; for
seeing his son (who had learned of him to be cruel) durst enterprise to
slay him, he dyed of grief and sorrow: And we need not doubt but Severus
serves little or nothing to maintain the doctrine of Machiavell; neither is
one example so considerable against a million of others contrary: for men must
make a law of that which happens most often, and in many examples, not of
that which seldom happens.

When Anniball began to execute evil his businesses in Italy, and that the
Romans Titus Livius, Example touches men more than does callamitie and loss.

It was a great cruelty in the duke John of Bourgoigne, when he durst so much
enterprise, as to cause to be slain the duke of Orleance, the kings only
brother; Monst. lib. 1 cap. 38. 39. 112.
which cruelty cost many heads, and was cause of infinite evils in the kingdom
of France, and finally was the cause that the duke himself was massacred, on
the same John Petit, who durst affirm in terms of Theology, that that act
was goodly, praiseable, and worthy of remuneration. True it is that in the
time wherein we are, there are found many such doctors of the bottle, patrons,
and defenders of sins and vices, such as this John Petit: but as in the end
he was known to be a liar and a slanderer, and his propositions condemned
heretical; so God will cause his imitators of this time, in the end to be
found like him: but that the ass may appear by his ears, I have briefly set
down his oration.

The duke of Bourgoigne, having made himself the stronger in arms within
Paris, he took order that there should be held a Counsel, and an assembly,
therein to propose his justifications: In which Counsel assisted Monssier le
Daulphin,, the king of Sicile, the cardinal of Bar, the dukes of Berry, of
Bretaigne, of Lorraine and many contes, barons, and many other great lords,
and the rector of the University of Paris, accompanied with many doctors,
clearkes, and bourgesses: There was brought in by an usher, master John Petit a
doctor in Theology, before all those nobles, My most redoubted lords,
Monseignior the duke of Bourgiogne, contie of Flanders and Arthois, twice peer
of France, An oration of a doctor in Divinity.
and deane of Pears, is come before the most noble, and most high Majesty
royal, as to his sovereign lord, to do him reverence in all obedience, as he
is bound by four obligations, which commonly are set down by doctors in
Theology, and of the cannon and civil law; Of which bonds the first is, of
neighbor to his neighbor; the second, of parent toward his parent; the
third, of vassaile toward his lord; and the fourth will be, that the subject
not only offend not his lord, but also revenge such Monseignior le Daulphin
should espouse his daughter, and that the son of my said lord of Bourgoigne,
should marry madame Michelle daughter to his royal majesty; and as S. Gregory
says, Cum crescunt dona, crescunt rations donorum, that is, when gifts
increase, so do their obligations also. All these obligations are cause that
my lord of Bourgoigne has caused to slay the duke of Orleance lately dead,
which act was perpetrated for the very great good of the kings person, of his
children, and of all the realm, as I shall so sufficiently show, as every man
shall be satisfied: For the said Monseignior of Bourgoigne, has charged me by
express commandment Monseigneur S. John the Evangelist prince of Theologians:
And therefore I humbly beseech you, my most redoubted lords, and all this
company, if I say any thing which is not well said, to attribute it to my
simpleness and ignorance; that I may say with the Apostle, Ignorans feci
ideoque miserecordiam consecutus sum, that is, I did it of ignorance and
therefore am I pardoned. But some may here make a question, saying, It
appertains not to a Theologian to make the said justification, but rather to
a jurist: I answer, That then it belongs nothing to me, which am neither the
one nor the other, but a poor ignorant man, as I have said, whose sense and
memory fails: yet a man may say and maintain it, That it well belongs to
a doctor in Theology, to defend his master, and to say and Paul says, Radix
omnium maloru^ cupidit as, quam quidam appetentes, erraverunt a fide. These
words are in the first to Timothy, the sixth chapter, and are thus englished:
Lady Covetousness of all evils is the root, which Lucifer by his pride, fell
from Paradise into hell; and also because it is said in Ecclesiasticus, chap.
10. Initium omnis peccati, superbia: that is, Pride is the beginning and root
of all sin. All men may then argue from this place; Then is not dame
covetousness: But the answer hereunto is, that there are three manner of
covetousness, that is, of Honor, of Riches, and of Carnal delectation: but
the first kind comprehends pride, ergo, etc. This covetousness also of
honor, comprehends vain-glorie, wrath, hatred, envy; insomuch, as he that
is spotted with this kind of covetousness, is enflamed with vainglory, and
angry against his lord, whose place and domination he would gladly occupy,
and moreover hates and envieth him: And

For proof then of my Mayor, I will note and propose eight principal Verities,
by Monsieur de Bourgoigne. The first Verity is, That every subject and
vassale, which upon covetousness enterpriseth against the corporal health of
his king and sovereign lord, to take away his most noble seignorie, commits
the horrible crime of treason, and is worthy of double death, that is, of the
first and of the second. I prove it, because every disloyal subject and
vassale against his sovereign, sins mortally. Ergo, etc. Also I prove it by
S. Gregory, who says thus: Tyrannus est proprie qui non Dominus reputatur,
non just principatur, aut non principatu decoratur: That he is a tyrant,
which is not the true Lord, or which rules not justly, or which is not
honored by his principality. Also John the Evangelist, who says: Qui vivit
non morietur nec laedetur a morte secunda: that is to say, That he that shall
have victory upon lady Covetousness, and her three daughters, Ire, Hatred,
and Envy, shall not need to fear the second death, namely, eternal
damnation.

The second Verity is, that in the aforesaid case, wherein the subject or
vassale is worthy of double death; yet the vassale is more to be punished than
the simple subject; and a baron more than a simple vassale; and a county more
than a baron; and a duke more than a county; and a kings allie more than a
stranger. I prove it, because the obligation of a duke or the kings kinsman
toward the king, is by many degrees greater than of a county, baron, or of a
vassale: Ergo, then the punishment must be in an higher degree: And that my
consequence is good, I prove it, because Gregory: Cum crescunt dona, crescunt
rations donorum. As gifts increase, so ought the reasons of gifts (that is
obligations) to do: I prove also my said Verity by another argument. It is a
greater scandale, that a duke or the kings allie should go about to take away
the kings seignorie, Ergo then, the punishment ought to be greater, seeing the
scandale is greater. Thirdly, I prove my said Verity, because there is a
greater peril of a great man than of a little; therefore the remedy of
punishment ought to be greater to withdraw great men from yielding and obeying
the enemy of mankind, and dame Covetousness.

The third Verity is, That in the case aforesaid, when the vassale commits
treason, meriting double death, then is it lawful for every subject, according
to the laws moral, natural, and divine, to kill without any command that
traitor and disloyal tyrant; and it is not only lawful, but also honorable
and meritorious. I prove this verity by twelve reasons in the honor of holy
Theology: The first, of a doctor, Qui ad liberatioonem patriae, tyrannum
occidit praemium accipit, and facit opus laudabile and meritorium. That is: He
which sleyeth a tyrant, to deliver his country, receives a reward, and does a
laudable and a meritorious work. The second authority is taken out of that
excellent doctor Salceber in his book of Policraton, who says: Amico adulari
non licet, sedaurem Tyranni mulcere licitum est, quia ei licet adulari quem
licet occidere: that is: It is not lawful for any to flatter his friend, but
with fair words he may well bring a tyrant asleep, for it is lawful to kill
him. The third authority is of many doctors in Theology, all which I set
down but for one, that I may not exceed the number of three, namely, of
Richard de Mivile, Alexander de Halles, and Astensis, which Peter, who says:
Subditi estote Regi quasi praecellenti: that is, Let each man obey his king, as
the most excellent and sovereign. My three second reasons of the twelve, are
founded upon the authority of three morrall philosophers. The first, Licitum
and laudabile est cuilibet subditorum occidere tyrannum: that is, It is lawful
and praiseworthie for every man to sley a tyrant. The second authority is from
the noble morallist Tully, who says in his Offices, That they which killed
Julius Caesar, were worthy of praise, because he had usurped the seignorie of
Rome by tyranny. The third authority is out of Boccace, who says: That men
may well conspire and employ arms against a tyrant; and that it is a thing
most holy and necessary, Moses, who without authority slew the Egyptian: who
tyrannized over the people of Irael: For at that time Moses had not the
authority of a judge over the people of Israel, which was delivered unto him
nigh forty years after that he had slain the Egyptian. The second
authority is the example of Phineas, who without any commandment slew the
duke Zambry, because he allied him Phineas was commended and reverenced in
three things, in love, honor, and riches. The third authority is that of S.
Michael the archangell, who without the commandment of God or any other,
fought against the tyrant Lucifer, so disloyal to God his sovereign, who went
about to usurp the seignorie of God: The said S. Michael was favorably
rewarded in three things, that is, in honor, love, and riches: in love,
because God loved him more than any other Angel: in honor, because God made
him a perpetual prince of the heavenly host: in riches, because God gave him
riches as much as he desired or could carry away: so it appears, that my
third Verity is well proved by twelve reasons, in the name of the twelve
Apostles: of which reasons, three are taken from the holy Theologians, three
from Moralists, and three from Legists,

My fourth Verity is this: It is more meritorious and honorable, that a
tyrant be slain by the kings parents, than by a stranger; and by a duke, than
by a county; and by a barron, than by a simple vassale; because therein
shines more the love and obedience of the sleyer, and is more honorable to
the king to be revenged of a great man, than a base and mean man.

My fifth Verity is: That alliances, promises, oaths, or confederations ought
not to be kept, if for keeping them, there come any prejudice to the prince or
to the commonweal; Ergo then we must observe the obligation toward the
prince and commonwealth, and break all other obligations, oaths, and
confederations. Also in arguing thus: Whenever a man does a thing better than
that which he swears to do, he is not perjured in doing that better thing, and
omitting that thing which he swore to do (as expressly the master says of
Sentences in the last of the third) but in this propounded case, it is better
to kill a tyrant, although a man have Ergo then it is no perjurie nor evil
done, to sley a tyrant against his sworn promise, alliance, or confederation
that he has with him. Also Isiodorus in his book of sovereign good says,
That we must not observe an oath, whereby a man shall be forced rashly to
commit an evil: but in our case a man shall be forced to an evil by such a
promise and oath: Ergo he must then not observe it.

The sixth Verity is: That if so it happen, that the alliances, oaths, or
confederations, turn to the prejudice of one of the promisers, he is in
nothing bound to keep them. This verity is prooved in thus arguing: The end of
every commandment is charity, as the Apostle says: but the chief charity
begins at our selves: Ergo the commandment to observe the faith and
promise, ought not to be observed, if Frangenti fidem, fides frangatur eidem:
He that breaks faith, faith ought to be broken to him again: Also in all
promises that are made, every man must include, If it please God: But certain
it is, it pleases not God, that we should do any thing against the law and
order of charity: Ergo, etc.

The seventh Verity is: That to every subject it is lawful, honorable, and
meritorious Boccace above alleged: Also by the example of king Iehu, who
dissembled to approve the service of Baal, to trap the sacrificers, for which
he was praised: Also by the example of Ioiada, who by treason caused Athalia to
be slain, for which he was praised: Also of Judith, who slew Holofernes by
dissimulation, whereupon she is praised: And this is the fittest death for
tyrants to die on, that is, to be slain villanously by watchings and
espiements.

The eight Truth is: That every subject which enterpriseth and works against
his sovereign lord by Necromancie and invocation of devils for covetousness
to have the crown, is a violator of the Catholic faith, and worthy of
double death, Bonaventure (in his second book, Distinction the sixth) says,
That the devil never pleases the will of such men, but first idolatry and
infidelity are mingled together: For as faith serves much to the operation of
the miracles of God, so infidelity is as requisite in the operation of
divellish things: The devil also will do nothing for such men, unless they
agree to yield him the domination over them, whereof he is very desirous: Also
that great doctor in the ninth article, in Secunda Secundae, says and
affirms, That invocations of devils never come to effect without a foregoing
of a corruption of faith, idolatry, and an express compact with devils. And
this opinion do the venerable doctors, Alexander de Hales, Richard de Mivile,
and Astensis hold, and commonly all the other doctors

Here you see my eight Verities well proved: I come now to eight Correlatives.
The first is: If it come to pass, that in the case aforesaid, these invocators
of devils and traito^^ ^o the king be imprisoned, and some of their partakers
deliver or cause to deliver them he ought to be punished with the same
punishment as they are themselves, namely, with the first and second death.
Secondly, every subject that makes a bargain with any man to empoyson his
sovereign lord, although the enterprise come not to effect, is also well
worthy of death. Thirdly, every subject that by dissimulation of pastime
causes apparel to be made to put on his sovereign lord, and to put fire
therein, thinking to burn him, is also worthy of double death. Dathan, Core,
and Abiron. Eighthly, the subject which by empoysonments and viands, seeks to
cause the king or his children to die, is worthy of the aforesaid death. The
last is, that every subject, which with soldiers causes the people and
country of his sovereign to be eaten up and exiled, and which takes and
distributeth his money at his pleasure, and makes it serve his turn to procure
alliances with his lords enemies, ought to be punished as a very tyrant with
the first and second death. And here I make an end of my Mayor of the
justification Monsieur the duke of Bourgoigne.

But I come now to declare my Minor, wherein I have showed, That Lewis late duke
of Orleance, was so much embraced with lady Covetousness, of the honors and
riches of this world, that he would have taken away the seignorie and crown
of France, from the king his brother and his children, by temptation of the
enemy of hell, using the aforesaid means: for he found an Apostata monk,
expert in the divellish art, unto whom he gave a ring and a sword, to
consecrate them to the devil: This monk went into a solitary place, behind a
bush, where he put off all his garments to his shirt, and fell on his knees, so
invocating devils: Straight there appeared two devils, apparelled in dark
green, whereof the one was called Hernias, and Estramain: Then this monk did
unto them as great reverence and honor as he could do to God our Savior: and
one of the devils took the ring, and the other the sword, and after vanished
away; the monk went away also. He returned into that place again, and there
found the ring, having a red color, and the sword, wherewith he thought to
have slain the king: but by the help of God, and of the most excellent ladies
of Berry and Bourgoigne, the king escaped. Also the said duke of Orleance made
an alliance and confederation with the duke of Lancaster, who in like manner
warred against king Richard of England his lord, as is abovesaid. Item, He went
about to have carried away the queen and her children, which he meant to have
carried into the county of Luxembrough, to take his will of Item, He
practiced to make Monseignior le Daulphin eat an impoysoned apple, which was
given to a child, who was charged to give it to none but to the said Daulphin:
but it so happened, that the child gave it to one of the sons of the said
duke of Orleance, who di^d thereof. Item, The said duke has always favored
the Pope in the extraction of money out of the kingdom, to obtain of him a
declaration against the king and his generation of inhabilitie to hold the
kingdom, and to give it unto him. Item, He has held armed men in the fields
by the space of 14 or 15 years, which did nothing but pill, exile, rob,
ransack, and sley the poor people, and force women and maids. Item, He laid
tallages upon the kings subjects, and employed the silver in making alliances
Monseignior le Bourgoigne, reserveth to declare in time and place.

It follows then by good consequence, that my said lord of Bourgoigne
Conclusion
ought not to be blamed for sleying the said duke of Orleance, and that the
king should like that deed well, and to authorize the same as much as were
needful: And besides, he ought to be rewarded in three especial things, that
is, in Love, Honor, and Riches, as were S. Michaell the archangell, and the
most valiant Phineas: that is to say (as I think in my gross and rude
understanding) That the king our lord ought more than before to bear amity,
loyalty, and good reputation

Here is in substance the Oration of that venerable doctor in Theology, unto
which I have not added one word, only I have shortened certain long and
reiterated allegations, whereby might be seen the beastliness of this our
master, a man hired to justify one of the most execrable murders that ever was
committed. Very Alexander de Hales, Salceber, Mivile, and other like. His
Correlatives and his Minor, are the false imputations wherewith the duke of
Bourgoigne charged the duke of Orleance. Moreover, this Oration was reviewed by
the masters of the faculty of Michael slew Lucifer without Gods commandment.
Thirdly, Phineas killed Zambry without the commandment of God. Fourthly, Moses
slew the Egyptian without the commandment of God. Fifthly, Judith sinned not
in flattering Holofernes, nor John in lying, that he would honor Baal. Sixthly,
it is not always perjurie, when a man does that, which he has sworn not to
do. Which articles having been declared heretical, they were condemned to be
burnt publickely, as also M. John Petits bones, who had maintained them (for he
was at this judgment dead and buried at Hesdin) and the

Surely it is a strange thing and very deplorable, that there should be any
such men in the world, which durst maintain with reasons so horrible a crime
far from all common sense, and all reason and humanity, as is a massacre
done and executed practisedly, without any form of justice. Is not this to
call things with contrary names, that is, to call injustice, by the name of
justice; cruelty, by the name of clemency; night, by the name of light;
evil, by the name of good, and the devil by the name of an Angel? Is not
this to praise that which is to be despised and detested, to follow that which
is to be fled, to love that which is to be hated, to bring into a confusion
Machiavell says to the contrary) it will not be to any evil purpose now to
show; That kindness, clemency, and goodness, are the true means to establish
a princes estate in firmitie and assurance: But because we shall handle
hereafter another Maxim, where it shall be more proper to discourse this
matter, we will reserve the speaking thereof to that place.

9. Maxim.
It is better for a Prince to be feared than loved.
MEn (says our Florentine) do love as it please them, and do fear

THis Maxim is a saying or proverb, which our elders have attributed Oderint
dum metuant: that is, Let them hate, so be it they fear. Caius Caligula
usurped this ancient proverb, as Suetonius says, and put it in practice
during all the time of his reign; Sucto. in Caligula, cap. 30
and he ended (as commonly such princes do end) which will rather be feared
than loved, as in another place we have said. The emperor Tiberius would
needs something mitigate this proverb, not allowing to make himself feared,
and yet disdained not hatred: For he was wont to say, as by the way of a
proverb or device: Oderint dum probent, that is, Let them hate, so they allow.
But it seems he made an evil match in coupling hatred with approbation: for
Nero, when he perceived that by his cruelties he was feared and redoubted, he
bragged, that none of them which had been emperors before him, had any
understanding how to command, neither knew they the power they had, to make
themselves be obeyed: But that power was well made known to himself, for men
made him well to feel* That power evil exercised, acquireth hatred to him
that exercises it, and hatred, ruin and destruction: So happened it to
Caligula, so to Tiberius, and

As for that which Machiavell says, That the prince is feared as he will, and
as it pleases him: If this were true, all should go well for him: for he
would always be so feared, as none should oppose themselves against his
desseignes and commandments, but that every one should come under the yoke,
and obey him purely and simply: But experience shows us the contrary, and
makes us see and know, That a Equity is the sinew of the commandment.
the obeyers, shall never be well put in action and practiced, unless it be
for

And as for that which Machiavell says, That it is very hard for a prince to
be feared and loved together, it is clean contrary: For there is nothing
more easy for A prince may well be seated and loved together.
a prince, than to obtain them both, as reason shows it: Because it is
certain, that a prince which maintains his subjects in good peace, keeps
them from oppressions, causing all them to be punished, which would oppress
them, and which will maintain their liberties, and punish the breakers of
them, and who will observe a good policy in his country, that therein there
may be a free and assured commerce, without imposition of tributes or burdens,
and he that shall cause good justice to be ministered to every one, it is
certain, that such a prince shall be greatly beloved of his Augustus, Traian,
Adrian, Antonine, and others, which were together feared, beloved, and
reverenced. I could here allege almost all our auncestor kings of France,
which with good justice, were not only redoubted of their subjects, but also
of all their neighbors: yea, that good reputation of justice in them, was a
cause, that often strange princes

10. Maxim.
A Prince ought not to trust in the amity of men.
MEn generally (says Machiavell) are full of ingratitude, variable, Cap. 17.
of a Prince.


AS well this Maxim as the former, is a plain tyrannous precept: For as says
the Poet Aeschilus:

No friend to trust, what common more? Amian. Marcell. lib. 16.

Each tyrant has this ill in store.
This is the reason why Denis the tyrant of Sicile, caused a strong house to be
built, where he dwelt, environed with deep ditches full of water on all sides,
over which there was no entry but a draw bridge, which was every night taken
in by himself, and certain lose planks of the bridge brought into his bed
chamber, which ever the next morning he carried himself to the bridge again:
He caused also his daughters to learn to be barbars, to poule and trim his
head and beard, and all this did he, because he durst trust no man in Commodus
a cruel tyrant also, used another more Lamp. in Commod.
sure receipt: For, trusting no man with his hair of head or beard, he
himself burnt them with a candle. I leave you to think, if such people be
miserable, whose consciences are tormented in such sort, that it judges them
worthy to have all the world for a capital enemy, in such sort as they dare
put no confidence in any, but are in continual fear and torment.

Far contrary from this doctrine of Machiavell, is the exhortation which
Misipsa ^a^ust in bello Iugurth
Iugurtha and his other children, admonishing them amongst themselves to
maintain a good amity and concord: It is not (says he) puissant armies, nor
great treasures, by the means of which a prince ought to conserve and
maintain his estate, but by his friends, which are not acquired, either by
force of arms, or by gold and silver, but by good offices and loialtie: But
who ought to be a more loiall friend than one brother to another? or whom can
he trust, who shall be an enemy to his own blood? I leave you a kingdom
firm and assured, if you be good; but feeble and weak if you be wicked: for
by concord small things increase, but by discord great things fall to ruin.
Behold a brief exhortation, but very weighty, to show how necessary it is to
have good Silla made to king Boccus of Mauritania: We are very joyful (said
he) that thou rather seek to be a friend, than an enemy of the Roman
people: for, even from her birth, the Roman people being poor, have always
better loved to acquire friends than slaves and servants, and have ever thought
it more assured to command voluntary people, than any by constraint: King
Boccus then cannot choose a better amity than ours, which can both favor thee,
and aid thee, and will never hurt thee; and to say truth, neither we, nor any
other can have too many friends.

The amity and friends which a prince may obtain by a good and just
government, may serve so to assure him of every man in his estate, that he
shall have Traian, who often went to visit and see his friends, only
accompanied with four Dion in Traian.
or five gentlemen, without any guard of soldiers. The like did the ancient
kings of France, which knew not that kind of guard we have now, of gunners and
halberdiers, but ordinarily marched without other company than gentlemen,
which only bare their swords about them.

Amity (says Cicero) is the true bond of all humane society; and whosoever
will take amity from amongst men, as Machiavell does from amongst princes, he
seeks to take away all pleasure, solace, contentment and assurance that can
be amongst humane creatures: For the friend is another our self, with whom
we rejoice Cicero, Plutarch, and other great philosophers, have learnedly
discoursed, unto which I send them, which will more amply understand

I will not deny, but many such friends will be found, like them whereof
Machiavell speaks; which will seem to be our friends, as long as they hope
to draw any profit from us, and which will make us fair offers, when they see
we have need, but will turn their backs in our necessities: There are
indeed but too many such, and we are but too often deceived with them; yet
we may not disdain the good for the evil; neither may we defame friendship,
for the vices and incommodities Augustus Caesar observed, is worthy
observation: for he did not easily retain every man in his friendship and
familiarity, but ever took time to prove and find their Sueton. in Aug.
lib. 66.
virtues, fidelity and loyalty. Such as he knew to be virtuous people, and
which would freely tell him the truth of all things (as did that good and wise
Maecenas) Euripides:

Adversity the best and certain'st friends does get;
Prosperity both good and evil alike does fit.
11. Maxim.
A prince which would have any man to dye, he must seek out some apparent
color thereof, and then he shall not be blamed, if so be that he leave his
inheritance and goods to his children.
WHen a prince (says master Nicholas) will pursue the death Cap. 17. Of the
prince.
of any man, he ought to color it with some just color; and when he puts him
to death, he must abstain from

THis is also another tyrannical precept, like to the former. For it Corn.
Taci. Annals lib. 1 and 4.
Domitian, who for light and no causes, took occasion to make many great
Roman lords to dye, which were of him suspected, as to tyrants all good and
virtuous men are ordinarily, which are better than themselves. The emperor
Tiberius (says Tacitus) at the beginning of his reign, hated men of eminent
virtue, and such also as were extremely vicious, suspecting the virtue of
some, and fearing to be dishonored, and despised by the vicious: But after he
came Machiavell, against many virtuous and honorable men: for, he caused to
dye a learned and most excellent man called Cremutius Cordus, because he writ
an history, wherein he praised Cassius and Brutus: He slew also Aemylius
Scaurus, for writing a tragoedie which pleased him not, and many other like
railors, whereby he sought to cover his tyranny. Nero likewise after he had
slain his mother, writ lies to the Senate, to be published all over, how he
had discovered a great conspiration, that his mother had intended against him,
to cause his death; and that he was constrained to sley her, to prevent her.
In like sort Caracalla after he had slain Geta his brother, caused a fame to
be spread all over, that Machiavell teaches: And there are none at this day,
which cannot examplifie this position, with many late and fresh examples in our
time. For the massacres of Paris, executed on S. Bartholomewes day, and the
execution after, made of captain Briquemand, of Maistre Arnand of Carignes, of
contie Mongomery, and of the lord of Monbrum, and other like, were all colored
with false imputations, by these Messers Machiavellists, and by wicked judges
their slaves, as every one knows.

And as for that which Machiavell says, That the children, of such as are
unjustly Dion in Neroue. and in A^to. Carac.
I believe few men will accord with him, in this point, for every one which
has a good man's heart, will sooner make account of honor and life, than of
goods. But certain it is, if the successor, his son or other kinsman,
despise and make no account to pursue by lawful means, that justice be done,
for the unjust death of the slain men, whom he succeeds, that he leeseth
his honor, and by the civil laws is culpable and unworthie of the
succession. Moreover the injury done in the person of the father, is reputed
done to the son himself: and the contrary: As also every man esteems
himself to suffer injury, when any of his parents or friends do suffer it:
Insomuch as such violent executions are without doubt more intolerable,
Machiavellists hold for a Maxim, That a dead man biteth not or makes no war,
yet the death of a man, oftentimes is the cause of many deaths, and of great
effusion of blood, as more at large shall be said, in another place.

12. Maxim.
A prince ought to follow the nature of the Lion, and of the Fox: not of
YOu must understand (says this Florentine) that men fight in two manners: the
one with laws, when matters Cap. 18. 19. Of the prince.
are handled by reason: the other with force: The first is proper to men, which
have the use of reason: The second appertains to beasts, which have neither
reason nor intelligence: But because the first is not sufficient to keep men
and to maintain them, in inioying of things belonging unto Chiron the
Centaure, half a man and half a beast, was given as an instructor for the
prince Achilles: For hereby he gave to understand, that a prince ought to
show himself a man and a beast together. A prince then being constrained well
to know how to counterfeit the beast, he ought amongst all beasts to choose the
complexion of the Didius Iulianus knevv well how to play the Fox, to come to
the empire, in promising men of war great sommes of money, to obtain the
empire: For after he was chosen; he played Severus, who was cunning to play
both, came against him with great force; insomuch as he was slain by his
own soldiers of his guarde, which went to Severus side. Severus seeing that
the captain Albinus, was in Gaul, with a puissant army; and captain Niger
in Levant likewise with a great army, he played the Fox, to allure them by
fair words: that they would not hinder him to obtain the empire: for he
feared them, because they had great forces in their hands, and that they were
more noble, and of more ancient houses than he: He made them great promises,
especially he promised Albinus to associate him in the empire, and to give
him the name and authority of Caesar, which was the like title, as at this
day is king of the Romans: And as for Niger, he held his children in his
hands as hostages, under color of honor and favor, so that he the less
feared him. As soon as he had thus by playing the Fox and deceit, stayed
Albinus and Niger, he ended his enterprise, to make himself known a
peaceable emperor: But after this, taking unto him the nature of the Lion, he
turned his forces against Albinus and Niger, and overcame them both, one after
another: So that by knowing well how to play these two beasts, the Lion and
the Fox, he made himself a peaceable emperor Maximin, after he was elected
emperor by the soldiers of his host, could not play one part of the Fox, but
only of the Lion, which was the cause that he endured not, and that many were
elected, to hinder his quiet possession of the empire, insomuch as in the end,
he was overthrovvne and slain of his own soldiers.

MAchiavell has not yet handled a discourse more worthy of Machiavelists,
will say, that herein is hid a secret of philosophy, and that Machiavell
means that a prince should be as subtle as a Fox, and violent like a Lion;
not that he must go with four feet, or that he must dwell in the deserts of
Arabia, or in holes in woods, or commit other such like actions, as the Fox and
Lion do. Well I am content to agree unto them this moral sense; and that
their master has reason on his side, and he with whom he has to do,
refuses to come to reason, Force is a servant of reason.
to his right use, is no other thing but a servant of reason, which obeys her
in all her commandments: and therefore therein there is nothing of a beast,
and they which thus employ their forces, do nothing that holds of a beast. As
for guile and subtlety, I say likewise, that in war a man may lawfully use
subtilties against his enemies, if so be his faith and the rights of war be
not violated, and this is not Machiavell is of another mind, namely, That a
prince is not bound unto right, faith, or religious promise, to hinder him that
he may not use now force, and now subtlety, according as the one or the other
may best serve him, to come to the end he pretends: For of faith and
promise, or of right and reason, men may not speak in Machiavels school,
unless it be to mock at them, which esteem such, most holy bands of humane
society: but concerning faith and promises, we shall have another Maxim,
wherein we shall rip up this matter to the bottom: Machiavell means in his
speech, do not ever succeed well to them who use them, but most commonly they
fall into their own nets.

When Anniball (by means of an ambuscado) had entrapped the captain Tit.
Livius, lib. 7. Dec. 3. and lib. 3. Dec. 4.
Marcellus, lieutenant general of the Roman army (who was slain upon the
place) he found about him his sealing ring: he considered straight upon a
subtle device, namely, to write unto the Salapians (which dwelt nigh) in the
name of Marcellus, by which he sent them word, that the next night he would
come into Salapia, and that they should hold the garrison of the town ready.
Crispinus, the lieutenant of Marcellus, knowing Anniball to be a master of
subtle inventions; doubting this, sent Marcellus was dead, and his ring in
Annibals hands, and that they should believe no letter under the name of
Marcellus: The Salapians having received this advertisment, and Annibals
letters, also put their garrison in arms; and as Anniball approached the town,
he caused such to march first as could speak the Roman tongue: As soon as they
arrived at the gates, they called the guards thereof, which playing well their
parts, at the last took up the port-cullis on high, and suffered about six
hundred of Annibals soldiers to enter in: then let they fall the port-cullis,
and cut in pieces all them which entered, which caused Anniball thus to be taken
in his own net. Thus was he known and discovered for a Fox, so as often they
turned his own nets upon him, as they do upon Foxes, when Counsel of
subtlety perilous.
they catch them, by bending their nets backward. And truly, it is most often
seen, that such subtilties as taste of treachery and disloyalty, succeed not
well: For as captain Quintius said to the Aetolians: Subtle and audacious
counsels are at the first very agreeable and pleasant, but to guide, they are
difficill and hard, and full of sorrow in the end.

Concerning this subtlety and perfidious deceit, a notable advice is given by
the Tit. Livius, lib. 2. Dec. 5.
Senate of the ancient Romans. The Romans being upon the point to move war
Perseus king of Macedonie, they first sent ambassadors unto him, and amongst
them, Martius Phillippus, to know the deseignes of that king, and to try if he
would repair the faults and injuries which he had committed against the
Romans. The said ambassadors found that king but slenderly prepared for war,
and altogether Tit. Livius, lib. 2. Dec. 5.
evil disposed to acknowledge or repair his faults: Therefore making him
understand, that he need to look for nothing at the Romans hands but amity,
and that at their hands he might easily look for a good peace or truce, with
this hope leaving him, they returned to Rome. Soon after they were arrived,
they declared in full to the Senate, all that they had done in Macedonie, and
especially, how they deceived king Perseus, in making him believe, that he
might at his pleasure have peace or Treaties of craftiness rejected of the
Romans
Pyrrhus their enemy, who offered to poison his master for a certain sum of
silver, but they discovered to the king the disloyalty of the Physician: that
also by this said sincerity they would Machiavell makes such great account.

In the year 1383, the duke of Anjou, brother of king Charles le Sage, went
into Italy with a puissant army to conquer Naples and Sicilie: Amongst other
lords which accompanied him in this voyage, was the earl of Savoy, who led
with him a good company of knights: as they were in Poville and Calabria,
seeing none to resist them, they begun straight to devise of a place where they
might assuredly have resistance: and it was made known to the duke of Anjou,
that the strongest place of all that country, was the Egge-castle of Naples,
which is builded in the sea, within which, Charles de la Paix, a competitor of
the said kingdom of Naples, remained: The duke of Anjou enquired by what
means he might come to have it: There came then straight an Enchanter unto
him, who said, that he would help him unto Charles de la Paix, who now held
it. And how is that, answered the duke? Sir, answered the Enchanter, I will
cause a gross and thick cloud to arise out of the sea, which shall have the
form of a bridge, whereof your enemies shall be so afraid, that they shall
yield themselves to you: Yea but (replied the duke) can men pass upon that
bridge: Sir (said the Enchanter) I will not assure that, for as soon as any do
make the sign of the cross as they pass, or do any way cross their legs or
their arms, or otherwise, all will fall to the ground, and go to nothing. The
Charles, which now possesses it, obtained it by my means; and I know he
fears me more than all the forces that can come against it: Well (replied the
Earl) I will deliver him from that fear, and I will not have him say, that so
many brave knights as we are, could not vanquish so weak an enemy as Charles
de la Paix is, but by the means Severus his using of deceit, so it does not to
all men, nor to the most part: and Severus was greatly diffamed for such
frauds, but his other virtues made him prosper.

But should we call this beastliness, or malice, which Machiavell says of
Chiron? or has he read, that Chiron was both a man and a beast? Who has told
him, that he was delivered to the prince Achilles, to teach him that goodly
knowledge to be both a man and a beast? Xenophon says, that Chiron was
Jupiters brother (so great a Xenoph. de Ven^t.
man he makes him) full of great knowledge, and of all virtue, generositie,
piety, and justice: nay he says further, that Aesculapius, Nestor,
Amphiaraus, Peleus, Telamon, Theseus, Ulysses, Castor, Pollux, Aeneas,
Achilles, and almost all great persons, which the Grecians place amongst their
gods, of him learned these virtues, whereby they have obtained immortal
praise, and the reputation to be gods: He says also, that Chiron was not in
the time of Achilles, but long time before: but because the prince Achilles was
instructed and nourished in his discipline, virtue, and manner of life, men say
he was Achilles his instructor. True it is, that the Poets have called him a
Centaure, because he took great pleasure in riding of horses, and in hunting,
which are exercises well beseeming a prince: But although he loved horses, and
the exercise of knighthood, yet was he never esteemed to hold any thing of a
beast, but rather of the divinity, as being endowed with all excellent
virtues, which bring men nigh God, and take them fardest from beasts. And
therefore the beastly malice of Machiavell is seen, in perverslie abusing the
example of that valiant and generous prince Achilles, to persuade a prince not
to stick to govern himself after the imitation of beasts; seeing that
Achilles was instructed, as is said, by Chiron the Centaure, Chiron rather held
of divinity, than of a beast, neither was Achilles instructed, but in all
heroical virtues: And we never read, that he ever used any Foxlike subtlety
or unlawful policy, or any other thing unwoorthie of a magnanimous prince,
well nourished and instructed in all high and royal virtues.

But since Machiavell travaileth so much to persuade princes to learn how to

13. Maxim.
Cruelty which tends to a good end is not to be reprehended.
ROmulus (says Machiavell) at the beginning of his kingdom, Discourse, l^b. 1.
slew Remus his brother; and afterward consented to the death of Tatius
Sabinus, king of the Sabines, whom he associated in his roialtie, that he might
unite together in one same city, the two people, the Romans and Sabines: It
would seem to many men of gross conceit, that Romulus proceeded evil, to
begin his kingdom with M. Nicholas) I am of a far other opinion: For it is a
general Maxim, That the state of the Commonwealth cannot be well laid and
compounded of new laws, if the Lavvmakers and Judges be many, but there ought
to be no more than one only person and spirit, to do, rule, and ordain all:
And therefore the prince which desires to come to that point, is not worthy
of any reprehension, if he commit any extraordinary exploit to come thereunto:
For Romulus vvorthie of praise, that he himself slew his brother, and caused
to sley Tatius his companion, that he alone might establish a good policy at
Rome, as after he did, erecting there a Senate, by which he was counseled
in all his affairs both of peace and war, and they Agis, king of Sparta,
who sought to conform the corrupted state of the Lacedaemonians, and to
establish in use, the ancient ordinances of Licurgus, but knowing that the
Ephori might hinder and contradict him in his deseignes, he caused them all to
be slain, whereby he got great renown, yea, as much or rather greater than
Licurgus himself, the first author of such laws: True it is, that Agis could
not make an end of his good entents and purposes, because of the unluckie
deseignes of the Macedonians, who making war upon him, vanquished him

THere was never murder nor cruelty, which is not colored with some pretext
or show of good: some cover themselves with justice, affirming all that they
do, to be founded upon a good reason and equity, and that justice would have
done no less, than that which they have executed; and that their execution is
the shortest way of justice, which would otherwise have been too long: so that
in place of murderers, cut-throates and massacrers, they are not ashamed to
call themselves abbreviators Machiavell: Murderers therefore and massacrers,
may well from henceforth cover themselves, with the name of abreviators of
justice, without reprehension, seeing officers of justice take also that trade
upon them, and cause as unjust and wicked executions to be done as they. Both
of these truly (according to this Maxim of Machiavell) do pretend for their
mischievous wickedness, a laudable end, and Machiavells doctrine, there cannot
be found so cruel a tyrant and murderer, but he should be justified, praised
and remunerated, because all murders, massacres, and assasinates, are always
found done to a good end, Foxes, according to their masters doctrine, yet in
the end, they will be always known Murder is always murder, to whatsoever end
it be done.
Machiavells doctrine, which is that they themselves which practice it, bring
evil to themselves, and are discryed, hated and evil beloved of all men.

The other inconvenience, which follows this Maxim, is that, if the prince
permit Cruelty overthrows justice.
men to commit murders, under color of a good intent and end, he shall break
the order of justice, which he ought to observe, in the punishment of
offenders, and so shall turn all upside down, and bring his estate and
country into confusion and peril: for when justice goes evil, all goes
evil, and when well, all goes well, as in another place shall be showed more
at full. Murders and massacres also never remain long unpunished; for God
incontinent sendes them their reward, as came to Romulus (Machiavells own
example) who was an unjust murderer, and in the end was murdered himself. And
in our time we see examples enough, and I believe we shall see more, in such
as the hand of God has not yet touched: But amongst these evils and
inconveniences, which ordinarily lay hold of these murderers, Paul says, That
we must not do evil, that good may come thereof: But I have already said in
another place, thar I will not employ the sacred armor of the holy scripture,
to fight against this profane and wicked Atheist, but I will still give him
this advantage, to contend with his own arms; namely, with profane authors,
which were not Christians, and which herein alone resemble him; for in other
things he holds nothing of them, and especially in the matter whereof we
speak, they have been most far from his detestable doctrine.

When Tarquin the proud king of Rome, saw that he had so behaved himself,
Titus Livius lib. 1. 21. Dec.
Machiavell, that he became extremely hated of all men, in such sort, as his
subjects not being able to bear his tyranny, did drive him out of his
kingdom, where he miserably died.

And so much there wants, that the ancient Romans delighted in massacring
Metius Suffetius Albanois, who was with four horses drawn to death, for a
strange and damnable treason by him intended: For although he merited to be so
handled, yet the Romans had the cruelty of the punishment in so great
disdain and detestation, that every body turned away their eyes (says Titus
Livius) seeing so villainous a spectable: And it was the first and last time
that ever they used that rigorous punishment. Likewise it greatly displeased
the Romans, that some (thinking to do well) caused to be slain a Tribune of
the people, a very seditious Genutius, who ceased not to trouble the
commonwealth, by divisions, whereby he stirred the common people to uproares:
If Genutius had had his lawful trial, it is likely he would have been
condemned: but therein there was this mischief, that none durst lay hold upon
him, for the reverence of his estate, during that year, but he must needs
have been suffered either to do what he would, or else to resist his
dessignes by other means, then by accusation, and not at all to condemn him,
before he were out of his office: This seemed a goodly color to dispatch him,
to shun seditions and troubles, which this Tribune raised, yet the execution
which was made without course of law, was found naught, and of an evil example
and consequence, and was the cause of great mischiefs and broils

And as for that which Machiavell writes, that Romulus caused to slay Tatius
Dioni. Halic. lib. 2. Titus Livi. lib. 1. Dec. 8.
his companion in the kingdom, the better to rule and govern the town of
Rome, this is false: for histories do witness, that after he had caused this
execution to be made, he became cruel and proud, toward the Senators,
exercising tyranny in many things, insomuch as the Senators themselves slew
him, even in the senate house, and cut him in little pieces, whereof every man
took one piece in his bosom: so that the body of Romulus was not found: for
they hired one to say that he did see the body fly into heaven, and the said
Senators helping this brute and report, Plutarch in Romulo.
placed him in the letanie of their Gods, and persuaded the people, that he
ascended Romulus his reward, for the murdering of his brother Remus, and his
companion Tatius, and they murdered him, as he had done them. For briefly it
is a general rule, that murderers are always murdered, which rule has
seldom any exceptions.

But whereas Machiavell says, That well to rule and govern a common wealth,
there would be but one person to meddle therein, there has been always the
contrary Titu^ Livi. lib. 3. Dec. 8.
practiced. When the Romans thought it good, by good laws and ordinances to
govern the estate of their common weal, they considered, that the number of
two Consuls (which were their sovereign magistrates) were too few, and
therefore they abrogated and took them clean away, and elected ren men in
their places, Dionisius. 14 Halic. lib. 10


As touching that which Machiavell says, of Agis, Plutarch in his life,
speaks otherwise thereof; for he says, that he was the most meek and
quiet man, in Plut. in Agid
the world, who sought to reform the estate of Sparta, by all good and honest
means, and to bring into force and use, the ancient laws of Licurgus: and
because the Ephori opposed themselves against his desseignes and purposes, he
practiced that Lysander and Agesilaus, should be advanced to the estate of
Ephori, as they were: But Agesilaus, overtaken with avarice, refused to stick
to the effecting of this good purpose of king Agis, so that he could not any
way bring to pass that Plutarch says, he speaks no word that Agis should
cause the Ephori to be slain, but contrary that the Ephori brought Agis to
his death, neither speaks he of any enterprise of the Macedonians: And I know
not where Machiavell has fished for that he here writes, unles he take it
out of his own brain, and then owes he nothing to any man, seeing it is his
own: But howsoever it be, he can learn it of no author, which shall not be
always convinced of a lie, by that learned Plutarch, who speaks as I have
set it down.

14. Maxim.
A prince ought to exercise cruelty all at once, and to do pleasures by
little and little.
HE which will invade a principality (says our Florentine) Cap. 17. Of the
prince.
whatsoever, is to be sharply and cruelly practiced, would at the first
entry be dispatched with all expedition, that there may be no occasion to
return often to one business, to the end, that afterward by gracious and good
dealing he may the sooner bring under and tame his subjects: for injuries and
offenses ought to be committed all at once, that being the less time felt by
subjects, they may stir and anger Agathocles the Sicilian, by the practice of
this Maxim, became king of Siracuse: This gallant was but a potters son,
and all his life wicked and full of vices; yet those his vices were
accompanied with a great bravenesse of courage he followed arms: By little
and little he did so Agathocles, and the greatness Alexander the sixth, Oliver de
Ferme was educated and brought up young, by one that was his mothers brother,
called John Foglian, who sent him to learn the military art under captain
Paulus Vitellius, thereby to come unto some honorable estate. This Oliver
being a gallant and personable man, and of a quick wit, after a good space he
had followed the war a la Sold, for wages, he John Foglian, whereby he
signified, That whereas he having been long time out of his country, had not
all the time seen his parents and friends, and now coming to visit them, that
they of the town might think he had been honorably employed in his pursuit of
war, desired his said uncle to find means that he might as honorably enter,
with an hundred horse of his friends and servants; and that Messier John
greatly rejoiced at these news, and failed in nothing to prepare all that was
possible to honor his nephew; insomuch, as the whole town every way
celebrated and reioiced at his coming thither, conducting him with all honor
agreeable to his descent, unto the Towne-house, where he abode certain days,
whilst he made all things ready for the execution of his enterprise: At the
last Alexander and his son the duke de Valentinois, and their enterprises,
whereunto his uncle, making a certain answer; Oliver began to smile, and
Oliver being followed of his soldiors, overran straight Caesar Borgia, who by
fair words drew him to Sinagallia, where catching him, he caused him to be
hanged and strangled, and if had not been this evil adventure, he was a man
likely to have done great things.

MAchiavell persisterh in giving tyrannical precepts unto a prince, teaching
him by this Maxim a very exquisite mean, to tame a people newly reduced into
his obedience, and to obtain Great cruelty cannot be put oat of men's hearts.
prince should make himself either loved or obeyed in a new conquered country
by such barbarous usage, seeing they themselves, which use all the kindness
they can, have much a do to obtain it? Assuredly, there is no nation so
effeminate and servile, Machiavell counsels: yet if it so fall out, that for
a time a people be forced under such a yoke, it is impossible that such a
subjection should longer endure than that force continues. The example
alleged of Oliver de Ferme, does well show it: for he continued not long, no
more than did Caesar Borgia, who by the like means had usurped the domination
of Romania, as has been before said. But can a man imagine a Machiavell
rehearses of Oliver de Ferme? who (under the pretext of amity) massacred most
wickedly his own parents, and such as had given him so honorable an
entertainment as was possible? Yet Machiavell proposes this gallant example,
for a prince to imitate, as he had before done, with the example of Caesar
Borgia: And as for Agathocles, true it is (as Suidas and others write) he
usurped the tyranny of Sicile, by causing with treason and treachery the
chief rulers of Siracuse to be slain: but what end made he also? even such
as he merited: For, being desirous to make great his domination over Italy;
he thought best to practice with intelligencers, which kept not their word
with him, insomuch as his purpose being broken and anihilated, by the same
means of treason and unfaithfulness, by which he made himself great, he
died Agathocles had so bad an end, as his life also had been very wicked, yet
dare Machiavell compare him with the greatest and most virtuous captains, that
have in times past been, and to offer him as an example, for a prince to
imitate: So that men may well say, that this wicked Atheist, has no other
purpose in his books, than to persuade a prince to become a tirant and most
wicked, by embrasing all vices, and chasing away all virtue: but heretofore I
have sufficiently discoursed upon the effects of cruelty, and therefore need
speak no more hereof.

But is not this a wise reason, to say, That cruelty ought to be exercised all
at once, that it may not be too often felt, as that is which is practiced by
little and little at many times: And why? that which is practiced all at once
is not felt, but at the instant it is practiced: Nay contrary we commonly
see, that such great cruelties as men commit against a great number of persons,
do so wound and irritate the hearts of all the kinsefolke and friends of them
that be murdered, that they feel it during their lives, yea sometimes the
wound bleedeth even to the third generation: But the cruelties which are
committed at many and diverse times, do not so far penetrate the courage, nor
prick men so lively to the quick, although continuance increases
coffeehouse. No man also can deny, but that it is a thing far more
Machiavell counsels, whatsoever good countenance he after shows of his
gentle and kind carriage: For the first apprehension of his cruelty, will be
found so fast sticking and engraven in the hearts of men, that no
demonstrations of gentleness and humility succeding, can abolish or raze it
out.

15. Maxim.
A virtuous tyrant to maintain his tyranny, ought to maintain partialities
and factions amongst his subjects, and to sley and take away such as love the
commonwealth.
IT most commonly happens (says Machiavell) in countries governed by
princes, that that which is profitable to Discourse lib. 2. cap. 2. and lib. 3.
cap. 3.
him, is damageable to subjects, and that which is profitable to his subjects,
is damageable unto him: Which causes oftentimes princes to become tyrants,
better loving their profit, than their subjects: As also the contrary makes
subjects often arise against their prince, not able to endure his tyranny and
oppression. To keep subjects Tarquin the last king of Rome, had well observed
this Maxim, and had caused Brutus to be slain, no man would have been
found, that durst have enterprised any

Here before Machiavell has showed, how a prince should best become a tyrant;
namely, by exercising all manner of cruelty, impiety, and injustice, after
the examples of Caesar Borgia, of Oliver de Ferme, and of Agathocles: Now he
shows how he in his tyranny, may maintain and conserve himself, that is,
by feeding and maintaining partialities and divisions amongst his subjects,
applying to his own private profit and use, that which should serve to all men
in Tyrants draw all to themselves.
general: So that it follows, that whosoever loves the profit of a tyrant,
by consequent hates the profit of his subjects, and he that loves the common
good of subjects, hates also the particular profit of a tyrant. But thus
speaking, I do not mean of tributes, which are lawfully levied upon subjects:
for the exaction of taxes, may well be the work of a prince, and of a just
ruler, but we speak of the proper and particular actions of tyrants.

Surely indeed if there be any proper and meet mean to maintain a
tyranny, it seems well, that that which Machiavell teaches is one, To
maintain subjects Titus Livius lib. 4. Dec. 4.
in partialities and devisions: For as Quintius says, (when he exhorted the
towns of Greece, to accord amongst themselves) Against a people which are in a
good unity amongst themselves, tyrants can do nothing, but if there be
discord Machiavell is a true doctor, who well understands the science of
tyranny, and no man can set down more proper precepts, for so wicked a thing,
than such as this Maxim contains; namely, to sley all lovers of the
commonwealth, and amongst other subjects to maintain partialities. Surely if
anything serve to maintain a tyranny, these seem most proper and covenable:
for they are made from the same mould that tyranny it self is, and drawn
from one same spring, of most execrable wickedness and impiety.

But yet I will hold, that neither these tyrannical precepts, nor any others
can long maintain a tyrant, or a tyranny: For the ordinance of God, being
far Tyrants are impious.
stronger than the detestable precepts of Machiavell, repugneth them, and never
suffers tyranny to be of any long endurance; as we have before showed, by
the examples of Nero, Caligula, Caracalla, and Domitian, as Sophocles says:

No man did ever see, Sopho. in A^ac. Flagel.

A tyrant once to prove godly.
And because tyrants are always full of impiety, God (with whom they strive)
Iuvenall says:

A tyrant seldom life does end,
But by the sword, which God does send. Corneli. Taci Annals. 5.

And besides that, God brings them to a tragical and miserable end, even
during their lives, are they continually tormented in their consciences with
fears, distrusts, and furies, which so trouble them day and night, that they
obtain no rest. To this purpose Tacitus rehearses, That when the emperor
Tiberius was come to the Tacitus) that an excellent wise man affirms (meaning
Plato) That if tyrants souls might be seen uncovered, a man should see them
torn and wounded with blows of cruelty, riotousnesse, and wicked counsel,
as we see bodies ulcerated with rods and cudgels. What Denis the tyrant of
Sicilie have, who trusted none? Also when one day a certain philosopher told
him, that he could not be but happy, who was so rich, so well served at his
table, and had so goodly a palace to dwell in, and so richly furnished: he
answered him: Well, I will show thee how happy I am: and withal he led that
philosopher into a chamber gallantly hanged with tapistrie, and caused him to
be laid on a gilded rich bed to repose himself; there were also brought him
exquisit and delicate viands, and excellent wines: but whilst certain
servants made these provisions for Monsieur the philosopher, who was so
desirous of a tyrannical felicity, another varlet fastened by the hilts to
the upper bed feeling, a bright shining sharp sword, and this sword was hung
only in a horse hair, the point of it right over Denis, to take him from the
supposed beatitude, wherein he was laid: saying, That he had rather be a poor
philosopher, than in that manner to be happy: Did not I then say well to thee
(answered the tyrant) That we tyrants are not so happy as men think, for our
lives depend always upon a small thread?

What repose could Nero also have? who confessed, that often the likeness of
his mother (whom he slew) appeared to him, which tormented and afflicted him;
Sueto. in Nero, cap. 34.
Caligula and Caracalla have? which caused always to be carried certain
coffers full of all manner of poisons, as well to poison Tyrants tormented of
furies.
others as themselves in cases of necessity, for fear they should fall alive
into the hands of their enemies. Heliogabalus also, what comfort had he in the
world? who provided always cords of silk to hang himself in, and brave
poynards and golden swords, exceeding sharp, in like manner at a need to sley
him. And indeed it is one of the greatest wisdoms that can be in a tyrant, to
take a good course for his death, when it is necessary and expedient for him:
for they are often troubled, and do come short therein: as we see of Nero, who
in his need could find no man that would sley Machiavels scholars, it is
likely he would have prooved more hardy.

But we have to note, as well upon this Maxim, as upon the former, that as by
his precepts here, Machiavell tends and goes about to form a tyrant, that
also we ought to hold for a true tyrant, every prince and ruler, which uses
these precepts, Marks of tyrants.
and practices them: that is, he which uses the cruelties before commended
by Machiavell, which maintains his subjects in division and partiality, and
which Bartolus, and them also which hystoriographers have marked to have been
in Tarquin the proud: For they say, when he changed his just and royal
domination Dioni. Halic. lib. 4.
into a tyrannical government, he became a contemner and a despiser of al his
subjects, as well the mean people, as the nobility and Patritians; he brought
a confusion Tarquin, Tarquin forgot nothing of all that a tyrant could do, but
that he slew not Brutus, which was a fault in the art of tyranny (as learnedly
Machiavell notes it) which fell to be his ruin: But the cause hereof was,
that Brutus in the court counterfeted the fool, whereby Tarquin had no
suspicion of him: For none but wise men and good people are suspect and
greevous to tyrants, but as for counterfeting fools, unthrifts, flatterers,
bauds, murderers, inventors of imposts, and such like dregs and vermin of the
people, they are best welcome into tyrants courts: yet even amongst them are
not tyrants always without danger: for amongst such fools sometimes happens
a Brutus, Denis the tyrant says.

But the example of Hieronimus (another tyrant of Sicilie) is to this purpose
well to be noted. This Hieronimus was the son of a good and wise king, called
Hiero, (whom also they well called tyrant, because he came not to that estate
by a legitimate title, although he exercised it sincerely and in good justice)
who when he died, left this Hieronimus his son very young and under age: For
the government therefore of him and of his affairs, he gave him fifteen
tutors, and amongst them Andronodorus and Zoilus, his sons in law, and one
Thraso, which he charged to maintain the country of Sicilie in peace, as he
himself had done by the space of fifty years Hiero was dead, Andronodorus
being angry because of so many tutors, caused the king (who was then but 15
years old) to be proclaimed of sufficient age to be dismissed of tutors, and
so dispatched himself as well as others, of that dutiful care they ought to
have had of their king and country: After, he got to himself alone the
government of the kingdom, and to make himself to be feared under the kings
authority, he took to him a great number of waiters for his guard, and to
wear purple garments and a diadem upon Denis the tyrant, and contrary to the
use of Hieronimus: yet was not this the worst; for, besides all this,
Adronodorus caused the young king his brother in law, to be instructed in
pride, and arrogancy, to contemn every man, to give audience to no man, to
be quarelous, and to take advantage at words; of hard access, given to all
new fashions of effeminacie and riotousnesse, and to be unmeasurable cruel,
and thirsty after blood. After Andronodorus had thus framed to his mind this
Andronodorus was consenting) to dispatch and sley him, but it was discovered,
but yet executed, which A conjuration discovered, yet executed.
was strange: For one Theodorus was accused, and confessed himself to be one
of the conspiracy: but being tortured and racked to confess his accomplices and
parteners in that conspiracy, knowing he must needs die, and by that means
desiring to be revenged of that young tyrant, he accused the most faithful and
trustiest servants of the king: This young tyrant rash and inconsiderat,
straight put to death his friends and principal servants by the counsel of
Andronodorus, who desired nothing more, because they hindered his deseignes:
This execution performed, incontinent this young tyrant was massacred and slain
upon a straight way by the conspirators themselves, Andronodorus obtained the
fortress of Siracuse, a town of Sicilie: but the tumults and stirs which he
raised in the country (as he thought for his own profit) fell out so
contrary to his expectation, that finally he, his wife, and all their race,
and the race of Hieronimus were extermined, as well such as were innocent, as
they that were culpable. And so does it ordinarily happen to all young princes,
which by corruption are degenerated into tyrants: So falls it out also to all
them, which are corrupters of princes, to draw them into habits of all
wickedness.

Lastly, here would not be omitted altogether this wickedness of Machiavell,
who confounding good and evil together, yields the title of Virtuous unto a
tyrant: Is not this as much as to call darkness, full lightsome and bright,
vice good and honorable, and ignorance, learned? But it pleases this wicked
man thus to say, to pluck out of the hearts of men, all hatred, horror, and
indignation, which they might have against tyranny, and to cause princes to
esteem tyranny, good, honorable and desirable.

16. Maxim.
A Prince may as well be hated for his virtue, as for his vice.
THe emperor Pertinax (says Machiavell) was elected emperor Cap. 19. Of the
prince.
Commodus, his predecessor: insomuch, as Pertinax, a wise and virtuous prince,
was hated of his men of war, because they feared he would reform them and
bring them into their old military discipline. Alexander, a prince endowed
with many goodly virtues. Hereupon ye may note (says he) that malice and
evil will is acquired and got, as well amongst men by their virtues, as by
their vices: And therefore if a prince will conserve himself in his estate,
he must accommodate and apply himself to the humors of such as can hurt him,
he must also imitate and follow their vices and corruptions: For in such
cases, good works and virtues are pernicious and contrary unto them.

TO the end that a prince, if he have any love and inclination to virtue,
Machiavell here proposes this Maxim: as though he would say, that betwixt
virtue and vice there is no difference; and that it makes no matter which of
them a prince do follow, provided, that he follow that which will be most
profitable to maintain him: And because vice seems to be most sit to maintain
a tyranny, his counsel is, that a prince should follow it: And if any will
reply hereunto, that vice will make a man be hated and evil beloved of all
the Pertinax and Alexander Severus, which (says he) were hated of their
soldiers for their virtues. I pray you is there any devil in hell that could
sow and maintain a more wicked doctrine than this? If we take away the
difference of vice and virtue, and that we make them but one, wherein differ we
from brute beasts? Surely herein only, that we shall be more full of vices and
wickednesses than they are, because the spirit of man is more ready to invent
al sorts of vices and deceits, than the nature of beasts: But the common sense,
reason, and judgment of all men, and the daily experience which we perceive
with our eyes, do manifestly show us, that as well in this Maxim, as in
others, Machiavell is a most impudent lier: For not only all good and virtuous
princes have always been well Good princes loved, and evil princes hated.
beloved and liked, but also the vicious and wicked princes have always been
and are evil beloved and hated of all the world, if it be not long of their
flatterers, which make a show they love them, whilst they have means to draw
any profit from them. But because I have somewhat at large handled this point
by examples, in another place, where I spoke of the friendship of flatterers, I
need not again here to repeat it.

Yet I must needs say and confess, touching men endowed with excellent
virtues, that sometimes it falls unto them, as it does to men which be bleare
and weak eyed, touching the light of the Sun: for like as they cannot bear
nor endure the light that law, the law of Ostracisme: and their reason was,
because people of high virtue Pericles, Themistocles, Alcibiades, and other
such like great and good men: yet this was not because they hated their great
virtues; but contrary they greatly admired them, yet were they suspected unto
Hiperbolus, a man of small virtue, whom yet the Athenians so honored, to
banish him by an Ostracisme, but they never showed the like favor to any other
of his quality: Neither was this, because Hiperbolus had committed any fault,
Hiperbolus then (having no long time made himself known to the Athenian
people by his orations) received this honor and recompense, to be banished by
the Ostracisme, the greatest honor that ever he had in his life. At Rome
likewise all the world had in great honor and admiration the great honesty,
plainness, and severitie to maintain laws of Cato the less, yet the people
never employed him in any great charges or estates, Plutarch in the life of
Cato de Vtica
Cato was, yet could they not but admire and highly praise him. Titus Livius
Titus Livius lib. 1. Dec. 1. lib 8. Dec. 4. and li. 5. Dec. 5
also witnesses, That the great virtues of Furius Camillus, Paulus Aemylius,
and of Scipio the African, were much admired of that people, yea, praised and
exalted even to heaven: but yet were they suspected, and for such accused and
rejected: Their accusers could say no other thing against them, but that they
were too much honored and esteemed, because of the great victories and
magnificall triumphs which they had had. Petilius, the accuser of that great
Scipio, said, That it was a great shame, Scipio, as though he alone should and
ought to have all the honor and credit of the whole commonwealth, and to hold
it covered under his shadow: Scipio replied nothing to this accusation,
neither knew he indeed what to reply, unless he had said, that there was no
reason his virtue should hurt him: but knowing well that his citizens could not
abide him, he banished himself from Rome, and withdrew himself to Liternum,
into a rural house which he

But in a prince this ought to have no place; for the more virtuous that men
be, Excellent virtues ought not to be suspected of a prince.
the more they ought to love and honor them, and to serve themselves with
them: for in so doing, the virtues of such good and virtuous servants are
imputed unto the prince himself, as we have before showed; neither can a
prince ever draw any great services from men of small virtue: for good services
are the effects of virtue: And as no man out of a bush or bramble, can get good
pears or other pleasant fruits, because such kind of plants have not that kind
of virtue in them to produce

And as for that which Machiavell says, That the emperor Pertinax was hated
Capitol. in Pe^^in. Herod. lib. 6.
of his men of war, for his virtue, is very false: for although in all other
things he was a notable good and virtuous prince, yet was he much and sore
spotted with that filthy vice of covetousness and illiberalitie (which
hereafter Machiavel teaches to be a notable virtue for a prince) insomuch, as
being come to that high degree of a Traian his predecessor had given them for
their nourishment and maintenance: This covetousness was the cause he was
despised of them and slain. And as for Alexander Severus, it was also the
covetousness of Mammaea his mother, which was the cause Herodian witnesses,
who lived at that time. And therefore the examples of Pertinax and of
Alexander, are by Machiavell to no purpose alleged, to show that princes are
hated for their virtues: yet although it were true, that such soldiers as slew
Pertinax, were people hating virtue; as also they which slew Alexander Severus
(which had gathered all corruption of vices under his predecessor Heliogabalus)
it follows not, that of such examples we must make a rule and Maxim: For
thieves and murderers do hate justice and magistracy, yet follows it not,
that a prince is not always more loved than hated, by doing good justice.
Breefely, such examples are exceptions and defailances of the rule, which
notwithstanding do not cease to remain always

17. Maxim.
A Prince ought always to nourish some enemy against himself, to this end,
that when he has oppressed him, he may be accounted the more mighty and
terrible.
PRinces (says our Florentine) make themselves great, when they Cap. 19. Of
the prince.


BEhold a Maxim of the same note as the former, hereunto tending, Tyrants want
not enemies.
be feared, rather than loved: But a prince which observes the doctrine of
Machiavell, needs take no great care to seek means to nourish an enemy
against himself: for there will be ynow, and more than one would, both within
and without his country, yea, in his own house: But to say that he can
oppress them all, to make himself feared Milicus Cornel. Tacit. Annal. 15.
had discovered to Nero a great conjuration practiced against him, he
performed that which Machiavell prescribes: for by oppressing and causing to
die, all the conjurators and enemies, and all their friends and allies, he made
himself so feared and redoubted, that there was not in Rome, great or little,
but he trembled for fear, only to hear the name of Nero: Such great men,
whose friends and parents were put to death, came and fell down on their knees
before him, and thanked him for the good and honor he had done them, to have
purged and cleansed their parentage and alliance from so wicked men as those he
had slain: Others in sign of joy Health. Nero thinking that all these joys
were true and unfeigned (yet were they but simulations) exercised still more and
more his butcherie, and in the end made himself so assured, (by Nero needed to
take no thought how to nourish enemies against himself, as Machiavell teaches
in this Maxim; for he never wanted a great number, as all tyrants have
ordinarily.

And how should not tyrants have good store of enemies, seeing even good De
Com. lib. 1. cap. 107, 108, 109, 100, 111.
and wise princes, do not want them? To this purpose master Phillip de Comines
makes a very good discourse, saying, That it pleased God to give to all
princes, kingdoms, and commonweals, an opposite and contrary unto them, that
both the one and the other might the rather be held in their duties; as
England has France; Scotland has England; Portugal has Castile; Grenado
has Portugal; the princes and commonweals of Italy, are contrary one to
another, and so it is of all God has give^ to every seignorie his opposite.
countries, and seignories of the earth: For, if there be any prince or
commonweal, which wants his opposite to hold him in fear, straight one shall
see him fall to a tyranny and luxuriousness: Therefore God by his wise
providence has thing can hold him in his duty, but only the fear of his
contrary. After that Comines Princes have not the fear of God, nor of
charity, for want of Faith.
not the fear of God, nor love to their neighbors? He answers, the want of
Faith: for if a prince believed verily the pains of hell, to be such as
indeed they are, he would do no wrong to noe man, nor retain an others goods
unjustly: For, if they believed assuredly (as it is true and certain) that
they are damned in hell, and are never like to enter into paradise, which
retain other men's goods, without making satisfaction, or that do any wrong to
any, without amends unto him: It is not likely there would be found a prince
or princess in the world, or any other person, which would withold another
goods (were it of his subjects, vassailes, or neighbor John of France, being
taken prisoner, by the prince of Wales at the battle of Poitiers, who paid
3000000 of franks for his ransom, and acquitted John, and Charles the sage his
son, for the said kings deliverance out of prison: And, if they would have
given nothing, yet the English would not have put him to death, but at the
worst have kept him in prison: And yet if they had caused him to die, the pain
that he had suffered, had not been comparable to the thousand part of the
least pain in hell: Why then did king John give all that has been said, and
so overthrew his children, and the subjects of his kingdom? because he: and
God who is a just judge, shall punish such princes, as do not fear him, and
it may be will not attend to punish them in the other world but in this world:
But let them know, that when it pleases God to punish Signs of a princes
ruin.
credit with him, new people, violent, unreasonable, and foolish, slothful,
and flatterers, which do and speak all things to please them: for when we
see this happen to a prince, we may well say, that God prepares his ruin.

Behold in sum, in his proper terms, the opinion of that wise knight
Messire Phillip de Comines, of the cause why God raises enemies unto princes;
which opinion truly is very christian, and proceeding from a man of a wise
judgment, and well experimented in affairs of State, wherein the said Comines
was exercised, by Lewis the eleaventh, and Charles the eight his son, in
embassages and other great and honorable charges: He was no such petty
burnepaper as Machiavell, who dealt in nothing, but in registring and writing
of the small broiles and troubles, of one house of the town of Florence, and
coming out of no better aschoole, dare deal to give lessons and documents to
princes and mighty kings, to teach them how they should govern, or rather how
they should become tyrants: But contrary, he that will read the history of
Comines, shall find many good precepts, which that good knight has marked by
experience in his time, which indeed are good and proper, as well to inform
and instruct a good prince, as they of Machiavell are to inform a most wicked
tyrant.

Upon this speech above alleged of Comines, that God diminishes the senses of
such princes as he will ruinat, I will add for a confirmation, the saying of
an ancient wise man, alleged by the poet Sophocles.

Agreeing well to verity,
The saying of the wise man is: Sophocl. in Aulig.

That which most evil you do try,
Most good it seems to you iwis.
Thus when we stir up God to ire,
He plagues us much for our desire.
18. Maxim.
A prince ought not to fear to be perjured, to deceive, and dissemble: for
THe prince (says master Nicholas) which will become great, Discourse lib. 2.
cap. 13. and cap. 18. of the prince.
and make great conquests, it is necessary that he learn well the occupation
and art of deceiving, as John Galeace did, who by that Messire Bernard his
uncle: The Romans also under that name of allies and confederates, so deceived
the Latin people and many others, that they reduced them into a servitude and
subjection, yet they never espied it, until the end. True it is, in this art
of trompery and deceit, men must needs use great fainednesse, dissimulations,
and periuries; and the prince which shall be heereunto (as it were) made by
nature and art, shall always obtain prosperous success in his affairs: For
men are commonly so simple, and do so soon bend to present necessities, that
the deceiver Alexander the sixth, who never did other thing, but made an art of
abusing men, neither ever applied his mind to other study, neither ever was
there found man, that would confirm his promises with more horrible oaths, nor
that less kept and observed them: Yet his tromperies

IN this Maxim is an amplification of that which has been before set down
by Machiavell, when he said, That a prince ought to know how to play the Fox;
for now explicating, what it is to play the Fox, he says, it is to know how
to deceive, to dissemble, and to be perjured; and that a prince ought to be
adorned with these goodly virtues of trompery, dissimulation,

And as for that which Machiavell says, That the deceiver will always find
some that will suffer themselves to be deceived, I confess there will be
ever found some idiot fools and sots, that he may deceive, yea that sometimes
he may deceive sharp witted and wise men: yet notwithstanding, it is as
certain, that there is not so great a deceiver, but he is sometimes deceived:
For as soon as a deceiver is discovered to be one, every man takes heed to
negotiate and traffic with him, or if they be forced The deceiver is often
deceived.
him: And herein the most part of the world make no conscience, but think it
not only lawful, but praise-worthie to deceive a deceiver: insomuch, as he
which has once a name to be a cousener and deceiver, all men will dispense
with themselves to deceive him if the^y can: and by that means the deceiver
having cause to take heed of many sundry persons, it is impossible but he
should be often deceived, and be often catched in his own nets. Therefore
Machiavell his reason, That the deceiver shall always find them which will be
deceived, does not so well conclude, as it seems: For if the deceiver find
always some to deceive, he shall also find some which will deceive him: and it
may be sometimes, for one that he deceives, he may find six which will
deceive him: because none can be so perfect in the art of trompery Machiavell
so much recommendeth to a prince) but also he shall always find others,
which know more than himself in some points, and many together do know more
than one alone, in all points of that art, one in one point, and another in
another: So that in the end he himself shall see always (according to the
common proverb) the deceiver shall be deceived.

As it happened even to Pope Alexander the sixth, whose example Machiavell here
alleges; for the end of all his tromperies and perjuries, was to make his
bastard Caesar Borgia, lord and king of all Italy, and after, of all
christendom if he could: But the issue of his desseignes and purposes was a
tragical act, as we have before discoursed in another place. Moreover, the
cause why that many times this Pope Lewis the twelfth, was: For that in that
time men so greatly feared the Popes bulls and interdictions, and that they
believed him to be a true lieutenant of God, on earth, so that they durst not
discredit any thing he did, but rather believed all his words as oracles: but
at this day children would mock at his actions, and few men will be baited
with his allurements.

But for whereas Machiavell says, That the ancient Romans under the deceit of
The Romans allies and subjects were not slaves.
those names, Allies and confederats, brought into their subjection and
servitude the Latin people their neighbors, is a plain and pure lie: For they
subjugated all men by war, at diverse times as we read in hystories. True it
is, that after once they vanquished Machiavell calls it; or if it be a
servitude, there are no people in christendom, whether they be subjects of
princes, or common wealths, which are not in a double, and quadruple servitude.

And whereas Machiavell says, That a prince ought to know the art of trompery,
and deceit, some will ask (to take heed of it) which are the precepts of the
art: Whereunto Machiavell, that no man can give precepts, practicale or singular
which may be applied to every business, to avoid deceit and fraud: But the
general precepts of art (which the philosophers call Axioms in philosophy)
are these; Bouldly to forswear themselves; Subtly to dissemble, to infinuate
into men's minds and to prove them; To break faith and promise, and such like
as heretofore we have handled, and shall do hereafter: But here we must
note one thing, which is, That one well experienced in the art of trompery,
will not always practice that principle, To break faith, for if he
ordinarily do it, he shall offend against another principle, which commands,
To dissemble subtly: For by, every where and ever breaking of faith, he
shall discover himself to be a manifest deceiver, whereas Fabius Maximus
admonishes Scipio to take heed: Thou desire Scipio Titus Livi. lib. 8. Dec.
3.
(says he) to make war upon the Carthaginians in Affricke, under an hope
thou have to have the favor of king Siphax, and of the Numidians, which have
promised thee aid and succors: But take good advice how thou trustest in the
barbarous nations, which commonly make no account to break their faith and to
deceive: True it is, in small matters they will keep their faith with thee,
well to assure thee in This was the admonition, which that wise Fabius, gave to
Scipio, then a young captain. What then should a man do, to guard himself
from such deceitful faith of deceivers, which appeeres and shows it self in
little things, and is defective in great matters? A man must do that which
Scipio answered to Fabius: I know well (lord Fabius says he) how a man must
lean upon the evil assured faith of Syphax, and the Numidians. I think so
much to lean, and rest my self upon them, as may serve my turn, so that yet
always I hold my self upon my guardes, to warrant my self from all perfidie
and treachery.

Moreover there is yet another remedy against such deceivers and dissemblers,
which promise much and in their hearts have no other intention, then in no
thing to keep their promises: that is to shun and fly from them, as from
hell, and from more than capital enemies, as Homer teaches us:

He that one thing in heart, another in mouth does bear:
Fly him an enemy thine, and as hellfire him fear. Homer. Iliad. lib. 9.

20. Maxim.
A prince, who (as it were constrained) uses Clemency and Lenity, advances
his own destruction.
IN an hundred times (says Machiavell) it will scant happen Discourse, lib.
1. cap. 32.
once, that the good and comfort which a prince does to his subjects, when he
sees himself as it were forced to do it, by fear of rebellion, or
otherwise, is gratefully received of them: For commonly the people, for
benefits so granted by their prince, are not thankful, but rather thinks
themselves beholden to such as draw their prince unto the bestowing of such
benefits upon necessity and constraint: And this is often the cause that the
people seeks occasions

IT should be best and more expedient, for a prince to prevent all his
subjects, with good and courteous dealings, than to attend till he see
himself constrained to diminish his rigor, Machiavell, is altogether wicked,
and cannot but bring into ruin a prince and his estate: for in sum, his
counsel is, To hold hard against his subjects, nothing to abate his rigor,
nor to use any kindness or graciousnesse, then and when he sees himself, to
do it, constrained and pressed thereunto. If a prince then will stand stiff
always rigorously to handle his subjects, and to oppress them, The rigor of
a prince is the cause of denial of obedience.
without abating any thing thereof, although he hear of their grievances and
complaints, and that he see them prepared to rebellion, and to deny their
obedience; what other thing can there follow, but the entire ruin of him and
his estate? For Sophocles:

Even as hard steel in fire we see
In pieces break most easily:
So minds too hard and fierce which be,
Most often with fall on ground does lie.
Wherefore this precept whereby Machiavell would make a prince stiff and
inflexible against his subjects, can bring to him but his own ruin: as it
happened to Roboam the king, who when his people humbly desired an ease and
mitigation of their tributes, he obstinately and proudly denied them: For this
king following such counsel as Machiavell gives here, made answer to his
subjects, that so much there

And to say, that the people are unthankful to their prince for benefits
accorded Constrained graunts are not without profit.
as it were by constraint, this is false, and experience shows us the
contrary: For the people is not so speculative, that they will cause to seek
out and examine the impulsive cause, which moved the prince to commit or ordain
any thing, but holds themselves contented with the good and profit which
redounds to them by that ordinance; and the enjoying of the good they receive,
brings unto them such a pleasure Machiavell says, That the subjects of a
prince cannot be thankful for a benefit accorded by constraint, it follows
not therefore, that such a benefit and a better handling must needs be
unprofitable and without fruit: For certain it is, that always this will make
cease the complaints of the people, and cause them to desist from all
rebellions and whatsoever enterprises are intended and machinated against him.
Titus Livius shows us by many examples, this to have many times happened at
Rome, where the commons entered into seditions and rebellions against the
Patricij, and such as were great men in authority, but they were appeased
incontinent as soon as the great men granted that which they desired: And yet
we find not, that the great Patricians and nobles of Rome did almost at any
time accord unto the commons, but as constrained and against their wills: There
was amongst them men of as good wits and judgment, as Machiavell, (such as
Coriolanus, Appius, Caeso, Fabius, Machiavell teaches) shall do better, not
to be so obstinate, but to plie and bow his courage, when the good of the
commonweal and his own requires it? following the admonition which that wise
knight Phoenix gave to the prince Achilles his disciple.

Appease thy self Achilles strong, thy hardened heart abate,
A mortal man it not becomes implacable to be: Hom. Iliad. 9.

Though power most, and honor eke on gods attend and wait,
To prayers of us mortal men, yet yield they, we do see*
Good princes have ever so used, and never were hindered by Machiavels subtle
distinctions: That he which owes obedience, ought to humble himself first,
and Foolish distinctions of the Machiavellists.
that the prince ought to accord nothing to his subjects, but of his own
proper motion, least he be seen to receive a law of them, unto whom he should
give laws, and that he ought not to capitulate with them: and that it should
be a very dishonorable

21. Maxim.
A wise prince ought not to keep his Faith, when the observation thereof is
hurtful unto him, and that the occasions for which he gave it, be taken
A Prudent and an advised lord (says Messier Nicholas) neither Cap. 18. Of the
prince. and discourse, lib. 3. cap. 42.
can nor ought straightly to keep his Faith, when such observation is
prejudicial unto him, and that the occasions and necessities, which caused
him to make his promise, are already past and extinguished. If all the men of
the world were good, this precept were to be blamed: but seeing the
ordinary wickedness of men,

ALthough the other Maxims of Machiavell may be called wicked and detestable
in the higest degree, yet does this Maxim carry away the prize above all
others, which concern duties amongst men: For whosoever will take away Faith
and loyalty from amongst men (as Machiavell would do) he withal takes away
all contracts, commerce, distributive, and politic The life and humane
society cannot stand without Faith.
than they: for then every one must dwell by himself; there should need no
towns Machiavell does) is to bring them into a brutish estate, wherein they
cannot live, nor subsist, nor enjoy the necessary commodities which one
receive of another, and by consequent it is to induce and to bring a ruin and
an universal deluge to all mankind. Yet if any Machiavelist will reply, that
the intent of their master, is not to take away all Faith from amongst men, but
only to break Faith, when there is profit in doing it: I answer him, that in
effect that is all one, and that these two things are almost equipollent, to
take Faith altogether away, and to break it ever when there is appearance of
profit: Machiavell, not to yield again that which was borrowed, because it is
for his profit to keep it: And so in all contracts and commerces, men may
cover the breach of Faith with the veil of utilitie and profit, and by that
means banish and chase away all Faith from men. Behold the effect and
consequence, of this detestable and wicked doctrine of Machiavell.

Which to confute, might well suffice the apparent evidence of evil, and the
absurdity Machiavell, by paynim and profane authors, and show him, that he
has but slenderly read his Titus Livius, upon whom he has written his
discourses full of ignorance and wickedness. Sextius and Licinius (Tribunes of
the Roman people) to obtain the favor and grace of mean people endebted,
would needs that a law should pass by authority, whereby all debtors might
preaccount in payment of their debts to their creditors, all the interest money
which they had before paid them, and that the rich men which possessed Appius
Claudius Crassus, Patrician, opposed himself against this law, and showed,
that it was pernicious and domageable: Because (says he) by such a law,
public Faith, which is the bond of all humane society, is broken: for the
goods and possessions which the rich men hold, they have obtained them or their
ancestors, by contracts of buying, selling, exchanging, and other like,
wherein there always passed Faith and oaths: and that therefore they which will
take from the rich, that which they have gotten unto them by a good and lawful
title, confirmed by that bond of Faith and oath; it were the means to abolish,
and to take away al Faith from amongst men, without which no humane society
can Appius Claudius hindered that law from passing, or being authorized: there
was then such account made of Faith, which they preferred before all
difficulties and particular necessities: And afterward, Titus ^ivius lib. 3.
Dec. 3.
calamities.

The Romans seeing themselves one day want money for the maintenance of their
armies, and payment of soldiers; the Senate consulted what provision to make
for this want: none of them thought it good to impose a taillage or tribute
upon the people, which would prove very greevous in many sorts: at last they
all agreed, Fulvius, in an oration to the people, to show them all their
public necessities, and to exhort such as were grown rich by farming grounds
belonging to the commonwealth, to lay out some silver for the maintenance of
the army in Spain. Fulvtus so well persuaded, that the farmers accorded to
lay down a certain sum of money, as much as was

King Perseus of Macedonie determining to make war upon the Romans, sent
ambassadors to the Achaeans, a people of Greece, and allies of the Romans, to
Callicratides (a notable man amongst the Achaeans) was of advice, That they
should give no ear unto that king Perseus, nor to his ambassadors, because the
Achaeans had already confirmed an alliance by Faith and oath with the Romans,
and that upon that Faith was founded all the assurance of their estate; and
that Faith had that property, that it will not be violated nor suspected in
any sort whatsoever: And therefore it was a breach of Faith, only to afford
audience Faith will neither be violated nor suspected.
to that king, whom they saw plainly prepared to make war upon the Romans:
This reason founded upon the authority of public States, was the cause that
nothing was accorded to Perseus. And likewise heereunto accords the saying of
Antonine: That the most lamentable thing in this world is, when Faith is broken
and violated by friends, and without the same, no virtue can be Dion in Marcel.
assured.

To this purpose, that Faith cannot be suspected, that is notable, which
Fabius Titus Livins lib. 2.
Maximus, D^ctator, did. Anniball being in battle array nigh Rome, conceived
this subtle device, to ruinate and utterly to destroy all the houses in the
fields, both for pleasure and for other necessary uses, but only the houses
and commodities appertaining Fabius: And this he did to bring a suspicion upon
Fabius, that he had made some secret compact with Anniball against his Faith
and duty. Fabius knowing well, that it was not sufficient perfectly to observe
his Faith, but that also he must be exempt from all suspicion, sent straight
his son to Rome, to sell and rid him of all he had without the town, which
he did: and so assured his public Faith, by his particular damage, taking
from the people all sinister opinion they might take of him. And assuredly,
there is nothing in the world more pleasant, than when Faith is sincerely kept,
even in adversity, and when we have most to do: Therefore the Romans
esteemed such, their good and loyal allies, as kept their Faith loyally,
during the time they had wars in hand: as did Ptolomeus, king of Egypt, when
the Romans had to do with Anniball and the Carthaginians: for he was always
firm Anniball, they sent ambassadors to Ptolomie, to thank him, for that in
their so doubtful and hazardous affairs, his Faith had not altered, and to
pray him to continue.

Attalus, king of Pergamus in Asia, came to the degree of royalty by his
virtue: Titus Livius lib. 3. and 7. Dec. 4.
for he was neither son nor successor of a king, neither had he the
heroical virtues of Hercules, of Alexander or Caesar to conquer a kingdom:
yea, breefely he had nothing in him (says Titus Livius) that could either aid
or bring hope unto him at any time to be a king, but only riches, which he
bestowed and used so well, that by the means of them, and by his fidelity
toward the Pergames, he became Eumenes his son, whose domination Fidelity a
good inheritance.
the Romans greatly augmented, because he continued in his fathers loyalty,
who at his death charged him, to repute that fidelity to be the best heritage
he left him.

There was nothing in the world which the old Romans had in greater reverence
Titus Livius lib. 1. Dec. 1. lib. 4. Dec. 3.
and observation than their public Faith: Therefore had they a temple of
Faith, Titus Livius) thought he could not better place his silver, nor better
assure it, than under the public Faith.

When Scipio the Affrican entered into Sicilie, wiih his army, to pass into
Africa, because he entered into it as a friend, he would suffer no man to take
any thing from the Sicilians: But (says Titus Livius) thinking that the first
thing he should do, was to maintain and defend the public Faith, he by a
proclamation commanded every man in his camp to yield, and to give to the
Sicilians all their own whatsoever: He also deputed judges to hear and
determine all complaints, touching such causes: This so pleased the Sicilians,
that from thence forward, they showed

Whilst Anniball was in Italy, Valerius Levinus being Consul, there was a
loan of money made of the Roman people: Afterward it came to pass that
Scipio having passed into Africa with his army, the Carthaginians sent unto
Anniball to come and defend Carthage, and the countries of Africa, insomuch as
he was constrained against his will to return: As soon as he was voided
Italy, although the Romans had not ended their war, neither were out of
great affairs, yet Levinus certified the Senate, that during the time of his
consulship, there was a great sum of money borrowed of the people, that it
was time to pay it, and that he in particular was bound in this case to
acquit the public Faith: therefore he desired that

This Roman virtue, straightly to observe Faith, was not only resplendishant
in the body of the commonwealth, but also amongst particular persons, which
never Titus Livius lib. 10. Dec. 3
had regard to any thing in the world so much, as in the keeping of their
Faith. When Scipio was in Africa, warring upon the Carthaginians, he accorded
a truce with them, if they would for that purpose send ambassadors to Rome,
which they did: Whilst the said ambassadors made their voyage to Rome,
Asdruball a Carthaginian captain, breaking the truce, distressed and took 230
Roman ships, upon the sea: Whereof Scipio being advertised, sent to Carthage
ambassadors, to Scipio: What did Scipio, he sent for them, and showed them how
their people had violated the public Faith, by breaking the truce, and
offending the right of nations, by the violent repulsing of his ambassadors
which he sent, Yet, said he, I will do nothing against the custom of the
Romans, in the holy observation of the public Faith, neither any thing
uncomely to my self: and after this speech, he sent them away, not doing to
them any harm. Hereby Frangenti fidem, fides frangatur eidem: Faith must be
broken to him that breaks Faith. Caesar also had this property, that he
would never imitate the treachery and disloyalty of his enemies, nor break
his Faith unto them, although they broke theirs: And indeed (as that wise
captain Quintus Cincinnatus said) natural reason, shows us, that we must
not sin, for others example, nor break a law, because others have already
broken it, nor commit that fault which we reprehend

These ancient Romans were so scrupulous and exact observersiof their Faith,
Titus Livius lib. 8. Dec. 2.
that not only they esteemed, that a man did violate it, when he did any
thing against it, but also whenever he suffered any thing to be done by
others, which seemed to be to the detriment of that Faith. As when Anniball
besieged and ruined the town of Saguntum in Spain, which was an allie of the
Romans; because they could not give succors to the Saguntines, before the
taking of the town, they thinking that herein their Faith was something
engaged, never ceased till they had rebuilded and repeopled it: And therefore
warred they in Spain, by the space of fourteen years, at unspeakeable
charge, and vanquished the Turditans, which brought in Anniball against the
Saguntines, and made them tributaries to the Saguntines, Anniball had sold,
after the taking of the town; and recalled from all parts, such as were
escaped, to repeople the town: So well affectionated were these old Romans,
to leave nothing behind, whereby they might make known, That a public Faith,
was the thing of the world, which they had in most singular recommendation.

Iugurtha king of Numidia in Africa, slew wickedly his two brethren, the
natural Salust. de bello Iugurth.
and legitimate children of good king Micipsa, who left his kingdom, as well
to the said children, as to the said Iugurtha, his adoptive son, borne of his
brother: The Romans which greatly loved that good king Micipsa, were much
greeved, Micipsa, yet notwithstanding says Salust, the public Faith got the
victory.

After that the emperor Nerva, was chosen emperor, he entered into the
Senate, Dion. in Nerva.
when it was assembled, and after he made them understand how kindly and
temperatelie, he meant to behave himself in the government of the empire, he
added for a conclusion an oath and promise, That never by his ordinance and
command, he would put to death any Senator: A thing which greatly pleased all
the company, and especially because that cruel emperor Domitian his
predecessor, whom he succeeded, had caused a great number to die, yea for
frivolous and trifling causes: What followed? It happened that certain
Senators conspired against Machiavellists say here, which most cruelly put to
death and massacre against publik Faith, even such as no way have deserved any
punishment.

But it is time to leave those ancient Roman examples (for we should never
Beliay. lib* 1. Of his memories.
Lewis the twelfth (who then held the duchy of Millan) made a league at
Cambray, with the emperor Maximilian, and pope Julius the eleventh, to expulse
at their common charge and expenses, the Venetians, out of the firm land, as
usurpers of that they held, upon the empire, upon the Church, and upon the
duchy of Millan: And it was accorded, that in the year following, at a
convenient and good time, every one of the said three princes shoule appear
upon the place with his army, and every man should have that yielded unto him,
that was his own, after they had conquered the said countries, which the
Venetians held: The king according to this accord, came himself in person,
with his army, and many great: Yet the king feeling himself strong enough
alone, gave battle to the Venetians, and got the victory, insomuch as their
chiefetaines were taken, and 2000 slain, and almost all the towns, which the
Venetians had on firm land, yielded to him: What then did this good king?
although the other two held not their Faiths unto him, and that having then the
duchy of Millan, he alone might easily have kept, all that he had conquered,
yet notwithstanding he voluntarily yielded to the emperor, Verone, Vicence,
Padua, and otherplaces belonging to the empire, and to the Pope, Rimini,
Faence, Cervia, Ravenna, and other church towns: Hereby this good king
showing in what great recommendation he had the observation of his Faith, and
to Machiavell says he ought to have done) had he not a fair pretext, to say
that others had not held promise with him, might he not have the said, that
he was nor bound to reconquer theirs at his own charges, by the traict of
their league? Might he not well have beaten the Pope with his own Cannons,
alleging as before. Frangenti fidem, fides frangatur eidem: But he was a
plain man, without guile, and sincere, he sought no evasions or refuges, but
an upright observer of his Faith and promise, yet Machiavell reprehends him,
because he used not deceits and tromperyes, as the popes Alexander and Julius
did.

The memory is yet fresh, of the great wars which the emperor Charles the
Francis the first, king of France had together: as also how they objected
Bellay. lib. 8. Of his memories.
one to another, the observation of Faith in their public escripts and
writings, yet whatsoever imputations were laid by one to another, experience
manifested the truth in the year 5539, when the emperor under the word of the
king passed through France, to go from Spain into Flanders, where the people
of Gant were risen up against him, for in that passage, the emperor showed
well that he believed, the king was a prince, who would keep his Faith
unviolated, when he trusted his own person under it, notwithstanding all the
wars, enmities, hostilities, and other differences which had so often
happened betwixt them two, and were not yet extinguished: And certain it is,
that if the emperor (who was a wise prince) had had the least doubt in the
world of the kings Faith and loyalty, he would never the part he played with
the king of Armenia, succeeded not alike unto him; which Augarus: But the
Armenians having discovered this perfidie and disloyalty, rose up in arms,
and would not submit themselves under the obedience of that perfidious
Caracalla. He also played another part of treachery, under the pretext and
show of marriage, with the king of the Parthians, Artabanus: For he writ
letters unto him, whereby he signified unto him, that the empire of the
Romans, and that of the Parthians, were the two greatest empires of the world;
and that he being the Artabanus, king of the Parthians: he therefore prayed
him, to give her to him in marriage, to the end to allie and join together the
greatest empires of the earth, as thereby also to impose an end to their
wars: This king at the first denied him his daughter, saying, that such a
marriage was very unfit, because of the diversity of their tongues, manners,
and habits; as also for that the Romans never heretofore allied or married
with the Parthians: But upon this refuse, Caracalla insisted and pressed him
more strongly than before, and sent to Artabanus great gifts, so that in the
end he gave to him his daughter: Whereupon Caracalla assuring himself, that
he should find noe hostility in the Parthian Artabanus prepared himself and
his retinue, in as good order as was possible, without any army, to go meet
his new son in law: What did this perfidious Caracalla? As soon as the two
parties were joined, and that king Artabanus came nigh him to salu^e and
embrace him, he commanded his soldiers earnestly to charge upon the Parthians:
Then straight the Romans embraced and entertained the unarmed Parthians, with
great blows of swords and other arms, as enemies, and as if there had been an
assigned battle, in so much as there was a great slaughter made of the
Parthians; but the king Artabanus, with the Caracalla and his friends, yet were
they sorrowful to many poor Parthians. Artabanus being saved, determined
well to revenge himself of that villainy and treachery: but Macrinus releeved
him of that pain, who within a little time after, slew that monster Caracalla,
who was already descryed through all the world because of his perfidie.

Besides, that perfidie and violation of Faith, is the cause, that none will
believe nor Perfidie is the cause of the ruin of the perfidous.
trust them which once have used it, yet proceeds there another upon it: which
is, That breach of Faith is ordinarily cause of the total destruction and
ruin of the perfidious and disloyal person. The example above alleged of
Anniball, may well Virius, and other Capuans, to the number of seven and
twenty, which desperately slew themselves, because they had broken their Faith
with the Romans: But amongst other examples, that of king Syphax of Numidia is
most illustrious and memorable: This Scipio, that he would aid and give him
succors against the Carthaginians. The Carthaginians knowing this, found
means to lay a bait for this king by Titus Livius lib. 9. and 10. Dec. 3.
a fair Carthaginian damsel, called Sophonisba, one of a great house, who by
her enticements so drew him into her nets, that she caused him to break his
Faith with Scipio, and made an alliance and confederation with the
Carthaginians (by the marriage of Sophonisba) whereby they accorded, that they
would have alike friends and enemies. Scipio being hereof advertised, was much
both astonished and greeved, yet he thought it good resolution not to attend,
whilst the two powers of king Syphax and of the Carthaginians were joined
together: He then so hasted, that he placed his army before king Syphax, who
was going with thirty thousand for the Syphax himself was taken prisoner, his
horse having been slain under him, and was brought alive to Scipio; who
demanded of him wherefore he had broken his Faith with the Romancs, which he
had so solemnly sworn betwixt his hands: This poor captive king confessed,
that an enraged folly had drawn him unto it by the means of the
Carthaginians, which gave him that pestilent fury, Sophonisba, who by her
flatteries and enticements had bereaved him of his understanding. After, this
miserable king was in a triumph by Scipio led to Rome, and died miserably, and
his kingdom brought under the obedience of the Romans, which gave a good part
of it to Massinissa, another king of Numidia, who had ever been loyal and
faithful unto them in the Syphax lost himself and his kingdom by his perfidie
and breach of Faith, and Massinissa acquired great reputation and honor, and
greatly amplified and enlarged his kingdom, for rightly observing his Faith
and loyalty.

Charles the simple, king of France, in his time made strong war upon
Robert, Annal. upon the year 916.
duke of Aquitaine, and vanquished him in a battle nigh Soissons, where duke
Robert was slain. Heber, county de Vermandois, brother in law of that Robert,
was so greeved and displeased at that overthrow, that he enterprised a part of
perfidie and villainy, to catch the king his sovereign lord: therefore with a
countenance of amity, he invited the king to a great feast in the town of
Perone, whither the king came Lewis (the third of that name) his son,
succeeded him in the crown; who at his first entry revenged not the death of
his father upon county Heber, fearing some insurrection in his kingdom,
because of his great kindred and friends: yet at the last he also made a great
and solemn feast, unto which he entreated the great lords and barons of his
kingdom, and even county Heber, and his friends and kinsfolks: As they were
all assembled at that feast, behold there arrived Lewis) who (booted and
spurred) fell upon his knees before the king, and presented letters unto him on
the king of Englands part: The king took those letters, and caused them to be
read low by his Chancellor, the rather to deceive: As soon as he had read
them, the king began to smile and say on high to the company: Truly men say
true, that the English are not wise: My cousin of England sends me word, that
in his country a rusticall and clownish man had summoned his lord (whose
subject he is) to a dinner at his house; and Heber, county de Vermandois.
Then took the king the word, and said: County de Vermandois, I judge thee and
condemn thee to death by thine own word: Straight after, the king commanded
that he should be hanged and strangled, which was done: So this perfidious and
disloyal Heber received the reward of his perfidie and breach of Faith, as he
himself judged to have merited.

Edward king of England, the second of that name, was much governed by the
Frois. lib. 1. cap. 5. 13, 14.
house of the Spensers, which took upon them the handling of all the affairs
of the kingdom, and despised far greater lords than themselves: The said
king having Spensers. They believing that the great lords of England, which
envied their credit, had caused this brute to be sown, resolved to take
vengeance thereof, by a most perfidious and disloiall means: For they
persuaded the king to convocate a general assembly of States, to advise and
provide (as they gave to understand) for the affairs of the kingdom: The
princes and lords of the kingdom not doubting any thing, assembled at the
kings command: But incontinent as they were assembled, king Edward (whom the
Spensers had persuaded, that his princes and lords meant to get his kingdom
from him) commanded them to be taken, and arrested prisoners: which was done;
and without any knowledge Thomas duke of Lancaster, the kings uncle, who was a
good and a sage prince, and who after was cannonized and saincted. This
perfidie joined with cruelty (for commonly the one goes with the other) was
the cause that the said king was deprived by all the States of England, of his
royalty, as unworthie to carry the crown, and was confined to prison, where
he finished his days: And the Spensers, authors of such disloialtie, were
executed and rigorously punished, according to their merits: For after they had been drawn on hurdles through the streets all over the city of Herford; their
privy parts were first cut away and cast into the fire; then were their hearts
taken out of their bellies,

It was also a great perfidie in Charles the last duke of Bourgoigne, in that
he De Comines, lib. 1. cap. 78. and Annal. 1475.
gave safe conduct to the contie of S. Pol constable of France, to come to him
with good assurance, and then took him prisoner, and delivered him to king
Lewis the de Greve. True it is, that the said county had committed great
faults, as well against the king, as against the duke: he had also always
studied to nourish war betwixt the said two princes; yet notwithstanding it
was a very dishonorable and infamous thing, for the duke to take him prisoner,
after he had given him his faith and assurance, by the safe conduct which he
granted him: For if he had not been, he had (according to his
determination) with his silver, fled into Almaigne, and from thence in time he
might have made his peace, and again have come into the kings favor: But he
was deceived as before: and the said perfidie was so much the more infamous and
dishonest, because it was perpetrated by this duke of Bourgoigne, for the
covetousness de Campobache, an Italian, and gave him charge to bring with him
many Italians to his service, as he did. This was the last act of the Tragedy
of his life: For this county de Campobache ceased not till he had betrayed him
unto the duke of Lorraine before Nancy, which the said duke of Bourgoigne held
besieged, and there was slain in an assault, which the duke of Lorraine gave
him, to constrain him to raise the siege. And so in like sort, as by perfidie
and violating of his faith, he had caused the constable of S. Pol, to leese
both life and goods: so by the treason and perfidie of Campobache, he both
lost his life and his house was ruinated and

He should never have done, that would set down all the calamities and
mischiefs proceeding of perfidie and breach of public Faith. It caused the
ruin of Carthage the great in Africa, which for a long time was one of the
greatest and most flourishing commonweales that ever was in the world. It was
the only ruin of Corinth, of Thebes, of Calchis, which were three of the
greatest, fairest, and richest cities of Greece. It was the cause of Ierusalems
destruction and of all the country of Judea: yea, breefely, there never
happened any great subversion and desolation in the world, were it of cities,
commonweales, kingdoms, empires, great captains, great monarchs, or of strong
and flourishing nations, but it came upon perfidie and and chaseth away all
piety, justice, and the fear of God; she brings in Atheism Alecto, an
infernal fury, excited and called lately from hell, to the vexation and
Perfidie an infernal fury. Subtle palliations are not profitable. Titus
Livius lib. 1. Dec. 3.
utter overthrow of this poor world.

And as for that which Machiavell says, That a man may find reasons and
covertures to cloak and color the breach of Faith, this has no place amongst
good men which respect their honor, which also repute palliations but
trumperies and frauds, and do make men's perfidies but the worse and more
damnable. The Carthaginians Caius Luctatius, lieutenant general of the Roman
army, upon which treaty, Luctatius made this reservation; Under the good
pleasure of the Senate and Roman people: This treaty pleased not the Romans;
and therefore as soon as they were advertised thereof, they certified the
Carthaginians, that they would not ratify it. Not long after, Asdruball,
lieutenant general of the Carthaginian army, made another treaty with the
Romans, wherein they comprehended the Saguntines: This treaty a long time was
observed on both sides, yet the Carthaginians, never expressly, only secretly,
approved and ratified it: At the end of which time, the Carthaginians sent
Anniball to besiege Saguntum, which they took and ruinated. The Romans after
this, sent ambassadors Asdruball, wherein expressly the Saguntines were
comprehended. The Carthaginians in their Senate would have cloaked and colored
this fact (according to Machiavels counsel) with certain fond subtilties,
saying, that they never ratified the treaty made by Asdruball, and that it was
as well lawful for them to disavow that which Asdruball had done therein, as
the Romans had abrogated the truce of Luctatius. This color seemed to have
some appearance in it, but being more narrowly entered into, nothing will be
discovered, but deceit and fallacy: For there must a greater estimation be
made of a ratification by Deed, than by Word, as the assurance of Deeds is far
greater than that of Words: so that the Asdruball, could by no means afterward
reprove it, as also because in that truce there was no reservation contained,
as there was in the treaty of Luctatius: The Roman ambassadors then espying
the palliation and quarrelling deceit of the Carthaginians, vouchsased not
otherwise to reply, but to present to their choice, either peace or war: The
Carthaginians left that choice to the Romans, which chused war; by which the
Carthaginians lost themselves and their country: And this came of their
deceitfulness and breach of Faith.

Not unworthie the rehearsal, are the subtle distinctions of king Antiochus
his Titus Livius lib. 4. Dec. 4.
ambassador unto Titus Quintius, lieutenant general of the Roman army, then
Quintius made Menippus and Hegesianax, the kings ambassadors, to understand,
that the only mean of peace was, that their king should avoid Europe, and
leave Greece at liberty: Hereunto Menippus replied by goodly distinctions well
trussed together, whereby he showed, that Quintius would give him a law,
saying, That he must needs avoid Europe. Quintius, who was nothing expert in
making distinctions, unless it were with the sword, although otherwise of good
natural sense: Well (said he) you have made me a distinction, and I will make
you another: There are two kinds of wars; the one may be made in Asia, the
other may be made in Europe: Touching the last kind, the Romans have just cause
to enterprise wars against your master for the guard of the towns of Greece,
least they should fall into the hands of Antiochus, according as they have
preserved them from the hands of Philip king of Macedonie: and as for the first
kind, the Romans are content not to deal at all: and if king Antiochus your
master will make war in Asia, let him do it, we will not hinder him. The
said ambassadors (which accounted to have brought much to pass by their
subtle distinction) were much astonished, when they heard this
contradistinction of Quintius: for they could not reply one word: And in the
Antiochus must pass (by the distinction of Quintius) to avoid Europe. Hereby
is seen, that such subtilties and palliations in treaties of peace and
observation of Faith, are but ridiculous things: For the affairs of the world
ought to be governed by a common sense and solid judgment, and not by
subtilties of distinctions, which should be sent unto Sophisters and
Logicians, to maintain their arguments in schools.

The Grecians have always been great masters in subtilties (as their writings
Thusi. lib. 1 de bello Pe^o.
show) yea, too much: for often it has happened, that determining to govern
the affairs of their commonweales, rather by subtle reasons, than by
arguments founded upon good judgment, they have overthrown themselves into
utter ruins and Thucydides, which endured eight and twenty years, and well
nigh ruinated all Greece from top to toe, as we say: for it was founded upon a
subtlety of small importance. This was the matter: Two of the greatest
commonweales of all Greece were the commonweales of the Athenians and of the
Lacedaemonians, for all the rest were small in comparison of them, and were in
a conjunction by a association either with the one or the other, except some
few, as that of the Corcyrians, which neither associated with the Athenians nor
with the Lacedaemonians. These two great commonweales had a treaty of
confederacy together, wherein amongst other articles there was one which said,
That if any of the cities of Greece, which to the Athenians, That if they
received the Corcyrians into their society,

In like manner was the subtle disputation of such as caused Pompeius, that
famous Plutarch. in Pomp.
captain, to die. After Pompeius had lost the battle of Pharsalia against
Caesar, he embarked on the sea with his wife and certain of his friends,
hoovering about Egypt, hoping there to be welcome, and entertained by the
young king Ptolomaeus, in consideration of the pleasures which he had
sometimes done to his father. At his approaching the land of Egypt, he sent a
messenger in a boat to that young king, who was in the town of Pelusium, to
know if he would receive him in assurance: But indeed the kings affairs were
then managed by three base persons, which understood nothing less, than well
to govern affairs of State, whereof the first was a mean chamberlain of
his; and the other two, Theodotus the Rhetorician his schoolmaster, and
Achillas his domestical servant: These three venerable persons fell to
counsel, Pompeius: At the beginning they differed in opinion, one saying, that
it were good to receive him, and the other, not: But in the end al three
accorded in the worst opinion they could have taken, which was, to receive
Pompey, and to slay him: Which opinion, this goodly Rhetorician Theodotus
persuaded to the other two by his subtle reasons. If we receive Pompeius
(says he) certain it is, we shall have Caesar for an enemy, and Pompeius
for a master: If we receive him not, they will be both our enemies; Pompey
Caesar, because we have not stayed him: But if we receive him, and put him to
death, Caesar will thank us, and Pompeius cannot revenge himself upon us, nor
endammage us: for a dead man is no warrior. Upon these goodly reasons of that
subtle rhetorician, the conclusion was taken by these three bad people, to put
to death this great person Pompeius, who had had so many triumphs and victories
in his life, and who had seen to wait on him sometimes five or six great kings
at once, to entreat him as an arbitror of their contentions and differencies.
If these bad Counselors had considered the greatness of Pompeius, who had so
many parents and friends, virtuous and great lords, as also the magnanimity of
Caesar, which would vanquish by true force, and not by perfidies and treasons,
they would never Pompey to die, as soon as he had taken port in Egypt: But it
was not long ere they received the reward of their perfidie, founded upon that
subtlety: for Caesar soon after arrived in Egypt, unto whom Pothinus and
Achillas presented the head of Pompeius, thinking greatly to pleasure him:
Caesar turned his face backward, because he would not see him, and begun to
weep, and withal commanded to put Pothinus and Achillas to death, which had
proffered him that present, which was presently done: And that subtle reason of
Theodotus, who persuaded them, that Caesar would thank them for their murder,
was not found Theodotus seeing this execution, and finding himself very
culpable, fled, and yet lived certain years, miserably wandering and begging
here and there, fearing (being known) to be massacred of the world, which every
where had him in execration: But in the end, after the death of Caesar, Brutus
by chance light upon him, and caused him to die miserably, after he had made
him endure infinite torments. Behold the end of those three Counselors of that
young king Ptolomaeus, who also by their evil conduction made but a poor end:
for he was slain in a battle nigh Nile, and none could ever find his body.
Would to God such as resemble at this day these three Counselors, might
receive semblable guerdon and reward as they did, to learn them to conclude
the committing of massacres and the use of perfidies

But the skoffe which Theodotus alleged in the forementioned counsel, That a
dead man makes no war, is at this day ordinarily in the mouths of our
Italianized courtiers, and thereupon they ground their counsels, to sley and
massacre all such as they hate: We must (say they) sley this and that man, it
is good to dispatch them, for a dead man makes no war: But if a man reply
upon them, that a dead man yet may because of war, although he can make no
war: what would they answer? Dare they deny so apparent a thing, as we see
with our eyes, and whereof hystories furnish us with infinite examples. Lewis
duke of Orleance, king Charles the sixth his brother, after the duke John of
Bourgoigne had caused him to be slain, made no war Pompeius after he was
slain, made no more war: but his death was the cause of a great and long
civil war, in the Roman empire. The violating and Judges, 19, 20.
death of a Levites wife, was it not the cause of a war, wherein there died
more than sixty thousand men. They which were slain at Vassi, Anno 1562, drew
not they on a civil war, which endured too long? They also which were slain
in Anno 1572, in the month of August by the great towns of France, but
especially Paris; were not Geta the young prince made to the emperor Severus
his Spar. in Geta
father. Severus having vanquished Albinus and Niger his competitors to the
empire, begun to make a great slaughter of the greatest lords and gentlemen of
Rome, which had taken part with Albinus or Niger, because they were of a more
noble house than Severus: As then, day by day he was committing his slaughter,
he one day said unto Bassianus and Geta his children (as men spoke of that
fact) I shall by this means ease you of all your enemies: Hereupon Geta his
son demanded of him: My lord and father, them which you mean to put to
death, are they a great number? Yea Severus) and told him the number: All they
(replied he) have they neither parents, allies, nor friends? Yea, they have
many (said Severus:) You then (said Geta) will leave us more enemies than you
take from us. This wise speech of this young prince, touched so well the heart
of Severus (although he was cruel) that he would needs cease from his
slaughter, but that Plautianus and other courtiers, which attended the
enriching of themselves by confiscations, incited him to continue. Let
murderers then hold themselves assured, that for one they have slain, they
stir up ten enemies: And yet is not this all: for all the rest of their
life they have souls and consciences tormented with the remembrance of such as
they have most wickedly

Although the soul from body mine cold death has ravished, Virgil Aene. lib.
4.

Yet absent I will follow thee, yea, with a flame full black
My shadow always shall appear about thee as one dead,
Which shall revenge on thee my blood, thou, who no ill do lack.
I thought good by the way to touch, what war the dead makes or what cause of
war they are, to refute that saying of the Machiavellians, That a dead man
makes no war. Let us now come where we left, Of subtilties, which we say
ought not to be practiced in the government of the affairs of State, and that
thereby none may cover any perfidie.

When Anniball had gotten the battle of Cannas, against the Romans, he took
a great number of prisoners, and because he more loved money, for their
ransom, than to hold them, he sent a certain number of them to Rome, to
practice and work their redemption, but he made them swear and promise, that
they Anniball, fayning he had forgotten something; after again followed his
companions, and so they all came to Rome: But their affairs coming to be
debated in the Senate, none would yield to redeem Anniballs camp, except he
which returned by the way, who with these came not to the camp, but remained
in his house, thinking he was well discharged of his Faith and oath: But when
the Senate heard tell of the fallacious and deceitful return of the said
soldier, so unworthy and unseemely for a Roman, they commanded him to be
drawn out of his house, and by force to be led unto Anniball. Hereby you may
see then, that no wise people of good judgment (such as were the ancient
Romans) can approve such subtle palliations and covertures of an infraction
and breach of Faith, such as Machiavell persuadeth to a prince.

A like deceit was in the king of France, Phillip the sixth of that name: for
having Froisart, lib. 1. cap. 10.
Phillip could not save his oath; for he that does any thing by a mediator, is
as much as if he had done it himself, neither did the deceit succeed well
unto him: for both the duke of Normandy was constrained to raise his siege,
from before the castle, and not long after the king lost the battle at Cressy.

The emperor Valentinian, in his time was cruel in his actions and dealings,
Amm. Marel. lib. 28.
Maximus, who as he examined certain criminal persons, promised them if they
would confess the truth* they should suffer no punishment, either of sword or
fire: These poor accused persons (as often men do) confessed things they had
never perpretated, trusting upon his Faith and promise: But this wicked judge
caused them to be beaten down and slain with leaden hammers, thinking by
this cavillation to save his oath: God would, that for a recompense he should
after be hanged and strangled, under the emperor Gratianus, a gentle and kind
prince: For it often happens, that such cruel judges, which have bestowed
great pains to make their d^lligence allowed of the cruel princes, have been
after paid their wages and

Nabis was a tyrant, who without right or title got sovereign possession of
the commonwealth of the Lacedaemonians, and there committed many cruelties and
Titus Livius lib. 5. Dec. 4.
indignities: The Aetolians (a furious and cruel kind of people) esteemed
that it would be a great glory and honor unto them, if they could slay this
tyrant any way, and that all Greece, especially the Lacedaemonians, would thank
them: So they enterprised to join themselves unto him, under a pretext and
show of Faith and socie^^e the better to overthrow him. Alexamenes was deputed
captain and conductor, of the Aetolian forces, to effect that enterprise, who
did so much, as he entered into league and confederation with Nabis, who at
that time greatly feared the Romans: This league being past, Alexamenes
persuaded Nabis, that both together Nabis believed him, insomuch as one day
being in the field together, Alexamenes came behind him, and threw him clean
over his horse with a blow he gave him, and then presently caused him to be
slain and massacred. This being done, Alexamenes and his people returning
toward the town of Sparta Nabis (although they desired no more than his
death) that they furiously rushed upon the Aetolians, which were dispersed
through the town, (and looked not for their pains to be so recompensed) that
they slew them almost all, and amongst them Alexamenes himself: such as
escaped the sword were taken prisoners and sold.

For the last example of this matter, I will set down that of Ioab, David
nephew 2. Samuel. 2. 3. 20. 1 Kings. 2.
and constable, unto whom he did good and great services: Yet David commanded
Solomon his son, that he should put to death Ioab his cousin germane (as he
did) because of his perfidie: for he had slain Abner and Amasa (two other
great captains) traitorously, under the color of amity. Ioab seemed to have
great causes to justify his fact: For Abner had slain Asahel, Ioabs brother,
and therefore Ioab could not but receive just sorrow and feeling thereof:
Moreover Abner had followed the contrary part to David, standing for the house
of Saul: Amasa was a rebel and a seditious person against David, and had
followed Absalons part; so it was evident, if Ioab had had our Machivellists,
judges of his fact, they would not only have adjudged him innocent, but for a
remuneration they would have made him some great amends, with the goods of
Abner and Amasa: but the judgment of David, which Ioabs perfidie was to him:
And hereby princes have to learn, to imitate this holy and wise king, by
whose mouth God teaches them, that they ought to observe their Faith and
promise, yea to their damage; a doctrine fully contrary to the doctrine of this
filthy and wicked Machiavell.

To conclude, Perfidie is so detestable a thing, both to God and the world,
that God never leaves perfidious and Faith-breaking persons unpunished:
Oftentimes he waits not to punish them in the other world, but plagnes them in
this, yea often strangely and rigorously, by exterminating (as it were) in a
moment all their raze, Homer (although a Panim) has wisely taught us, saying:

Though straight the God of heaven lay not his punishment divine, Homer. Ili. 4

At all times on the perfidious for his great perjury:
Yet neither he himself, nor child can skape his ire in fine,
No nor his wife, but all destroyed by hand of his shall be.
22. Maxim.
Faith, Clemency, and Liberality, are virtues very domageable to a prince,
but it is good, that of them, he have only some similitude and likeness.
THere is no necessity (says our Florentine) that a prince Cap. 18. Of the
prince.
should be garnished with all these virtues, but it is requisite that he have
an appearance of them: For I dare well say this, that having and observing them
in all places, they will fall out mervelous domageable unto him: And contrary,
the mask and semblance of them is very profitable: and indeed we see, each
day by experience, that a prince is often constrained to go from his

MAchiavell sets here down three virtues, Faith, Clemency, and Liberality,
which he reproves in a prince as domageable and pernicious, effectually to
use them: But whosoever can recover the maskes and similitudes of them, as they
are naturally Machiavell delights to mock and play, with the most excellent
virtues amongst men? As for the Faith which is and ought to be amongst men
(for Machiavell speaks not of the Faith, which is toward God) we have
discoursed upon it, in the former Maxim: And as for Liberality, we shall
speak upon it in another place: Here we will speak of Clemency,
Machiavells doctrine, whether this doctrine can be domageable to a prince or
no?

To show that Clemency cannot be domageable, but profitable to him, unto
Clemency profitable and honorable to such as are clement.
whom God imparteth that grace, to be endued therewith, an argument drawn
from the contrary concludes well and evidently for this purpose: For if
cruelty (which is directly contrary to Clemency) be pernicious and
domageable to him, that is infected therewith, as we have above showed: It
follows, that clemency,

This natural kindness and bounty of the soul then (which men call
Clemency) being in a prince, the first produces this effect, that she will
soften and mitigate the punishments of offenders, yea sometimes will forgive
and altogether acquit them, according as the circumstances of the fact, and of
the persons do require: For a prince ought well to consider, When, How, To
whom, and Wherefore, he pardons a fault, because it is not clemency but
cruelty (as the king S. Lewis said) when a prince may do justice, and does it
not: But for so much as equity is the soul of justice, which oftentimes is
repugnant and contrary to the rigor of laws and ordinances, therefore a
prince must needs employ his clemency, to bring equity in use, by dispensing
with the punishment of offenders, which should suffer by the rigor

The emperor Marcus Antonine governed himself very wisely in his use Capit.
and Dio. in Mar^o. Vulc. Gallicanus in Avidio Cassio.
great and erroneous faults, and had not taken a custom therein, he mitigated
and lenified such punishments, as were ordained by laws, by some other lighter
punishment: So in weighty crimes of evil consequence, he was inexorable, and
for them had no favor, much less pardon: And in regard of offenses committed
against himself particularly, he was as prompt and voluntary, to pardon as
was possible, and so it appeared in the case of Avidius Cassius: For Cassius
being in Esclavonia Marcus Antonine, and carried to him his head: Antonine
seeing the head of Cassius, was Cassius, than Cassius had done to him. Yea but
Sir (replied one of the captains:) What if by sparing the life of Cassius, he
had gotten the victory of you? We do not fear that, answered the emperor:
for we have not so honored the gods, nor lived in such sort, as Cassius could
have vanquished us. No good princes or very few were at any time vanquished or
slain, or despoiled Nero, Caligula, Otho, Vitellius, and other like, which
were cruel and full of vices, and like Galba and Pertinax, which were
exceedingly given to covetousness, than which vice, nothing becomes a prince
worse: But Augustus, Traian, Adrian, our father Antonius Pius, and such like,
as they modestly governed, so deceased they honorably and without violence.
Cassius was a good and valiant captain, whose fault we desired to have
pardoned, because it rather proceeded of temeritie than of evil will against
us, being persuaded when he made his enterprise, that we had been dead: and
although he could never have excused himself, but that he had greatly injured
our children, which by right and reason ought to succeed us in our estate, yet
would not we have had him to die Cassius could not have overthrown their
estate: but if contrary, Cassius had better deserved than they to govern the
comomwealth, and had been better beloved, it had also been reasonable and just
he had been emperor. By this answer of that good emperor, a man may see how
facile and easy he was to pardon offenses against him, which is a very
covenable virtue in a prince: for a prince can hardly rigorously punish faults
committed against himself, but he shall be taxed and blamed for rigor and
cruelty, although the fault merit greevous punishment, as the same emperor
witnesses by his missive rescribed unto the Senate, which made too rigorous a
pursuit against the accomplices of Cassius: And because the said letters contain
notable sentences I pray (says he) and require you (Masters) that in regard of
the Cassian conspiration, you will depose and lay aside your censure, and
conserve my piety and clemency, yea, your own, and let none die that be
culpable: let no Senator be punished, nor noble blood be shed: let such as are
banished, be called again, and let their consiscated goods be yielded unto
them again, and would to God that I could revoke and call again to life such
as are dead: For there was never found, that a prince committed a good
vengeance of his own Cassius his children, his son in law, and his wife: How
should I not say pardon, since they have done nothing, let them live in all
assurance, and so know that they live under the empire of Marcus: Let them
enjoy their fathers patrimony, his gold, his silver, and other their goods,
that they may be rich, assured, free, and let them be examples of our piety
and clemency, also of yours, in the mouth of all the world. Neither (o ye
Conscript Fathers) is it any great clemency to pardon the children and wives
of such as are banished and condemned, since I demand and pray for pardon, even
of the culpable themselves, whether they be Senators or knights, that you may
deliver them from death, from confiscations, from After this missive was read
in the Senate house, all the Senators with an honorable acclamation begun to
cry, The gods conserve Antonine the clement, Antonine most pitiful, Antonine
most merciful: The gods perpetuate thy empire into thy race: We wish all good
to thy Wisdom, to thy Clemency, to thy Doctrine, to thy Nobility, and to
thy Innocence. This acclamation declares well how amiable and acceptable
Clemency makes a prince: for there is nothing in the world that better gains
the hearts of men, nor that brings to a prince more reverence and love, than
this gentleness and lenity of heart: And indeed this good emperor by
Antonine was also so reverenced and loved of all the world from father to son
in many years and generations after him, that many emperors his successors
caused themselves to be called Antonines, that the rather they might be
beloved of the people, though that name belonged not unto them, nor were of the
race or family of Marcus Antonine: as did Diadumenus the emperor Macrinus his
son and his companion in the empire, and as also did Bassianus and Geta,
Severus his children, and Heliogabalus, they were all surnamed Antonines. But
as this name appertained not unto them, so held they nothing of the virtues of
that good emperor, with whose name they decked themselves. Yet many
reprehended in Marcus Antonine this his great Clemency, whereby he so easily
pardoned such as had conspired against him, saying, That he provided evil for
the safety of himself and his children, to suffer conspirators to live: This
was but a means to emboulden wicked people to enterprise conspiracies: and
amongst others, the empress Faustine his wife, found it evil and of bad
consequence, that he punished not rigorously the partakers of Cassius,
whereupon he writ a very memorable letter to this effect. Very religiously do
thou (o Faustine, my dear companion) to have care of the assurance Avidius
Cassius, I do advertise thee, that I had rather pardon them: for nothing more
recommendeth a Roman emperor amongst all nations, than Clemency. That was it
which placed Julius Caesar in the number of the gods; which has consecrated
Augustus; which gave that most honorable title of Pius, that is, gentle and
godly to thy father: Finally, Cassius himself had not been slain, if my
advice had been demanded in the slaying of him. I pray thee therefore my dear
companion

For a resolution then, certain it is, that nothing can so become, or is so
worthy of a prince to practice, as Clemency, by pardoning such as offend him,
and even them which have committed some fault, that may be excused by some
equitable reason, and by mitigating the punishments of the law to such, as upon
custom commit no excess, and which otherwise are virtuous and valorous
people, and their offense not exceeding great and heinous: for if otherwise a
prince use his Clemency, without having these considerations before his eyes,
his fact will rather hold of cruelty

But assuredly, as a princes Clemency brings to his subjects the fruit of a
good equity, so does it also acquire unto himself this inestimable good, to
be beloved of every one, as was Marcus Antonine the emperor. The like happened
to Vespasian Sueto. Vesp. Pas. cap. 14. and 15. in ^i^o. cap. 1. and 9.
the emperor, who was greatly beloved for his great Clemency and gentleness:
for he was so gentle, kind, and clement, that he easily forgot offenses
committed against him, yea, he would do good to his enemies: As when he married
and endowed very richly and honorably the daughter of Vitellius, his enemy,
which warred Titus was so good and clement, that he was never blamed for
bearing evil will to any man, and often he had this word in his mouth: That he
had rather perish himself, than lose any: He was of the people surnamed, The
delights of mankind, for his kindness and Clemency. In like sort Traian,
Adrian, Pius, Tacitus, and many other Roman emperors were so beloved and
reverenced of their subjects for their natural humanity and Clemency, that
they are placed after their deaths in the roll of their gods.

Moreover, whenever a prince shall be soft and clement, there is no doubt but
Clemency cause of good works
his subjects will imitate him therein: for it is the peoples nature to
conform themselves

The example of the princes life in all things commonly
The subject seeks to imitate with all his possibility.
But whenever subjects do imitate that most excellent virtue of Debonairetie
and Clemency, certain also it is, that the whole body of the commonwealth is
much better composed, more quiet, and better governed: For when men are given
to that virtue, they will withal addict themselves to Justice, Temperance,
Charity, Piety, and all other virtues, which do ordinarily accompany
Clemency, from Marcus Antonine, the world Capit. in Marcel.
was commonly well reformed in good manners: for every man studied to imitate
him in his virtues, and especially in his moderation and gentleness; insomuch
(says Capitolinus) as he made many good men of such as were very bad before,
and such as were good, he made them better. This is also the cause why
debonaire and gentle princes are always so praised and esteemed, not only by
men of their time, but also Homer, when he says:

A wicked man, full of fierce cruelty,
Behind his back of all accursed shall be; Odys. lib. 19.

Both during life, and after death also,
Defame on him in every place shall go:
But contrary, the good and sincere man
Will grave in mind his praise all that he can.
How all men in each place set forth his praise
To borders even of nations strange always.
But I do well know, that hereupon the Machiavellists will say and reply,
That if a A princes Clemency is not the cause of evil.
prince will be so facile, to pardon and to practice Clemency, he will thereby
incite men to take experience of that his virtue, and by consequent provoke
them to commit evil and excess, under the hope of impunitie: hereunto I
answer in a tripartite sort: First I say, That if a prince use Clemency,
without derogating from his justice (as above we have said he ought to do)
there will follow no impunitie of a punishable

The ancient Romans do confess, that their facility to pardon, has many
Titus Livius lib. 1. Dec. 4.
times brought wars upon them, as also revoltments of their allies and
confederats. But what then? Left they therefore always to show themselves
prompt and voluntary to use Clemency toward such as offended them? nay
rather it was the virtue, whereof they made greatest estimation, and which they
most practiced, knowing well, that Clemency was the true foundation of the
greatness and estate of the Philip of Macedonie against the Romans, than with
them to renew their alliance. Our ancestors (says he) have often
experimented, and we also have seen, that because ever we have been easy to
pardon, we have occasioned many to experiment our Clemency; yet were we
never so discouraged, as we would not at all times use equality to such as
have broken their Faiths unto us, and such as holily observed them, as also
reason wills, that such as are loyal and faithful be better beloved, favored
and respected than others: Have we nor warred upon the Samnites, by the space
of seaventie years? and during this time, how many times Anniball; but after
we had besieged them, there were more in the town which slew themselves,
pressed with an evil conscience, than we caused to dye, after we had taken
the town by force, and left them their town whole and their goods. Having
also vanquished Anniball, and the Carthaginians, which had done us so many
mischiefs and so often broken their Faiths, yet left we them in peace and
liberty. Briefly o Aetolians (said he) you should know and believe, that the
Roman people Phillip, than to vanquish and prosper with the Romans. Unto this
remonstrance of the Roman ambassadors, the Aetolians States would deliver no
answer, but amongst themselves resolved secretly, neither to be on the one
side, nor the other, and that at the end of the war, they would join
themselves to the strongest, which in the end was their bane, yet found they
refuge in the Romans Clemency: And verily Clemency is such a virtue, as a
prince may never dispoyle himself of, although sometimes it seem he get
harm thereby: For Clemency is not cause of any evil, but only the malice of
men does abuse it; yet it

Besides the effects whereof, we have above discoursed, which are to temper
the rigor of justice, to make the prince beloved, reverenced, and praised of
all the world, and to fill his subjects with good manners, there are yet, three
other effects worthy of note in a princes Clemency, that thereby he may be
better obeyed, more assured in his estate, and may augment his domination: And
to touch those three points in order one after an other, I will presuppose for
the first point: That a prince makes himself easily and well obeyed, when the
wills of his subjects are of themselves A clement prince better obeyed.
that more enduceth a subject to render his prince obedience, and to obey his
command,

Therefore the laws and ordinances which the Romans, gave to the Macedonians,
Titus Livius lib. 5. Dec. 5.
after they had brought Macedonie under their obedience, endured very long
before they were in any thing changed or corrected: For they were so upright
and convenient for that nation, as the usage it self (says Titus Livius,
which is the true corrector of laws) found nothing to reprehend or correct, by
the experience of many years. Very memorable also is the manner of the Romans
use, to make How to make good laws.
laws, and especially those which they gave to the Macedonians: For they were
not Titus Livius) it came often to pass, that the Tribunes (whose office it
was to cause the law to be received or rejected by the people) desisted from
the receipt of a law, being moved so to do by the reasons and remonstrations of
such as disuaded it: and often times also opposing themselves against the
reception of a law, they departed from their opposition, being moved thereunto
by the reasons of such as persuaded, and truly if the laws and ordinances,
which are made for the government of a kingdom or other

Moreover none need to doubt, but when he that has authority to command,
Dion. in Pompeio. Plutarch in Lucul.
Lucullus was a valiant and wise captain, who executed great matters against
Mithridates and Tigranes, two of the greatest kings of Levant, and of all Asia,
but in the end not being able to obtain the love of his soldiers, he was in
hazard by their disobedience to have overthrown all the glory and honor,
which he had acquired: This disobedience of his army, was the cause that the
Romans called him from Levant, before he had altogether ended the subjugating
of those two kings, and sent in his place Pompeius, who did nothing else but
(as I may say) gathered the fruit that Lucullus had sown, and carried away the
honor and triumph of his pains and travels: For the necessity was such, that
Pompeius must necessarily be sent in Lucullus his place, Lucullus was nothing
obeyed of his people of war, because they loved him not, he was so stern and
uncourteous: and as soon as they had obtained Pompeius for their captain
general, they greatly obeyed him, because he was unto them gentle, clement
and affable, insomuch as he did with them, what he would, and by their forces
and valloures he brought all the East under the Romans obedience: This then
was a great evil hap for Lucullus (who otherwise was endowed with excellent
virtues) that he could not use softness, clemency, and kindness toward his
soldiers, and have gotten love, and to have contained them in his obedience,
but so to lose the fruit of his travailes and victories, not wholly finishing
that whereof he had taken charge.

But yet greater evil luck happened unto Appius Claudius, who was so
exceeding Titus Livius lib. 2. Dec. 1.
rigorous and imperious, that he caused his soldiers, rather to hate than
love him: He being Consul and captain general of the Roman army, against
the Volsques, practiced in the camp toward the soldiers, the same rigor and
severity which he did against the common people at Rome, and cared not to be
beloved, but only sought to make himself to be feared: This was the cause
that his people of war would not obey him, but as constrained, they executed
their charge cowardly and negligently: When he commanded to march quickly and
swiftly, his soldiers would go slowly and softly; when he came toward them
to command them any thing, they would not vouchsafe to regard him, but fixed
their eyes on the

The Bounty, Clemency, and Gentleness of a prince manifest themselves by
many means toward his subjects, as by good tractations and comforts, far
from oppression, by maintaining their liberties and franchises, by making
edicts and equal Charles the eight, Anno 1483, as M. Philip de Comines
witnesses: for the poor people De Comines, lib. 1. cap. 109, 110.
of France were before vexed and eaten up by the space of 20 years and more
with great tallages and imposts, and great civil wars, which never comes
without a great ruin: yet notwithstanding, seeing themselves so much honored
by their prince, as by him to be convocated together with the States to
understand public affairs, and therein to give their aid and advice, not
only the States accorded to their king, the impost which he demanded, but
also humbly besought his majesty, that it would please him to assemble them
again within two years after, and that if his said Majesty had not money
enough to dispatch his affairs, they would at his Might it Comines.
not be accounted a far more just thing both before God and the world by
such force as this, to levy money, than upon a disordinate will? For no prince
cannot otherwise levy it but by tyranny: would privileges, to take it at
their pleasure, be alleged against so good subjects, which so liberally give
that which is demanded? These words of Comines are very notable to be applied
to our time.

Let us now come to the other effect of the Clemency of a prince, which
concerns the assurance of his estate. Hereupon I think every man will
confess unto me, A clement prince assured in his State.
that there is nothing that better assures a prince in his estate, than when
he has no enemies: But a debonaire and gentle prince shall never lightly
procure enemies, but rather daily friends: because that virtue of Clemency is
of it self so amiable and attractive, that they are always loved, which are
endowed therewith: And if sometimes enemies arise against a good and gentle
prince (as the envy and desire to have and to make themselves greater, causes
ambitious and covetous men sometimes to enterprise upon such clement princes)
yet very hardly shall such enemies Alexander Severus was very modest, Lampri.
in Alex. Sever.
soft, clement, and affable toward all his subjects, wherewith Mammaea his
mother was not content: So that one day she said unto him, that he had made his
authority not regarded, but contemptible by his Clemency: Yea, but (answered
he) I have made my estate so much the longer and more assured: And in truth he
had in likelihood lived longer time: but she so ruled him, that he got the
evil will of his subjects, Alexander is attributed to Theopompus king of
Sparta, who knowing, that the puissance of a king is good and Plutarch in Apo.
excellent, when kings use it well: but because there were far more kings
which abuse their powers, than that use them well, he provided for himself and
his successors certain Censors and correctors, to reprehend them of their
faults, which were called Ephori: Certain then said unto Theopompus, that by
this establishment of Ephori he had lessened and enfeeblished his power: Nay
then (said he) I have fortified it, and made it perdurable, meaning to say (as
true it is) that there is nothing which better fortifieth, nor which makes more
firm and stable a princes estate, than when he governes Severus otherwise
endowed with Spart. and Dion. in Carac.
many great virtues, had not this good, to be debonaire and clement, but rather
was rigorous and cruel: yet he knew well, and himself confessed, that
Clemency is a virtue most worthy of a prince, and he much desired to be so
esteemed, although his actions were contrary. I know well, that here the
Machiavellists may reply upon me, that he feigned and only made a show, to
esteem of Clemency, upon a certain kind of playing the Fox, and
dissimulation, which Machiavell holds to be convenient for a prince: Here
unto I make a double answer: And I say, suppose in this place Severus meant to
play the Fox, yet when he so much praises Clemency, and Severus, although he
was exceeding sanguinarie and cruel during his reign, yet in the end he
found, that it had been better for him, if he had been Clement: for with his
own eyes he saw Plautianus his greatest and especiallest friend, and Bassianus
his eldest son (whom with himself he associated in the empire) both of them
(though not together) conspire to slay him; insomuch, as he durst not punish
them, because they had learned of him to be sanguinarie and cruel: and at the
end of his days, the last words he spoke, were, That he left the empire firm
and assured to his Antonines (meaning Bassianus and Geta, which he named
Antonines, that they might be beloved) provided, that they proved good princes:
but if they were wicked and cruel, then he left them weak Bassianus his eldest
son (who succeeded him in the empire) was as cruel as he, and begun to
exercise his cruelty, in slaying with his own hand Geta his brother, and
after continued it upon his friends and other notable people a great number,
which he brought to their deaths: and therefore was not his foot long in the
empire, but (according as his father prophesied of his death) he was soon
despoyled Macrinus his lieutenant, and lived but nine and twenty years,
whereof he reigned six. The emperor Domitian also was a very cruel prince,
yet he greatly praised Clemency in a prince, and ordinarily, when he reasoned
upon any affair in the Senate, he often enterlaced amongst his speeches some
commendations of his own Clemency, although he was most cruel and wicked.
And breefely, we may say and conclude, that this virtue of Clemency is so
excellent and lowable of it self, that even the wicked, which reject it, are
notwithstanding constrained to have it in estimation, and to confess it is a
virtue worthy of a prince.

From the beginning that Rome was reduced into the form of a commonweal,
Tarquins, the people were sent to the war Dioni. Halic. lib. 5.
without wages, and whilst they were at the war for the commonweal, the
interests and usuries which they ought to the rich (for always the poor are
debtors to the rich) left not to increase and multiply; insomuch, as when the
soldiers returned from the war (some being maimed and wounded) in stead to
have rest in their houses, they had the usurers on their backs, which demanded
the usuries run on, during the time of the war: Hereupon arose there in the
town a great sedition, for the poor amongst the people could not suffer this
rude handling, that they thus should be tormented with seisures and pawning of
their goods, and with imprisonments of their persons, for the interests growing
during the war, and being in the commonwealths Valerius Publicola (who was
one of them which helped away the tyrant from Rome) spoke thus: This the
usurers rigorous dealing, is but a new tyranny: and it is but a small thing
for us to have expulsed from Rome the tyranny of the Tarquins, if now we will
establish another: and that it was too unreasonable, that soldiers should pay
interests running on, whilst they served the commonwealth, since also they
served without wages. Therefore he exhorted the Senate to releeve the people of
those interests for their content, and that afterward they might with so much
the better will serve the commonweal at a need: For else (says he) certain it
is, if there be a continuance of this rigorous dealing, it will bring the
people into a great disobedience, and Publicola, knowing well, that the
firmitie and assuredness of the public State is founded upon Clemency and
Gentleness.

Anniball making war in Italy, meaning to go to Capua, commanded one of
Titus Livius lib. 2. Dec. 3.
the prisoners he held, to guide him to a place called Casin, which was in the
way to Capua: This prisoner supposing Anniball had bidden him guide him to
Casilin (and that because Anniball spoke not well the Latin language) he
conducted Anniball perceiving he was evil guided, caused to whip and hang the
prisoner which had done this before he would hear any excuse. This rigorous
execution and other cruelties that he used, never caused such as were allied
with the Romans, to break from them, although on every side they saw
themselves in great peril, because (says Titus Livius) they knew that they
were commanded by a just and a moderate government, and by good people that
hated cruelty, therefore refused they not to obey (which is the

Antiochus king of Syria, and a great dominator in Levant, having enterprised a
Titus Livius lib. 7. Dec. 3.
war against the Romans, they sent against him Lucius Scipio, for captain
general of their army, although otherwise he was no great warrior: But the
cause why the Romans delivered so great and honorable a charge unto him was,
because the great Scipio the Affrican, his brother had declared, that if Lucius
his brother were chosen general captain to go against Antiochus, he should
be there as his lieutenant: As then they both were in Greece with the Roman
army, making war upon that king, it so happened, that the only son of
Scipio the Affrican was taken prisoner by Antiochus soldiers: Antiochus having
this young lord in his hands, Scipio was of such Clemency, that he would never
forget, that the pleasure and that the amity of so great a personage might
stand him in good stead in some great necessities, as loss of a battle, or
of a captivity, or such like. Not long after Scipio fell sick, whereof
Antiochus hearing, he sent him his son without ransom, fearing Scipio would
die with grief and melancholy, by whose death he doubted to leese a good
refuge: For that king (says Titus Livius) trusted more in the Clemency and
authority of Scipio alone, for the uncertain and doubtful haps of war,
than in his army of 60000 footmen, and 12000 horsemen. Is not here, think
you, an admirable effect of Clemency, that an enemy does better assure his
estate upon his enemies Clemency,

But what need we any more to amplify by examples or authorities this point?
does not ordinary experience show, and ever has done, that all good and
clement princes have always been very assured in their estates: as Augustus,
Vespasian, Traian, Adrian, the Antonines, and many other Roman emperors, and
the most part of our kings of France, which were clement and debonaire, do
fully prove this which I say: for they reigned very peaceably; died of
natural deaths; and after their deaths were greatly lamented of the people.
Here I may not forget a notable sentence of the emperor Antonius Pius, which
he received from Scipio the Affrican, Capit. in Pio. Sue^. in August. cap. 35.
which was this, That he loved better to preserve one of his subjects, than to
sley a Scipio and the emperor Pius, that they had rather slay an enemy, than
save an hundred friends. Are not these people worthy to command? Neither make
they any account more of their princes subjects, than of slaves, which men may
beat, scourge, or sley at their pleasure, as beasts: as indeed there has been
lately a burne-paper-fellow, a writer for wages, one of these Machiavelists,
who durst publish by writing, That the authority of a prince over his subjects,
is like that which goodly doctrine upon their shoulders: but how much more
notable and humane, is Augustus Caesar? who so much feared, that men had such
an opinion of him, that he would not take away, but only diminish the liberty
of the people, that he could never abide and suffer to be called Dominus, that
is to say, Lord, but abhorred it as an injurious name, and full of opprobry,
because it has some relation to Servus, which is to say, servant, or slave: he
being far from the affectation of such great and magnificall names, as many
great men have since well liked of, without showing the effect of them.

The third point now remains, which is to show, That the Clemency of a
prince A prince by Clemency increases his domination. Dionis. Halic. lib. 2.
Plutarke in Caesar and Alexand.
is cause of the encreasement of his domination. Hereupon we read a memorable
history of Romulus, who was so clement, soft, and gentle toward his people,
which Julius Caesar vanquished the Gaulois: for he was so soft and gracious
unto them, and so easy to pardon, and used them every way so well, far from
all oppression, that many of that nation voluntarily joined themselves unto
him, and by them he vanquished the others. When Alexander the Great made great
conquests in Asia, most commonly the citizens of all great cities met him, to
present unto him the keys of the towns: for he dealt with them in such
Clemency and kindness, without in any thing altering their estates, that they
liked better to be his, than their own.

Anniball having taken the town of Saguntum in Spain, was so feared and
redoubted, Titus Livius lib. 2. Dec. 3.
that the most part of Spain submitted themselves under his obedience, and
abandoned the Roman society, because they had not aided Saguntum against
Anniball: The Romans (to repair their fault whereat they took much grief)
sent great forces into Spain under the conduction of Publius Scipio, father of
the African, and of Cneius his uncle: Anniball to contain in obedience the
Spaniards, took in hostage their children, their brethren, or parents of all
the nobility of the country, and the notablest citizens of the good towns,
and set them under guard at Saguntum, under the charge of some small number of
soldiers. God would, that those hostages should find means to escape from
their prison, yet it was their haps to fall Scipioes. The Scipioes having
possession of them, in place to revenge themselves upon them (as they feared)
for the fault they and their parents had made by their revoltment from the
Romans, they welcomed and dealt with them very graciously, and sent them all
to their parents and houses. This Clemency and kindness of the Scipioes was
cause, that soon after all Spain forsook the obedience of Anniball and the
Carthaginians, and fell under the government of the Romans, which they would
never have done, if these hostages had been dealt with after the counsels and
precepts of Machiavell.

Yet the example of Clemency in Scipio the Affrican, is more notable than this
Titus Livius lib. 3. Dec. 3.
of his father and uncle. After the deaths of his said father and uncle, this
young lord Scipioes and their host. Scipio as soon as the town was taken,
caused all the hostages to be brought before Flaminius his treasurer to handle
them well and honorably: Amongst other hostages, there was a young lady of a
great house, which was brought to Scipio, which was of so great beauty, that
as she passed by, she dreweach man's regard upon her: This lady was fianced
unto one Allucius, prince of the Celtiberians. Scipio taking knowledge Allucius
extremely loved her, he sent for them all: Her parents came with a great
quantity of gold and silver for her ransom: Allucius came also: They all
being present before Scipio, he said to that young prince Allucius: My dear
friend, understanding, that ardently you love this young lady (as her beauty
well meriteth it) I thought it good to keep her for you, as I would my
affianced should be kept for me, if the affairs of the commonweal permitted
me to think upon the action of legitimate love: in favor then of your
affections, I have preserved your loves inviolated: in recompense whereof, I
only desire and pray you, that from henceforth you will be friends unto the
Roman people: and if you will credit me as a good man, that is desirous to
follow the traces After Scipio had thus graciously entertained this young
prince, he was so filled with shame and joy, that presently he prayed the gods
that they would acquit to Scipio that great benefit, for he could never do
it. The said ladies parents stepped forward, and presented unto him a great
quantity of gold and silver for their daughters ransom, which although Scipio
refused, yet they pressed it so sore upon him, that he accorded to take it, and
bad them lay it before him; which they doing, Scipio called Allucius, and said
unto him: Good friend, besides the dowry which your father in law will give
you, my desire is, that you will take this silver Allucius very joyful of so
great a benefit, thanking him greatly, returned with his lover in great
contentment unto his country: where as soon as he came, he sowed the fame of
those things through all Spain, saying, That there was come into that country
a young lord, like the gods, which vanquisheth all men, by arms, by clemency,
and magnificence: Within a small time after he came to the service of Scipio
with 1400 horse. Not long after came also to Scipio the parents of the other
hostages which he had taken in new Carthage, all which he yielded unto them,
conditionally to be the Romans friends. He gave also to a great lord called
Mandonius, his wife, who was sister of another great lord, named Indibilis,
which were exceeding joyous thereof, and promised Scipio all fidelity:
Massiva, the nephew of Massinissa king of Numidia, which he sent to his uncle,
after he had honorably apparrelled, mounted and accompanied him. This was the
cause that Massinissa stuck so firmly to the Roman party, wherein he
constantly persevered all his life, and greatly aided Scipio, to the overthrow
of the Carthaginians: And as for the Spaniards (whose hostages Scipio had sent
home without ransom) they performed many great favors to him in all his
Spanish wars: Breefely, this great Clemency, Scipio, were the cause that all
his high and mighty enterprises were ever facile and easy unto him: But
herein appeared in him a double Clemency, namely, that the two lords
abovenamed, Mandonius and Indibilis revolted, and so caused all their country
to revolt also, upon a false fame that run of Scipioes death: But after finding
the report false, they resolved yet once again to prove his Clemency as an
assured refuge, and so went and fell on their knees before him, desiring
pardon, and confessing their faults. Scipio after he had rebuked them, said
unto them in this sort: My friends, by your merits you shall die, but you shall
live by the benefit of the Roman people: And although the custom be, to take
all arms from rebels, yet I will not take them from you, but if you fall any
more into such a By this example then of Scipio it appears, that a prince
ought always to be inclined to Clemency, whereby he may obtain friends,
augment his dominations, shun Gods indignation, the envy of men, and to do to
another that which he would should be done to himself. This is it which
Romulus said to the Antenates and Caeninians, which he had vanquished and
subjugated: Although (said he) you have merited to suffer al extreme things,
for that you rather loved war against us, than our amity: yet many reasons
Dioni. Halic. lib. 2.
moove us to use our victory moderately, in respect of the indignation of the
gods,

The Roman Senate had always Clemency in great recommendation, yea, even
toward them which had often rebeled. The Ligurians (which now we call Genevois)
Titus Liviu^. lib. 2. Dec. 2.
rose up against the Romans many times; insomuch, as they sent against them
Marcus Popilius, Consul, with a puissant army. Popilius having subjugated and
vanquished them, he took their arms from them, dismantelled and destroyed
their towns, Popilius was countermanded to return, and give over the
government to another of Liguria.

Camillus, general captain of the Roman army, besieged the town of
Falisques, Titus Liviu^ lib. 5. Dec. 1.
the Romans enemies: The schoolmaster of Falisques enterprised a great
wickedness Camillus his camp, hoping he would give him some good recompense,
speaking in this manner: Lord Camillus, I yield into your hands the town of
Falisques, for I here bring you their dear and loving children, which to
recover, they will easily yield themselves to you. To whom Camillus answered:
Wicked wretch, thou addressest not thy self to thy like: We have by compacts
no society with the Camillus commanded to bind the schoolemasters hands
behind him, and to give all the scholars rods in their hands, which whipped
him naked into the town. As thus in this sort the children brought their
master to the town, all the people ran to see the spectacle, which so changed
their courages, before full of wrath and hatred against the Romans, that
straight they sent delegates to Camillus, to desire peace, admiring Camillus
knowing, that he alone could not enterprise to conclude a peace, sent the said
delegates toward the Senate of Rome; where arriving, they made this speech to
the Senate: Having (my masters) been vanquished by an agreeable victory both to
gods and men, we yield our selves to you, knowing, that our estate shall be
better under your domination, than in our own liberties and customs: The
issue of this war will serve hereafter for a double example to al mankind:
for it seems you do better love loyalty in war, than present victory: And
we being provoked by your kindness and loyalty, do gladly and willingly yield
you the victory. We offer our selves your subjects, and we shall never repent
our selves of your domination, nor you of your loyalty. The peace and alliance
accorded to the Camillus entered Rome in triumph, and was more esteemed to be a
victor by Clemency, than if it had been by Arms.

He that would here collect so many examples as hystories do furnish us
concerning this matter, should never have done, but I satisfy my self with
the most memorable amongst them: for in a notorious and evident thing, there is
no need to insist more amply.

23. Maxim.
A Prince ought to have a turning and winding wit, with art and practice made
fit, to be cruel and unfaithful, that he may show himself such an one when
there is need.
IT is good (says our Florentine) that a prince should appear Cap. 18. Of a
prince.
the contrary at all times at a need: For most commonly necessity requires,

THe Philosophers call habitude that promptness and aptness which men acquire
by frequent exercise of the actions of every art. As a Tailor by customable
exercise of cutting and shaping, obtaines an habit and dexterity, to know well
how to make garments. An Archer in a crosbow or gunne, by the often exercise of
shooting, obtains that habitude, to draw well, and to shoot nigh the white:
Machiavels mind then is, That it is not sufficient for a prince sometimes to be
cruel, perfidious, fierce, covetous, and illiberall; but by frequent exercise
of cruelty, perfidie, and covetousness, he must obtain an habitude,
promptly, dexteriously, and handsomely at his pleasure to practice these goodly
virtues at a need. For if by frequent exercise he could not obtain this
habit, it might so fall out, that in his necessity he should be found to seek
in the practice of them in that sort which should be requisite and necessary:
even as an Archer or Gunner cannot know how handsomely to handle his Bow and
Gunne to come nigh the mark, who not past once or twice before has handled
them: Because (as Aristotle says) one sole action Machiavell to teach them the
precepts of the art of wickedness: As this Maxim must needs be one of them,
whereby he wills, that these vicious qualities of cruelty, perfidie, and
niggardliness should be in a prince, not as in an habit and perfection: But I
will not stand to confute here this Maxim: for before, we have sufficiently
spoken of cruelty and perfidie, and at large demonstrated, how unworthy they
are for a prince: And as for Covetousness, we shall have Machiavell here
teaches: for there was never Arabian, Scythian, or Turk, which ever taught a
more strange and barbarous doctrine, as to persuademen to make habitudes of
vices? Let us also learn to discern spirits before we believe them. If
Machiavell had been known to be such a man as I hope he shall be deciphered
by this discourse, it is likely he should not have done so much harm as he
has done. And finally, let us thank our good God, which has not permitted,
that our spirits should be infected with such a corruption, as to approove or
follow such abhorrent doctrine from piety and reason, and such monstrous and
savage opinions: Thucidides calls them, servants and slaves of absurd
opinions, such as follow evil counsel sooner than good, as the Athenians
often did: So do I believe them to be double, yea, centuple slaves and
miserable, which suffer their spirits to be persuaded and deluded with the
doctrine and impiety of Machiavell.

24. Maxim.
A prince desirous to break a peace, promised and sworn with his neighbor,
ought to moove war against his friend.
THe prince (says Machiavell) having made certain capitulations Discourse.
lib. 2. cap* 9.
been established and well observed, so that he fears directly to break
them, lest he fall to open war with his said neighbor, he must stir him by
taking arms against his friend, knowing that the other will feel himself
touched, when the assault is delivered to his friend and confederate, and
will sustain and revenge him, and so shall it seem that he himself* is the
first provoker of war and breaker of peace*

MAchiavell, because he has above taught, that a prince may always find
colors enough to palliate and cover the infraction of faith, now he gives a
rule, saying; That to palliate a rupture of peace or confederation, with a
prince his neighbor, he must assail his confederates friend: We have before
amply disputed against these subtle palliations, and have showed by many
examples, that the issue has always prooved evil to them that use them: And
surely such cautells and subtilties,

The ancient Romans, by the form and course they had to make confederations
and peace with the people their neighbors, showed well how far they were from
Titus Livius lib. 1. Dec. 2.
this doctrine of Machiavell: For the Pater Patratus (who was the stipulator or
master of the ceremonies or arbitrer of peace) after all articles accorded, of
the one part, and of the other, and oaths taken, pronounced a great height,
these words; The first of the two people which breaks the peace, be it by
deliberate counsel, or by subtle deceit, grant o Jupiter, that the same day,
he may be bruised and beaten,

25. Maxim.
A prince ought to have his mind disposed to turn after every wind, and
variation of Fortune, that he may know to make use of a Vice, when
A Good thing is not always profitable, nor in season, and oftentimes a prince
who would practice it, shall thereby draw Cap. 18 and 25 Of a prince.
on his own destruction: For sometimes it falls out, that necessarily he must
use that which is evil, and vice: Therefore a wise prince, ought to take great
heed to the time, and to the windlike variation of Fortune; and ought to have
knowledge, to serve himself

BEcause a Prince that has been nourished in virtue, as he reads Machiavell,
might make some difficulty to believe him, and to esteem that it should evil
become him, altogether to despoile himself of virtue, to put on vice: For this
cause, Machiavell (desirous Constancy is a companion of all other virtues.


I will then presuppose, that Constancy is a quality, which ordinatilie
accompanies all other virtues: yea it is as it were of their substance and
nature: Therefore is Justice defined, A constant will to yield to every man,
that which belongs: And Temperance may be also defined, A constant
moderation to use well all things: and Prudence, A constant provision in all
affairs, and so of all other virtues: Hereupon I make this illation, Since
constancy is of the nature and substance of all virtues, and as it were mixed
amongst them, that thereof it follows, That he which is inconstant, can have
no virtue in him, for virtue goes not without Constancy: Machiavell also (as
beastly as he is) so understood this: for by degrees going about to lead a
prince, and all them, which follow his doctrine, to a sovereign wickedness
(as philosophers lead men to a sovereign good) he has considered, that he
must make for his foundation, Inconstancy: For an inconstant man disposed to
turn with all winds, can never be but full of all sorts of vices, Machiavell
then was not any thing deceived, when thinking to lead a Protheus garments,
and that he has no hold nor certitude of his word, nor in his actions, men
may well say, that he is abandoned of physicians, and his malady is
incurable, and that in all vices, he has taken the nature of the Camoelion.
At the hands of such a prince which is inconstant, variable in his word,
mutable in actions and commands, there is nothing to be hoped for, but evil,
disorder, and confusion.

How much more notable and worthy to be engraved in princes hearts, is that
Titus Livius lib. 6. Dec. 3
sentence of Scipio the Affrican: That they are vanquishers, which being
vanquished, do give place unto Fortune: But the better to understand this, I
will set down the Scipio his father and uncle were overthrown, with the most
part of their army in Spain, the day being come, whereupon they elected their
magistrates at Rome; none durst hazard himself, to demand the government of
Spain, for evil luck which happened to the two brothers Scipioes: Heereat the
Roman people, being very sad and sorrowful, cast their eyes upon the great
men of the city, to see if any of their hearts would arise, to demand the
government of Spain: and because none did it, they esteemed the affairs of
the common weal, to be in a deplored and desperate estate: The above said
young lord Scipio (who after was called the Affrican, of the age only of two
and twenty years) arose and demanded of the Roman people, the said
government Scipioes might seem unluckie, in regard that his father and uncle,
had been vanquished and slain in Spain, that notwithstanding he doubted not,
but to turn the chance of Fortune: Briefly by a great and favorable consent
of all the people, he was chosen governor of

The same Scipio another time (but long after) speaking to Zeusis and
Antipater, Titus Livius lib. 7. Dec. 4.
ambassadors of the king Antiochus, which demanded peace of him, after he had
been vanquished, used these words full of gravitie and wisdom: The peace
(says he) which you demand now that your are vanquished, we agree unto you,
with like conditions as you offered before our victory: For in all fortune,
good or evil, we have Constancy stirs not for prosperity or adversity.
always the same courages; neither can prosperity exalt us, nor adversity
humble us Anniball, who is in your army: Therefore make known unto the king
your master, that we accord unto him, the same peace which we offered him
before our victory. Here may you see, how constant the Romans were in
virtue, without any change either of prosperity, or adversity. Here is no
Machiavelizing, we must not go to the school of Scipio, nor of the ancient
Romans, nor of any other valiant princes, to learn Machiavells doctrine, to
have an unconstant and mutable courage, to change and to turn as the wind:
This must be learned in the school of a sort of Italian Machiavelists,
resembling harlots which love every man, yet love no person, and which with
doubtful and unstayed

We commonly say, That the king is the lively law of his subjects, and that
the prince ought to serve for a rule to his people: but is it not a ridiculous
thing* to say, That the law ought to be a thing unconstant and mutable with
every wind? Nay contrary, the law ought to be firm, constant, permanent,
inviolable, and inviolably observed, else it is no law: And therefore amongst
all mortal men, the prince is he, which ought to be most constant and firm,
to show, that he is the true and lively law of his people and subjects, unto
whom his carriage and actions, ought to serve for a rule. A prince then must
be of one word, and to take heed, that he be Constancy of a prince^ wherein
it ought to be employed.
not mutable nor double of his promises, and that he always have a
magnanimous of his calling, with such clemency and affability, as his
subjects desire in him: Augustus Caesar, Vespasian Traian, Adrian, the
Antonines, Alexander Severus, Constantine the Great, Theodosius, and other
like: Such before them, were the great Darius, king of the Persians and Medes,
conqueror of the monarchy of Africa; the great king Sirus, and Alexander the
Great: Such also were the ancient kings of France; the great Cloius, the
generous Charlemaigne. the good S. Lewis, Philip August the conqueror, Charles
le Sage, Charles the seventh, the victorious Lewis the twelfth, father of the
people, Francis the great restorer of letters, Henry the second le Debonaire,
and many others: These be they that a prince must propose to imitate, not such
of no account, as deserves not a place amongst princes, such as Agathocles a
potters son, and usurper of the Sicilian tyranny; or Oliver de Ferme, a
barbarous and most cruel soldier, who massacred his own parents and
friends, to usurp the tyranny of the place of his nativitie; or that Caesar
Borgia the Popes Machiavell proposes for patterns to be imitated of princes.
Reasonlesse creatures themselves, do they not show that a prince ought to be
constant, to maintain his subjects in peace and tranquillity, without stirs or
motions? The king of honnie Bees, is he not always resident and abiding in
his hive with constancy, to keep his little subjects in tranquillity? And
whenever amongst these small creatures, there are found some unconstant and
straying kings, which cannot abide in their hives, and within the circuit and
limits of their power, do we not see that they bring all their little people
out of order? For straight as their king begins to stir and go out, his
subjects remoove withal; so that oftentimes by Machiavell teaches them) they
can not fail but destroy and ruinate themselves and others.

Hereupon is very worthy to be noted, that which Euripides says, That a
good and virtuous man never changes his manners, for the change of either air
or country, or either for prosperity or adversity: his verses englished are
these.

An evil ground under an heaven sirene,
good store of Corn often times does bring we see: Eurip. in He^^ba.

Good ground also, with a sharp air I ween,
bad store of fruit produces unto thee:
Yet by the heavens a good man or an ill,
his nature change will not for any hap:
For always wicked, wicked prooveth still,
and good men, good will prove, for evil clap
In good men's hearts there is no adversity,
in life of his can breed diversity.
And assuredly this facion of the Machiavellists, with each wind to change
manners, cannot be found any way good, by good and virtuous men, who have
their hearts in a good place; no more than they can approve the riming verses,
which the Machiavellists have always in their mouths.

Cum fueris Romae Romano vivito more,
Cum fueris alibi vivito sicut ibi.
That is to say,

When thou at Rome, a Roman life then must thou lead,
when other where, do as they do, in the other stead.
For these manners are proper to the Chamaelion, which take all colors of the
place where he is, and of the Polypus, which always seems to be of the
color of the earth, whereupon it shines: But this is not convenient nor
comely for a good man, who ought always to be constant in virtue, without
changing or varying, no not though the heavens should fall upon him: But
because the Poet Horace,

So constant is a good man always in his life,
that he stirs not for all the peoples rage and strife: Hor. lib. 3. Carm.
Ode 3.

The tyrants fierce cannot move him, nor boistrous wind
which all the sea does turn: nor thunder claps I find:
His constant virtue cannot alter any way,
No though the heavens should fall upon his head, I say
No fear could touch his hautie heart, by night or day.
26. Maxim.
Illiberality is commendable in a prince, and the reputation of a mechanique
IF the prince (says he) will be liberal, incontinent he impoverisheth
Cap. 8. and 16. Of a prince.
himself, and being poor shall be despised of every man: And if he will
repair and help his poverty, by pilling his subjects, Cyrus, Alexander, and
Caesar, but of his own he ought to be an houlder, and illiberall: For there
is nothing that Pope Julius was liberal, till he obtained the Popedom, but
as soon as he had gotten it, he forsook that trade, to the end to make
war upon the king of France, Lewis the twelfth, as he, did. The king of
Spain likewise, he understood that king Ferdinand (grandfather of Charles the
fifth) had not so happily atchived so many great enterprises, if he had
affected to be esteemed liberal.

IN my opinion, this Maxim should not please courtiers, either Machiavellists
or others, which ever like best, that a prince be not only liberal, but
rather profuse and prodigal, so far are they from opinion that he should
be covetous: But certainly as illiberalitie and covetousness is damnable,
and no way beseeming a prince, so also is profusion and prodigality:

As for Covetousnes, which Machiavell houlds to be covenable for a prince,
certain it is, that there is nothing in the world which makes him more
contemptible Covetousness cause of a princes ruin,
and despighted than it does: for of it self it is odious in all men (because
it is Galba, otherwise a good and sage prince, but suffering himself to be
governed by some about him, which were rapinous and covetous, he himself also
Tacit. lib. 17 Annals. Dio. in Galba
being too hard to his soldiers, thus destroyed and defiled all his virtues:
But that more is, this his covetousness and the rapines of his officers, cost
him his life, Pertinax was good and one of the most wise and moderatest
princes, that ever was, Dion and Cap. in Perti.
and who a man might say, to be as it were irreprehensible, and a very father
of the people (he always so studied every way to comfort his subjects) but he
was so spotted and defiled with that vice of covetousness, that he thereby
became hated and contemned of his men of war, so that they slew him. The
emperor Mauricius was Pomp and Laetus in Mauritio and Pho^a.
a very niggard, yea so great was his covetousness, that he delighted in
nothing, but heaping up of treasures, and would spend nothing: whereby every
man took occasion to blame and despise him: The great store of treasure which
he had, made Phocas his lieutenant (who otherwise was a man of no account and a
coward, but as covetous Phocas being come to the empire, continued in his
covetousness more than ever was found in Mauricius his predecessor, and
respected nothing but heaping up of treasures, by rapines and extorcions,
without any care of government of his empire: This miserable covetousness and
carfulness of this traitor Phocas, was the cause of his own ruin, and the
entier dissipation of the Roman empire: For during his government there were
cut off from the Roman empire, Germany, Gaul, Spain, the most part of Italy,
and Slavonia, and Mesia, the most part of Afric, Armenia, Arabia, Macedonia,
Thracia, Asiria, Mesopotamia, Egypt, and many other countries; whereof some cut
themselves from the empire, and other were occupied by the king of Persia, and
other potentates,

This happened not alone to Phocas, to have lost his domination, by the means
of his covetousness; for the like fell to king Perseus of Macedonie: This king
having Titus Livius lib. 4. Dec. 5.
enterprised war upon the Romans, gathered together great store of
treasures, but when it came to be distributed, to have soldiers, he showed
himself so holding and covetous as was possible: For having caused to come
from the Gaulois, very great succors into his country, by the covenant of a
certain sum of money, which he promised them; yet refused to deliver them
silver when they came, excusing himself amongst his people, that it was a
dangerous thing, to receive so great a Titus Livius, he did but find means,
to bring all those treasures into the Romans hands, for their booty: for the
Gaulois seeing themselves thus mocked by this king, returned, spoiling all his
country as they passed: and after, the Romans vanquished Perseus, and got all
his treasures, which he lost with his crown, and his life, and this fell unto
him, by his covetousness.

Marcus Crassus a Roman citizen (being worth 350000 crowns of annual
revenew) Joseph. Antiq lib. 14. cap. 8. and 13. Pluta. in Crasso.
was yet so covetous, that seeing Lucullus, had enriched himself by the Levant
war, never ceased till he had obtained charge and commission to make war
upon the Parthians: And that which incited him, most to purchase that charge,
was, Pompeius (who had made war there not long before) had had goodly means
to heap up great treasures, if he had listed, as he might have pilled the
temple of Jerusalem, where the treasures of sacred vessels, and of the
widows, and orphants, mounted to the sum of two thousand Talents, or five
millions of Crowns: So Crassus resolved to rob that temple, to redouble his
riches, and therein not to be so scrupulous, as Pompey had been: And so
indeed Crassus passing by Jerusalem against the Parthians, pilled the temple,
and to himself appropriated Crassus going on, came into Armenia, and from
thence came to the Parthians, where he gave battle to king Herodes, or rather
to Surena his lieutenant: but Crassus losing the battle (where his only
son was slain) escaped on foot, thinking to save himself, which he could
not do, but in the end was overtaken and slain, and his head carried to
Herodes, who with it served himself in a play of a Tragoedie, which was played
before him, where they talked of an hunter which had slain a great savage
beast. Here may you see the tragical end of this insatiable covetous wretch
Crassus, who was justly and soon punished, for his great and horrible
sacrilege which he had committed in the holy temple of Jerusalem.

By these examples then it is evidently seen, That Covetousness is customably
the cause of the ruin of such princes and great lords as are infected
therewith: so far is it off, that it is profitable, as Machiavell says: Yet
true it is, that there have been some (but very few) which being covetous,
notwithstanding have not been ruinated by that vice; as the emperor Vespasian:
but the reason wherefore the covetousness of Vespasian was not cause of his
destruction, is for that he exercised it not Dion. in Vespasi. cap. 16, 17.
else but upon his rapinous magistrates, and because he employed on good uses,
and for the utilitie of the public good, such money as his avarice heaped up,
yea, he even practiced great liberalities toward good people; and ruinated
cities, to rebuild them. Surely, if those reasons be well considered, they will
serve Vespasian for a Vespasian employed not upon his own pleasures and
delights, the silver which his covetousness had collected, but bestowed it on
good uses for the good of the commonwealth. And certainly, there is nothing
that more troubles subjects, which pay tributes, than when they see, that the
prince spends evil, the silver which is levied upon them, which would Lewis
was herein something like Vespasian: for he levied much money upon his subjects,
yea, triple so much as his predecessors had done: but he spent it not in his
pleasures and delights, nor other dissoluteness, nor in practice of
liberality upon unworthy people, but upon good things, about the affairs of
the kingdom: as to buy peace with his neighbors, and to corrupt strangers,
which might serve therein or in other affairs: Moreover, he did not as the
emperor Mauricius, or as king Perseus, which heaped up great treasures, and
then durst not touch it: for (as Comines says) he took all, and spent all.

Princes then which levy money upon their people, are something excusable,
Profusion cause of ruin in a prince. Sueto. in Calig. cap. 37, 38, 40, 41.
spare other good subjects, which are not of that sort: But such as make great
levies upon the people, and do bestow them evil, they cannot be any thing
excused in their covetousness and prodigality. The emperor Caius Caligula
succeeding Tiberius, found an inestimable treasure, even 67 millions, and
500000 crowns. To calculate this unmeasurable sum after the proportion of
1240000 crowns, du Bellay says) which were sent to Fontarabie in the year
1529, for king Francis the firsts ransom, it should be found, that the 67
millions of Caligula should make about 1800 Mullet loads, which is an huge and
a most admirable treasure: yet did this monster spend all this, in less than a
year: But was this possible, will you say, that so great heaps should be laid
out in so little space? Yea I say: for this brainelesse fool caused houses to
be builded upon the sea, yea, and that should be only, where men said it was
deepest: So that there to make good foundations, he was forced to cast in great
heaps of stones, as great as high mountains, and so much more, as any thing
was impossible, so much rather loved he to do it. Moreover, he delighted to
bring down mountains and rocks, to equal Tiberius) in less than a

The emperor Nero likewise laid great imposts and levies of money upon his
Sueto. in Nero. cap 27. 30 32. Dion in Nerone.
subjects, and quashed and made void the Testaments of such as would not make
him their heir: As an ingrate person to his prince, he by force took treasures
out of temples, and committed infinite other extortions: But how expended he all
this money? In making sumptuous bankets, as Caligula did; in giving
unmeasurable gifts to flatterers and bad people, and upon other strange
dissoluteness: He always apparrelled himself with exceeding rich and
precious habites, yet he never put on garment twice; he played away great
sums of money at once: he fished always with golden nets, the cords whereof
were knit with purple and scarlet; he never went abroad with less than a
thousand coaches or litters drawn with Mules, whose shoes were all of silver,
all the Mulleters also were gallantly and costly apparrelled: Sabina Poppea,
his wife, Nero made so great and riotous expenses, that no silver could suffice
him: insomuch, as spoiling his provinces of their goods and riches by rapines
and imposts, and withal practicing great cruelties (for rapine and cruelty
are always companions) he brought upon himself the hatred of all the world,
and

The like happened to the emperor Vitellius, who in a year spent in bankets
without all measure, nine millions of crowns. Dion says, That in a vessel
served at Dion. in Vitel. Sueto. cap. 13.
his table, he had so many tongues, brains, and livers of certain strange and
exquisit fishes and birds, as cost ten thousand crowns. Suetonius says, That
his brother bestowed a supper upon him, whereat was served two thousand
exquisit fishes, and seven thousand exquisit and precious birds, besides all
other services. These so exorbitant and unreasonable expenses, drew him into
covetousness, rapine, and cruelty which was the cause that he was massacred
and slain, and reigned but a year and ten days.

Here might I add to these, the examples of Domitian, Commodus, Bassianus, and
many other Roman emperors, which held of the two extremities of Liberality,
namely, Covetousness and Prodigality, using Covetousness and rapine, to
heap up silver, and Profusion to spend them; all which had the like end, as
Nero, Caligula, and Vitellius had: But hereby is sufficiently showed in those
examples, the contrary of the Maxim, which Machiavell says is true, and that
a prince which is covetous and hard, cannot prosper, but especially, when he
naughtily bestows the treasures and money which he heapeth up. Now there
remains to show, That Liberality is profitable and necessary for a prince,
when he applies it to good uses.

When Alexander the Great departed from Macedonie to go to the conquest
Plutarch. in Alexand.
of Asia, he caused all the captains of his army to appear before him: At
their Perdicas, said unto him: What then will you (Sir) keep for your self?
Even Hope, answered Alexander: We then shall have our part thereof (replied
Perdicas) since we go with you. Thus Perdicas and certain other also, refused
the gifts which their king offered them, and were as thankful, as if they had
accepted them: So that they accompanied him in his voyage of Asia, full of good
will, to serve him, as they did: For he was so well served of these valiant
Macedonians, his subjects, that with them he conquered almost al Asia: so the
Liberality of Alexander was very profitable

The ancient Romans had this custom, ordinarily to increase the seignories
and Titus Livius lib 7. Dec. 4. Plutarch. in Caton.
dominations of the kings their allies, as they did to Massinissa, king of
Numidia, unto whom they gave a great part of the kingdom of Syphax his
neighbor, and some part of the country of the Carthaginians, after they had
vanquished Syphax and the Carthaginians: as also they did to Eumenes, king of
Pergamus, in Asia, unto whom they gave all they conquered upon king Antiochus
from beyond the mount Taurus, which came to more than four times so much as
all Eumenes his kingdom. They also practiced great Liberalities toward
Ptolomeus, king of Cyprus; toward Attalus, another king of Pergamus; toward
Hiero king of Sicilie, and many others. And what profit got they by all this:
even this, that in the end all the countries and Silla, Marius his lieutenant,
making war upon king Iugurtha, persuaded Bocchus, king of Salust. de bello.
Mauritania, to take part with the Romans against Iugurtha, because (says
he) the

The king Cotis of Thrace having promised the Romans, that he would prove
their good and faithful friend, and to that effect having delivered them
hostages, notwithstanding they aided king Perseus of Macedonie against the
Romans, when after by war king Perseus was vanquished, wherein Bitis the said
king Cotis his son was taken prisoner, this king would have ransomed his
son, and withal made certain frivolous excuses: The Senate made him this
worthy answer, That the Romans knew very certainly, that he had preferred
the good grace and favor of Perseus before their amity, but that therefore
they would not cease to give him his

Augustus Caesar seeing himself have many enemies, which he had gotten by
civil Dion. in August.
wars, he knew not whether he should put them all to death, or what he
should do: For he on the one side considered, that if he caused all to die,
then the world would think, that either he was entering into the butcherie of a
civil war, or else to usurp a tyranny: and on the other side he feared,
that some mischief would happen unto him, if he suffered them to live. The
abovesaid Livia his wife (which was a Cornelius the nephew of Pompeius, whom
he advaunced into the office of Consul, and in like sort to others, which he
took to be his enemies, he practiced beneficence and bountifulness, in such
sort, as he gained all their hearts. But because the remonstrance which Livia
made to Augustus, is very memorable, I will here summarily recite it: I am very
sorrowful (my most dear lord and spouse) to see you thus greeved and
tormented in your spirit, so that your sleep is taken from you: I am not
ignorant, that you have great occasions, because of many enemies, which you
will have still, feeling in themselves the deaths of their friends and parents,
which you have of the spirit may these well be called, Affability and Soft
words of princes toward This remonstrance of Livia was the cause that Augustus
let loose and set at liberrie all them which were accused to have enterprised
any thing against him, satisfying himself with the admonishments he gave them,
and besides gave great goods and benefits unto some of them, so that as well
those as other of his enemies became his friends and good subjects. Behold
here what good came to Augustus by his beneficence and liberality.

The emperor Marcus Antonine feared nothing more than the reputation of an
hard and covetous man, and always wished and desired, that such a spot of
infamy Dion. in Marco.
might never be imposed upon him: And indeed, all his carriage and actions
Francis the first of happy memory, did imitate the example of this great and
wise emperor, establishing public lectures at great wages in the University
of Paris, a thing whereof his memory has been and shall be more celebrated
through the world, than for so many great wars as he valiantly Antonine
forgave the people all the fiscall debts and arrerages which they ought him, by
scedules, obligations, or otherwise for fifty years before, which was an huge
and unspeakable liberality: But he did this to take away all means and
matter, from all officers and fiscall procurators, of molesting and troubling
his subjects afterward with researches and calling on of old debts. Thirdly,
he never laid impost or extraordinary exaction upon his people, but handled
them in all kindness and generositie: He never made profuse and superfluous
expenses, but held an estate both at home and in the court, sober and full of
frugalitie: And finally, to show how he delighted in liberality, he caused a
temple to be builded to Beneficence.

Behold here a true pattern, after which princes should conform themselves to
know how to practice that goodly virtue, Liberality: And very notable is that
point that that good emperor Antonine held the estate of his house ruled by
frugalitie and sobriety, and far from the strange profusions of those
monsters, Caligula, Nero, and Vitellius: for he considered, that it were much
better to employ for the public wealth of his empire; the revenues and money
thereof, than in riotousnesse and vanities; and that such unmeasurable profusion
constrains a prince to fall to Traian Dion in Traiano. Lampr. in Alex. Spar
in Andria.
also hold his estate soberly governed, and he maintained no unprofitable
persons in his service. No more did the emperor Severus, who would not suffer
in any offices any persons to be placed, which were not necessary: They had
also good sallaries and rewards of him, yea, he would often rebuke them, for
not demanding gifts of him: And wherefore (says he) will thou, that I should
be thy debtor, seeing thou ask me nothing. Adrian also had this property,
that he gave great gifts unto his good friends and servants, and made them
rich, before they demanded any thing: And above all, he was liberal toward
professors of letters, and learned men, which he enriched: but he much hated
such as by evil means became rich, and generally Machiavels Covetousness,
nor his Prodigality: And therefore they flourished and prospered during their
reigns, and left after them a perpetual memory to posterity of their
virtues and praises.

Our kings of France, as Clovis, Charlemaigne, Lewis the piteous his son,
Robert, Henry the first, Lewis le Gros, Lewis the eight, S. Lewis, and many
others, were very liberal, but they exercised their liberality and
principality upon the Church and Churchmen, which they but too much enriched.
Yet we read, that Charlemaigne was also very liberal toward learned men,
and that he spent much in founding

By this abovesaid, I hope the Maxim of Machiavell is sufficiently confuted,
and that it evidently appears by our examples and reasons, That Covetousness
is domageable and dishonorable to a prince, as also is his contrary
profusion, and that Liberality is profitable and honorable unto him: And as
for the reasons which Machiavell alleges, they are foolish and false, as his
Maxim: For to say, That a rich prince shall be esteemed puissant, because he
has great treasures, that reason does evil conclude. King Perseus of
Macedonie (of whom we have spoken) had The power of a prince lies not in
treasures.
great treasures, yet left he not to be esteemed a king pusillanimous and of
small valor, and such was his reputation in his own country, and amongst his
own subjects. Crassus also was known to be more richer than Pompeius; but he
was not esteemed so valiant nor so good a man, neither in his life had he the
tenth part of Pompeies honors. Mauricius and Phocas Roman emperors, by their
covetousness heaped up great treasures; but were they therefore esteemed
puissant and valiant? nay contrary they were esteemed cowards, and in the
catalogue of such emperors

But I pray you let us come to the reason. When a prince has the fame to be a
great treasurer, does he not give his neighbors occasion to seek means to
enterprise upon him to obtain those treasures? Wherefore is it, that the
Venetians (which if they list, might be the greatest treasurers of the world)
have made a law amongst De Con. l. b. 2. cap. 21.
them, to have no treasure in their commonwealth, other than of arms? It is
because they know well (as they be wise) that if they heap up treasures in
money, they shall Machiavell thinks: for money of it self cannot but serve
us for a bait to attract and draw upon us them which are hungry and desirous of
it. And although commonly, money is thought to be the sinews of war, yet are
they not so necessarily required, that without money war cannot be made. I
will not here allege the poor Hugonet soldiers, which most commonly warred
without wages: but I will only allege the military estate which was in the
Roman empire in the emperor Valentinians time, and since: For in that time the
military Valentinians time, and others) it will be found, that money makes not
a prince puissant. Moreover, I do confess, that it is certain, that in the
military policy

As for that which Machiavell makes no account of, that a prince be reputed to
be a Mechanique, I leave it to them to think which have, I will not say, the
heart of a prince, but only of a simple gentleman, that has honor but in a
little recommendation, if they would not be greeved to be reputed a
mechanique person. I know well, that the nobility of Italy, which more
commonly trade and deal with Machiavel would persuade them.

And as for the examples which Machiavell alleges of Pope Julius and of
Ferdinand king of Spain, which (he said) were covetous, yet effected great
matters: I answer him in one word, That it prooveth nothing of that he says:
for Pope Julius made no great prowesses not conquests, as every man knows:
and king Ferdinand in the exploits and enterprises of wars was not covetous,
for any thing we read in Machiavell says of those two, I will oppose always
against those two obscure examples, them above alleged, which are far more
illustrious and notable, and by the which I have showed, that Covetousness
has always been pernicious to princes; and Liberality without profusion,
profitable and honorable.

For a resolution then of this matter, I say, That the vice of Ingratitude
accompanies ordinarily covetousness, and that none can be covetous and
illiberall, unless Bochus, who said, It was less dishonorable, for a prince
to be vanquished by arms, than by munificence: And therefore that good
emperor Salust in bello Iugurth.
Titus, whenever he passed any day, without exercising some liberality and
beneficence, said to his friends: O my friends, I have lost this day, meaning
that that was the chief mark, at which a prince should shoot, to wit,
Beneficence, and that otherwise he emploies his time evil.

27. Maxim.
A prince which will make a straight professiion of a good man, cannot long
endure in this world, in the company of so many other that are so bad.
MAny (says Machiavell) have written books, to instruct a prince, and to
bring him to a perfection in all virtues, as Xenophon Cap. 15. Of a prince.
did in the institution of Cyrus: There are also many philosophers and others,
which by their vvritings have formed Ideaes and figures of monarchies and
common weals, whereof there were never: He then that will amuse and stick
upon the forms of philosophers, monarchs, and commonweals, by dispising that
which is done, and praising that which ought to be done, he shall sooner
learn his own ruin, than his conservation: Leaving then behind, all that
can be imagined of a princes perfection, and staying our selves upon that
which is true, and subject to be practiced: By experience I say (says Master
Nicholas)

THis Maxim meriteth no other confutation, than that which resulteth
Machiaveell says here, and that princes which have been good men, have
always reigned long and peceably, and have been firm and assured in their
estates: and the wicked contrary, have not reigned long, but have violently
been deposed from their estates: And as for ideaes and forms of perfect
monarchs, and commonweales, whereof some philosophers have Patterns to imitate
must be perfect.
written, they handled not that subject, saying there were any such, but to
propose a pattern of imitation for monarchs, and government of commonweales:
For when a Caesar Borgia, Oliver de Ferme, Agathocles, how can he do any good
thing, or approach to any good, seeing the patterns hold nothing thereof:
Patterns then which men propose to imitate, must be the best set down that
they can be, that if in our imitation we hap to err, from a perfect image of
Virtue, yet we may so so and in some sort express it in our manners: But what
means Machiavell, when he says, That men must leave behind, that which
authors have written, of a princes perfection, to draw us unto Horace says:

He that in highest place cannot abide,
Let not the meanest place him be denied.
So that it seems, Machiavell knows not what he would say, when he houlds,
That we must not stay upon that which authors have written of a princes
perfection, but upon that which is practiced, and in use: For if he mean,
that vice alone is in use, he then gives wicked counsel and advice, and if
he will confess that good and virtue is in use and practice, then will it
follow, that we must not reject that, which is written of a princes
perfection, although a man cannot come to the perfectness thereof, for always
it is good and praiseable, to come as nigh thereunto as we can.

And touching that which Machavell says, That a prince who is a good man, can
not long endure amongst so many others, that value nothing: I see well that he
means, hereby to persuade a prince to apply himself to the wicked, and to
do as they do, and to be wicked with them which value nothing: But if
Machiavell had well considered, That goodness and virtue, are always in price
and estimation, yea even with men of no value, which are constrained to praise
that, which they hate: And if he were resolved (as it is certain) that
subjects do commonly apply (Dion witnesses that in the time of the emperor
Antonine the philosopher, many studied philosophy to be like him) he would
never have given this precept to a prince, to accommodate himself to the vices
which are in facion and use: but contrary, he would have taught him to follow
goodness and virtue, to draw his subjects thereunto, and to receive honor and
good reputation in the world: But in truth we need not mervaile, if
Machiavell hold opinions so far discrepant from the way of virtue, for that
is not the path, whereby he pretends to guide and conduct a prince; but his
way, is that which leads to all wickedness and impiety, as we have in many
places demonstrated.

The ancient Romans one day, found certain verses of their prophetess
Sibilla, Apollo, to know where they might find the mother of the gods: The
oracle sent them to king Attalus of Pergamus: Attalus led them into Phrigia,
and showed them an old Image of stone, which in those quarters, they had
always called the mother of the gods: The said ambassadors, caused that image
straight to be embarked, and brought to Rome, whereof the Senate being
advertised, it fell in deliberation amongst them, who he should be, that at
the gates should go to receive the mother of the gods: and it was concluded,
that that must Titus Livius) desired the lot might fall upon him, and theere
was not any, but he loved better to be elected the best man The title of a good
man more esteemed of the Romans, than to be Consul or Dictator.
of the city, than to be chosen either Consul or Dictator, or into any other
great estate: The election fell upon Scipio Nasica (coosin germane of the
Affrican) who was a young man, but a very good man, and the son of a good
father; who went to receive that old goddess of stone, mother of the Gods: But
I do demand of you, if those good Romans, had been instructed in the
doctrine of Machiavell, and had learned of this Maxim, That it is not good to
make a straight profession of a good man; would they so much have wished, that
this election had fallen upon Machiavell, make more estimation of goodness and
virtue, than of the greatest riches and dignities.

And indeed, there is nothing more certain, but that it is the goodliest and
most honorable title, that a man can possibly have, To be a good man: And let
it not displease great lords, which are embarked in the highest title of
honors of Constables, Marshals, Admirals, Chancelors, Presidents, Knights of
the order, Governors, and Lieutenants of the king, and other like great
States: for all those titles, without the title of a good man, value nothing,
and

28. Maxim.
Men cannot be altogether good, nor altogether wicked, neither can they
perfectly use cruelty and violence.
John Pagolo (says Machiavell) usurped Peruse (which was Church land) by
murdering his cosins and nephews to come to the seignourie: This was a man
accomplished in all vices, without conscience, and kept his own sister: Pope
Julius the eleventh, in Anno 1505 going about to reunite to the Church, such
lands as were dismembered from it, by the usurpation of many particular lords,
took his journey to Peruse, without any arms, accompanied of many Cardinals,
with but a simple guard; yet this train was Pagolo who knevv well, that
he came thither to dispossess him of his seignorie, yet had not the courage
to sley both him and his Cardinals, although he might easily have done it, and
have enriched himself with the booty, but suffered himself to be taken, and
carried away by the Pope his enemy: This was not any remorse of conscience,
that made Pagolo commit this fault, but it was because he knevv not in a
need to be altogether wicked: Hereupon I conclude, That men leave to

THis Maxim is a true end and scope, whereunto Machiavell would lead a
prince, and all such as follow his doctrine; namely to Machiavell teaches a
sovereign wickedness.
be altogether wicked, in all perfection of wickedness. The degrees to come to
this so high and sovereign wickedness, have (for the most part) been
already declared: For Machiavell has showed, That cruelty, perfidie,
impiety, subtlety or deceit, covetousness, and other like (which are the
degrees whereby men mount the top of all wickedness) which live without law or
policy, a more detestable and infamous doctrine, than Machiavells school? May
not any man see that he builds by his precepts, a true tyranny? yea that
he uses the like method to teach his sovereign wickedness, that
philosophers do to teach the sovereign good: For as Aristotle, Plato, Cicero,
and others which dealt in writing of the sovereign good, first showed the
virtues and good manners, whereby they must ascend thereunto, as by degrees: so
this stinking doctor Machiavell, uses the same manner, teaching a prince all
kinds of evil and wickedness, which may lead to the highest degree and top
of all vices, and of all evil.

But I will not long stay in refuting this Maxim, for I think I have before
so well beaten down those degrees, whereby he would have princes ascend to
that Machiavell teaches, come ordinarily to evil ends: so far is it off to be
domageable, That a man cannot be perfectly wicked, as most impudently he
affirms: And as for the example of Pagolo, which he alleges, it is a
strange thing, how this gallant should not attain to the full top of all
wickedness, since they of his nation, have commonly their spirits so prompt,
and quick to all evil and corruption: But it is credible, he was some luskish
and faint hearted fellow, which wanting no good will to slay the Pagolo feared
to do well, if he had slain the Pope Julius, and therefore he would not do
it, because he would not do good, but only apply himself to evil and v^ee,
as Machiavell teaches: And indeed if he had slain this Pope, he had done
great good to all Christendom of that time, for he lighted and stirred up
wars amongst Christian princes, and delighted in nothing so much, as to sow
trouble every where, yea he vaunted, that he would do more with S. Paul's
sword, than all his predecessors had done, with S. Peter's keys. Pagolo then
(who had sworn to the doctrine of Machiavell, as is to be presumed) would not
be the cause of so great good, as by slaying that monster, to do so much good
to Christendom: But Machiavell Machiavell. I therefore do greatly mervaile
how Papists can esteem of Machiavell: But indeed they which esteem so much
of him, are not papists, though they say they are; but are a people, which in
their hearts, make no care either of God, or of the devil, nor of the Pope,
nor of the popedom, no nor of any religion; but are very Atheists, full of
impiety, like their master, yet indeed they go well to Mass, and there is
good policy in it; for therein they make to appear, that they have so well
profited in their Machiaveline philosophy,

29. Maxim.
He that has always carried the countenance of a good man, and would become
wicked to obtain his desire, ought to color his change, with
WHen a man desires to change from one quality to another (says Discourse
lib. 1. cap. 42.
our Florentine) as when he will become wicked for some cause, having always
before carried the countenance of a good man, he must do it discreetly, and
before seek occasions (by providing himself in the mean while new friends)
to lean upon in the place of the ancient, which abandon him: And herein a
great fault was committed by Appius Claudius, who was one of the ten sovereign
potentates

THis Maxim is like that of Renardizing and fox like deceit, whereof we have
before spoken: For this is a precept, how of a good man to become wicked, and
yet the world should not perceive it: And (says Machiavell) he must not be
so gross as at the first utilitie: Thus does he change himself by little and
little, and so from good shall Machiavell makes of the change and variety of
manners, by the chance of colors: For as black never takes white well, his
contrary, unless first white be tainted with some other color, as blew or
red: So the change (says Machiavell) from good to wicked, is never made unto
any good purpose, without some pretext and show, which gives to a man an
appearance betwixt good and evil.

Here is a singular precept in the art of wickedness, To become wicked, and
yet the world shall not perceive it: for if the world know it, then it is an
ignorance of the art which wills a knowledge, well to dissemble, and that a man
should be apt and fit to

You see then (and he that sees not is very blind of sense and understanding)
that this abominable Florentine persevereth still to teach a prince the art of
wickedness: But for so much as before we have disputed against all the kinds
thereof, as likewise against hypocrisy and dissimulation, I will speak no
more hereof. And as for the example of Appius Claudius, one of the ten
potentates of Rome, which Machiavell Appius exercising an office which endured
but a year, carried himself well for that first year, which was the cause
that he and his companions were continued in their estate another year: but
with great difficulty obtained they that continuation; for it was as it were a
breach of their law to continue an office to any person more than a year:
Appius seeing, that it should be impossible to obtain of the Roman people, a
continuation for a third year, thought it good now to make himself feared, by
seeking to obtain his estate by force: and like enough he had gotten again
his office, had there not happened a war against the Romans, which came nigh
unto them: and therefore Appius and his companions, could do no less (if it
were but to defend themselves) than Appius Claudius and Spurius Oppius, where
they died, and banished the other eight, and confiscated their goods. The cause
then why Appius could not obtain the tyranny which he had enterprised, was
not, for that he changed too suddenly from good to wicked, but because the
time of his office being expired, he could not be obeyed: and herein, all the
dissimulations and foxlike dealings of Machiavell, could have done him no good:
for as soon as any man's office was expired at Rome, he that held it, must
come out, were

Moreover, this Maxim here, is not only wicked, but also hard to practice:
For very difficult it is, that a man should change from a good man to a wicked,
and not be perceived, though in his actions he use many palliations and
dissimulations: For amongst people there are always some one which is not a
beast, but (as the proverb is) can know flies in the milk, and which straight
can discover the dissimulations of those Machiavelizing Foxes, and can cry,
The Fox, that men may take heed

30. Maxim.
A Prince in the time of peace, maintaining discords and partialities
Our ancestors of Florence (says Machiavell) especially such Cap. 20. Of a
prince.
as were esteemed the vvisest, have always held this Maxim, That Pistoye
must be held in obedience by the means of Partialities: And for that cause they
nourished in certain towns belonging unto them, discords, the more easily to
govern them. The Venetians also, moved with the like opinion, maintained in
the towns of their

Whenever the commonwealth is governed by a good prince, who Partiality
pernicious to a prince.
practiced, alienateth him from the love of his subjects: for if he nourish
Partialities amongst his subjects, he cannot possibly carry himself so egally
toward both parties, but in them both will be jealousy and suspicion:
insomuch, as each party will esteem the other to be more favored of the
prince than they, whereupon he purpose, and to execute an enterprise, as
before we have demonstrated by many examples: Partiality the foundation of
tyranny.
they which mean to introduce a tyranny into a country, do first cast this
foundation of Partiality, as the certainest mean to establish and build a
tyranny: and although no tyranny be ever firm or assured, and that we
seldom or never see, tyrants Machiavell shoots to establish a tyranny, as
we have before showed in many places.

It may be Machiavell learned this Maxim of Claudius Appius, who was a man of
courage, and very tyrannical toward the Roman people* and if all other
Senators had been of his humor, assuredly the Senate had usurped a tyranny in
the city, and changed the Aristocraticall estate into an Oligarchie: but most
commonly, Claudius Appius always gave the Senate advice, to sow a Partiality
Titus Livius Dec. Dionis. Halic. lib. 9.
amongst the said ten Tribunes, and by the practice of that same amongst
them, they might oppose themselves against laws, which others would have to
pass: For (said he) by this means the Tribunes power shall ruinate it self,
without that we shall seem any way to meddle therein, and without that the
people shall know, that any of our action is in it. This counsel of Appius was
many times followed, but in the end they found it did them no good: For after
the Tribunes were partialized one against another, and that thereby nothing
could pass nor be concluded by way of deliberation and accustomed suffrages,
then fell they to arms and seditions: So that in the end the people were
constrained by force to pluck from the Patricians, that which they would not
permit to be handled and disputed, by the accustomed Horace says very well,
expressing that which happens ordinarily in the world:

That which denied is most commonly,
Desired is of us most ardently.
Moreover, it often came to pass, that the Patricians desired to make pass to
the people (by means of the Tribunes) some law, which seemed unto them
profitable for the commonwealth, but they could not come to their pretenses,
because they had fashioned the Tribunes to a contradiction one of another: And
of those Tribunarie partialities arose at Rome, great insurrections of the
people, and great murders and effusion of blood, as there did, when the two
brethren Graccht were slain: And therefore that goodly counsel of Appius
(whereupon Machiavell has made Machiavell.

The Chalcedonians were well advised, not to believe the counsel of the
Aetolians, which resembled this doctrine of Machiavell, and the counsel of
Appius: for when the war was open betwixt the Romans and the king Antiochus,
the Chalcedonians, allies and friends of the Romans, caused to be assembled
the States of Antiochus made them understand, That his only coming into
Greece, was to deliver the country from the subjection and servitude of the
Romans, and therefore required them to allie and conjoyne themselves with him.
The Aetolians (which were very unconstant and mutable people with each wind, as
are the Machiavelists) chanced to be in that assembly, and persuaded the
Chalcedonians, that it was certain, that the king Antiochus had passed from
Asia into Europe, to deliver Greece from the Romans servitude, and that they
thought it best, that all the cities of Greece ought to allie and contract
amity with both the two parties, the Antiochs and the Romans: For (said they)
if we allie our selves with both parties, when the one would offend us, the
other will revenge us. Mixtion, one of the principals amongst the
Chalcedonians, made to the Aetolians a very wise and notable answer: We see
not (masters Aetolians, say they) that the Romans have seized upon any town
in Greece, neither that therein they have placed any Roman garrison, nor that
Antiochus into Greece, cannot but hurt us, who can perform no greater good
unto us, than to withdraw himself far from our country: And as for us, we
are resolved to receive none within our towns, but by the authority of the
Romans, our allies. The Chalcedonians then governed themselves after this
answer, and it happened well unto them. But the Aetolians were almost all
ruined and lost by practicing their foolish opinion, to entertain both the
Romans and Antiochians, together: for so were they of necessity forced to
seek practices, always to Antiochus into his country, these miserable
Aetolians fell into a desperate case, like to have torn one another in pieces,
burdening and accusing mutually one another to be the inventors of that wicked
counsel: yet in the end, by the Romans clemency and bounty, which pardoned
them, they

In the town of Ardea, a neighbor of the Romans, there was a like
partiality, Titus Livius lib. 4. Dec. 1.
as there is at this day at Genes: for now at Genes the people is banded
against the nobles, and they will by no means receive any for duke of Genes of
the nobility; insomuch, as all dukes of Genes must needs be villains and base
men of race, and it may be there will be found in France of the like race, as
at Genes: The like partiality (I say) being in the town of Ardea, betwixt the
nobility and the people, it happened that two young batchelers, one of the
people, and another of the nobility, fell at debate one against another, about
the obtaining in marriage a young maid of excellent beauty, but of a base and
carterly race: Great bandying there fell out about this marriage, they of the
nobility all casting their heads, and employing their abilities for masters of
the town, and the people were driven away: The people straying Titus Livius:
The Ardeates (says he) were continually in an intestine war, the cause and
commencement whereof proceeded of the contention Machiavell, at whom I do
much marvel, that he dare attempt to write discourses upon Titus Livius, since
any may see, be understands him not, and his doctrine is also clean contrary
to that of Titus Livius. Unto the said sentence of Titus Livius, I will add
that which he recites from Quintius Capitolinus, who admonishing the soldiers
of his army: Our enemies (said he) come not to assail us upon any trust they
have in our cowardice or their

The partialities of the Carthaginians, were they not cause of their utter
ruin? There were two factions at Carthage, the Barchinian (whereof was
Annibals house) Titus Livius lib. 1. Dec. 3.
and the Hannoenne contrary. As soon as Amilcar the father of Anniball, was
dead, the Carthaginians elected for captain general of their army, Asdruball
their citizen, one of the Barchian faction, which they sent to make war in
Spain with a great army. Asdruball had learned his art of war under
Amilcar, which was the cause why he sought to have Anniball nigh him (who at
that time was very young) to administer unto him the same benefit which he had
received at his fathers hands, and therefore writ to the Senate of Carthage.
The Senate brought this to deliberation, and Hanno his advice being demanded,
he reasoned in this sort: Masters (said he) me thinks the demand of Asdruball
is very equal, yet I am not of opinion, his request should be granted him:
For it is equal in that he desires to restore a like benefit to the son,
as he has received of the father: yet may not we herein accommodate our selves
to his will, and give him our youth to nourish after his fancy. I am then of
advice, that this young Anniball be nourished and educated in this city, The
wisest and best advised of the Senate were of this opinion, but the plurality
(which was of the Barchian faction) was to send young Anniball into Spain to
the war, who as soon as he came there, was much beloved of the soldiers; as
well because he resembled his father Amilcar, as for his military virtues. Not
many years after, he was chosen captain general of the Carthaginian army:
But as soon as Hanno, for he lighted the great fire of the Punicke wars
against the Romans, whereby in the end the Carthaginians were utterly ruined:
All this proceeded but from the Partiality which was at Carthage: for as soon
as the Hannonians reasoned one way, the Barchinians must needs reason to the
contrary, and they studied for nothing, but that by the plurality of their
voices, their opinion might obtain the upper hand, without any care or
consideration, what opinion was the best: And thus ordinarily happens it,
where there is any Partiality: For then men give themselves more to
contradiction, than to judge after an wholesome sentence, and without passion
of that which is profitable and expedient.

The Partialities of the houses of Orleance and Burgoigne (in our grandfathers
Lewis duke of Orleance, the alone brother of king Charles the sixth, took for
his devise (Mitto.) Duke John de Bourgoigne took for his (Accipio) challenging
as it were thereby an egalitie with the only brother of the king, under color,
that he was richer than he: This commencement of contrary devices, which they
caused to paint in their banners of their lances, and on their servants
liverie coats, erected a great Partiality; insomuch, as the duke of Bourgoigne
enterprised to cause the duke of Orleance to be slain (as he did.) The
children of the duke of Orleance (because justice was not executed on their
fathers massacre) levied John also by arms resisted them, insomuch, as all the
realm was partialized about the quarrel of these two great houses: After,
duke John was slain at Monterean-fante-Yonne, in a strange manner: whereupon
his son Philip, willing to revenge himself, sent for the Englishmen, which
he caused to pass through France, and occupied at least the third part of the
kingdom of France. This duke Philip made peace with the king, but he had a son
(Charles his successor) who would never put trust in the king of France,
fearing himself, because of the wars which his father and grandfather had
raised in the kingdom, but would needs graple with king Lewis the eleventh.
This king (who was too good for him) raised him up so many enemies on all
sides, that the house of that duke came to ruin. Behold the fruits Machiavell
recommendeth so much to a prince! And hereupon should well be noted, the saying
of master Philip de Comines: That Divisions and partialities are very easy to
sow, and are a sure token of ruin and destruction in a country, when they
take root therein, as has happened to many monarchies and commonweales.

De Comines to prove his alleged saying, sets down other examples, The
Partiality of the houses of Lancaster and York in England, whereby the house
of Lancaster was altogether ruined and brought down, and the one house
delivered to the other, seven or eight battles betwixt three and fourscore
princes of the royal blood of England, and an infinite number of people. This
here is no small thing, but it is rather Edward the fourth, who saved himself
in Bourgoigne, yet in so poor estate, that he went bare foot and without hose
after the train of duke Charles of Bourgoigne, demanding his alms from house
to house. He after recites the tragical acts of the duke of Warwick; of the
kings, Edward and Henry; of the prince of Wales; of the dukes of Gloucester and
Somerset, which are strange hystories, that cannot be heard or read without
great horror, and cannot but make men detest all Partialities and divisions.

In the time that Anniball made war upon the Romans, there were created
Titus Livius lib. 1. and 7. Dec. 3. and lib 4. and 5. Dec. 1
Consuls together at Rome Marcus Livius and Claudius Nero, which bore great
enmity one toward another, and of long time: The Senate fearing that these
enmities betwixt those two Consuls, should cause some Partialities in the
administration of their estate, which might turn to the damage of the public
good, admonished Marcus Livius made answer, That it was not needful, and that
their enmities and Partialities, should cause them with envy, to seek one to
do better than another: but the Senate was not of that advice: For they
remembered, that in the time of the Proconsulship of Quintius Paenus, Caius
Furius, Marcus Posthumous, and Cornelius Cossus, the Roman army had been
vanquished and chased by the Veians, because of the Partialities of the
cheefetaines, which could not accord in their counsels and deseignes, but
tended always to contrary ends. The like also happened in the Proconsulship
of Publius Virginius, and Marcus Sergius: But the most memorable and latest
example, which the Senate had before their eyes, was the loss of the battle
at Cannes, where the Romans lost Paulus Aemylius, and Terentius Varro. These
examples moved the Senate to exhort these two Consuls, Livius and Nero, to a
reconciliation, not believing that their Partiality could serve them for any
thing, but evil to conduct the affairs of the commonweal; insomuch, as being
constrained by the Senates authority, they accorded and reconciled themselves
together, and very well acquitted themselves in their charge, and overthrew
together a succor of fifty thousand men, which Asdruball conducted and
brought over into Italy, to Anniball his brother: In this defeat also,
Asdruball himself was slain, and his head secretly carried and cast into
Annibals camp, who yet knew no news of that journey: When Anniball saw

The reconciliation then and concord of Marcus Livius and Claudius Nero, were
the cause of a great good and utilitie to the commonwealth, and remounted the
affairs Concord very profitable to the commonwealth.
thereof into a great hope, and abated the pride that Anniball had taken of the
battle at Cannes; as also by the contrary, the Partiality of Paulus
Aemylius (who was a wise captain) and of Terentius Varro (who was very rash
and headie) was the cause that the Roman Commonwealth was almost utterly
overthrown, and that Anniball was mounted into so great pride and hope, to be
master thereof.

Concord then, and not Partiality, is profitable and healthful to a
commonwealth: and to this purpose is very memorable, the oration of Fabius
Maximus, to the Roman Titus Livius lib. 10. Dec. 3.
people. Fabius being elected Consul (which was the greatest magistracy in
the Roman common weal) five times, and twice having had for his companion
Publius Decius; the people at this time would needs take for his companion,
Lucius Voluminous: But the above said Fabius arose upon his feet* and turning
himself toward My masters, I have already had in two Consulships, for
companion Publius Decius, and we have carried our selves together, in a very
good concord, therefore I pray you to give me him, yet this time also, in
favor of my age, which hardly can now accustom it self with any other
companion: You know that there is nothing more firm, for the tuition of the
commonweal, than magistrates which accord well: for every man will communicate
his counsel more privately, with him he knows, and who is of manners and
conditions accordant with his own, than with another. At this request of
Fabius, the people accorded unto him, Decius for his companion, yea, and that
with such joy and comfort, as each man thought that from so good concord of two
Consuls, there could not proceed

The Romans one day, having no silver in their public treasure, to make war
which they then had on their arms, the Senate gave charge to certain
Senators, Titus Livius lib. 5. Dec. 1.
to remonstrate to the people, that each man should make them ready to do
their best, for the defense of the common wealth, and that none ought to
abandon the defense of their counrrey, for want of sold and payment of wages:
This was so well done, as first the knights offered, for nothing to serve the
commonweal: Incontinent after this offer made, there run to the palace
grear troops of people, to cause themselves to be enrowled to march in war
without wages: The abovesaid Senate, caused and ordained, that the colonels of
soldiers, as well foot as That assuredly the city of Rome was most happy,
invincible and eternal, by this concord: That the knights were most brave men,
worthy of praises: That the people were good and lowable, and that the
debonaritie and kindness of the Senate had been vanquished by the prompt and
voluntary obedience of the people. Here you may see what

But when we say, That concord is good, necessary and profitable for the
conservation of the public good; I say not, that herein is meant, that all
persons which deal in the commonwealth, ought of necessity, to be of one
humor, of one vice and complexion; For rather contrary, they must needs be
gentle and sharp, affable and fierce, severe and pitiful, such as Appius, and
Publicola, Catoes and Caesar's: For as in the Lute, if the strings were all of
one sound, the harmony were worth nothing, but being of diverse sounds, tending
to one melody, it prooves a pleasant and agreeable harmony; so in a
commonweal, or in a princes Counsel, if all were Tullius Hostilius king of
the Romans, said to Suffetius dictator of the Albanois; The Partialities (says
Dion. Halic. lib. 3.
he) which thou reprochest unto us, are profitable, and not domageable to the
commonwealth, as thou say: For we contend together, who shall most profit
it, great,

I conclude then this matter, with the saying of Comines, That if a prince
which is in peace, maintain Partialities amongst his subjects, they will bring
him into war, and if he be once in war, they will bring him unto ruin and
confusion: I conclude then, That a prince above all things, ought to take
heed, that he nourish no Partiality amongst women.
in maintaining a Partiality amongst the ladies and gentlewomen of his court,
and so may always have some pleasant news to laugh at, and take his pastime:
But yet I could like better, that amongst the ladies of a princes court, there
should be such a Partiality, as there was in times past, amongst the Roman
ladies: The Titus Livius lib, 10. Dec. 2.
Patrician ladies had a chapel, dedicated to the Parrician Pudicitie or
chastity, unto which place they often went, to make their devotions, in a
great troop: These ladies being one day in their chapel, there arived
Verginia, who was a Patrician, but she was married to Lucius Voluminous, who
was of the third estate, although also a great lord: These Patrician ladies
would by no means suffer Verginia to enter Verginia said, she was by race a
Patrician, and that she was a chaste wife, without reproach, and married to a
lord, who had received great honor and estates, in the commonwealth, and was
now in a high degree thereof, although by race he were but of the third
estate: Notwithstanding whatsoever she could say, these Patrician ladies would
not suffer her to enter into their chapel: Verginia seeing this (to show that
she was a chaste lady) caused an altar to be erected to Pudicitie, and
dedicating it in the presence of a great troop of other Patrician ladies: I
dedicate (says she) this alter to the Patrician Chastity, and do admonish
you all, that the same contention, which is amongst our husbands who shall be
most valiant and Behold here a contention worthy of virtuous and sage
ladies! But at this day, ladies contend, who shall best dance, paint, and
deck, themselves, and to do such like thjngs, as do not lead them into the
chapel of the Roman Patricians, nor to the altar of Verginia her Chastity,
but rather do lead them clean contrary.

31. Maxim.
Seditions and civil dissentions are profitable and blameless.
I Say against the advice of many (says master Nicholas)

IT were to be desired, that Machiavell and his nation, which with abundance
of goods) that at this day, there are seen no good houses, but they Seditions
cause of ravishments, of goods, and of cessation of commerce* and agriculture.
And truly it is as in a forest, when a man sees all the goodly oaks hewn
down, and that there remains no more there, but thorns, shrubs, and bushes;
For even as such a forest, which either has none, or few trees in it,
meriteth rather the name of a bush, than of a forest; so the kingdom or
commonweal, whose good and ancient houses are impoverished, deserves rather
to be named by the name of a desert, than of a kingdom or commonweal.

Moreover, the reason which Machiavell alleges, whereby he would prove
Seditions to be good, is very gross and foolish: for follow with this,
Because Seditions are sometime not the cause but the occasion, that there are
made some good Aulus Gellius mocketh, who would maintain, that the fever
quartaine is a good thing, because it makes men sober and temperate, and to
guard themselves from eating and drinking too much. Such philosophers as
delight to broach such absurd opinions, deserve to be left without answer,
with their Seditions and fever quartaines, to draw out such profit from them,
as they say do proceed out of them: Does not the common proverb say, That
from evil manners, do proceed good laws? and does it therefore follow, that
evil manners are goods? that is, does it follow, that white is black, or
black white? The grossest headed fellows know well, that law makers, never
set down laws, but only to reform

Moreover, it is not always true, that which Machiavell says, That Seditions
are causes, or occasions of having good laws and rules: The Seditions which
were raised up at Rome, by Tiberius Gracchus, and Caius his brother, Tribunes
of the people, Tiberius Gracchus, pursued by his Seditious faction that a law
(called Agraria) might be received and authorized, whereby it was not lawful
for a Roman citizen, to possess above ten acres land, which was as much to
say, as to take away the more from them, which had more: And because Marcus
Octavius his companion, in the Tribunate, opposed himself to hinder the
passage of this law, as both wicked and unjust; Gracchus would needs have had
him Scipio Nasica (who was accounted the best man thereof) slew him in the
Capitol, and caused his body to be cast into Tiber: His brother Caius
Gracchus being Tribune of the people, a certain space after, sought again to
bring up that law Agraria, and would needs devise one out of his own brain;
whereby it was ordained, that in all Lucius Opimius Consul (by the decree of
the Senate) caused the people to arm themselves, and to go assail Caius
Gracchus, with the seditious of his troop: and in the conflict Gracchus was
slain, with Flacchus his fellow in the Triumvirate. Finally, the seditions of
these two brethren Gracchi, tended but to bring forward wicked laws,

The seditions also, which were raised up at Rome, by the Triumvirate of
Octavius, Antonius, and Lepidus, what good brought they to the commonwealth?
They Dion. in Augusto.
were cause of infinite mischiefs, of great and long civil war, of the death
of an infinite number of persons, of the ruin, impoverishment and pillage of
the provinces of the empire, and finally of the change of the estate of the
commonwealth, into a monarchy: And although that the subjects of the Roman
empire, did not then feel any harm by that change, because they light on a
good prince, Augustus; yet after they felt it, under five or six emperors,
all which successively followed, Augustus, that is to say, Tiberius, Caligula,
Claudius, Nero, Otho and Vitellius, all which were bad emperors, and governed
very tyrannically.

Herodianus writes, That the Greeks were first subjugated, and brought under
subjection by the Macedonians, and after, by the Romans, because of their
accustomed Herod. lib. 3.
seditions, whereby they bannished or caused to die ordinarily, the most
valiant and generous persons that they had in their commonwealth: And yet after
they were brought under the Romans yoke, they could not hold themselves from
being seditious, yea even when there were many competitors to the empire: for
ever they banded for some one, which was after cause oftentimes of the racing,
ruinating and destroying of their best towns, as happened in the time of
Severus, to Niger.

Before the Romans had subjugated the Gaulois, Gaul was divided into petty
commonweales (as Julius Caesar says in the commentaries) which notwithstanding
were leagued together, and held a diet, once a year at Dreux to parlie and
confer of the whole countries affairs: But at last there fell a partiality
amongst them, insomuch, as there became great war betwixt the Sequanois and
the Autunoys: The Sequanois drew to their succors the Alemains, under the
conduction of Ariovistus; and the Autunois the Romans, under the conduction of
Caesar: Caesar ariving in Gaul, to succor the Autunois, did so well, as he
planted greater division and sedition through all Gaul, and by that means
subjected it to the Roman the Romans, against whom they had aunciently made
war, and obtained

The ten Potentates which were created at Rome in the place of Consul, would
Dionis. Halic. lib. 11.
needs usurp a tyranny, and continue in their estate beyond the time
established by laws: But what means used they? even sedition: For so long as
they could maintain sedition betwixt the people, and the Patricians, their
tyranny was in some assurance, but as soon as great and small of the city,
were at an accord, the ten Potentates, were withal straight ruined and
overthrown. But this example, is very fit to confirm the Maxim of
Machiavell, according to the end whereunto it tends, which is, to establish a
tyranny: for seditions and civil dissentions, may something serve a tyrants
turn to maintain him in his tyranny, but because heretofore we

32. Maxim.
The means to keep subjects in peace and union, and to hold them from
Rebellion, is to keep them always poor.
THe towns (says Machiavell) which are placed in lean Discourse lib. 1. Cap.
22 lib. 2. cap. 7. lib. 3. cap. 16. and 25*
and barren soiles, are customably united and peaceable, because the
inhabitants there, being ever occupied in ploughing, Quintus Cincinnatus,
Marcus Regulus, Paulus Aemilius, and many others which were very poor, yet
executed great things. And surely we have ever seen that poverty, has
produced better fruits than riches, and that a

Here may a man see the very counsel, which Guiemand gave to Giles, governor
for the Roman emperor in the town of Soisons, and the neighbor countries.
Chilperick the fourth of that name, king of France, had for one of his most
especial friends and Guiemand, who was a valiant and sage French baron. This
king sometimes led a slipperie and disordinate life, so that to furnish his
pleasure and unmeasurable expenses, he was constrained to impose upon the
people great imposts, and to commit great exactions. The French, which at that
time were of an austere courage (says the history) begun to hate him and
bear him evil will, and to resolve amongst themselves to seize his person,
and to appoint a tutor for him, and so to take from him all his young and bad
counselors about him: which he perceiving, demanded Guiemand his advice, what
he should do: Guiemand counseled him to fly, and to give place to the French
ire, which in his absence he would appease, and as soon as they were quieted,
he would recall Chilperick then retired toward the king of Thuringe, and in
his absence the French elected for their cheefetaine, the said Giles, governor
of a great part of Gaul, which the Roman emperor then held: This Giles called
Guiemand to be about him, as one of his Counsel, because he was reputed a wise
man: Guiemand dissembled the best he could by the space of nine years, all
which time he was about this Giles, yet never forgetting the amity and
fidelity which he bore to his king: But amongst other things which he
counseled this governor, this was one, that he gave him to understand, that
the Frenchmens Guiemand himself) called again their king Chilperick, unto
whom Guiemand sent the halfering which he had. The king returning, the French
gentlemen met him even at Bar, where they dealt with him most honorably: The
king also forgave them all new tributes and imposts, and from thence
Sardanapalus, which he had been before his flight, he became after his return
a noble and valiant prince, and chased the Romans from a good part of Gaul
which they held, and greatly enlarged the limits of the realm of France.
Therefore is it evidently seen, that the Maxim of Machiavell, or the counsel
which Guiemand gave to Giles (which is one same doctrine) is not very good, and
that the issue thereof cannot be but evil.

And to argue this point by reason, I think every man will confess unto me,
that The force of a prince consists in the riches of his country.
Machiavell in a certain place where he speaks of war, maintains, that
the common saying is false, That money are the sinews of war, this hinders
not, but that which we say may be true: For suppose it be true (as Machiavell
by his foolish subtlety maintains, that it is the good soldiors which
Machiavell) because they have not of themselves either motion or operation: yet
at the least are they the means which causes the sinews to moove, and
without which soldiers can do nothing, or at least, without payment, in
equipolent kinds to money, as victuals, apparel, and armor. And if it be
objected unto me, that there are some poor nations, which notwithstanding are
puissant and warlicke, as were the Macedonians in the time of Alexander the
Great, and these were poor in regard of the Greeks, Persians, and Medes; and
as at this day are the Tartarians and Scythians; and as the M. de Comines
says. The Macedonians also, became very rich, after that under the conduct of
Alexander, they had conquered Asia, yet remained they always generous and
valiant. The Romans also in time of the foundation of Rome, were very poor,
but within a small time they became very rich, yet therefore lost not their
valor and generositie. It is not then the poverty of the country which makes
a warlicke people, but rather the nature and inclination of the heaven, which
likewise is much aided, when the country may become rich.

If there be opposed unto me also, That we see many princes and private
persons, Riches is more requisite for a general, than particulars.
Caligula did 67 millions of gold, which Tiberius left him; and as Caesar did
the great treasures which he heaped up in Gaul, and as many others did.
Hereunto I do two ways answer: First, I say, it follows not, that r^ches
and treasures are evil, because some abuse them, no more than wine is to be
condemned, because many are drunk therewith. And although there be some
princes and other persons which have abused their riches, there are also many
which use them well. I moreover say, that the consequence is not good in this
case, from Caesar's time, which were so exceeding opulent and rich, that their
excessive riches drew them out of the limits of virtue, to give themselves unto
all luxury, and to enterprise novelties and changes.

But when I say, that unmeasurable riches are pernicious most often to
particular A prince ought not to the sawrize.
persons, I mean also of the person of a sovereign prince: For it is neither
good nor profitable, that a prince do treasure up nor make heaps of riches:
for it serves but for a bait, to draw unto him enemies, or to engender quarrels
and divisions after him: and we often see, that princes great treasures are
causes of more evil than good. Tiberius left after him, for what good purpose
served it? It served to commit a thousand villainies and unprofitable expenses,
full of corruptions, which Caligula would never have made, if he had not found
that treasure? And the treasure which Charles le Sage, king of France, left
behind him, wherefore served it, but to sow enmity and division amongst
brethren: for Lewis duke of Anjou got it, for which the dukes of Berry and
Bourgoigne bore him evil will, and on their sides also (to get treasures) they
caused great exactions to be laid upon the people. And what good did this
treasure to the duke of Anjou? but tended to the destruction of him and his
treasure, in the conquest of the realms of Naples and Sicilie. The great
treasures of king Croesus of Lidia Sirus of Persia and Media, to his own
destruction. The treasures of Perseus, king of Macedonie, made him put so great
confidence in his forces, that he would needs have war with the Romans, and
so lost all, together with himself. Breefely, it is neither good nor
profitable for a prince to heap up, nor to have great treasures and riches
enclosed in one place. And what then? must a sovereign prince be poor? No:
But contrary, he had need be rich and very opulent: for otherwise he shall be
feeble and weak, and cannot make head against his enemies: but his riches and
treasures must be in the purses and houses of his subjects, that is to say, a
prince must so deal, that his subjects by good handling The surest treasure of
a prince, is in the subjects purses.
and maintenance of good peace, may abound and be rich, that their towns may
be maintained in their liberties and franchises, and in free commerce, and that
the labourer and all others may be comforted and preserved from extraordinary
and excessive imposts, and from exactions and pillings of magistrates, and of a
company of ruffians and violent persons, which under color, that they hold
the place of an Archer in the kings military ordinances, or some horseman,
therefore will they eat and ruinate the poor labourer and others, under color
of a commission to receive

By the abovesaid reasons it seems unto me, that the Maxim of Machiavell is
Poverty makes men enterprise novelties.
sufficiently confuted; and that it is seen, that a prince for the good of his
estate, ought to maintain his subjects rich and not poor: For to say that
poor subjects will be more tractable and obedient, and will more easily thrust
their heads under the yoke, and will better bear burdens when they are laid
upon them, it is rather contrary. This was the opinion of the emperor Galba,
who said (when one told him, Vitellius enterprised upon the empire) that there
were no people less to be feared, than such as are every day in thought to
live, and therefore he being such an one, was not to be feared. But Galba knew
well in the end, to the loss of his life, that his saying was not true, and
that a person in necessity will seek all means, good and bad, right and
wrong, to obtain his purpose. The same cause of poverty made also Otho to
enterprise to aspire to the empire: For he himself said, that he had rather
die in war, in hazarding himself to come to an empire, than to die in prison
for his debts. Therefore said Julius Caesar to such as were poor and great
spenders, or which were loadened with crimes, that they stood in need of a
civil war; meaning, that the Sueto. Caesar. Dict. cap. 1^1
best mean to put away their poverty, was to see pilleries and thefts
permitted (as Salust: Always (says he) men of one city, which have no goods,
do envy good people; do make most account of such as are naught; do hate
the present government, and desire a new; and disdaining their own affairs,
do study for a change, because poverty cannot incur any hazard of loss.

If it were needful to confirm this by examples, to show, That poverty has
many Dion Halic. lib. 5. 6. 7.
there were many stirrs and seditions against usurers, which eat up, and
impoverished the people, and caused great faintness. The like often happened
in France: for in the time of king Philip Augustus the conqueror; in the time
of S. Lewis; in the time of king John; and many other times, the Jews and
Italians, which held banks, Annal. 3.
and practiced usuries in France, whereby they ruinated the people, were chased
and bannished out of the kingdom. The factions of Mailotins, and of such as
carried coules, and hoods of diverse colors, and other like popular
inventions, tending to seditions and civil wars, were not founded upon any
other foundation than that, For poor people of base estate, are always the
authors and executioners of such factions and seditions. In the time also that
France was under the obedience of the Roman Dion in Aug.
them by undue exactions: As in the time of Augustus, there was in Gaul one
Licinius, a receiver of imposts, who practiced great and undue exactions upon
the people, unknown to Augustus; and because at that time, part of Gaulois
paid tributes, each chief of every house a certain sum by month; this
master deceiver made a week but six days, and a month, but of twenty four
days; so that in the year, were fourteen months, and so two fell to his
profit: Augustus being advertised hereof, was much grieved, yet did no justice
thereon. Not long after, Augustus sent for governor into Gaul, Quintilius
Varus, who was a great lord, and before had had the government of Siria, where
he had filled his hands: Ariving Varus and his army, against the high Almaines,
upon which he made war; but after they had conducted him and his army into a
straight, whence he could not save himself, they set upon him, and defeated
and cut his army in pieces. Varus and the other great lords of his company,
slew themselves in despair: And hereupon the Gaulois rebelled against the
Roman emperors many times; as under Nero, under Galien, and under many
others, and at the last freed and cut off themselves altogether from the
obedience of the empire: Whereupon I conclude, That to Machiavell counsels)
there can arise nothing but insurrections, feditions, and confusions in the
commonwealth.

But the means that a prince ought to hold, to enrich his subjects without
weakening his own power, is first to take away all abuses, which are committed
upon Means how a prince may enrich his subjects.
on the people, in the collection of ordinary tributes: For a prince most
righteously may levy ancient and accustomed tributes, to sustain public
charges, otherwise his estate would dissolve: And he ought not to follow the
example of Nero, who once would needs abolish all tributes and imposts: and
because the Senate showed him that he ought not to do it, he imposed other
new, without number. For a good and wise prince, will do neither the one nor
the other, but without inventing any new Tullius Hostilius made in his time at
Rome, whereupon he was much praised, and his poor people comforted: Men must
also imitate the ancient Romans, Titus Livin. lib. 6. Dec. 3. lib. 3. Dec. 2
as are paid in regard of grounds, whereunto they belong: For there was
neither Senator nor bishop, but he paid as well as they of the third estate:
There must also be a provision made, that the receivers and treasurers (which
are they which do most hurt to the people) may no more pill and spoil the
world: There must also an hand be houlden, that so excessive usuries be no
more practiced, under the name of pensions and interests; and that it be
permitted to deliver silver, to a certain moderate profit, which upon great
pains it may not be lawful to exceed: for to forbid at once all profit, is
to give unto men occasions to seek out palliations in contracts, by sales of
pensions; by letting to hire fruits; by selling to sell again; fained
renumerations, Tiberius, whereby it was ordained, that no man might hold a
banque, upon a great pain, which had not two Sueton. in Tib. cap. 48.
third parts of his goods in ground of inheritance: moreover there must be
expressed the superfluities of apparel, of banquets, and other like, whereby
men do so impoverish themselves, this shall be a cause that poverty or to
have little, shall be the more tolerable: For as Cato the elder said, in an
oration for the law Oppia (against the great estates and luxuries of women:) It
is a great evil, and dangerous shame, the shame of poverty and parcimonie,
but when the law forbids superfluities and excesses Finally a prince must be
a good justicer, ever respective that the meaner and poorer sort, be not
oppressed by the greatest, neither by such men as are violent or evil livers:
All those things shall be no charge to the prince, to bring to pass: yet by
these means, he may greatly enrich his subjects, which then will never spare
any thing they have, at their princes demand. The people of the earldom of
Foix, are of their own natures rude and Gaston, contie of Foix (who was in the
time of king Charles the sixth) his subjects paid him so great tallies and
imposts, as he held a kings estate, though he were but a count: Yea they
paid him them, very liberally, without constraint, and bore unto him, great
amity and benevolence: and whereupon came this? but because he maintained
them in peace, when all his neighbors about him, were in great war, and that
he maintained so good justice amongst them, as none but he alone pilled and
vexed them. And certain it is, that if men must needs be robbed and spoiled,
they had rather to be so dealt with, by one man alone, then of many; and that
subjects will bear it better at their princes hands, than of particulars; but
especially, when extreme and hard tallies de Comines together praises and
reprehendeth king Lewis the eleventh his master, saying That he pilled and
oppressed his subjects, but yet he would never suffer any other to do them
any evil, or any way to rob or spoil them.

But to many it may seem, that that we have abovesaid, tends too much unto
Aristides, Phocion, Lisander, Valerius Publicola, Fabricius, Curious, Quintus
Cincinnatus, Menencus, Agrippa, Paulus Aemilius, and many other great persons,
which have carried themselves, like good and virtuous people, though they were
very poor, because they suffered Poverty, with a great and constant courage,
and without straying any thing from virtue. Yet so much there wants, that
Christian doctrine approves this Poverty of begging; that contrary it
forbids plainly, that none be suffered to beg: And likewise the word of
God witnesses unto us, That good men will not willingly suffer their children
to beg their bread, for always God assisteth, and gives them means:
Therefore Monks called Mendicants, have gone too far, in praising, extolling,
and exalting Poverty, not taking it as it must be understoode by the word

You must then know, that these Mendicants, at their first entry into the
world (to renown their names) proposed to themselves, straightly to follow the
estate of perfection, How the Mendicants pleaded against Poverty and lost the
cause.
that by their own merits they might enter into Paradize, and cause others
necessity of their living. And it is good, to note in those good brethren the
Carmelites

These Mendicants then (being obliged and restrained unto Poverty, by a solemn
vow which they make at their profession, in their orders) they are so annexed,
united, and incorporated in it, and with it, that never after they could be
never so little separated or dismembered, what diligence or labor soever they
used to do it; hereof they have found themselves much troubled and sorrowful:
For howsoever gallant and goodly the Theorique of Poverty is: yet in practice
they have found it a little too That every man must live: But a man

But the profession of Poverty (especially of that high one) repugneth and
contrarieth all this: For thereby it is not lawful to have any possessions,
nor to acquire corn, wine, or other victuals, for as much as by the
acquisition thereof (whether it be by sale, donation, exchange, or other like)
the acquirer and obtainer thereof makes himself a proprietor and master of the
thing which he obtains; which is not in all good companies, and especially
in great feasts and bankets, after the old proverb,

He that implete is of viands,
Fasting, to others recommands.
But upon these difficulties touching the practice of Poverty, the Mendicants
have made many great questions and scruples of conscience, which many Popes
have sought to resolve, yet could never satisfy nor content those brethren.
Amongst others, the Friars Minors were greatly troubled in their spirits upon
this; that by their rule (which the blessed S. Francis left them) it is said by
an express article, That the Francis, their founder; whereby he had ordained
and expressly forbidden, That none should gloss upon his rule; and that none
should say, that it ought to be understood thus or thus; and that none should
obtain Apostolical letters Ergo then, etc. Unto which their spirits, that
that which they eat, is not their own, neither the apparel that Nicholas the
C. Exist. de verb. sig. 6. Platina in Nicol. 3.
third. The Friars seeing, that such a Pope (who once was one of theirs, and
who knew the difficulties which were in the practice of this High Poverty)
could not be but favorable unto them, held a Chapter general, where they
resolved to send certain Francis, and for the observation of the prohibitions
contained in his Testament, and generally for the whole practice of that High
Poverty; humbly beseeching his said Paternitie to provide therefore, as he
knew to be requisite: yet they most humbly showed unto him, by form of advice
(without any mind of presumption, to give any interpretation to the said rule)
that it seemed unto them, that the glorious S. Francis neither Francis having
commanded them by his rule to beg hardly, and without shame, by consequent has
permitted them to take whatsoever any man gives them in alms, be it moovable
or unmoovable, silver or cloth, to enjoy or use as their own. Moreover, they
humbly remonstrated unto him, That often in cases of maladies, and other
necessities, they were forced to borrow, which they could not repay, unless
they had whereof to do it: and that therefore it was necessary unto them to
be permitted to acquire and heap up, to satisfy such as had lent them in
their necessity for their credit sake. Upon this Nicholas caused to assemble
the college of Cardinals, which in their Conclave examined well this great
cause; and by their advice he ordained and declared, That the Friars Minors
could have nothing in propriety, neither in particular, nor in common, because
the true perfection of the order consists in this point, to be dispropriated
every way of all goods, without having or retaining in them any right: But he
reserved unto them the fact (and not the right) of the usage of goods, which by
legacies, or otherwise, might fall and appertain Genere, or general, and to
every one in Specie or particular. And finally, upon that last point wherein
the Friars do understand, that in cases of necessity they are forced to
borrow, and that therefore they desire permission to acquire, to repay; Pope
Nicholas answers them, That they have not well proceeded therein, to contract
either borrowing or lending, because in that kind of contract there is a
translation of propriety from him that lends, in him which receives: And as
the Legists say: Mutuum est cum fit de meo tuum, that is, A thing is lent, when
that which is mine, is made thine. To shun therefore this inconvenience, he
gave them an acute and an ingenious counsel; which was to procure and find
means, that they which had devotion to give to their Covent, should Nicholas
resolved the difficulties of the Mendicants, touching the practice of their
poverty: For he permitted unto them the use of goods which fell unto them, and
reserved the propriety of them to the Roman That always there should shine in
these Friars, an holy and manifest Poverty. This was a condition which touched
them very nigh, as shall be said hereafter.

Yet the Mendicants seeing themselves to have a permission by his Apostolical
bull of Pope Nicholas, to cause legacies and foundations to be given unto them,
incontinent they begun to practice themselves diligently to have them. And
because they considered, that by sermons they might easily draw the devotion of
the people toward them, they rushed upon that practice with all their might:
which so well succeeded unto them, because the bishops and curates of that time
(as for the most part they were at that day) were but beasts, and could not
preach at all, neither well nor ill, but the most sufficient only knew their
mass at the most. The Sermons then of these Mendicants, being of great
estimate and credit with the people, they straight drew unto them store of
legacies, pensions, and foundations, they never forgetting,

This was the cause that about the year 1311, the Curates (being countenanced
Cap. 1. De Sepult. in extravag.
by bishops) complained much to Pope Boniface the eight: saying, that the
Mendicants troubled them in their ancient possessorie of Sermons, Confessions,
and Sepultures, and that they thought it was most reasonable, that they to
whom appertained the charge of souls, should also have the bodies of the dead
to bury, and that they should hear them in confession, unto whom they
administered the sacraments* Boniface upon this complaint of the Curates (for
which all Bishops and Prelates entreated) would give provision, and by his
ordinance which he made, with the advice of his brothers Cardinals, he exhorted
much the Curates to take patiently, that the Mendicants have right and
authority to preach, constituted by Apostolical authority, that they should
levy and retract a fourth

The Pope Boniface having made this ordinance and rule betwixt the Curates and
Mendicants, soon after they entered further than ever, into contentions and
debates: For when Curates went into the Mendicants Covents to ask their fourth
part of the practickes and obventions of the said Mendicants, they would
straight join altogether, and make such a shouting, braying, and hissing at
the poor Curat, calling him beast, idiot, ass, and saying he could not well
read his Mass, nor decline their name: And further, would ask them certain
petty questions out of Grammar, and bid them turn something into Latin, to
shame them. And think thou beast (said they) that we have taken pains to
prepare meat to put in thy mouth? Belongs it unto the Ass, to reap that
which we sow: Go, go beast to thy Breviarie, if thou Dispauterie, and Amo,
Quae Pars, and come not hither to trouble and defile the pure fountain of holy
Theology, wherein thou understandest nothing: some others cried, come, come,
unto our Refectorie, and we Cap. 1. De Privileg. in etravag.
will lay the Trebelliane fourth part on their shoulders. These poor Curates
then (seeing the said Mendicants approach them, beating one hand against
another, letting down their coules, and lifting up their fists) in a great
fear retired out of their Covents. And knowing no way possibly to obtain
their due, which had been granted them by Pope Boniface, they offered their
greefes and sorrowful complaints to Pope Benedict the eleventh, in the year
1304, or thereabouts. But the Mendicants Benedict after good deliberation upon
this weighty matter, with the advice of his Cardinals, and of certain other
good old doctors of Law, found, that the Mendicants their reasons were well
founded in right, and that there was no apparent reason, wherefore they should
pay to the said Curates the fourth part of their practickes and obventions: For
although there was some color in that, that the Curates said, That they ought
to have the fourth part of obventions and revenues Godfredus in Summa, Azo,
Hugolinus de Fontava, Guilliermus de Cuneo, Rainerius de Foro Livio, Hubertus
de Bobio, Petrus de bella Pertica, Oldradus de Ponte, and many other old
doctors of Law. They alleged also certain strong pillars out of Bartolus and
Baldus, upon which they said their opinion was founded. And therefore Pope
Benedict, moved with their allegations and with equity, rased and made of no
validity the ordinance of Pope Boniface in that case, taking away and utterly
abolishing the said fourth part: yet something to content the Curates, he
ordained, that they should have the half of the funerals of such as were
buried with the Mendicants, that is to say, the half of the spoiled things
which served for the conduction of the body (as torches and cloth about the
coffio) which was no great booty, in comparison of legacies, obits,
foundations of masses, and other obventions, yet there was no help, the
Curates must needs be contented

Yet hereof engendered a greater quarrel than ever, betwixt the Curates and
Mendicants: For the Curates said high and clear, That Pope Benedict had done
them wrong, to take from them the said Trebelliane upon practickes and
obventions of Mendicants, and that those new come beasts would have all, and
would spoil all Curates of their goods and revenewes: And that under the title
and name of Mendicants and contemners of the goods of this world, they
manifested themselves to be rapinous hypocrites, which will needs have all,
by right or wrong. These Curates so cried and complained, and so well
remonstrated their right unto Cap. 2. De Sepult. in Clem.
Pope Clement the fifth of that name, at the Counsel of Vienne, Anno 1311, that
the Benedict, and again brought into force that of Pope Boniface.

Moreover, in the said Counsel of Vienne there was demonstrated unto the said
Pope Clement, that the said Mendicants had greatly abused the commission of
Pope Cap. 1. De Verb. sig. in Clem.
Nicholas, who had reserved, That always in the order of the said Mendicants
there should shine an holy and apparent Poverty: yet already the said
Mendicants had so well practiced and profited in their trade, that there was no
more amongst them any appearance of Poverty: For each day they instituted
heirs, they gave legacies pensions, and revenues, vines, gardens, and other
possessions, also they builded their Covents like royal palaces: insomuch, as
there appeared in them nothing but richesse Nicholas set down in his bull.
Pope Clement having understood all this by the advice of the said Counsel,
declared the said Mendicants (although he himself had been one) incapable to
be heirs, to receive testimentarie legacies, or to have possessions, rents, or
pensions, yea, to have barnes of corn, or cellars of wine, unless in time of
great necessity, or to have precious Church ornaments or houses sumptuously
builded. Breefely, this Pope to their great grief, brought them again to
their first practice of High Poverty, Mean, and Base, and cut near their
wings, that they might not forsake and abandon it from

But Pope John the two and twenty of that name, in Anno 1324, took yet from
them the said usage of Fact, and sent them purely and simply to their
clap-dish, and Nicholas, to leave the use of goods to Mendicants, and to
reserve the property of these goods to the Roman church, was but a simulation
and hypocrisy, wherewith the Mendicants seek to cover themselves, and abandon
fairly that holy Poverty, wherein they have constituted the estate of
perfection, and whereunto he sent them.

When the Mendicants saw themselves thus disgraded and remitted, as deep as
ever into their Poverty, they were much offended, but then there was no order
nor John (that is Anno 1490) there was a Pope created, called Alexander the
fifth, a Candiot by nation, who had Monst. lib. 1. cap, 56.
been a Friar Minor in his youth, unto whom these Mendicants resorted, and
showed him, that they were the true Curates, and pastors of the people, because
they had right and privilege from the Apostolic seat, to confess all people,
and to bury their bodies, and that those whom they confess were held and
reputed both well and duly confessed, without any need to be again confessed
to Curates, and those which they bury, were known and reputed to be well and
duly buried: They further with inhibitions to such as called themselves
Curates, and to all others, not to trouble, Peter, and of S. Paul, and of
perpetual damnation, without any hope of grace, pardon or appeal. Upon this
goodly remonstrance, containing so ponderous and considerable reasons, Pope
Alexander referred the matter to counsel, and by the advice of his Cardinals,
granted to Mendicant Friars, all that they demanded, and caused with great
expedition to go out fair and ample bulls, and well leaded: These good
Mendicants friars, as soon as they had got out their bulls, came straigbt from
Rome to Paris, to cause them to be received and registered in the court of
Parliament: But before they presented them to the said court, they advised and
concluded, that it was most expedient to have the Caesar that which is Caesar's,
and to God, that which is Gods, which is to say, that we must needs yield to
every man, that which belongs unto him, to Curates tenths, and oblations, and
to Mendicants, their begging and alms: They further said That it was
reasonable, that the name should answer to the thing, and that since that
Friars, Iacobines, Carmelites, and Augustines, have chosen that name of
Mendicants, that really and in effect, they ought to be beggars, and not
Curates; A short time would not serve, to set down and Non alligabis etc. that
is, Thou shall not bind the throat of the Ox which treads out Dignus est
operarius etc. that is, The workman is worthy of his sallarie or wages, and
many other like places, which they had at their fingers ends: And to confute
those Mendicants bulls, they said, they were but new come, wherewith they do
trouble the world; and that before that they were borne, the people was as well
preached unto and instructed, and Masses, confessions, and other divine
services as well done and exercised, as since they came into the world; and
that they had nothing in them, but babble and certain subtilty, wherewith they
brought the people asleep, and persuaded them, that they are learned, although
they know nothing; and that they are full of hypocrisy and simulation, making
an outward profession of Poverty, yet tending in effect to no other end, but
to have and heap up goods and revenewes. They moreover said, that it was a
mortal sin, to give any thing to these Non alligabis, Et dignus est
mercenarius etc. saying, that they formally made for them; for they were the
true oxen which tread out the grain, and the true workmen which travail in
divine service: and that they say more Masses in a month in one of their
covents, than there is said in all the cures of Paris in a year: and that for
one man and one woman, which those Curates confess, they confess an hundredth,
and for one body, which the Curates bury, they bury an hundred, and
therefore, for Curates to allege these places, they cut but themselves, with
their own knives: And as for their sermons (said they) these masters Curates
will be so proud, to compare them with ours. Do not all: After the Lent was
passed, they came to justice, for the Mendicants pursued the reception and
enrowling of their bulls, entreating the court of Paris, to admit and allow
them, whereupon the said Curates of Paris, formed an opposition: As the parties
proceeded in their causes, they respectively alleged, by intendits, replies,
duplications, triplications, the reasons and means Alexander died: Then the
Curates began to oppose against them, that the said bulls, had no force nor
vigor in them, unless they were confirmed by Pope John the four and twenty
of that name, successor of the said Alexander: The Mendicants (much grieved
heereat) sought to obtain a confirmation, but could not: For the Curates got
before them, insomuch as the poor Mendicants seeing themselves out of hope, to
obtain the reception and enrowling of their said bulls, resolved to leave the
pursuit thereof, and the Iacobines first left the cause, and the others
consequently: So that the Curates were maintained diffinitively, in the

These Mendicants seeing themselves fixed and fastened to their Poverty, more
than ever, took it with the best patience they could possibly, for so were
they forced to do: Yet notwithstanding, some particulars amongst them, which
were the most angry and had most credit, did so much, as they obtained for
them, provisions and reservations, from the Pope, of certain cures and other
benefices, with dispensation to hold and possess them, notwithstanding their
vow of Poverty: The abovesaid Curates of Charles the sixth, then reigning: The
king by the advice of his Counsel, made an ordinance, in the year 1413,
wherein he much praises the rules of the Mendicants founders, in that by them
it is ordained, that they ought to live in Poverty and Mendicitie, without
having any thing in common or in particular, saying that such an ordinance is
both salutarie and good: And that Poverty is so annexed to the Monachall
profession of Mendicants, that the Pope himself cannot separate them: which
considered, he forbids expreslie, that none shall have regard to the said
provisions, obtained by any Mendicants upon cures or other benefices, and if
any be in possession, that he be taken out, and they which are not yet
received, that none should receive them in:

But yet a strange case it is, that the passions and hatred of men, should be
such, as they have no end: The said Mendicants were so far from contentment
at this ordinance, that they bare great malice to all Curates, yea the one
beheld the others, Sixtus the fourth, came to his papacy, in the year 1472,
the Mendicants became very proud, because he was a friar minor, and waxed
insolent and audatious against Curates, assuring themselves that the Pope would
support them in all things: The Curates then not being able to suffer the
detractions, skoulding and insolences of Peter ad Vincula, and of S. Sixtus to
hear the differences of the said Curates and Mendicants, and in quietest
manner to compound them: The Cardinals heard the parties in their alligations,
and did so much with them, as they submitted themselves to their final
judgment: After this to set a firm Cap. 2. De Tre^ga, and pace in ex^ra.
Articles of peace betwixt the Curats and the Mendicants.
and final peace, betwixt the said parties, they pronounced for them an
amiable sentence, which was authorized by the Pope, in Anno 1478, and
contains the Articles following, That Curates from thence forward, should no
more say, that the Mendicants were authors of heresies, seeing that the Faith
has been greatly brought to Sixtus greatly approved, and generally exhorred
them all to concord and union, in the name and as Vicker of him, who said Pacem
meam do vobis, Pacem meam relinquo vobis, I give you my peace, I leave you my
peace: By which articles of the said

This conclusion here is also clean contrary to the Maxim of Machiavell,
That Poverty cannot be a cause to hold a people in peace and obedience,
seeing it Gregory the ninth, Anno 1230, which Pope was Platina in Gregory 9.
then much troubled with resolving the hard points about their Poverty; and
amongst Nicholas recites it in his abovesaid Decretall: For that of Pope
Gregory is not found printed in the body of the Cannon law, as the others
are, whereof before we have made mention. But herein is no great loss, no not
though all the Cannon law were lost with it: For although some thing be good in
it, yet the most of it is good for nothing but to maintain wickedness,
abuses, and Romanish superstitions, that it were expedient to bury that little
good in it, so that all the evil might be choked with it: For from hence
there is come into the world infinite (both spiritual and corporal)
calamities.

33. Maxim.
A Prince which fears his subjects, ought to build fortresses in his
country, to hold them in obedience.
THe Prince (says Machiavell) who has more fear of his own Discourse lib.
2. cap. 24. and cap. 20. of the prince.
people, than of strangers, must build Fortresses: but he that doubts
strangers more than subjects, needs not: For the best Fortress that is, is
not to be evil beloved of subjects, and if a prince be once evil beloved of
his people, there is no Fortress can save him. Spoliatis arma supersunt: Arms
remain yet to the unarmed. Also to unarme them, Furor arma ministrat: Fury
administreth arms enough. Likewise, to slay the chief Sforces builded the
castle at Millaine, which done, they judged, that by the means of that
Fortress they might with assurance handle their subjects at their pleasure,
and therefore spared no kind of violence: insomuch as they acquired the hatred
and evil will of their subjects, Sforces had no good by their fortress, but
were spoiled of all the duchy.

ALthough Machiavell have not dealt with the art of tyranny Machiavell has
handled all the parts of the art of tyranny.
in his writings by a method, yet has he not left behind, any part of that
art: For first he has handled, How a tyranny ought to be builded, that is, by
cruelty, perfidie, craft, perjurie, impiety, revenges, contempt of counsel
and friends, entertainment Machiavell thinks this mean ought to be
practiced, and that other aforesaid means are not so Hydra her heads.

But I will not stay long in the confutation of this Maxim, but only I will
say this, That experience makes us wise, and that the invention of Citadels
(which in our time princes have builded against their subjects) has been cause
of infinite evils: For all commerce and traffic has been and is greatly
diminished in towns, where

Yet I will say this by the way, That our Machiavelists of France, which were
authors and enterprisers of the massacres of S. Bartholmew, read not well this
place The Machiavelists of France, do not always follow their master.
of Machiavell, which we come to allege: For they said, That men must not
stay upon fishing for froggs, but men must catch in their nets the great
Salmons, and that one Salmons head was more worth than ten thousand froggs;
and that when they had slain the cheefetaines of pretended rebels, that they
should easily overthrow Machiavell says (which also since they have seen by
experience) That a people cannot want heads, which will always rise up, yea,
even those heads which be slain. If they had so well noted and practiced this
place of Machiavell, as they do others, so much blood would never have been
shed, and their tyranny it may be had longer endured than it has done: For
the great effusion of blood, which they have made, has incontinent cried for
vengeance to God, who (according to his accustomed justice) has heard the
voice of that blood: and for the cry of the orphant and widow, has laid the
axe to the root of all tyranny, and already has cut away many branches

As for Fortresses in frontiers of countries, they have been long time
practiced, and are profitable to guard from incursions and invasions of
enemies, and to the end such as dwell upon the borders, may the more peaceably
enjoy their goods. We read, That the emperor Alexander Severus gave his
Fortresses upon frontiers, to Lamprid. in Alex. Pomp. Laetus in Constant. Magno.
good and approoved captains, with all the lands and revenewes belonging unto
them, to enjoy during their lives: to the end (says Lampridius) that they
might be more vigilant and careful to defend their own. And afterward, the
emperor Constantine the Great ordained, That the said Fortresses, with their
grounds and revenewes, Feudi.

34. Maxim.
A Prince ought to commit to another those affairs which are subject to hatred
and envy, and reserve to himself such as depend upon his grace and favor.
A Prince which will exercise some cruel and rigorous act (says cap. 7. and
14. of a prince.
M. Nicholas) he ought to give the commission thereof unto to show that he
consented not to his cruelty, as did Caesar Borgia, and Messire Remiro Dorco.

THis Maxim is a dependancie of that goodly doctrine, which Machiavell learned
of Caesar Borgia (which although it was very cruel) yet meaning to appear
soft and gentle, following therein the Maxim which enjoyneth dissimulation,
commits the execution of his cruelty to Messire Remiro Dorco, as at large
before we have discoursed that history. And because we have fully showed,
that all dissimulation and feignednesse is unworthie of a prince, we will stay
no longer Marcus Antonine said, It seems to the world, that that which the
prince does, he does it by his absolute authority and power, rather than of
his civil and reasonable power. Therefore to shun that blame and suspicion, it
is good that the prince delegate and set over such matters to Judges, which are
good men, not suspected nor passionate, not doing as the emperor Valentinian
did, who would never hear nor receive accusations against Judges and
Magistrates, which he had established, but constrained the recusators or
refusers, to end their Passionate Judges cannot judge well.
justice to be administered, is, That Judges be not suspected nor passionat:
because the passions of the soul and heart do obfuscate and trouble the
judgment of the understanding, and cause them to step aside and stray out of
the way. It is also a thing of very evil example, when a prince with an
appetite of revenge, or to please the passions of revengefull great men, does
elect Judges and Commissaries that be passionate, and which have their
consciences at the command of such as employ them: As was done in the time of
king Lewis Hutin, in the judgment of Messire Enguerrant de Marigni great
master of France; and in the time of king Charles Messire Iean de Marests, the
kings Advocate in the parliament of Paris: And a man may put to them the
judgments given in our time against Amie du Bourg, the kings Counselor in the
said parliament, and against captain Briquemand, and M. Arnand de Cavagnes,
master of the Requests of the kings household, and against the county de
Montgomerie, and many others: For the executions to death, which followed,
manifested well, That the Judges were passionate men, their consciences being
at the command of strangers, which governed

35. Maxim.
To administer good Justice, a Prince ought to establish a great number of
Judges.
TO have prompt and quick expedition of good Justice (says Machiavell) many
Judges must be established, for few can dispatch Discourse lib. 1. cap. 7.
few causes, and a small number is more easy to gain and be corrupted, than a
great number: And vvithall, a great number is strong and firm in Justice
against all men.

EXperience has made us wise in France, that this Maxim of Machiavell is not
true: For since they multiplied the Officers of Justice Multiplicitie of
Officers. cause of the corruption of justice in France.
in the kingdom, by the increase of Counselors in parliaments, by erection
of Presidents seats, by creation of new or alternative Officers, we have
processes and law causes more multiplied, longer and worse dispatched than
before: insomuch, as by good right and by good reason the last Estates general
held at Orleance, complained to king Charles the ninth, of that multiplication
and multitude of Officers, which served not (as it does not yet) but to
multiply law causes, to ruinate and eat up the people, and yet no better
expedition of Justice than before, but rather worse and notoriously more long
and of greater charges to the parties. Upon which complaint it was holily
ordained, That offices of Justice, which became vacant by death, should be
Lewis the twelfth. And by the same means it was also ordained, That the said
Offices should be no more sold, but conferred and bestowed by the king (at the
nomination of men, notable and of quality in every place) to persons having
good reputation of honesty, and whose ability in knowledge shall be examined
extemporally, at the opening of a book before their reception. But the
Machiavelists have rased and quashed these two articles; The Machiavelists have
made dear Offices in France.
the last, to have silver for the sale of Offices; and the first, to bring
foyson and abundance of merchandise: for the greater number there are of
Offices, so much the better is the traffic and commerce, because there are
every day more times of respite, whereof to make money. And we must not
think, that the abundance of sold) are within this little time sold, as all
other Offices, at the tax and price of ten, Cato said, being put by the
Praetorship, which he demanded) worthy to be Presidents or Counselors, than
to be so in effect, by the price of silver. As for them which are beasts and
ignorant, they have some reason to make provision for that merchandise, to get
whereof to live, and pay their debts: otherwise should they die for hunger, or
else be despised and pointed at with the finger, for that by reason of their
ignorance they shall be employed in no affairs

By the resolution then of the Estates of Orleance, it is seen, That this
Maxim of Machiavell was reprooved and condemned, and that it is neither good
nor profitable

Affairs to many committed,
Are always carelessly regarded.
Moreover, suitors always desire with their own mouths to inform the Judge
of them: yet in the mean time the multiplicitie and great number of Judges,
makes

I resolve then against the saying of Machiavell, That it were better, that
there were but one person, in every estate or degree of inferior justice, than a
great multiplicitie of Officers: but my meaning is not, to stretch this unto
sovereign Justice, but customs, ordinances, and laws written) it is good and
necessary, that equity great, and unbrideled, for the quality is therein
more requisite than the quantity. The Lewis the twelfth, inferior Officers were
not many in one seat and degree of justice, for there was but one in every
seat thereof, to administer it; namely a Provost, or ordinary judge, in the
first degree; a lieutenant general, or bayliffe (as they call him) or steward
in the second degree; but in sovereign courts of Parliaments, and the great
Counsel, they were many, yet not in so great number, as they be at this day.

But seeing we are in hand with means to establish a good justice, I will
touch therein some small points, which I have marked in histories. We must
then presuppose, Good Justice consists in good laws and good Magistrates
that to cause good Justice to be administered, a prince must needs have good
laws, and create good Magistrates and Officers: As for laws some concern the
decision of matters, and other the formalitie of process: Touching such as
concern the decision of matters, it seems well that there has been
sufficiently provided, by the local custom of every country, and by the
right or law written: Well might it be desired, that the doctrines of the
docters of the civil, and cannon law, were well chosen, and the good set a
part and authorized: For though in judgments we can hardly lack them, yet
are they so confused, and wrapped with contrary opinions, that they which hope
to find in the doctors gloses and commentaries the solution of some doubtful
question, do often fall into inexplicable laborinthes, and for Licurgus or
Solon, to make those said laws, men's wits are so wild, and their spirits so
mervaisously plentiful and fertile, to bring forth contentions and
differences, and so easily to descent one from another: yet notwithstanding I
think not that it is impossible, something though not altogether, to repress
this arising, and secunditie of law causes,

But it is nothing to have good laws, if there be not withal good
magistrates, for their execution: for the magistrate, is the soul of the law,
who gives it force, vigor, action, and motion, and without whom the law is but
a dead, and an unprofitable thing. A good magistrate then is a most excellent
thing, yea the most excellent in the world, yea he is a very rare thing, at the
least in his time: yet might there Dion writes, That the emperor Caius
Caligula, had an horse called Velocissimus, which he so much loved, that he
made him often to dine and sup at his table, and caused him to be served with
barley in a great vessel of gold, and with wine in great caldrons of gold
also: Not contented thus, to honor his Velocissmus, he determined with
himself to advance him unto estates and offices, and to the government of the
commonwealth, Caligula would make his horse a consul of Rome
and so resolved to make him Consul of Rome, and had done it (says Dion) if
he had not been prevented by death. The Machiavellistes of this time, which
read this in Dion, can well say, that this was an act of a senseless and mad
man, to give such an estate to a beast: Yet do they find it good at this day,
to give estates to as Velocissimus was: for (if the worst had fallen) if
Velocissimus had been created Consul of Rome, he could have done no other
harm to the commonwealth, nor to particulars, unless it had been a blow with
his foot, to such as had saluted him too nigh; but he would never have made
any extortions, pillings, or other abuses, which the beasts of our time commit,
which are placed in Offices: And this is it which Horace says, That we mock
him which is evil favouredly powled, and him that wears a rent shirt under a
silk coat, or Epist. 1. lib. 1
that has his gown on the one side long, and on the other, short: but he is
not mocked, who wastes great goods riotouslie, who overthrows right, and
commits infinite sins and abuses in his charge, men will peradventure say
he does evil, but

How many Offices be there in France, more fit for Velocissimus, than for them
which hold them: And that which is least perilous, every man does laughat, but
this which is most dangerous to a commonweal, no man dare so much as say, it
ought to be amended, much less corrected: For there is a simple beastlinesle
and ignorance, and a malicious beastliness and ignorance: The simple ignorance
is like to that of Velocissimus, which can do neither good nor evil, but
malicious beastliness and ignorance, is a beastly ignorance of all good and
right things, but of a great capacity to hold all vices and wickedness, such
as our Machiavellistes: If then a man must needs choose one of the two; who
sees not that it were more expedient Velocissimus, than some of our
Machiavellists, or our Office-cheators, which comes by retaile, unto that which
they bought in gross.

But the prince, who resolves with himself, to establish good Magistrates
(without which, he can have no good justice, though his laws be the best in
the world) he must consider and note many things, both in particular persons,
and in bodies in general: for he should take notice what an office it is, for
which he should provide an officer, and accordingly seek a person whose
virtue and sufficiency may be Proportion geometrical to be observed in
providing of Officers. Aristo. lib. 1. Ethniks.
correspondent and equal unto the functions of that estate: For a far
greater sufficiency is required in a President, than in a Counselor; and in a
Councellor, than Aristotle speaks, by giving to the most fittest and
sufficientest, the greatest estate, and to them which are meanly fit, mean
offices, and estates, and the least, to such as are least sufficient: This it
is, which Fabius Maximus showed to the Roman people, when they would needs
create Consulls, two young lords, that is, Titus Octacilius (Fabius his Aemilius
Regillus, when Anniball made war in Italy: Masters (said he) if we had
peace in Italy, or that we had war here, against a lesser captain than
Anniball, so that there were place to amend and correct a fault, when it were
made, we would not hold him well advised, that would hinder your election,
and as it were withstand your liberty: But in this war against Anniball, we
have made no fault, but it has cost us a great and perilous loss, therefore
am I of advice that you do elect Consulls, which match Anniball: For as we
would, that our people of war were stronger than our enemies; so ought we to
wish, that our heads and cheefetaines of war, were equal to them of our
enemies: Octacilius is my nephew, who espoused my sisters daughter, and has
children by her, so that I have cause to And withal, that no other has
greater cause than my nephew, not to charge himself with a weight, under which
he should fall. The Roman people found his reasons good, therefore revoked
their election, and by a new suffrage elected Fabius himself, and gave him for
a companion, Marcellus, which assuredly were two great and sage captains.

This rule to elect magistrates equal to every charge, above all ought to be
well practiced in the election of sovereign judges, for after they have
judged, if they have committed a fault, it cannot but very hardly be repaired:
so that the reason which Fabius alleged, having place in the election of
sovereign judges, the provision which

The particular qualities, required in a Magistrate, cannot better nor more
briefly Particular qualities required in a Magistrate
be described, than by the counsel, which Iethro gave to Moses: For he
advised him, to elect people fearing God, true and hating covetousness: Surely
this counsel is very brief for words, but in substance it comprehends much.
For first, the Magistrate which shall fear God, will advise to exercise his
Office, in a good conscience Exodus cap. 18.
and after the commandments of God, and above all things will seek, that God
be honored and served, according to his holy will, and will punish ^uch as do
the contrary. If the Magistrate fear God, he will love his neighbor as
himself, plead before them, should serve their turns (as they say) as a cow
for milk; whereby Iethro requires in Magistrates and Officers of Justice,
were well considered by the prince, in such sort, as he would receive none into
an Office of Justice, who feared not God, loved not verity, and hated
covetousness, certainly Justice would be better administered, to his great
honor, and the utilitie of his subjects.

I will not say, that amongst the Paynims, there were Magistrates, which had
the Iethro required in a Magistrate. When Cato the elder was sent governor and
lieutenant general for the Romans, into the Isle Titus Livius l^b, 2. Dec. 4.
of Sardaigne, he found that the people of the country, had already a
custom for many years before, to expend and bestow great charges at the
receipt, and for the honor of all the governors, which were sent from Rome;
he found also through all that country, a great company of bankers and
usurers, which ruinated and eat out the people by usuries: As soon as he was
arived in his government, he cassed and cut off this, and would not suffer them
at his arrival, to be at any charge for his Cato stayed not upon these
considerations, believing that the permission of a certain, might easily be
disguised and perverted, and that men which be subtle in their trade, might
easily in their contracting and accompting, make them lay down eight for ten,
or twelve for fifteen: Briefly Cato governed himself

He was in all matters assuredly a brave man, he was a good soldier, a good
lawyer, a good orator, cunning both in towns and in rural affairs, proper in
time Titus Liviu^ lib. 9. Dec. 4.
of peace, and as proper in time of war, a man of severe innocence, and who
had a tongue that would spare no man's vices, even publicly to accuse them, as
indeed in all his life he never ceased to accuse vicious and evil living
people, to make them be condemned by Justice, and especially in his age of
nintie years, he accused one Sergtus Galba. This man stepped one day forward,
to demand the Office of Censor, which was an Office very meet for him,
because he delighted more to blame Cato were Censor, he would practice a
rigorous Censorship, and that he would disgrade many Officers and Magistrates
(as this lay in the Censors power) which were far from good. And this which
feared them most, was, that Cato himself, as he sued for that Office said
openly, that if he were chosen Censor, he would bring to their trial, an
Lucius Valertus, whom he demanded, because he was like humorous as himself.
These two being Censors, they failed not to remove many out of their places,
for they cassiered many Senators and Magistrates, yea such as were of great
houses and nobility: They caused their houses to be demolished and
overthrowen, which had builded on public ground: They caused diverse ponds and
lakes to be paved, which were full of mudde and dirt, Cato was surnamed
Censorius. Would to God we had at this day such men, and that princes would
employ them; for the commonwealth stands in great need, so to be purged of so
many evils and corruptions, as do infect and ruinate it.

King Charlemaine and S. Lewis may in this place serve for examples to all
kings, Annals upon Anno 809. and 2253.
and princes: For we read, That these two good kings, true lovers of good
Justice performing the Office of good Censors, sent often in their time,
commissiaries and enquestors Judges ought to have no acception of persons.
they were ended, as seemed good to Magistrates, which always gave a color
to Dion. Halic. lib. 10.
always carried away the gaining of the cause: for Magistrates (which were at
their command) supported and favored them. The meanest sort of people
perceiving, that under color of former judgments, they were abused, and so
that they almost always lost their causes, against the great men of the city;
many began to quarrel and complain: Insomuch as that the Tribunes publicly
proposed, that it was necessary there were ten potentates elected, in the
place of two Consuls, to administer the commonwealth, and write laws and
ordinances, whereby from thence Good Justice cause of peace, and evil, cause of
Sedition.
way appease: But at the new creation of Consuls, it happened that Lucius
Quintius (who dwelt in the fields, in a little husbandry he had) was elected
Consul, and sent for to his village, where they found him at his ploughes
tail, ploughing his final: This good person was honorably brought as
sovereign Magistrate into the town: as soon as he was arrived, he began
to exercise his estate, and to administer justice to every man, as well poor
as rich, without respect or exception of persons. He in a little time,
dispatched all old causes, which had long hanged in suspense, by the means of
prorogations which rich men made: and behaved himself so discreet and just in
the handling of all causes, as he was generally esteemed a good and equal
judge. He abode all day in the palace, to hear and dispatch causes, and he
gave audience to every man very patiently and benignely, and used speedy and
good Justice, to one and others indifferently, having no regard to persons, but
to the merits and to the Justice of the cause then in the question only: By
this means Quintius brought to pass, that not only the great men, were no
more suspected judges to the meanest, but also Justice was so agreeable and
plausible to the people, that the sedition ceased, and all the people were
appeased, so that none demanded any more to have new laws, whereby to judge
causes, but every man greatly contented himself, to have for a law so good and
equal a judge, and Magistrate. And surely there is nothing in the world, which
sooner cease seditions and stirs, nor that better maintains public peace
and tranquillity, than a good Justice, administered by good and equal
Magistrates: But on the contrary, a wicked Justice is often cause of uproares,
insurrections, and civil wars, as poor France can say at this day.

The example of both these cases appeared certain years after Quintius was
Dion. Halic. lib. 10. and 11.
out of his magistracy: for they which succeeded him, had not that grace nor
dexterity, well to administer Justice: insomuch as the Tribunes took up
again their determination, to create ten Potentates, to write laws and
ordinances, after which men might be judged in all causes: And indeed the
Senate (as it were constrained) accorded to this creation, and there were
chosenten Potentates, which with great deliberation composed the laws of the
twelve Tables, which were found very good and equal: and not only they
proposed and made in public places the said laws, and engraved them in Tables
of brass, but which more is, they certain times administered Justice to every
man, after these laws, with great uprightness and equity: And amongst other
Potentates, there was Appius Claudius, who showed himself very Appius alone
performed not only the Office of a good Judge, but also of a Tribune, to
sustain the good right of the mean people. But this good Justice endured but
a year: for the second year, the said Potentates being made to continue but
for a year in their estates, resolved altogether so to remain, without ever
despoiling themselves of that Office: And to gain people to their faction,
they began to do Justice clean contrary to that of the first year, using
favor and subornation, always giving sentence as the first year of their
estate, by their good Justice they brought and maintained a

Unto this example of the ten Potentates, might we compare the wicked,
partial, and venale Justice, which has reigned in France since fifteen
years (which is and has been the principal cause, and as it were the nurse
of all troubles and seditions) and that little of good Justice which we see to
shine (as a lightening, which soon passes away) after the first troubles in
Provence, when the President de Morsen, and certain Counselors were sent
thither: For the little good Justice which they did in that quarter, in so
little time as they remained there, was the cause that the people of Provence
(which naturally are very hot and furious) carried and guided themselves

We have before said, That Quintius patiently heard all them which demanded
justice of him: which is a point, that all Justices and Magistrates ought well
to observe: For according to the right of nations and of natural equity, none
ought to be condemned without being heard. In the time that the Tarquins were
chased from Rome, they underhand practiced many citizens, by promises and
otherwise to commit a treason to the commonwealth, and to establish Tarquin the
Proud in his estate. The corrupted citizens procured to them many slaves of the
best sort of citizens, by promises of liberty and other good recompenses:
insomuch, as all the hired people Marcus and Publius Laurentius, which were of
this conjuration: these many times were tormented in their beds in sleep, by
hideous and fearful dreams, this made them go to their Divines, to know from
whence these dreams proceeded. The Divines told them they proceeded from some
wicked enterprise which they had in their heads, which they could not well
bring about, and it were good they left off, that they might Servius Sulpitius,
one of the Consuls. Sulpitius saw an evident and nigh peril to the
commonwealth, if suddenly it were not provided for: yet did he not think it
good to deal in the punishment of the culpable, before they were well
vanquished and plain matters averred against them (as our Machiavelists of
this time do, which take law against men after they have slain them) but
secretly communicated the fact to the Senate. The Senate referred to him to
proceed in that matter as he thought fittest for the utilitie and conservation
of the commonweal. Sulpitius considering then, that amongst the conspirators
there were many great persons and well allied, and that he might reap great
envy and hatred, if he Tullius Longus, his companion in the Consulship (who
then besieged the town of Fidenes) that he should come to Rome with a good
part of his army: and he dealt so, as he arrived nigh the gates at the hour
of midnight, at the night assigned, and that there he should stay, til
Sulpitius sent him word. This done, he gave charge to the two Laurentines
(which had discovered the enterprise unto him) to advertise their accomplices, as
from the side of the Tarquins, to execute their desseigne that night, and that
they all should meet in the market place, the better to know what every man
should do. This was so done: insomuch, as the conjurators being altogether
assembled in the public market, the Consul Longus was assigned to enter into
the town with all his forces, and so in the market place were all the
conjurators environned and wrapped in by the good order that Sulpitius had
taken: so that they were all by this means convicted of the fact: insomuch, as
none of their parents or allies could deny the crime. This was the cause that
every man said after (when it came to the punishment of the conspirators) that
it were a good deed to punish them, and Sulpitius had well performed his duty.
Breefely, by this clear and evident proof which Sulpitius drew out of this
conspiration, he obtained great honor and praise, whereas he should have
heaped upon himself great envy and evil will of the allies and parents of
such as were culpable, if he had caused them to be executed without great and
evident verification of the crime.

Helpidius also, lieutenant of Justice at Rome, in the time of the emperor
Constantius, Am. Marcel. lib. 21. A Judge ought to fear to offend his
conscience.
showed himself a good and sincere Judge: For being commanded by the emperor
to rack and torment a poor accused person, he would never do it, because he
found no matter nor sufficient proofs against him to do it: but humbly
besought the emperor rather to discharge him of his Office, than constrain
him to do a

The prince then which will make a good election of magistrates, ought to take
care to choose persons, which like Cato will not wink at vices, and which will
patiently hear parties, and judge equally, as did Quintius: which will be
diligent, well to draw out the truth of the fact, before he give judgment upon
any, as did Sulpitius: which may be such persons as fear to offend their
consciences, like Helpidius. And briefly, that they be fearers of God, lovers
of truth, and not covetous, according to Iethro his counsel: Thus doing, he
need not fear to have his justice well ruled and holily administered. He must
take heed he do not like the emperor Tiberius, who gave his Offices to great
drinkers and gourmandizers, taking pleasure to see a man tun up Suet. in Tib.
cap. 42. A^. Marcel. lib. 23 and 27.
the emperor Julian the Apostata, who for a Judge (one time) gave to the town
of Alexandria in Egypt, a most cruel and turbulent man: And when it was told
him, that this Judge was a man very unwoorthie of such an Office: I know nor
(says he) how unworthie he is: but because the Alexandrians be turbulent and
covetous persons, I will give them a like Judge, which may deal with them
after their merits. This was a very inconsiderate part of this emperor, to
give a wicked magistrate to a corrupted people for their amendment: for that
is, as if one should give unto a diseased person a wicked physician to heal
him. There was the like fact committed in our time by the Machiavelists; but no
marvel if Atheists follow the traces of an Apostata, Valentinian, who
constrained the parties to subject themselves to the judgment of suspected
Judges to be their enemies: For all these said emperors were greatly blamed
by authors of their time, and are yet by all hystories, for their so evil
choice of unworthie men in Offices, which rather they ought to have recoiled
and dejected, as many other emperors did, which for far less causes have
cassierd and dispatched them out of their Offices; as some have written, That
Augustus Caesar Ixi in place of Ipsi. And Vespasian cassierd another, because
he perfumed himself and smelled of musk, saying, he would have loved him
better, if he had smelled of Garlic. And Domitian cassierd another, because
he delighted in dancing and puppet plays: for Domitian (although otherwise
very wicked) had this good in him, that he caused well to be chastised, all such
as our Machiavelists are at this day. Likewise also Fabricius Censor, cassierd
out of the Senate Cornelius Rufinus Senator, because he had vessels of silver
weighing ten marks, which at this time comes to 40 crowns. But I leave you
to think, if they would not then have rigorously punished such as do spoil
and eat the people; which sell Justice, or which commit like abuses (which at
this day are manifestly

But it is not enough, that a prince make good election of his Officers and
Magistrates by the consideration of each man's particular virtues, but also, in
seats where he must needs establish many Judges together; he ought to take
good advisement well ^o compose the body of that assembly, by considering the
qualities required, to give a good harmony and temperature to all the body.
And for this purpose he ought to compose and temper it of persons of diverse
estates and diverse countries: Publius Rutilius (who was a good and sincere man)
was condemned to banishment (because he had repressed the excessive and undue
exactions of Publicans in Asia) being evil beloved of the knights, which were
the greater number of the assembly. The Senators disdaining and grieving at
this wicked judgment, stirred up Livius Drusus Tribune of the people: at whose
pursuit there was a law made, That from thence forward the Senators and
knights should be of a like number in the judgments of causes: Which law was
Caius Gracchus (who also was a Tribune of the people) would have caused to
pass, whereby he sought to these, that in the judgment of causes there might
be two knights against one Senator: For herein there is no equality nor
equity; and therefore by good reason that law was rejected, yea, and to the
ruin of Gracchus, who was slain in the too earnest pursuit of that law.

Iosaphat also, king of Judea, after he had established good magistrates
through Paral. lib. 2. cap. 1410. Antiq. lib. 9. cap. 2.
to every man, without having any regard, but to the fear of God, and not to
the riches nor the dignity of persons, finally established a seat like a
parliament, in the town of Jerusalem, composed of persons elected from all the
lines and families of his kingdom, as Judges, holding the degree of supreme
jurisdiction, unto which, men might only appeal from the sentences of inferior
Judges. The same temperature kept also the ancient Romans in all sorts of
their magistrates: For they not only had of their nobility, but also of their
knights, and of the third estate to the contentment of every one: and that
magistrates being so temperated, they so might be suspected neither to great
nor little. This is it which was said of Marcus Valerius (that Dionis. Halic.
lib. 7.
valiant and wise Senator and great captain of war) persuading the Senate
to receive the people to Offices, and into the administration of the
commonweal. Masters (said he) all they which will well establish a public
estate, ought to consider, not only that which is present, but also that which
may come: But certainly, if the whole administration of the commonweal
remained always in the hands of such as are rich and puissant, it might so
come to pass in succession of time, that some small number of them would
usurp a tyrannous domination over the people: But when some of the people
shall be mixed amongst such as are rich and puissant, they dare enterprise no
tyranny, fearing to be punished by the laws; whereof the magistrates of the
people may pursue against them the observation. Finally, so much the greater

A Prince having by good election well ordained the magistrates of his Justice,
A Prince ought to punish evil Judges, and to reward good men.
he ought after, to consider how he may maintain them in their duty to
walk upright, and to keep themselves from corruption. To do this, he must
observe two things: To cassier them which deal evil in their charge, yea,
that he punish them according to the greatness of their faults, and that he
recompense and remunerat them which deal well in their charges. We have above
set down some examples of certain Lewis, who of his kingdom sent often
Commissaries through his provinces to get information of the abuses of
magistrates, that he might do justice thereof: For this example meriteth well
to be practiced in the time wherein we are. Moreover, the emperor Alexander
Severus practiced very well these two points, whereof now I speak: Lamprid. in
Alex.
touching the punishing of evil magistrates, and remunerating the good. For on
the one side he so hated wicked magistrates, which abused their Offices, that
one day there coming to his Court one Arabinus, who was reported to have
committed thefts Arabinus not only lives, but dare appear in the Senate, and
before me. On the other side, Alexander would remunerate and bountifully
reward such magistrates as were good, and well acquitted themselves in their
charges: For (said he) good magistrates which are good men, must be bought and
enriched: but wicked men of no value must be impoverished and driven away. We
may also allege the example of the most part of our ancient kings of France,
which stipended well their Officers of

Hereupon some have thought, that to shun abuses and corruptions of magistrates,
Magistrates in France ought neither to be temporal nor ambulatorie.
to make them ambulatorie, by remooving of them from time to time from one
province to another. This opinion has been held by a great person of our time,
which seems to be founded upon many good reasons: For if magistrates were
temporal, by consequent they should be subject to the Syndiks, and to give
account of their administration: and if they were ambulatorie, they should not
know the persons submitted to their jurisdictions, neither could they contract
with them any inward familiarity and love, which often do cause Judges to
stray out of the right way, and do draw the curtain from the eyes of Justice:
And both by the laws of the Romans, and the ordinances of king Lewis, and many
other kings his successors, the magistrates of Antonius Pius continued always
in his time his magistrates, which Capit. in Pio.
in their Offices acquitted themselves well. And in the time of Severus, and
other emperors after him, it was practiced, that to the Office of the
Praetorian praefecture, they Niger, lieutenant of the war for the emperor
Marcus Antonine, complained to him. But that incommoditie was much more
supportable in that time, than Spart. in Nigro.
at this day it can be, in France: for the Roman magistrates seldom decided
private

After that the prince has well established his justice as well by publication
of A Prince ought himself to minister Justice.
good laws, as by institution of good magistrates, yet is he not discharged:
For he ought himself also to deal therein. And this is another point of the
Counsel which Iethro gave to Moses: For after he had counseled him, what
magistrates he should establish under him, he added more, That Moses ought to
reserve unto himself the knowledge and decision of great affairs, which are
of consequence. And assuredly, this is a point very necessary, and which a
prince ought not to leave behind: for he is debtor of Justice to his subjects,
and ought to give them audience in things whereof he is to have necessary
knowledge: for all things are not proper to be handled before magistrates
established by the prince: but there are many things, whereof the Dionis. Halic
^ib, 1. and 5.
and monarchs, the authority which was attributed unto them by the people,
consisted in three very notable points: whereof the first was, To minister good
justice unto their subjects, by causing them to observe the laws and customs
of the country, and to take knowledge themselves of the injuries which are
great and of consequence amongst their subjects. The second point was, To
convocat an assembly of a Senate, to Homer) calls them (...), that is to say,
Distributers of justice. This is it wherefore almost all good princes have had
their ordinary days of Audience, wherein they took knowledge of the complaints
and grievances of their subjects, and administered right and justice unto them.
Julius Caesar took great pain and travail to hear causes, and to administer
justice, and to cause them to observe laws which concerned Suet. in Caesar,
cap. 43. in Aug. cap. 3 in Claud. cap. 15. in Galba, cap. 7. 8, 9. Domitiano,
cap 8.
the commonwealth: as especially the law Sumptuariam, which would permit no
excess in bankets, nor dissolutnesse in apparel. Augustus Caesar likewise
kept an ordinary Claudius also (although he were of an heavy and dull
spirit) yet held he his Audience, and administered right to parties. So did
Domitian, who (how wicked soever he was in other deportments) with great
industry and diligence administered good justice unto parties, and often
revoked decrees from the Centumvirat seat, which for favor were given, and
spared not to punish corrupted Judges. The emperor Galba likewise (although he
was of the age of threescore and twelve years, when he came to the empire) yet
dealt with audience of parties, and administered justice. So did Traian, Adrian,
the Antonines, Severus, Alexander, and many other Roman emperors give Audience
Adrian, namely, That one day as he went into the fields, he was required by a
poor woman (who had watched to speak with him) to do her justice upon a
certain complaint she made unto him: The emperor very Dion. in Adrian.
kindly said unto her, That that was no place where she should require justice,
and sent her away till another time: The woman replied upon him: Sir (said she)
if you will Adrian was never moved hereat, but stayed still, heard her, and did
her justice. If we read the hystories of France, we shall find, that it has
yet been more ordinary and common with our ancient kings to hold Audiences
(which men called Lict de Justice, The Bed of Justice) than with the Roman
emperors. Charlemaigne king of France, and emperor, besides Annal. upon Anno
809, and 814, and 1215.
that he took great care, that Stewards, Bayliffes, and their deputies, should
walk upright without abusing their Offices, would also, that they should
reserve unto him all great causes, or such as were amongst great lords: Then
caused he the parties to appear before him, he heard them patiently, and
agreed them amiably, if he could by any means: and so he gave his sentence, and
good and prompt justice. King Lewis le Debonaire, because of his good and holy
conditions) following the traces of Charlemaigne his father, held a public
Audience in his palace three times in the week, and heard the grievances and
complaints of every one, executing to all quick and right justice. But what
good came there hereof? Even this (says the history) that the public good
in this good kings time, was so well governed and administered, that there was
almost no man found amongst his subjects, which complained, that any man did
him wrong or injury, but al men lived in great peace and prosperity, one not
daring to offend another, for the fear they had of the kings good justice,
which he would administer himself, and so cause his ministers to do after his
example. So much could that royal virtue of Justice do Philip Augustus
(surnamed the Conqueror, for his great prowesses and conquests) was also a
good Iusticer, and willingly heard the complaints of his subjects: insomuch, as
one day understanding, that Guy Count de Auverne used greatly to pill and
violently to spoil his subjects and neighbors, exacting upon them great
sums of money against their wills, and without the kings consent their
sovereign, and having found him culpable hereof, condemned him (by the advice
of the barons of the realm) to lose his land and seignorie of Auverne, which
from that time was united to the crown. We may also place here the good justice
of the kings, Charles le Sage, Charles the seventh, Charles the eight, Lewis
the twelfth, and of many other kings of France, Annal. upon Anno 1255 and 1269
Gaguin in the li^e of S. Lewis. The good justice of Lewis.
Lewis, who amongst other virtues wherewith he was endowed, he was a very good
and upright administer of justice. This good king having a great zeal to
establish a good Justice in his kingdom: first he would and ordained, That
the good and ancient laws and customs of the kingdom should be well and
straightly observed, upon the pain he would take of his Bayliffes, Seneshals,
and other magistrates, if they caused them not to be well observed. And to the
end the said magistrates might carry themselves well in their offices, he chose
other officers, the best that he could find, of which he secretly enquired of
their virtues and vices. And to the end benefits and desire to gain, are the
means whereby magistrates may be corrupted, and de Coucy, who caused to strangle
two young Flamins, when he found them hunting in his woods. For the king caused
to be called before him the said lord, who fearing to be handled as he had dealt
with the Flamins, would have taken the hearing of the cause from the king,
saying, he was to be sent for before the peers of France. But the king forced
him to abide his judgments, and indeed had made him die, if great lords
(parents and friends of the said lord de Coucy) had not importuned so much the
king for his pardon: unto which the king accorded, that he should have his life,
but yet he condemned him to the war against the Turks and Infidels in the
holy land by the space of three David: Happy are they which do judgment and
Justice at all times. He said also, That this was no mercy but cruelty, not
to punish malefactors. Moreover, he was a king full of truth, chaste,
charitable, and fearing God; which are virtues exceeding worthy for a good
prince, and which commonly accompany good justice. But the godly precepts he
The ten commandments which the king S. Lewis at his disease, gave to his
eldest son.
gave (being in extremity of his life) to king Philip the Hardy, his son
and successor, I would not depart from thee my son, without giving you for my
last blessing the doctrines and precepts which a good father ought to give to
his son, hoping you will engrave in your heart these your fathers last words.
I command you then my dear son, That above all things you have always
before your eyes the fear of God, our good Father: for the fear of God is the
beginning, yea the accomplishment of all true wisdom, and if you fear him,
he will bless you. Secondly, I exhort you to take all adversities do this,
you shall be loved and honored, because the light of the servants makes and
God by his bounty maintain you firm and assured in your estate and kingdom:
Thus finished this good king his last words, full of holy zeal, and
correspondent to his life, passed and yielded his soul to his creator, which
had given it him. His son king Philip third of that name, called the Hardy,
because of his valiancie which he showed against the infidels, and against
other enemies, as well during the life, as after the death of his father, made
good profit of these excellent commands, and maintained the kingdom in good
peace, and great prosperity during his reign.

For an end hereof, I do note in this good king Lewis, That it is very true
which the scripture witnesses unto us; That the lust shall spring up, and
receive of God Valois, and the house of Burbon, have issued from this good
king: God by his mercy grant grace to princes of this time, which are
descended from so good a root, that they may engrave in their hearts the godly
commandments of this king, whose meaning verily, was not only to prescribe to
the said king Philip his son, but generally to all his posterity.

36. Maxim.
Gentlemen which hold Castles and Jurisdictions, are very great enemies of
commonweales.
THe Leages and Cantons of Almaigne (says Machiavell) live very peaceably, and
at their ease, because they observe Discourse lib. 1. cap.
an equality amongst themselves, and suffer no gentlemen in their country; and
those fevv they have, they so hate them, that when by adventure any of them
fall into their hands, they put

THey which have frequented the countries of Almaigne, and of Suises, may well
give Machiavell the lie, for that he says in this Maxim: for in those
countries may be found many gentlemen great Iusticers, having under them, men,
jurisdictions, and castles, which were not only maintained in their nobility
and authority, but also are there greatly respected and employed in public
affairs: Machiavell does here, who says, they be dangerous people in a
country, and that they are enemies to an estate politic: I know not if those
he named be such (namely the gentlemen of Naples, of Romania, of Lumbardie,
and of Rome) and I am content to confess unto him, because I will not contest
and strive against him, upon a fact which has some appearance of truth: But I
deny unto Machiavell has builded by his writings, that is, a Tyrannical: For
hystories tell us, that our ancestors, especially the barons, lords, and
gentlemen, have vigorouslie always opposed themselves against tyrannies, and
would never

37. Maxim.
The Nobility of France would overthrow the estates of that kingdom, if their
THe kingdom of France (says Nicholas) is a kingdom more living under laws,
than any other, whereof their Parliaments Discourse lib. 1. cap. 1.
are the gardiants and maintainers, especially, that of Paris: And hitherto
that kingdom is maintained, because the Parliaments have always been
obstinate executors and resisters against the Nobility, without which the
kingdom of France had come to ruin.

MAchiavell had done much better to have meddled only with the estate of
Florence: for he shows well his ignorance, and that he never knew the estate
of France, nor how it has been governed by our ancestors: For I pray you,
where has he found this, that the kingdom of France, would dissolve and come
to ruin, but that the Parliaments are executors against the Nobility? Is not
this as much to say, as the French Nobility will ruinate the kingdom, if it
be not brideled and held short by Parliaments, and that it were better there
were none? I doubt not Machiavell thus though: For we see it by the practice
of the Machiavellists, which never shot at other mark, than to ruinate in
France all the Nobility, the better to establish their tyranny, at ease
without contradiction: And for this effect have they cassed, violated, and
overthrown all the good laws of the kingdom, by the means of which it has
always hitherto been maintained: and Machiavell confesses and said true,
which his disciples having well marked, and desiring to ruinate the said
kingdom, have not failed to begin by the laws thereof, knowing well Since
what time Parliaments of France were instituted. Before Parliaments the
kingdom was no less flourishing in peace and good justice than since.
that having ruinated her foundations, she will be easily dissolved and
overthrown.

But to confute this Maxim, I will allege no other thing but that we see in
our French hystories, That our kingdom was as much or more flourishing, and
better Philip le Bell, Anno 1294. That of Toulouse, during the reign of Charles
the seventh, Anno 1444. That of Bourdeaux, in the time of the same king, Anno
1451. That of Daulphin, in the time also of the same king (but by the
authority of king Lewis the eleventh his son then Daulphin, and then
inhabiting in Dauphine) in Anno 1453. The Parliaments of Dijon and of Provence,
in the time of the said king Lewis the eleventh. That of Rovan, in the time of
king Lewis the twelfth, in Anno 1499. And that of Bretaigne, was erected only
in the time of king Henry the second, in Anno 1553: But before there was any
news of all those Parliaments, was not the kingdom large and flourishing,
rich in peace, flourishing in war? None can deny this, without giving the lie
to all our hystories, which do witness, that in the times of Clowis, Charles
Martell, Charlemaigne, Philip August, S Lewis, and of many other kings of
France, the kingdom greatly flourished in peace and war: Yet was there no
news of all the Parliaments abovenamed: And so much there wanted, that the
gentlemen troubled or ruinated the estate of the kingdom, when there was no
Parliaments; that by contrary, they were they which exercised in person, the
estates of Machiavell is a mere slander, and that the Nobilite of France is
not such as he makes it (although in all estates there be both good and evil)
and that of all times, even before there were any Parliaments, the Nobility
were employed to maintain the kingdom in peace and repose by their exercise
of the charges and offices of justice.

And would to God, that yet at this day gentlemen would not give themselves so
Many of this time despise letters and the nobleness of virtue. Salust. in
Catelin.
whereby a man knew how to maintain peace and justice in his country, than of
the military virtue, whereby we are defended from strange oppression. And
indeed it is a small thing (as Salust says) to be puissant in arms without,
when within we have no counsel. For the Barbarians, as the Scythians and
Tartarians, are greatwarriors against their enemies and neighbors, yet amongst
themselves they have no counsel, no good policy, no well governed justice, no
letters, sciences, nor schools, and in sum they are Barbarians, though they
be warlike. Whereby appears how much it serves to the public estate of a
country, to have within it a good find that Julius Caesar, Augustus,
Tiberius, Claudius, Adrian, Mark Antonine, Severus, Macrinus, and many other
emperors were very learned in letters and sciences, yea themselves writ
books. We read also in our hystories, that king Charlemaigne, king Robert,
Charles le Sage, and of recent memory, king Francis the first of that name,
were princes endewed with good knowledge, for their times: I say for their
times: for the time wherein were these ancient kings (except the said king
Francis) were full of barbarousnesse and ignorance, and far from the learned
world of the emperors, which we have before named. I will also note another
notable vice, which runs current amongst gentlemen at this day, which is,
That they make so great account of their Nobility of blood, that they esteem
not the Nobility of virtue; insomuch as it seems to some, that no vices can
dishonor or pollute the Mark Antonine, made so great account of the Nobility
of virtue (although he himself was most noble, and of an ancient race) that
in comparison of it, he made no estimate of Nobility of race, therefore
married he his daughters to persons which were not of great ancient Nobility,
but to such as were wise and virtuous, such as none were found like amongst the
most illustrious races of Rome. Maecenas also was a great lord in the time of
Augustus Caesar, issued of a royal race, yet he made no account of that
Nobility of blood, in comparison of that true Nobility which is of virtue:
He loved, honored, praised, and enriched learned men, yea was very familiar
with them, and had them ordinarily at his table, although otherwise they were
of base race: This his love and favor, which he Maecenates. The Poet Horace
greatly praises him, because he preferred the Nobility of virtue, before
that of race, when he says:

Thou say tru^ Macenas, what matters it to thee: Sermon. lib. 1. Sa^ir. 6.

On what (...) is borne, so that borne he be free.
Therefore gentlemen of (...), ought not to despise such as by their virtue may
bouldly say, and carry themselves ^or Nobles, (...) ^ught to respect them, and
acknowledge Euripides says:

At the good accounted ^^, of Noble blood to be: Euri. in Hecu.

But double is his honor, whom, we virtuous do see.
Here will I end these present discourses, exhorting and praying the French
Machiavell: For so may they know how wicked, impious and detestable the
doctrine of that most filthy Atheist is, who has left out no kind of
wickedness to build a tyranny accomplished of all abominable vices. They
which know this, I believe will couragiousl^e employ themselves to drive away
and banish from France, Machiavell and all his writings, and all such as
maintain and follow his doctrine and practice it in France, to the ruin and
desolation of the kingdom, and of the poor people. I could much more have
amplified this discourse, if I would have examined all the doctrine of
Machiavell: For he handles many other very detestable and strange

I pray God our Father and Creator, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ our
only Savior and Mediator, that he will preserve his Church, and his elected,
from the contagious and wicked doctrine of such godless and profane men as
are too common in the world: and that he will not suffer them which are of his
flock to be tossed and troubled by a sort of turbulent and ignorant spirits:
But that he will grant

FINIS.
THE INDEX OR TABLE OF Machiavels Maxims, confuted in those discourses,
divided into three parts.
The Maxims of the first part do handle such Counsel as a Prince should take.
A Princes good Counsel ought to proceed from his own wisdom, otherwise, he
cannot be well counseled. Max. 1. The Prince, to shun and not to be
circumvented of Flatterers, ought to forbid his friends and Counselors, that
they speak not to him, nor counsel him any thing, but only in those things
whereof he freely begins to speak, or asks their advice. Max. 2. A Prince
ought not to trust in Strangers. Max. 3.


The Maxims of the second part, handling the Religion which a Prince ought to
observe and be of.
A Prince above all things ought to wish and desire to be esteemed Devout,
although he be not so indeed. Max. 1. A Prince ought to sustain and confirm
that which is false in Religion, if so be it turn to the favor thereof. 2.
The Paynims Religion holds and lifts up their hearts, and makes them hardy to
enterprise great things: but the Christian Religion, persuading to Humility,
humbles and too much weakeneth their minds, and so makes them more ready to
be injured and preyed upon. 3. 4. The great Doctors of the Christian Religion,
by a great ostentation and stiffenesse have sought to abolish the remembrance
of all good letters and antiquity. 4. When men left the Paynim Religion they
became altogether corrupted, so that they neither believed in God nor the
Devil. Max. 5. The Roman Church is cause of all the calamities of Italy.
Max. 6. Moses could never have caused his laws and ordinances to be observed,
if force and arms had wanted. 7. Moses usurped Judea, as the Goths usurped a
part of the empire. 8. The Religion of Numa was the chief cause of Romes
felicity. 9. A man is happy so long as Fortune agrees to his nature and
humor. 10.


The Maxims of the third Part, entreating of such Policy as a Prince ought to
have.
That War is just, which is necessary: and those Arms reasonable, when men
can have no hope by any other way but by Arms. Max. 1. To cause a Prince to
withdraw his mind altogether from peace and agreement with his adversary, he
must commit and use some notable and outrageous injury against him. Max. 2. A
Prince in a conquered country, must establish and place Colonies or Garrisons,
but most especially in the strongest places, and to chase away the natural and
old inhabitants thereof. Max. 3. A Prince in a country newly conquered, must
subvert and destroy all such as suffer great loss in that conquest, and
altogether root out the blood and race of such as before governed there. 4. To
be revenged of a city or country without striking any blow, they must be
filled with wicked manners. 5. It is folly to think, with Princes and great
Lords that new pleasures will cause them to forget old offenses. 6. A Prince
ought to propound unto himself to imitate Caesar Borgia, the son of Pope
Alexander the sixth. 7. A Prince need not care to be accounted Cruel, if so be
that he can make himself to be obeyed thereby. 8. It is better for a Prince
to be feared than loved. 9. A prince ought not to trust in the amity of men.
10. A prince which would have any man to die, must seek out some apparent
color thereof, and then he shall not be blamed, if so be that he leave his
inheritance and goods unto his children. 11. A prince ought to follow the
nature of the Lion and of the Fox, yet not of the one without the other. 12.
Cruelty which tends and is done to a good end, is not to be reprehended. Max.
13. A Prince ought to exercise Cruelty all at once: and to do pleasures by
little and little. Max. 14. A virtuous Tyrant, to maintain his tyranny, ought
to maintain partialities and factions amongst his subjects, and to slay and
take away such as love the Commonweal. Max. 15. A Prince may as well be hated
for his virtue, as for his vices. 16. A prince ought always to nourish some
enemy against himself, to this end, that when he has oppressed him, he may be
accounted the more mighty and terrible. 17. A prince ought not to fear to be
perjured, to deceive, and dissemble: for the deceiver always finds some that
are fit to be deceived. 18. A Prince ought to know how to wind and turn men's
minds, that he may deceive and circumvent them. 19. A Prince, which (as it were
constrained) uses Clemency and Lenity, advaunceth his own destruction. 20.
A wise prince ought not to keep his Faith, when the observation thereof is
hurtful unto him, and that the occasions for which he gave it be taken away.
21. Faith, Clemency, and Liberality, are virtues very domageable to a prince:
but it is good, that of them he only have some similitude and likeness. 22. A
Prince ought to have a turning and winding wit, with art and practice made fit
to be cruel and unfaithful, that he may show himself such an one when there
is need. 23. A prince desirous to break a peace promised and sworn with his
neighbor, ought to move war against his friend with whom he has peace. 24. A
prince ought to have his mind disposed to turn after every wind and variation
of Fortune, that he may know to make use of a vice when need is. 25.
Illiberalitie is commendable in a prince, and the reputation of an handicrafts
man, is a dishonor without evil will. 26. A prince which will make a strait
profession of a good man, cannot long continue in the world amongst such an
heap of naughty and wicked people. 27. Men cannot be altogether good nor
altogether wicked, neither can they perfectly use cruelty and violence. 28. He
that has always carried the countenance of a good man, and would become wicked
to obtain his desire, ought to color his change, with some apparent reason.
29. A prince in the time of peace, maintaining discords and partialities
amongst his subjects, may the more easily use them at his pleasure. 30. Civil
seditions and dissentions are profitable, and not to be blamed. 31. The means
to keep subjects in peace and union, and to hold them from rebellion, is to
keep them always poor. 32. A Prince which fears his subjects, ought to
build fortresses in his country, to hold them in obedience. 33. A Prince ought
to commit to another those affairs which are subject to hatred and envy, and
reserve to himself such as depend upon his grace and favor. 34. To administer
good Justice, a Prince ought to establish a great number of Judges. 35.
Gentlemen which hold Castles and Jurisdictions, are very great enemies of
commonweales. 36. The Nobility of France would overthrow the Estates of that
kingdom, if their Parliaments did not punish them, and hold them in fear.
37.


FINIS.

