The offspring of the house of Ottomanno, and officers pertaining to the great
Turks Court.

Whereunto is added Bartholomeus Georgieuiz Epitome, of the customs Rytes,
Ceremonies, and Religion of the Turks: with the miserable affliction of those
Chrstians, which live under their captivity and bondage.

In the end also is adjoined the manner how Mustapha, eldest son of Soltan
Soliman, twelfth Emperor of the Turks, was murdered by his father, in the
year of our Lord 1553. all Englished by Hugh Goughe. ()

Imprinted at London in Fletestreate, near unto saint Dunstones church by
Thomas Marshe.

To the right worshippeful knight, Sir Thomas Gressam. Hugh Goughe wishes all
godly honor, with Nestors years, and Galens health.
Being not many Months sense, by some fortunate chance (right
vvorshippeful) in the hearing of certain grave communicatio^, debated by me^,
both discrete, learned, and not altogether vnvvorshippefull: it was at that
present my luckye hap to hear of such well disposed persons as of late
days, and before our time, had been benefactours to England their native
country. Among the which, some of a Zealous mind, had bestovved their sage
counsel and politic devises, for defense of the same, other of a favorable
affection, given their labor, to the having in readiness of such necessary
instruments, as both in time of peace, might cease our doutfull minds, from
carefulnes thereof, and in the perilous seasons of war, defend us from our
daily imminent adversaries: the rest, being not many in number, had
either, of a godly and voluntary vvil, wholy (which chanced more seldom)
applied their riches, or many joining together, laid out their treasures, to
the erectinge of such noble buildinges, as might be for a public commoditye
unto the inhabitants of this worthy I Will of Britain. All whose deeds for an
everlasting memorial of them, and of there well spent days, have most
vvorthely deserved to be engraven in tables of brass. But fevve, yea alas to
fevve, have flourished, in whom all these commendable qualities haue*reygned,
as both to be beneficial to their country, by sage council, procuring of
safegarde for protection of the same, and bestovving of their substance, to the
building of such famous and magnificent works, as might serve for common
utility unto all men. And by the discretion of those men,, that be learned and
wise, if ever any subject has enjoyed the^, they attribute it unto you. For
what is he, which is ignorant of the policies, and travels, that your
vvorshippe have used and sustained, for to get safeguard, and requisite
furniture to the realm. Besides the infinite riches given to the buildinge of
that princely work, commonly called the Burse, which already declares, and
in London is openly to be se^ne. what commodity generaly, it will bring to
the Citisens thereof. These noble exploi^es (as in deed they are not a little by
all men praised) can not, but be highely commended. To what end should I
rehearse, or make mention of the great diversity, which men account to be
between it and the huge tower of Babilo^, or outrageous buildings in Egypt
named Pyramides: or of the exceeding difference, whereby it excels the
intricate Laberinthes, and monstrous pillars, erected in diverse parts of the
world: c^sidering that it is unknown unto fevve, that these were either
builded for a vain ostentation, or frivolous memorial, with out any
profitable use, or of envy, because the founderers of the same, vvoulde not
leave over much store of worldly treasures unto their successors. I neade not
also to make rehearsal of your curtesy, ge^tilnes, friendship, and liberality
toward al men, yea and (which deseruethe no small commendation) toward
the unknown, and strangers, as diverse other, and I also of late days, have
sufficiently proved. In consideration vvherof, lest I might seem, either
unmindful of such benefits, as vndeseruidlye, I have received at your
friendly hands, or be thought unthankful, by not endeavoring, (according to my
pore habilities) partly to recompens^ your favorable gentilnes declared
tovvarde^ me: I counted it good to present your vvorshyppe, with some such
treatice, as both^ might declare me mindful of your so unspeakable benefits,
and vvype clean away from you, the opinion of detestable ingratitude,
which otherwise your vvorshippe might most justly have conceived of me. And
in so much as within these three hundred years, to the great damage, and
utter decay almost of Christ's infallible religion, the great Turks power,
and Empire has spredde it self so far, that at this instant, ar subject to
his cruel tyranny, above four and thirtye most famous nations which in
times paste have been christened, yea and within these fourscore years, as
one Hiltenius by prophesyinge has foretold us, he shall have dominion both
in Italy and Germany: ponderinge with my self this pitiful estate, and
lamentable ruin of Christianitye, I imagined that it did not so become me, as
by dvvtie I was bound, in gratifying your vvorshippe, to reveal and make
manifest unto my country men, the nature, disposition, customs, rites, and
faith of those circunsised Infidelles, with the horrible rackinge, painful
tormenting, and unnatural abusing, of our faithefull brethren the innocent
Christians, most miserably oppressed with the heavy youke of their
unmeasurable taxes, tributes, and continual bondage: that they by considering
of the dangers, hanginge universally over our heads, may learn hence fourth
to amend their sinful lives, and call incessantlye unto god for soccour
against that mortal aduersarye, both to the undoubted verity of Christ's
holy gospel, to our country, lives and souls.

VVerefore according to my simple skill and knovvleage I have translated into
our vulgar speech, this little book, that herein, the unacquainted with the
latin toungue, may learn read and see the su^me of their belefe, the
unstable, vveake, and folish foundations of their fained religion, which in
token of my bounden dvvtie, I offer and dedicate unto your vvorshippe: desiring
most humblye that you will accept it in good part, and so accept it, as to
vouchesafe to protecte and defend the same, with the title of your worthy
name. This if you do, and receive it so fauorablely, as other things of late
days you have done, you shall encorage me, hereafter for so frendlye taking
of these rude lines, to attempt and give the onsette, both upon books of
greater volume, and matters of more weight and substance. In the meanne time I
will not cease daily to call upon God, that he of his infinite goodness, will
increase this loving affection toward your country, endvvynge you with
perfect health, with all godly honor, and after this vvaueringe life, to
advance your worship above the skies, there to remain in perpetual
blissednes, world without end.

Your vvorsnippes most

Bartholomeus Georgieuiz the author wishethe unto the godly and Christian
reader perfect felicity
THe civil discention, deadly discord and contentious wars of our Princes,
most christian reader, have procured me this, that (being spoiled of all my
goods, bound with cheines, led to be sold as a beast, through towns,
villages, streets, and the most dangerous and slippery places of Thrace and
the lesser Asia), seven times I have been sold unto most peineful and manifold
kinds of husbandry: and there constrained under the turkish rustical whippe
and sharp ordinances, in hungar and thirst, in cold and nakedness, lying a
broad out of house, to keep horses, and feed flocks of sheep and ^eardes, to
learn the art of warrefare, and exercise tylling of ground, From whence
taking flight, and lyuinge by the mast of Oaks, by wild herbs, and there
bitter roots sprinkeled with a little salt, and wandering in deserts,
beholdinge the north pole as my guide, I have been environed with most
ravenous wild beasts, I have moreover, on plankes of timber, bound together
with a cord, endeavored to pass over the sea Hellesponte: but being taken at
length, brought back again unto my master, bound hand and foot, cast prostrat
on the earth, and greuosly beaten with rods, I was after cast of unto the
unmerciful regraters of mankind, and slaughterous boutchers to be sold: so
that tossed with the fluddes of adversity by the space of thirtene years, I
have been forced to suffer and sustain many miseries, afflictions, calamities
and persecutions, through ye love that I bare unto our holy and catholyke
faith, But when I could not escape by that more nere way, which is through
Thrace such tirannye, grievous bondage, and cruel affliction of the
Infidelles, flying by an other way, which is to wit, toward the pole
Antartike, throught the most dangerous places, and desartes of Caramania and
Siria.

Through soudrie perilles on the land
And dangers straung by seas and sand.
At length I came into the holy land, unto the Friars of Saint Frances, by
Jerusalem, dwelling in the mount Sion. From whence after the course of ^ne
year, raised (by gods providence) ^s it were from the dead, taken out of the
mouth and jaws of that ravenous and insatiable dragon, and delivered from his
rackinges and torments, I came unto my brethren the christians ^as an undoubted
messanger of their pu^nishementes, that they may do worthy ^penance for there
errors and offenses, lest they com into that place of torments and affliction:
that they may understand also in what hatred they ought to be, which hinder
from that most holy and long desired expedition the christian sword, in time
to come, to be the revenger of our miseries, foreshewed so many years sense, as
well by the prophetical mouth of true beleuers as infidelles, and
predestined to destroy and vterly subvert that kingedome of Satan, when
therefore after my pergerinatio^ throuh the holy land and visitinge of certain
places in the w^ste parts, I had briefly noted the tragidyes of their
crueltye, and certain other things which by remayninge in the court and
warrefare of of the Turkish emperor, I had learned, either by daily
conversation long use, and experience, or such as I had heard the learned and
wiser sort of the same, to rearde and rexearse, or (in time past mentioned and
readen) understood to be questioned by their sagest cou^cellours, and committed
the^ to memory: all, in few words and faithefully written, at sundry places
and diverse times, by piece meal, I had published, after with publishing, when
by certain learned and well disposed men, I had found them made common,
dispersed into diverse languages, and perceived that they would be profitable,
expediente, and after a sort necessary unto the readers, I gathered the whole
into this one bondell, and now brought and reduced it unto a more compendious
order. I offer them, most gentile and Christian reder, of thee to be redden.
Thou therefore by the example of our savior Christ (which preferred the little
gift offered by a poor widoishe woman, before the rich presents of so many
Princes) vouchesafe to take and accept in good part this simple gift of a
poor afflicted Pilgrim.

The Original beginning of the Turkishe Empire and Lineall Race of their
Emperors, with the trade and Ordinances of their wars
THat the Turks are lineally descended from the Barbarous Nation of the
Scithians, not only all the auncyente Hystoryographers do witness, but also
there manners, face, countena^ces, pride, rashenes, wonderful audacity, and
finallye al their trade and order in fightyng does it most evidently declare^.
They six hundred years sense, entering into the lesser Asia, which now has to
name Natholia, committed there infinite spoilinges, and robberies, until by
little and little they had brought subject to their empire inheritances, castles,
and cities, and oppressed the inhabitants of Asia the lesser, which had not
been accustomed to fightinge, and wars. Neither at that time had the Turks
any certain Prince or King, but, rouing abroad by flocks, ouerrane, brought
under their subjection, and cruellye raygned over the noble countreye of all the
lesser Asia. But afterward when three hundred thousand footmen and an hundred
thousand horsemen of the Christians had assembled and gathered together unto the
most renowned Duke Gottfridus Bilioneus, and passed over the Sea to possess
and inhabit the holy land, where was the sepulcher of our redemer Jesus
Christ: the Turks also flocking together, created one Soliman there Captain,
and so made war against the Christians. But after a cruel and blouddye
battle, they were by the said Christians vanquished and put to flight. From
this time foreward we read not that the Turks had any Prince, until the
year after Christ's incarnation a thousand and three hundred, about which
season at lenght Ottomannus began to wexe famous, and being of great powr^ and
strenght, was created first Emperor of the Turks, from whom all the rest, as
the table ensewing shall plainly declare, consequently took there beginning.

A brefe rehersall of all the Emperors of Turkeye
Otthomannus,
OTthomannus first Emperor of the Turks, which was of the turkishe nation
as it were the grandfather, and from whom all the other Princes of Turkey do
take their name, was fortunate, victorious, and a very cruel tyrant. He
reigned eight and twentye years, and dyed in the year of our Lord, a
thousand, three hundred, twenty and eight.

Oreanus,
OReanes second Emperor of the Turks, was subtle and wittye, he invented
sondrye sorts of instruments and Enginnes of war, and governed the Empire
two and twenty years.

Amurathes,
AMurathes the son of Oreanes and third Emperor of the Turks, being a
young man, was disceiful, circumspect and vigilant. In the year of Christ a
thousand three hundred three score and three he possessed by force of arms
Adrianopolis, and raygned three and twentye years.

Baiazetus,
BAiazetus the first of that name and forth Emperor of ye Turks, was
victorious, but a famous and cruel tyrant. He brought in subjection to his
Empire almost all Greece, and was at lenghte vanquished by the most mighty
Tamberlane.

Cyriskelebes,
CYriskelebes the son of Baiazetus, and fifte Emperor of the Turks, came
unto the Empire being a very young man. He fought a battle with Sigismundus
Emperor of Rome, which at that present was king of Hungarye, ouercam and put
him to flight in the field called Salumbetus. He dyed being yet of youthely
years, and rained about six years.

Moises,
MOises was sixth Emperor of ye Turks. After yt he had slain Oreanes his
brothers son, he obtained ye turkish Empire, but not long governed the same.
For he was also murdered by Mahometus brother unto Oreanes slain of him
before, which after the death of Moises brought under his subjection the Empire
of Turkey.

Mahometus,
MAhometus the first of that name, and seventh Emperor of Turks was notable
through his cruelty. He weakened in many battles the strenght of the
Walachians, and oppressed them. He reigned fouretene years, and dyed in the
year from Christ's incarnation a thousand four hundred and nintene.

Amurathes,
AMurathes the second of this name, and eight Emperor of the Turks was full
of guile and cruel. He first invented, and established the order of
Ianitzaries, of whom it shall be spoken hereafter. He reigned years thirty one,
and died in the year of christian health, a thousand four hundred and fiftye.

Mahometus.
MAhometus of that name the second, ninth Emperor of ye Turks, was bold, of
great audacitye stubborn, and rash. He took Constantinople in the year from
Christ's incarnation, a thousand four hundred fifty and three, the nine and
twenty day of may, and was Emperor thirty and two years.

Baiazetus.
BAiazetus called the second of that name, tenth Emperor of ye Turks, by
force of war subdewed all Moldauia, and brought it in subjection to his
Empire. Besides that he fought many, great, and perilous battles, at the which
he was present in his own person among his soldiers. He reigned thirty and
one years.

Selimus,
SElimus eleventh Emperor of ye Turks was marvelous cruel. He poisoned his
Father, and by that means obtained the turkishe Empire, in the year of our
Lord God a thousand five hundred and twelve. Afterward when he had subdewed
the great Sultan, he sacked the most populons city Alkairum, and reigned but
eight years, at what time he was justly punished for his crueltye.

Solymannus,
SOlymannus the son of Selimus and twelueth Emperor of the Turks, which
reigned in our time, but now is said to be dead, was for our sins and
offenses fortunate and victorious. By him were subdewed ye Grecian city Alba,
with Rhodes. And after that he had vanquished king Ludouicus, he adjoined also
to his Empire, Buda, Strigonium, Alba Regalis, and many other cities of
Hungarye. He also in the year of our Lord a thousand fiuehundred twentye and
nine beseged Vienna, where from by help of the sone of God, whom he has as
his enemy, he was driven away.

In what manner the Turks do use to make vvarres.
AFter that the Turks had vanquished the strenght and power of the
Macedonians, they kept and imitated there traininge up of soldiers, warrelike
discipline, and manner in governing, although in every particular point they
agree not. Wherefore there harneis being coats of maile, they are accustomed to
fight with spear, shilde, and swords crooked in the back like our wood
knives, and often times prove conquerours. It is most certain that the
Ianitzaries do nothing at all differ from the most picked soldiers of
Macedonia, by whose martial prowes Alexander the great, vanquished the
inhabitants of the Eastern parts, and brought the^ in subjection to his
Empire. They bring up, exercise, and instruct them even from their infancye in
fighting and the wars. Not one among them does know either his parents, or
knisefolke. They are (to say the truth) the children of christians, ravished
and taken away at sondrye robberies, and spoiling conquestes, which being
brought into the orcharde of the turkishe Prince, they practice and train up
in warrelike feats and exercises, whereby in time to come, they may be have and
defend the^ selves more ma^fully in the forefront of their battelles. If any of
them chance to dye, or to be slain in the field, either at the assaute of
any city strong castle, or other mighty places of defense, incontinent they
ordain and substitute in there places, certain of those so exactly exercised
and instructed young men, and by that means fill up the member. By reason where
of the band of Ianitzaries, which is is it were the fortress and heart of
all the power and strength of the Turks, does always confinew vndeminished.
They have not equal stipendes, but every one has a pension: according to his
propre manlines and puisant deeds atchiued.

And this is the only cause why they prove so desperate prompt and ready to
attempt all kind of valiant acts and adventures, as of late years we have
of them been taught and certifyed, not with out our great grefe, damage, and
discommodytie. For even since the time of Amurathes the second, which first
constituted the Ianitzaries, and disposed them in this order, we never read
that they lost the universal and hole strenght of any general army, but by
experience have rather known them, to be the victours and conquerours.

The Turks do maintain and keep with such justice and severity the
discipline of war, the laws and customs in battle, that in this behalf they
may seem far to pass ye Gretia^s and Romans. There never chances among
them, either divisions, mutual slaughters, seditions, or treason. For they are
fourth with beheaded, being but for a trifeling offense convicted. The turkish
soldiers in many respects do surmount the warriors of other nations. First
of all they readily obey, with out grudging or disdain, their Prince and
Captains, which is not observed among us. Secondly al though they be enforced
with most urgent necessity, yet they never take flight, but rather assail
and fight more desperately. For they fully believe that by celestial providence
it is determined at what time, and after what sort every mane shall end his
life and dye, and therefore they think that no misfortune may chance unto them
before the prefixed hour.

Finally in as much as they are endurable and most patie^t, a long space of
time they can sustain the^ selves with out bred or wine, with only water and
rice.

The Officers perteinning to the great Turks Court and vvarres, with the
disposition of the same, and diversities of his soldiers.
Vizier Bassae,
Vizier Bassae are Councillors to the turkishe Emperor: For with these he
accustometh to deliberate and consulte of all his business and affairs. They are
in number four, and are chosen by the Emperor him self, of the multitude of
those, which have forsaken Christ, and of Christians ar be come Turks, yea
there have been found to prove of them more worse then the Turks the^ selves
Their authorytye and power is of great estimation, and they are of marvelous
riches and substance.

Lesker Kadie
LEsker Kadie are ye chief Judges, which determine, and discide, be they never
so many, all contentions, and controversies of war. The one has his seat in
in Romania, the other in Natolia. Their office is to declare the law, sit in
judgment, and the causes of as many as ar brought before them, to decyde
according to the laws of Mahomet. Unto these do apeale and resort all the
other inferior Judges named also Kadie, and in their power it lies to give
judgment of any controversy, be it never of so great weight.

Beglerbeg,
BEglerbeg he has the soueraintye of al other Captains, and is chief Prince
of warrefare, or one that supplieth ye chief Princes rome. There ar two
Beglerbegs, and they have the dominion over them that are named Szantsakbegler.
The one has his abode in Nato^lia at Cutheia a city of Galatia, the other in
Romania in a city of the Ruscians, which of them is called Sophia.

Tepthedar
Tepthedar in their language does signify a book, in the which reckoninges and
accou^ptes ar written. Whereof they have their name Tepthedar. They are ye
Questours, or Treasourers. The one in Ramania, the other in Natolia do receive
an accounte of the yearly profits, and revenues, through out the whole
turkishe Empire, and of all rentes and expenses. They are of great authority an
estimation in the courts of Princes.

Iereys,
Iereys is Prince of the battles fought upon the sea, and wars about the sea
coasts, which always is choseu out of the number of them wyche are named
Szantsakbegler, or Liuetenantes which govern Calliopolis. He has the charge
of three hundred ships, all which are governed by sails.

Moderie,
Moderis are men learned in the constitutions, decres, and ordinances of
Mahomet, wise, and of marvelous experience, and therefore they are all
generallye called by this name.

Muthi,
Muthi are lawiers, of the which one is elected to be as principal Doctor of
the law, whose apointmente or deciding it is not lawefull for any manne to
retracte or call again. If any obscure and dark places are found in the
laws, these are consulted concerning the interpretation thereof.

Iaziti.
Iaziti are diverse scribes in the courts of turkishe Princes, howbeit they use
sondrye languages and letters. For in Turkeye they speak and writ with
their propre spech and letters. In Greece and Italye with the tongue and letters
of the Grecians. But in Pannonia and Moldauia are accustomed in writing the
language and letters of the Rascians. The Turks do call all the scribes by one
name Iaziti.

Spahioglani.
Spahi in their ^ong betokens noble, and Oglan does signifye a young man or
son, whereof they have to name Spahioglani, and they are the principal
borsemene in the turkishe army, brought up in the Emperors Orchard, and are
called his sons. Out of ye band of these are chosen such as they call
Szantsakbegler, after that his Legates or Ambassadors. The full number of the^
is a thousand* being apparaled with gorgeous and rich ornaments, they ride
by the Emperors right side. Every one of the^ has seven or eight soldiers
under him.

Soluphthari
Soluphthari, these are hrought up together with the Spahioglans, and are
equivalent unto them in power and dignity. Their number also is a thousand,
being cladde in most fine and sumptuous robes they go by the Emperors left
side.

Capiti.
Capi in the turkishe language does signify a Gate, of the which their name
derived is Capici. They are the kepers or porters of the Princes Gates, which
are maruelously esteemed, and advanced to high dignities. They are elected out
of the band of Ianitzaries. The number of them is fourhundred.

Vlufagi.
Vlufagi are a thousand horsemene so called, chosen from the troop of
Ianitzaries, or pycked soldiers of the Bassaens, which have made manifest by
some famous or notable act their fidelytye and manlye prowes. They keep the
third rank after the Emperor of Turkye.

Caripiti.
Caripiti, these also are horsemene, in number a thousand. And even as their
horses are quick and swifte, so are they also endewed with wonderful audacity
and swiftenes. They use and arm them selves with bow, arrows, shilde, ^ere,
and crooked swords, and have stipendes very large.

Solakhi.
Solakhi, are the principal and best appointed soldiers. These also are chosen
from the band of Ianitzaries, which ar marvelous skilful in showing with
arrows, and are practiced and accustomed, above all the rest, in shewtinge
the^ of most straight unto ye prefixed mark. Their number is seven hundred,
whose office is to enuiron and safegarde the Emperor with their arrows nocked.

Ianitzaraga.
Ianitzaraga. By this name is called the Chefteine of the Ianitzaries, which
has under him Peticapteines, of whom certain have the gouernme^te over a
thousand, other of five hundred. There are besides these Centurions, and
captains over ten. Under whose dominion do the rest of the Ianitzaries lead
a most quiet life.

Ianitzari,
Ianitzari are footmen in number twelve thousand, most valiant, of marvelous
practice, and strong soldiers, unto whose fidelity the turkishe Emperor is
wont thefelye to credit and commit him self. They use long Gunnes, out of
the which they showte fourth pellettes with great swiftnes, and strike the
mark or thing whereunto they send the same.

Beslie,
Beslie, are also soldiers most famous and exercised, which have declared
notable acts of their strenght. Every one of them receives the stipendes of
five soldiers, and are almost in number fourhundred.

Mutapharak
Mutapharak, are the sons of great Princes, ministers or servants of the
Emperor, they enjoy abundant lybertye, and sustain no travels, sauinge that
they stand before the turkish Emperor, observe, wait upon, and accumpanye
him.

Czausi.
Czausi, these do carry clubbes in their hands, they order and dispose the
host. They go also before the Prince in the army, and make him way, as
hereafter it shall be declared again. There are of them three hundred. Whose help
and aid, the turkishe Emperor is also accustomed to use in Ambassadges.

Gimlie,
Gimlie. These soldiers are formessangers, which have horses most swifte, and
when necessitye requires, can ride and dispatche a great space of ground in
one night. They are covered with coats of maile, and fight with shild spe^es
and crooked swords.

Alcantzi,
Alcantzi be horsemen of the lowest estate or degree, they are cruel wasters
and spoilers, which, in as much as they go to war, only for their private
commodities sake (for no spoils or booty is wont to be exacted at their
hands) they waste and consume every thing with fire and sword. The
multitude of them is great, for they excead the number of thirty thousand.

Mekther
Mekther, are ministers of the turkishe Prince, which are ordained to purge,
make clean, and deck up the houses of the Emperor of Turkeye. These have the
charge of all the hanginges of tapestrye and arras. They keep the tents of the
turkishe Emperor, when he goes unto any war.

Asappi,
Asappi are footemene very skilefull in showetinge of arrows, sent from the
cities of Turkeye, the help the turkishe Emperor in time of war Every one of
them, for the stipende of one month, does receive three turkyshe peace of
goulde.

The Turkishe rites and ceremonies. The form of the turkishe temple, of the
resort thereunto, and order in praiinges.
THey have temples of a compete^t largenes, and sumptuous, called in their
language Meschit, in the which I save at all no images or pictures, sauinge
these words written in the Arabian tongue: La Illah Illellah. Mehemmet,
Iresul, Allab, Taure Bir Pegambir Has: which is as much to say as, their is
no god but one, and Mehemmet his prophet, one receatour, and the rest of his
Prophets equal. Or these Fila Galib Illelah, which thuse may be englished,
their is none so strong as God. After that their is to be seen a great
multitude of La^pes burning with oil, all the temple whitlimed, the pauement
covered with mattes, and bewtisyed from above with hangings of tapistre work.
Not far from the temple, their is a toure or turret of exceading height,
which their pressed asce^dinge before the time of prayer repeatethe these words
thrice, with a loud voice, his ears stopped with his fingers: Allah Hechber
which does signifye, their is one true God. Whose voice being heard, both
the noble and baser sort of mean resort unto the church, they are so given,
and addicted unto devotion. Then the forenamed priest coming down does pray
with them, and so is he bound to do five times within the space of a day and
night, by his office. But as many as come unto the prayer Church, ought first
to wash their hands, feet, and pryuy parts: after ye thrice they sprincle
water upon their beads, rehearsinge these words: Elhemdu Lillahi, wiche is,
glory be to my God. Last of all their shoes put of, called Patsmagh, and
left before the door of the temple, they enter in: some with bare feet, other
having clean shows named Mesth, with the which they tread not one the bare
earth. The turkishe women never keep cumpanye, and sit with the men, but a
part in a place altogether separete from their sight and hearing: and they
seldom frequente the temple, but at the time Bairam of Easter, and now and
then on the Frydaies, which in their language is named Gsumaagun, they pray
from the nynthe hour of the night unto the twelueth of the same, which is
myddenighte: and in the time of their prayer, they marueilouslye beat and
torment their bodies with continual mouynge and exclamations, in such wise
that often times destitute of strenght and remembrance, they fall flat one the
earth and if any of them from that time foreward shall feel her self to be
with child, she affirm the to have conceived by virtue of the holy ghost.
And when they are delivered, the children borne of them are called Nefes Oglu,
which is Souls, or children of the holy ghost. So was it declared unto me by
their waitinge maids: for I never saw it, neither is it permitted that any
man should be present at that spectacle. But at the prayers of the men I have
been often times with my master, whose manner and custom is such. While their
prayer endures, they put not of their bonettes (wyche in their tou^g are named
Tsalma) but touch them with the tops of their fingers, as though they were
about to lift the^ up, they knele on their knees and kiss often the earth. A
heinous deed among them it is accounted that a Christian should be permitted
to their prayers: for they believe (as it is reported among the^) their churches
to be defiled by such uncleanly persons. For the Christians accustom not
those often frequented was^hinges, acordinge to their custom. There the priest
goes up unto the pul^itte, and preachethe about the space of ^wo hours: his
Sermon being finished ^wo boys supply ye room, with singing pronounce their
prayers. Which also en^ed, the priest begins with all the people in a low
voice to singe (shaking his head from one side to an other) no other but these
words, La Illah Illelah, whose meaning is, there is but one god, and so the
space almost of half an hour ^he shakes him self, and soundethe the prayers
with his voice. But ^^ch kind of prayers and ceremonies, as singinge and
Sermons are not used every day, saving in the time of Lent, and on a
festival day, as Thursdaye, from the ninthe hour of the night unto the
twelueth. And of some Frydaye is most religiously observed.

Of the Turks Lent, when They keep it and how their Easter is observed.
ALent they have also, in their propre language called Orutz, wherein every
year they fast the space of one Monethe and a weke, but not always one, and
the same, for if this year they fast Januarye, the next following they
absteyne in Februarye, goinge in order, so that in the course of twelve years,
they fast a year, and the twelve wekes are offredde unto God in steed of a
Tenth. In the time of their fasting, they taste all the day of no kind of
meat, no not so much as of bredde or water. But after the sight of a star,
it is lawful for the^ the feed on all sorts of meats, excepting stranguled,
and the flesh of Swine. Stranguled meat of the^ is called Murdar, which does
signify a dead, or unclean carcas, and the swine Domutes. The Lent finished
they celebreate the feast of Easter, in their mother speech ^ned Bairam, with
marvelous solemytie, by the space of three days, anoyn^nge the nails of their
hands and feet ^ith a certain ointment by the^ named ^hna, which causethe
their nails to ^lister: they steigne with the same oynt^ente also, the tails
and feet of their ^ouses: this color sticks very fast, and cane not easily
be weeped or was^ed away: wherefore except new nay^s increase out of the
roots, they all^ayes apeare glistringe, but from the ^andes with often and
continewal washyng it may he weipte out. The women not only infecte their
nails, but also their hands and feet with the same Oyntemente.

The manner of the turkisne circumcision, after what sort it is done, and of
their names.
THey use Circuncision called in their propre spech Tsuneth, not on ye eighte
day, according to the custom of the Jews, but after the childs birth when
he is in the age of seven or eyghte years, then skilefull in speaking their
language: and that ceremonye is observed among them at that time, for the
words of confession, which are required before the circumcision (the Thumb
of his hand called Larmath, lifted up) and they are those to wit, that
before we have mentioned to be written in their temples. And the child is not
brought unto the chuch, but circumcised at home in his parents house, At this
solemnity have I ben often present, which is done after this manner. First of
all their frindes are called together to a bankete, for whom of dayntye dishes,
there are sufficient prepared, of all kinds of flesh, such as they may
lawfully feed on, and here and there, (as among the richer sort) is slain an
Ox, in the which (flean, and his boweles taken out), they encloase a sheep,
in the sheep a hen, and in the hen an egg, all which holy together are
roasted in honor of that day.

After that at the time of their banketing and feast, the child is brought
fourth to be circumcised, then the Physician or Surgion seruinge for that
purpose, opens the mitte of his yard, and takes the skin folded in a
crampe wire, son after whereby to rydde the child from fear, he says that
ye circuncision shall be deferred until the next day, and so departs, not
long betwine, fayninge as though some thing were omitted or forgotten,
which necesarye appertains to the acco^plishinge of that act, upon a
sudden he cutteth of peace of that skin, which covers the head of the
childs yard, putting upon the wound a little salt and soft silk thense
fourth he shall be called Musulman, which is circumcised, and they have no names
given them on the day of circumcision, but at their very birthe, when first
they are brought into light and this world, which are these, and first of
kings as Suleiman, interpreted Solomon Sultan Stelim, which is a Prince of
peace Murath Begh, a desired ruler: Mustapha and such like. Of captains as
Pirin, Haradon, Hader, Ebrahim. And the names of lords of the meaner condition
are Spahalar, Sauslar, Eminler, Behram, Memmi Mehe^met, Alli, Ahmat, Tcielebi,
Paiazith, Chatsun, Hutscref. Unto all the rest, Mutsa, Ionutz, Sthender,
Perhat, Ferro. Their captives and bondemene, for the greater part are called
Seremeth, which name signifies a bold and spedye seruante. From that time
forewarde the feast continewing by the space of three days, the circumcised
child is brought with a most solemn triumph unto a Bathe. And in retourning
home, he is lead by the guestes and banketters, which offer gifts unto him
before provided: some silk garments, some silver cups, other money or
horses. The women also present him with shirtes, naptkinnes, and other such
like. Every of the feasters gives acording to his pleasure, habilytye, or
riches. The women are not at all circumcised, but confessing only the fornamed
words, are counted Mulsuman But if any among the christians of his voluntarye
will, granting him self to be a Mehemmetiste, does suffer circumcision
which not seldom chau^ceth by reason of the most grievous yoke and burden of
tribute, he is carried through all the streates and high ways of the city,
with great honor and joy of all the people, playing upon timbrelles: unto him
also are given certain gifts, after that he is made free from paying any
tribute, in their mother tongue called Haracs. And through gredines of this
lucre and advantage, many of the Grecians, which they call Vlumlar, and
Albanians, that are named Arnautla have been circumcised. If any manne forced
by vyolence, as one which has stricken a Mulsuman, misused him with reproach,
or blasphemed Mehemmet wiche I saw chance unto a certain Bishop of the
Grecian religion) be circumcised, there is no thing given unto him, albeit he
shall be discharged from paying any tribute, as the rest Mulsulmanlar, which is
of the circumcised are.

Of the turkishe Prestes by whom they are elected, and how they live.
THe prestes, which in their speech are called Talismanlar* do very little or no
thing at all differ from the lay people, neither from the chief ministers of
their ceremonies (which among us are. Bisshoppes) and no deep learning is to
be required in them, it is sufficient if they are of abilytye too read the
Alkaron and Mussaphus. But they that can interpret them according to the
text, are counted profundely learned: because they were not delivered by
Mehemmet in the vulgar turkishe tongue, but in the Arabian language, for they
count it a heinous matter if being interpreted they should be written in their
mother speech. These prestes are elected by the people, but receive a stipende
for their labor of the king: they have wives and their apparel is like unto
seculer men. If the stipende be not sufficient for them to live, through
the multitude of their children, they use some handye craft, and handle some
such occupation, as may be thought worthy a free manne, they become schole
masters and writ books, I save verily no printers among them, but they
dress their paper very finelye. The rest do use other means for advantage
and games, as the occupatio^s of Showemakers, Tailers, and such like.

The festes of the turkishe Munkes and manner of there living.
There are not wantinge among them Munkes called Deruislar, of diverse sorts
verily, but chefely of three orders. The first order is of those, which having
no one thing propre, goo as it were naked, saving their pryuye parts are
covered with shepes skins, and likewise in the time of extreme coldness, they
use the same skins to cover their backs: but their sides, hands, feet, and
head, they cover at all with no garmente. Requesting alms as well of the
christians as Turks, they desire it Alahisi, which does signifye for gooddes
sake. These Munkes devouring the herb called Mas^ath, are driven into a
madness, in so much that they wound them selves, and draw a lance from one
side of their breast ouerth wart unto the other, after, that alongest their
arms, without shewinge fourth any token of grefe: and remove not the kindlede
dry sticks of trees laid upon their head, breast, and hands, until they be
resolved in to asses. I saw an other sect which forebidden carnal copulation
with women, go, the fore part of their yard, or the secret part it self
perced through, and therein encloased an iron ringe of the weight of three
pounds to observe chastitye.

The third order seldom goes abroad, but does remain day and night in
temples, having little cabines in the corners of those churches, with out
shows, garments, and bare headed, having nothing about them, exceptyng one
shirte. fasting the space of many days, and prayinge, that God would
reveal unto them the estate of things to come, with whom the turkishe, being
about, and entendynge to stir or make war accustometh to consulte.

Of the marueillous reu^erence which the Turks exhibit unto the traditions
of Mehemmet.
THe Turks attribute such reverence unto the traditions and decrees of
Mahomet, yt not only god they blaspheme note (which chances often among us)
yea if they but find, a scroll, in what facion soever it be written, lyinge on
the earth, taking it up, and often times kissed, they encloase the same,
throuste into some chenke of the wall: for it is counted a sin, that the
letters, wherwithe the name of God, and laws of Mahomet are written, should be
trod under their feet. And therefore no man dare to sell an Alkaron, or
any other of their writings unto a christian, or mane of some other faith and
religion, lest being neglected and cast away, they should be trodden under
their feet, or touched with unclean hands, if otherwise they are be headed.
Wherefore in this respect, they can not verily but be preferred and esteemed
before us.

Of the Schools for both kinds, and in what arts they instruct their
youth.
THey have places appointed to trade in good letters their youths of both
kinds, called in their tongue Ochumachgirleri, and teachers for the same which
are named Hogsialar, howbeit separatly they are instructed, as the male
children by men, and young girls by women, in Astronomye, Philosophye, and the
art of Poetrye. During the time of their learning, speaking in a shr^l voice,
they move their bodies from one side to the other. They have no skill in
artifyciall Music, but feign certain vearses by prescribed rules, which are
in this manner. Every vearse ought too comprehend a leven syllables. Wherefore
it pleased me for an example to subscribe these few.

Vearses called of them Bethler.
Birechen bes on eiledum derdumi
Iara dandam istemiscem iardumi
Terch eiledum Zachmanumi gardumi
Ne ileim ieniemezum glunglumi
They are amorous vearses, of a goddess called in their language Assih, which
is goddess of love, whose interpretation word by word is such: Birechen,
bes on, eiledum, derdumi:
Of on, fifty, I have mad, in my tribulation
Iara dadam, istemiscem, iardumi:
Of my creator, I have required, succor
Terch eiledum, Zachmanumi, gardumi:
I have neglected, of my country, the visitation.
Ne, ileim, ieniemezum, glunglumi.
What, shall I do? I can not subdew, my mind.


How they contracte matrimonye, of their dovvries, and occasion of deuorse.
There matrimonye called in their tou^g Eulenmech, is done in this manner. They
join to gether in marriage with out any betrowething^ made, they take their
wives without dowrye, and for the most part are constrained to bye them,
contrary to that aunciente custom, which in time past was used among the
Romans, where the son in law was wounte to be bought, and not the sons
wife. The spouse has no comelye deckynge or furniture about her body, which
the bridegroom is not compelled to rau^some and by of his wives parents. Leude
and unseemly behavior or baraines causes a divorce betwine them. Their Judge
has certificate, and decydeth such matters. Marriage is also permitted unto
them with their bond servants, but the children borne are counted in
servitude and boundage.

Of their Pilgrimmes, and to what places they go in Pilgrimage.
Pilgrims in their language called Hagfilar, do visit the places by them
counted sacred and holy, which are Mecha, Medinus, (as our men Jerusale^)
where they affirm that Machomet dyed, but no less through hope of gain, then
for religion or devotions sake. There after the s^ght of a Shoe called Tsaroth,
which gilted only, hangs down from the roof or vaulte of the temple, and
certain most subtle nets, named Chumas, bought, they depart with great
advantage into their country. And in their return, some for devotions sake
does carye water through the streates, and offer the same srelye unto the
thyrsty, such as they meet, other attend their propre business. And if any,
by what means so ever it be, hap to dye in the journey, allthoughe they come
not to Metha, yet are they accounted among the number of Pilgrims.

The foolish fail written by Mahomet in his Alkaron, and of the beast named
El Barahil

MAchomet write the in this Alkaron of two Angels called Aroth and Maroth,
whom he affirmethe to have ^ene sent by God into the earth, that ^hey
should minister justice and equity unto men, and were commanded too ^rinke
no wine, neither adioyne them selves in company with women, or show unto any
body the way which leads to the place of perpetual blissednes, whi^he
transgressynge the commandment of God, becam dru^ke, deceived by a woman,
defiled them selves, and declared unto her the way which to heaven brings,
whom when God saw coming toward heaven: he asked the Angels standing by
him, who it was that endewed with such a shape, would come into heaven. When
the Angels had affirmed that it was through the folly of Aroth and Maroth,
God commanded that the woman should be turned inta a Star, but bid them
cast the Angels cheyned together into a burninge pit forever there to be
tormented. He makes mention likewise of a beast named El barahil capable of
the speech of man, which beast carried Machomet into heaven, where he
confessed to have seen great Angels, having many heads, and those heads to
have diverse and manifold to^ges. These truly ar rather toys to mock Apes
withal, and unworthy to be spoken by such a prophet as they count Machomet to
be. But peradventure well tipled with wine, he thought to have dreamed in his
dreams of such miracles, or rather prodigious folishenes. Therefore in as much
as he was not ashamed to declare such trifles, by mouth, but also to write
them in his Alkaron, he ought deservedly not to be called a Prophet, but a
false deceyuer, and malicious seducer from the truth.

Of the miracles wrought at Mecha by Machomet, and of such as they report him
there daily to do.
I Doubt, and am uncertain whether they ought to be called miracles, or
miraculous trifles, those I mean which are written in their book named
Mehemmedinum* For they stedefastlye affirm and throughely persuade them
selves, that, when Mecha should be builded, God through the prayers of
Machomet gave commandment unto the Hills, that every one should bring
stones, for the erectynge and building up of Mecha: and when all the hills had
brought the tenth of his stones, whereby Mecha was builded and finished, a
certain hill named Araphatdagh being more slack, by reason of his coming
from far coasts, then ye rest, when he saw Mecha throughlye builded, and
perceived that they neaded not his stones, began bytterlye too weep. Whom when
Machomet had seen murning, and understood the cause of his lamentation, said,
let not thy courage fainte the, and be not sorowefull, but lay down there
(apointinge to the place with his finger) thy tenthe: and whosoever shall not
pray upon that stone, his pilgremage shall be unprofitable and unthankful.
Then Machomet stroke the stone with his foot, and brought water there from, not
good to be dronken of, and called it by name Abzemzemsui, which is water of
purification, whereof al their Pilgrims are accustomed to carry home with them
in vessels: and when one chances to die, the clothes wherein the dead carcas
shall be wrapped are sprincled with that water, in remissyon of all his sins
and offenses.

They say also that no man can come unto Mecha, but his coming is foreknowen
by Machomet, which afterward to the kepers (and they are all Eunuchs) by him
is revealed: but if that Hagij, which signifies Pilgrim, be a thief, a
wicked person, christian, or manne of oher such like religion, the forenamed
kepars do prohibit him entrance into Mecha. But in deed his dead corpse, as
some affirm, lyethe not there, but the shape of an image printed by the person
of Machomet in a wall of the temple, whom they kiss, and so return unto
their habitation. Those Infideles have such vain lies persuaded unto the^ by
Machomet, and a great number mo to be laughed at, which here I am ashamed to
allege. Howbeit I would that the gentyle reader, should enquere of some
Turk, whether such things are so in deed, and then he shall bol^lye affirms
that the Author has spoken mere veretye and truth.

Of their alms houses, and what meat is given unto the pore.
THey have hospitalles or alms houses, called Imareth, builded by the
testamentes of their kings, in which places meat or food is given unto the
poor and Pilgrimmes, but diversely at sondrye places. There are which give Rice
named Pirrincts Tsocba, with flesh: at an other place, Bolghdaias, which is
made of wheat, in stead of potage, they add bread also of a reasonable
quantitye: the drink which they distribute is water. But place is granted
unto none there to remain alnyght, or sleep, for there is a public
Charuatsaur^e, where frelye they are received to hospitalytye, howbeit there be
assigned unto them no beds, but they sleep under the covering of a house
either in heye or straw.

The manner of their sacryfice, for what cause they do it, and how the beasts
offered are used and distributed.
THey offer beasts in sacrifice, but for the most part before vowed, called
Chorban as well in the turkyshe as arabiane language: In the time of any
disease or peril, they promise (every mane acording to his ability) in
certain places to sacrifice either a Sheep or Ox: after that the vowed
offringe is not burned, like unto a beast killed and laid on the altar, as
the custom was among the Jews, but after that the beast is slain, the
skin, head, feet, and fourth part of the flesh are given unto the pressed,
an other part to poor people, and the third unto their neigheboures. The
killers of the sacrifice do make ready the other fragmentes for the^ selves
and their compaynons to feed one. Neither are they bound to perform the vow,
if they have not been delivered from the possessed disease or peril. For all
things with them are done condytionallye I will give if thou will grant. The
like woorshyppinge of God is observed among the Gretians, Armenians, and other
realms in Asia imitating yet ye christian religion.

What is assigned to be done by the Testamentes of the Turks, as well of
men as women.
IF any of the circumcised dying entendeth to make a testament, such legacies
for the most part are appointed, (their neigheboures and friends called
together) either to fetch springes of water, and bring them before some
Hospital, temple, or dry place, that is frequented be men Haritsi, moved
with a godly zeal, and Gsianitsi, for their souls health. Other bequethe
their goods to make captives and bound men free. But the women (as this
kind above all other is most superstitious) give monye unto souldyers, for to
kill a certain number of christians. They make account, that by so doing, it
will greatly profit the health of their souls. The kings apoint temples and
hospitalles to be builded, and other of the nobility when their lotte is to dye.

Their ceremonies about the dead, and manner of interrement.
IF a circuncised manne dies among them, the men take care to make ready the
dead corpse: if any of the female kind, the women. They wash clean the coarse,
and wrappe in fresh and neet lyuen, after that the same is carried unto some
place without the city, for it is a heinous crime to burye in the temples.

The taper bearers and monks with light go before, the prestes follow after,
singing by all the way, until they come unto the place of interrement. But
if the disceased person were poor and nedye, money gathered together is
accustomed to be given unto the religious people for their labor and travel.

The building of there sepulture called Tulbe, and of the sacrifices done to the
dead.
Upon the kings sepulcher is builded a temple, for their kings are buried in
Cities: the tumbe of rich and poor mean, is about the height of an auter, so
that beasts can not leap upon, and defile the same. They often resort thither
in wepinge and murnynge: and certain infernal sacrifices laid on the
monumente, as bread, flesh, cheese, Eggs, milk, and the banquet continewinge
by the space of nine days, according to the Ethnicke custom, it is al
devoured, for the disceased souls sake, either by Pismares and the birds of
heaven, or poor people. For they affirm that it is like acceptable unto God,
that alms should be offered to the brute beasts having need thereof, as unto
men, sins that it is given for ye love of God. I have senne many, which
giving the valewe in monye of one little bird before kept incloased, have cast
of the same to fly away: other to throw bread into the river for fishes,
through the love of God: addinge that they for such mercifulnes toward the
neadye, should receive an abundante reward at gods hands.

Of the Turkishe vvarrefare: and first of the king, and a part of his officers.
THey have all one king, and in their language he that now reigns, of the^
is called Huncher Othmanlardan Sahitsultan Suleiman, which by interpretation
is, Solomon is emperor and Prince of Turkeye, of the Othomans descended,
which now has his first begotten sone of the age of three and twenty years,
or their about named Mustapha, in crueltye and tyranny, passing his
predicessors, often lying in wait for his father, if he might by any means
kille or cause him to be slain, through gredie affection, and desire to
bear rule. But in what sort, he was murdered by his Father it shall be
declared in the end of this book. The king has under him two chief
goue^nours, or liuetenantes, over Europe and Asia, named Tsangiach Begler, unto
the which are subject inferior presidentes called Timargilar, whose hestes
do certain ordinarye souldyers obey, but if they be found lingringe and
slack, when they be called for expedition unto war, are punished with ha^ging.
Bassalar, which they interpret heads, are many in number, they for council
do always accompanye the king. Sulihtarlar also, which are the guard of his
body, are wont continewally to follow immediatlye after his back, together
with his Capugtsibegler chamberlaines, Iazitgtsibegler chauncellours, Eminler
exactours of tribute, which is to wit, of children and money, Spahalar light
harneysed horsemen, a great route, Vlachlaris posts* or pursiuantes, with
other such like always following the court.

The estate of the Turks peers or nobility, and of the possessione.
NOt one of the nobles, does possess any province or city by right title of
inheritance, which after his death, he may leave unto his children, heirs or
successors, with out consent of the king. But if a Prince or governor
coueteth to have certain possessions, it is granted unto him upon this
condition. They enter in bargain concerning the Prince and revenues of those
possessions. The Turk does know, how many soldiers may yearly be maintained
by the profits of that province, then ye Liuetenante is bound to have always
in readiness for him, that band of soldiers, at all callinges, otherwise he
leeseth his head: and no thing may excuse him from going unto war, but only
sickness. And if at any time, it shall please the Turk to deprive him of that
benefyte, it is in his free will and choice: But if he be not deprived, it is
his propre possession until death. After whose interremente, if the heirs of
the disceased, will observe and keep the same covenant, they are permitted to
enjoy it, if not, it is assigned unto others. If some time any of these peers
or noble does talk with the king, he fasteneth his eyes on ye ground, not
daring to behold his countenance.

Of the Bassans, whom we may call councillors, chancellours or rather
Secretaries.
ALl the Bassans, for the greater part are made ^nuches (as it was declared
unto me, when I was bond manne of a certain ruler in Constantinople and are in
greater estimation with the Turk then all the rest of his nobles, excepting
the Sangiackes, and almost as many as are advanced unto that dignity, are
the ravished children of christians. Not one among them, albeit he has a
daughter of the Turk to wife (as one Chrusta^ a Bassan had) is endowed either
with castle city are town, which he may challenge by inheritance: but if he
be aduau^ced unto any honorable authority, he enioyethe the same until his
death, or as long as it shall please the Turk.

The obedience which the Turks are constrained to attribute unto their king
and of his messaengers or poastes.
NOt one, either of the Jenitsaries, or nobles, has leave, or may be
permitted to walk in the city, armed, or girded with a sword: except it
be, when the Turk goes out of his palaic^, either to pray, or hu^te. The
governors and officers of the city do bear in their hands coogelles, which
if they find any brawlyng, or doing iniurye, and offense one to an other,
they punish them with the aforenamed coogelles. And not one speakinge to an
officer, dare to look him in the face, but falling flat to the earth, and
kissyng his feet, he spekethe unto him his eyes fastened on the ground. And
when the king sends Poastes with letters unto the governors of any his
Provinces, whose horses, as son as they are weried with iourneyng, or tired
with swifte, and contine wall galopinge, the poast is licensed, to take from
them their horses, what soever they be which meet him in the way, but if in
traueling he meets with none, then he turns toward the cytyes or towns,
Cadiam, which is to say, the judge he goes unto, which, except he provide
him an horse, is hanged before the gate of his oune house, and for this cause,
horses are nowrished by few, but for the greater part Asses. And when that
messanger, or poast shall come to those, unto whom he was sent, the kings
letters received with great humilytie, kyssed, and his comaundementes with all
speed possible executed, he is sent away. Then is no Prince which dare gain
say him, no one Province or city (as it often chances among us) that
rebellethe, and finallye not one which does not fear him.

By what means the Turks power is alvvaies found, and how it may be
deminished.
THe turkishe Emperor equallye distributeth all his provinces, unto the peers
of his realm, but on this condition, that continuallye, as well in the time of
peace, as war, a band of souldyers may be mainteyned by the yearly profits
of that province: his power is not at al deminished, the souldyers being
slain, except he leese also the province. As for an example, if the Emperor
of Turkeye has now four hundred bands of souldyers, of the which a hundred
is sustained by the revenues of Hungarye, then if Hungarye should be lost,
he leeseth also the hundred bands of soldiers: but if he forgo no province,
and leese all the souldyers mainteyned thereby, he leeseth nothing: because that
to succeed in their places, (yea if he would desire a greater number,) they may
easelye be found: like as among us ecclesiastical liuinges, and other vacant
offices, may quicklye find a possessor.

The state of the Chazilarious.
THe soldiers called Chazilar, are strong, and marueilouslye practiced in
warrelike affairs, which at the first bickering, do break their spears upon
the adversaries, vsyng no kind of weapons, saving sheelde, spear and gleues,
according to our countrymen, with a helmet, and coat of maile: but their
speres being broken, they manfullye fight with drawn gleaues, defending them
selves with sheildes, alwais endeavoring to mischefe the hands or heads of
their enemies, and lyinge in wait with all their force to destroy them. It is
counted among them no praise, but an ignominyes, to stryke the enemy or horse
with the point of their swoorde. These men put all their life and safegarde
under moderation of the goddess Fortune, called in their mother speech Hassup,
or Ctsutara, of whom the most common proverb among them all is this, Iazilan
Gelur Bassina, which in the English tongue after this manner may be
interpreted, Iazilan, the writynge, Bassina, on the head. Gelur, shall take
effect: their meaning is that, what so ever the Goddess Fortune, at the day
of Natiuitye, has written on every man's head, to avoid it, it is impossible
although he lurketh in an in vincible castle. Their worthy deeds and
exploites are written by Historiographers in vearse, and rehearsed by all sorts
of men, that the rest with such like boldness (encoraged through desire of honor
and praise) may valiu^tlye, and with out fear assail their enemies. But for
every noble victory atchiued by them, their stipendes are doubled, and
therefore all the fornamed horse men, ought to follow and accompany the king,
furnished with these kynds of weapens, that is to wit, Jauelinges or spears,
gleaues, darts, and iron clubbes, some have tergates, other have none, and
they always receive wages, as well on the time of peace as war.

How many orders there be of the turkishe footemene.
THe first order of footemene, is of the Solachlaries, which are archers, they
use bows, arrows, gleaues, and differ by their head garment from the
Ienitzaries. The second order is of the Ienitzaries, they also have wepons like
unto the Solachlaries, howbeit, for bow and arowes they use hargabusheares and
poleaxes. All these gathered from among the christians, leadynge their lives
their under tribute, taken away by force, circumcised, and brought up in a
certain place called Tsarai, do fight most coragiously against the
christians, and have stipendes little enoughe to live by: that is to say, some
four, five, or six pieces of monye called Ahtse, of the which three score do
make up a Crown: and these upon pain of life may not ride, except they be
sick. There are many also found to be made Ienitsaries of the Turkishe
children. The third order of footemene is of the Azaplares, of whom, the war
being ended, ye wages also do cease, and they are all the children of Turks.

They use a long spear, gleaue, and have red head coueringes, or of some
other color, made of cloth, with four angles, corner wise, called Tachia, and
differ from the Ianitsaries, and Solachtaries, by their garments, and armor:
in the time of battle they throust through the horses of their enemies. There
is besides these an other order of footemene, from wallachia, of the Grecian
religion, named Voinichlar, which have no other stipend of the Turk, then that
they are free from payinge any tribute and Tenthes. The men of this order are
bound, at their proprecostes and charges, to feed the idle horses of the
Turkish king, to take iare of them, and bring them fourth in the time of
war.

Of the great Turks tents, and pauilions of his nobles, and soldiers, with
the order of their iorneyinge in the time of war.
WHen the Emperor of Turkey, forsaking Constantinople, sets forewarde unto
any war, he takes with him two tents, called Satorlar, that one this day,
may be pitched at the next place of taryinge, when the day following, he
purposes to be received. The greatness of his tabernacle is such, that unto
the beholders a far of, it may be thought a city: next thereunto do the
Princes pitche their pauilions, and encompasse round the kings tabernacle:
after these the horsemen, whereof every one singulerly, or three enjoy a tente.
The footmen also have unto them peculier tabernacles, for it is decreed by
ordinance of war, that no mane shall lie abroad out of house, or covering.
Certain laborers do make way for the Army to pass, placing heaps of stones,
or piles of wood, on every side, as tokens of the way, in so much that in the
dark, they can scarce straye out of the way. They begine to set forewarde
about middenight, and continue marching until noone tide of the next day. In
the time of their iorneyinge, the king is carried, sittinge in the middeste,
betwne two Bassans talking with him, before whom do journey certain soldiers
of the ^enitsarye order, on horses, caryinge burning torches, and this is done
in a very obscure and dark night. Then the Tsanlar, which are captains or
disposers of ye Army, having iron clubbes, sharpened and ky^e on every side,
do drive men away from the kings sight, by the distance of stones cast, or
shootynge of an arowe, where Sulihtarlar, the multitude of the guard does go,
among whom are the wagons or chariottes laden with love boys, seruyng for the
Turks use and his peers. Then the forenamed captains or disposers of the
army, journey either before them, or come after, with infinite bands of
horsemen, footmen, and soldiers of diverse orders, some having wages, other
for gain, and lukces sake: men only, for they bring no women with them.

The driving of their beasts, order in the camp, in what sort they lodge,
and with what food they live.
AFter these succedeth a multitude of Camelles, Mules, and horse (sumetimes
they bring Elephantes with the^ also, called in their language Phil) carrying
victalles, tents, with other such things necessary for the Camp. And when
the Turks tabernacle is pitched, every thing is their settled, and placed in
order, as it were in a city: there are places for Shoemakers, Bakers and
Butchers: some seek and provide for all sorts of flesh, but if fresh meat
can not be gotten, then they draw fourth such food as is carried by their
beasts, that is to wit, bredde twice baken, flesh dried in the smoke, named
Pastarmar, chese, and milk congealed to curdes. They are most pacient of
hunger, thirst, and cold. Very seldom they herboure, or lodge in cities, but
in the feldes under tents, not far from heye cocks and rivers, having a
greater regard unto their beasts, then of them selves, contented with a light
and base meat, as congealed milk tempered with water, and bread put therein,
either new, or twice baken, both masters and servants. There is such silence
observed among them in the night season, that they neglecte their captives
flyinge away, for fear lest if a noise, or clamor should be stirred, they
should suffer the punishment ordained for ye breche of Silence: but at what
time they go to rest, and when they rise from their beds, to walk abroad,
they cry all with a loud voice these words, repeatynge them thrice Allah,
Allah, Allah, which does signify. O god, O god, O god.

What severe justice is exercised in the time of war.
Such severity is used to the breakers of decrees, and there ordinances in war
that no soldier dare to take any thing vniustelye, if otherwise he should be
punished with out compassion: For there ar elected among them, certain
ordinarye kepers, or defendours of such necessaries, as ar brought in the
ways, toward the camp, by children of eight or ten years old, which
bring to be sold, bredde, eggs, fruit, corn, with other such like. The
forenamed officers ar also bound to defend the Orchardes of fruits, sytuate by
the ways sides, in so much that they them selves dare not to take one apple,
or other such like thing, with out license of the possessed, for if it happen
otherwise they also shall be punished by leesing there heads. When I was in an
army of the Turk, at an expeditio^ or voyage against the Persians, I save a
Espahye together with his horse and servant beheaded, because his horse
breakyng louse, had entredan other man's field.

Of the triumph to be celebrated for the Turks victory, vvher he is
always resident, and wherefore he makes war so often against the
christians.
WHen it is signified, or relation made of the Turks victory, the cytyes
break fourth into all kind of joyfulness. By night about the first kindeling
of the candell, they begin this triu^phant mirth, torches, linkes, and tapers
of wax, are every where displayed, the house and ways whereby the turkyshe
emperor must pass are adorned with tapestry works clothe of Arras, and
hanginges of silk. But the most solemn pomp is done at Constantinople, where
he is always resident, if no wars be stirringe between him and other
countries. Howbeit by the laws, he him self is bound, after every three
years, to take a voyage into the christian realms, either for amplifyinge or
defense of his kyngedome and dominion.

Of their hunting.
There is no nation, under the sun, that so much deliteth in hunting as the
Turks. For in pursuing wild beasts, they run through on there horses,
dangerous, sharp, and rockye places, taking diverse kinds of beasts, and if
the dead beast has been choked by dogs, neither they them selves do feed
upon the flesh thereof, neither the christians inhabiting those costs. But if
by chance they kill a boar, him they give unto the christians of those
parts, for the circumcised are forebidden to eat of Swines flesh.

Of husbandry, and crafts men, unto whom the tenthes do perteine, of the
bath, and ceremonies about the same.
THe Husbandemen do til the feildes by their servants, and pay the tenth
thereof unto their Emperor. The laborours sustain them selves with handye
crafts, but they which live sluggishlye, and in idelnes, do pine away with
hunger. Merchandise is practiced also very diligently among them. They travel
into Asia the less, which now is called Natolia, Arabia and Egipte, they
discloase them selves, even among the Venetians. In every of their cytyes there
are Bathes, in the which according to their accustomed use, they wash them
selves twyse or thryse. If they void urine, their priuey member is washed, if
they unload the burden of nature, their fundament is made clean with water:
the like is done by the women, both kinds are waited upon, as the men by there
servants, and the women by their waitinge maids, caryinge after them
vessels full of water. And when they go fourth to wash, the women do
anointe them selves, with a certain kind of Oyntement, which after the space
of half an hour, does cause the hears to fall of, the men them selves do
shave there priuye parts, and in no wise they suffer the hears to grow, but
rid the^ selves thereof, as well the men as the women, in every month twice or
thrice: but chefly when they frequent the temples, otherwise (as defillers of
the sacred and holy place) they should be consumed with fire. There are among
them also diverse sorts of crafts men as bowchers, shoemakers, tailers,
goldsmithes, siluersmithes, and of al other kinds of metal, likewise printers,
and masons, but not of so subtle and excellent wits, as certain there ar
among us.

The justice and equity used among Citizens.
ALl the christians, and likewise the Turks, have one judge chosen from among
the circumcised, which is bound to minister the law, and justice equallye unto
all estates of men. If any man commit murder, he shall suffer death for the
same. If he steal, or take any thing by force, he shall be therefore hanged. As
it chanced unto a certain Janitsary, that had dronken up the milk of a
woman, carrying it to be sold in the market, not payinge the price thereof,
which, accused before the judge, when he had denined the fact, being hanged
up by the heels, and bound hard about the middle with a cord, incontinent
he vomitted up the milk, and fourth with by judgment condemned to hanging.
This happened, I being present, at Damascus, when I iorneyed from Armenia
toward Jerusalem. If any temple commit adultrye, the man is cast into
prison, and after certain months redeemed for monye, but the adulterous
womanne is carried through the streates and high ways, on an Ass, scourged
with whippes naked, and having the intralles of an Ox hanged about her neck,
is stoned to death

The tilling of their ground, of the grain, Vines, and other fruits, which
grovve in those countries.
AS well the Christians, as circuncised Turks, do till the feldes, maintain
pastures, and plant vines, having corn or grain like unto this of our
cou^trye, as wheat, Millet or Hirse, barlye, Oats, fine wheat, beans, and al
kinds of pulse: forthermore Rice in great plentye, flax, and silk cotton,
more then in our countries. Both the sorts of men aforenamed have also in
possessyon vineardes, vsinge diversely the fruits thereof.

The Christians make wine, but the Turks a kind of honye called in their
language Pecmez, they use, and order certain reasons in such sort, that as
well to the eye, as in taste, they all ways seem fresh and new, and are by
them named Vzum Turssi. They have fruits there in great abundance. At their
propre seasons, the Orchardes, gardens, and feldes, are replenished, and laden
with Pompones, Melons and cucumbers. There are nuttes, apples, pears, pome
granates, almoundes, chest nuttes, figs, cheries, plummes, and other of like
sort, for a small price to be bought, but not in every nation. For there are
places, as hear and there in Cappadocia and Armenia the less, where (through
extreme cold) not one of these ar to be had, or may be gotten.

The state of their Shepardes, what heardes of beasts they feed, and of the
tribute which is required of the Christians.
There are Shepardes among the Turks called Sobaenlar, which lead there lives
contineweally in desartes, and chang places for fresh pasture almost every
month, having at all no houses or possessions, exceptyng tents, and droues of
beasts. They feed Camelles, Mules, Horses, Oren, Sheep, Goats, and make
cheese, butter, and shere Sheep, whereof they make a kind of garment, or
clokes called Ghepenech, and tapestrie workinges, which are sold, to bye corn
for food unto their family. The fornamed Shepardes generally, do yearly pay
unto the turkish Emperor, tyethes, of ye increase of al their beasts. The
Christians also, living under tribute, ar constrained to pay te^thes, which
in quantity is to wit, of every male beast, one crown, and which is most
cruel, they take away from them by force all their sons having no wives,
making search therefore in there houses, every fifte year.

The form of building there houses.
THeir is no great magnificence bestowed upon there houses, the greater ^art of
them builded of brick work, and ^her brick is made after two sorts, either
they are baked in a keele, or dried by heat of the Sun. The rowses of there
houses join together wedgewise, as do the buildinges of our country, and this
is observed through out al Europe, but in Natolia the coueringes or roufes,
are plain, in fashion of a flower, without any ridge: cundites they have, and
water pipes, that send down the rain water unto them, which is conveyed
through rouled pipes.

The fashion of there garments, vvherof they are made, and in what sort.
THeir aparaill made of the substance of wool, flare, and silk, is rich and
magnificent enoughe, the garment called Chauton, they use gardeo, plaites, and
hangyng down even unto ye shoe he^me our breeches they abhor, obiectinge
the^ opprobriously unto us, as things to be ashamed at. Their shertes named
Gumlech, and Naptkins ar dyed with a violet color, there head is builded up
with an heap of cloth, in manner of a turret, and gathered together at the
top, not much unlike the fashion of a steeple, and such a covering for their
head is called in there tongue Tulbent, or Salma. The wives of rich men go with
their faces covered, and never open their countenaunces unto any other saving
their husbands, neither at any time frequent the market, or common assemblies.
The shoes named Babucs, or Csisme, as well of the women as men, have thick
sooles, that they may use them the longer space.

Of their meats, and food.
THey use bread most wholesome, called Echmech, both white, and brown, even as
the men of our countries do, but they scater or mingle with the dooghe a
certain kind of seed named Sussam, after that it is baked, which geuethe a
delectable switnes unto the eaters, that bread is not used among the
Christians, sauinge at certain places, here and their in Spaigne, as in the
kingdom of Granata, and about Civil. In their food is bestowed great
conninge, and diverse sorts of sauces, their ordinarye meat is so much
thickened with rice* that the parts thereof may be drawn a sonder with their
hands. Marvelous is the abstinence among them from fish. They eat all
sorts of flesh, exceptynge of Swine. Their are among them no tauerns, or
public Innes, to entertain strangers, as with us, howebeit in the streets are
sold diverse kinds of meat, requisite for sustenance, with other things
necessary to live by.

The diversities of their drink.
THree sorts of drink they have: the first is made of Sugar, of them named
Secher, or honye alayed with water, this drink has to name Tserbeth. The
second is of reasons (the kerneles first drawn forth) boiled in water, after
that is added water of Roses, with a quantitye of pure honye, that drink has
his denomination Hossaph, and is sold every where in Turkye, it is sweet, and
causes the bealy to swell. The third is of that kind of honey named Pechmes,
which is made of new wine sodden, until the third part be boiled away,
this drink in taste, and to the sight represents the lykenes of honye, it is
alayed with water, and given to be dronken of their servants.

The manner of the turkishe tables, and how they sit at meat.
WHen the time of refreshyng is come, they put under them mattes, called
Hactser, after that they spread, abroad tapestrye clothes, or Cuishens. Some,
sit down upon the bare ground. Their table having to name Tsophra is made of
leather, it is sprede abroad and drawn together in form of a purse. They
sit not down acordynge to our custom, or after the manner of the ancient
fathers, as leanyng to their Elbowes, but their legs lyinge one over the
other, crossewise, much like unto Tailers, Grace or thank geuinge unto God is
said, before they taste of any meat. They eat spedelye and with great silence,
in which space their wives are kept in some secret place The men servants,
after the age of twelve years, are not permitted to enter the house where women
be: but you^ge boys, within the age of twelve years, coming in, and goinge
fourth, do bring them things necessary, which separated far of, have their
habitation in an other house. The bound women have not so much lybertye, as
to step without the doors, except it be with the Turks wives when they enter
the bathes to wash, or go some other where, with out the city, as into
Orchardes, vineardes, and Gardens, for recreations sake (which often times
they are wount to do) but labor hard, continewally lurkynge in there houses,
neither are they permitted to talk, or be conversant with the men servants,
as in his propre place, which is in the treatise next following, of the
afflictions of captives, the readers easily shall understand.

The salutation of the Turks, Persians, and Arabians, is such.
Sellam aliech Tsultanum,

Peace be unto the O Prince.

Sellam aliech Baba.

Peace be unto the O Father.

Sellam aliech Ana,

Peace be unto the O Mother.

And so the rest in order you may salute according to the worthiness of their
persons.

There answer.
Rahmatullah Sellam alechmi,

Our merciful God give peace to you also,

Rahmatullah aliech, tseudigum,

Our merciful God give unto you, my friend,

Berechyat.

his blessyng.

A Dialogue conteininge questions, and aunsvveres of a Turk with a christian,
and first the Turk in this manner speaks unto the Christian.
Handa gidertsan bre Giaur?

Whether go thou O Christian?

The Christian. Tsultanu^ giderum stambola.

O Prince I go toward Constantinople,


The Turk. Ne issum Vac bu meinleketten?

What business have thou in these countries?


The Christian. Ederum bezrgenlik Affendi

I exercise marchaundise master.

Or

Maslahatom var anadolda.

My business is into Asia.


The Turk. Ne habar scizum gilerden?

What news is there spoken of in your parts?


The Christian. Hits neste bilmelom tsaa dimege.

I know not what news you desire to understand, that I might declare it unto
you.


The Turk. Gioldassum varmi tsenumle?

Have you any companion?


The Christian. Ioch, ilanuz gheldum.

No, but alone I came.


The Turk. Gelutmisun benumle?

Does it please you to come with me?


The Christian. Irachmider tsenum iataghom?

Is your lodgeynge far of?


The Turk. Iachender, guestereim tsaa bundan,

It is hard by, I will show it you from hence.


The Christian. Gel ghusteriuere, tseuertson Allaha.

Come and show, if you love God.


The Turk. Kalch iochari tur honda.

Lift thy self up, stand here.


The Christian. I know not in what part it is.

Bilmezum hanghi darastan der.


The Turk. Tsag eline bacha ghun doghtusine.

At the right hand look toward the east.


The Christian. Bir buch eun atsarhibi, gurunur, o^mider?

One high house as it were a Castle apeareth, is that it?


The Turk. Gersksou oder iaken deghilmi?

It is even hit, it is the same, is it not hard by?

The farevvell.


The Christian. Tsamarlodach tseni Alaha.

I commit you unto God.

Ben gitmezom oraa.

I will not go that way.


The Turk. Bre neden korkartson? nitie gelmetson?

Oh whom do you fear? why come you not?


The Christian. Benu^iolum deghelder oraa.

My iorneye is not that way.


The Turk. Vargeth tsagloga, eier ghelmeson.

Depart with good Luke, if you will not come.


The Christian. Gegsien hair altson.

A prosperous night chaunse unto you.


The Turk. Aghbate hair oltson.

And unto you a more happy night.

Ben kurtoldom tsoch succor Allaha.

I am delivered, high praise be unto God.


These few words of the turkyshe language, I have here added for the, most
gentill reader, not of necessity, but for delectations sake: that thou may
understand, how gross and barbarous they be* The ever living God grant, that
they may have more need of our speech, then we of there is.

Farevvell.
The lamentable affliction, as well of the captive Christians, as of them
which live under the most grievous youke of Tribute.
In what sort the Christians, taken in war by the Turks are handeled.
THe turkishe Emperor entending to take any voige, against the Christians,
among other his honorable marchantes a great number or rablement, of unnatural
Regraters of man kind, and slaughterous bouchers, sitting on Cameles, does
always accumpanye him: these for hope of bondemen, do bring with the^
cheines of a merueilous le^ght, in the which may fiftye, or three score
easily be bound on a row. So many as the enemies sword has not muthered and
consumed, they by of the spoilers and botye sekers, which is permitted unto
them, on this condition, that they pay the tenth of their captives unto the
Emperor, the rest it is lawful for them to keep, either for their propre
use, or to be sold: and among them there is no merchandise so fruitful,
profitable, or more used and accustomed, as in time paste it was among the
Romans which called gods mercha^dise, bought with no fault, and in the which
no conuincement by law ought to be feared.

In what manner the Emperor orders, and diposeth his captives.
THe aged sort, and youth of both kinds, which befell and happened unto him
under the name of te^thes, he this disposes, that the well stricken in years,
may be sold to apply husbandrye, howbeit they are very seldom taken, for it is
arare thing, that they should be spared, whom age of many years has made
scarce saleable. The young men, and virgins, they keep enclosed in a certain
place named in their language Sarai, that there they may be instructed in
profitable arts and sciences, whereby in time to come, they may use them the
more commodiously, but first it is attempted, that, the christian faith and
religion being denied, they may be circuncised. And now having received the
first instructions of their ceremonies and the proportion and lineamentes of
their bodies, diligently marked by Phisiognomye, they are acording to every
ones disposition and towardnes, appointed, either to learn the laws of their
country, or, (if a greater force of body, apeareth in them, then sharpnes of
wit,) unto warrefare: and they have given for their daily pention, two or
three Ahcse pieces of money, that they call Aspres, three score of the which do
make a crown: they think it to be sufficient for their food, and aparaill,
until they be able to fight in a battle. In this manner, they are instructed
in the rudimentes of warrefare. First for the tenderness of their strenght,
they have a weke bow assigned unto them, but in continuance of time, the force
of their body, and skilfulnes in showtinge being increased, a tougher and
more strong bow is assigned, thus it still augmenteth until they are fit for
the war. A most severe master, at night will be present among them, to
examine, and have an accounte of there daily exercise, and as often as they have
^rred from the mark, so many times shall they be beaten with rods. These
are ascribed to the order of Solacrarors, which are Archers. Certain other ar
brought up, for that they may be elected among the Ienitsaries: these also
have their ouersears, which constrain them to a daily kind of combating,
their contendyng is with clubbes. But the rest (Oh envious act) in whom a
greate^ grace of beauty apeareth, ar so mangled, that no manlines is to be seen
in all there bodies, with no small danger of leesing their lives: but if they
escape, yet from thence fourth saftye and sauegard may they not obtain,
until they are made pertakers of their unnatural lust and lecherye, or, their
comely bewtye wearynge away, ar made Eunuchs, to serve matrones, and dames,
either appointed to keep horses and Mules, or assigned to be drudges in their
kitchens.

How they deal with virgins, and other women.
SVche as are endewed with excellent bewtye, they choose to be Concubines, the
meaner sort are given to rich Dames and matrones, for waiting mades, to use
them about their necessary business, among the which, certain ar such
vncleanlye offices, that with honestye they may not be named: for the maids ar
compelled to follow them, with a vessel of water, when they go fourth to lay
down the burden of nature, and purge their inferior parts. The rest are
streightlye kept to labors fit for women, as imbrotheringe, and weuing. It is
lawful for none of them all, either to persiste in the Christian religion, or
conceive any hope of fredome, as long as they live.

In what sort, the other Turks do Use their captives.
HEre before we have showed, what the turkishe Emperor accustometh to do,
and now shall be declared, what is done by these private persons. When any new
captives by them ar received, first they endeavor by all kind of thretninges,
fair promises, and flatteringes, that the late obtained bondmen, may be
circuncised: which when it is done, he is handled sum what more gentellye, but
all hope of returning into his country is clean cut of: for burning is
ordained ^s a punishment unto the flyers away, Those which ar counted most
constant, and less fugitive, ar taken by their ma^ters, to serve them as pages
in the army, and then at lenght freedom is purchased, when, being unprofitable
through his age, he is rather rejected by his master, then dimised, or when his
master being in danger of death at the wars, does bequeth him fredome. They are suffered to marry, but their children ar disposed according to the
arbitrament, and pleasure of their master, which thing causes the wyser
sort to abhor matrimonye. But such as refuse circumcision, ar most cruelly
tormented: what miseries have I there sustained by the space of thirten years?
Verily I am not able to express in any words, what calamity and grefe is in
that kind of life.

After what manner, they which ar vnskilefull of manual sciences, ar used.
MOst miserable is the estate of them which have not learned the manual^
crafts, for they only among them are had in honor and regard, wherefore
when the learned sort, prestes, and noble men, which have lead all their life
in idelnes, come into their hands, they are counted in a more grievous case then
of all the rest. For the regrater never entendeth to bestow any cost on them, as
scarce saleable: they travel bare legged, with uncovered heads, and often
times naked in the greatest part of their body: for their first garments worn
out, there shall be no new apparel bestowed upon them, they are lead and drawn
through cold, snow, rocks, stones, summer and winter, and have no prefixed
end of miserye until they dye, or chance upon some folyshe master, which
byeth such unprofitable merchandise, this is their pitiful estate, and
doleful misfortune. Finallye not one among them is so happy of what age,
condition, science or bewtye so ever he be of, that, falling sick by reason of
iorneyinge, the regrater will leave him at some place to be looked unto. First
he forces him to go with stripes, if that can not prevail, he is placed on a
beast, upon the which if he cane not sit upright, he is bound to the beast,
his fore part, and face lokinge to the ground, like unto a fardell or pack:
and being about to dye, first spoiled of his garments, they cast him into the
next diche, or pit, there to be devoured by dogs, and vultours.

How the new taken captives are handeled in iorneyinge,
NOt only in the journey, they bind there captives in perpetual cheines but also
add manacles to their hands: the distance of a pass is betwine every of
them, lest one should tread under feet the other: which they do for this
occation, because they would not bestoned, of the bondemen, to death. For in
as much as every Regrater leads with him a great multitude, so that often
times they have five hundred men lincked in Iron^, they fear the force of so
great a number if they should have their hands at liberty, and free to cast
with all. But when the night is come, they late their feet also with gives, and
lay them up right to al domages of the air. The state of women is more
gentill, they which are of competent strenght, go on their feet, the weker
sort ar carried upon beasts, but such as are so feeble, that they cane not
abide the rockyng of the beast are placed to be borne in panniars like Geese.
The night is unto them more sad and sorrowful, for either they are enclosed
in mighty senced places, or enforced to suffer the beastly lust, and unclean
lechery of those mankind regraters. And a most lamentable howlynge and weeping
is heard through the dark of youthelye wightes of both kinds susteining
violence, neither may the age of six or seven years defend the miserable
wretches from such filthiness, the malicious nation is so fearce and fervent,
both against and beside all course of nature in libidinous lecherye.

After what fashion the captive Christians are lead, and brought fourth to be
sold.
WHen the day begins too were bright, they are brought fourth into the
market to be sold, like drones or flocks of sheep and Goats. The merchantes
assemble together, the price is set: if the captive likes them, his
garments taken of, he is showed openly before the eyes of his master to come,
all his members are vewed, they are felt, and every part searched, whether any
hurt or damage having been taken, lies in the limbs and joints. If he
likethe them not, again he is returned unto the regrater, so many times that
to suffer, as any man entending to by shall come and draw near: if he
contenteth their minds, and they agree upon a price, he is leaden away to
most painful bondage, either to be made a ploughe manne or sheparde, that
in the weane time I may omit more laborous travels. For there are among them
unspeakable examples of miserye, I have seen men very often coupled
together in a youke to draw the ploughe. The bond women, are most streitly
kept to perpetual labors, separate from the sight of men, and they are not
permitted so much as to talk with their fellow servants. If any man has
been taken by them, with his wife and children, the noble and rich men will bye
him very gladdely, and he is made ouersear of their farms, either to take the
charge of tillinge their land, dressyng of their vineyards, or maintainyng
pastures. The children of these are in bondage. If they persevere and continewe
in the christian faith, a certain time of bondage is assigned unto them,
which being passed, they enjoy their ancient fredome: howbeit their
children, except they be redeemed, remain in servitude, according to the
pleasure of their master, either to abide in the same places, or some other
where to be transferred: there is no land given by inheritance, for the which
they serve a certain space of time. If after their obtained liberty, they
long to return into their country, letters patentes are delivered unto them
for safe conducte. But unto such as have abiured and foresworne our religion,
neither is there any determinate time of bondage, neither law to be challenged
concerning return into their native land, all hope of Fredome only depends
at their masters free will and pleasure, and albeit that fredome be obtained,
yet pay they tyethes, as the rest of the Turks do, but are free from other
burdens, were with the Christians ar oppressede.

The state of those captains which they make Shepardes.
PEinefull is the life of husbandmen, yet more grievous it is with the^ which
are bought to take the charge of Shepardes, they must lead their lives in
deserts, and remain continually both day and night abroad in the open air:
only their master with his wife, dwells in the tente, and besides the
painful travel in defendyng and keeping their stocks, they are constrained at
leasurable hours to make garments, and tapestrye workinges. Every month
they change pastures, conueying them selves from one hill to an other. They
which are of a nature more gentil and tractable, ar w^nte to gene a small
stipend unto their servants, such as we read to have been measured among
the Romans, and that is counted their propre goods, which is kept for
assistance in the way, if after obtained Fredome they purpose to return into
their country, or unto other things necessary for maintenance of their life.
But this chances not every where, for it is a miserable enticement in to
bondage, whereby they restreine them from their intent of departure. But unto
them which have denied Christ: because they are sure that they will not take
flight, no such favor is shown.

The flight of bond men out of Europe.
FLight is more easy for them to take which pass their days in Europe, then
unto such as are sold over into the regions beyond the seas: for by them no
dangerous places ar to be passed but rivers, which easily they may swim
through, the greatest peril is in goinge over the sea Hellesponte. These
which purpose to fly away, are wont to endeavor it in the time of harueste,
for that the more commodiously they may hide them selves in the corn, and
have sustenance thereof, they continewe their flight in the night season, and
lurk in the day time, either in wooddes, marshes or among the corn, and had
rather to be devoured by wolves and other beasts, the^ back to be drawn
again to their old masters.

Of their flight out of Asia the Lesser.
THey which seek means to fly out of Asia, do take their iorneye toward
the sea Hellespont, betwine Call^polis, and ye turrettes sumtime called Seston
and Abidon but now in these our days Bagas Asar, which may be interpreted, a
castle of the streightes of the sea, where the sea is most narrow. They carry
with them an Axe and cords, both to cut down trees, and bind them
together, thereof to make them boats for passage over the sea, bearinge no
other thing with them, saving salt: by night they enter the boat. If the
winds and good fortune be favorable, they row over in three or four hours,
if otherwise, either they perish in the waters, or are driven back again to
the sea banks of Asia* Having escaped the seas, they approach the hills, and
fixinge always their eyes upon the Pole, and Boots, they direct their
iorneye into the north part: In the time of hunger they sustain them selves
with Acornes, and herbs sprinckeled with salt. If a company resort and
assemble together to take flight, they invade by night the Shepardes, which
being slain, they carye away with them what meat and food soever there they
find, howebeit often times they perish them selves, receiving death of the
Shepardes, or taken by them, and delivered to their old masters, ar brought
again under their accustomed thraldom and bondage. But a greater number the
dangers destroy, then do escape in safty, for either they are drowned by
shipwreck, devoured with ye teethe of wild beasts, slain by their enemies
sword, or finally famished for defecte of nowrisheme^t, when by flyinge they
have wandered a long space.

Of the punishment ordained for fugitives.
Manifold ar the punisheme^ts appointed for flyars away: some hanged up by the
heels ar most grievously scourged, but of such as have committed murder, the
feet ar launced with knives into many furrows, and so miserablely mangled
they sprinkle them with salt, through the bodies of other is thruste a great
forke, that has an iron top, which a long space both day and night they
bear and sustain.

The favorable affection of Grecians and Armenians toward fugitives.
Punishment by death and forfaiture of all their goods is ordained for the^,
ye fauer or further the flight of fugitives. Notwythstandyng the Armenians and
Gretians do not cease daily to hide the Christian captives in their houses,
and bring them diffigured with their apparel unto the ships of the
Venetians, or other Christians, and give provision requisite for their
iourneye, with all other things necessary, neither by them are there omitted
any tokens of godly love, For they affirm to have received like favor at our
hands, at what time they come to Rome and Compostella.

Of the inchauntementes Used by the Turks against Fugitives.
THey have a certain kind of inchauntmente, whereby they bring the^ back
ma^ger their teth. The name of the servant written in a scroll of paper is
hanged up in his lodging or cabinne, after that they conjure his head with
horrible words and incantatio^s: which do^ne by poor of the devil it comes
to pass, that the servant flyinge shall think to chance, in his iorneye,
among Lions or Dragons, either the sea and fluddes to break out against
him, or all th^ges to seem black by reason of darkness, and driven back with
this terrible sightes, he retorneth unto his master.

How the memory of Christ by little and little vvereth to oblivion in the
Provinces sumetime of Christian religion.
THere are certain yet remayninge alive, which have in remembrance the
conqueringe of Constantinople, and the kyngdones of Gretia, Albania, VValachia,
and Seruia, which the Turks do now call Bosnam, reduced and brought into
Provinces, they verelye stick most firmelye unto Christ, but the younger
sort can not remember it, and in short space it will come to pass, that the
oblivion of Christianitye shall replenishe all those countries: The like will
happen in Croatia, Ilungarie, and Sclauonie, which are ^ate additions and
augmentinges of the Turkishe empire.

In what sort the conqueror aafe^ any victory behave them selves, and how
by them are used the Spirituatie.
WHen the Turk has subdued any^ province, all the goods thereunto appertayning
as well moveable as not moveable, are granted and given for a bootye. He notes
out by the ground all the nobility, but chieflye the princes issue. And in
that at this present is favored by them the son of king Ihon, they do it
not to none other end, then if Hungary should be taken from them, they may
place him therein, new mischiefs to attempt, but when of Hungary they shall
have sure and safe possession, no doubt but they will rid him out of this
life. For the Turks to obtain a kingdom do favor neither their own blood
nor kinsfolk, no not their propre brethren. If they murder not the spiritual
men, at least wise* spoiled of al their riches and promotio^s* they cast them
of to be laughed at, and to get their living by begging. They take out of the
Churches all the belles, organes, and other musical instruments, yea the
temples them selves profaned and defiled, they consecrate to their Mahomet: the
naked and base chapelles are let stand for the Christians, where they say
their service not openly, but with great silence, and covertly: which when
they are fallen to the ground by means of earthequakes, consumed with fyrye
flames, or rotten through longstanding, it is not lawful for them to reedifye
without the payment of a greatsome of money. Sermons and preaching of the Gospel
is plainelye forbidden, neither is it lawful for the^ to assemble unto any
Christian common wealth, bear wepo^s about with them, be cladde with like
apparrail unto the Turks, dance, or set fourth pleasant sightes of a
ioyefull life* If any injury be done toward the, or Christ, by opprobrious
words, thou must hold thy peace, and patiently suffer it. But contraryewyse,
if thou speak any unworthy or disdainefull thing of their religion, thou
shall be enforced to circu^^ision, if then also thou mutter against Mahomet,
fire and burning shall consume the to ashes. And if a horseman of ye
Christians pass by a Musulman, which is one entrede in the turkish religion
it is necessaryly required that he descend from his horse, and worship the
other sitting, with a lowly countenance, and be^ding his body, which except it
be done, he is beaten down from his horse with clubbes.

The estate of prestes and munkes liuinges under tribute of the Turks.
PKestes and mu^kes with the Turks are of all other in vileste estate, they are
reputed as co^mitters of sacrilege and accursed both by god and man, neither do
they receive any stipe^ds of ye church. Upon Festival they have cast unto
them ^ y certain women, a small quantitye of bredde, no thing is distributed
among them upon otherdayes. They live by purueyinge of wodde: for the custom
is that they he we down trees in the woddes, wherewith their asses being
laden, they wander with that marchaundyse through out all the streates,
proclayming wodde to be sold.

Of the unmerciful tributes exacted at the Christians hands.
THe Christians do pay the fourth of all their increase, and this fourth is
not only gathered of the profits of their lands, fields and flocks, but
also the manual artificers do give the fourth of all their gains. There is
besides this an there burden of payment, by the which so many as ar in one
family, do exhibit every one a duccate. If their parents be not able to
discarge it, they are constrained to sell their children into bondage. Some
other linked in cheines do wander door by door to beg money for
dischargement thereof, but if neither then they are of ability to pay, they are
condemned to perpetual imprisonement. And now when they have performed all
dew^ies, yet is it always lawful for the Turk to have the free election of
the best of his sons, which, circumcised, and conveyed away out of his
parrentes sight, is trained up for the wars, neither shall he ever return
again to his parents, and first because a child will quicklye commit Christ
to obliuio^, soon after also his parents and alyes, so that if they should be
conversant with him, he can not discern, or judge one of his kinsefolke. No man is able to express ^^ words, with what bitter tears, sorowefull
sighs, and pitiful sobbinges that violente separation is done. The Father
seethe his son, whom he has instructed and brought up in the true
worshippinge of Christ, to be drawn by force unto the warrefare of Satan,
that he may fight against Christ: the soon is ravished from his parents
perpetually to live among strangers and Aliantes, utterly to forsake that
which by blood is dearly beloved, grateful through aquainta^ce, and friendly
by familiarity: from thense foreward to come among the number of them, whom
the Grecians are wont to call Apatoras and Ametoras. And albeit that this
greatly degenerate from the true Christian faith, yet a great number of them
do carry under their armepittes, as a most sure preservative against evil
happes, the Gospel of saint Ihon, (which is to wit. In the beginning. etc.)
throughely written unto the end, both in the Grecian and Arabian language,
which intentinelye and with fervent desire expect and long for the Christians
sword (of whom the turkishe prophet does speak, as it shall be declared in ye
treatice next following) to revenge and deliver the Christians from their
unspeakable afflictions and painful persecutions. Which in that it has
not until this day made haste, and ben lifted up against them, who soever
they be that are the hinderers thereof, and to what purpose they do it, it
forces not, but they seem trewlye to have deserved most unworthily of the
Christian religion. For now (Oh soroweful mischaunce, our brother George of
Varadinum being disceased) how quickly have we lost the government of the
Temesuans? let hence fourth Hungary lament, and Transyluania be sorowefull,
Pollonia also ought to be circumpecte, with Lute^ Russia, Prussia, Moschouie,
Dacia, Denmerke, Gutlad, Norvvaie, and Sueuelande Lotte the like be said of
Austriche, Morauie, Siletia, Boeme, Saxony, Germany. England, Scotteland.
Spaigne, and France. Let Rome, Venice with all Italy look no better to speed.
God grant that these things may attain unto a more happy end then I
suppose they will.

A salutinge dialogue in the Sclauone tongue.
Bogh pomozi gospodaru

God help you my patron.

The Answer. Dobro dossao priiateliu.

In good time you come my friend.


The Question. Ieli ouay praui put u kaliplie?

Is not this the straight way into Callipolis.


The Answer. Ni brate, Zabludiossi daleko.

No brother, you have erred greatly,


The Question. Od Zemlie koiessi kazuimi.

Of what Country are your? tell me.


The Answer. Od Vlaske Zemliessam, od benetak*

Of the Italia^s region I am, from venice.


The Question. Vkasi mi praui puth takoti boga.

Show me the straight way, for gods sake,


The Answer. Hodi ssamnon, neboisse nistar

Come with me, neither fear you* any thing.


The Question. Ieda koie glass imas, Kazuimi.

If any news you have, declare it unto me.


The Answer. Ne takomi vice dafnam prouidablih ti.

No by my faith If I knew any I would show it you.


The Farewell, and geuinge of thanks. Ostai Zbogom brate, onie grad

Stay in gods name brother, that is ye city.

K amogres

whether you go.


The Answer. Poi Zbogon, i bogh te zdrano no^sio.

Depart in gods name, and god the in safty keep.

Hallu ti imam i dobrati nots bila.

Thanks unto you I give, and a haypy night have you.


The Lords prayer in the Sclauone toungue.
Nass otsse ki yessi na nebessi. Our Father which art in heaven. Ssuhtisse
tuoie i am. Kralyeusstuo Holowed be thy name. They kingdom. pridi, tuoia olia
budi na zemlij kako come, they will be done in earth as it is na nebu. Dai
na^ga danass nassega in heaven. Give unto us this day our ssagdaniga kruha,
iodpusciaina^ nasse dughe daillye bredde, and forgive us our debtes. kako mi
odpuscianao nassiiw dusuikon, i as we do forgive our depters. and nepeliai
nats u napast, da izbaui lead not us into temptation, but deliver nate od
nepriazni, Amen. us from evil.

Amen.
The Salutation of the Angel.
ZDrano Mario puna milosti, gospidin Hail Marie full of grace, the Lord is
stobum, blasena ti meusenami, with the, blessed art thou among women, i blasen
tsad tuoye vtrobe and blessed is the fruit of thy womb Jesus Kristus, Amen.
Jesus Christ,

Amen.
The Author unto the Christian reader.
I Thought it good, most favorable reader, hear to recite certain words of
Scaluone speech, yt thou might know by how much the Sclauone tongue,
differs from the Persian language, which is used by the Turks. Understand
therefore that it is lawful for all men, skilefull in that tongue, safelye to
pass into Croatia Dalmatia, Russia VValachia, Seruia, Boeme, and Poole
although through distance of the provinces, they differ not alitle in
certain words, and pronunciation, as the Italians from the Spaigniar: des,
and Germans from the Flemminges. Farther let not this be unknown to the, that
the Russians and inhabitants of Seruia do use one language in their divine
service. For they have four and thirty letters, not much unlike those of the
Grecians* And likewise the Croatians, but their letters differ very much from
the other in form* howbeit in number and pronunciation they ar like. And
therefore it is impossible for us, with English letters to utter the true
pronunciation of their words. The Turks conversant in their kings court, and
confines of Scla^^ony do use the same language.

Farevvell.
The horrible act, and wicked offense of Soltan Solimam Emperor of the
Turks, in murtheringe his eldest son Mustapha, the year of our Lord. 1553.
I Have thought it a thing convenient, and necessary for me purposing to make
manifest by writing unto the world so mischenous a deed, for the more full and
perfect demonstration thereof, a little to retire, and first of all brefelye to
tu^che the original cause, and beginning of that unnatural act. It is
therefore to be understood, ye Soliman had begotten this Mustapha on a
certain bondewoman, unto whom even from his childehoode he assygned the
province of Amasia. Whether, after the contine wance of certain months, he
iorneyed, his mother him accu^panying, at what time, through his florishinge in
youthelye years and virtue, he was thought, in ye opinion, and judgment of
al men, by some heavenly providence, to be given and sent unto their country.
This young man being departed with his mother, the king in process of time
what rauyshed above measure with the be wtie of an other his co^cubines named
Rosa: by whom he had four men children, and one woman. The finite had to
name Machomet, and unto him was given the province of Caramania. The second
Baiasith, which held the country of Magnesia. The third Selimus, unto whom
Machomet being dead, was assigned the province of Caramania. The fourth was
surnamed Iangir of the bunches, where with he was both deformed before, and
behind in his back, notwithstanding of a sharp prudent and politic will.
But the virgin was married to one Rustanus a paschan. He after the slaughter of
Hybrachimus obtained the dignitye of a Vizier, which we may call one of the
chief councellers. But abusing that office with ye auerice in him naturally
engraffed, he either renewed or clean changed all the customs and orders,
deminished the yearly stipendes of the soldiers, which they call
Janischaries, enhaunsed the reuenews of the Captains (paid by them unto the
Emperor) which are named Sangiackes, increased sub^idies and tributes upon
the provinces, and no less added a measure to the inordinate expenses of ye
kings house, applyinge his office to none other end, then that he might heap
up for him self infinite treasures, by his colored and di^ceitfull pillage, by
the which means, being esteemed as a dilligent and profitable seruitour, he
easily allured the kings favor unto him self: little regarding in the mean
time, that he was envied and hated of all other men. During which space, Rosa,
of whom we have mentioned before, perceyuinge her self to be favored and
beloved of the king above the rest of his concubines, under a color of
religion minded to declare unto ye Muchti, that in deed she was stirred of a
godly desire and affection, and throughely purposed to build a temple, and
erecte an hospital, to receive pilgrims in the honor of the high God, and
his prophet Machomet, yet that she had determined, not to attempt it with out
his council and advise. wherefore she demanded of him whether such works
would be acceptable unto God, and any thing avail for the health of her
soul* To which demaundes the Muchti answered, that the deeds would be unto
god most grateful, and although not much profitable for the safegarde of
her soul, yet that they would be a great ^urtherance unto the kings soul,
under whose dominion, and at whose commandment were all her goods, riches,
and also (for she was a bondewoman) her life. With this answer, the woman
seemed, every day one more the^ an other, to be sad, sorrowful, and disquieted
in her mind, and so much that in the space of many days she could not be
comforted. Of which anguishe and pe^siuenes, the king being certifyed, begane
to solace her most curteouselye, affirminge that he in shoorte space would
find a remedy, whereby at lenght she should enjoy the long wished end of
her desire, Wherefore incontine^t he made her free, and thereupon confirmed his
deed by such writings (as among them it was accustomed to be done) that from
thence fourth she should never be bound unto him again. After obteining of
this desired and loving favor, Rosa with a great quantity of treasure,
departed to finishe the work before mentioned. Duringe which time the king
(as above it is specified) baited, and as it were drowned, passinge all
moderation, in an unbridled desire and lust of Rosa, commanded by a messanger
that she should come unto him. But the craftye and desceitfull woman, from
whom no guile was hidden, subtillye willed the messanger, that he should
admonished his Lord of honestye, and obseruinge the laws: and that she
acknowleged her self no longer to be bond, but a fre woman, albeit in the
mean season not to deny, his kingely majesty, at his arbiterment to have the
apointing and disposition both of her life and death: but concerning carnal
copulation, that of all other things it could not be done, with out the
committinge of a most grievous sin and offense. And least perhaps he might
think it to be a fable forged, and fained by her, that she was contented, and
would repose her self in all things to the judgment of the Muchti. This
repulse so stirred up the inflamed heart of the king, that, all delay set
aparte, he commanded the Muchti to be sent for unto him, and giving him free
leave to answer, asked, whether with out breaking and violation of the
laws, he might carnallye join with a bond woman by him made free? whereunto
the Muchti auneswered, that it was not lawful, except he had first contracted
lawful matrimony with her. But this difficulty so augmented the kings
affection, that blinded beyounde all measure with sensual appetite, he
consented in wedlock too the free woman. Wherefore the marriage robes, and other
necessary provision made ready, acordyng to their custom, he sent her five
thousand Soltane ducates, under the name of a gift for their marriage, not with
out the great admiration of all men, especially because it was contrary to the
usage and custom of the house of Ottomanno. For, to avoid equality in the
Empire, they never marye any honest and lawful wives, but in their places, to
satiffye their pleasures, and libidinous lusts (whereunto in most vile and and
filthy manner, they are subject, as boue all other nations) they have ravished
virgins from all parts of the world, bewtifull and in favor the most
excellent, whom princess like, and honorablelye, they nourishe in the kings
palaice (which of the^ is called Sarai) bring them up to serve for all uses and
commodities, and instruct them in honest, and civil manners, with whom the
kings by course, as their pleasure shall be, are wount to accompanye. But if by
chance any among them being begotten with child of the king, shall afterward
bring forth and be delivered, then she above all the rest is reverenced and
honored, and for a great dignity and reputation, is therefore called Soltana.
Those women after the birth of their children ar married to great Lords,
paschans, and Sangiaches. But to return unto our purpose of to this bond
woman latelye made free so highelye advanced by the benefit of Fortune, yt
she might well be thought the chefest of all the women of Asia, and accompanied
with such success of felicity, whereby she might satisfy all her ambitious
endeavors and desires: this only thing remained, that means and occasion
might be found, whereby Soliman being dead, the succession of the Empire,
might be translated unto her only posterity which purpose, the gentilma^ly to
wardnes of Mustapha so much hindered, a young mane of a noble courage, and
passing wit, no less excelling in his coragious heart, the^ in strenght by
reason of ye multitude of his soldiers, which also through his magnanimity
and fortitude was in wounderfull estimation with the souldyers, and for his
grave wisdom and upright justice, marueilously favored of the people. All
which commendable qualities in him, the crafty woman well considering, and
privily with Rustanus consultinge of that matter, for she knew (as by the
instinct of reason it is most probable) that Rustanus would rather desire his
kinseman, and brother of his wife, to be advanced and settled in the Empire,
then Mustapha with whom she knew for a certaintye, that he was in most mortal
hatred, and chefely because there had fallen betwyne them great variance and
strife. For from the beginning, whiles he went about to deminishe the pentions
of others (as before we have partly touched) he endeavored also, but in vain,
to detract a part of the stipend and revenues of Mustapha: whereby she sone
coniectured, that so noble and stout a heart, if he should be advanced unto
the estate of the Empire, would not easelye burye in oblivion, so vnderserued
an iniurye, in so much ye Mustapha reigning, he thought by means of his
forepassed life, that not only, he should fall in danger of his office and
dignity, but also of his head. All which lykelihodes to chance the
malicious woman pondering in her pestilent mind, endeavored to kindle in the
kings thought no small suspicions of Mustapha, which were that he inflamed
with desire to bear rule, having his confidence in the favor and benevolence
of all men toward him, and swellynge through the great army of soldiers
(of the which he has great plentye and abundance) left no other thing to
be looked for at his hands, then that shortly he would affecte the Empire,
and craftelye lie in wait to murder his Father. And whereby the better to
conceal and clooke this matter, she fitelye provided all things to be
attempted by Rustanus, which continually had the charge of weighty affairs
about ye king neither were there any craftye means privy unto him, which he
applied not for the destruction and accuseme^t of the young men. For unto as
many as were sent for administration and government of the province of Siria,
he privily told, as though Mustapha was had in suspicien by his father,
geuinge in charge to every of them that they should have a diligent eye unto
the estate of Mustapha, and with out fail to certify him by writing of all
such matters as they both saw and heard concerning his behavior: craftily
affirming, that the more odyous things, were written by them of Mustapha, so
much the more they should be in favor and accepted of the king. From that
day forewarde Rustanus being often certifyed by them, of the princelye
excellency, wisdom, fortitude, magnanimitye, benevolence, and liberalytye of
Mustapha toward all men, wherewith he had marueilouslye purchased unto him
the favor of the multitude, and no less of the most fervent desire, with the
which all men, for the most part, seemed to be kindled, about election of
him unto the Empire: all this notwithstanding, he not only first dared to sow
the seed of so mischeuous a conspiracy, but also those letters delivered unto
the ungracious woman, he left the rest to be prosecuted by her pestiferous
head. But Rosa seeing good opportunity offered, for accomplyshinge of her
detestable intent, thought never to lean of corrupting the kings mind with
effeminate allurementes, and Flatteringes (as she knew the ways, few like unto
her) so that, if at any time mention should be made of Mustapha, she would
take a fit occation of the time to oppen the letters.

And in deed she was not deceived of her expectation, for a conueniente
season being awaited, she admonished the king not with out tears (as unto
women in fained matters they are at no time wantinge) of the peril and danger
whereunto he was subject, rehearsing among other objections, how Selimus the
kings parent, had before at one time, by such like means deprived his Father
both of his kingdom and life: wherefore she earnestlye entreated him by
example of other to take diligent care for him self. But these arguments of
suspicion, at the first sight, seemed not in every behalf so probable unto the
king, whereby it came to pass, that by those assayes, the cursed woman little
profited. Which perceiving in her enuiouse heart, after tracte of certain
months, she directed her malicious thoughts vn*to other disceites, seeking
opportunitye by all man's possible, to distroye the young manne with poison.
Neither were there wantinge bloudsheders, and most detestable men, prompt and
ready to accomplish vilanouslye all heinous acts, least by celestial
prouidenc^ she might have applied her self to s^ horrible a deed. wherefore he
first touched not the venimed robes, sent unto him, by this woman, under the
name of his Father, until an other had been clad with the same: by which
provident wisdom, he prevented the vndeserned mischefes of his unnatural
stepmother, and openly, in the sight of all men made manifest the poison.
Howbeit the adulterous harlot yet ceased not to imagine against him fresh and
new wiles, for she went about (being boldened through the amourous drynkes,
with the which by the heelpe of a bewtifull woman, a Juishe enchauntrisse,
she had so allured the kings mind, that every day rich presents, and
the success of diverse requests, were unto her daily, more and more promised by
the king) to get her self such benevolence and familiarytie, as never any
before had obtained in the princely palaice of Ottoma^no: for she desired,
that by course her children might he conversant in the royal houses of their
Father, which was because by their continewall presence, and daily fair
flatteringes, they might more and more entice unto them his Fatherlye love, and
if through some fortunat chance, Mustapha should also come, she might get
a more convenient occation to oppress him: if not, to expecte the time to kill
him by messangers.

But Mustapha in deed not coming (for the kings sons have not accustomed,
their father not wittinge of hit, to depart out of the provinces assigned unto
them, and repair to Constantinople, except their father being dead, they come
accompanied with a great number of soldiers, to take possession of the Empire)
she had soon in redines an other mischefe. For the request which was
desired, being obtained, she brought to pass, that not only in the city,
but in the provinces also her children followed the king their Father yea
Giangis difformed with bunches accompained his father remaining in the ca^pe.
But the forged invention of this wicked step mother standing in doubt the
space of certain years, fortune at le^ght minding to fauer those cursed
iutentes of the woman, brought suspicious letters from the Paschan (for every
of the kings sons is wount to have with him one Paschan, which is such a
one, as occupies the rome of him, that gives answer unto the people
concerning the law, and ministers council about warrelyke affairs, with a
teacher by whom he is trained up in good letters, and princelye behavior)
which was constituted ouersear of the regiment of Mustapha, and gouernynge of
the province of Amasia: in the which was contained, a marriage to be in
handeling betwine Mustapha and a daughter of the king of Persia, and that he
therefore referred the matter unto the sacred gate, because that if any
misfortune should chance thereof, he might be counted free from al suspicion.
These letters brought unto Rustanus, he thought that at lenght he should
bring the long hoped ruin, and destruction of Mustapha to a desired end. And
making no longer delay, with speed he declared all the whole matter to Rosa,
and soon after both conueyinge them selves into the palaice, they revealed
the state thereof before the king. In the which cause, whereby to drown the
kings mind, yet staggeringe, and full of doubts, in their ambiguouse
suspicious, they applied all their wilye disceites, saying: that Mustapha, as
an ambitions person, to be kindled, and set on fire, with a furious rage of
the mind, contrary to all heavenly and human laws, through desire of
obteinynge so noble an Empire: to conspire also against his fathers death: and
whereby a greater confidence might be given to their crafty imaginations, they
put the king in remembrance of the aliance contracted by Mustapha with the
persians, most ancient and deadly enemies to the of spring of Ottomanno, and
therefore he ought narowely to see unto him self, lest, to persian strenght
joined to the Sangiaches and Ianischaries, whose fauoux Mustapha long sense
had won by his liberality, in short space, he should bereue his father both
of life and kingedome with these and such like accusations, they brought the
troubled mind of the old manne to such pass, that he fullye purposed to
provide for safegarde of his own estate, by death of his son, after this
manner. In the year of our lord God a thousand five hundred fiftye and twoe,
he caused with all diligence and celerytie, through out, for the most part,
all his provinces, to be proclaimed, the Persians, departed out of their
coasts, to have invaded Siria with a great Oste of armed men, overthrown
cities, lead away the people captive, and, no mane resistyng them, spoiled all
the country with fire and swoorde, which so bold an enterprisse, and
desperate act to repel, that he was constrained, to send thither Rustanus
with an, army. Certain bands of soldiers therefore being gathered together,
he priuelye committed the^ to Rustanus, that as secretlye as it might be, and
without all tumulte, he should lay hands or Mustapha, and bring him bound
unto Constantinople, but if he could not commodiouslye bring it to pass,
that then by one means or other, he should cause him to be murdered. This
unnatural and beastelye commandment of a father being received, Rustanus
guarded with a mighty Oste of soldiers, marchethe toward Ciria. Whither, when
he was come, Mustapha certified of his ariual, all lingrirg set a part,
iorneyed toward Siria, accompained with seven thousand of the most valiant
and best appointed soldiers through out all Turkeye. Whereof Rustanus having
intelligence, and seeing that he could not, according to his intent, accomplish
the wicked commandment, of his most cruel and unkind father, with out
longer tarying begane to fly, and, retiring made have with his army to
Constantinople again, and with such speed, that he dared not to see the duste,
raised in the air by the horsemene of Mustapha, much leesse too abide his
coming. Being returned therefore with his company of soldiers, he
persuaded all men, to have found the province quiet and in safegarde. But at
lenght opened unto the king in secret the cause of his return: adding that
he had senne by most manifest signs and conjectures, the minds of all the
whole army, to be meruellouslye inclined to the favor of Mustapha and yt he
thought it not good, in so dangerous a business to attempt the matter by open
war: for which cause he referred the decydynge thereof unto the wisdom of
his majesty This relation increased new and no small suspicion in his
vncurteouse and bloudshedynge father, and in no point degenerating from the
engraffed crueltye of his ancestors, from which too deliver him self, in
his wicked thought he throughely determined, wherefore in the year next
following, he commanded a mighty oste to be gathered to gether, signifying
that the Persians had invaded Siria with a more huger army then before: and
that he forced for a public safeguard, had determined thither to lead the
Oste in his propre person, and resist the inte^tes of their enemies. The
soldiers therefore gathered to gether all most at a beckning, and necessary
provision generally ordained for the war, commandment being given to set
forward, after few days the blood suckyng father does follow his army.
Which when he was arrived in Siria, fourth with charged Mustapha, to repair
unto him at Alepes (for there he had pitched his te^tes. But in the mean space
Solimam was not so able to conceal, by outward aparance, (although diligent
regard was applied thereunto) the detestable and deadlye hatred, which in his
heart he had conceived toward his son, but that it came to the evident
perseverance of the Paschans, and other men of greater dignitye about him.

Through the which one Acmat a pascha secretly warned Mustapha by a messenger,
that he should have a more careful regard unto his life and saflye.

And in deed Mustapha thought it not unworthy to be marueled at, ye his Father
with out any probable reason, should thither resort with so great an army of
soldiers, howbeit trusting to his innocencye extremely vexed with anguish and
perturbation of mind, he fully purposed to satiffye and obey, (although with
no small peril of his life) his fathers commandments. For he thought it to
be more honest and laudable, by obeyinge his father to incur death, then by
living to fall into the crime of disobedience. But weyinge, in this so great
sorrow and heaviness, many cogitations in his mind, at lenght constantlye and
with out tremblinge, he demanded of his teacher, whom (as before we have
mentioned) he had always with him, in his court, whether on empire of the
whole world, or a blissed life, were rather to be wished for by a man? unto
who^ the doctor freely answered, that ye Empire of this world, unto a man
throughlye considering it, does bring no felicitye, but under a vain and
colored apearence of the true goodness, for then that, their is nothing more
unstable, and less assured: in as much as it is wont to bring with it self,
mere sorrow, perplexitye of mind, tribulation, suspicions, manslaughter,
fear* ungodliness, unjust dealinges, ruin, captiuitye, spoilinge, with diverse
other kinds of mischefe, never too be wished by such a one, as is desirons to
attain unto the true blissednes, by the which doutles a happy life should
be lost and not won, but unto whom be given, depelye to weye and consider
the vnstabilitye and shortness of this our fragile estate, which the common
sort estemeth to be the true felicite, and strive against the vanities of
this world, and embrace honestye, that no doubt for them, there was a place
assygned and prepared in heaven by the high God, where they ^shoulde give the
fruition of perpetual joy, and a blessed life. With this answer of the
Doctor, the young man's mind being marueilously troubled, as it were after a
sort, by a presagement of his death, it is throughelye purposed, he said,
and abidyng no long communication, incontinent directed his iorneye toward
his blood thirstynge Father, and not far from him, pitched his tents in the
plain field. But this so hastye coming of Mustapha, kyn^led a greater
suspicion in his wicked Father, and in the mean time Rustanus ceased not, in
that behalf to augment and increase this suspicion with his most leude lies,
and dissembling devises, for geuynge a sign, he encoraged the Janischaries,
and other the chefest soldiers of the army, to go fourth and mete Mustapha.
And farther prolonging set a side, every one most spede^ye executed his
commandementes, provided and furnished him self for the iorneye. After that
the most disceitfull villain shewinge fourth (as he knew exceadyngelye to
feign) a disdainefulnes in his countenance, conveyed straight way him self
into the kings tente, most impudentlye affirming^, that all the principal
soldiers, for the most part, were departed of their own accord, and
without any biddinge, to receive and meet Mustapha. Which being heard, the
king, through vexations of his mind, began too were pale, and going out
of his tente, soon persuaded him self, that the words were true which had
been spoken by Rustanus. And there wanted not unto Mustapha prodigious visions
of his unfortunate chance to com. For the third day before he should make
ready him self for the iourneye, slepyng about the twye light of the day, he
seemed to have seen Machomet appareled with glisteringe robes, taking him by
the hand, to bring him unto a certain place most delectable, granished with
exquisite and gorgiouse palaices, and environed with a most pleasant garden,
which pointing to every thing with his finger, spoke to him in this manner:
saying, here perpetually do rest as many as in the world, have leaden a godly
and vpryght life, with such as have been mainteiners of the laws and
righteousness, and equity and reprouers of sin and vices. After that turnyng
his face on the other side, to have beholden two broad and most swifte rivers,
whereof the one to seethe with water more black then any pitche, and great
number to be drowned therein, the rest to appear above the water, cryinge for
mercy with a most horrible voice: and in this place, he said, are tormented
such as maliciously have wrought iniquity, remaininge under the waueringenes
of his fickle life. And the greatest part of them he affirmed to be Emperors,
king, princes, and other such great potentates of the world. Which being
finished, Mustapha broken out of his sleep and vision, commanded the Doctor to
be sent for, and opened unto him the whole course of his dream. But he musing
there upon a long space, (for the supersticious Machometists do attribute very
much unto ye doting to yes of dreams) replenished with sorrow and pensifenes,
in the and answered, that the vision was to be feared, as one which foreshwed
unto him great peril of his life. Wherefore he councelled him to have especial
regard of his health and dignitye. But Mustapha, as he was endewed with
magnanimitye and fortitude, having no respect to his awneswere, stow^lye
replied, saying, shall I suffer my self to be made a fearde, and vanquished,
with frivolous and childishe fear? whi rather do I not make have with a
constant and vnwauering courage, to go toward my Father, and so much the
bolder, because I know most certainelye, that I have always so duelye
reverenced (as it beecommed me) his majesty, that he unwilling thereunto, I
never turned mine eyes toward his royal seat, much less my feet, but
least of all minded to affecte the Empire: except the especial favor of the
high God, had called him away unto a better life, and not then also withou^e
the free and public election of the whole Oste, that at length, with out all
slaughter, bludsheding, and crueltye, I might reign after a godly sort
iustelye, and keep inuiolated the Frendeshippe of my brethren. For I have
purposed with my self, and rather chosen, sins that my Fathers will and
pleasure does so require, by dwe obedience to end my life, then reigning
many years, to be reputed of all men, but chiefly by mine adversaries, as a
rebel. This communication finished, Mustapha apparaleth him self in whit
robes, puts certain letters in his bosom, which the Turks mindinge to
go any where, ar wont always to carye with them, (for in supersticious
ceremonies they dote very much,) and so set forward toward his Fathers
camp, and (as we have said (pitched Pauilyons: this at length accompained
with certain of his trustye friends, he directed his iorneye to the tente of
his wicked Father, mindinge with great reverence (as the customs among them
required) to kiss his parents hands.

But when he came to the first entrance thereof, remembryng him self to be
girded with a dagger, he entered not in before he had laid down the same,
because he would not be seen to come armed in his fathers presence, and to
remove far from him all suspicion. Being entered the iuner parts of the t^nte,
he was received ioyfullye enoughe and with such reverence as ought to be
required, by the Evnuches of his Father. But seeing but one seat prepared
wherein he alone should sit* replenished with care, he stead still a good
space musinge with him self, and at lenght demanded where the King was. When
the standers by had answered, that he should incontinent behold him, he
saw from the other side seven dumb men to come toward him, (whom the
Emperor of Turkye is accostomed to have about him, as partakers of his
secrets, and redye wickedlye to accomplish all kinds of murder, and heinous
acts) wherewith being stricken with fear and terror, behold my death, he
said, and risynge, contented to fly away, but in vain, for apprehended by
the Evnuches and kepers, he was drawn by force unto the appointed place of his
unhappy chance, and with out any longer delay, the dumb men quickly bound
the stringe of a bow about his neck, the miserable young man struggeling,
and humbly desiringe that he might be permitted to speak but two only
words unto his father, which beastlye and unnatural manquellour, that, from
an other side of the tente beheld that lamentable sight, rebuked them with a
thundrynge crewell voice, saying: what not yet at lenght, will you execute my
commandments? and kill this traiter which by the space of ten years has
not suffered me to take one quiet nights rest? whose so sharp, fearce, and
imperious words being heard, the Evnuches by help of the dumb men, threw
the miserable wretch to the ground, and the stringe bound about his neck,
drawn from either his sides, they strangled the most unhappy sone, by
commandment of his unkind Father. This horrible and pitiful murder in such
sort dispatched, sone after by assigneme^t of the king, was taken the Paschan
of the province of A masia, and beheaded in the kings presence, which
accomplyshed, he sent for the bunched Giangir, ignorant of such happes as were
befallen, and iestinge as though he had done a thing worthy praise and
commendation, he bid him to go and receive his brother Mustapha. Then Giangir
with a joyful and merye heart made haste, thinkyng to have met with his
brother. But when he came unto the place, and unhappy strangled brother, and
beheld him yinge one the earth, it is impossible to be declared, with what
griping gryfes he was pricked at the heart. And scarce was he yet come thither,
when his malicious father, sent after him messangers, which in his name,
should offer unto him all the treasure of Mustapha, his horses, tents,
servants, robes, ornaments, and besides that the province of Amasia. But
Giangir replenished with extreme sorrow and pensifenes, for the pitiful death
of his dearest beloved brother, powrynge out plentye of tears, spoke in this
manner: Out upon the, O defestable and wicked dog: Otraiter, I will not name
the Father, thou thy self now enjoy the treasures, horses, ornaments, and
province of Mustapha. Could there any such thing take place, in that fearce
ungodly and mischeuous mind of thine, as too murder so noble, warlyke, and
son of such a toward, whose like the house of Ottomanno had never until
this day, neither shall in time to come, and that with out all respect of
humanytye or right of bloudde? I will beware therefore, least hereafter, thou
triumph in like manner, brag so vnshamefastlye over me poor bunched miser.
Having in this sort tragicallye lamented, and taking in hand his dagger,
wherewith he was girded, he thruste it through his inward boweles, and so
sodainlye gave up the ghouste. Which deed when it came unto the Emperors
hering, a hard matter it was to speak, what vexations griped him at the heart.
Howbeit so great anguishe and sorrow overcame not his covetous mind, for
incontinent he commanded all the rich treasures of Mustapha to be brought
into his tents. But the soldiers thinking that all his substance was
granted and given for a pray, made earnest speed with prompt and ready
minds to perform the kings hosts. During which time the soldiers of
Mustapha remaining in the camp, ignorante of that which had befallen to their
Lord and governor, seeing so great a band of soldiers, to come rushe on,
with out al order of war, whereby to repel and drive of their tumultuous
insolence, came armed against them, and so manfullye brake their force, not
with out slaughter of a great number on their side. As soon as ye rumor of
this tragedye was brought unto the kings soldiers, perceiving the hurlye
burlye more and more to kyndle and increase, determined to help their
companions: and so at lenght proclamation made unto armor, a blouddye cumbate
was fought on both sides, in so much that in short space were slain above two
thousand men, and many other wounded: and the tragedye had gone farther, if
one Achmat a Paschan, a man most grave, and for his virtuous exploites, of
no small reputation among the soldiers, had driven back the Janischaries,
and apeased their rage, turnynge him self also toward the soldiers of
Mustapha, and mitigated with gentill words and exhortations their stirred
minds, saying: what will you now dear brethren and loving friends,
degenerating from that wisdom through the which, in so many ages you have
been praised and highelye commended, go against and withstand the
commandments of the great Soltan our Emperor? I can not (as God should
love me) marvel enoughe, what has so inflamed your hearts, whom I hethervnto
have allowed as mostvaliant and renowned soldiers, as in this civil conflicte,
to str^tche fourth these wepons against your own fellows, which with such
prosperours success, and good fortune, you have used upon the enemies of the
house of Ottomanna, and to represent such a spectakle unto your adversaries,
yt they, by whose right hand they lament them selves, vanquished, should now
rejoice for their mutual destruction and slaughter. Therefore my sons have
diligent regard, for your magnanimities sake, lest by this your rash
insolency, you lose that wisdom and fortitude, whereby unto this day above all
other men you have been extolled, and reserve these weepons, which to much you
have exercised against your own selves, for your enemies, when a better
occatien, and more praise worthy shall be ministered. With this and such like
sainges, Achmat the Paschan aswaged the kyndled corages of the soldiers, so
that they suffered all things peaceablely to be carried out of the tents of
Mustapha unto the king. But when the death of Mustapha came to the
Janischaries and ears of the whole Host, a fresh sedition began among them.
Every one cried unto armor again, and making a terrible noise, by reason of
their tears and wepinges, as they were this in a ragyng and furious mind,
came violentlye rushynge with great tumulte and drawn swords, into the
kings tente. But this renewed conspiracye, broug^t such trembling into the
kings mind, that destitute of all council, he would have taken flight, with
no small danger of his head. How beit being held by his servants, and
taking occation of necessyty, he purposed to attempt the thing, which in
saftye, he never thought to have done, and entringe out of the doors, spoke in
this sort (but with a pale countenance) unto the soudiers: what rumor, noise,
rufling, and insolencye is this, wherewith so rasshelye you have disquieted my
mind? What do this furious, inflamed, and irefull visages signify? Will you
not call to remembrance that I am he which has the power to rule and govern
you? Have you determined to blotte your warrlyke prowes, and the martial
feats of your ancestors, by shedynge the bloudde of your king and Emperor?
Unto the king speaking in this manner, stoutlye answered the soldiers: that
they in deed confessed him to be the same, whom many years sense they had
elected, but in that they had by their coragious mankynes conquered him so
large an Empire, and defended the same, for this occation to be done, because
he should raygne vprightlye, minister justice, and not without regard to lay
his hands one every just person, and wickedlye too embrwe him self in the
blood of Innocents. And that in defense of an upright quarrel, they were come
armed, and provoked to revenge the death of giltles Mustapha, neither the king
to have any reasonable cause, whereby to be stirred with displeasure against
them. Their desire therefore was, that, whereby to purge them selves openly of
the crime of traiters, of the which they were falsely accused by ye
adversaries of Mustapha, the accuser should come fourth in the midst, and
that they would not lay down their armor, before he had personallye
apeared in judgment, and begin his accusation, as the law required, upon
pain of like punishment. Duringe the time that these things should he done,
the horror of that heynou^ act, provoked them all to weeping, in so much that
the king seemed to repent him of that cruel, detestable, and beastlye killing
of his so^ue. Then the king promised unto the soldiers, with gentill words,
the success of their demaundes, and endeavored, as much as he could, to
pacifye their inflamed minds. But in the mean time the soldiers, lest the
king should craftelye have escaped, and disapointed them of his promises, and
the expectation of such things as they had requested, remained all of set
purpose, with diligent care to keep the watch and ward, After that the king
clean deprived Rustanus of all his dignities, took from him the kings ringe,
whereof he had been keeper, and delivered it to Achmat the paschan. But
Rustanus broken with fear and trembling, seeing him self scarce void of
danger in his own tents, fludde privily unto the pauilious of Achmat the
paschan, and consulted with him what were best to be done in so doutfull and
perilous a business, which answered, that therein he should use the advice of
the king, and obey what so ever by him should be commanded. These words
greatly contented the mind of Rustanus, and making no long delay, asked
council of the king concerning all his mind, by messangers, his trusty and
familiar friends. But answer being given, that, al lingering set a part, he
should absent him self, most spedely from the kings sight and pauilions: he
replied, that it could not conveniently be done, with out money and pauilions,
unto whom the king again answered, that neither time, place, or longer delay
to take commodious opportunity, by any means should be granted* Then
Rustanus at length, with out longer taryinge, giltye enoughe unto him self, of
his misceuous committed deeds, acco^pained with eight of his most faithful
friends directed his journey toward Constantinople, and with spedy pace (as
fear is accustomed to minister wings) in the end came thither, and there
with Rosa, and many other confederates unto that conspiracye, expects the
euente of his fortune, not with out great iepardye of lesinge his head. The
rumor went that Soliman also, giltye unto him self of so outrageous a murder,
was pricked with a supersticious repentance, to go unto Mecha, and taking his
journey, being compelled by the Persian power, from these to speed him self
unto Jerusalem, there to offer sacrifice (called in ye language Corban) for his
disceased son. And this much (once to make an end) came to my remembrance, to
declare, or rather give admonishement of Mustapha, yt he was, for his warrelyke
prowes, and prompt mind to shed christian blood, so favored of all men,
that they may think never any to have sprongen out of the lineage of
Ottomanno, which would have promised so much concerning enlargeme^t of their
empire, so that among them of dispared matters is risen this proverb Gietti
Soltan Mustapha, whereby they would signify, that of their first purposed
intent their labor to be lost, or in vain. We oughht therefore to rejoice one
with each other, for the death of so fearce, cruel and deadly an enemy, and
think, that it came not to pass with out the providence of God, which in
that behalf was minded to provide for our saftye and sauegarde. Finallye,
let us once at length, take diligent care for our selves, that we may
abstain from civil wars and dissentions, thinking, that we ought to go
against (every manne adding his helpinge hand) this common enemy, not only
of our native country and lives, but also unto our souls. Which if we do,
it shall not be hard to drive from us this mortal aduersarye unto the name
of christianity, if otherwise, it will be dangerous, least, (we being
occupied about hateful conspiracies among our selves) endeavor to invade,
wast, and spoil with his tyranny that part of Europe that yet remain the
unto us unperished, which the almightye and omnipotent God forbid, and
reduce ds unto concord and unity for his son JESUS Christ's sake our
Savior and redemer

AMEN.
Imprinted at London in Fletestrete, nere to S. Dunstons Church by Thomas
Marshe*


