THE EXERCISE OF ARMS FOR GALIVRES, MVSKETTES, AND PIKES After the order of
his Excellence. Maurits Prince of Orange Count of Nassau etc. Governor and
Captain general. over Geldreland. Holland Zeeland Vtrecht. Overyssel. etc.

Set forth in figures. by Jacob de Gheyn.

With written Instructions for the service of all Captains and Comaundours.
For to show hereout the better unto their jong or vntrayned Soldiers the
plain and perfett manner to handle these Arms.

Printed at the Hage. With Privilege of the Emperors Matie. the King of
France, and the Noble and mighty Estates General of the united Provinces

TO THE PRINCE.
NOr your highness, nor any man to whose vevv this present book shall come,
shall need to find it strange, either, why it has borrowed an English
habitt, or shrovvded it self under so great a protection: since on the one
side it represents unto You that manner of exercise of Arms, which has for
many years been practiced in this school of war, the United Provinces, and
that, by a Captain whose vvorth (I think) not any part of the world is
ignorant of: in which war the valor of the English and Schottish nations
(now Brittaynes) has been of that special mark and note, that, for ready
use of their Arms, provident care of the Commanders and commendable obedience
of the Soldier toward his chief, it can not be denied but that the
Provinces have received very acceptable services at their hands. On the other
side: to whom could I (in judgment) more fitly and (as I may say) justly,
address the proprietye of a work of this worth and nature? then to a
Prince descended from so many powerful and victorious Kings, who even by
destyny and judgment of all the world, is not only the heir of their
Fortunes, but an inheritour of their virtues also: then to a Prince the son
of the most puissant King of all his predecessors: who, though he blesses
his Realms with the svveetenesse of peace, yet (doubtelesse) he places the
security of that content, in the due and lavvfull exercise of Arms. Lastely,
to whom rather (I say) should I dedicate this work? then to a Prince, that
through the light of his own proper example, does so much beautifye and
ennoble the practice of Arms, who even in the fore-springe of his years and
amidst so many other princely entertaynements fit for his youth and state,
does yet give such a luster to this of Arms, by the continual familiaritye he
has with them in his often practice, that I think I may say, and say
truly, that the most true and perfect knowledge of them is rather to be found
with your Highness, then brought to You. Therefore, as all those excellent
professors of excellent sciences (where in yet your Highness excells them all)
are every one in special duty bound, to give the best testymonye they can of
their thankfulness, both in regard of the favor which some receive in being
nere You, and also of the honor which You do to all their professions, in
not disdayninge to participate with their industries: So have I in all humble
and due respect, thought it fit, to tender You this acknowledgement of mine,
hopinge that your Highness shall receive no small contentement, by addinge the
long experience of the Nether-lands practice to Your own knowledge of
ancient Histories, and those wise and deep-grounded instructions of that great
Monarche the King Your Father.

Your Highness his. Most humble servant in all duetye at command. Jacob de Gheyn.

TO THOSE THAT LOVE THE EXERCISE OF ARMS WISSHETH JACOB DE GHEYN HEALTH and
prosperity.
IT is out of all doubt, that neither the quietness of a common wealth
without arms, nor the arms without convenient or due exercise, can stand or
be maintained. Which has not only been well considered by the old sages or
wise, that have undertaken to give any examples of law, but is approved by
the effectual experience of the most famous Towns and People, that have
preserved their Estate chieflye by those means. And examining the further
course of the whole World, we shall find, that the sovereign power has
always been by those which here in did most surpass their neighbors. The
Grecians, in the time thye have been in their most shyning glory have much
embraced this point, and there in by their wit not little proffited. Yet the
Romans have far surpassed here in as well those as all others, and ever
exercised their youth at all kind of arms by those whom they called
Campi-doctores or Mastres of the field. Which manner is playnelye showed unto
us, in the writings that are there of come to our hands, the same reason
stands fast for ever, and with all nations. But in regard that not only the
use but even the arms them selves are much changed chiefly sithence the
findinge out of Gun powder, it can not be denied but that we can reap small
or no benefit by the old rehearsals, without we have neewe instructions. His
Princely Exce. there fore the Earl Maurice of Nassau etc. to whose care (by
the Lords Estates general of the united Provinces) is left the charge of
defending so worthy countries and the conducting of a war which is taken for
a school or pattern to the whole World, Like as he throughout the whole
military order (before his time, much decayed) has restored and partelye
brought to the examples of the old, partly by his own inventions amended and
adorned, so has he taken great regard to the exercise of Arms, as one of the
principal parts of the military order, where out are risen such comodites as
unto every man is known not only in these Countries but also in the uttermost
parts of the world. This has been the chief cause that has moved me to
give out the order which his Princely Exce. in the using of the Calivres,
Muskets and Pikes does observe as the perfectest and best pattern, as well to
pleasure those whose duty it is to follow the order of his directions, as to
accomodate any other who shall seek to draw benefytt to himself by so
necessary exercise and practice of arms. Having to that purpose drawn all the
postures that come in the holding or using of the arms by order and the same
described with his reasons and words of command: A work (without question)
very fit for novices and yongeso uldiers to whom it belongs to exercise
themselves with great diligence here in, very necessary also to all Captains
and Comandors the better to look to the exercising of soldiers, and lastly
very proffitable to all Princes and People, beit in time of war the better
to defend themselves, and offend their enemies or be it in time of peace with
the more facilitye (by this kind of exercising) to draw a better assurance to
themselves, and become the more dread full and redoubted to others. Seening
then our meaning goes no further then to instruct the untrained soldiers and
to reinforce the mind of the expert by the sight and reading of it: No man
shall find it strange that we in drawing of the Pikes, only set that which
for the use of the same is most necessary, omitting diverse manners of tossing
of the pike by form of recreation, which in military exercise brings little
benefit or profit. Concerning the different or suitable apparel and arms of
the figures, there is to be considered, that the shot with head pieces, and
the Musketeers with hattes are drawn and differently appareled, not that we
hold it for necessary, but that such varietye might give the fuller ornament
to the pictures, and to show to posterity the manner of soldiers apparel
used in these days, Like as on the other side the Pikemen are all armed after
onesorte or kind, for no other reason then to represent the right manner and
fashon of the arminge of his Exces. own Guard, as it is at this time. In the
small shot and Musquettiers, you shall also consider that the first figure
shows how a man shall hold a Musket or Caliver already charged upon his
shoulder, and the other pictures followinge tell what is further to be done
both for discharging, and likewise for charging again of the piece. And
because that every man standing still shall know how to behave himself intyme
of need, there is properly set down in the end each several picture with his
several difference of stand or posture and that to give truer light to the
judgment of the obseruer. But above all is to be well considered that which
seems here to require a leasurly and stow proceeding in the apprehension (by
reason of the smalenes of the sculpture which could not conveniently be
otherwise formed) that I say) must the industrious learner with a diligent
practice strive to bring to a nimble and quick readiness of action.
Nevertheless so, as that in the best fashon and with the most care and
providence he make it appear that it is to offend the ennemy without hurting or
anoynig him self or his fellow, the rest the written instructions and the
pictures shall show.

SHORT INSTRVCTION VPONTHE CONTREFAIC TINGES, TOUCHING THE RIGHT USE OF
CALIVERS, for the young or inexpert Shot, which instruction by Cipher letters
is agreeing or answering orderly with every picture. And because here to are
joined some pictures of standing still for sentenels, to show how the
soldier in time of need (ready with his piece) shall stand, there fore do
the writings also there of agree with every figure or picture, according his
number.
SHOT.
FIrst of al is in this figure shovved to every Shot how he shall stand and
March well, and also hold and carye his Caliver, Match and Rapier: That is
to say, he shall in laying on the piece join the Seer close to the shoulder,
holding it with the left hand, and that about the hollovve or thumb-hole of
the stock, and not at the end there of, remembering alvvayes to carry it with
the mouth up, least if by chance the piece went of, he should hurt his
fellow, he shall also hold the match burning or kindled at both the ends,
betwixt the two least fingers of the same left hand, holding the same hanging
dovvnevvards within the stock, to the end that he may lenghthen the same at
all times, and to use and change one end after an other, shall also besides his
flaske or charges, carye about him a tutchboxe with tutch powder, to put out
of the same and not out of the flaske or charges, the said powder in to the pan.

In the 2. figure is taught, how he going and preparing him self to shoot,
shall take the piece from the neck, that is to say, he shall not with the left
hand pull the piece from the shoulder, but shall take it with the right hand
only (like as this figure shows) beyond the great skrue, because the piece
falls there, (benig balanced in the hand) much lighter, and shall take it of
with one hand alone (whereby shall be seen that he is master of his piece)
sinking it a little in the left hand without bending or hanging his body
toward it.

In the 3, how he shall hold and govern the piece before he take it in the
left hand, he shall with the right hand hold the piece in balance, with the
mouth vpvvards, without tutching the body, and have ready the left hand to
meet the piece and to receauce it in the same.

In the 4. how he shall carye the piece in the left hand, standing and going,
not only easily and well, but also hold it in balance in the same hand, that
it do not lie to high nor to lovv, and also not hurt his fellow if the piece
went of by chance, setting for ease and suretye sake the elbovv against his
hyppe, like as this figure teatcheth.

In the 5. how he shall well and proprelye take the match out of the left
hand with the tumb and second finger holding alvvayes the piece in a due
hight, asvvell for the ease, as for not to hurt his fellow vnadvisedlye, and
although that generally (for some good respects) we have ordained to take the
match betwixt the thumb and second finger, yet is it not our purpose so
precisely to bind a man thereto, as that he may not take the same betwixt
the thumb and two next fingers, if that be easier for him.

In the 6. how he shall blovv of the match and hold it well betwixt the thumb
and second finger, before he do put it upon the Cock, that is to say, he shall
bring the match handsomely near the mouth, and blovv of the same under the
hand, without bending himself to much thereto, like as this figure shows.

In the 7. how he shall with the thumb and the second finger, bring the match
into the Cock, and not skrue it in, for to loose no time and is te be
understood, that he alvvayes a fore hand, shall direct the vvidenesse of the
Cock to the thickness of the match, for to be the sooner ready to shoot.

In the 8. how he shall hansomly try his match and with the thum and second
finger govern the same, to the end he may make it presently longer, shorter,
as also higher, and so set the same that the piece do not fail or refuse him.

In the 9. how he shall blovv of the match speedely and well, and being well
blovvne of, finely with open arms and with the two fore fingers cover the
pan lid for the sparks, and shall open the same without bending him selff
toward it, bringing handsomely the piece to his mouth, like as this figure
shows.

In the 10. how he shall present the piece, from above dovvnevvards, and not
from beneath opvvards, to the end he do no harm te his fellow, that goes
a fore him, (if by chance the piece went of) and also that the bullet that
can not alvvayes (especially in time of haste) be rammed in do not fall out.

In the 11. how he shall set the piece against his breast and present it, bow
his head, hold up the right elbovv, and stand right and fast with his body,
and because the piece shall be set against the breast and not against the
shoulder, shall set the body to it: moreover how he shall bovv in the knee
the left leg, that must stand before, and hold styf and strong the right,
leg that must stand behind, to the end he may both the better govern and
discharge his piece, as also accomodate, him self in the presentinge of it.

In the 12. how he shall (having shot) take the piece oderly from his cheek,
and hold it up least he should hurt his fellow if the piece (failed before)
should chance then vnavvares to go of.

In the 13. how with the same fingers where with he set the match in the
cock, he shall handsomely take it again away, not pluckinge or tvvitchinge
it, as also, that by such vnheedynes he put not the coal of the match out.

In the 14. how he shall join the match again betwixt the fingers where he
has had it out at the setting of it up, holding still the piece up wards.

In the 15. how he shall blovv out the pan standing yet open, and having
shot of the piece, becanse (if any sparck should be remaining therein) the
tutch-boxe do not take fire at the putting in of neevv powder, and so hurt him
self, making (to win time) in the mean while the tutch box ready.

In the 16. how he shall put the powder in the pan out of the tutch-boxe,
and not out of the charges or flaske, for not to loose time in dravving or
turning of the same, holding in the mean time the piece vpvvards, for the
reasons a fore said.

In the 17. how he shall put to the pan with his fore finger like as this
figure shows.

In the 18. how he shall cast or shake the powder or corns of from the pan,
if any might lie upon it, because the piece shall not go of, when he shall
come to try the match.

In the 19. how he shall blovv of again the powder, al thoug he have shaked
it of, for more assurance.

In the 20. if he will charge again, how he shall turn the piece with the
left hand, which to do handsomely, he shall convaye it with the right hand
under toward the left side.

In the 21. how he shall let the piece sincke by the left side, and with the
right hand take the flaske or bandelier.

In the 22. how he shall open the charge of the flaske, or else if he do
wear a bandolier, he shall do like as is shevved by the Musquettiers.

In the 23. how he shall put the powder out of the greater flaske, holding
alvvayes the piece from the ground, if he be able to do it.

In the 24. how he shall with a turned hand dravv the skovvring stick out of
the stock, and hold the piece from the ground, like as this figure shows.

In the 25. how he desiring to take the skovvring stick shorter in his hand,
shall turn the end of the same (which is the end that furst he pulled out
(and thrust it to his body, slippinge the hand quickly to the nether end, to
bring it the better and the steadyer into the piece and if he will shoot
with a bullet he shall take the bullet with the same hand (vvherevvith he
now has the skovvring stick shorter) out of his mouth or from thence where
he carries his bullets, and with like quicknes put it into the mouth of the
piece.

In the 26. how he shall with the skovvring-stick ram in the powder and the
bullet together, holding alvvayes the piece from the ground, like as this
figure shows.

In the 27. how he shall with the in side of his hand turned from him dravv
the skovvring stick out of the piece, holding alvvayes the piece from the
ground.

In the 28. how he shall (to take shorter the skovvring-stick) thrust the same
again to the body, as is taught before.

In the 29. how he shall (having the skovvring-stick under and the end) surely
and with speed put the same in the stock again.

In the 30. how he (desirous to take the piece again in the right hand) shall
bring the same first with the left hand before him, like as this figure
shows.

In the 31. how he shall with the right hand take the piece belovve under at
the great skrue, and hold it vpvvards, being ready to lay it again upon his
shoulder.

In the 32. how he shall with one hand lay the piece again upon the
shoulder, being very ready with the other hand, to hold it fast there upon.

In the 33. how he having the piece upon his shoulder, going to be sentinel
shall hold and carye it again, like as is said at the first figure.

In the 34. how he standing sentenell and will make him ready, shall with
one hand take the piece from the shoulder, as is taught before.

In the 35. how he standing sentenell, and having taken the piece from the
shoulder, shall receive it in the left hand.

In the 36. how he (standing sentenell having the piece in the left hand)
shall hold the right arm or elbovv somvvhat from him with his hand at the
Seer, and the stock against the right hippe, like as this figure teatcheth.

In the 37. how he (standing sentenell) shall hold and govern the piece in
balance in the left hand, for to have the right hand at liberty.

In the 38. how he (standing sentenell) shall well and orderly take the match
out of the left hand with the thumb and second finger.

In the 36. how he (standing sentenell) shall bring the match with the thumb
and second finger toward the mouth, and blovv it of, holding in the mean
time the piece in balance in the left hand.

In the 40. how he (standing sentenell) shall with the thumb and second
finger Cock the match, without skruing the same in, as is taught before.

In the 41. how he (standing sentenell) shall with the thumb and second
finger guide and conveniently try the match.

In the 42. how that he (standing sentenell that upon any sodeine occasion he
may be ready) shall with the two foremost fingers cover the pan, to
prevent the falling of any sparks, provided alvvayes that his match be light
and Cockt, ready to discharge.

The words of Command. By which the Captains shall command their Soldiers
orderly, all what they have to do with the piece. Which words also agree
by order upon every figure.
1. Shoulder your Piece and march. 2. Vnshoulder your Piece. 3. And with the
right hand hold it up. 4. In the left hand take your Piece. 5. In the right
hand take your match. 6. Hold well your match and blovv it of. 7. Cock your
match. 8. Try your match. 9. Blovv your match, and open your pann. 10. Present
your Piece. 11. Give fire. 12. Take down your Piece, and in the left hand
hold it well. 13. Vncock your match. 14. And join it again betwixt your
fingers. 15. Blovv out your pan. 16. Proyme your pan. 17. Shut your pan. 18.
Shake of your pan. 19. Blovv of your pan. 20. Turn about your piece. 21. And
to your left side let it sink. 22. Open your charges. 23. Charge your piece.
24. Your skovvring-stick dravv out. 25. Your skovvring-stick take shorter. 26.
Ram your powder. 27. Your skovvring-stick dravv out your piece. 28. And take
it shorter. 29. Put up your skovvring-sticke. 30. With the left hand bring
forvvard your Piece. 31. And with the right hand hold it up. 32. Shoulder your
Piece. 33. Hold your Piece well upon your shoulder, and march to the place of
guard. 34. Vnshoulder your piece. 35. And in the left hand let it sink. 36.
Hold your Piece well. 37. With the left hand alone hold your Piece. 38. In
the right hand take your match. 39. Blovv of your match. 40. Cock your match.
41. Try your match. 42. Guard your pan and stand ready.
General Command.

Hold up the mouth of the Piece.

Here to must a Comandour look, and alvvayes have his eyes upon his Soldiers,
and use them to hold the Piece alvvayes vpvvards, for to prevent all mischief.

CORTE ONDERVVYSINGHE OP DE FIGVERLIICKE AFBEELDINGHE, BELANGHENDE t'rechte
ghebruyck des Roers, voor de jonghe often onervarene Schutten, vvelcke
onderrechtingh by syfer ghetal op elcke figure vervolghens is corresponderende.
End alsoo noch eenighe stilstaende figuren tot Schiltvvachten hier zijn by
gheuoecht, om te vvysen hoe den Soldaet in tijt van noot (met zijn Roer al
ghereet zijnde) staen sal, so accorderen oock de schriften hier van, op elcke
figure achtervolghens hun ghetal.
SCHVTTEN.
EErstelijck vvort even yeder Schudt in dese figure ghevvesen, hoe hy well staen
often Marcheren sal, met even zijn ghevveer als Roer, lont end rappier houden
end draghen sal, namentlijcken sal hy t'Roer met de sleutel bide schouderen
comen laten end t'selfde met de lincker handt, niet onder aent eynde vande
lade, maer ontrent het duym gadt houden, draghende t'selfde altijt achter om
hooch, om soet Roer onversiens los gonghe, zijn ghesel gheen schade te done,
end de lont die aen beyden enden branden moet tusschen de tvvee kleynste
vingheren vande selfde handt voeghen, end die selfde binnen de lade
nedervvaerts hanghen laten, om die t'allen tijden langher te connen maecken
end het even deel om t'ander te moghen ghebruycken end vervvisselen, sal mede
altijt behalven flessche often laet maten, even cleyn flesken met laedt poluer
draghen, omme daer vvt alleen, end niet vvt de flessche, often maten het polver
in de pan te done.

Ten 2. hoe hy int voortagen als hy sich te schieten verdich maecken sal, zijn
Roer vanden hals afnemen moet, te vveten hy en sal het Roer niet met de lincker
handt vande schouderen trecken, maer alleen met de rechter handt (ghelijck dese
figure bevvijst) achter de groote schrouve. midts het Roer aldaer gevvichts
halven licht is, aengrypen, end alsoo met even handt daer deur men sie dat hy
des Roers machtich sy, afnemen, latende t'Roer even vveynich inde lincker handt
sincken sonder t'lichaem daer nae te crommen often te buyghen.

Ten 3. hoe hy t'Roer regieren end houden sal eer hy t'selfde inde lincker
hant nemet, te vveten hy sal t'Roer met de rechte handt om hooch int ghevvichte
houden, sonder aen het lijf te gheraecken, end de lincker handt ghereet
hebben, om het Roer te ghemoet te comen, end t'selfde daer in te ontfanghen.

Ten 4. hoe hy t'Roer, als hijt inde lincker hant heeft int stae^ end voort
gae^, niet alleen licht end well draghen, maer oock het selfde alsoo int
ghevvicht met de selfde hant houden sal, dat het noch te hooch noch te leech en
sy, end alsoo zijn ghesel indient Roer onversiens los ginghe gheen schade toe
en voege, settende om lichtheyt end vasticheyt vville den ellenboghe tegen de
heupe, gelijck dese figure aenvvijst.

Ten 5. hoe hy de lont well end met voordeel vvt de lincker handt met den duym
end den tvveeden vingher nemen sal, houdende altijt t'Roer in even bequame
hoochte, so well om de lichtheyt als ooc om zijn ghesel onversiens gheen
schade te done, end al is it so datmen (om redenen) generalijcken seyt, de
lonte te vaetten tusschen den duym end den tvveeden vingher, men nochtans niet
en vvil segghen, dat even yeghelijck daer so vast inghehouden sy, often hy en
match de selfde well tusschen den duym end de tvvee voorste vinghers vatten,
indien hem sulckx ghemacklijcker viel.

Ten 6. hoe hy de lonte affblase end tusschen den duym end den tvveeden
vingher well houden sal, eer hy de selfde op den haen drucket, te vveten hy sal
bequamelijck de lont ontrent den mont brenghen end de selfste onder de hant
affblasen, sonder daer nae seer te bocken, ghelijck dese figure aenvvijst.

Ten 7. hoe hy de lonte op den haen met den duym end den tvveeden vingher
drucken, end niet in schroeven sal, om gheen tijt te verliesen, well
verstaende dat hy altijt te voren de vvijdde vanden haen nae de dickte der
lonte rechten moet, ten eynde hy des te rasscher verdich sy, end schieten match.

Ten 8. hoe hy de lonte met voordeel versoecken, end met den duym end den
tvveeden vingher, de selfde regieren sal, op dat hy de selve terstont langher
corter, als oock hoogher maecken can, end de selfde alsoo stellen, dat hem
zijn Roer int schieten niet en vveyghere.

Ten 9. hoe hy t'seffens, de lonte rasch end well affblasen, end met even
gheblasen hebbende, well met openen armen, end met tvvee voorste vinghers
der pan decksel voorde voncken decken, end de selve opdoen sal, sonder sich
daer nae te crommen often te buyghen, brenghende t'Roer met bequaemheyt nae den
mont toe, ghelijck dese figure aenvvijst.

Ten 10. hoe hy van boven nedervvaerts, end niet van onderen opvvaerts
aenleggen sal, op dat hy zijn ghesel die voor hem sy (so t'Roer onversiens los
ginghe) gheen schade en do, oock om dat den coghel (die altijt inder haest
niet en kan ghevoedert vverden) niet vvt en roll.

Ten 11. hoe hy dat Roer teghen die borst setten, end aen legghen, t'hooft
sincken, den rechten ellenboge om hooch houden, end met het lichaem recht end
kloeck staen, end op dat het Roer op de borst, end niet op de schouderen
aengheleght vverde, t'lichaem daer nae voeghen sal, daer beneffens hoe hy het
lincker been, dat voorstaen moet, buyghen, end t'rechter dat achter staen
moet, stijff houden sal, ten eynde hy t'Roer des te ghevvisser regieren, end
los schieten (als mede aenlegghen) kan.

Ten 12. hoe hy gheschoten hebbende t'Roer well vande kaecke aff done, end om
hooch houden sal, omme soo't Roer ghevveyghert had zijn ghesel andervverff
gheen schade te done.

Ten 13. hoe hy de lonte well, end op dat hyse selver niet vvt en lessche, met
de selve vinghers daer mede hy de selfde opgheset heeft, vanden haen afnemen
end niet trecken moet.

Ten 14. hoe hy de lonte vveder tusschen de vinghers voeghen sal, daer hyse int
op maecken vvt had ghenomen, blyvende altijt zijn Roer voor om hooch houdende.

Ten 15. hoe hy inde pan de vvelcke noch open staende, end t'Roer los
gheschoten zijnde blasen sal, op dat de laedt flessche so daer even voncxken op
vvaer blyven legghen, niet aen en gae, end hy selve schade lyde, maeckende (om
tijt te vvinnen) ondertusschen het laetflesken ghereet.

Ten 16. hoe hy dat laet polver op de pan vvt het laetflesken, end niet vvt
die maten, often groote flessche done sal, omme doort verrucken van dien, of
andersins, gheen tijt te verliesen, houdende midlertijt het Roer om redenen
voorsz, voor om hooch.

Ten 17. hoe hy de pan met de voorsten vingher toe done sal, ghelijck dese
figure aenvvijst.

Ten 18. hoe hy t'polver so daer vvat op der pan decksel vvaer blijven
ligghen affschudden sal, op dat vvanneer hy de lonte versoecken vvilde, het
Roer niet onversiens los en gae.

Ten 19. hoe hy t'polver, niet teghenstaende hy t'selve afgheschudt heeft,
andermael afblasen sal, om all sekerheyts vville.

Ten 20. hoe hy vvillende vvederom laden, het Roer met de lincker hant
omdraeyen sal, omme vvelckes bequamelijck te done, so sal hy t'selfde met de
rechte handt onder, nae de lincker zijde toe stieren.

Ten 21. hoe hy t'Roer neffens de lincker zyde laten sincken sal, end met de
rechterhant nae de flessche often bandelier vatten.

Ten 22. hoe hy de mate vande flesche open done sal, often indien hy even
bandelier droech so salt selfde gheschieden ghelijck het bide Musquettiers
ghevvesen vvort.

Ten 23. hoe hy vvt de mate vande groote flessche het polver int Roer done sal,
houdende altijt hetRoer vander acrden, indien hy des selfde machtich sy.

Ten 24. hoe hy den laedtstock met even verdraeyde handt vvt de lade sal
trecken, end t'Roer vander aerden houden, ghelijck dese figure bevvijst.

Ten 25. hoe hy, vvillende den laedtstock cort vaeten, den selfden omghekeert
teghens het lijf aen stooten sal, end de hant verdichlijck naert beneden eynde
schuyuen, om den seluen des te gevvisser int Roer te brengen, end indien hy
met scherp vvilde schieten, sal hy het loot met de selfde hant, daer hy den
laetstock alsoo cort in ghevat heeft, vvt den mont, often van daer hy de kogels
draecht, verdichlijcken nemen, end int Roer vallen laten.

Ten 26. hoe hy met den laedtstock het poluer end het loodt samen int Roer
stampen sal, houdende het Roer altijt vander aerden, ghelijck dese figure
aenvvijst.

Ten 27. hoe hy vveder den laedtstock met even verdraeyde handt vvt het Roer
trecken sal, houdende altijt t'Roer vander aerden.

Ten 28. hoe hy om den laetstock corter te vatten, den selfden vveder teghen
het lijf aenstooten sal, gelijck te voren gheseyt is.

Ten 29. hoe hy hebbende den laedtstock heel onder aent eynde ghevat, den
selfden met ghevvisheyt verdichlijck vveder inde lade steecken sal.

Ten 30. hoe hy vvillende t'Roer vveder inde rechter hant vatten, t'selfde
eerst met de lincker hant voor brenghen sal, ghelijck dese figure aenvvijst.

Ten 31. hoe hy t'Roer inde rechter handt onder aende groote schroeve vatten,
end om hooch houden sal, ghereedt zijnde om t'selfde vveder op de schouder te
legghen.

Ten 32. hoe hy t'Roer alleen met even handt vveder op de schouder legghen sal,
vvesende terstont ghereet met d'ander hant, om t'selfde daer op well te houden.

Ten 33. hoe hy t'Roer op schouder hebbende, (gaende nae de schiltvvacht)
t'selfde ghelijck bide eerste figure gheseyt is, vveder houden end draghen sal.

Ten 34. hoe hy op de schiltvvacht staende, end vvillende hem verdich maken,
t'Roer vveder als voren gheseyt is, met even hant vande schouder afnemen sal.

Ten 35. hoe hy op de schiltvvacht staende, t'Roer vande schouder ghenomen
hebbende t'selfde inde lincker handt ontfanghen sal.

Ten 36. hoe hy staende op de schiltvvacht, t'Roer inde lincker handt hebbende,
den rechten arm van sich de hant aenden drucker, end de lade aende rechter
heupe houden sal, ghelijck dese figure bevvijst.

Ten 37. hoe hy staende op de schilt vvacht, t'Roer inde lincker handt alleen,
int ghevvichte well houden end regieren sal, op dat hy de rechter vry hebben
match.

Ten 38. hoe hy staende op de schiltvvacht, de lonte well end met voordeel vvt
de lincker hant, met den duym end den tvveeden vingher nemen sal.

Ten 39. hoe hy staende op de schiltvvacht, de lonte met den duym end den
tvveeden vingher, naer den mont brenghen end onder de hant afblasen sal,
houdende ondertusschen het Roer met de lincker hant alleen int ghevvichte.

Ten 40. hoe hy staende op de schiltvvacht, de lonte met den duym end den
tvveeden vingher op den haen drucken sal, sonder de selfde, ghelijck te voren
gheseyt is, in te schroeven.

Ten 41. hoe hy staende opde schiltvvacht, de lonte met den duym end den
tvveeden vingher regieren, end met voordeel versoecken sal.

Ten 42. hoe hy staende op de schiltvvacht, omme in tijt van noot ghereet te
zijn, met de lonte opgheset staen, end de pan voor de voncken (met tvvee
voorste vingheren) bedecken sal.

De vvoorden van commandment. VVaer mede de Capiteynen hun Soldaten
vervolghehs ghebieden al t'ghene sy met het Roer hebben te done, vvelcke
vvoorden oock vervolghens op elcke figure zijn accorderende.
1. Op u schouder u Roer well hout end Marcheert. 2. Van u schouder u Roer
neemt. 3. End met de rechter hant om hooch hout. 4. Inde lincker handt u Roer
neemt. 5. V lonte inde rechterhant neemt. 6. V lont afblaest, end well hout.
7. V lont opdruckt. 8. V lont versoeckt. 9. V lont afblaest end u pan opent.
10. V Roer aenleght. 11. Schiet. 12. V Roer affneemt end met lincker hant
well hout. 13. V lont afneemt. 14. End vveder tusschen de vinghers voecht. 15.
V pan affblaest. 16. Op u pan polver doet. 17. V pan toedoet. 18. V pan
affschut. 19. V pan affblaest. 20. V Roer omdraeyt. 21. End neffens u lincker
zijde sincken laet. 22. V mate open doet. 23. V Roer ladet. 24. V laedtstock
vvttrect. 25. V laedtstock cort vat. 26. V polver near stamped. 27. V laedt
stock vvt u Roer trect. 28. End cort vat. 29. V laedt stock op steect. 30. V
Roer met de lincker hant voor brenght. 31. End met rechter hant om hooch
hout. 32. Op u schouder u Roer leght. 33. Op u schouder u Roer well hout, end
Marcheert nae de schiltvvacht. 34. Van u schouder u Roer neemt. 35. End inde
lincker hant sincken laet. 36. V Roer well hout. 37. V Roer inde lincker hant
alleen hout. 38. V lont inde rechter hant vat. 39. V lont affblaest. 40. V lont
opdruct. 41. V lont versoect. 42. V pan decked, end ghereet staet.
Generael commandment.

V loop om hooch hout.

Hier op moet besonder even bevel hebber acht nemen, dat hy altijt het oogh op
zijn Soldaten hebbe end hunluyden gevvenne t'Roer altijt met den loop om hooch
te houden, om all ongelucken te verhoeden.

IDGheyn. in, 1


2


3


4


5


6


7


8


9


10


11


12


13


14


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


22


23


24


25


26


27


28


29


30


31


32


33


34


35


36


37


38


39


40


41


42


SHORT INSTRVCTION FOR THE FIGVRES; SO MVCH AS CONCERNS THE RIGHT USE OF
MVSkett for the young or inexpert Soldier, which instruction does orderly
agree with the Cipher letters of each figure. And because there be some
figures of stilstandinghe postures here after annexed, as found fit for
sentinels to use, to show how a soldier in time of need shall stand ready
with his Musket in the Musket rest, therefore are the said instructions
follovving appropriated to every figure according to their number.
MVSKETTIER.
FIrst of all is shevved to every Muskettier, how he shall handsomely carye
his Musket and his Musket rest, That is to say: that he having the rest in his
right hand, shall at every pace when he goes, set it forevvard in the earth,
having a fore hand made a little string at it, for to trayle the same if need
be, letting the Musket come with the skrue (which is fast by the Seer) close
to the shoulder, the hand about the hollovve or thumplace, and the match
burning or kindled at both ends, betvveene the two smalest fingers, of the
same hand, lettingh the same hang down at the inside of the stock, because
he may put it up at all occasions (if need be) and to use the one and the other
end by changing, shall also alvvayes besides flaske or charges, have a tutch
box with tutch powder, to put only out of the same the powder in the pan.

In the 2. figure is shevved, how he shall in an other manner carye his Musket
rest, when he will make him ready to shoot, that is to say, he shall carye
the rest close to the Muskett in the left hand, letting the rest (so far als
the Iron is) come above the hand, like as this figure shows.

In the 3, how he shall, when he will take the Musket from his neck let the
Musket rest sink a little through the left hand without help of the right
hand, and together with the right hand alone, easelye take the Musket from his
shoulder, and take hold beyond the great skrue, because the Musket is there (in
regard of his weight) lighter, letting the same sink a little in the left
hand, without bending the body to it.

In the 4. how he shall hold up the Musket with the right hand only for to
receive the same with the rest in the left hand, that is: he shall not let the
Musket fall in the other hand, but shall meet it with the left hand, and join
the same betwixt the thumb and the rest handsomelye.

In the 5. how he shall hold the Musket with the rest in the left hand only,
and that the Musket be neither to high nor to low, but in balance, and have
his right hand free, setting the elbovve for the more strenght, against his
hyppe, without trayling the Musket rest, onles the soldier wear to vveake
or to vvearye.

In the 6. how he shall well and readily take the match out of the left hand
with the thumb and the second finger holding ever the Musket in a due height.

In the 7. (having taken the match betwixt the thumb and second finger) how
he shall bring the match to the mouth and blovv it of without bovvinge him to
much toward it.

In the 8. how with the thumb and second finger he shall orderly cock the
match, and not skrue it in having before directed the vvideneffe of the cock
to the thickness of the match.

In the 9. how he shall handsomely try and govern the match with the
thumb and second finger to the end he may presently set it higher, lovver,
longer or shorter.

In the 10. how he shall blovv of the match and together with the two fore
fingers cover the pan lidde (for fear of sparks falling therein) and also open
the same handsomely.

In the 11. how having laid the Musket in the rest (keeping alvvayes the
mouth of it at a reasonable height) setting the left leg before and the
Musket rest so me what forvvard, he shall be then ready to present.

In the 12. how he shall present well and hold the Musket and the rest in the
left hand, bearing the right arm or elbovv somvvhat up and turning a little
the body to the left side, the left knee bovved and the right leg straight,
and this not only for fashions sake, but also that the Muskett may be held
and shot of the surer. Besides must be regarded that when he will present,
he set the Musket hard (not against the shoulder) but against the breast: for it
is so more graceful besides he shall not lay his cheek to the stock before
he have set the Musket to his breast, because it has other vvayes no grace,
much less can he shoot surely but to the contrary for the most part slubbers
it over in haste.

In the 13. how he having discharged shall trust the Musket a little forvvard,
take up the rest and hold the same with the Musket in the same hand, and not
trayle it, onles he were to vvearie holding alvvayes the Musket up, for fear
of hurting any man, if the Musket should chance not to have gone of.

In the 14. how he shall oderley take the match out of the cock with the
same fingers he put it in, not pluckinge or snatchinge it out for fear of
deadinge the coal.

In the 15. how he shall join again the match betwixt the fingers where he
has taken it out, and ever hold the Musket in a meet height.

In the 16. how he shall blovv of the sparks, if any be remained in the pann,
to the end the tutch-boxe do not take fire, when he will put powder in it,
where by he might hurt him self, having in the mean time the tutch-boxe in
the right hand, for to loose no time.

In the 17. how he shall put powder in the pann out of the tutch box, and not
out of the charges, because the charges are drawn to and fro in charginge,
and that is a great hinderance to the quicknes required in shooting.

In the 18. how he shall shutt the pan with the fore finger like, as this
figure shows.

In the 19. how he shall cast the tutch powder from the pann lidde, to the
end the Musket do not go of vnadvisedlye when he comes to try the match.

In the 20. how he shall blovv the powder of the pann lidde if any were
remained there on, for more assurance.

In the 21. how (to charge again) he shall turn the Musket with the rest
guydinge, or as it were, steeringe the same at the lovver part or end with
the right hand toward the left side.

In the 22. how he having turned the Musket shall let the same sink to the
left side and trayle the rest, and to do it more convenientlye the right hand
must presently succor the left.

In the 23. how he shall trust open the charges with the tumbe, trayle the
rest and hold the Musket from the ground, if he be able.

In the 24. how he shall charge the Musket out of the charges, letting the
Musket rest yet trayle, but no way sufferinge the Musket to come to the
ground, if he be not to vvearie.

In the 25. how he shall with a turned hand dravv the skovvringstick out of
the stock, traylinge the rest but not the Musket.

In the 26. (desirous to take shorter the skovvring-stick) how he shall thrust
the same (turned) against the body letting the hand slip hastily to the
nether end for to bring it the surer in the Musket and if he will shoot
with a bullet, he shall with the same hand that took shorter the
skovvring-stick, take speedely the bullet out of his mouth or place where he
usually carries them, and so let it fall or roll into the Musket.

In the 27. how he shall with the skovvring-stick ram the powder and bullet
together in the Musket trayling still the rest but not the Musket, if he be
strong enough.

In the 28. how he shall with a turned hand dravv the skovvring stick out of
the Musket again, trayling the rest but the Musket from the ground, if he be
able.

In the 29. how (to take the skovvring-stick shorter) he shall set the same
again to the body, as is said before.

In the 30. how (having the skovvring-stick under at the end) he shall put
the same surely and speedely again in the stock.

In the 31. how (desiring to take the Musket again in the right hand) he
shall first bring it forvvard with the left hand, like as this figure shows.

In the 32. how he shall take the Musket again with the right hand at the
great skrue and hold it up, letting the Muskett rest (which is yet trayling)
come forvvard the lenght off the string, to make it come readely in the left
hand.

In the 33. how he shall lightlye with one hand lay the Musket upon the
shoulder, and yet in the mean time hold the rest.

In the 34. how he, having laid the Musket upon the shoulder, shall again
carrye and hold the same, as is already said.

In the 35. how he (desiringe to make him ready, standing sentinel) shall
with one hand again (as is said) take the Musket from the shoulder.

In the 36. how, when he is in his place of sentinel and will fashion him
felfe to his posture or guard, he shall lay the Musket in the rest, like as
this figure teatcheth.

In the 37. how (being now sentinel, and the Musket lay in the rest) he
shall bear his right arm or elbovv from him, holding his hand at the Seer, and
keeping the stock of the piece close to his right hippe: like as this figure
shows.

In the 38. how he, standing sentenell, shall hold before him the Musket in
the rest, so that he (having the Musket in balance) may govern the same
with the left hand only, and have free the right hand: as this figure
shows.

In the 39. how he (standing sentinel) shall take the match well and
convenientlye with the thumb and fore finger out of the left hand.

In the 40. how he (standinge sentinel) shall with the thumb and fore
finger bring the match to his mouth and blovv it of under the hand, holdinge in
the mean time the Musket in due balance upon the Rest, and that with the
left hand only.

In the 41. how he (standing sentinel) with the tumbe and fore finger shall
cock the match without skruyng the same in, as is said before.

In the 42. how he (standinge sentinel) with the thumb and fore finger
shall guide and try the match handsomelye, holding (as is said) the Musket
still in balance.

In the 43. how he (standing sentinel to be ready in time of need) shall
stand with his match cockte and the pan guarded (for fear of sparks) with
the two fore fingers.

The words of Command. Where by the Capitaynes shall orderly command their
Soldiers all what they have to do with their Musket and Musket rest, which
words are also agreeing by order with every figure.
1. March with the Musket rest in your hand. 2. March, and with the Musket
carye the rest. 3. Sink your rest and vnshoulder your Musket. 4. Hold up your
Musket with the right hand and let it sink in the left. 5. In the left hand
hold your Musket and carye your rest with it. 6. Take your match in the right
hand. 7. Blovv of your match and hold it well. 8. Cock your match. 9. Try
your match. 10. Blovv of your match and open your pann. 11. Hold up your Musket
and present. 12. Give fire. 13. Take down your Musket and carye it with your
rest. 14. Vncock your match. 15. And put it again betwixt your fingers. 16.
Blovv your pan. 17. Proyme your pan. 18. Shut your pan. 19. Cast of your pan.
20. Blovv your pan. 21. Cast about your Musket. 22. Trayle your rest. 23. Open
your charges. 24. Charge your Musket. 25. Dravv out your skovvring-stick. 26.
Shorten your skovvring-sticke. 27. Ram in your powder. 28. Dravv your
skovvringe-sticke out of your Musket. 29. Shorten your skovvringe-sticke. 30.
Put up your skovvringe-sticke. 31. Bring your Musket forvvard with the left
hand. 32. And hold it up with the right hand and recover your rest. 33.
Shoulder your Musket. 34. March and carye your rest with your Musket. 35.
Vnshoulder your Musket. 36. Lay your Musket in the rest. 37. Hold your Musket
on the rest. 38. Hold your Musket in the rest, and with the left hand only in
balance. 39. Take your match in the right hand. 40. Blovv of your match. 41.
Cock your match. 42. Try your match. 43. Guard your pann, and be ready.
General Command.

Hold up your Musket.

And in regard it is a matter of no small consequence, a comandour shall
alvvayes have a special care and eye to his Soldiers to accustom them to
hold ever the Musket with the mouth up, the better to prevent all mischieff.

CORTE ONDERRECHTINGHE OP DE FIGVERLIICKE AFBEELDINGHE, SO VEEL AENgaet het
recht ghebruyck vant Musket, voor de jonghe often onervaren Soldaten, vvelcke
onderrechting by sijfer ghetal op elcke figure vervolghens is corresponderende.
End alsoo noch eenighe stilstaende figueren tot schiltvvachten hier achter aen
gevoecht zijn, om te vvijsen hoe den Soldaet in tijt van noot met zijn Musket
inde furquet liggende, al ghereet end verdich staen sal, so accorderen oock
de schriften van dese, op elcke figure vervolghens hun ghetal.
MVSQVETTIER.
TEn Eersten vvort even yder Musquettier ghevvesen hoe hy int voortgaen zijn
Musket end furquet, bequamelijcken draghen sal, als te vveten dat hy,
hebbende de furquet inde rechter handt, de selfde int voortgaen, t'elcke mael
op der aerden voort setten sal, hebbende oock daer aen te voeren even koordeken
vast ghemaeckt, om de selfde alst van noode sy te moghen sleypen, latende het
Musket met de sleutel dicht by de schouder comen, de hant ontrent het duym
gat, end de lonte die aen beyde eynden branden moet tusschen de tvvee cleynste
vinghers vande selfde hant voeghen, end de selfde binnen de lade nedervvaerts
hanghen laten, om die t'allen tijden langher te connen maecken, end het even
deel om t'ander te moghen gebruycken end vervvisselen, sal mede altijt
behalven flessche often laedt maten even cleyn flesken met laedt polver dragen, om
daer vvt alleen het polver inde pan te done.

Ten 2. hoe hy op even ander maniere zijn furquet draghen sal, als hy hem tot
schieten sal vvillen verdich maecken, te vveten hy sal het furquet neffens de
Musket inde lincker hant draghen, latende de furquet so langhe het yser is
boven de hant schieten, ghelijck dese figure bevvijst.

Ten 3. hoe hy de furquet vvanneer hy de Musket vanden hals nemen vvil, deur
de linckerhant sonder hulpe der rechter even vveynich sal laten sincken, end
met (...) (...) Musket lichteliick vande schouder met de rechter hant alleen
nemen, end achter de groote schroeve aengrijpen, om diesvvil het Musket
aldaer gevvichts halven lichst is, latende t'selfde even vveynich inde lincker
handt sincken, sonder t'lichaem daer nae te crommen often te buyghen.

Ten 4. hoe hy de Musket met de rechter hant alleen om hooch houden sal, om
t'selfde neffens de furquet inde lincker hant te ontfanghen, als te vveten hy
en sal het Musket in d'ander hant niet laten vallen, maer sal met de lincker
hant de Musket te ghemoet comen, end t'selfde daer tusschen de furquet end
den duym bequamelijcken in voeghen.

Ten 5. hoe hy de Musket neffens de furquet inde lincker hant alleen, mits dat
de Musket noch te hooch noch te leech en sy int ghevvichte houden, end de
rechter hant vry hebben sal, settende den ellenboghe om meerder vasticheyts
vville teghens de heupe, sonder de furquet te slepen, ten vvaer den Soldaet te
svvack often moede vvaer.

Ten 6. hoe hy de lonte well, end met voordeel vvt de lincker hant, met den
duym end den tvveeden vinger nemen sal, houdende altijt het Musket in even
bequame hoochte.

Ten 7. hoe hy de lonte, de vvelcke hy tusschen den duym end den tvveeden
vinger ghevat heeft, naer den mont brengen end afblasen sal, sonder daer naer
seer te boucken.

Ten 8. hoe hy de lonte metten duym end den tvveeden vingher well op drucken,
end niet inschrouven sal, ten vvelcken eynde hy die vvijte vanden haen nae de
dickte der lonte gherecht moet houden.

Ten 9. hoe hy de lonte met voordeel versoecken end metten duym end den
tvveeden vingher regieren sal, op dat hy de selve terstont langer, corter, als
oock hooger end legher maecken can.

Ten 10. hoe hy de lonte affblasen sal, end met eene^, met de tvvee vorste
vingers der pan decksel (op datter geen voncken vande lont op en vallen)
decken, end de selve bequamelijck op done sal.

Ten 11. hoe hy de Musket inde furquet leggende, de selfde voor om hooch
houde^, het lincker been voor stellen, met even de furquet voorvvaerts vvt
setten, om als dan aen te legghen.

Ten 12. hoe hy well aenlegghen, en die Musket end furquet met de lincker
hant houden sal, den rechter arm om hooch, en t'lijff ghed. aeyt, de lincker
knie buyghen, end de rechter stijf houden, op dattet niet alleen te beter
staen, maer oock de Musket des te ghevvisser gehouden, end geschoten moechte
vverden, daer beneffens moet achtinghe ghenomen vvorden vvanneer hy aenlegghen
vvil, dat hy de Musket vvelstaens halven, heart aensette, end dat niet teghen
de schouder maer teghen de borst, ooc niet eer de kaecke teghen de lade
legghen, hy en hebbe dan de Musket te voren teghen de borst gheset, alsoot
anders gheen gratie en heeft, veel vveynigher men ghevvisselijck schieten can,
maer men sich meerendeels verhaestet.

Ten 13. hoe hy gheschoten hebbende, de Musket even vveynich voorsich stooten
sal, de furquet vvederom opnemen end deselve inde hant vast, neffens de
Musket houden, end niet slepen sal, ten vvare hy te svvack vvare, houdende
altijt de Musket omhooch om ^emant (so de Musket ghevveyghert had) te
quetsen.

Ten 14. hoe hy de lonte well, end op dat hijse selver niet vvt en lessche,
met de vinghers daer mede hy de selfde op gheset heeft, vanden haen nemen end
niet trecken moet.

Ten 15. hoe hy de lonte vveder tusschen de vingheren, daer hijse te voren vvt
ghenomen heeft, voeghen sal, houdende altijt t'Musquet in bequame hoochte.

Ten 16. hoe hy de voncken, so daer op de pan iet mochte ligghen, affblasen
sal, op dat het laedtflesken niet aen en gae, als hy t'polver daer op schudden
vvil, vvaer door hy sich selven mochte quetsen, hebbende onder tusschen het
laedtflesken (om tijt te vvinnen) inde rechter hant ghereet ghevat.

Ten 17. hoe hy dat polver vvt het laedtflesken (end niet vvt de maten) op de
pan done sal, want de vvijle de maten ladens halven verruckt vvorden, so
hindert sulckx int verdich schieten seer.

Ten 18. hoe hy de pan met de voorste vingher toe done sal, ghelijck dese
figure bevvijst.

Ten 19. hoe hy het laedt polver vander pan decksel af schudden sal, ten
eynde de Musket, vvanneer hy de lonte versoecken vvil, niet onversiens los en
gae.

Ten 20. hoe hy ten overvlo^^ dat laedt polver vander pan (...) ligghen, aff
blasen sal, om all seeckerheyts vville.

Ten 21. hoe hy de Musket (omme vveder te laden) met de furquet omdraeyen sal,
stierende de selfde beneden met de rechter hant, naer de lincker zijde toe.

Ten 22. hoe hy de Musket omgedraeyt hebbende, de selfde neffens de lincker
zijde late^ sincke^, end de furquet slepen sal, en om sulckx bequamelijck te
connen done, moet de rechte hant de lincker terstont te hulpe comen.

Ten 23. hoe hy de mate met den duym open douvven sal, de furquet laten slepen,
end de Musket vander aerden houden, indien hy de selfde machtich sy.

Ten 24, hoe hy, vvt de mate de Musket laden sal, latende de furquet noch al
slepen, sonder de Musket teghen d aerde te slepen, ten vvare hy te svvack
vvaer.

Ten 25. hoe hy den laedtstock met even verdraeyde hant, vvt de lade trecken
sal, end de furquet als noch laten slepen, maer niet de Musket.

Ten 26, hoe hy vvillende den laedtstock corter vatten, den selfden omgekeert
teghen t'lijff aen stooten sal, schuyvende de hant terstont naert beneden eynde
toe, om des te ghevvisser den selfden inde Musket te connen steecken, end
indien hy met scherp vvilde schieten, sal hy het loot met de selfde hant, daer
hy den laedt stoc alsoo cort in ghevaet heeft, vvt den mont, often van daer hy de
koghels draecht, verdichlijcken nemen, end int Musket rollen laten.

Ten 27. hoe hy met de laedtstock, het polver end het loot samen int Musket
stampen sal, latende de furquet noch al slepen, maer niet de Musket, indien hy
de selsde machtich sy.

Ten 28. hoe hy vveder de laedt stoc met even verdraeyde hant vvt het Musket
treckensal, de furquet slepen, end de Musket vander aerden houden indien hy
des machtich sy.

Ten 29. hoe hy om den laedtstock corter te vatten, den selfden ander mael,
teghen het lijfaen stooten sal, als voorseyt is.

Ten 30. hoe hy hebbende den laedtstock heel onder aent eynde ghevat, den
selfden met ghevvisheyt verdichlijck vveder inde lade steecken sal.

Ten 31. hoe hy vvillende d'Musquet vveder inde hant vatten, t'selfde eerst met
de lincker hant voor-brenghen sal, ghelijck dese figure bevvijst.

Ten 32. hoe hy de Musket met rechterhant by de groote schrouve vvederom
vatten end om hooch houden sal, latende de furquet (die noch sleypt) so lanck
het coordeken is voor vvt schieten, om met voordeel de selfde te done inde
lincker hant comen.

Ten 33. hoe hy de Musket well lichtlijcken end met even hant op de schouder
legghen, end ondertusschen de furquet houden sal.

Ten 34. hoe hy hebbende de Musket op de schouder gheleght, de selfde (vveder
als voren) houden end draghen sal.

Ten 35. hoe hy vvillende hem (op de schilt vvacht staende) verdich maecken,
zijn Musket vveder als voren gheseyt is, met even hant vande schouder aff nemen
sal.

Ten 36. hoe hy vvillende hem stellen op de schilt vvacht, het Musket inde
furquet leggen sal, ghelijck dese figure bevvijst.

Ten 37. hoe hy staende op de schilt vvacht, de Musket inde furquet ligghende,
den rechten arm van sich, de hant aenden drucker, end de lade aende rechter
heupe houden sal, ghelijck dese figure bevvijst.

Ten 38. hoe hy staende op de schiltvvacht, de furquet met de Musket daer inn
leggende, voorsich houden sal, sulckx dat hy de Musket int ghevvichte, end
met de lincker hant alleen regieren, end de rechter vry hebben match: ghelijck
de figure bevvijst.

Ten 39. hoe hy staende op de schiltvvacht, de lonte well end met voordeel
(vvt de lincker hant) met den duym end den tvveeden vingher nemen sal.

Ten 40. hoe hy staende op de schiltvvacht, de lonte, met den duym end den
tvveeden vingher, naer den mont brenghen end onder de hant afblasen sal. (...)
he^ Musket inde furquet (met de lincker hant alleen) int ghevvichte legghen.

Ten 41. hoe hy staende op de schiltvvacht de lonte met den duym end den
tvveeden vingher op den haen drucken sal, sonder de selfde (ghelijck te voren
gheseyt is) in te schroeven.

Ten 42. hoe hy staende op de schiltvvacht, de lonte met den duym end den
tvveeden vingher regeren, end met voordeel versoecken sal, houdende als
gheseyt is het Musket int ghevvichte.

Ten 43. hoe hy staende op de schiltvvacht, omme in tijt van noot ghereet te
zijn, met de lonte opgheset staen, end de pan voor de voncken met de tvvee
voorste vingheren bedecken sal.

Devvoorden van commandment. VVaer door de Capiteynen hun Soldaten vervolghens
ghebieden al t'ghene sy met hun Musket end furquet hebben te done, vvelcke
vvoorden oock vervolghens op elcke figure zijn accorderende.
1. Marcheert met de furquet inde hant. 2. Marcheert end draecht de furquet
neffens de Musket. 3. V furquet sincken laet, en van u schouder u Musket
neemt. 4. Met rechter hant u Musket om hooch hout, end inde lincker hant
sincken laet. 5. Inde lincker ha^t u Musket neemt, end u furquet neffens de
Musket draecht. 6. V lonte inde rechterhant neemt. 7. V lont afblaest, end
well hout. 8. V lont opdruckt. 9. V lont versoeckt. 10. V lont afblaest, en u
pan opent. 11. V Musket om hooch hout end aenlegt. 12. Schiet. 13. V Musket
afneemt end neffens u furquet draecht. 14. V lont afneemt. 15. End voechtse
vveder tusschen de vinghers. 16. V pan affblaest. 17. Op u pan polver doet. 18.
V pan toedoet. 19. V pan affschut. 20. V pan affblaest. 21. V Musket omdraeyt.
22. End u furquet sleypt. 23. V mate op doet. 24. V Musket ladet. 25. V
laedtstock vvttrect. 26. V laedtstock cort vat. 27. V polver near stamped. 28. V
laedtstock (...) u Musket ^rect. 29. V laedtstock cort vat. 30. V laedtstock
op steect. 31. V Musket met de lincker hant voor brenght. 32. End met de
rechter hant om hooch hout, end u furquet hervat. 33. Op u schouder u Musket
leght. 34. Marcheert end draecht de furquet neffens de Musket. 35. Van u
schouder u Musket neemt. 36. V Musket inde furquet leght. 37. Op u furquet u
Musket hout. 38. V Musket inde furquet, met de lincker hant alleen int
ghevvicht houdt. 39. V lont inde rechter hant vat. 40. V lont affblaest. 41. V
lont opdruct. 42. V lont versoect. 43. V pan decked, end ghereet staet.
Generael commandment.

V loop om hooch hout.

End alsoo hier in seer veel is gheleghen, so moet besonder even bevelhebber
hier op groote achtinghe nemen, end altijt zijn oogh op zijn Soldaten houden,
en deselve gevvennen t'Musquet altijt met den loop om hooch te houden, om te
verhoeden all ongelucken.

IDGheyn. in, 1


2


3


4


5


6


7


8


9


10


11


12


13


14


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


22


23


24


25


26


27


28


29


30


31


32


33


34


35


36


37


38


39


40


41


42


43


BRIEF INSTRVCTION UPON THE CONTREFAIC TINGES, CONCERNING THE RIGHT USE, OF ALL
what a Soldier needs to know in handling of the Pike, for the young or
vntrayned Soldier, which instruction agrees by number with every figure in
order.
PIKEMEN.
IN the using of the Pike is first shevved unto the Soldier how he (standing
still) shall hold the Pike before him, govern it against the thumb and take
it up in three times, That is to say: he shall not (for comelynes) set it
with in or without the right foot, but just before him in the same line:
well understanding that he is not bound to set the right foot alvvayes
before. His arm he shall hold not stretched out butt a little bended and his
hand about the height of his eyes.

In the 2. figure is shevved, how, before the first changeinge of his hold,
he shall with the right hand lift the Pike a little from the ground and take
it suddenly again with the left hand toward the nether end, leavinge so
much length belovve as he can afftervvardes reatch well with the right hand,
like as this figure does teatche.

In the 3. how he, before the second changeinge of hold, shall lift up the
Pike with the left hand and quickly with the right hand take the same at the
end.

In the 4. how, before the third changeinge of hold, (having joined the Pike
with the left hand against the right arm) he shall govern the same against
the said arm and carry it up, or advanced.

In the 5. how (havinge carried the Pike advanced) he shall set the same
down upon the ground again in three times, like as before, that is: he shall
let the right hand with the Pike sink a little together, and for the first
changeinge of hands, with the left hand take the same vpvvards, like as this
figure teatchet.

In the 6. how, to change the second hold, he shall let the Pike sink with
the left hand and with the right hand quickly take the same heigher, like as
this figure shows.

In the 7. how, at the third changeinge of hold, he shall govern the Pike
with the right hand only and set it again upon the ground, as is taught in
the first figure, and if he will then lay the Pike upon the shoulder, he
shall do that again in three times, as follovveth.

In the 8 place is shevved, how, before the first changeinge of hold (havinge
the Pike in the right hand) he shall let the same fall over a little against
the thumb and presently take it with the left hand close to the right hand,
like as this figure shows.

In the 9. how he (before the second changeinge of hold) shall bring the Pike
forevvard with the left hand and with the right hand take hold backwards, the
more handsomely and gracefully to lay the Pike on the shoulder.

In the 10. how he (in the third changeinge of hold) shall carye the Pike
level upon the shoulder, hold the right arm up and the thumb against the
pike, not only for fashions sake, but because he may govern and carye the
same the better.

In the 11. how he shall carye the Pike slopinghe to avoid the danger of
hurting on an other when they march close: and in the next figure shall
beshevved how he (carrying the Pike level or slopinge) shall let the same
sink when soever he will come to port or otherways charge the pike, and
how he shall set the same at three times again upon the ground, and desiring
to lay the same upon the shoulder, shall do it at three times, as is taught
before, But when he carries the Pike advanced he shall charge the same at one
time.

In the 12. how he (before the first changeinge of hold) shall take the Pike
with the left hand speedely as far as he (standinge right) can reatch,
liftinge the same with the left hand up from the shoulder, the better and
with more ease to be able to cast the Pike over with the sharp end before.

In the 13. how he (before the second remoovinge of his hand) having brought
the Pike with the sharp end before, shall take the same with the right hand
under at the end and lettinge it sink handsomely dovvnevvards, shall so the
more conveniently pass through the port.

In the 14. how he (at the third time) shall duly charge the Pike, the right
arm stretched out, havinge the same well in the right hand, setting the left
elbovve fast against the hippe, and shall be taught how he shall set down
the Pike again at three times or motions.

In the 15. how he (before the first changeinge of hands) with his right hand
shall put down the butt end of the Pike, the better and more easelye to
raise the sharp end of the same.

In the 16. how he (before the second changeinge of hand) shall take hold of
the Pike with the right hand (above the left) so far as he easily can reach.

In the 17. how he shall at the third time, set the Pike down to the
ground, guide it against the thumb, and hold the same well as is said at the
first figure, and shall in the two next figures be shevved, how he carrying
the Pike up or advanced, shall charge the same at one time only, but because
in the former figures is sufficiently taught how he (the Pike standing down)
shall take it up again, it shall therefore be needless to demonstrate it
again with the figures, but thus much shall serve only for remembrance.

In the 18. how, havinge at three times (as is sufficiently said heretofore)
taken the Pike from the ground and the but end in his hand, he shall guide and
carrye the same advanced in the right hand against the same arm.

In the 19. how he (havinge the Pike advanced) shall take the same with the
left hand higher and at the same time charge vvithall, but if he desire to set
the Pike down again, he shall do it as is taught by the figures before. But
if (having charged the Pike) he would carrye the same again advanced, he
shall do it in one posture or motion.

In the 20. how (standing at a port at the marchinge in or out of any men) he
shall hold the Pike at the point like as this figure shows.

In the 21. how he (trayling the Pike) shall hold the same close at the point
and set the right hand above the hippe fast to the body, and if he will
charge or other vvayes carrye the same, then he must (as it were) measure the
Pike by palms, handling it with convenient distance, like as the two next
follovving figures shall show.

In the 22. how (before the first changeinge of hands havinge first so far as
he could put forvvard the Pike with the right hand) he shall (bendinge him
self a little) palm or hand-on the same speedely, taking it still from
beneath or belovve.

In the 23. how he (palminge forvvard) shall bring the Pike with the left
hand yet more forvvard, havinge brought the right hand which was the foremost
before, to be now behind upon the second change of the hand.

In the 24. how (havinge brought the Pike (by palminge) forvvard to the end
and having the same sure in his hand) he shall charge the same: but if he
would in the former manner (that is traylinge) carry the said Pike, let (him
by the said manner of palminge) bring the same backwards again. Here is to be
considered that (although there be but two palminge figures here set down,
which some might take as if it were said that just in three remooves of the
hand the Pike could be charged yet is not that our meaning, but that
follovving the example of those two palming figures, the learner must know
that he is to palm or hand the Pike (by shifting hands) so long till he have
recovered the lovver or butt end of the Pike into his right hand.

In the 25. how he (expectingt horsemen) shall set the Pike against the right
foot and dravv his svvord over the left arm, like as this figure shows.

In the 26. how, marchinge with the Pike upon the shoulder, he shall
conveniently turn him self to the left hand (if need be) and charge the Pike
backwards in three motions or remooues of the hand.

In the 27. how he (before the first changeinge his hold or remove of his
hand having first with the right hand advanced the Pike from the shoulder)
shall at the same time take hold of it some what forevvard with the left
hand, because in so doing he may more easily lift the Pike over his head.

In the 28. how (havinge the Pike over the head in the left hand and already
turned him self to the left side) he shall (for the second remooving of hold)
take the same with the right hand under at the end.

In the 29. how (as is said before) he shall the third time charge the Pike
backwards and stand turned about. The three follovvinge figures shall shevve
how he shall turn him self in three motions, and also how he shall stand or
march, like as is seen in the 26. figure.

In the 30. how he (before the first remoovinge of the hand) shall reach and
take the Pike farther with the left hand and prepare him self to turn.

In the 31. how (having already turned him self to the right side) he shall
lift the Pike over his head with the left hand and receive or take the same
somevvhat more backwards with the right hand.

In the 32. how he (for the third time) shall carry the Pike again in the
right hand upon the shoulder sloped, level or advanced, if need be.

And seeing experience teatcheth, that the soldier can not speedely nor
hansomely change the order of his Pike, but through knowledge how to handle
and hold the same well, therefore are there, for his better instruction,
certain words of command hereby annexed together with the times of
changeinge or remoovinge of the hands, which do altogether agree both with
the rules of instruction, as also with the Cipher numbers alloted to each
several picture, to the end that the Captains may show or theatch their
neevv vntrayned Soldiers the handlinge of the Pike after this manner, I mean
so much as is necessary for their use, but havinge once obtained the handling,
the Soldier shall be then exercised with the words of command only, which
words are set here after apart and without the distinctions of times, such as
here immediately follovv.

The words of Command. With the time of changeing of hold.
1. Your Pike standing down advaunce in three times or motions. 2. the first
Time or Motion. 3. the second Time or Motion. 4. the third Time or Motion. 5.
Order your Pike. the first Motion. 6. Order your Pike. second Motion. 7. Order
your Pike. third Motion. 8. Shoulder your Pike and carrye it level. the first
Time. 9. Shoulder your Pike and carrye it level. second Time. 10. Shoulder
your Pike and carrye it level. third Time. 11. Slope your Pike. 12. Port
your Pike. the first Time. 13. Port your Pike. second Time. 14. Port your
Pike. third Time. 15. Order your Pike. the first Motion. 16. Order your Pike.
second Motion. 17. Order your Pike. third Motion.
Advance your Pike in three Times or Motions.

18. These three have but one figure marked with the number 18. because the
other two are shevved before. 19. Charge your Pike in one motion. 20. Cheek
your Pike. 21. Trayle your Pike.
And palming your Pike charge.

22. Not bound to do this in three motions, 23. or times, as is said in the
instruction 24. numero 24. 25. Charge your Pike at the right foot and dravv
your svvord. 26. Your Pike being shouldered charge backwards in three times.
27. the first Time. 28. second Time. 29. third Time. 30. Right to your order
and your Pike slope. the first Motion. 31. Right to your order and your Pike
slope. second Motion. 32. Right to your order and your Pike slope. third
Motion.
The words of command in general, after which the Captains shall see their
Soldiers exercised when the Soldier is come so far that he can handle his
Pike as becomes, it is then to be understood that for orders sake these
words follovvinge (so far as is needful) are set down agreeinge to the
former which have their reference to the Pikemen, exceptinge some only which
in the order of the Pike do the same action that has been shevved enough by
the figures with their times or motions. Also that at the first command,
where is said advaunce your Pike, it is spoken to the first figure, that
stands still in order with his Pike set down, and the better to prevent
all confusion, must be remembered that every manner of carryinge or charginge of
the Pike must be done apart, and no other begone or taken in hand till the
first be done and the Pike set down in order again. To which purpose this
general command shall be used or observed.

Order your Pike.

Words of Command. With out their time of changeinge hold.
Advaunce your Pike. Set down your Pike. Shoulder your Pike. Level your
Pike. Slope your Pike. Port your Pike. Order your pike. Advaunce your pike.
Charge your pike. Order your pike. Cheek your pike. Order your pike. Trayle
your pike. Charge your pike. Order your pike. Charge your pike against the
right foot and dravv your svvord Order your pike. Shoulder your pike. Charge
your pike backwards. Right to your first order. Slope your pike.
And although these words of commannd follow after this manner because the
Pike must alvvayes be set down again, where by is thought that the
Soldiers cann the sooner learn the perfect or fast handlinge of the same, yet
is not the meaning that a man should be just bound to it alone, but he may
asvvell begin at the midst or any other place, as well as at the
beginning to do the Comands, and that as occasion serves, which stands in
the discretion of the expert Captain or Comandour.

WITH PRIVILEGE OF THE EMPEROVRS MATYE. THE FRENCH KINGS, AND THE LORDS
ESTATES of the United Provinces etc.
Where of the contence is such.

NO man of what quality or condition soever he be, shall undertake to
contrefaict this present bocke of the exercise of Arms, or any where else
contrefaited-sell the same, with in their Empire Kingdom or Lands, in the
time of eighr years follovvinge, be it in small or great, in part or whole,
neither the writings nor the figures, nor the order kept in this work, any
vvayes to follow without express consent or leave of Jacob de Gheyn upon
pain of loss of all the contrefaict work, and threescore pound sterling
besides, as more plainly is to seen in the principal letters give here of
unto him, etc.

A remembrance for the Bookebindere.
THe writings are (as also the figures) dealt af in three sundry parts, as
Calivres, Muskets and Pikes, and shall be bound-in after this fashion: The
vvrytinges of the Calivres before the figures of the same, and the other
writings likewise, each before their own figures.

CORTE ONDER VVYSINGHE OP DE FIGVERLIICKE AFBEELDINGHE, BELANGHENDE t'recht
ghebruyck, van al t'ghene even Soldaet int handelen vande Spies noodich is, voor
dejonghe often onervaren Soldaten, vvclcke ondervvijsinghe by'tghetal op elcke
figure vervolghens is corresponderende.
SPIES-DRAGHER.
INtexerceren vande Spies vvort den Soldaet eerstelijcken ghevvesen, hoe hy
stilstaende in ordeninghe de Spies voor sich well houden end teghens den duym
regeren, end in dry tijden opvvaerts draghen sal, als te vveten hy en sal de
Spies, vvelstaens halven binnen noch buyten den rechter voet setten, maer
ghenoechsaem op de selfde linie, sonder nochtans dat hy ghchouden sy den
rechter voet int stilstaen altijt voor testellen, den arm niet vvtghestrect
maer even vveynich gheboghen, end de hant so hooch alst ghesicht houden.

Ten 2. hoe hy voor de eerste hervattinghe, de Spies met de rechter hant even
vveynich vander aerden om hooch heffen sal, end met eenen de selfde
verdichlijck (met de lincker hant) nedervvaerts aen vatten, latende so veel
lencktc beneden, als hy hier naer met de rechter hant sal connen bereycken,
ghelijck dese figuere bevvijst.

Ten 3. hoe hy voor de tvveede hervattinghe de Spies met de lincker handt om
hooch heffen, end met de rechter de selfde onder aent eynde (verdichlijcken)
vatten sal.

Ten 4. hoe hy voor de derde hervattinghe, hebbende de Spies met de lincker
hant teghens den rechter arm ghevoecht, de selfde inde rechter hant teghens den
selfden arm regieren end opvvaerts draghen sal.

Ten 5. hoe hy hebbende den Spies opvvaerts gedrage^, de selfde vveder in dry
tijden als vore^, op der aerden neder setten sal, als te vveten hy sal de
rechter hant met de Spies t'samen even vveynich laten sincken, end de selfde
met de lincker hant, voor de eerste hervattinghe, opvvaerts aenvatten, ghelijck
dese figure bevvijst.

Ten 6. hoe hy om de tvveede hervattinghe te done, de Spies met de lincker hant
sal laten sincken, end met de rechter hant de selfde (met eenen) verdichlijck
hoogher vatten, ghelijck dese figure bevvijst.

Ten 7. hoe hy inde derde hervattinghe de Spies met de rechter hant alleen
regeren, end vveder als bide eerste figure gheseyt is, op der aerden
nedersetten sal, end vvillende als dan de Spies op schouder legghen salt
selfde vveder in drytijden gheschieden, als volghen sal.

Ten 8 hoe hy voor de eerste hervattinghe de Spies inde rechterhant hebbende de
selfde tegens den duym even vveynich sal laten overvallen, end met eenen
verdichlijck de selfde met de linckerhant dicht onder de rechter aenvatten,
ghelijck dese figure bevvijst.

Ten 9. hoe hy voor de tvveede hervattinghe de Spies met de lincker hant naer
voren brenghen, end met de rechter handt de selfde achtervvaerts aenvatten
sal, om de Spies alsoo bequaemlijck op de schouder te legghen.

Ten 10. hoe hy inde derde hervattinghe de Spies op de schouder plat dragen,
den rechter arm om hooch, end den duym teghen de Spies houden sal, ten eynde
hct niet alleen well en stae, maer dat hy de selfde dies te beter regieren end
draghen can.

Ten 11. hoe hy de Spies schuyns draghen sal, om vvanneermen dicht op even
Marcheert d'een den anderen (met het punt) niet en soude beschadighen, end
salinde naervolghende figuren ghevvesen vvorden hoe hy, draghende de Spies
schuyns often plat, de selfde in dry tyden sal laten sincken, vvanneer hy de
Spies door even Poort often andersins vellen vvil, end hoe hy in dry tijden de
selfde vvederom op der aerden nedersetten sal, end vvillende de selfde op de
schouderlegghen, sal t'selve (alst te voren ghevvesen is) oock in dry tijden
gheschieden. Maer so vvanneer hy de Spies opvvaerts draghet, so sal hy die
alleenlijck in even tijt vellen, end daer naer vvederom in even tijt opvvaerts
dragen.

Ten 12. hoe hy voorde eerste hervattinghe de Spies met de lincker hant so
verde hy de selfde, recht staende can bereycken verdichlijcken aenvatten sal,
heffende de selfde met de rechter hant ghelijckelijck vande schouder om hooch,
om alsoo bequamelijck de Spies met de punt voorvvaerts over te vvorpen.

Ten 13. hoe hy voorde tvveede hervattinghe de Spies (hebbende de selfde
alreede met de punt naer voren ghebrocht) met de rechter hant onder aent eynde
vatten sal, end de selfde van boven nedervvaerts bequamelijcken laten sincken,
om alsoo door de poort te connen passeren.

Ten 14. hoe hy ten derde mael de Spies bequamelijcken vellen, den rechter arm
uyt ghestreckt, de Spies inde selfde hant well vatten, end den lincker
ellenbooch teghen de heupe vast setten sal, end sal voorder ghevvesen vvorden
hoe hy in dry tijden de Spies vveder neder setten sal.

Ten 15. hoe hy voor de eerste hervattinghe de Spies met de rechter hant,
achter om leech drucken sal, om alsoo bequamelijck de selfde voor om hooch
tedoen rijsen.

Ten 16. hoe hy voor de tvveede hervattinghe de Spies met de rechter hant
(boven de lincker) so verde hy de selfde ghemackelijck bereycken can,
aenvatten sal.

Ten 17. hoe hy ten derde mael de Spies vveder op der aerden nedersetten, end
teghens den duym regieren, end well houden sal, ghelijck bide cerste figure
gheseyt is, end sal inde tvvee naervolghende figuren ghevvesen vvorden hoe hy
de Spies opvvaerts draghende, de selfde alleen in even tijt vellen sal, dan
alsoo inde voorgaende figuren ghenoech ghevvesen is, hoe hy de Spies
nederstaende in dry tijden opvvaerts draghen sal, so heeftmen sulckx hier
onnoodich gheacht met figuren mere te vvijsen, maer stellen dit alleen tot
memory.

Ten 18. hoe hy hebbende de Spies in dry tijden (ghelijck hier voren ghenoech
ghevvesen is) vander aerden opgheheven end onder aent eynde ghevat, de selfde
inde rechter hant teghens den selfden arm regieren, end opvvaerts draghen sal.

Ten 19. hoe hy hebbende de Spies opvvaerts ghedraghen, de selfde met de
lincker hant hoogher aenvatten, end in even tijt vellen sal, end vvillende de
Spies vveder nederstellen salt selfde gheschieden alst bide vorighe figuren
ghevvesen is, maer indien hy de Spies ghevelt hebbende vveder vvilde opvvaerts
draghen, salt selfde alleen in even tijt gheschieden.

Ten 20. hoe hy staende aen even poort (int vvt often in trecken van eenich volck)
de Spies aent punt houden sal, ghelijck dese figure bevvijst.

Ten 21. hoe hy de Spies sleypende draghen, de selfde dicht by de punt vatten,
end de hant recht boven de heupe vast teghens het lijf aensetten sal, end
vvillende de selfde vellen often op even ander vvijse draghen, so moet het selfde
door palmen gheschieden ghelijck de tvvee naervolghende figuren vvijsen sullen.

Ten 22. hoe hy voor de eerste hervattinghe, hebbende eerst de Spies so verde
hy heeft gheconnen, met de rechter hant, voor uyt gheschoten, de selfde met de
lincker hant, even vveynich boeckende, ondervvaerts verdichlijck aen palmen sal.

Ten 23. hoe hy voorts palmende, de Spies met de lincker hant noch mere naer
voor brenghen sal, hebbende de rechter die te voren de voorste was, alreede
hervat, end als nu achter ghebracht.

Ten 24. hoe hy hebbende de Spies al palmende voor ghebrocht end well ghevat,
de selfde vellen sal, maer indien hy de Spies vveder op de voorgaende vvijse
(te vveten sleypende) draghen vvou, so moet hy de selfde palmende vveder naer
achter brengen, is mede te bemercken (dat al is it so) datmen hier maer tvvee
palmende figuren en heeft ghestelt, vvaer uyt eenighe souden moghen verstaen
als oftmen segghen vvilde datmen de Spies palmende just in dry tijden soude
connen vellen, t'selfde nochtans de meyninghe niet* en is, maer datmen op de
voorgaende maniere uytvvijsende de tvvee palmende figuren, de Spies so
menichmael haer palmen moet, tot datmen de selfde met de rechter hant onder
aent eynde ghevat heeft.

Ten 25. hoe hy Ruyter vervvachtende de Spies teghen de rechter voet setten,
end met even zijn gevveer* buyten den lincker arm uyt trecken sal, ghelijck de
figure bevvijst.

Ten 26. hoe hy Marcherende met de Spies op schouder, sich selven alst van
noode sy, bequamelijck naer de lincker hant omvvenden, end de Spies in dry
tijden achtervvaert vellen sal.

Ten 27. hoe hy voor de eerste hervattinghe, hebbende de Spies eerst met de
rechterhant vande schouder om hooch geheven, de selfde gelijckelijck met de
lincker hant voorvvaerts aenvatten sal, om so doende de Spies bequamelijck
over thooft te heffen.

Ten 28. hoe hy hebbende de Spies over thooft inde lincker hant, mits hem
selven alreede naer de lincker zijde ghekeert hebbende, de selfde met de
rechter hant aent eynde (voor de tvveede hervattinghe) vatten sal.

Ten 29. hoe hy de Spies ghelijck gheseyt is, ten derdemael achtervvaerts
vellen, end gans ghekeert staen sal, end sullen de dry naervolghende figuren
vvijsen, hoe hy in dry tijden sich selven vvederom keeren, end ghelijck de 26.
figure staen often Marcheren ^al.

Ten 30, hoe hy voor d'eerste hervattinghe de Spies met de lincker hant verde^
bereycken end aenvatten, oock sich selven tot vveder om keeren ghereet maecken
sal.

Ten 31. hoe hy hebbende sich selven alreede naer de rechte ^ijde omghekeert,
de Spies met de lincker hant over het hooft heffen, end de selfde vvat
achtervvaerts, inde rechter hant ontfanghen end aenvatten sal.

Ten 32. hoe hy ten derde mael de Spies vveder inde rechter hant op de schouder
schuyns often plat draghen sal, often oock opvvaerts indient van noode sy.

End alsoo bevonden vvort dat den Soldaet zijn Spies niet well noch
verdichlijck en can herstellen, dan door vvetenschap vande selfde well te
connen handelen end hervatten, so zijn tot ondervvijs vanden selfden hier by
gheordineert, seeckere vvoorden van bevele met hun tijden van hervattinghe die
al te samen met ghetal op de figuren als oock op d'onderrechtinghe vervolghens
zijn corresponderende, op dat de Capiteynen h^n nieuvve end o^erva^en
Soldaten, op dese maniere het handelen vande Spies, so veel hun van noode is,
moghen done leeren, maer de handelinghe hebbende, sullen de Soldaten gheoeffent
vvorden achtervolghens de vvoorden van bevele, die hier naer alleen, end
sonder tijden, op hun selven ghestelt zijn.

Devvoorden van bevele. Met hun tijden van hervattinghe.
1. V Spies neder staende, in dry tijden opvvaerts draecht. 2. eersten tijt. 3.
tvveeden tijt. 4. derden tijt. 5. V Spies herstelt. eersten tijt. 6. V Spies
herstelt. tvveeden tijt. 7. V Spies herstelt. derden tijt. 8. V Spies op de
schouder leght end plat draecht. eersten tijt. 9. V Spies op de schouder leght
end plat draecht. tvveeden tijt. 10. V Spies op de schouder leght end plat
draecht. derden tijt. 11. Schuyns u Spies draecht. 12. V Spies door de Poort
velt. eersten tijt. 13. V Spies door de Poort velt. tvveeden tijt. 14. V Spies
door de Poort velt. derden tijt. 15. V Spies herstelt. eersten tijt. 16. V
Spies herstelt. tvveeden tijt. 17. V Spies herstelt. derden tijt.
V Spies in dry tijden opvvaerts draecht.

18. Dese dry tijden hebben maer even figuer geteyckent met numero achthie^ om
dat d'ander (...) elen zijn.
V Spies in eenen tijt velt.

19. Eenen tijt. 20. Aent punt u Spies hout. 21. V Spies sleept.
End palmende u Spies velt.

22. Dit onghehouden in dry tijden te done. 23. ghelijck bide onderrechtinge
nume. 24. to 24. gheseyt vvort. 25. Teghen u rechter voet u Spies velt, end u
ghevveer treckt. 26. V Spies op de schouder legghende, in dry tijden
achtervvaerts velt. 27. eersten tijt. 28. tvveeden tijt. 29. derden tijt.
Rechts herstelt u, en u Spies schuyns draecht.

30. eersten tijt. 31. tvveeden tijt. 32. derden tijt.
De vvoorden van bevele, vvaer naer de Cappiteynen hun Soldaten sullen done
oeffenen, vvanneer sy so verde zijn, dat sy de Spies connen handelen, men sal
verstaen datmen om order te houden dese vvoorden so veel noodich is, oock op
de figueren heeft done vervolghen, uytghesondert eenige (...) herstellen vande
Spies t'selfde vverck done, dat te voren by de figuren met hun tijden ghenoech
is ghevvesen, oock datmen int eerste bevel, daermen seght opvvaerts u Spies
draecht, spreeckt teghens de eerste figure, die met zijn Spies nederghestelt in
ordeninge still staet. End om all confusie te mijden staet te mercken dat
ieder maniere vande Spies te draghen (often oock te vellen) besonder end alleen
ghedaen, end gheen ander aenghevanghen moet vverden al voor t'eerste
volbracht, end de Spies vveder nederghestelt sy, ten vvelcken eynde men dit
generael commandment ghebruycken sal.

V Spies herstelt.

Woorden van bevele. Sonder hun tijden van hervattinghe.
Opvvaerts u Spies draecht. Neder u Spies stelt. Op de schouder u Spies leght.
Plat u Spies draecht. Schuyns u Spies draecht. Door de Poort u Spies velt.
Neder u Spies stelt. Opvvaerts u Spies draecht. V Spies velt. Neder u Spies
stelt. Aent punt u Spies hout. Neder u Spies stelt. V Spies sleept. V Spies
velt. Neder u Spies stelt. Teghen u rechter voet u Spies velt, end u ghevveer
treckt. Neder u Spies stelt. Op de schouder u Spies leght. Achtervvaerts u
Spies velt. Rechts herstelt u. Schuyns u Spies draecht.
End al is it so dat dese beuel vvoorden aldus achter den anderen vervolghen,
om datmen de Spies t'elckemael vveder herstellen moet, vvaer door men acht dat
de Soldaten de vaste handelinghe der selver te eerder connen leeren, so en is
nochtans de meeninghe niet datmen hier aen so vast verbonden sy, often men match
ooc well beginnen vvt den midden, often anders (so well als van voren) dese
bevelen te done, end dat naer gheleghentheyt vander saecke, het vvelck staet
ter discretie vanden ervaren Capiteyn often bevelhebber.

MET PREVILEGIE VANDE KEY: MA: DEN KONINC VAN VRANCRIICK, EN DE E. M. HEEREN
Staten Generael der Vereenichde Nederlanden.
End is den inhout aldus luydende.

DAt niemant hem en vervoordere t'sy van wat qualiteyt often conditie by sy, dit
teghen woordich boeck vande VVapenhande linghe naer te maecken, often elders naer
ghemaeckt binnen haere Rijcken end landen te vercoopen, binnen den tijt van
acht naervolghende laren, t'sy int cleyn often int groot, int deel often int
gheheel, de schriften noch oock de figueren, oock de order in dit werck
ghehouden gheensins naer te volghen, sonder expres consent van Jacob de Geyn op
verbeurte van allen het naer ghemaeckte werck, end ses hondert Carolus gulden
daer en boven, als breeder blijckt by de principale brieven hem hier van
ghegheven, etc. Anno 1607.

TOT MEMORY VANDFN BOECK-BINDER.
DE schriften zijn (ghelijck oock de figueren) in dry besondere deelen
afghedeelt, als Roers, Musquetten end Spiessen, end sullen inghebonden
vvorden op dese manier, te vveten, de schriften vande Roers voor de figuren der
selve, end de ander schriften van ghelijcken elckx voor hun eyghen figueren,
etc.

IDGheyn. in, 1


2


3


4


5


6


7


8


9


10


11


12


13


14


15


16


17


18


19


20


21


22


23


24


25


26


27


28


29


30


31


32



