The Wars in Germany, With the taking of the several towns by the Marquess
Spynola, and the present estate of the whole Army now on foot, in right of
the Emperor, sent from the Pope. Emperor. King of Spain. Archduke. The
Cardinals. And German Prelates. Together with the present estate of the
contrary Army, conducted by Grave Maurice of Nassau, and the Towns by him
taken. Truly translated out of Dutch and French into English: and printed at
Antwerpe the third of September. 1614.

depiction of Ambrogio or Ambrosio Spinola, or a man in armor with a musket or
gun and sword standing over a house in the countryside

Printed at London for Nathaniell Butter. 1684.

A true relation of the taking of the town of Aix or Accon, Weesell and diverse
other towns in Germany by the Marquess Spinola general of the King of
Spaines Army; under pretense to reduce them to the obedience of the Emperor,
and the religion they call Catholic. Together, with a full declaration of the
whole army now on foot ready to join with the aforesaid Marquess, being
sent from the Pope, Emperor, Archduke, Conclaue of Cardinals, and the
Catholic Prelates of Germany, and entitled the most Christian league: Their
numbers, ensigns, and Emblemes.
TO enter into the bosoms of Princes, or from a prophetique boldness to
interpret the hidden mysteries of their designs, shows in an ignorant
presuming nature, such an impudence as can neither find warrantie nor excuse:
therefore to trace mine Authors relation truly without any inquitie of the
grounds, ends or determinations of these strange, sudden, and unlooked for
garboyles, which have even with much admiration, set open all the eyes and
ears in Eu- You shall understand that about the five r^pe.

And twentyth of August last, in this present year 1614. according to the Roman
computation, Spinola coming before Accon.
and the fifteenth of August in our account: The Marquess Spinola (to whom
they give the title of excellence) being general of the king of Spaines
forces, came with a power of 1500. horse, and 12000. foot, before a Town in
Cleueland called Aix or Accon, famous both for the antiquity thereof: as also
for certain hot Bathes which are therein, but especially for the privilege of
keeping (as Guychardine reports) of an Iron crown wherewith the Emperors are
crowned at their first elections. Before this town the Marquess Spinola with
his forces set down and planted against it three pieces of Cannon upon Saint
Siluesters Hill, and four other great field pieces of Brass at the gate of
the bridge against the great Tower or Bulwark: yet before he began to make any
shot or play upon the town, he sent certain Ambassadors into the town, upon
whose deliberate and perswasiue entreaties, Accon taken by composition.
the towns-me^ accorded to make composition, upon these conditions following.
First, that all Soldiers of what name title or quality soever, being then
resident in the town (being at that instant to the number of six hundred)
should depart from thence, with bag and baggage, full armed, Drums beating, and
their ensigns displayed, which were of white silk chargd with a black cross.
Also that they should have safe conduct for forty Carts to convey and carry
them and their baggage: to all which the Marquess accorded. Now as Captain
John Van Diick alias Seram and Mounsieur de Potlites, with Captain Peter Galon
de Meres commander of the Marquess of Brandenborch soldiers, were issuing
out of the town with their white ensigns flying and chargd as beforesaid with
black crosses, diverse wealthy Burgers or men of account in the town, whether
fearful of evils to come, or suspicious of evils with which they had been
formerly acquainted, or stirred up by their conscience then likely to taste
tyranny, attempted to issue out of the town, with the soldiers, but were by
strong hand hindered and turned back again, by certain bands or companies of
Almaines to the number of 600. who entered at the same gate at which they
departed.

Also at the same instant at another gate of the town called Collogne port or
gate, entered another company of Almaines equal to the former number.

Likewise at the Bridge port or gate, there entered other six ensigns of
Almaines, who presently marched up into the town, especially to the place
where the Protestants were accustomed to hear their preaching.

An other part of the army marched toward a place in the Town called the
Asses head, where other Protestants did exercise their religion; The rest of
the Army went to the Cytadell or Town Hall near to the Hospital, without
hurting or offending any that were of that which they call the Catholic
Religion, whom likewise they exempted and made free from all charge,
disbursments or taxations due for the relief of their Soldiers, lodging the
army only upon the charge of the Protestants, whom they suggested to have
(whilst they were masters of the town) stopped and barred against them all
these gates or entrances; that is to say first the port Royal, secondly, the
Hill port; thirdly, the Zongle port; fourthly, the port Albertus; fifthly, the
port Winaerte Bongaerts; sixthly the Roost port, and lastly, Saint James port;
not leaving any open for use but these only: the Bridge port, the port of
Collogne, the Bortscher port, and the Younkers port.

The twenty seventh of August, the Army arose from before the town, and
marched about some two leagues from Aix or Accon, and there encamped again.

The eight and twentieth day of August the Army arose, The taking of the Town
of Duren
and marched before the Town of Duren, against which they encamped themselves
again, and whilst the Army there lay, there came out of the said town of
Duren certain principal men of great account and reckoning mounted on
hors-back, and apparelled all in black, who by a mutual and general consent
were sent out of the town, as agents or negotiators for all the rest, humbly
to crave that it would please his Emperyall Majesty to pardon their offenses
and misdemeanors how ever ignorantly or otherwise committed against him: most
humbly and affectionately defiring to render and subiest themselves to the
Laws and ordinances of his Imperial Majesty, bringing and offering the Keys
of the Town to the Marquess Spinola, which he received in the name and right
of the Emperor, with all the courteous humanity that his great place could any
way extend: All which accomplements being finished, the very same day the
Marquess sent into the town two Companies or Ensigns of Soldiers being to
the number of three hundred men well appointed, being under the command of the
Count Emden.

The taking of Mersweicke and Rangleroy.
The same day also being the twenty eight of August the Army arose from this
Town of Duren, and marched forward toward Mersweicke and Rangleroy.

The taking of Nuys.
The nine and twentieth of the same month of August, the Army marched toward
the town of Nuys.

Upon the thirtieth day of August the chief Burgamaster of Nuys came to salute
the Marquess Spynola, being bravely attended, and his person drawn in a
Caroach, with four horses, and after some conference and ordinary
accomplement, to which, none but themselves were privy, the Marquess entered
into the Town with five troops of horse, whilste all the rest of the army
remained without the Town.

As Soon as the Marquess had ordered and disposed of the Town of Nuys, and
placed garrisons as he liked best, without any stay at all, but even the very
self same day being the thirtieth day of August, he departed thence, and
marched toward Dusseldorpe, which is about a league from Nuys, yet at his
departure from Nuys the Town discharged six Cannons in honor of the
Marquess, and as it seemed in a very triumphant and gallant fashion: after
which the army marched toward the town of Reysers-wert.

The thirtieth day of August aforesaid, The Duke of Neuwenborch Ioynes with
Spinola.
the Duke of Neuwenborch met and joined his army with the Marquess Spynola
near to the town of Juliet, which army of the Dukes was composed of seven
thousand foot and one thousand horse, in so much that at that time the
Marquess Spynola's army was increased and accounted to be twenty six
thousand foot, and four thousand and three hundred horse, one thousand Wagons
for munition, every wagon, having three horses, besides Victualers and other
necessary depe^dants to the Army, which are in number above two thousand
wagons.

A bridge made over the Rheyne.
The one and thirtieth day of August, being the day after the joining of these
two great bodies into one, they began to make a bridge over the Reine, a little
above Rein-Berke betwixt the two forts; in the labor and workmanship of which
Bridge was employed above one hundred men, besides Pyoners, and other
mechanical laborers.

The Bridge being perfitted as it were in a very moment of time, The taking of
Orsoy.
the army passed over and marched the first day of September to the town of
Orsoy, which they presently took, and at the same instant there arrived at the
same Town of Orsoy, a company with Italians which came out of the town of
Geldre.

The sacking of Mulham.
The same day they marched thence with the whole army, and coming to the new
built City of Mulhem near unto Colloigne, began that day to sack,
destroy, and make an utter deuastation of the same, finding it as it seemed,
either utterly unpeopled, or so weakly provided of resistance, that nothing
stood to oppose their furies.

The same day also the army was drawn to Meures, Meurs compounded (...).
being a town lying against Rijnsburge, where the Governor or Commander
thereof came forth, and with all humility and reverence saluted the Marquess
Spynola, and so obtained all such conditions as were thought meet for the
places over which he had commandment.

The second day of September the army came and encamped before the town of
Weesell, The taking of Weesell.
and having lain there the space of two days, in the end took it by a most
kind and friendly composition, and albeit be wholly inhabited by Protestants,
and that Spynola has put thereinto a Garrisson of five hundred Spaniards,
Clemency showed to the Protestants.
yet in no degree whatsoever does the Soldier offer violence against any of
the Townsmen; which clemency is supposed by the best judgments, not to
proceed so much from love as from fear of after troubles, which might follow
any cross or tyrannical proceeding in these hostile and furious businesses.

After the departure of this great army from Weesell, Spynola before
Reinsberch.
the Marquess marched to Reinsberche, where he urged many entreaties and
offered diverse capitulations, but all to no effect, for the town being
esteemed impregnable, and as it were invincible, there was little hope left of
the winning of the same.

Grave Maurice rises and marches to Emricke.
During the time that this great army called the most Christian league or
war, ran thus like an irresistable flame through all the bowels of
Germany, threatening an utter loss to all the poor afflicted Protestants, as
it is given out by most credible and assured information, from the one and the
other side: The most excellent and for ever renowned Prince the Grave Maurice
of Nassau, with a very great and strong army of all the best and most
experienced soldiers of the Netherlands, marched up into the higher parts of
those Countries, and about the second day of September in this present year
1614. (being the same time that the Marquess Spynola took Weesell) the
aforesaid most excellent prince Grave Maurice besieged and took a town of the
Catholics called Emricke, Emrick taken.
upon the self same conditions as the Marquess had taken the town of Weesell
before, using the same clemency and mercy (in a somewhat more larger measure)
to the Catholics, which he understood had been practiced before by the
Marquess to the Protestants, as it seems, to give the world notice, how
far he prefers a noble president before any just wrath, severity or
revenge: a nature so rich and commendable in the bosom of so worthy a Prince,
that it can never be sufficiently admired of any that take delight to hold
their rank amongst the best of the virtuous.

The third day of this present month of September, Grave Maurice and Grave
Henricke march to Reys
the excellent Prince Grave Maurice accompanied with the most noble count
Henricke, raised their army from before Emricke, and marched to another town
near adjoining thereunto called Reys in the Dukedom of Cleue, against which
they laid a strong siege and begirt the Town round about, and there were
remaining at such time as these and many oother occurrents received their
dispatches; so that what success will issue from the same, may be expected
and wished, but no certain truth can be related, only the great all-seeing eye
of the divine justice no doubt will order their counsails and actions, so as it
may be best for his own glory and his Churches comfort, against which,
questionles was never prepared so numberless, strong, and powerful an army,
as you may understand by the sequel of the Discourse which now follows.

A most true and full Relation of the several parts and members of that most
great and general body of the most invincible Catholic Army, knit and united
together into one maine substance, by the Pope, the Emperor, the King of
Spain, the Archduke of Austria, and all the Catholic Cardinals,
Archbishops, Bishops, and other inferior Priests of Germany; with their
several Generals, and Commanders of each particular Armies: their Names,
Places, and Dispositions: together, with their several Emblemes and Devises,
placed as Trophyes upon each of their Standards, or Ensigns Royal: in such
sort as they have been most carefully taken by especial eyewitnesses and most
truly published for the satisfaction of all Christian people. A matter most
famously remarkable, and worthy of admiration of all that shall happen to
read, and with a charitable judgment truly understand the same.
SOme few days (as it is given out by most credible report) after the Duke of
Niewenborch had joined his forces with the Marquess Spinola, there came also
and joined with them these Armies following.

The Popes Army.
First, from the Popes Holiness (drawn as he urges from a holy comiseration
of the Catholic cause) was sent an Army of two thousand Horsemen, and
fifteen thousand footmen, with all necessary provisions needful in such a
business, but by the distressed Protestants it is coniectured; nay, almost now
gathered to a full belief, that this his huge liberality and expense of Men
and Treasure would not have come so freely, had not his design some aim at
the utter extyrpation of them, and their undoubted true Religion, which, should
it appear or proceed in any greater manifestation, no doubt but all Christian
ears would be filled with his cruelty, and what he would guild with a noble
charitablenes, would of the wisest and most modest tongues be called a
tyrannical bloudinesse, a foul and ignoble-title for a man of his holy Order,
or a Prince of his great Place and Authority.

The General.
This great Army of the Popes has over is for General or chief Commander, one
named Don Pascor, or Pastor, of Constantinople; a man of great birth, place,
experience, and valor, amongst the Italians: He bears in his Standard
(which is all entirely red without any other Emblem or Empresa, the color
as it were, His Empresa.
speaking the anger and revenge his aims level at) and in the midst thereof
this Motto or words written, Mors and Vita, Death and Life; some translate it
Death or Life; others dead or living, but I take it to be Death and Life; Death
to his withstanders; Life to such as will be yoked to him. It has been
reported by some, that he bears in his red Standard or Ensign, a living
man, standing over a dead man, and a Latin sentence written underneath,
signifying, Thou have thy merry: but this I rather take to belong to some other
great Commander, being as it were with him a second in authority.

Next to this Army of the Popes, marches the Emperor Mathyas, The Emperors
Army.
his own Army being two thousand Horsemen, and twenty thousand Footmen,
compounded of several Nations, and Provinces; but all held well approved in
War, and of a great expertation and experience.

The General.
The General, or chief Commander of this great Army of the Emperors, is the
great Lord of Rhodes; a man very highly esteemed for valor, wisdom,
experience, and what else adorneth a perfect Soldier.

(...) Emblem.
He bears in his Standard or Ensigne-Royall, which is all white, prefiguring
a more hurtlesse and innocent temper, mixed with much more clemency and Justice
then the former, a Lady or Virgin aparayled in white also, and a Lion standing
by her, with a word or Motto, signifying, Both these belong to Accon: now there
be some reporters which affirm that his Ensign is all white, without any
charge but only certain words, which signify in English, I have much to
look for, and never to run away; others translate it, I expect much, but
howsoever I will not fly: but this as I said of the former, may belong to some
other high Commander; howsoever neither but show the strength of a great and
undaunted resolution.

Touching the King of Spaynes Forces, which is called the Army of the most
Catholic King, The King of Spaynes Army.
they are numbered for certain to be fifteen hundred Horsemen, and twelve
thousand Foote-men, being for the most part all natural Spaniards, well
experienced and approved Soldiers, as drawn from his most worthiest Garrisons,
and other places, of his most Warlike employments.

The General of this great and famous Army, is the Marquess Spinola, The
General.
held amongst all the Spaniards a man of rare valor, wisdom, and all
greatness of mind, and one on whose reputation does lodge the badge of much
good fortune in all his former affairs, whether they have been by Land or
Sea, which have knit so unto him the King his Masters love, that his risings
have been accounted more swift then any other of his rank: a good note of
worthiness, if his virtues and lovaltie endeavor to keep and preserve them
without tyranie or ambition.

His Emblem.
His Standard or Ensign royal is all white like the Emperors, wherein is
portrayed a man standing with a chain about his neck, yet as it seems
either vnmanacled and at liberty, or at most but in a willing and most pleasing
servitude, for underneath him is writ a sentence, which signifies in English,
My Chain shall bind others.

Now there be some Reporters that affirm, that in his Ensign besides the
chayned man, there is a Tiger and a Bear, and the word as aforesaid, and I
will not stand much to argue the contrary; for although it make the body of the
Emblem, like a surcharged coat, somewhat too much burdened, against the
strickt rules of our curious deuise-makers, yet are they all so significant,
and so well expressing the resolution of a strong Conqueror, that they may
well become the invention of him to whom they are attributed.

Next this Army is ranked the Army of Albertus, Archduke of Austria, The
Archdukes Army.
and brother to the Emperor Mathyas, and are fully accounted to be one
thousand five hundred Horsemen, and ten thousand Foote-men, all good and
approved Soldiers, by him bred, and disciplined, with great perfection in the
Neather-lands, and other places, to which his occurrents have drawn him.

The General of this Army is the Archbishop of Albyod, The General.
a very Noble descended Gentleman, full of great spirit and wisdom, and one
of high estimation with the Archduke, as may appear by this great employment,
and many other graces and favors done him in other services, all which he
seeks to acknowledge in his readiness and preparation, for any employment
shall be fixed upon him.

His Standard or Ensign royal, is all black, His Empress.
and in the midst thereof a withered Tree, and a sentence underneath it,
signifying in English, Wax green again, or I will wax green again. Some
report that he has in his Standard a Hearce or Tomba, which in Herraldry is
an Emblem of despair; but I refer that to some better intelligence, for I
take the other to be much more proper, and better suiting with the goodness of
a Noble nature, which indeed is often darkened with these horrid and dreadful
presaging menaces.

The Prelates Army.
Last of all, is an Army leauied by all those which they entitle Catholic
Prelates, in Germany, as Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, and other inferior
Priests, all which have with a mutual consent drawn their minds and
substances together, and from thence raised up a power of one and twenty
hundred Horse men, and fifteen thousand Foote-men, not so well experienced or
approved in the Wars (by supposition) as the others be: but no doubt men
daring enough, and apt to go on without either care or question of the
enterprise to which they are drawn, as is commonly seen and allowed in men
of their mercinarie quality: and doubtless this Army is composed of all
Nations whatsoever, their Purses for the most part being the entire commanders
of their strengths, being by no other bond engaged to the obedience of their
Lords and Masters; so that who so ever is out of employment in this Army, may
find business to preoccupate his whole spirits withal.

The General of this Army thus gathered from the very flux and multiplicity
of Masters, The General.
is the Archbishop of Riffin, or as some call it St. Raffin, a man of great
trust and estimation, with all the Clergy in those Countries, and much
renowned for his valor, wisdom, policy, and many other souldierly
qualities, wherewith he has been plentifully endewed, only so violent in the
blindness of his Religion, or as they call it Catholic profession, that many
of his actions may without offense undergo the censure or badge of much blood
and cruelty.

His Ensign or Guidon (for indeed it can have no other title of greatness
added unto it) His Empress.
is all of a gray color, portraying the gravity, soberness, and discreation
which should be employed in those mighty Desseynes, and most especially from
men of such sanctity and pureness of life, as in right the Masters of this
Army should be, and in the midst of this gray Ensign there is growing in
his full glory a full blown and fair flourishing Lilly, with his natural
leaves, branches, and beauties about it, and underneath a sentence signifying
in English these words, Natures Innocence is the best clothing: a Motto which
no doubt promises virtuously, if the issues be answerable to the ostentation:
but if they be raised for any contrary purpose to goodness, as to expel from
that long enriched Empire, the true preaching of the Gospel, and profession of
the most true, ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic Faith, there is no doubt
but the ruins of their own Babell will fall upon them, and confound them; if
otherwise it be for the benefit of the Christian Faith, and the abollishing of
Mahomet and his blasphemies, no doubt but their Armies will stand like the
Israelites, and find GOD himself continually fighting their battles: how
ever, to that power be all their powers and actions referred who is the GOD and
Master of the hearts of Emperors, Kings, and Princes.

The universal power and whole gross body of this entire Army, consists of
nine thousand one hundred Horsemen, and seauenty two thousand Foote-men: the
two bodies joined together make full foure-score and one thousand and one
hundred able fighting men.

This Relation was Printed in Antwerpe, both in Dutch and French, as may
appear by the original.

FINIS.
An Advertisement to the READER.
GEntle READER, I have given thee here the first and fullest tastes of these
high and strange preparations in Germany, with that true plainness and want
of flattery, as I did receive them imprinted by especial Authority in
Antwerpe; and as more shall come to my hands so I will present them unto thee
with all integrity and soundnes of truth: holding it an unpardonable sin to
add to the Names or Actions of such Mighty and Sacred Persons, the least
falsehood or scandal that may any way be imagined.

Farewell.

