Our trust against trouble. Very expedient for the time, composed for our
better consolation, and consideration of these crosses of war, lately
attempted, and still intended against us. With diverse special prayers and
Meditations, very requisite to be remembered of us, before, in and after the
time of our trouble. By Charles Gybbon.

2. Esdras. 16, 15. Behold famine, plague, trouble, and anguishe, are sent as
scourges for amendment.

Seen and allowed.



At London, Printed by John Charlewood, dwelling in Barbican at the sign of
the half Eagle and the Key, and are there to be sold. 1589.

To the right worshipful Sir John Heigham Knight, long life and happy days.
THe proof of your worships goodwill, has made me presume to present these my
pains under your favorable protection: not doubting, but as your worship is
zealous in Religion, conformable in living, and a supporter of godly
enterprises, so you will become a Patron to any good proceedings. Thus being
loathe to trouble your patience with any prolixius or tedious discourse not
omitting my humble duty, I commit your worship to the tuition of the
Almighty.

Your worships to command. Charles Gibbon.

To the courteous and Christian Reader.
IF every Christian well considers the course of his life, he shall find it
nothing else but a continual war, for the Spirit has three carnal enemies
which daily encounter with it, the flesh world and devil, what more filthy
then the fruits of the flesh.

Romans 8.13
If ye live after the flesh ye shall die what more wretched then the work of
the world.

1. Ioh. 5, 19
The whole world lies in wickedness, what more detestable then the deeds of
the devil.

1. Pet, 5, 8,
As a roaring Lion he goes about seeking whom he may devour.

Now if we will expel these enemies we must use these remedies.

Romans 8, 13
If we mortify the deeds of the body we shall live.

1, Ioh. 5.5
If we believe that Jesus is the son of God, we shall overcome this world

Iam. 4.7
If we resist the devil he will fly from us. And no doubt these external
troubles (...) war (wherewith we were lately visi^) were sent of God for our
good, to ^^tifie us in this spiritual fight. For he ^^ing the adversaries
ready to pre^le, did (by the same scourge) put us (...) mind of his
indignation, because we ^^ginne to faint in so good a fight. We ^^ue lived a
long time in peace (the lord be praised for it and still prolong (...) but we
have abused this blessing, Psalm. 30.6
^d said in our prosperity (as David ^d) we should not be moved. Our ^ts
have lulled us a sleep in security, ^e flesh has followed all sensuality,
^e world has bewitched us with ^eere vanity, and the devil has nus^d us in
iniquity. Insomuch that it ^as high time for the Lord to touch (...) with
these troubles, least we had pe^hed in our sins, and although he ^th begun
very mildly, in hope of ^r conversion, we may be assured he ^ll proceed to
punish us more ex^^eamelie, if there be no reformation.

Therefore now let us learn to amend our lives for fear of a further
affliction. Let us hear the word of God with more diligence, and follow it
in our life with more obedience, and though we live in the flesh, 2. Cor, 10, 3.
let us not war after the flesh. Though we are in the world, 1. Cor. 7.31
let us use it as though we used it not. Ephe. 4.27.
Though the devil daily follow us, let us not give place to him.

Thus by resisting evil, we shall grow in grace, and so by the means of our
amendment, we shall pacify the wrath of God, and consequently appease the
fury of our foes, which GOD grant. Amen.

Yours in the Lord, Charles Gibbon of Bury S. Edmond.

A prayer for the good protection of our gracious Queen and Realm.
Eternal good and gracious God,
stretch forth thy saving hand:
Let not our sins provoke thy wrath,
but look upon this land.
In thee we do repose our trust,
as one that never fail,
Subvert both far and fawning foes,
they never may prevail.
Alas what are we of our selves
and want thee on our side,
But even as chafe against the wind,
not able to abide.
Extend therefore thy heavenly help,
and though there be but ten,
They shall affright ten thousand foes,
if thou do say Amen.
Have mercy on us all O Lord,
For Christ our Saviors sake
Accept our prayers in good part,
and present pity take.
Remember our good sovereign Prince,
thine own anointed dear,
Expel her foes, increase her friends,
no hurt may happen here.
Give to her subjects faithful hearts,
to love her as they ought,
In any wise not to rebel,
or think a wicked thought.
Not once to suffer or consent
to harm her any way,
As we by duty all are bound,
because she is our stay.
An other godly Prayer very good and necessary to be used in these
troublesome days.
O Eternal and everliving Lord, although we thy wretches (by reason of our
manifold sins and offenses) are unworthy to cry or call upon thee for
comfort, in these thy crosses of tribulations come upon us: yet seeing (O
Lord) thou have willed us in our trouble to call upon thee, Psalm. 50.15
and thou wylt hear us: and in the burden of our sins to come unto thee, and
thou will ease us, Math. 11.28
we presume to prostrate our humble prayers before the throne of thy majesty,
beseeching thee of thy rich mercy in Christ, to forgive our sins, by thy
daily renewing spirit, to amend our lives, and by thy favorable protection, to
defend us in these our troubles, that we may not be made a pray unto the
lust of our enemies, whereby we may be made a reproach among those profane
people, and thereby they may triumph against thee in our overthrow, and say.
Where is now their God. Confound and scatter (O Lord) these our enemies, in
their impious enterprises and proceedings, Gen, 11, 8
as thou did those presumptuous people at Babell. Infolde them in the folly
of their filthy devises, as thou did to Ahithophell. 2. Sa. 17.23
Infeeble their force, and smite them with thy Angel, as thou did the power
of Saneherib In their terrible and desperate attempts, 2. Re. 19.35
let them be drowned, as was Pharaoh. Entrap and overtake them in their
treasons, Exo. 14.16
as thou did Absalom. Turn them (if any be to be converted) as thou
did Manasses, 2. Sam. 15 7
otherwise let them feel their due punishment, as did Corah and the rest of
his conspiratours. Number. 16.31
So we thy people and sheep of thy pasture, shall praise thee for ever, and
from generation to generation, we will set forth thy praise. Hear us O
merciful Father, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Mediator and advocate.
Amen.

A Shield for a Soldier. Selected out of the Scriptures, containing very
necessary Meditations, and prayers to be used in the time of trouble.
LOrd it is nothing with thee to help with many or with no power. 2. Ch, 14.11
Help us O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, and in thy name are we come
against this multitude. O Lord thou art our God, let not man prevail against
thee.

O our God will thou not judge them, 2. Chapter 20.12
for there is no strength in us to stand before this great multitude ye
comes against us, neither do we know what to do, but our eyes are toward
thee.

In God do I trust, I will not be afraid what man can do unto me. Psalm.
56.11.


O Lord our God, I beseech thee save thou us out of our enemies hand, 2. Re.
19.19.
that all the kingdoms of the earth may know yt thou O Lord art only God.

Psalm, 25, 1, 2,
Unto thee O Lord, lift I up my soul, my God I trust in thee, let me not be
confounded, let not mine enemies rejoice over me.

Psalm. 21.13
Be you exalted O lord in thy strength, so shall we sing and praise thy power.

Psa. 22.4.5
Our fathers trusted in thee, they trusted and thou did deliver them. They
called upon thee and were delivered, they trusted in thee and were not
confounded.

Psa. 25.17.18.19.
The sorrows of my heart are enlarged, draw me out of my troubles, look upon my
affliction, and my travel, and forgive all my sins. Behold mine enemies for
they are many, and they hate me with carnal hatred.

Psalm. 30.10
Hear O Lord and have mercy upon me, Lord be thou mine helper.

Psalm. 27.12
Give me not unto the lust of my adversaries.

Psa. 31.15.16
My times are in thy hand, deliver me from the hands of my enemies, and from
the^ that persecute me, make thy face to shine upon thy Servant, and save me
through thy mercy.

Our soul waits for ye Lord, Psalm. 33.20.
for he is our help and our shield, let thy mercy O lord be upon us, as we
trust in thee.

Plead thou my cause O lord with the^ that strive with me, Psalm. 35.1.2
fight thou against them that fight against me. Lay hand upon the shield and
buckler and stand up for my help.

Let not them that are mine enemies uniustlie triumph over me. Psalm. 35.19


Let not them say in their hearts, Psa. 35.25
O our soul rejoice, neither let them say we have devoured him.

Be merciful unto me O GOD, Psa. 56.1.2
for man would swallow me up, he fights continually and vexes me.

Mine enemies would daily swallow me up, for many fight against me O thou
most high.

Have mercy upon me O God, Psalm. 57.1
have mercy upon me, for my soul trusts in thee, and in the shadow of thy
wings will I trust till these afflictions ouerpasse.

Psa. 60.11.
Give us help against trouble, for vain is the help of man. Through God we
shall do valiantly, for he shall tread down our enemies.

Psa. 70.1.2
O Lord have thee to deliver me, make have to help me O lord. Let the^ be
confounded and put to shame that seek my soul, let them be turned backwarde
and put to rebuke that desire my hurt.

Help us O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name and deliver us, and
be merciful unto our sins for thy names sake.

Psalm 36.1.2. Psa. 79.6.9.
Power out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and upon the
kingdoms that have not called upon thy name. So we thy people and sheep of thy
pasture shall praise thee for ever, and from generation to generation we will
set forth thy praise.

Psa. 86.1, 2
Incline thine ear O lord and hear me for I am poor and needy. Preserve thou
my soul for I am merciful, my God save thy servant that trusts in thee. Be
merciful unto me O God, for I cry upon thee continually.

Rejoice the soul of thy servant, Psa. 86, 4, 5 6, 17.
for unto thee O lord do I lift up my soul.

For thou Lord art good and merciful, and of great kindness unto all the^ that
call upon thee. Give ear Lord unto my prayer, and harken to the voice of my
supplication.

Show a token of thy goodness toward me, yt they which hate me, may see it,
and be ashamed, because thou O Lord have helped and comforted me.

O Lord hear my prayer and let my cry come unto thee. Psa. 102.1, 2
Hide not thy face from me in the time of my trouble, incline thine ears unto
me, when I call make have to hear me.

Help me O Lord my God, Psalm. 109, 26, 27.
save me according to thy mercy. And they shall know that this is thy hand,
and that thou O Lord have done it.

Our help is in the name of the Lord which has made heaven and earth. Psa.
124, 8.


Deliver me O Lord from mine enemies for I hide me with thee. Psalm. 143.


Psalm. 144.11 12.
And for thy mercy slay mine enemies, and destroy all them that oppress my
soul, for I am thy servant.

Rescue me and deliver me from the hands of Strangers, whose mouth talks
vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood. That our Sons may
be as the plants growing up in their youth, and our Daughters as the corner
stones, graven after the similitude of a Palace.

Psalm. 144.13.14, 15
That our corners may be full, abounding with diverse sorts, and that our sheep
may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets.

That our Oxen may be strong to labor, that there be no invasion, nor going
out, nor crying in our streets.

Blessed are the people that be so, yea blessed are the people whose God is the
Lord.

Our trust against trouble.
That we may the more patiently, thankfully, and joyfully carry and overcome
the cross of tribulation and trouble. Let us first of all consider who is the
Author of it.

1. It is God that sends war.
AND that is approved unto us in these words. Behold now for I, I am he, and
there is no Gods with me, Deu. 32.39
I kill and I give life, I wound and I make whole, neither is there any that
can deliver out of my hand. The Isralites confessed all their afflictions to
come from God. Come (say they) let us return to the Lord: Hosea, 6, 1
for he has spoiled and he will heal us, he has wounded us, and he will
bind us up. etc.

So that we may learn by this, two profitable instructions.

1. Albeit the wicked do make war, we must not suppose they do it of
themselves, for God does after a sort use and send them as his servant, (and
so very fitly calls them) because he makes them to serve him by
constraint, and that which they do of malice, he turns to his honor and
glory, as he did by Nebuchadnezer, who when he besieged Jerusalem, he did it
not of his own accord, for the Lord had said before, I will send
Nebuchadnezer my Servant. Iere, 25, 9
etc.

2. Although our enemies attempt to trouble us, yet this is our assurance, they
can proceed no further then God will permit or appoint them, because they are
but as instruments to execute his indignation. Esaias, 10, 5,


Since it is God that sends war, we are next to consider wherefore or for
what cause he does commonly use to send it, for he never sends his
visitation in vain.

2 War is sent as a scourge for sin.
And that may appear unto us by this sentence. Psalm. 89, 31,
If they break my statutes and keep not my commandments, then will I visit
their transgression with the ^^d and their iniquity with strokes.

And may further proved to us in ^ese places. Leu. 26, verse, 17 Deuteronomy. 28,
verse, 20, 22 2, Chro. 20, verse, 9


The Jews attributed all their afflic^ons to their sins. Baru. 2, 5, 6


The sins which so provoke the Lord punish us, no doubt are these amongst ^anie
other.

^use of his word. ^ontempt of his Minist. ^ouetousnes. ^^tortion. Pride.
Whoredom. Drunkenness, and such like.
These and such (...) sins reigned in Israel, Jerusalem, and Judah.

For which sins the Lord did send his word amongst them, as you may ^ad at
large, in Esaias. 28. Eze. 22. Iere. 5. So that we may observe in this, be
special considerations.

That we must not take these trou^s to come of course, but acknowledge (...)
sins to be the cause, and thereby we all perceive that God by sending the^, ^th
seek nothing but our good, premo^hing us gently, least we perrish in our sin
securely. 2, Esd. 16, 15
Behold famine, plague trouble, and anguish, are sent as scourges for
amendment. Pro, 3, 12,
For whom God scourges he loves.

2. That if we show an unfeigned confession, and make a true and hearty
contrition for our sins, leading our lives in better obedience of the word of
God, these troubles shall be taken away from us. For ye Lord has said to those
that do so, Leu, 26.6, 7
I will send peace in your land, ye shall sleep and none shall make you
afraid, and the sword shall not go throg^ your land, ye shall chase your
enemies* and they shall fall before you upon the sword, and five of you shall
chase an hundred, and an hundred of you shall put ten thousand to flight, and
your enemy shall fall before you upon the sword. For the Lord takes no pleasure
in the destruction of sinners, 2, Chr, 12, 12 Ezekiel, 18, 32
but in their conversion

3. That if we still persevere in ou^ sins without repentance (making (...)
account of this mild correction latel^ sent us) Rom, 2, 5
we shall not only heap vnt^ our selves wrath against the day of ^^dgment,
but also in this life, Leu, 26, 16 Nehe, 9, 28
procure ^he Lord to punish us seven times more according to our sins, and
make ^im give us over unto the lust of our e^emies. (which God defend.)

3. How we ought to remedy and defend these afflictions.
In that they come of God and not of ^an, we may learn three singular lessons.

1. That we must not altogether de^ende upon the ordinary and lawful means
as Men, Munition, Worldly ^ower and Policy, for that is abhomi^ation in the
sight of God, as may appear by that which is pronounced against the Isralites,
Woe unto the^ that go down into Egypt for help, Esaias, 31, 1,
and stay upon Horses and trust in Charrets, because they are many, and in
horsemen because they are very strong, but they ^ooke not unto the holy one of
Israel, nor seek unto the Lord. And afterward there is produced a reason to
reprove them. The Egiptians are men and not gods, Esaias, 31, 3,
and their horses flesh and not spirit, and when the lord shall stretch out his
hand, the helper shall fall, and he that is helped shall fall, and they shall
altogether fail. And ye Prophet Jeremy says. Cursed be the man that trusts
in man, Iere, 17, 5
and makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart from the Lord. Judge, 20,
20.
The same Isralites trusting in their strength were discomfited by the
Beniamites, for it is written. 1, Sam, 2, 9
In his own might shall no man be strong.

2. That as we must not neglect the instrumental and lawful remedy to with
stand the adversary. So we ought especially to respect the efficient cause,
(which is God) who sends ye enemy, remembering what the Psalmist says.
Blessed is the man that makes the lord his trust, Psalm, 40, 41 Iere, 17, 17
for God can as well without as with weapon, terrify and destroy the enemy. 2,
Chr, 14, 11.
Abiiah making war against Jeroboam, got the victory not altogether with the
multitude of men. But it is there said, he did the rather prevail, because he
and his stayed upon ye Lord ^od of their fathers. 2, Chr, 13, 18
David fighting a^^inst Goliath, ye huge Giant, although ^e did not contemn the
Armor King ^aul put upon him, yet (because he could ^ot away withal) he did
not wear it. Notwithstanding, betaking himself to ^^s sling, and committing
his trust in God, he overcame his enemy, because ^he Lord will have his power
known (...) prevail. Assuring us thereby, 1, Sam, 17 51, 54,
that (...) we fight in faith under his defense, ^e will never fail us.

3. That we must both fight with our ^^ndes and pray with our hearts together,
following the good example of our ^^refathers in their afflictions. 1, Sam, 7,
8, 9
The Children of Israel did not only fight against ye Philistims, but
requested Samuel (that notable Prophet) to cry unto the Lord for them. 2, Ch,
20, 12,
Iehoshaphat fight^ng against his enemies, did withstand with weapon and
prostrate his Prayer. Asa warring against the Ethiopians; 2, Ch, 14, 11
did both resist with weapon, and persist in prayer, for as we must not omit
the lawful ordinance (God has appointed) to defend us. So we must commit our
selves to him, who gives the success, and submit both to his protection.

4. How we may take comfort in these crosses of trouble.
Let us but consider what moves the enemy to intermeddle with us.

Surely nothing else but sinister occasions as some of these ensuing.

Pretending,

1. To hurt our sovereign Queen the Lords anointed.

2. To hinder the free passage of Gods word amongst us.

3. To destroy the little flock of Gods fold in this land.

4. To set abroche all superstition and abomination.

No doubt as their intent is evil, so their success will be such.

Exo, 14, 16
Paraoh (that tiranicall rebellor) making war against the Isralites (that
chosen people of GOD) could not prevail, 2, Chapter 20, 22
for the Lord drowned him and al his host in the Sea.

The Moabites and Amonites (that perverse and wretched people) making war
against Iehoshaphat ye good King of Judah) they were so far from ouerco^ming
that one enemy did help to destroy an other of his adversaries.

Sanaherib that great blasphemer making war against Hezekiah that godly
Prince, 2, Re, 19, 35.
had so good success in his enterprise, yt the Angel of the Lord went out and
in one night smote in the Camp, an hundred, fourscore and five thousand of
his men.

Zerah of Ethiopia, 2, Chr, 14 12, 13,
making war against King Asa, was so far from giving the overthrow, yt he
and his were enforced to fly, and receive the foil.

Thus we may see by these examples that although God will sometime punish his
children for their sins, by suffering the nenemy to assault them, yet he will
not permit the enemy to prevail over his people, so they repent and be sorry
for their sins, and repose their trust in their troubles under his defense.

Let us not be terrified because of the multitude of men, but let us remember
that notable saying of Asa in his trouble, 2, Ch, 14, 11
Lord it is nothing with thee to help with many or with no power. For no doubt
we may say of our enemy (as Hezekiah did of Sancherib, With him is an arm of
flesh, but with us is the lord our God, for to help us and to fight our
battles.

Let us pray without despair, considering what the Lord has said. Psalm. 50, 15
Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee. Exo, 17, 11
When Moses lyfted up his hand, Israel prevailed, but when he let down his
hand, the Amalekites prevailed, teaching us thereby to prostrate and persevere
in our prayers, without fainting, for the Lord is nigh to all those that call
upon him in faith. Psalm, 145, 18,


5. How we ought to behave our selves after troubles for the good success is
sent us.
We must offer to God the Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving.

As the Lord has promised in our troubles to hear and help us, so he has
said. Thou shall praise me. For of him, Psalm, 50, 15 Rom, 11, 36,
through him and for him are all things, to him be glory. Least if we forgette
or neglect to be thankful to him for his benefits, he does further afflict
us. For it is said of Hezekiah, (after God had wonderfully delivered him from
his enemies) that he did not render according to ye reward bestowed upon him,
for his heart was lift up, 2, Ch, 32, 25
and therefore the wrath of God came against him upon Judah and Jerusalem.

Therefore that we may the more effectually offer our praises to God, let us
observe two things.

1. Comemoration. Of the opposite danger of our enemy with our safe
delivery. 2. Consideration. Of our unworthy merits, with Gods wonderful
mercy.
In so doing we shall find Gods goodness so superaboundant, and our deserts so
repugnaunt, that every one of us, in the end of our troubles, shall be enforsed
to say as David did, Psalm. 116.12, 13, 17
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will
take the Cup of salvation and call upon the name of the Lord. I will offer to
him a sacrifice of praise.

Gen, 14, 19
Melchizedeck gave thanks for Abraham's victory.

Exo, 15, 1, 2
Moses and the Isralites song praises for their deliverance.

Judge, 5, 1, 2
So did Deborah, Barak and diverse others.

For if the Lord smelled a savor of rest at the burnt offering of Noah, how
acceptable will our praises be, that proceed from a contrite heart, since ye
Lord himself says: Psalm, 50, 23
He that offers me praise shall glorify me.

A tryumphe after trouble. Containing a praise or thanksgiving, fit for every
Christian to offer and confess to God, for the benefit of their deliverance.
Collected out of the Scriptures.
I Will magnify thee O Lord, Psalm, 30, 1
for thou have exalted me, and have not made my foes to rejoice over me.

By this O Lord I know that thou fauourest me, Psalm, 41, 11,
because my enemy does not tryumphe against me.

Thou have turned my mourning into joy, Psalm, 30, 11
thou have loosed my sack and gyrded me with gladness. Therefore shall my
tongue praise thee, and not cease: O Lord my God I will give thanks unto thee
for ever.

I will always give thanks unto the Lord, Psalm, 34 1, 2, 3, 4
his praise shall be in my mouth continually, my soul shall glory in the
Lord, the humble shall hear it and be glad. Praise ye the Lord with me and let
us magnify his name together. I sought the Lord and he heard me, yea he
delivered me out of all my fear.

Psalm, 44, 5 6, 7, 8,
Through thee have we thrust back our adversaries, by thy name have we trodden
down them that rose up against us, for I do not trust in my bow neither can
my sword save me. But thou have saved us from our adversaries, and have put
them to confusion that hate us. Psalm. 56, 12
Therefore will we praise God continually, and will confess his name for ever.

Thy vows are upon me O GOD, I will render praise unto thee.

Psalm, 59, 16,
I will sing of thy power and praise thy mercy in the morning, for thou have
been my defense and refuge in the day of my trouble.

Psalm, 63, 5, 6
My soul shall be satis-fied as with marowe and fatnes, and my mouth shall
praise thee with joyful lips, when I remember thee on my bed, and when I think
upon thee in the night watches, because you have been my helper, therefore
under the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice.

I love the Lord because he has heard my voice and my prayers. Psalm. 116 1,
17, 18,
I will ^ffer to thee a sacrifice of praise and will call upon the name of the
Lord. I will ^ay my vows unto the lord, even now ^n the presence of all his
people.

The Lord is my strength and song, Psalm, 118, 14,
for he has been my deliverance.

Blessed be the Lord my strength, Psa, 144, 1, 2
which teaches my hands to fight, and my fingers to battle, he is my goodness
and my fortress my Tower and my deliverer, my shield and in him I trust.

If the Lord had not been on our side when men rose up against us, Psalm, 123,
1, 2
they had then swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us.

Praised be the Lord which has not given us, Psalm, 124, 6
as a pray unto their ^eeth. Amen.

FINIS.

