THE INVASIONS OF GERMANY. With all the Civil, and bloody Wars therein,
since the first beginning of them in Anno. 1618. and continued to this present
year 1638. Wherein are described the several Battles, Encounters, Conflicts,
and Assaults, of Cities, Towns, and Castles, at several times, and in
several places, with a new and exact Map of Germany, wherein the Cities, and
Towns are figured with the same figures which are expressed over the heads of
the patticulars in the book, so that the Reader may behold at one view the
places, time, year, and event of every Battle, Skirmish, and Assault. Together
with the Progress of every Army, marked with several marks or lines, with
the Pictures of the chief Commanders on both sides. Faithfully collected out
of good, and credible Originalls.

By a Gentleman well deserving that has suffered much in those wars.

LONDON, Printed by I. Norton, for I. Rothwell, and are to be sold at the
Sun in Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

To the Reader.
THe Civil Wars of this (sometime) flourishing Country might be rather
desired to be buried in silence, then be recalled and perpetuated to memory,
^ut that the Lord will have his great ^orkes to be had in remembrance, that
^^hers might see, and fear him that does that ever he pleases in Heaven, and
(...) Earth. How great the misery of Ger^any has been, no tongue can
express, (...) heart can believe, except those that have ^ene, and felt the
bitterness of it, they have ^runken the wine of Astonishment, though they
would not believe their misery (...) have been so near, nor so dreadful, who
^or these last twenty years have been mi^^rably destroyed, that I may say of
it, as the ^rophet Esaias says of Jerusalem: Your Country is desolate, your
Cities burnt with fire, your land strangers devour in your presence. She is
now left so poor, that she can call nothing her own, she that relieved others
is now in need of others relief. She that of late was as a Princess among the
Nations, with her sumptuous Palaces, is now with the Daughter of Zion, as a
Cottage in a Vineyard, or as a desert Wilderness.

We all this while continue as the Vineyard of the Lord, fenced about by his
providence, and sheltred under his protection, we only hear what others
feel. God strikes some that others might take warning. Go to my place which
was in Shiloh, where I set my Name at first, and see what I did to it, says
the Lord. Esaias. 7. 12. We are admired (by all the world) for our peace, it will
be our wisdom to labor to be as famous for Piety, peace should be the Nurse
of Piety, if we improve this our prosperity to Gods Glory, it may be a
lengthning of our tranquillity.

If you shall meet with any harsh phrase, (...) unusual expression in the
ensuing Treatise, you will be easily inclined to a charitable construction,
when you shall consider that he is a German borne. A Gentleman sometimes of
good worth in his own Country, able to deliver himself elegantly in his own
Language, in Latin, or in those other Languages in which he has been longer
exercised, than in our English tongue. You shall find it worthy your reading,
wherein you shall suddenly behold the state of the wars, the several Battles,
Encounters, Conflicts, and Assaults of Cities, Towns, and Castles, with a new,
and exact Map, with figures both on Map, and Book, referring you to each other,
wherein you may perceive the time, the year, and day, with the success, and
event of every Battle, Skirmish, and Assault, extracted out of the best German
Histories. Read, and consider. Vale.

Henry Duvall Count of Dampier Lieutenant, General to Bucquoy.
Who Came into Bohemia with an Army of 6000 men 24 Iuny 1618. fought against
Count of Thurn Mansfeld. Duke Anholt Generals of ye Bohemians Forces: was ^hot
and afterward his head cut of by the Hungarians of Bethlehem Gabors. Garrison
in the assault of Prespur^. 8 Oct: 1620

THE INVASIONS OF GERMANY.
With all the civil, and bloody Wars, since the first bebeginning of Anno
1618. to this present year 1638.
(1)
COunt of Dampier Liutenant General for the Emperor Mathias, with an Army of
six thousand men, makes the first invasion into the Kingdom of Bohemia,
besieged and assaulted the Town of Pilgram, wherein three companies of the
Bohemians were put to the sword, and the rest taken prisoners. This Pilgram was
the first Town, which by the Imperial Forces was assaulted, the fifth of
September. Anno 1618.

(2)
The Imperial General, Count Bucquoy with his Army coming into Bohemia,
fought the first battle with the Bohemian forces, consisting of 14000. horse
and foot, under the leading of Count Mathias, of Thurn, before Budweis, the
12. of October. Anno. 1618. The Bohemian forces stood not long considering upon
the matter, but fell with such fury upon the Imperialists, that they utterly
dispersed them; killing an exceeding great number, and some 300. prisoners were
taken.

(3)
The 11. of November, Anno. 1618. Count Ernst of Mansfeld coming into Bohemia,
he first presents himself with his, and the Bohemians Army, before the City
of Pilsen. Summons being given the second time, and denied; Mansfeld brings
forward his approaches. Some sallies, and rencounters there passed: for all
which Mansfeld gat up a very large battery and mounted some pieces of good
Ordnance upon it. A vast breach and a saultable he made, and commands it to be
stormed. The Imperial Garrison, with the Citizens therein maintained it very
stoutly, and beat off the Aslaylants many times from their walls. But Mansfeld
so overlayes the defendants with numbers, that he by maine force enters the
City.

(4)
September the 4. Anno 1619. The Imperial General Bucquoy falls upon the
Town Biscka, in Bohemia, wherein all that were found in Arms, are put to the
sword. Immediately after this Bucquoy lighting upon a great party of the
Bohemian Forces, not far from th^s Town, takes away three Cornets of them,
and more then 1500 utterly defeated.

(5)
Bethlehem Gabor, Duke of Transylvania, sending an Army of 12000. horse and
foot, under the command of Redei Ferentz, to aid the Bohemians, who joined
with them, and making an Army both together of 26000. brave men. All these
being drawn up into battalia, before the Imperialists Camp, at the
Donaw-bridge by the Imperial residence, and City of Wien. The Bohemians being
desirous to tempt General Bucquoy out of his Camp into fair Campagnia. The
25. of October. Anno. 1619. fell there out a sore battle on the further side of
the same bridge; wherein on the Bohemians side were slain some 1000. men; On
the Imperial side above 4500. and a great many of common soldiers wounded,
which were brought with waines into the Hospitalls of Wien. General Bucquoy
himself wounded, but not mortally.

(6)
At Egenburg in Bohemia, a great Battle was fought under the conduct of Duke
Christian of Anhalt, then General of the Bohemian Army, against the Imperial
Generals Bucquoy, and Dampier, wherein the Imperialists were beaten, with the
loss of 2000. common soldiers, and diverse officers. On the Bohemians side
were also slain, 1800. the 10. of March, Anno. 1620.

(7)
The 26 of August. Anno. 1620. Marquess Ambrosius Spinola, with an Army of
25000. Foot, and Horse, came into Germany, marching with his Army toward the
Protestants Leaguer, before Oppenheim in the Palatinate; from thence removed to
Creutzenach, which he besieged. The Palatin Garrison, out of all hopes of being
relieved, parlies, and yields, the 31. of August. he took Altzheim. Then with
12000. men encompassed the Town of Oppenheim again. The Town unprovided for
siege, was rendered also unto Spinola, the 6. of September. Anno. 1620.

Marquis Ambrosius Spinola General. over ye Spanishe Army in the Netherlandes.
Was sent by the King of Spain with 25000 men into the Palatinat the 26. of
August. A^^ 620 fought against Marquis of Durlach. Mansfeld. and Duke of
Brunswick, takes in possession the most part of ye Lower Palatinat dies in
Italy in the niew fort of Serivia. the 15 of Sept: A^^ 630.



(8)
The Elector of Saxony, with 12000. of Horse, and Foot did assault the Town
of Bautzen, wherein eight Companies of the Bohemians were in Garrison. The
Saxons fell to myning, and shooting of Grenades into the Town; attempting to
scale the walls, are by a Sally many times beaten off. But the Saxons with 12.
pieces of Canon, fired and spoiled at last this goodly City; against which
they made in the space of two days 3931. shot, and also takes it. The Town
is almost wholly turned to Cinders. 1136. houses. 9. goodly Churches, and two
Hospitalls are burnt, the 25. of September. Anno. 1620.

(9)
Count of Dampier being very desirous to surprise the Hungarish Garrison under
Bethlehem Gabor in Presburg, goes thitherward with 6000. of Horse, and Foot,
takes and fires the fort in the Suburbs, near the River Donaw. Five hundred
Soldiers thereupon were commanded to storm the Castle, and with a Petard to
enter it. But the Garrison perceiving this, issues out of the Castle, and a
great number of the Assaylants cut in pieces. Count Dampier himself was shot,
and afterward his head was cut offby the Hungarians. October. the 8. An. 1620.

(10)
Upon the 7. of November, Anno. 1620. a great, bloody, and sore battle was
fought before Prage; in which the Duke of Bavaria, and the Imperialists under
General Bucquoy, and Tilly, did overthrow the Bohemians, and Protestants Army;
all Canons, and Ordnance were here taken, 9000. men of the Bohemian Forces
slain, 6000. upon the place of battle, and the rest, in the rest of pursuing.
Prisoners were taken, the young Duke Christian of Anhait, the young Count of
Thurn, Count of Styrumb, diverse Officers and Captains, and of common soldiers
500. On the Bavarian, and Imperialists-side, slain some 250. and some brave
Cavaliers, and Chief Commanders, as the General Quartermaster Caretti,
Colonel Megaw, Captain Prosing, and Dompre, with 4. Wallons Captains more.
^he Protestants Army before the beginning of this battle is said to have been
full 30000. men, and of the Imperialists, and Bavarians. 50000.

(11)
July the 10. Anno. 1621. The Imperial General Bucquoy presents himself in
full Battalia before Ne^heusel, wherein Bethlehem Gabor had a strong Garrison,
and demands it to be rendered, The summons being denied, the Town is surrounded
by his Army. The Garrison falling out slaying there 900. Imperialists, and
bringing some 100. away prisoners. Some days after, the Garrison sallies out
again, where General Bucquoy himself, with diverse Commanders was slain, and
Prince Torquato de Comitibus, and some Officers taken prisoners, and so the
Imperialists were feign to levy their own siege.

(12)
July the 8. and 11. Anno. 1621. Diverse Troops of the Bavarian General
Lieutenant Tillys Army, made a show of themselves before Count Mansfelds
Quarters, near Frawenberg in Bohemia who sending out some troops against them,
drove them to retreat, and cut in pieces 300. of them. The next day the
Imperialists came on with greater forces, the Mansfeldish well aware of their
coming, these feigning to flee, draw on the Imperialists into an ambush, where
many of them were slain, and amongst them the Bavarian Colonel Baur, with
diverse Captains and Ritt-masters. In these diverse rencounters of the Bavarians,
slain more then 1600. on the Mansfeldish side some 500.

(13)
September the 19. Anno 1621. Don Cordua, Spanish Vice-Generall, with his whole
Army, and diverse pieces of Ordnance, coming to besiege the Town of
Franckendall in the Palatinat, wherein was a Garrison of some 12. Companies
under the command of Colonel Witgenstein; who sallies out with his Soldiers
many times upon the Spanish, defeats, and disperses many of them. But Count
Mansfeld coming with an Army of 16000. men to relieve the Town, the Spanish
were forced to give over, and to leave some Ordnance behind them. On the
Spanish side were slain and wounded in all this time of the siege, from the
19. of September, till the 14. of October, no less then 3000. men. 9.
Citizens, and 100 of the Garrison were also slain.

(14)
Bethlehem Gabor by this time falling with an great Army upon Tirna a Town in
Moravia, wherein was an Imperial, Garrison of 7. Companies; this being a
wonderful well provided place, makes great countenance of resistance, in so
much that Bethlehem Gabor in the third assault lost above 700 of his men before
it. But at last parlies, and yields Anno. 1621.

(15)
In the beginning of April Anno. 1622. Count Ernst of Mansfeld advancing with
his Army into Alsatia besieged the strong Town Zabern; and 12. days, and
nights together he battered it. All which time the Imperial Governor Count of
Salm, with his Garrison, and the Citizens help, defended the Town, and put of
one or two assaults very manfully. Mansfeld fell very furiously on again, and
was again repulsed with loss of 300. of his men, with diverse Officers, and
Commanders.

(16)
April the 5. Anno. 1622. General Tilly summons the Town Neckergemund three
English miles from Heidelberg, the Garrison doing some resistance, whereupon
the Imperialists with assault, the Town surprised, putting to the sword both
the Garrison, and Inhabitants with women, and children. The second day after
this Massacre, Tilly falls upon 20. Cornets of the Mansfeldish Hors-men,
defeates, and kills 200. of them.

(17)
The 14. of April Anno. 1622. Count of Mansfeld coming to revenge in full
Battalia against Tilly at Mingelheim near Wiseloch in the Palatinat, cut in
pieces 2000. of his Hors-men, and followed so hard upon his reere, that the
ways side by the River Rhein toward Germersheim were strewed with the dead
bodies of his Army: takes 13. Cornets, and 4. Ensigns 4. pieces of Ordnanc^
and many prisoners, amongst them 2. Colonells 1. Sergeant Major, diverse
Rittmasters, Captains and Lieutenants on the Mansfelders side slain not above
100.

(18)
After this General Count of Mansfeld encompasses the Town Ladenburg in the
Palatinat; to which he the next morning gives summons by a Trumpet. The
Imperial Governor giving a denial answer. Mansfeld brings forward his
approches: one part being blown open with a petard, is intred by the
Mansfeldish, put to the sword the resistance, and takes 8. Ensigns. Anno. 1622.

(19)
The 26. of April Anno. 1622. At Wimpffen General Tilly, and Don Cordua
fought a bloody battle against the Marquis of Durlach, which battle began
from the morning till 8. a Clock in the night. The Marquis with his Cavallary
having charged the Imperialists, and Spanish, at several times, was with such
resolution answered, that after five or six charges bet wixt them, his whole
Army was defeated, all Ordnances, and baggage, 7. Ensigns, and 11. Cornets
taken; 5000. slain upon the place of Battle on both sides; amongst which
Magnus Duke of Wirtemberg, and one Duke of Saxon Weimar. 800. Common Soldiers,
besides Captains, Rittmasters, and Lieutenants, both of Horse, and Foot were
taken prisoners.

Ferdinand Cordua Vice-Generall of the Spanish Army.
Left by Spinola in the Palatinat 1621 Besieged Franckendall and many other
places, was beaten of the same Siege with loss of 3000. men by Mansfeld:
sought against him and Branswick in the Battle before Hochst. 1622 the 9. of
Iuny. and in ye Encounte^ upon, the Borders of Brabant the 26. of August 1622.



(20)
Whereas Duke Christian of Brunswick had taken the Town, and Castle Hochts;
June the 9th. Anno. 1622. settled his quarter in the same place. But long he
stayed not. For General Tilly with Don. Cordua with 22000. of Foot, and 140.
Cornets of Horse, marching against him, a great conflict fell out, which
continued 6. hours. But the Imperialists more in number overthrew, and
dispersed the others, which fleeing to the Bridge so throunged, and wedged in
one another, that a great number thrust into the River Main; wherein more were
drowned, then killed in the battle. Duke Christian with 5. Cornets of Horse
through the River did escape. Of great Commanders on the Dukes side were not
many slain, except the Count of Lowenstein, which was drowned. Colonel
Lieutenant Kochler, and Francking with 5. or 6. Captains more were taken
prisoners.

(21)
In the end of July, Anno. 1623. Duke Christian of Brunswick charged some
Imperialists under the leading of the Duke of Saxon Lawenburg, within few
leagues from Please in the Dukedom of Brunswick. 1000. Imperialists Horsemen
he cut in pieces, the rest fled, leaving 7. Cornets together, with one
Rittmaster, and some prisoners and 140. Wagons of Ammunition, and Baggage
behind them.

(22)
Upon the 7. of August. Anno. 1623. A sore battle was fought at Statlo in
W^stphaly, wherein General Tilly prevailed against Duke Christian of
Brunswick, and defeated his whole Army. 4000 of Duke Christians Army were
slain, and so many, and more taken prisoners; all baggage, and Ammunition. 11.
demi-Canons, and 4. Lesser pieces of Ordnances besides 70. Ensigns, and 9.
Comets taken. Prisoners of account were, Duke William of Saxon weimar; the
Count of Isenburg General of the Artillery, John Philips Rhinegrau, a Count of
Witgenstein, and another Count of Slick, besides diverse Colonels, Captains,
and other officers. Duke Christian, and the Count of Thurn, who was hardly
wounded, and with the most of his Horsemen fled by night unto Breford. On
Tilly side slain 3. Rittmasters, and one Captain, and some 100. of common
Soldiers.

Christian Duke of Brunswick. and Bishop of Halberstad
Came first into upper Germany with 1500 Horsemen ye 18 Nov: 1621. fought
several Battles with Tilly and Don Cordua was overthrowen. lost his left Arm
in a Battle upon ye borders of Bmb the 26. Aug: 1622. d^ed of a seaver at
Groningen 6 May. 1626.



(23)
Octoher the 4. Anno. 1625. 3000. Imperial Horsemen, and 3000. of Foot,
falling upon the King of Dennemarcks, and Duke Christian of Brunsrick's
Troops, near the City of Hannover, in the lower Saxony, where above 500. of
them were slain, and all the rest utterly rooted. 5. Cornets took the
Imperial Party, and many Prisoners also. Duke Frederick of Anhold was shot
dead upon the place, in the beginning of the Conflict. And so dyed Colonel
Obentraut, and that of the wound received in the Battle few hours after, in
the Imperial Leaguer.

(42)
April the 21. Anno. 1626. Count Mansfeld comes with his Army before the
strong Sconce by Dessaw-bridge, in which the Imperial General Altringer then
commanded. Against this Mansfeld casts up three Batteries: from whence he
night, and day thunders upon the Imperialists. Duke of ^riedland coming to
succor them, skirmishes with the Mansfelders, and utterly defeates the
Horsemen, and four Regiments of Foot: 3000. of the Mansfelders were slain
upon the place; amongst them three Colonels. Kniphousen was taken prisoner with
other Officers, and 30, Ensigns, and 7. pieces of Ordnance. The Imperialists
lost some 1000. men likewise.

Ernst Count of Mansfeld
Came into Bohemia the 20 of Aug: 1618 was first General of ye (...) and
Commander of 4000 Horsemen: took. Pilsena Town in Bohemia by assault fought
against Tilly. Cordua and Spinola had a particular Army by himself in the
Pelatinat. Alsatia Silesia and Hungaria: died at Racon betwixt Sara and Spalato
in his yourny from Constantinopel toward Venice the 10: of November: 1626



(25)
May the 27. Anno. 1626. General Tilly with his Army, setting him down at the
siege of Mun^en, in the Dukedom of Brunswick, which he most fiercely
assaults. The Danish Garrison, under Colonel Claut, sallies out of the Town,
and does valiantly resist them. Tilly resolves upon a general assault, by
force breaking into the Town, he takes it; massacring and putting to the
Sword 25000. Citizens, and Soldiers, with women, and children in it.

(26)
July the 29. Anno 1626. General Tilly, with the Count of Furstenberg,
General of the Ordnance, coming with 20. Cornets of Horse, and 1500 of Foot,
to the relief of the Fort Calenberg, which was by the Danish Army besieged.
But Tilly encountering with them, put them to a retreat, and defeates them
utterly; took 21. Cornets, and Ensigns, and many prisoners, with slaughter of
500. Common Soldiers, 6. Rittmasters, and other Officers, and Colonel Frytags
of the Danish Army.

(27)
The 25. of August. Anno. 1626. At Luttor, few leagues from Wolffenbuttel, in
the Dukedom of Brunswick, the Imperial General Tilly obtained a great
Victory against the King of Dennemarck, and there slew, and took prisonerssome
4000. men of Foot, with. 60. Ensigns, and 6. Cornets. There was ^laine besides
on the Kings side, upon the place of Battle, the valiant Colonel Fuchs, who
commanded, as Sergeant Major, Colonel Nyab, Colonel^ Pentz; the Danish
General Commissary Powis^ and the Landgrave Philip of Hessen. Prisoners ^^
account were taken, Colonel Lindstaw, Colonel^ Franking, Courville, Rantzaw,
and diverse other Officers. On Tillies side some 3. or 400. were slain.

(28)
The Austrian Boores, some 20000. strong, did besiege, and assault the
Imperial Town of Lintz but were beaten off with loss of 800. men. Afte^ this
they fall upon some Imperialists Forces, under the leading of Duke Adolph, of
Holstein, which they utterly defeat, the rest were glad to run away. This to
revenge comes Pappenheim, with 6000. men upon them, and overthrowes them. 3000.
he cut in pieces, and put the rest to flight, the 4. of November. anno. 1626.

(29)
The Town of Northeim in the Dukedom of Brunswick for a long time being
blockd up by the Imperialists. The Imperial General Sergeant Major, Count of
Furstenberg resolves to take it by a general Assault; whereupon the
Imperialists fall furiously on at several times, but by the Danish Garrison,
and Citizens, were again as bravely repulsed, with loss of 6. Captains, 8.
Ancients, and some 100. Common Soldiers. 9. Captains, with diverse Officers,
and 500. Soldiers were wounded, and hurt. The Garrison being out of all hopes
of relief at last parlies, and yields, the 5. of June, anno. 1627.

(30)
Betwixt Bredenborg and Itzeho in Holstein, the ^mperiall Commander, Count of
Slick, fought a Battle against the Marquis of Durlach, where the Marquis lost
the Field. The Imperialists took 42. Ensigns, and 32. pieces of Ordnance from
him, with a slaughter of many 1000. men, whereupon the ^mperialists surprised
the Fort Bredenborg, putting ^o the sword all that was found in Arms, in
October. Anno. 1627.

(31)
Count of Slick having notice that 12. Danish Companies under the conduct of
Colonel Calen^ach, 4. of Conrad Nell, and 6. under Colonel Holck with 200.
Horsemen, of Colonel Bauditzen were ^nquartered about Froy-borg in Jutland,
he with all ^is forces overtakes them. 300. Musketeers, and Dragooners were
cut in pieces, 3000. of the Danish Horsemen, sticking in Morish places, were
also taken prisoners by the Imperialiests, the 17. of October. Anno. 1627.

(32)
Duke of Fridland sending the Imperial Colonel Pechman with 7000. Horsemen,
and Dragoners to pursue the Danish, and Weinmarish Army about Fridberg in
Silesia, where began a great fight betwixt the^; ^ll the Danish Troops were
ruinated, the rest put ^o fight, 10. Companies of them were taken prisoners,
and afterward constrained to turn unto the ^mperialists, Colonel Pechman was
slain in the first encounter.

(33)
The first of June, anno. 1630. Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, with some
12000. (for so many brought he out of Sweden with him, his Fleet was about
some hundred and thirty Ships of all sorts) landed first at that Dorp, or
Village, in the Isle of Vsedome, called Pennemund. The Kings Army consisting of
eleven Regiments of Swedish, Scottish, and High-Dutchmen, was entrenched before
daylight. The Enemies Confusion in this Isle, which the King took, at his
coming, and assaulting, was so great, that three hundred of them perished by
the sword, or in the water.

Gustavus Adolphus king of Sweden,
Came into Germany and landed first in the Jle of Vsedom, with an Army of 12000
men the. 1. of July Ao: 1630. obtained many glorious victory Conquered in two
years and 4 Months two third parts of Germany, was shot through y^ Body and
slain in y^ Battle of Lutzen y^ 6. No: Ao: 1632.



(34)
The King of Sweden sends that Colonel, and his men, who had layne in
Garrison in Stetin, which Town was rendered to the King the 26. of July. Anno.
1630. to the Town of Stargard. This Colonel came by night upon the Town, and
having given advertisment unto these Burgers within, they secretly opening a
Port unto him, give him present entrance. He thus got in presently, cutts in
pieces the Corpse du-guard, which had the watch upon the Marketplace. This
done, he without stay goes toward another Port, which he presently assaulted,
killing 350. Soldiers, which he found within them.

(35)
The King of Sweden passing beyond Stetin, and toward Stralesund again, he
set's him down before Wolgast, the Town he by fine force took in. In the
heat of the assault, the Garrison, and chief Citizens retire themselves into
the Castle. This the King asseiges. Torquati Conti the Emperors General in
those parts, came with 3. Regiments toward the relief of it, but was beaten,
and lost 12. Ensigns, and 3. Cornets in the skirmish. The Garrison consisting
of 600. Soldiers thus defeated of her succors parlies. In this siege the King
lost 120. men. This was done in the end of August. Anno. 1630.

(36)
The Imperial Garrison, under the cammand of the cruel Colonel Gotze, having
plundered, and forsaken the Town Pasewalck, and carried the chief men away,
take it again, from the Swedes, which being 140. strong, had entered the
forsaken Town, September, the 7. and after most valiant resistance: beat,
kill, and drive out the Swedish; fall to tortu^ing of the Townes-men for their
money; ravish Women, and Girls even in the open Streets, and Churchyards; yea
Women in Childbed; kill and abuse the men, fire the Houses, and the People, in
them; thrust Straw into Cellars where children are hidden, and then set fire to
it, burn the Churches; massacre the Ministers; and at length burn down the
whole Town. Thus their rapes and ravages continue till the 11th or 12th of
September. Anno. 1630.

(37)
After which the same Imperialists go to Vckermund, a Town hard by, this they
fall upon, and take; use as before, keep the gates shut, and so burn the
people in the Town. Anno. 1630.

(38)
October the 5th. Anno. 1630. Certain troops of Crabats making a brave before
the trenches at Stetin, drive away the Cattle thereby feeding. In rescue of
them there ^ally out 1000. Swedens. The Swedes overlayd by numbers, loose some
300. brave men, 2. Captains of Horse, and one Sergeant Major in the Skirmish;
the rest being glad to get out with their lives.

(39)
A pretty kind of Battle between the Swedes, and Imperialists, happened upon
the 11th. of November. Anno. 1630. In the mist before Colbergen. In which, what
with those that were slain by the Enemy, and what they had killed themselves
at their own mistake, were 500. men lost. But the Emperors whole Forces both
Foot, and Horse were defeated: their Cannon, all their Baggage and 4. Cornets
taken from them.

(40)
December the 23. Anno. 1630. The King of Sweden with 12. Regiments of Foot,
and 85-Troops of Horse in person, draws down toward the Town of
Griffenhagen, naturally a very strong place in Pom^ren; in which lay an
Imperial Garrison of some 3000. Men; and Don Capua a Spaniard their Governor.
A fair, and large breach being made, 10. 15. or 20. Pieces of Canons
continually going off together, the Swedens twice attempt to enter, and are
twice most valiantly repulsed. But 2500. Men (for no more were now left) being
unable to hold out against 20000. The Town is at the third assault taken. The
Governor received a shot in his thigh, whereof in prison he afterward dyed:
many chief Commanders and 100. Common Soldiers were also taken. 200. were
slain, some fled, the rest flinging away their Arms craved quarter, and had
it.

(41)
About the midst of September, Anno. 1630. The Imperialists of Garze, which
Town they leaving afterward empty unto the King of Sweden, did loose more
then 1000. Men in a bloody fight, with the Kings Forces.

(42)
At the self same time the Swedish Commander Bauditzen fell upon the
Imperialists Garrison of Piritz a Town betwixt Griffenhagen, and Connixberg in
which were some 1400. Men those he defeates, and so was that Town taken.

(43)
In the beginning of Octocter. Anno. 1630. Duke of Friedland sent a strong
convoy of 4000. Men to open the passages, and to thrust some men, and victuals
into the City of Rostock, which was block't up by the King of Sweden. There the
Swedens grapling withal, shrewdly defeated, and kill the most of them: utterly
frustrating their design. About the beginning of December, some 7. Cornets of
Horse issue out of the same Town, to go a boote-haling: these the Swedish
pursue. In the skirmish were 200. Imperialists slain upon the place 280. taken
prisoners; and some 400. Horse brought away: scarcely 20. Sound men recovering
into Rostock again: which afterward yielded to the King, and their Lord the
Duke of Mecklenburg.

(44)
February, the 14. Anno. 1631. The King of Sweden with an Army of 16000. Horse,
and Foot set's down to the siege of Dammin a very strong Town; after a
hideous Battery was the Castle first taken of all by assault; the 15th. day, he
thunders upon that again, beats down the works, and makes so vast a breach
in the walls, that the Imperial Govemour the Duke of Savelly finding the place
not to be tenable against such thunder, and resolutions, parlyes, and yields.
the King lost about 200. men in this siege.

(45)
At this time General Tilly with an Army of 22000. Men, and 26. pieces of
Ordnance besieging Feldsberg a Castle near unto New Brandenburg, which was
kept by the Swedish, by assault he took in, putting all to the Sword in it.

(46)
Thence he did go to New Brandenburg, which was taken by the King of Sweden
with Composition, which Tilly streightlie besieged, and most fircely assaulted.
There are his men soundly knocked down many a time, by the Swedens Sallyes out
of the Town, and by others from the Army by Dammin. Tilly thus enraged with
the loss of his men, after a large Breach in the Walls made with his Ordnance,
he breaking into the Town, he takes it, kills all that he finds in Arms:
except the Governer Kniphousen; four Captains, some Lieutenants, and Ancients
with about 60. common Soldiers: all which he sends prisoners away. This was
done the 9th. of March, Anno. 1631.

(47)
Near Munchenberg 600 Swhedish Horse falling on the sudden upon 700. Crabats,
of which the most part they kill, and 100. they take, their Colonel hardly
escaping into Franckford Anno. 1631.

(48)
The King of Sweden Vantcurryers going toward the siege of Franckford, surprise
Zednick kill 300. Crabats obtain 3. Cornets, and 460. Horse, with a great
booty besides, Anno. 1631.

(49)
The King of Sweden with an Army of some 18000. men advancing toward
Franckford upon the Oder the 3. of April, Anno. 1631 which he took by great,
and bloody assault of the Imperialists. Count Schomberg who commanded in chief
within the Town (with full 7000. men in Garrison) Tieffenbach, and Monte
Cuculi escaped into Silesia. The Soldiers, and fleeing Imperialists so
thronged, and wedged in one another upon the Oder Bridge, which was clustred
full with carriages, that many were stifled, and many thrust into the River
Oder. Lieutenant General Herberstein was slain; so were Heidum, Walstein, and
Iour, all Colonels, with 500. other Captains, and Officers: and 2000.
Soldiers at the least dead upon the place: besides those that were drowned;
and others found in Cellars, Chambers, and elsewhere, as many more perchance.
General Major Sparre, Colonel Waldaw, Colonel Meves, Buttler, Count Sebaudi
all Colonels, and 2. others, together with 800. common Soldiers being sent
prisoners unto the King. Ensigns were there 23. with 8. Cornets presented unto
the King. There were 300. Swedes slain, and 100. hurt. To increase the misery
of the Citizens, there fell a fire at night, which burnt down 17. fair Houses.

(50)
Some Swedish over-confident of their valor, and fortune would needs set upon
certain Troops of Imperialists, which they heard were then abroad betwixt
Landsbergen, and Schiffelbein. But the Swedes are well beaten, 300. of them
lost, and 3. Cornets. Upon the 15. of April Anno. 1631. The King of Sweden
having fully finished his works. before the strong Town of Landsbergen, falls
strongly upon the Enemies Outworks, and takes them; and 300. Soldiers in
them. The Garrison, some 4500. in all, over which was Count Cratz Governor,
whose son the young Colonel, in falling out, by a Musket bullet was killed
demands conditions. About this siege first, and last, the King lost 600. Men.

(51)
In this time the Imperialists attempted the recovery of Crossen in Silesia, a
great Town upon the Oder, which the Swedes had taken before upon agreement:
but the Swedish Garrison being assisted by there Fellows out of Franckford,
and Landsbergen, kill some 200. of them upon the place, driving the rest into
Great Glogaw.

(52)
June the 13. Anno. 1631. ^00. Imperialists in Werben were taken sleepers,
killd, rowted, or imprisoned; their Leiutenant Colonel, their chief
Quarter-matter, and their Town surprised by the Kings of Swedens General
Baiudtzen.

(53)
Upon the last of June, Anno. 1631. The Swedish Colonel Duwaldt sent out from
the King with 2000. Horse, and 2000. Dragoners, who passing through the River
Elue at a shallow passage, (as Bauditzen had done before in surprising Werben)
falls upon the City of Tangermnnd; where both Town, and Castle being taken,
the most of the Garrison slain in the resistancie.

(54)
The King of Swedens General John Bannier falls upon Havelberg, 110.
Imperialists he put to the Sword, 440. taken prisoners, and the Town also, the
9th. of July. Anno. 1631.

July the 17. Anno. 1631. A great defeat was given to the Imperialists from the
King of Sweden Colonel Callenbach, and the Rhinegrave at Tanger; where 4.
Regiments of Horse they utterly defeated. 1500. were slain. Colonel
Bernsteins which was their leader killed, Colonel Holck, and Coronino fled,
some 28. or 29. Cornets taken, besides those that were burnt.

(56)
Whereas General Tilly the City of Magdenburg for a long time besieged, Count
Pappenheim then General Field Marshall, the 10. of May, Anno. 1631. by a
General assault enterd, and the Imperialists fall to killing. The valiant
Falckenburg chief commander was slain. the Marquis of Brandenburg
Administrator hurt, and taken Whilst all thus goes to wrack, a mighty fire
breaks out, the whole City was in 12. hours space wholly turned to cinders,
excepting 139. houses. Six goodly Churches were burnt. 20000. people at least
were here killd, burned, and smothered. 6000. being observed to be drowned in
the Elue. Tillyes Wallons, and Crabats would give Quarter to few, so that all
were killed.

(57)
Upon the 7. of September Anno. 1631. about a mile from Leipsig a sore Battle
was fought betwixt the King of Sweden, and General Tilly. Tillies Army was
some 44000 brave men. The Kings troops were some 18000. and the Duke of
Saxony, together with the Elector of Brandenburg some 22000. in which great,
and bloody Battle the King prevailed against Tilly. There were 9000. of the
Imperialists slain^ upon the place of Battle: and a great number besides in
the chase, the same night, and the days, following. The King lost some 1200.
Men in the whole fight, and the Duke of Saxony not full 2000. Of the chief
Commanders on the Kings side these were slain, Baron Teufel, Callenbach, Hall,
Aldergast all Colonels, with diverse Captains, Lieutenants. On the Duke of
Saxonies side these. Colonel Bintauf, Starshedel, Sergeant Major Holbersdorff,
and Lamminger, both Lieutenant Colonells, and some more: whereof some died the
same day, and some the next. Of Tilly side slain these following, the General
of the Ordnance Count of Schomberg: Erfft Serjant Major General: Baumgarten,
Planckhard, Colonels; Colonel Leutenant, and Baron of Grota, Caratelle
Leutenant Colonel: together with diverse other Italian Colonels, besides
Captains of Horse, and Foot. Tilly himself wounded, and fled into Hall.

9 John Tscherclaes Count of Tilly first Lieutenant General of the Duke of
Bavaria
Came into Austria with 6000. of Horse and foot the. 10. Juny. Ao: 1620 was
victorious in ye Battle before Prage fought against ye Marq: of Durlach.
Mansfeld. Branswick. and King of Dennemarck and overthrow. them. his wholly Army
defeated by ye King of Sweden in ye Battle of Leipzig and Lech. dyed. at
Jngolstad of the wound receved in the Conflict at Lech the 20 of April. Ao:
1632



(58)
October the 8. Anno 1631. the King of Sweden took by a general assault that
strong, and (by the Enemy supposed) impregnable Castle of Wurtzburg, being
therein an Imperial Garrison of 1500 fighting men. All that resisted suffered.
The Governor Keller, a Captain of a Troop of Horse, saved his own life by
begging it at the Kings feet: all the defendants being slain, and taken
prisoners. The Castle for one hour was permitted to the pillage: where an
unvaluable booty was obtained by the Soldiers. Some 200. of the Swedish lost
their lives upon the service. Troy it self was not better provided for its ten
years siege, for victuals, money, and Ammunition, then this goodly, rich,
strong, and pleasant Fort of Wurtsburg was.

(59)
The Town Werthhaim was kept by the Italian Colon. Piccolomini. He now issuing
out of the town, and making the best resistance that he could, had all his men
that escaped not by fight, either slain upon the place, or carried away
prisoners. October the 15. General Tilly having a mind to be revenged of the
loss of Piccolominies men, and the town, sends some 3000. Horse, and Foot to
make an enterprise upon that place again. The King of Sweden sends some of his
men against Tilly. Tilly falling into the Swedish Ambuscado whence he gate not
out, but with the loss of 2700. men 800. Horse, 14. Ensigns, and Cornets, and
all their Arms, and Baggage.

(60)
About October the 21. Anno. 1631. General Tilly sends out 3. Regiments more
to oppose the Swedish at Rotenburg an Imperial town near the head of the
River Tauber; but these three whole Regiments were either routed, or
slaughtered by the Kings Troops.

(61)
December the 8, Anno. 1631. the King of Sweden took by assault the Castle of
Oppenheim, where 200. Spanish of Don Cordua's Army were cut down, and 8.
Colors taken.

(62)
Not long after this, Rhinegrave Otto Ludwick upon his march toward
Franckendall, chances upon, a Partee of 9. Troops of Don Philip de Silva' ^^
Horse (who was then General of all the Spanish in the Palatinate, and in the
Bishoprics of Mentz and Triers) that were going out a booty haling, whom,
after a long fight, he rowtes, and overthrowes, taking 5. Cornets away, from
them Anno. 1631.

(63)
Upon the New-yeares day at night, anno. 1632. was the strong Town, and Fort
of Manheim, yea the strongest of all the Palatinate, by a pretty stratagem
surprised by Duke Bernhard of Saxon Weimar. Being believed, and admitted as a
friend into the Town, he presently cut in pieces the next Court of Guard,
kills 300. of the Garrison: lays hold upon Maravelli the Governor, and his
Lieutenant Colonel; giving Quarter to none, but to the Germans.

(64)
About the 8. of January, Anno. 1632. After the Town of Wismar had yielded to
the Swedish General Todt, and the Imperial Garrison under Colonel Gram,
marching out with almost 3000. men, upon occasion of a quarrel by the way,
whom the Swedish Colonel Lohausen falling aboard with, kills 300. upon the
place, and so terrifies 2000. more, that to save their lives they became
Soldiers to the King of Sweden. And Gram himself taken prisoner.

(65)
January the 20. anno. 1632. the Swedish General Rhingrave falls upon
Kirch-berg, in the Hunts-ruck, and takes it in by assault; wherein 147.
Italians, and Burgundians were put to the Sword, and 100. Germans taken
prisoners.

(66)
About this time the Rhingrave sets upon 2. Regiments of Spaniards, not far
from Kastel: whereof, one he utterly overthrew, forcing the other to retire
into the fastness of a wood. Here were 8. Colors obtained, and afterward
presented unto the King of Sweden, at Mentz. But the Spaniards resolving not to
put it up so, suddenly pass over 1800. Horse, and disposing one Foot Regiment
in close Ambush. The Rhinegrave hoping of the former fortune, though he had
but 600. Horse in all with him, lost in the cloze of the Business some 300.
men.

(67)
January the 22. Anno. 1632. The Town and Castle Crutzenach, wherein 600.
Germans, and Spaniards were in Garrison, taken in by great assault from the
King of Sweden; a breach first wa^ made of the Kings Canon, through which the
Town was entered: the Castle being night and day besieged, at last yields upon
hard conditions. There were lost on the Kings side, 3. Captains, and of common
Soldiers, 250.

(68)
In the beginning of February, Anno. 1632. General Field-Marshall Pappenheim,
having gott^^ notice, how that the Swedish Colonel Cag, wa^ with three new,
and weak Regiments, Dragooners, of about 1500. men, lodged near unto Hoxter,
and Corvey, he falling into their Quarters, cut in pieces the most of them.

(69)
Before the middle of February, Anno. 1632. Landgrave Wilhelm of Hessen
reprised Warburg, whereinto Pappenheim had newly thrust a Garrison of 900. men.
The Town he took by storm; and all that resisted, dyed for it.

(70)
About this time Duke William of Saxon Weimar, and General Bannier do storm,
and enter by forc^ the Town of Gottingen, wherein the Imperial Colonel
Carthaus commanded with a Garriso^ of 900. men. Carthaus with his Officers
flinging down their Arms, are taken prisoners, and the houses plundered.

(71)
February the 28th. Anno. 1632. Gustavus Horn, Swedish Field-Marshall, cut in
pieces two Regiments of General Tillies Horse, obtaines 2. Cornets, the rest
together with the baggage being all burnd within a mile of Bamberg. But
Gustavus Horn likewise in forsaking Bamberg, lost 500. prisoners. Henry
William, Count of Solms wounded, whereof he dyed in March following at
Sweinfurt.

(72)
Gustavus Horn in recovering Mergentheim first of all defeated 800. new-come
Imperialists, who had thought to have thrust themselves into the Town. The
Garrison after this being roundly besieged, and for two or three days
battered, came to a composition the 16. of December Anno. 1631.

(73)
Whereas the King of Sweden besieged the City Donawerth, wherein were some
1200. Foot. 500. Horse, and 500. of the Bavarian trained Bands, and Rodulph
Maximilian, Duke of Saxon Lawenburg being their Governor, perceiving that they
were neither able to resist the King, nor to stay the expectation of relief;
thought a little before break of day to have, under favor of the darkness,
marched out of the Town over the Bridge, toward Bavaria, this design of
theirs was hindered by Colonel Hebron: that though Saxon Lawenburg, and some
few with him got safely over, yet the rest that would have followed, betwixt 3.
and 400. of them being cut down, and 400. taken prisoners, the 27. of March,
Anno. 1632. Donawerth being thus taken, the Kings Troops falling upon 400.
Imperial Soldiers, in a Castle not far from Donawerth, kill 200. of them in
the Castle, and the rest were taken prisoners.

(74)
The 5 of April. Anno. 1632. A great confict happened at Lech, the King of
Sweden passing the same River Lech, and General Tilly straightly opposing him
not to come over, the General Altringer of the Bavarians Army with the shot of
a Fieldpeece was spoiled, and carried off in the Duke of Bavarians own Coach:
and Tilly also received a Musket Shot, which proved a mortal wound unto him.
The Duke of Bavaria himself and the whole Army fled by great disorder, some
1000. men of the Bavarians Army were here slain, with many great Commanders,
and under Officers.

(75)
In the end of April, Anno. 1632. Pappenheim being come with an Army of 10000.
Horse, and Foot, in the City of Stade falls upon 4. Com^anies of the Swedish
Colonel Monroes, and a Swedish Regiment of General Major Leslyes, cuts them
off, takes 19 Colors, and some of the Captains, and Officers prisoners.

10. Godtfrid Henry Count of Pappenheim.
Sent from the Emperor the 10. of October. Ao: 1626 with 6000. against the
rebellious Boores into Austria Afterward was made Field-Marshall to General
Tilly over the Jmperiall and Bauaria^ Army. was stricken with a bollet of a
Falconet in the Battle of Lutzen ye 6 of No: A^: 1632



(76)
In the beginning of June an. 1632. the Imperial General Cratz, with 2000.
Foot, and Baron of Cronenburg with his Regiment of Horse, together with 2.
Regiments of Crabats, besieged and takes the Imperial City of Weissenburg: the
Swedish Garrison, consisting of 8. Companies of Foot, and 2. of Horse, refusing
to turn to the Imperial party, had all their throats cut. The Town
plundered, the chief Citizens, and Ministers were carried away prisoners, the
Gates of the City burnt down to the ground.

(77)
Duke Bernhard of Saxon Weimar in the pursuit, of the Imperial Army under
Ossa, lights upon one of his bravest Regiments, consisting of 2000. men, and
conducted by Hannibal, Count of Hohen-ems: all which he had utterly rowted and
defeated; took the Count, with 400. prisoners, and 8. Ensigns. This defeat
happned about Isne. an. 1632.

(78)
Sir Patrick Ruthven then Swedish Governor in the City of Vlm, falling upon
some 1000. Boores stirred up by their Landlords against the Swedes, killed
400. of them about Kempten. Others of them beingbusie at Zipperiden, where
almost 800. were cut in pieces, 300. more of them in an other place were
affrighted, and disarmed by the Swedes, Anno. 1632.

(79)
The Imperialists falling upon 5. troops of the Elector of Saxonies Horse, then
lying at Rakonick in Bohemia, where the Saxons were surprised, and knocked
down, scarce 120. of them escaping with their lives, and loss of two Cornets.
Anno. 1632.

(80)
The Saxons Forces, under the leading of Baron Hoffkirck, defeated 900.
Crabats, and take 11. Cornets from them, about Prage. Three Ensigns of the
Imperialists, that had before cut off 5. Companies of Saxons at Rakonick; were
almost every man of them cut in pieces, by the Saxons again, before the Gates
of Prage. Anno. 1632.

(81)
July the 30. Anno 1632. Colonel Sparr was sent out from General Walstein, in
his encamping before Norimberg, with 8. Cornets of Horse, and 20. Troops of
Crabats, and 500. Musketeers to cut off the Swedish Colonel Dubatel in his
retreat from Freyenstat. But the King of Sweden with his Dragooners falling
upon the Walsteiners, rowted, and defeated them. Sparre himself, with his
Lieutenant Colonel Tertskie taken prisoner, together with 4. Captains, diverse
Officers, and above 100. Common Soldiers, 3. Cornets were then obtained, and
2. Ensigns. 600 of the Walsteiners were slain upon the place; and diverse more
drowned in the River, and Moorish places. On the Kings side were not many
slain; but amongst them was Colonel Ries. This was done about Burghtan.

11. Albrecht Walstein Duke of Friedland. General of the Jmperiall Army
Came first against the Mansfeldishe and Weinmarishe Forces into Silesia out of
Hungary the. 16 Apr: Ao: 1626. pravailed against ye King of Dennemarck: was
quitted of his Generallship Ao: 1630. and again recalled to it Ao: 1632. Lost
the Battle before Lutz^^* was killed with: a Partisan from Cap: Debrox at ^gra.
Feb: 25 Ao: 1634.



(82)
July, the 20. Anno. 1632. Landgrave Wilhelm of Hessen with a partee of 500.
Horse, and as many Musketeers lighting upon 3. Companies of Imperialists,
killed 100. of them, took 2. Cornets, and 500. prisoners. 150. of the
Imperialists more slain the same time about Sweinfurt.

(83)
June, the 23. Anno. 1632. Duke Bernhard of Saxon Weimar came before the Port
of Ehingen; those he breaks with a petard; he puts 200. Imperialists therein
to the Sword, who had before surprised the Swedish Officers in the same place.

(84)
By this time Duke Bernhard surprised the Town of Fuessen, opening the Gates
by Petards, and Scaladoes; wherein* 1500. men of the Imperial General
Altringers old Regiments were in Garrison: 300. of which being in the heat of
slaughter were cut off; the rest flung down their Arms, and were taken
prisoners.

(85)
Upon the 24th. of August. Anno. 1632. a bloody conflict fell out betwixt the
King of Sweden, and the Imperial Army before Norimberg, where on the Kings
side were slain. The Count of Erpach who dyed of his wounds: General Major
Boethius Lieutenant Colonel Scepter, Rittmaster Maurice of Malsburg with
Rittmaster Crailsheim all men of account. Diverse other Captains, Lieutenants,
Ensigns, and other inferior Officers there lost their lives, with 800. common
Soldiers, wounded on the Kings likewise the Count of Eberstein, Castle, and
Thurn all Colonels, together with diverse other Captains side, Rittmasters, and
other Officers, of common Soldiers there were some 1500. wounded. On the
Imperial and Walsteiners side slain 1000. of common Soldiers of acount were
slain the Lord Fugger, Colonel Aldobrandino, Colonel Don Maria de Caraffa.
Some days after this Battle, the King going out upon a party falls upon some
Walsteiners, 250. of them he cut in pieces, diverse prisoners they left behind
them.

(86)
In the end of August. Anno. 1632. The King of Sweden in his removing from
Norimberg cutts the throats of 350. Crabats by Rain, and took 7. Ensigns from
them.

(87)
About this time 14. Hassian Troops of Horse sent to relieve the Town
Volckmarsen were discovered, and surprised by the Pappenheimers, of these were
200. slain, and as many prisoners, with the loss of 9. Ensigns, and all
their Baggage. The Town was yielded presently upon it to Pappenheim.

(88)
September the 20. Anno. 1632. General Pappenheim pursuing the Swedish
General Ba^dissin and Skiermishing with him 20. English miles together, did
very much spoil upon the Swedish, and cut of all the sick, and tired men,
that could not fast follow: There being slain on both parties. ^^e 1000. men.
This was about Hebenhusen.

(89)
August the 17. Anno. 1632. A great fight was ^^tweene the Swedish, and
Imperialiests before ^einaw, where the Imperial Leager then was un^^r Don
Balthazar di Marradas with some 12000 ^ong. The Swedish Colonel, and the
Saxons Field^arshall Arnheim falling upon the Imperialists ^orse quarters, they
after a charge or two took the ^wte upon it: running toward Sweinitz, and
^^eslaw; some 4000. of their Foot having thrust ^^emselves into the Fort of
Steinaw. In theirs en^^unter were slain above 2000. Imperialists. The ^wedish
hereupon recovered the Pass, and Fort of ^^einaw. Upon August the 31. the
Imperial Ge^^rall Sergeant Major Schaffgotzki was also over^^rown by Arnheim
betwixt the Od^r, and Namstaw; ^here 1200. Imperialists lost their lives, the
rest ^ed, and their Colonel Eckstad with many Of^^cers taken.

12 Don Balthazar di Marradas
Sent from the Emperor with. 2 Rigiments of Spaniards ye ^^ Jul: 1620 into
Bohemia afterward left Chief Commander in (...) parts by Walstein. fled out
Prage at ye Saxons com^ing. 1 of Nov: 1632. recovered and lost again some
places in Bohemia: defeat^ at Steinaw and before Breslaw by Arnheim 1653.



(90)
Upon the 6. of November Anno. 1632. hap^ned the long, cruel, bloody, and
bravely fought ^ttell of Lutzen, which in continual exercise one place or
other had lasted from 9 in the ^orning until night, in which the Swedes by the
^lour of Duke Bernhard Saxon Weimar, and ^enerall Major Kniphousen did
overthrow, and put flight the Imperial Army, and their Generalissi^o Duke of
Friedland. 9000. men were slain upon ^e place; and many a brave man dyed of
the an^^ish of his wounds miserably. Of great Comman^ers slain on the Kings
side; First, the King of ^wedens Majesty himself, whose death is never e^ough
to be lamented. Next to the King was ^rave Neeles, Duke Ernst of Anhalt, Count
of ^hurn, Colonel Wildenstein, Colonel Winckel, ^ergeant Major General
Isler, and Colonel Gers^rff, with diverse Lieutenants Colonells, Majors,
^ittmasters, and Captains. On the Imperial side; ^e Abbot of Fulda; the Count
of Pappenheim ^ield Marshall: Count Berthold Wallenstein: Ser^eant Major
General Breuner, Lo. Westrumb, Lan, ^omargo, Witzleb, and Foves all Colonels:
together with Taxheim, Lampert, and Cammerhoff Lieute^ant Colonels; besides
Majors, Captains of Horse, and Foot, and other Officers.

(91)
Gustavus Horn Swedish Field Marshall, and the Rhinegrave Otto Ludowick
obtained a noble Victory before Wiseloch the 16. of August. Anno. 1632.
defeated a thousand Horsemen of the very flower of the Imperial Army, led by
C^lonell Vitzthumb, and Montbaillion, where Col^nell Montbaillion was shot
dead, and so his I^tenant Colonel fell at the same time by hi^ Diverse
Rittmasters were there dismounted, and ^bove 400. of the common Soldiers
slain.

(92)
October the 15th. 1632. the Swedish General Rhinegrave falling upon the
Imperial Army under Count of Salm, who with 4000. Boores. 200* Soldiers, and
600. Horse intend to relieve Be^feld, which was by Gustavus Horn besieged, ki^^
600. of them, and takes about 150. prisoners where upon the rest retired unto
Molsheim.

(93)
Upon the 30. of October Anno. 1632. wa^ the strong Town, and Fort Benfeld
delivered to Gustavus Horn, who from the 12. of September until the 30. of
October, had straightly besieged, and many times assaulted. The Imperial
Governor having done, and suffered as much a^ might be expected from a man in
his place, had lost above 400. in all this time of his men, marching out with
400. Foot, and 220, Horsemen.

(94)
The 16. of November. 1632. whereas 12. Cornets of the Brisachers Horse, were
resolved to affront Gustavns Horns Quarter, and to attempt the relieving of
Colmar, Rhinegrave Otto Ludwick, with 3. Regiments flies in upon the necks of
them, kills, takes, and disperses them, scarce 100. of them recovering with
safety unto Brisach, 7. Ensigns he took from them, and that he might pursue
the victory, falls likewise upon the Imperialists at Witte^en hard by
Ensisheim, where 300. he knocked down upon the place, and amongst them 2.
Barons of Reiffenberg, Lieutenant Colonel Roben, a Sergeant Major. 6. Horse
Captains, with diverse Cornets and under Officers. Colonel Ascanio their
chief commander being escaped with 3 Cornets of Horse, the remainder of 1200.

(95)
The 8. of December, Anno. 1632. the Swedish Colonel Zillhart of Gustavus
Horne's Army, and Lieutenant Colonel Remthinger with a reasonable partee
steal suddenly upon Endingen, where the Imperial Colonel Croneck with 5.
Troops of Horse was enquartered, who was himself in the very beginning of the
fight shot dead upon the place, above 100. of his men slain, and all the rest
dispersed, and the Town of Endingen taken.

(96)
The 9. of January, Anno. 1633. the Vantcurriers of Gustavus Horn Army falling
upon 200. Bauarian Dragooners not far from Memmingen, kill the most of them,
whereupon Gustavus Horn with his whole Army advanced toward the Bavarian, and
Imperial Army under Duke of Feria skirmish with them, and defeat 2. Regiment
of Horse, where the chiefest Officers were slain, 6, Cornets taken, and the
rest prisoners.

(97)
January, the 28. Anno. 1633. the Swedish Colonel Canofsky having gotten
intelligence of 1700* Imperial Horse, and 1500. Musketeers coming upon him
to surprise him, and his forces, presently gathered his men together, falls
with fury upon the Imperialists, and dispersed them, forced the rest to run
away into Fryburg, took 400. prisoners, and killing 400 of them.

(98)
In the end of January, Anno. 1633. 4000. Imperialists took by force that Fort
of Oppelen. But the Saxon Colonel Sneider falling upon them, cut in pieces
300. of them, and put the rest unto a disorderly retreat. Not long after this
Skirmish, the Swedish, and Saxon Forces coming again upon the Imperialists at
Strelen, where they were beaten off, with slaugther of some 500 men.

(99)
The 24th. of March. Anno. 1633. After Duke Bernhard of Saxon Weimar had taken
the Town Herrieden, Dan, and Ohrenbaw by assault, the Imperial General John
de Werth with 40. troops of Horse coming to relief, and to beat of the
Swedish, Duke Bernhard falls upon them, killed more then 400. of the
Imperialists, the rest escaping with loss of 2. Cornets, and some prisoners.

(100)
In the middle of April, Anno 1633. The Swedish Colonel Dubatel with 5.
Troops of Horse falling into the Quarters of 3. Troop^s of Crabats, at
Wonsidel, he cut in pieces the most of them, takes 3. Ensigns, and their
Colonel, with some Officers prisoners. Few days after Dubatel light upon
1600. other Crabats, that scoured up and down the country, cut the throats of
the most of them, carrying away their 8. Ensigns.

(101)
The 25. of April, anno. 1633. Duke George of Luneborg, Swedish General,
having besieged Hamelen* upon the River Weser; 30. Cornets of Horse, and 12.
Ensigns of Foot, under command of the Imperial General Bonninghusen, and
the Bishop of Osenbrug came to the relief of this Town, whereupon Duke
Luneborg sent the Lieutenant General Melander with some Regiments of Horse and
Foot against them, who encountering with the Imperialists at Angeren, near the
City of Lemgow, killing, and destroying them utterly. There were slain upon
the place of this Battle almost the half part of this Imperial Army, and
amongst them Colonel Haxthusen, Colonel Dunbert, Colonel Aschenburg, with
diverse Captains and Officers, and 9. Ensigns were taken.

(102)
June the 4. Anno. 1633. The Swedish under the leading of Colonel Deloni fell
upon 1600. Imperialists and Bavarians before the City of Memmingen, where the
Imperialists were defeated, and Knocked down, few of them escaping with their
lives into Memmingen.

(103)
About this time, the Swedish Field-Marshall Gustavus Horn having taken with
composition the strong Fort of Pappenheim, the Imperial General Altringer
sends 1500. Crabats to attempt the Swedish; but the Swedish being ready to
entertain them, kill 300. of them, and drive the rest to a shameful retreat.

13 Gustavus Horn Swedish General Field Marshall,
Came into Germany with ye king of Sweden 1630 was first sent with a Army
toward Silesia. then afterward General of a particular Army by himself in
Franconia Alsatia and Swabenland, where he much prevailed against the
Coesarca^^ and Bavarian Forces was taken prisoner by ye k: of Hung: in ye
Battle of Norlingen. 27 Aug: 1634



(104)
Upon the 28th. of June. Anno. 1633. A bloody Battle was fought at Oldendorp,
where the Imperlalists, who had gathered a new Army under the leading of
General Merode, and Count of Cronsfeld, coming the second time to the relief
of Hamelen, by the manhood of the Swedish Generals, as Duke of Luneborg,
General Melander, and Kniphousen, they were overthrown, and 5000. of them
slain upon the place; amongst them the Imperial Colonel, Quad, Westphall,
and Dincklag, General Merode, who dyed few hours after, besides Captains,
Rittmasters, Lieutenants, and other Officers, whose dead, and naked bodies were
not known. Prisoners were taken Sergeant Major Mars^seler, Colonel
Westerhold, and diverse Officers more, besides 2500. Common Soldiers. 13. great
pieces of Ordnance, and 70. Cornets, and Ensigns, also taken. On the Swedish,
and Hassians side some 200. lost their lives. Hereupon the Town of Hamelem was
rendered to the Swedish Conquerors.

(105)
At Pfaffenhoven, in Alsatia upon the 31. of June. Anno. 1633. Prince Palatin
Christian of Berckenfeld General of a Swedish Army, by himself, obtained a
great Victory against the Duke of Lorrlayne, in which Battle the Lorrlaynes
Army was wholly ruinated, and defeated; leaving all their Ordnance, and Baggage
behind them with the loss of 1000. men; the Swedish Garrison in Pfaffenhoven
likewise in the heat of this encounter fell out, cutting of, and dispersing
500. of the Lorraynes Musketeers. Of the Swedish were slain the General of
the Ordnance Schulthes, and Baron of Ruppa; of common Soldiers slain, and
hurt some 208.

(106)
In the middle of October 1633. the Imperial General Bonninghusen falling at
night upon the Swedish, under Field Marshall Kniphousen near Paterborn cut off
a great many, took 200. prisoners, and 5. Ensigns of them.

(107)
November the 4th. Anno. 1633. Gustavus Ho^^ Swedish Field Marshall coming
with his Army upon 3. strong Regiments of Imperialists, and Bavarians under the
conduct of the Count Bray Colonel Luirs, and Konig of General Altringers
Army, he gives them a shroud defeat, put to the Sword 400. of them, and many
carried away prisoners, amongst them Count of Bray, and diverse Officers more.
This Skirmish happened at Oberndorff near Balingen.

(108)
In the end of the Month November Anno. 1633. the Swedish General Rhinegraves
Horse Regiment falling upon some troops of the Imperial General Altringer
about Mindelheim, where after a sharp conflict near 1000. Imperialists were
cut off, and Altringer himself had been almost surprised.

(109)
About this time the Swedish Colonel Kanoffsky had a good fortune upon that
Pleskowish Regiment of Crabats, which he utterly routed at Wangen; their
Liutenant Colonel he took prisoner besides some other Officers, the rest
being put to the Sword. A little after this the Swedish General Major Rostein
runiated also three Regiments of Imperialists, about Kempten whereof many were
cut in pieces, and the rest put to flight. Anno. 1633.

(110)
At this time the Swedish General Rhinegrave took in many places in the upper
Alsatia, and amongst others aslaulted the Town Rufach, in which he took
Prisoners the old Earl of Lichtenstein, together with many other Officers, and
above 500. common Soldiers, which gave up their names to the Rhinegrave, but
the Boores were all put to the Sword, within a week or 10. days space, there
were a full 1000. Imperialists cut off in several places thereabouts. Anno.
1633.

(111)
In the end of December Anno 1633. the Swedish Colonel Cracaw falls upon some
Imperial troops of Colonel Bucheim, going toward Huimolst near
Landsbergen, where he sorely ruinated them, kills 400. takes 9. Ensigns, one
Cornet and many prisoners.

(112)
December the 29. Anno 1633. Landgrave William of Hessen, and the Swedish
Field-Marshall Kniphousen took in by a general assault, the Town of
Saltzkoten, and whereas the Citizens thereof had dealt very treacherously with
the Swedes, the Town was set on fire, by heaving and shooting of Grenades in
two several places, which burnt so fiercely, that the whole Town quite
consumed unto ashes; few of the Citizens and Garrison could escape away, but
the most of them were put to the sword. The Imperial Governor was also taken
prisoner.

William Landgrave of Hessen the first Protestant Prince* in Germany
Which made an union with ye king of Sweden and 1631. did go privately over
unto ye kings Camp at Werben and returned with 3. Regiments of Horse and. 1.
of Foot. for his assistance. Brought an Army of 12000. men to yoine with kings
Forces at Franckford ye 20. Nov: 1631. took many Cities and Castles in Ringkow
Westphaly. and Lower Saxony. died of a burning Fever in Eastfriesland. 1637



(113)
Upon the 29 of January Anno 1634. the Swedish Colonel Kirkhofer of Duke
Bernhard Saxon Weymars Army, had the fortune to light upon the Imperial and
Bavarian General, John de Werths Regiment, consisting of 11. Companies, all
which he wholly routed and dispersed, some prisoners he took and brought into
Deckendorff. At the same time the Sergeant Major of the Sa^tlerish Regiment,
brought back three of John de Werths Ritmasters. 3. Lieftenants. 2. Cornets.
and above 80. prisoners. In both these conflicts were full 300. Imperialists
slain, the Bavarian Colonel Swartz taken prisoner. Not long after two Swedish
Colonells, Rosa and Karpffen, light upon Colonel Corpus with his Regiment of
Crabats, whom falling upon unawares, they put them to flight, kill 300. and
take 200 prisoners.

(114)
February the third Anno 1634. Landgrave John of Hessen, and the Swedish
Lieftenant Colonel Ramell and Colonel Sperreuter with 700. Horse, fall out of
Weissenburg upon the Imperialists, with whom they began a hard skirmish, 300.
Dragooners and Musketeers they cut in pieces, and took 800. prisoners.
Amongst which were Colonel Snetter and Haslanger. The rest of the Imperialists
fled, leaving four Ensigns, with four Ancients, one Rittmaster, and one
Lieftenant.

(115)
The tenth of March An. 1634. the Swedish Colonel Plato sent from Duke
Bernhard Saxon Weimar unto Mundelheim, to surround the Crabats Regiment of
Budiani in it, took the Town by assault, and put some 200. that lay in it, to
the Sword; their Leiftenant Colonel he took prisoner, together with many
Officers.

(116)
About this time, Rhinegrave Otto Ludowick Swedish General did obtain a great
victory against the Lorraynes and Imperialists, under command of Count Salm,
and Marquess of Bassompier General of the Lorrayne Forces who with 7000.
strong set upon him, that was little above 2000. betwixt the Town of Senan, and
the Dorpe of Ochsenfeld, whereof the Lorraynes and Imperialists were slain
2000. upon the place. Colonel Philip was shot. Count of Salm, Governor at
Zabern, Marquisse of Bassompier with Colonel Mercy, and 600. common Soldiers
were taken prisoners. The Duke of Lorrayne retired himself into Dan.

(117)
The 29 of May Anno 1634. 700. Imperialists Horsemen, and other commanded
Forces, together with 700. of Foot, under the leading of Colonel Wolckenstein,
came before the town of Wangen, thinking to surprise it unawares, and in haste
they assaulted it with great fury: on the other side the Commander Colonel
Kanosfky with his Swedish Garrison did as bravely, and resolutely stand to
their defenses; so that after some time of resistance the Imperialists retired;
The Swedes issuing out upon them, pursued them till they came to Ravenspurg,
where Canofsky constrained them to fight, and put above 500. of them to the
Sword, and brought 400. prisoners with him into Wangen.

(118)
Whereas the loss of the City of Regenspurg so much discontented the Imperial
Party, that the Caesarian Army augmented with 2000. Hungarians, and the
Bavarian Forces under the General Altringer, marched thitherward to regaine it
the 17. of May Anno 1634. But Duke Bernhard of Saxon Weimar sudden coming, was
so terrible to the Enemy, that they presently retired toward the upper
Palatinate. The Swedes pursuing them, and overtaking the Rear, cut of 300
Crabats, amongst which was their Commander Pleskowits slain, and took 400.
prisoners. On the Swedish side was General Major Courville shot through the
body, whereof he died immediately. But the Bavarians joining with the Imperial
Army under the King of Hungary, both which together consisting of 30000. Foot,
and 15000. Horse, applying themselves to the fiege, intending to make an
assault upon the City, when they could make a sufficient breach by battery.
Hereupon May the 26. with an 100. pieces of Ordnance begin to batter it.
Presently after, they made an assault, but were repulsed with the loss of 500.
men, by the Swedish Garrison out of the City, taking prisoner of the Imperial
Colonel Breuner, diverse other Officers, yea the Swedes they surprise many
Crabats in several places, which were put to the Sword with their commander
Budiani; that also in this first assault of the Imperialists 3000. lost their
lives. July the 10. was the last assault upon the City on all sides, wherein
4000. Imperialists, likewise miserably from the Swedish were cut in pieces. But
whereas the Garrison and Citizens had for a long time, behaved themselves
stoutly in defense of the City, even to the admiration of the Imperialists,
who had before it, by their own relation, 8000. slain upon the place, 6000.
others who had runneaway, made 15000. Canons shot upon the Town, cast above
2000. Grenades into it, and 465 Sallies endured from within, the City is at
last surrendered upon honorable conditions.

Ferdinand the third king of Hungary and Bohemia proclaimed king of the
Romans the 11. Dec: 1636 at Ratisbone.
Which City he for along time besieged, most fierceli assaulted, and at last
took from the Swedens upon honorable Conditions the 16 July. 1634. Fought a
bloody Battle with Duke Beruhard of Saxon Wemar* and Gustavus Horn Generals of
ye Swedish Army. before ye City of Nordlingen and obtained the Victory against
them the. 27. Aug: 1634,



(119)
May the 12. Anno 1634. Duke Georg of Luneborg Swedish General, having
received certain intelligence, that the Imperialists, and Leaguish Forces
consisting of some 3000. men, had an intent to relief the Town of Hildesheim,
which he still besieged; he sends 1330. Horses in all of his, under Colonel
King toward the Enemy, where began, not far from the Town Bevern, a sharp
conflict betwixt them; at last the Swedish were victorious, the opposite
parties were put to a Sudden flight, with great loss and slaughter. The
Protestant Forces pursuing them so furiously, that they were head long tumbled
into the river of Weser; the way of Bevern was strowed and scattered full of
dead carcasses, there were very few that escaped, and the most of them were
afterward found and slain. Prisoners were taken some 300. amongst which was
one Colonel Lieutenant. one Colonel the Earl of Essenfeld, and an Earl of
Wangenburg.

(120)
The Imperial Commander Bonninghusen was with General Geleen besieging the
Town of Coesfeld, to which they gave two fierce assaults the 17. and 19. of
May. Anno 1634. at which assaults, they were bravely received, and repulsed
with great loss, and whilst they lay at the siege, the Swedish and Hessish
Troops came suddenly in the neck of them, and after a furious encounter for
the space of four hours doubtful, the most part of their Foot Forces were
dispersed, and a great many of them slain: and pursuing the Horsemen betwixt
Ham and Lunen, 500. of them were slain; with the rest of the Horsemen
Bonninghusen and Geleen retired to Lunen, which the Swedish after the third
assault had it also surrendered: 4000. Soldiers which were therein are come
over to the Swedes.

(121)
About this time General Lieftenant Melander of the Hassian Army, marching
against the Army of the Catholic Leaguers in Westphalia, overtooke their Foot
forces, and put 1500. of them to the Sword; the rest under the command of
General Bonninghusen and Geleen, fled in a confused order into Hamme, wherein
he left a Garrison under his Colonel Lieftenant Veglen; which Town the
Swedish went to assault, there the Petards were employed and took such effect,
that though the Soldiers defended themselves stoutly from the walls, yet the
City was taken the 27. of May. Anno 1634. to the great confusion and most
total ruin of the Leaguish Catholic Army; and more than the fourth part of
the fame Army was put to the Sword.

(122)
After this the Swedish Army being brought before the City of Munster, the
Swedish General Duke of Luneborg without delay summoneth the City, to be
surrendered unto him: but they giving an denial answer, the Swedish did
continue the siege. A party of some 1000. strong sallyed out of the City, to
fetch provision in it, in their return were met by some Hassians, and Swedens
in the Army, who put 800, of them to the sword, and and took from them all the
provision. An. 1634.

George Duke of Lunenborg Chief Commander of Fridlands Army before
Stral-Sundt: 1626
Came to the king of Sweden and maid General in Lower Saxony with 5000. men
Swedish Forces. 1. May 1631 besieged and took many places obtained 2 glorious
Victoria against the Jmperialists the 28. Juny 1633 at Oldendorp the other
before Hildesheim. 5. of July. 1634.



(123)
Upon the third of May. Anno. 1634. General Fieldmarshall Arnheim of the
Saxons Army obtained a memorable battle, and brave successful victory against
the Imperialists at Lignitz: where the onset and first shocke of the Battle
was very hot and fury, continuing with great obstinacy and bloody opposition,
the space of five hours: the Saxons Canons being three times lost to the
Imperialists, and three times with much occision recovered again from them by
the Saxons: the Imperial Curassiers and the Crabats did show much valor, and
resolution for the most part of the Battle, till in the end the victory
inclined to the Saxons side. The Imperialists fleeing toward Lignitz were
pursued and cut in pieces, by the Saxons with an exceeding great slaughter,
above 4000. Imperialists were slain upon the place; amongst whom were Colonel
Bigots, two General Majors, the Lieftenant Colonel of Winsen Regiment, four
other Officers and Commanders, and 1400. taken prisoners. Colonel Trost was
dangerously wounded, and so was Coloredo the General himself, and Colonel
Winse. Colonel Goslitz was taken prisoner, most of the Captains of the Foot
Forces were slain. Of the Saxons party slain about 400. whereof 2.
Ritmasters, 5. Cornets, and four Ancients, and 200. hurt: 36. Ensigns. nine
pieces of Ordnance. 27. Cornets won in the field, and two others more in
pursuing of the Enemy.

(124)
The 6. of May. A. 1634. The Imperial Commander Goltz coming with 5000. men
to besiege Oppelen, began to assault it in 5. several places at once. But the
Saxon Garrison under Command of Colonel Sneider, did their best to keep the
Imperialists out. That 140. of them lay dead in the ditch near the breach,
three or four one over another, and near the other works lay scattered here
and there, a great many carcases, in so much that above 400. were found dead
upon the place, and more then were slain, were hurt and wounded. The Commander
Goltz was slain, the Lieftenant Colonel Sieghose was shot in the shoulder.
four Captains with some Lieftenants and Ancients lost their lives, leaving
their Ordnance alone upon the Batteries, and ran away.

(125)
The fifth of April Anno 1634. The Army of the Catholic League, after some
resistance, having taken the Town of Hoxter by assault, the Imperialists made
their victory exceeding bloody: sparing neither armed or unarmed, man, woman,
or child, putting all to the Sword, and what the Sword could not spoil, they
caused the fire to consume, and the dead corpse they cast into the river Weser:
yea did most inhumanely and butcherly murder and hew in pieces, without
respect either of age, sex, or condition: the Hessish General Lieftenant
Melander hearing of the cruelty of the Imperialists, sending 1200. Horsemen
before his Army against them, put above 500. to the Sword, and took 4.
Companies of them prisoners.

(126)
June the seventh Anno 1634. Betwixt Landshut and Pfaffenhoven in Bavaria,
Gustavus Horn having the pursuit of the Bavarian General John de Werth, cut in
pieces 900. of the Bavarians, and John de Werth himself hardly escaped.

(127)
June the 14. Anno. 1634. General Field Marshall Horn did reprise and take by
assault the Town Aicha, put the most of the Townsmen and Soldiers to the
sword, hanged the perfidious Commander, who contrary to the agreement and his
promise, had repossest himself of the place, from which he had so lately been
ejected, before one of the gates, and burned the Town to the ground.

(128)
July the 12. Anno 1634. Duke Bernhard of Saxon Weimar and Gustavus Horn taking
Landshut in Bavaria by assault, fired the Castle and Suburbs, pillaged the
City, and put as many as they found in Arms to the Sword. Hither was
Altringer the Bavarian Field Marshall sent with some troops to succor it, a
man known to the world, for a prudent and valiant Soldier, but he in a
battle being slain, with a shot through the head, his Army was routed.

(129)
Upon the 26. and 27. of August Anno 1634. the great, sore, and bloody Battle
was fought before Norlingen, in which the King of Hungary together with the
Bavarians and Spanish Army, under Cardinal Jnfant of Spain, prevailed against
the two Swedish Generals Duke Bernhard of Saxon Weimar, and Gustavus Horn, so
that the Swedish Army being overlayed, and oppressed with multitude of the
Imperialists, Spanish and Bavarian Forces, was forced to give ground, and so
were beaten and disordered, that many of the old and best Infant^ria were
slain, and diverse of the best Commanders killed, hurt, or taken prisoners:
amongst others the valiant Gustavus Horn, who himself, together with the
Fieldmarshall Cratz, the General Major Rostein, the General Major
Schafelitzki, Colonel Hume, Lieftenant Colonel Stuart and Forbes, and other
high and under Officers were taken prisoners. The young Marquess Friderick of
Anspach, the Lord Zerotin, Colonel, Sneidewind, which commanded as General
Major, Colonel Wettberger, Colonel Grun, Colonel Lieftenant Willibart,
Sergeant Major King, and seven Scots Captains, besides Lieftenants, Ensigns,
and other Officers were slain upon the place of Battle. General Lieftenant
Hoffkirchen, and many of other Officers and Commanders were wounded and hurt:
what and how many of common Soldiers on both sides were slain, man had no
certainty of it. After this bloody Encounter was ended, the City of Norlingen,
being yielded to the King of Hungary.

17 Ferdnand. Cardinal Jnfant of Spain
Joined with the Jmperiall Camp at Norlingen 22 Aug: 1634. with: 12000 Jtalian
and Spainish forces in witch fight he gained much glory and is Gouerner of
Brabant. etc:



(130)
The Imperial Army came from thence, besore the Imperial City of Hailbrun,
and troubled the same with no Ordnance, but only with Grenades, in such
manner, that at once, there were set on fire, and burnt to the ground, above
140. houses. A Swedish Lieftenant Colonel Senger of Smidbergers Regiment,
commanding in the Town, being slain in a sally, and the Town taken, in the
end of August. Anno 1634.

(131)
Whereas July the fifth Anno 1634. The Imperialists under command, of the
Colonells Waldeck and Schelhammer, who brought together above 400. Horse and
Foot to Neustat, did the second attempt to relief Hildesheim, were by the
Protestants Army, under the Swedish General Commissary Anderson, and General
Lieftenant Vsler defeated; within one hour they fled in a disordered
confusion, and the rest of the Army, within a short space was so utterly
routed, that of 2500. Horse, scarce 250. return to Neustat; their Foot Forces,
being at the first 1500. were almost slain upon the place. About 1000.
prisoners were taken, amongst which were two Lieftenants Colonells, two Majors,
seven Ritmasters, three Captains, 11. Lieftenants 9. Cornets, and 13.
Standards. The City of Hildesheim whereupon, when they within saw themselves
deprived of all succor, July the 17. was delivered to the Swedes.

(132)
After the Battle at Lignitz, the Saxons Army under Lieftenant General
Arnheim, marched toward Olaw, wherein the Imperial Governor Rostick, being
advertised of the Saxons coming, burnt the whole Town to the ground, and
betook himself into the Castle: from thence the Saxons did go to Oels,
wherein the Imperial Governor Don Johan de Languiall yielded, to the mercy of
the Saxons, and was taken prisoner, with his 300. Soldiers; likewise in the
pursuit of the Imperialists from Namslaw, took more than 100. prisoners of
them, in the month of May Anno 1634.

(133)
Upon the 29. of June 1634. the Swedish General Bannier, entered into a set
Battle with 15000. Imperialists, under the conduct of their General Coloredo,
and got a noble victory, near the City of Griffenberg in Silesia, where the
Imperialists lost some 4000. men, slain upon the place, and many Officers of
account, were taken prisoners: 30. Cornets. 70. Ensigns, and 38. pieces of
Ordnance were gotten by the Swedes, by this puissant Army.

(134)
July the fourth Anno 1634. The Saxons Army, though not with strong opposition
took Sittaw in Silesia by assault; which issue of the assault was bloody on
both sides; the Saxon Colonel Lieftenant Wanger was slain, by a bullet of
four pound weight, with 50. common Soldiers, and the Master of the Horse, to
the Duke Saxon Lawenburg, received a mortal wound: whereof he died few hours
after. On the Imperial side within was slain the chief Commander, Lieftenant
Colonel Fuchs, two Captains, and 60. Soldiers, the rest were taken
prisoners, with 12. Ensigns, and two standards of the Enemy. The City being
plundered by the Soldiers in the fury.

(135)
About this time, the Saxon Commander Donner, who was guarded with some 400.
Horse, lighted upon the young Maximilian of Wallenstein, of the Imperial Army,
who held his Randevouz near Glatz in Silesia, routed his troops, carried away
300. prisoners, and amongst them two Captains.

(136)
As the Saxon Colonel Daube took the City of Elnbogen, upon the river Eger,
he by a stratageme, though it was both well fortified, and well manned, and had
but one way of coming to it, quickly entered, and put the Imperial Garrison
therein to the Sword. July the 15. Anno 1634.

(137)
At this time, the Saxon General Lieftenant Arnheim, and the Swedish General
Bannier being sat down before the City of Prage, with their Army, they
played upon the City, with their Canons, for the space of three days, and
were replayed unto from thence in the like kind, with great loss on both
sides. 900. men of the Saxons, and Swedes there being slain, of the Imperial
Garrison within consisting of 14000. men, under the Command of Coloredo, and
Don Balthazar, two expert and valiant Soldiers, which neither omitted the
fortification of the City against assaults, nor shunned the danger of fight,
lost their lives some 600. after this the Swedes and Saxons marching off.

(138)
The 25. of August Anno 1634. General Bannier coming with his Army, before
the Town of Satz, distant from Egra three German miles, upon the Borders of
Bohemia, the Imperialists within standing out after his summons, took it by
force, putting all to the sword in it.

19 John Bannier General of the Infantery
Came into Germany with the king of Sweden 1630. employed afterward from ye
king with a strong Army toward Tyrole Bavaria Lower Saxony and Sil^sia: did
admirable good service in ye Battle o^ Leipzig 1631. is yet still General and
Chief Commander of all ye Swedish Army in Pomerland and upon those borders,
where he lately ye. 3. Oct: 1636. obtained a memorable Victory against ye Imp:
and Saxons Forces at Wi^stock



(139)
The Swedish and Saxons Armies jointly marching forward in Bohemia, did obtain
a bloody victory on the Enemies side, in taking by assault the Town of
Limpurg; wherein did lie four Companies of Imperial Dragooners, and three of
Foot; the Soldiers assisted with the Citizens, and Boores, and women, threw
burning pitch and scalding water upon the Protestants Army, made what
resistance they were able, but their unadvised Action, and desperate obstinacy,
provoked the invaders to anger, which was not pacified, but with the death of
above 2000. persons in that City. The principal Commander in the midst of the
slaughter with 150. Soldiers retired into the Castle, craved quarter, but was
likewise put to the Sword with all those, that were with him. After this cruel
victory, some Imperial succouts were coming to relief this place, but those
the Swedes encountered also, slew a great many, took the Wagons and
carriages, and forced the rest to a confused flight August. the 6. Anno 1634.

(140)
August the 12. 1641. General Bannier advancing with his Army toward
Brundeis, where he first got the bridge from the Imperialists, and broke it
down, then cut in pieces 300. Crabats, which were hindered in their flight,
and lastly took the City.

(144)
The fourth of January 1635. The Imperial Commander Bamberger, who had
formerly commanded in Vdenheim, for the elector of Tryer as the Swedes took it
the year before, using the benefit of the frost, took it forcibly again,
from the French, and German Soldiers, that till then held it, by an assault.
Six Companies, the most of them in heat of blood, were put to the Sword
therein: the Governor himself was taken prisoner.

18 Piccolomini a great Commander first of Walsteins Army after Pappenheim was
mortally wounded in the bloody Battle of Lutzen.
Advanced with his own and ye Cauallery which Pappeheini had seconded ye
Jmperiall Army with extremity of resolution, was twice or thrice shot: and
whereas his Regiment was that which: first Charged when ye King of Swe^: was
slain Walstein, reunrded him as much as was better, then 100000 pounds
Sterlings. 1632 Com^anded afterward ye principal part of ye k: of Hun^ Army,
was sent to assist ye Spanish Cardinal Ao: 1637



(145)
January the 17. Anno 1634. Count Lodowick of Nassaw Dillenburg took the
strong Fort Braunfels, three English miles from the City of Mentz, to the
terror of the Imperialists, 1400. of whom being quartered thereabout, by
assault, having mastered the out-workes, fell upon the head watch, whom he put
to the Sword, applied his petards to the gates one, he fired the rest of the
gates and so entered, one Lieftenant, two Captains, three Lieftenants, one
Cornet, three Ancients, and many under Officers, and 156. common Soldiers were
taken prisoners, besides the loss of many, who were slanie.

(146)
February the 28. Anno 1635. A sharp Gonflict fell out betwixt the
Imperialists, and the French, together with Duke Bernhard of Saxon Weimar
troops, before the City of Speyer, in which the French and Swedish prevailed
against the Imperialists, that rhey retired toward the Fort of the same City,
800. of them being partly slain in the Battle, and in part taken prisoners
by Duke Bernhard. After this Duke Bernhard fell upon the gates of the Suburbs,
though it was guarded with 400. men, 300. of these were put to the Sword, and
the rest saved by the mercy of the Conqueror. On the Assailants side, were
slain about sixty men, and about that number wounded. They of quality were
these, a French Baron, Commander of the Regiment of Normandy. one Lieftenant,
one Ensign, and Captain more of the French Army. Of the Enemies were slain
600. After this bloody Encounter the Imperial Garrison in Speyer, being no^
brought to 500. Foot, and 300. Horse, 900 others being slain in this short
time of the siege and many taken prisoners, yielded upon discretion. Meternick
the late Commander and Hartemberg Commander of the military men, and Gotz the
Colonel, who was dangerously wounded, with 80. Officers became prisoners, to
the Swedish and French Generals. This City of Speyer, was first taken by
Mansfeld, then retaken by Tilly, lately recovered by the King of Sweden,
reposessed by John de Werth, conquered again by the French in this siege, and
afterward taken in again by Gallas.

(147)
The 21. of March, Anno 1635. The Earl of Eberstein, General Major of the
Hassian Army, surprised and defeated 1200. Crabats, and obtained a noble
conquest near Hirchsfeld in Hassia. Jllo Lieftenant Colonel, who was
commander of these Crabats, himself being shot through the head, most of his
Soldiers and Officers were slain, and the rest, which escaped with their
lives, made prisoners, whom with their baggage, and 500. goodly Horses the
Count of Eberstein, Governor of the same City, brought into Cassell.

(148)
The strong and goodly City of Vlm being already blockt up in the end of
February, Anno 1635. by the Imperial General Gallas, expected every day to be
besieged. In the beginning of March. Anno 1635. six Companies of their Garrison
sallying out of the City, fell upon 300. Crabats, which were lodged in a
neighbor village, slew them every man, and took their Colonel alive and
brought him into the City: also in the end of April, a Swedish Colonel, who
had escaped out of prison from the Imperialists, assisted with the maine body
of the Garrison, having in one Sally utterly rooted three whole Imperial
Regiments.

(149)
The seventh of June. Anno 1635. The Imperial General Lieftenant Hatzfeld,
for Gallas being advanced into the lower Palatinat, besieged the town
Keiserslautern, battered it with his Canon, made breaches in the wall,
assaulted it valiantly several times, and was in the end beaten off, with the
loss of 1500. men, by the valiant Swedish Colonel Schombeck Commander in the
same Town. But the Imperialists fell violently again upon the City, the 7.
of June, carried by their number and desperate manner, and in the fury, in
revenge of their Enemies, 3000. of whom were lost in this siege, put not to the
sword, those only, whom they found in arms, but old men also, women, children,
and little Infants, without any condition or distinction. Only the Colonel
Schombeck, of all the Swedish Regiment shrewdly wounded, became a prisoner to
Hatzfeld, and some Citizens saved themselves by much entreaty, and promise of a
large beneficence.

(150)
July the 19. Anno 1635. Duke Bernhard of Saxon Weimar, and the French
Cardinal de Valette, who were in all about 18000. Foot, and 10000. Horse well
disciplined, fell upon the Rear of the Imperial General Gallas, and cut of
some 1600. of his Foot, and above 1000. Horsemen, near Lanstell.

(151)
The Caesarian Field Marshall Goetz, marching with his Army toward Hessenland,
summoned Zoest, a small City upon the River Lip, which refusing to yield,
was by his Army besieged, and almost burnt to the ground, by the Grenades
cast out of the Camp the 9. of September. Anno 1635.

(152)
About the middle of October. Anno 1636. A bloody and sore Battle, was fought
at Witstock, in which the Swedish General John Bannier got a glorious victory,
against the Elector of Saxony, and the Imperialists, where was a hard and long
doubtful Combat. Of the Imperial chief Commanders were slain; the two
General Majors Wilsdorp, and Goltz, and Marazini himself deadly wounded, and
five Colonells slain, whereof threee are particularised by name, Wilzberger;
young Hatzfeld and Kunigell besides Rittmasters, Captains, and diverse
Officers, and by 7000. of common Soldiers slain upon the place of Battle,
and many others more, which fell by the Sword, of the Swedes in the
prosecution, six whole Regiments as Coloredoes, Wendensales, Walsteins, Goltz,
Eracts, and Pappenheimes, being totally ruined. Prisoners were taken 1500.
amongst which were 170. Officers, and 146. women of quality, wives to the
Caesarian, and Saxon Colonells, and their Officers. 143. Cornets and Ensigns.
14. pieces of Ordnance, and 8000. Wagons were left to the Conquerors. On the
Swedes side were slain 1000. and upwards, amongst were of account the two
Colonells, Berghawer, and Conigham, four Lieftenants Colonells, and sundry
Ritmasters, Captains, and under Officers. Colonel Cracaw, Linse, and Gun were
wounded.

(153)
The Fourth of November Anno 1636. The Swedish Army under General Bannier,
fell upon 300. Saxons Horsemen; the avantguard of seven Regiments, under the
Saxon General Major Dehne, near the Fort of Mansfelt whom the Swedish
environed round about, put the greater part to the Sword, and took the rest
both Officers, and common Soldiers prisoners.

(154)
About this time the Swedish General Bannier receiving intelligence, of two
Imperial Regiments enquartered not far from Helmstat, routed them totally,
and cut in pieces the most part of them.

(155)
November the 15. Anno 1636. The Count of Eberstein, General Major to the
Landgrave of Hessen, hearing of the Imperialists march, and how the Swedes
pursuit after them, made all the haste he could to stop their journey, falling
upon the Reere-guard, commanded by General Goetz near Rotenburg, upon the
river Fulda, where being compassed in behind and before, by the Swedes and
Hassians, four of his best Regiments, were cut in pieces, and also defeated.
three pieces of Canon. 13. Ensigns, 300. Horse being taken; 800. Imperialists
more were also not far from this place, from the Hassian Commander Gunterot
slain and taken.

(156)
December the 16. Anno 1636. The Imperial Commander Geleen being upon his
march, with four Regiments toward Westphalia, to unite his Army to Goetz and
Hatzfeld the two Imperial General Majors, was encountered by the Swedish
General Major Stalhanse about Ma^ningen, who slew 700. of them upon the place,
took near as many prisoners, and amongst the rest, the two Colonells,
Manteuffell and Ramsdorff, gained three pieces of Ordnance, and pursued the
rest almost to Wurtzburg, General Geleen and the Count of Furstenberg saved
themselves with much difficulty.

(157)
In the beginning of January Anno 1637. the Swedish General Major Stallhanse,
who having passed the river Sala, cut off the bridge behind him, in three
several Skirmishes with the Imperial Commander Hatzfeld, who led the
Avantguard of ten Regiments, ruinated four of them utterly not without much
loss of his own party. After this the Hassian troops, after a a sharp
conflict with the Imperial Count Budiani, and his Crabats, cut in pieces 300.
of them, himself was forced to flight, and carried with them 26. p^risoners,
all or most of them of note, and eminent Commanders in the Army. In another
place the Hassians falling upon four Companies Caesarians, which lay in a
small City, put them all to the Sword, and returned home with 150. Horse and
other good booty, and baggage, of which they had spoiled the Imperialists.

(158)
A bloody timefell out betwixt the Imperial Generals, and Banniers Forces,
March the 23. Anno 1637. The Swedes advancing with six full Regiments, burned
the City and Castle of Stralen to the ground, and surprised one of the
Caesarian Quarters near Wurtzen, carried away 300. Wagons laden with baggage:
the Caesarians burning hereupon many fair towns to the ground, that 44.
several fires within two Leagues compass, might at once been discovered to
the eye. Colonel Slang being sent by Bannier with 1500. Horse toward
Leisnick, and Eylenburg, in his return at Wurzen, defeated two Imperial
Regiments, carried away their baggage, slew 600. upon the place, takes many
prisoners, amongst which were two Ritmasters, five Lieftenants, and many other
Officers. General Bannier in the absence of Colonel Slang, purposely to bring
a general terror upon the Army of the Imperialists, falling upon 2000.
Imperial Horse, whom he defeated and routed utterly. This victory incited him
to proceed further, and appearing in Battle arry before the Enemies Camp,
another sharpfightfell out, where the Swedes encountered with three Imperial
Regiments, charged them so furiously, that about 300. of them were slain, and
so many drowned in the river.

(159)
The Bavarian General John de Werth with the stren^gt of his army, which
consisting 4300. Horses, and as many Foot, four several times did assault
Duke Bernhard Saxon Weimar, near Ensisheim, but was still repulsed with loss
of above 1000. in several conflicts. 500. dead corpse being found dead upon
the place, and all the Officers of one whole Regiment slain, and so Duke
Bernhard with the loss o^ 130. of his men, got a happy victory. After this
Battle was ended, Duke Bernhard with the Rhinegrave, took by assault the Town
Ensisheim, and slew as many as they found in Arms. The Officers were made
prisoners, and the rest came to serve under Duke Bernhards Colors.

(160)
June the 5. Anno 1637. The Imperial General John de Werth with his own
forces, and 24. Cornets of Crabats, commanded by Jsolani, going to relief
Kentzingen, was beaten and defeated by Duke Bernhard of Saxon Weimar, who slew
and routed 500. of his Foot, and three squ^drons of his Cavallery, with the
loss of 100. of his own.

(161)
June the 6. Anno 1637. General Bannier lighting upon some certain Companies
of the Saxons Commander in the Town of Meissen, own Foot Regiment enclosed
them with his Army, and put them all to the Sword, not leaving one to carry
news of his fellows misfortune. This done, by a stratageme he presently
surprised the Town, who came also in with his Cavallery, made himself Master
of the City, putting also to the Sword, some few only excepted, which saved
themselves in the Castle with the Governor Meurer.

(162)
June the 15. Anno 1637. The Imperial Gommander Mercy in behalf of Charles
Duke of Lorrain with 13. Regiments of Horse and four of Foot, to hinder Duke
Bernhard with his Army, from passing the river Soane. Duke Bernhard having
notice of the Lorraines design, put his men into Battalia, toward the River,
where after a great Encounter Duke Beruhard got the victory near Sangre upon
the borders of Lorraine. All the three Germain Regiments of the Imperialists,
50. persons excepted, were slain, or brought into captivity 500. dead corpse
of them being found upon the place, and 900. taken prisoners. 3000. Horses
gained by this victory. Prisoners of note were these, the Count of Reux
Colonel, two Lieftenants Colonells. ten Captains of Horse, 9. Lieftenants,
14. Cornets, 13 Quarter Masters, 37. Corporalls. 13. Trumpets. 426. common
Soldiers, and 400. Dragooners. But 16. Ensigns gained by the victory, were
sent to the King of France. This defeat was seconded by another; Mercy having
rallyed up his broken Army with 2000. Horse, was again defeated by the
Rhinegrave, who slew 400. of them upon the place, put the rest to flight, and
pursued them to Veson.

Bernhard Duke of Saxon Wemar first General* of a 1000 Horse and Foot of the
king of Sweden Army about the Bodensee Danuby and in Bauaria. 1632
Then was left with half of the Kings Army in Franconia by his great Valor
and manhood obtained victory in ye Battle of Lutzen: half the Swedish Army was
committed to him after ye Kings of Sweden death is now General for ye King of
France and ye confederate Princes in Lorrain Alsatia and about ye Rhine. where
in this present year ye 3 of March. 1638, got aglorious Victory against ye
Imperialist before ye Town of Rhinfelden.



(163)
August the first, Anno 1637. the Swedish Colonel Wrangell, being advertised
that in new Brandenburg, lay ten companies of Imperial Dragooners, making in
all about 700. Horse, under the command of their Colonel Debroll, and 300.
other Horse commanded by Winsen, drew out 800. of the most valiant in the Army
at Anclam, marched directly against them, surprised and slew the major part of
them, took 300. prisoners, with three Lieftenant Colonells, two Ritmasters,
and three Captains, with two Cornets, gained in the Battle.

(164)
August the second Anno 1637. Slang the Swedish Colonel was attended with the
like good Fortune falling upon two Brandenburgish Regiments, under the conduct
of Colonel Dobitz, ^eere Shiffelbein, he surprised them suddenly, defeated
them totally, and put them all to the Sword, except 200. whom he made Captives.

(165)
About the midst of August, Anno 1637. the Imperial General Gallas falling
upon the Castle of Vckermund, where the young Lieftenant Colonel Wrangell lay,
took it by assault, and put the Swedes to the Sword.

(166)
The third of March new style, Anno 1638. Duke Bernhard of Saxon Weima got a
glorious victory before Rheinfelden, where he the Imperial Army under Command
General John de Werth twice entirely defeated, having slain in the first
ski^mish, about the pass of Bicken 400. and 600. taken prisoners, with 10.
Cornets of the Enemy; and in the second Combat betwixt the same City,
Rheinfelden, and Lauffenberg, 1200. more cut in pieces upon the place of
Battle, and 2500. were taken prisoners, the most of them Officers, and men of
quality, as General John de Werth himself, together with the Italian Duke of
Savelly, General Lieftenant Enckenford, General Major Sperreuter, besides 17.
Colonells and Lieftenants Colonells, 106. Rittmasters, Captains and Ancients,
with 110. Cornets and Ensigns. On Duke Bernhards fide slain not above 500. in
the Battle, but amongst them Lieftenent General John Philip Rhinegrave, and
some other Officers.

(167)
Upon the fourth of March. Anno 1638. The Imperial General Klitzingen with
200. Horse and Foot, surprised and took in by assault the strong Town and
Fort Gartz in Pomeren, wherein all that he found in Arms of the Swedish
garrison, were put to the Sword, taking prisoner in it General Major Trumund,
two Lieftenant Colonells, eleven Captains with 12. Ensigns.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
NVmb. 19. lin^ 11. for no both, read on both. by numb* 20. in the mar. for
2627. r. 1623. numb. 22. l. 1. for August, r. August. numb. 22. l. 12. for
Stick r. Slick. afte^ the numb. 23. for numb. 42. r. 24. numb. 32. l. 6. for
figh^ r. flight. numb. 52. l. 5. for Baiudtzen, r. Bauditz^^ numb. 53. for
resistancie, r. resistance. after numb. 54. r. 55. which is left out. numb. 72.
l. 6. for 1631. ^ 1632. numb. 114. l. 3. for and r. unto. numb. 122. ^ 9. dele.
and. numb. 129. l. 31. for Nortingen r. No^linge^ numb. 143. l. 4. for was, r.
were. by numb. 144 an^ 145. in the m. for 1634. r. 1635. Vlt. page for 1635. r.
1638.

Here is also a more large Relation of the Batttell lately fought for
Rhinefelden betwixt John de Werth, and Duke Bernhar^ Saxon Weimar, and with
more circumstances, as is mentioned. Numb. 166.

21 John de werth a Bauarian Commander took in the City of Anspach, and was
rewarded with the honr. of the Marquisat there of by the K: of Hungary
Made an invasion in Francomaye 10 Au: 1634 afteryebattel of Norlingen being
Joined withye Duke of Loraine, took in many places in the vper Al^atia, had a
Fortunate attempt againstye French in Picardi 1636, did go with Picolom^nito
Luxinberg, returned with his Army into A^satia, 1637* where he had many
Incounters withye Rhine grave and Saxon Weimar, who took^ him (...) Battle
before Rhin^^ld 31 1638




