THE LANDS Mourning, FOR vain Swearing: OR The downe-fall of Oaths. Declaring
how this Land groneth under the burden of this Sin, and of Gods fearful
Judgments that attend it. A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, the 11. of July.
1613. BY Abraham Gibson, Mr. of Arts.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Ralph Mab, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Angel. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR John Swinnarton, KNIGHT, Lord Mayor of the renowned
City of LONDON.

AND To the right Worshipful, Mr. Edward Rotherum. Mr. Alexander Prescot.
Sherifs.

WITH The rest of the right Worshipful ALDERMEN, AND Other worthy Citizens of
London.

A. G. Dedicateth these his poor Labors, which lately were of them most
Diligently attended. Graciously accepted. Earnestly desired.


TO The Christian Reader, all Christian Graces.
CHristian Reader, for my self already to be seen in the Press, will be to
some as great a wonder, as Saul among the 1 Samuel 19. 24.
Prophets. I must confess, that in regard of the small number of my years,
(being so few months above the age 24
required to our calling,) I might justly have incurred the censure of
presumption both to Preach at the Cross, and to come into the Press, had I
not to the former been enjoined by Authority, and to the latter pressed by
importunity. After many denials I was forced to yield to the continuing
requests (and no less earnest, then godly) of such Honorable, Worshipful,
and worthy intreaters: Whose liking thereof, had it been no better then my
own, the place of Birth had been the place of Burial; and the Cross had been
the Grave, wherein to leave it. But the rather have others desires for
publishing this Sermon, at length prevailed and overcome me, because the good
acceptance, and encouragement, which it had of the hearers gives me hope that
some benefit may ensue to the Readers, and that it shall be profitable to some,
hurtful to none. It lays open a sin very dangerous and detestable; and yet
(the more pity) too common and customable. If hereby I may reclaim but one
from it, I have my reward: that is the only mark I aim at, not affectation
not ostentation. Plain it was in the Preaching, more plain it is in the
Printing: some Quotations I have omitted, and interposed in the Margent, to the
end it may no way be obscure, but plain to the plainest. Thus (with Wisdom)
Pro. 9. 2. 5.
I have prepared cheer for thy soul; and now (with her also) I inuit thee to
eat of it. When I can provide better thou shall have it. In the mean time
accept this, and welcome to it. If thy stomach be curious, it is not for thee:
If otherwise, much good do it thee. If any good hereby redound to thy Soul,
let God have thy praise, and me thy prayers.

Waldingfield parua. Suffolk. Thine in Christ Jesus, A. G.

THE Lands Mourning, FOR Vaine-Swearing. OR, THE DOWNE-FALL of OATHS.
A Sermon preached at Paules-Crosse, the 11. of July. 1613.
IEREM. 23. 10. Because of OATHS, the Land mourns.
RIght Honorable, right Worshipful, and Well-beloued, Men, Brethren, and
Fathers, if ever there were a time when, if ever a place where, Gods Ministers
and Watchmen, as Esaias Esaias 56. 10.
calls them; his Stewards and Ambassadors, Tit. 1. 7. 2 Cor. 5. 20.
as Paul names them; his Angels and Messengers, as Malach. 2. 7.
Malachy terms them, had need to cry aloud and not to spare, to speak Esaias
58. 1.
boldly and not to fear, to show the people their transgressions, and to the
House of Jacob their sins; then now is the time, here is the place: the time
is now, in this our age, the place is here, in this our Land. That which the
Heathen man spoke in former times, is much more verified in these times: (...),
Hesiod. (...).
Both Land and Sea is full of evil: such general forwardness on the one side
to that which is bad, such frowardness there is on the other side to that
which is good; we may truly say with Paul, the days are evil. Ephesians. 5. 16.
Notwithstanding, the sound of the Word has gone into all the Land, the bright
beams of the Gospel have gloriously shined upon us, and the bells of Aaron
been long rung amongst us; yet how many proud Pharaohs, that do not stick to
say in their hearts, Who is the Lord that I should hear his voice? how many
Exodus 5. 2.
ungodly Ahabs, that have sold themselves to work wickedness in 1 Kings 21.
25.
the sight of the Lord? how many wicked Ieroboams, that cause others to sin?
and, to use the Apostles 1 Kings 22. 52.
words, (...), Romans 1. 32.
not only do such things themselves, but favor and delight in them that do
them? On the other side, how little is the Flock of Christ? Luke 12. 32.
how few amongst us Faithful, as Abraham was? Righteous, as Lot was? Zealous,
as Josiah was? Religious, as David was? True hearted, as Jonathan was?
Courageous, as Paul was? and Devout as Cornelius was? These, and such like, are
gathered to their Fathers; few, or none, are left of them: they are like the
Summer gatherings, as Micah. 7. 1.
Micah speaks. This gate is strait, Mat. 7. 14.
this way narrow, and few there be that find it.

God has offered us his Spirit, but that we have quenched: he has sent us
his Prophets, but them we have despised: he has given us his Mercies, but
these we have abused: he has warned us by his Judgments, but those we have
neglected. Satan never more busy, Revel. 12. 12.
for his time is short: Sin never so common, as in these last days: men draw
it with Cords, as Esaias 5. 18.
Esaias speaks: drink it like water, Job 15. 16.
as Job speaks: they lie, they continue, and sleep in it: and it is safer to
commit it then to reprove it. Gods Ministers may say of this Nation, as the
Prophet, of Israel, From Esaias 1. 6.
the sole of the foot unto the head, there is nothing whole therein, but
wounds, and swelling, and sores full of corruption. We may take up the
complaint of the Children in the Market place, We have piped unto Luke 7. 32.
you, and ye have not daunced; we have mourned unto you, and ye have not
wept.

And what? must we then be silent, and cease to speak at all? or must we,
with the false Prophets, Ezech. 13. 18.
speak pleasing things, sowing Pillowes under men's arme-holes, and flattering
them in their sins? No, this is neither good for us, nor them: Not good for
us, says Paul, 1 Cor. 9. 16.
there is a woe to us, if we preach not the Gospel: not good for them, says
the Lord by Jeremiah, Their Iere. 6. 14.
hurt is not healed with sweet words. The calmest Sunshine does less
purify the air, then the terriblest thunder and lightning. The pleasantest
Potion does seldom purge so kindly as the bitterest Pill. So words that to the
care are sweetest, are not always to the heart the wholesomest. And therefore
Esaias must Cry aloud, and lift up his Esaias 58. 1.
voice like a Trumpet. Jeremiah must Iere. 1. 17.
trusse up his loins and not fear their faces. Every one of us (that are the
Surgeons of souls) had need to cut and lance these festered sores, and by
sharp Corrasiues make them smart at the quick, though our Patients be
impatient, and our selves endure, with Moses, murmuring; Exodus 5. 21.
with Michaiah, smiting; with 1 Kings 22. 24.
Jeremiah, imprisoning; nay, with Ierem. 32. 2.
John Baptist, beheading. Mark 6. 27.


In which respects, and upon The Apology for choice of the Text.
which considerations, (Right Honorable, right Worshipful, and dear
Brethren) when being called by commandment unto this place, I meditated with
my self what at this time to entreat of, as best befitting the estate of our
times, I resolved to decypher out some dangerous wound, to lay open unto you
some capital crime, some notorious impiety, some general sin, for which God
may have a just controversy with the Inhabitants of the Land: choosing for
this time and in this place, to be (with James and John) The son of Thunder,
rather Mark 3. 17.
then (with Barnabas) the son of Consolation. Amongst other the Acts 4. 36.
sins of our Land and crimes of our age, I find, as none more heinous, so
none more common then the abuse of Gods holy Name, by profane Swearing. A
sin most odious in the sight of the immortal God, and yet so small in the
eyes of mortal men, that like a Leprosy Swearing, a general sin, and spread
over the whole Nation.
it has ouer-spread the whole body of our Nation, from the Cedar to the Shrub,
from the highest to the lowest, from the richest to the poorest, from the
mightiest to the meanest. And therefore give me leave in this Honorable
assembly plainly to entreat of these words I have made choice of: and out of
them to show the haynousnesse of this sin, which in Ieremialas time caused
the Land to mourn, for so faith our Prophes in this my Text.

Because of Oaths the Land mourns. NOt to stand either upon the Author, or
Occasion, or Connection, or Exposition of this portion of Scripture, which of it
self is plain and easy, but to come (without any Circumstance) to the Text
it self, it contains (you see) The Contents of the Text.
a complaint of the Prophet Jeremiah, laid in against the Jews for not
forsaking, and against their false Prophets, for not reproving their vain,
idle, and wicked Swearing; whereby they both dishonored God, and caused his
heavy Judgments to fall upon them.

In a word it shows unto us the The revvard of unlawful Oaths.
reward of unlawful Oaths, which is first (as you may consider it) simply
propounded, Mourning: and 1
then aggrauated by the generality 2
of it, in that it extends to the whole Land, so says the Prophet, The Land
mourns. In the first, we are to note two things; first, the The parts.
cause: secondly, the effect.

The cause, Swearing. 1
The effect, Mourning. 2

The cause, in the former words, Because of Oaths: the effect, in the next,
the Land mourns. And well may Oaths cause mourning, and swearing end in
sorrowing. For as to those that do now mourn in Sion, there is a blessing
pronounced, Matthew. 5. 4.
and comfort promised, They shall Isa. 61. 3.
have beauty for ashes, joy for mourning, and the garment of gladness for the
spirit of heaviness; their April showers bring May flowers, they that Psalm.
126. 5.
sow in tears shall reap in joy. So to those, that here pass their time in
iollitie, and never think upon the affliction of Joseph, but make Oaths their
pastime, and swearing their music in their greatest merriment, there is a woe
denounced and judgment threatened, their laughing shall Luke 6. 25.
end (says Christ) in wailing and weeping: their Oaths, says my Text, shall
conclude in mourning.

Because of Oaths the Land mourns. Text.
FIrst, of the cause, and then of the The first part.
effect. The cause is expressed in the first words, Because of Oaths. The
cause.
I know indeed, the Hebrew word here used, (...), is diversely read of
Interpreters upon this place. But I take our common translation to be the most
proper, and therefore read it: not, because of cursing, as Hierome A facie
maledictionis. Hieron. Propter execrationem. Treme. Arbitrer notari hic periur.
Call. Propter iuramentum falsum. Chal. Paraph.
and Tremellius: nor, because of perjury, as Calvin and the Chaldee
Paraphrase; but because of Swearing, as our late translation; or, because of
Oaths, as our Geneua reads it. Which notwithstanding we must not with the
Anabaptists take to be understood of all kind of Swearing whatsoever, but
only of vain Oaths, and no other. For an Oath An Oath in it self good, but
may be abused, as Prayer.
in it self is good, and warranted by God, but yet may be abused as every
other good thing. Prayer which is an excellent part of Gods Service, is
diversely used and performed: Sometime well, and then it is acceptable: sometime
ill, and then abominable. In like manner an Oath, which is a kind of Prayer,
is in some cases lawful, in other unlawful. Lawful it is when rightly used:
unlawful it is when Gods worship is abused: For the better explaining whereof
I shall think it not amiss to insist upon these two things. First, that there
is 1
a lawful use of Oaths. Secondly, what Oaths are lawful, what unlawful. 2


For the first. That there is a 1 That there is a lavvfull use of Oaths,
appears, 1 by precept.
lawful use of Oaths, it may appear both by precept and by pattern. First,
by precept from the Lord himself, as Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord
thy GOD, and serve him, and shall swear by his Name. So, Thou shall swear the
Lord lives, etc. Ierem. 4. 2. And he does not only command it, but promise to
reward it, Ierem. 12. 16. The end Ier. 12. 16.
why an Oath is thus ordained and The end of ordaining an Oath.
required, is twofold: 1 The glory of God. 2 The good of Man.
And first, it makes much for the glory of God, when hereby he is appealed
unto, 1 The glory of God.
as the chief Judge of the whole World, and men flee to his Name, as to a
strong Tower, Proverb. 18. 10. In this regard says Prou 10. 18.
one, an Oath is a divine thing; for it Diuina res est iusiurandum: sacra enim
anchora est, ad qua^ confugitur, quum humana sapie^tia progredi non potest.
Huld. Zvvin. Elench. in Catabap. Strophas.
is a holy Anchor-hold, to which we flee when man's wisdom can go no further.

And surely herein we give unto God, first, the glory of omniscience, when we
call him to testify of our secret thoughts, and so acknowledge him (...), Acts
1. 14.
The knower of hearts. Secondly, the glory of Truth, when he is appealed unto,
as Truths witness and maintainer, and falsehoods revenger. Thirdly, the glory
of Power, whereby he can; and of Justice, whereby he will take vengeance of
those that swear Muscul. append. ad Psalm 15. de Iuramen. Quare plane insani
hominis esse oportet, si quis iuramenti vsum, modo leuit as and mendacium
absent, non agnouerit tam non derogare quicquam gloriae Dei, vt illam etiam
illustret.
falsely. Wherefore in these respects we may conclude with Musculus, that
certainly he can be judged no better then a madman, who will not acknowledge
that the use of an oath, being taken neither lightly nor falsely; is so far from
any whit derogating from the glory of God, that it does even much manifest, and
set it forth.

2 The good of man.
The second end why an Oath is of necessity required, is the good of Man, it
being (as Melancthon calls it) Praecipuum vinculum ordinis politici, Phil.
Melanct: in Mat 5.
the chief bond of civil order: for hereby is Propter iustitiam conseruandam,
veritatem astruandam, amicitiam confirmandam; etc. Bonaueh. centiloq. pars 1.
cap. 12.
Right and Justice maintained, Truth and Verity preserved, Peace and concord
established, discord and dissension ended: There must be an end of strife, who
does not grant it? An end of strife there cannot be, till confirmation on the
one side be stronger then on the other. To this end in the first place reasons
must be used: when these fail, then by witnesses must the matter be
stablished: when witnesses fail, an Oath must be used: Deuteronomy. 19. 15.
and this is (...), the end of strife, as the Apostle calls it: An Oath for
confirmation is the end of all strife, Heb. 6. 16. So we see that an Oath is
ordained by God, and that to very good end and purpose.

Now secondly, as we have precept to command it, so pattern to 2 By pattern.
commend it. It is commended by example and pattern without exception; and
that,

First, of the Saints of GOD.

Secondly, of the Angels of GOD.

Thirdly, of GOD himself.

First of the Saints of God, both in the Old Testament and New. In the 1 Of the
Saints of God.
Old Testament, of Abraham to the King of Sodom, Genesis 21. of Jacob to his Uncle
Laban, Genesis 31. of Joseph Genesis 21. 24.
to his Father Jacob, Genesis 47. So of Genesis 31. 53.
David to Jonathan, of Elias to Obadiah, Genesis 47. 31.
1 Samuel 20.
of Elisha to Iehoram, and diverse others. And from the Old 1 King. 18. 15.
2 King. 3. 14.
Testament come we to the New, Paul does it in diverse Epistles; as to the
Romans, God is my witness, Romans 1. 9. To the Corinthians, I call Romans 1. 9.
God for a record unto my soul, 2 Cor. 1. 23. 2 Cor. 1. 23.
To the Galathians, I witness before God that I lie not, Gal. 1. 20. Gal. 1.
20.
To the Philippians, God is my record, Phil. 1. 8. Thus we have the Phil. 1. 8.
pattern of the holy men of God.

Secondly, not only so, but of 2 Of the Angels of God.
the Angels of GOD. So we read, Dan. 12. 7. that the Angel held up both his
hands, and swear by him Dan. 12. 7.
that lives for ever: so we read, Rene. 10. 5. 6. The Angel life up his
Revel. 10. 5. 6.
hand to Heaven, and swore by him that lives for evermore.

Thirdly and lastly, of God himself, the pattern of patterns. He 3 Of God
himself.
is recorded in Scripture to have sworn diverse Oaths: sometime by his
holiness, Psalm. 89. sometime by his right hand, Esa. 62. sometime by Psalm. 89.
35.
his great Name, Ierem. 44. sometime Isa. 62. 8.
by his soul, Ier. 51. Not that Ier. 44. 26.
his saying needed confirming, Ier. 51. 14.
whose bare word is Yea and Amen: 2 Cor. 1. 20. Propter hominum socordiam Deus
jurat. Call.
but to convince the infirmity of our nature, and to comfort it being
convicted. He has done it, as the Apostle says, (ex abundanti) willingly
prael. in Ier. Cur Scriptura iurantem inducit Deum, nimirum vt infirmitatem
naturae nostrae coargueret, and conuicta^ consolaretur. Philo. in libel. de
sacrif. Cain and Abel.
more abundantly to show the stablenesse of his counsel, Heb. 6. 17. For this
cause he swore to Abraham ever to bless him, Gene. 22. 16. to David never to
forsake him, Psalm. 132. 11. to the Gentiles not to be angry with them, Esa. 54.
8. Thus by all that has been said, it is evident that there is a lawful use
of Oaths, which God has not only 2 What Oaths are lavvfull, what unlawful.
by precept enjoined, but also by his own practice approved. Now it remains
that I come to show what Oaths are lawful, what unlawful.

For the first: A lawful Oath, I call 1 The description of a lavvfull Oath.
that when we swear in a weighty matter, by JEHOVAH, in truth, in
righteousness, and in judgment. Of these things in order.

And first, it must be in a weighty 1 It must be only in a vvaighty matter.
matter, when all proofs and testimonies fail, and when the controversy
cannot be decided, nor the truth discerned, nor the matter determined, but
only by Jehovah; for Reason.
then only it makes for the glory of God, when he is appealed unto in a
matter of moment and importance, and so acknowledged all-seeing and
all-powerfull: and on the contrary the name of God is much dishonored, when
called to witness in every trifle which is not worth an Oath. Plain by a
similitude.
It were (we know) a disgrace, and so it would be taken to disturb and
disquiet the Kings Majesty with such a cause, as the lowest and basest
Officer might determine. How then can God take it, to be made so bold with, as
to be called out of his Throne in Heaven to decide trifles? It is to make less
reckoning of him Guiliel. Tripolit.
then the Turks of their Mahomet, by whom they will not swear lightly and
vainly, but upon occasion of great necessity.

Secondly, it must be by Jehovah 2 It must be by Jehovah.
as is plain by the Word of God, and reason.

First, by the word of God, Thou shall swear by his Name, Deuteronomy. 10. 20. Every
tongue shall swear by me, Deuteronomy. 10. 20.
Esai. 45. 23. And he that swears Isa. 45. 23.
in the Earth, shall swear by the true God, Esai. 65. 16. Isa. 65. 16.


Secondly, by reason: for first, to him we swear by, we give divine Reason.
honor, and attribute omniscience, 1 He only is omniscient.
and the discerning of thoughts: for an Oath is taken in uncertain, and
unknown matters, of which he only can judge that knows the heart. Now this
is proper to God alone, he discovers the deep and secret things, Dan. 2.
22. and he knows the hearts of all the children of Dan. 2. 22.
men, 1 Kin. 8. 39. Therefore he only to be sworn by. 1 King. 8. 39.


Secondly, to him we swear by, 2 He only is omnipotent.
we attribute omnipotence, and the revenging of falsehood. This also is proper
to God; therefore he only Mihi vindicta.
to be sworn by, for vengeance is Deuteronomy. 32. 35.
mine, says the Lord, Romans 12. 19. Rom 12. 19.
and he is able to destroy body and soul in hell fire, Matthew. 10. 28. Matthew.
10. 28.


Thirdly, God only is to be inuocated, 3 He only to be inuocated.
and prayed unto. Now an Oath is a kind of invocation, wherein we desire God
to witness the truth of our speech, and to punish us if we speak falsely.
Therefore we are to swear neither by Angel, Saint, nor any other creature,
but by God alone.

All these are his royal Titles, and Not the least of these Titles must be
denied him.
not the least of them must be denied him. He is not as the Gods of the
Heathen, which (like good fellows) would part stakes: but the true God is a
jealous God, and will not give his glory to another, Esa. 48. 11. Exodus 24. 5.
Hence arose the use which was among Esa. 48. 11.
the Jews, (and is observed Gloriam meam non dabo alteri.
in these our times in the taking of public Oaths) to touch the Bible, when we
swear not by it, but the contents of it, which is God, and the sum of it,
which is Christ, who because he is the subject of the whole Word, is
therefore called (...) John 1. 1.
the Word, John 1. 1. And so much for the second condition of a lawful Oath.

To proceed: as it must be in a 3 It must be in veritate.
weighty matter, and by Jehovah, so in Truth, in Righteousness, and in
Judgment. Which three last properties are set down by our Prophet, D. Hieron.
in Ierem. Tres comites iuramenti, sine quibus non iuramentum, sed periurium
fiat.
Chap. 4. 2. and they are termed by a Father, the three Companions of an Oath;
without which it becomes no Oath, but perjury. We must swear, 1 In Truth;
not falsely. 2 In Righteousness; not wickedly. Iudicio caret iuramentumincautum:
veritate iuramentum mendax: iustitia iuramentum iniquum and illicitum. Aquin.
3 In Judgment; not rashly.
By the first are condemned false and fraudulent Oaths: by the second, sinful
and unlawful Oaths: by the third, rash and unadvised Oaths. To speak of
them in order: And first, that an Oath must be in Truth, is a known truth, and
needs no proof; you see the God of Truth requires it. Now, An Oath
tvvo-fold.
whereas an Oath is twofold, either Assertorie, or Promissory: by the
Assertorium de facto: promissorium de futuro.
one affirming something done; by the other, promising something to be done; we
are to know that in both Truth necessary in both.
Truth is necessary.

And first, in a Promissory Oath we 1 In an Oath promissorie.
are commanded first to swear what we mean to perform, and after 1
to perform what we have sworn. 2
Not breaking our promise, Numb. 30. 3. Deus dicitur iurasse sermon
Metaphorico 1. quoad similitudinem iurantis immobiliter aliquid deliberauit,
per quod declaratur, non solum quae promittuntur Deum decreuisse, sed omnimoda
immobilitate defin^^sse. Caietan. in Cap 2. Genesis
but performing our Oaths, Mat. 5. 33. And for this we have the example of God
himself; he remembers the Oath to Abraham, Lu. 1. 37. So must we, if the
sons of God, and such as will rest in his holy Mountain, not change our
Oath, though to our hinderance, Psa. 15. 4. Nay, Cic. offi. lib. 3.
Tully the Heathen Orator tells us, that an Oath must be sacredly kept
toward our enemies: as David made conscience of keeping his Oath to Shimei,
that before had cursed him, 2 Samuel 19. 23. And therefore the Latin word
(Iuramentum, Valla. lib. 6. eleg. cap. 37. quae enim iuramus firma et immota
debent esse.
a iure manente) plainly signifies unto us, that our Oaths must be steadfast
and constant. And so much the Greek word imports unto us ((...)) whether we
Joan. Scap. ex Eust. page 1194.
understand it, (quasi (...)) a hedge, or (quasi (...)) a bound, or limit:
because the Swearer has hedged himself about with Gods truth, and is so
brought within bounds and limits, that he cannot but perform what he has
sworn. And so much for truth in an Oath promissorie.

Secondly, in an Oath assertorie 2 In an Oath Assertorie a tvvo-fold truth.
there is a double truth required: Logical, and Moral, as the Schoolmen
speak. The one, the truth of the thing: the other, the truth of the mind. The
first, when we speak as it is: the second, when we think as we speak. In a
lawful Oath both are requisite. First, that our tongue 1 Veritas Logica.
go according to the thing, and that not upon Conjectures, and probabilities,
but upon a truth, and a truth undoubted, for which we have good ground,
proof, and warrant. Secondly, that our mind accord with our tongue: not
meaning 2 Veritas moralis.
one thing, when we swear another, but according to the simple and plain
understanding of the Oath, being in conscience persuaded of the truth of it.
Thus in every particular it stands us in hand to have our laynes girt about
with verity, Ephesians. 6. 14. and good Ephesians. 6. 14. Reason.
reason: for otherwise we either make God a liar, or else easy to be
deceived, when we call him to witness a falsehood: both which are impious, and
very injurious, both to God our Creator, who is The God 1
of truth, Psalm. 31. 5. and to Christ Psalm. 31. 5.
our Redeemer; who is Truth it self, 2
John 14. 6. and to the holy Ghost John 14. 6.
our Sanctifier, who is the Spirit of Truth, John 14. 26. And so much 3
for the third condition of a lawful John 14. 26.
Oath.

Fourthly, it must be in Righteousness 4 It must be, in Iusticia.
according to Justice. And here we must chiefly look to two things: 1. That
the Occasion 2. That the Matter
be just.

First, that there be just cause and And here we must look to two things:
occasion to take an Oath, either in respect of God, or Man. First, in respect
of God, when thereby his doctrine 1 That there be just cause and occasion to
take an Oath, in respect:
is confirmed, his honor advanced, his service furthered: thus David swore to
bind himself to his worship. I have sworn and will perform it, Psalm. 119.
106. thus 1 Of God. Psalm. 119. 106. 2 Chronicles. 15. 14
did Asa and his people, 2 Chro. 15. thus Josiah and his people, 2 Chro. 34. 2 Chronicles. 34 31
Secondly, in respect of Man, when Nehem. 10. 29
thereby either publicly or privately, 2 Of Man. Exodus 22. 10 11
necessary Leagues and Covenants 1
are confirmed; homage 2
and Allegiance to Princes testified; the life, goods, or good name either of
our selves, or our neighbor 3
preserved, the truth in doubtful matters discerned; and in a 4
word, brotherly love furthered. 5


Secondly, as the occasion, so the Matter it self must be just and lawful: 2
That the matter it self be just and lavvful.
not only true for substance, but righteous: which is then, when it does stand
with Piety and Charity. And reason there is it should Reason.
do so; for we must swear according to the rule of godliness: God will be
worshipped with his own worship, and he will not be a witness of his own
dishonor, and of harming our neighbor. Therefore he that swears to do a
He that svveareth a thing unjust, makes God, either the witness of a lie, or
an approuer of sin.
thing unjust, either swears not as he means to do, and so makes God the
witness of a Lie: or else swears with resolution, and so makes God an
approuer of Sin: both ways contemning his power, as though he were unable to
revenge. And so much for the fourth condition of a lawful Oath.

The fist and last follows; it must be in Judgment. Now, that is 5 It must
be, in Iudicio.
an Oath in Judgment (whether public or private) which is done with
understanding of the Law of An Oath in judgment. what.
God, and of the Country wherein we live, therewith concurring. Judgment then
requires Discretion, Perk. Cas. of Consc. Lib. 2. cap. 13. sect. 2. quaest. 2.
Understanding, Consideration; and that of five things principally: First, of
the thing in question, which is to be confirmed: Secondly, of 1
the nature of the Oath that is taken: 2
Thirdly, of the mind and true meaning 3
of him that swears: Fourthly, 4
of the particular circumstances, of time, place, and persons, when, where, and
before whom he swears: Lastly, of the event and issue of the Oath. All these
are duly to 5
be regarded. The reason is, because Reason.
God is the God of order, and in matter of truth and righteousness will have
all things done according to the rule of Policy and Judgment. And surely this
Judgment Judgment of great use in an Oath:
and understanding is of great use in an Oath: for, it will guide us to take
it, never but upon necessity, and then advisedly.

First, only upon necessary occasion: For it vvil cause us to take it, 1 Only
upon necessary occasion.
and so much is employed in the Hebrew word (...), which (being used in the
Passive) signifies to be sworn, rather then to swear: to show, that we are
to do it sparingly, being drawn thereunto by necessity. For, an Oath being a
necessary good, is not good, but when Bonum necessariu^ extra terminos
necessitatis non est bonum.
it is necessary: as a Potion not good, but in time of sickness.

Secondly, when necessary to do it advisedly: not rashly, but discreetly 2
When necessary, to do it advisedly.
with due deliberation, with reverence, and fear of so glorious a Majesty. It
is the precept of an Heathen man, (...), reverence an Oath: and the Child of
God Venerare Iuramentu^. Pytha.
is described to fear an Oath, Eccles. Eccles. 9. 2.
9. 2. whence we read that the Israelites swore with all their hearts, 2 Chronicles. 15. 15. that is, all their understanding, all their affections, all 2 Chronicles. 15. 15
the powers of their mind were employed, and set on work, in a due
consideration, and reverent fear of the Oath and Covenant made unto the Lord.
And so much for the last condition of a lawful Oath.

Now from Oaths lawful I come 2
unto unlawful, which what they are will appear from that which has been
said, being such as fail in the former rules. An unlawful The description of
an unlawful. Oath.
Oath therefore I call that: when we swear in a matter whether weighty or
light upon every little occasion, or by any other thing then God, or not in
truth, righteousness, and judgment: of which in order.

And first, it is unlawful in a matter 1 Unlawful when upon every little
occasion.
weighty or light, when upon every little occasion. We read of Moses, Exodus
18. that he had inferior officers to judge the smaller Exodus 18. 26.
causes, and the people came not to him, but upon some great occasion, when the
causes were difficult and hard to be decided. How much It is much to debase God.
then is the supreme Judge of heaven and earth debased, when called from
heaven to give judgment upon small or no occasion? It is to And to set less
by him, then by an earthly Judge:
set less by him then by an earthly Judge, whom we count it a disgrace to
trouble in a trifle. Nay, it is to deal worse by him then by a good Nay, then
by a good suite of apparel.
suite of apparel, which we will not wear every day, but lay it up for
special days: And yet the Name of God, how is it worn and torn, every day
of the week, every hour of the day, (I had almost said) every minute of the
hour. Luke. 23. 34.
Oh Father forgive them: for they know not what they do. They know not what
it is to swear. For what is an Oath? not only (as Iuramentum est cum diuina
veneratione dictio probationis expers. Arist. Rhet.
Aristotle defines it) Asaying void of proof, with divine worship: nor only
(as Iurare nihil aliud est, quam Deum testem inuccare. Aquin.
Aquinas) A calling of God to witness: (and yet if it were no more, it were
not to be taken idly) but an Oath properly, Iuramentum est inuocatio Dei, qua
petitur, vt is tanquam vnicus cordu^s inspector, testimonium det veritati, and
iurantem puniat, si sciens fallat. Vrsinus Catecpars 3. quaest. 102.
Is a solemn invocation of the holy Name of God, whereby we desire him, as
being the only seer of hearts, to witness the truth of our speech, and to
punish us, if we speak falsely. And yet as though God were unworthy to have
reverence, or unable to take vengeance, how do men pollute his Name by daily
and hourly Oaths, vvherby they turn (Asylum in domum communem) the
Sanctuary of Verity into a common house of vanity. So we see in the first
place Oaths are unlawful, when taken upon every little occasion.

Secondly, unlawful, when not 2 Unlawful, when by any other thing then God,
be it either pro eo, or cum eo.
by Jehovah. And here men offend against God two ways: first, when they leave
his Name, and take another for it: secondly, when they use it, but add
another with it: both are forbidden by God: both are 1
threatened of God. The first, Iere. 5. 7. Ierem. 5. 7.
How should I spare thee for this? thy Amos. 8. 14.
children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no Gods. The second, 2
Zeph. 1. 5. where he threatens Zeph. 1. 5.
to cut off those, that swear by the Lord, and swear by Malcham. Hence then
come to be reproved Hence are reproved diverse kinds of Oaths.
diverse kinds of Oaths, chiefly these: 1. Heathenish. 2. Civil. 3.
Supersticious. 4. Impious. 5. Ridiculous.
First, all Heathenish Oaths: by their 1 All Heathenish Oaths by their Gods.
Genesis 31. 53.
Gods, as Laban, by the God of Terah, an Idolater, Genesis 31. 53. and as Iezabel
by her Gods, 1 Kings 19. 2. These Oaths are expressly forbidden by God
himself, Exodus 23. 13. Exodus 23. 13.
Ye shall make no mention of the name Josh. 23. 7.
of other Gods, neither shall it be Psalm. 16. 4.
heard out of thy mouth. Hos. 2. 17.


The second kind here reproved, Zach. 13. 2.
are Civil Oaths. Give me leave so 2 All Civil Oaths, by the Creatures.
to term them for distinction sake, because among carnal men they pass
without controulement, as readily and freely, as civil speech from their
mouths. As, how common a thing is it, among the profaner sort, to swear by
the light, Heaven, Sun, fire, meat, drink, money: so, by their hand, soul,
and such like: by which kind of Oaths they are very injurious both to God By
which Oaths they are 1 injurious to God.
and to themselves. First, injurious to God, in that they invoke the
creatures, which is only proper to the creator: and so they place them Iurare
est aliquid dicere cum inuocatione Dei Ergo non iurandum per creaturas quia non
sunt inuocandae.
in the seat of God, making them corriuals with the Monarch of heaven and
earth, and matching them with him in greatness, both of Wisdom to know
secrets, and of Power to revenge falsehood, both Melancth. in
which GOD requires as due to Mat. 5. 34.
himself alone. Isa. 48. 11.


Secondly, injurious to themselves, 2 Injurious to themselves.
calling those things to judge them, which God has made to serve them. And
surely, it is worth the They much disgrace them selves.
marking and observing how a number (that in other cases stand upon their
credit) do herein much disgrace themselves, setting those things as Lords
above them, that are as servants subject to them; for men Psalm. 8. 6.
swear by him that is greater then themselves. Heb. 6. 16. Heb. 6. 16.


The third kind here reproved 3 All superstitious Oaths, by Saints, or Idols.
are superstitious Oaths, that savor of superstition, and nothing else. Such
are the Oaths of the Popish sort by their Idols, as Mass, Rood, Cross,
Christendom, Testament, Evangelists: So by our Lady, by the Virgin Mary, and
other Saints. By which kind of Oaths they show By the use of which Oaths is
shevved 1 Great folly. 2 Gross Idolatry.
both great folly and gross Idolatry. Their folly, in calling them to
witness, who can neither hear them, nor help them. Their Idolatry, in
forsaking the true God, and making creatures their God. For, when a man
swears by any other thing then GOD, he makes that his Christ. Hom. 12 oper.
imper. super Matthew. Idolatriam ab eo committi dicit, qui jurat per ali quid.
quod Deus non est, eo quod illud deificet per quod jurat.
God, and himself an Idolater, as Jerome and Chrysostom upon the fifth of
Matthew do both affirm: therefore we may conclude, that in an Oath there is
no mention to be made of Saints. The reason is given by Melancthou, Because
they Ne facienda mentio sanctorum in iuramento, quia nec sunt omnipotentes, nec
inspectores cordium, nec executores poenae. Melancth. in Mat. 5.
are neither emnipotent, nor seers of the heart, nor executioners of punishment.

4 All impious and fearful Oaths by the parts or adjuncts of Christ.
The fourth kind here reproved, are impious and fearful Oaths, which (me
thinks) I am afraid to mention, blasphemous, horrible, terrible, by the parts
or adjuncts of Christ, as by his life, death, passion, flesh, heart, wounds,
blood, bones, arms, sides, guts, nails, foot, with many hundred more, which
a gracious heart cannot but melt to hear, tremble to speak, quake to think,
and yet (good Lord) how common are they in the mouths of the profane Common
in the mouths of the sons of Belial. Whereby they deal with Christ, 1
Worse then Judas, Matthew. 26. 15.
sons of Beliall, whereby they pierce the sides, wound the heart, tear the
soul, and rend in pieces the body of our blessed Savior; worse then Judas,
who betrayed him to be crucified for money: these crucify him themselves
merely upon vanity: worse then the Soldiers, 2 Worse then the Soldiers,
Matthew. 27. 35.
that divided his garments; these divide his person, his natures, his members:
worse then the Jews, who cried to Pilate, Crucify him: these instead 3 Worse
then the Jews, Mat. 27. 23.
of Cross and Nails, do between their own teeth grind him, and 1
tear him. They did it ignorantly, 2
these wilfully: they but once; these Acts 3. 17.
often: they in his humiliation; these 3
after his exaltation. Wherefore as 4
these commit the greater sin, so they must expect the greater condemnation.
Think upon this, oh impious blasphemer, and be pricked Let svvearers ruminate
upon this.
with remorse for this crying sin, as at Peter's Sermon many Jews Acts 3. 37.
were for their sin: otherwise know and be assured, that it shall be easier
for those that crucified Christ at the day of judgment, then for thee.

The fifth and last kind here reproved, 5 All ridiculous and new fangled
Oaths.
are ridiculous Oaths: too frequent in the mouths of simple Idiots in the
Country; as, by my fey, lakin, bodikin, by Cock and Pie, and diverse such like
Oaths (which I am not much acquainted with) foolish, trifling, toyish,
childish. Many there are, that invent such as these, and think they may have a
License and Pasport for them, when the Name of God is not expressed: but, says
Calvin, While men will be so Atqui dum ingeniosi esse homines volunt, vt fucum
faciant Deo, nihil quam friuolis cauillationibus se ipsos deludunt, Calu. in
Jacob. 5. 12.
witty as to deceive God, by their vain cauils they deceive themselves. They
must not look for this ere the more to be excused, since it is no other thing
but a mocking of God, and profaning of his name in these ridiculous toys
secretly insinuated. Know therefore, that in a trifle, thou must not swear at
all. In a matter of importance that requires an Oath, thou may, and must use
the name of GOD reverently and religiously. So we see in the second place
Oaths are unlawful, when by any other thing then God.

Thirdly, unlawful, when not in 3 Unlawful when not in truth.
Truth: and in this kind we may offend two ways. First, when our tongue
disagreeth with the thing. Secondly, when our mind disagreeth with our tongue.
First, when our tongue disagreeth with the thing, not speaking as it is, or as
it is upon And that, 1 When our tongue disagreeth with the thing.
certainety, but too suddenly and rashly, as we imagine and conjecture.

And herein a number are very faulty, who being carried away A common fault.
with their own imagination, when they have no sure ground for what they
speak, yet adventure to confirm it with an Oath.

Secondly (which is worse) when 2 When our mind disagreeth with our tongue.
our Mind disagreeth with our Tongue, not thinking as we speak, but entending
to deceive those to whom we swear. The former of it self may be frailty
and infirmity: but being joined with this This is flat perjury, which God
abhors, forbids, reproves.
latter it becomes flat Perjury. And this is an horrible and grievous sin,
which the Lord abhors, Zach. 8. 17. and straightly forbids, Leuit. 19. 12.
and sharply Zach. 8. 17.
reproves, Iere. 7. 9. Leuit. 19. 12.


And this is the cause (says Saint Ier. 7. 9.
Augustine) we are forbidden to swear at all, not because all Swearing is a
sin, but because forswearing Non quia iurare peccatum est sed quia peierare
immane peccatum est, a quo long nos esse voluit, qui omnino ne iu. remus
admonuit.
is an horrible sin, from which he would have us to be very far, who has
warned us not to swear at all. And that not without special cause and
reason. For it is a sin in the highest degree, and contains in it many
capital sins. If therefore Aug. in Mat. 5.
as Christ says, Mat. 12. we Mat. 12. 36.
shall give an account of every idle word, much more of every false word: and
if of every false word, much more of every false Oath. To lie, of it self, is
a sin, says Musculus. Mentiri per se malum est. Malum hoc accessione
iuramenti duplicatur.
To add an Oath to it is a double sin. The Prophet complains of those that
speak deceitfully. Psalm. 12. 2. how much worse Wolf. Muscul. append. ad Psalm.
15. de Iuram.
are they that swear deceitfully? their sin must needs be very dangerous.
Psalm. 12. 2.


Now, of this false Swearing there Of Perjury there are diverse kinds.
are diverse kinds, all which are very heinous: for an Oath being twofold (as I
showed before) promissorie and assertorie, we are to know, that this sin
may be in either of 1 In an Oath promissorie two vvayes.
them. First, in a promissorie Oath, and that two ways: first, when by Oath
we promise that we never 1 When we promise by Oath that we intend not.
mean to perform. Secondly, when having meant it simply at the Oath taking,
we afterward inconstantly 2 When we intend at the Oath taking, but after
change.
change our purpose, the thing being neither unlawful nor impossible, but
only inconvenient: both these are no small sins, whether done in plain or
cunning manner.

What shall we say then to that impious doctrine of the Church of Hence is
reproved,
Rome, which teaches that a man ought not to hold faith with Heretics, 1 The
impious doctrine of the Church of Rome.
whom they style such as profess the Apostolic faith, reject their idle
inventions, and renounce that Antichristian Synagogue? by the entertaining of
which doctrine, Gods Name and Majesty is abused, fraud and treachery
maintained, and contracts between Nation and Nation ouer-turned.

And what shall we say to that impious practice of the Pope of 2 The impious
practice of the Pope of Rome.
Rome, who making himself equal with God, challenges to himself power to
dispense with a lawful Oath, and to discharge Subjects from their sworn
Allegiance to Christian Princes? What is it else, but a direct crossing of Gods
sacred Majesty, who has given express charge to perform our Oaths, as
Mat. 5. 33.
being made not only to man but Exodus 22. 11.
to God: and therefore called, An 1 Samuel 20. 8.
Oath of the Lord, Exodus 22. 11. So 2 Samuel 21. 7.
that our Oath must be performed Ezekiel. 17. 19. Iuramentum etiam hosti
seruandum: non enim considerandum est cui, sed per quem iuras. Hierom.
to our very enemy. And Jerome gives the reason, for you must not consider to
whom, but by whom you swear.

Whence we may boldly conclude, that notwithstanding the Popes relaxation,
who has no liberty to loose, when GOD has bound; no power to separate, when
Mat. 19. 6.
God has coupled; no authority to release any lawful Oath, wherein is not
only a bond of man to man, but of man to God: notwithstanding (I say) this,
our Jesuits, Priests Jesuits, Priests and other Papists, who break their
Oath of Allegiance (notvvithstanding the Popes Dispensation) are guilty of
perjury.
and other Papists, who having sworn Allegiance to the Kings Majesty, (as
next under God) in these Dominions Supreme Governor) do afterward violate
this lawful Oath, denying his Supremacy, and maintaining the Popes, are
guilty of this horrible sin of perjury. Wherefore it were to be wished,
they would herein follow the pattern of the ancient Romans, though
Heathens, whose integrity was The fidelity of ancient Romans.
such, that they would not break Oath with their deadliest Enemies.

Amongst the rest, memorable is the Example of A^tilius Regulus, Tit. Liu. Aul.
Gel. Valor. Max.
who to keep his Oath made to the Carthaginians, his A rare Example.
mortal enemies, returned Prisoner to Carthage. And though not compelled for
any other cause but his Oath: yet (as Tully says of him) the love neither of
his Country, nor of his own, withheld him, when withal Neque eum charitas
Patriae retinuit, nec suorum: neque vero tum ignorabat, se ad crudelissimum
hostem, and ad exquisita supplicia proficisci.
he knew he should go to a most cruel enemy, and to exquisite Torments;
which afterward he sustained till he dyed, in the cruellest and bloudiest
manner that could be invented. A shame then is it for Cic. de Offic. Lib. 3.
Christians to come short of Heathens, whose only guide was the light of
Nature. And so much for Perjury in the first kind.

The second kind of Perjury 2 In an Oath assertorie, two vvayes.
is in an Oath assertorie: and that when we swear either a known untruth: or
an unknown truth. The first is, when we swear that to be 1 When we
swear a known untruth.
truth, which is certainly known to be untruth. The second, when we swear
that for truth which for the 2 When we swear an unknown truth.
present we surely imagine a falsehood, though in time to come it proves to
be truth.

So then it is plain and manifest that in an Oath whether promising What
Perjury is properly.
or affirming, Perjury is not so much swearing a thing false as swearing it
falsely, when heart and words agree not, and when the end thereof is Non enim
falsum iurarc, peierare est: sed quod ex animi tui s^^tentia iuraueris. Cic. de
Offic. Lib. 3.
deceit.

Upon what ground then is that Doctrine founded of Equivocation, and Mental
reservation, which our double hearted Adversaries do both Against the doctrine
of Equivocation.
teach and practice in time of danger. Whereby they justify that wicked speech
in Euripides, detested of the very Cic. Lib. 3. de Offic.
Heathen themselves. (...). Iuraui lingua, mentem iniuratam gero. Eurip.
I have sworn with my tongue, but not with my mind. Like the fraudulent Oath
of Plutar. in Lacon.
Cleomenes, with his enemies, who swear a Truce for three days, and when they
least thought on him, he set upon them and destroyed them in the night. Such
are the Oaths of our perjured Priests and Jesuits; (I can term them no
better) who have a tongue for the Prince, and an heart for the Pope, desiring
diuellishly to deceive those to whom they swear. Which opinion and practice
being admitted and received, does not only overthrow the end of a lawful
Oath, Which opinion and practice being admitted, takes away the end of a
lavvfull Oath.
(which is the deciding of strife, and confirming of truth) but excludes the
Authors of it from Gods holy Mountain: For, he only shall rest there, says
the Prophet David, And excludes the Authors of it out of Gods Kingdom. Psalm.
24. 4. Exhortation.
who has not sworn deceitfully, Psalm. 24. 4. But speaks the truth in his
heart.

For our selves therefore that desire to partake of the joys of heaven, let us
be exhorted in the fear of God, to follow the truth in love, Ephesians. 4. 15.
and to beware of this sin of Perjury, in what kind soever. And because it
is a sin: 1 Injurious to God. 2 Pernicious to our Neighbor. 3 Dangerous to
our selves.


First, injurious to God, and that in diverse Reason 1. Injurious to God.
respects:

First, in Lying, which God hates, Pro. 6. 17. And in defrauding 1
which God reuengeth. 1 These. 4. 6. In Lying and defrauding. Prou 6. 17. 1
These. 4. 6.


Secondly, in defiling his blessed Name, by making that a shelter for 2 In
desiling his blessed Name.
lies: which is as much as if the Keeper of the Kings Seal, should seal
therewith Letters of Treason: so is it no less treason to the King of Which is
treason to the King of Kings.
Kings, to seal and confirm a lie with his name, which of it self is a
Tower, and Sunctuary of verity, Prou. 18. 10. Prou. 18. 10.


Thirdly, in abusing his glorious 3 In abusing his glorious Majesty.
Majesty, by making him a party in the sin, and so contrary to himself,
as though he were like the Devil, the father of lies, John John 8. 44: Quid
enim restat Domino, vbi sua veritate fuerit spoliatus? Iam Deus esse desinet.
Call. Instit. lib 2. Cap. 8. Sect. 24.
8. 44. And what do they herein, but overthrow his very essence? for, take
away his truth, he ecaseth to be God.

Fourthly, in contemning his fearful threatenings, denounced against all that
offend in this sin: for what does the perjured person, but desperately 4 In
contemning his fearful threatenings.
tempt God, and (as it were) outface him, provoke, and dare him, according to
his Word to inflict The perjured person dares God.
upon him the deserved vengeance, which in his Oath he calls for, if he
swear falsely.

So we see in how many respects this sin is a dishonor to GOD. Whence Joshua
to bring Achan to confession of the truth, says, My son, give glory to the
Lord God of Josh. 7. 19.
Israel, Josh. 7. 19. Intimating, that by perjury God is greatly dishonored.

Secondly, as it is injurious to Reason 2 Pernicious to our neighbor.
God, so pernicious to our neighbor. For hereby is the end of an Oath
frustrated; discord preserved, falsehood erected, injustice maintained. And it
is yet more pernicious, if in And most of all, when in public place of
Judgment, for there is vvrong done 1 To the Jury.
public place of judgment: for there the perjured person does wrong to
diverse. First, to the Jury, in drawing them to give wrong verdict. Secondly,
to the Magistrate, in drawing him to give wrong judgment. 2 To the Magistrate.
Thirdly, to his Neighbor, who is hereby much wronged and 3 To our Neighbor.
injured.

Either: In his state, and goods. 1
Or, In his name, and credit. 2
Or, In his body and life. 3
Or, In his soul and salvation. 4



Thirdly, and lastly, it is a sin, as Reason 3. Dangerous to ourselves.
injurious to God, and pernicious to our Neighbor, so dangerous to ourselves.
For, by perjury men becoming Devils incarnate; nay, in this regard Perjured
persons, Devils incarnate,
beyond the devil himself (of whom we have not heard that ever he abused the
name of God to confirm his lies, but fathers them himself) they John 8. 44.
must needs draw down the punishments of God upon them. In the midst whereof
(as one says) they find and feel that that God whom Experiuntur enim periuri
in medijs poenis, Deum quem inuocarunt, vere esse iratum testem, ac vindicem
ipsorum perfidiae. Thesaur. Theol. Matthew. Vogel.
they have inuocated is a sore angry witness, and revenger of their falsehood:
for so he threatens to be a swift witness against false swearers, Mala. 3.
5. and that very justly: for an Oath consisting not only of invocation,
whereby they call God to witness, but also of imprecation, whereby they call
him to revenge, and bind themselves to punishment if they swear falsely;
justly Justly does God punish perjured persons,
may God take them at their word, and execute upon them the desired and
deserved vengeance. Whence it 1 Here, and that.
is, that he punishes them both here and hereafter. First, here, and that 1
Inwardly. Introspice in mentem illius, qui sit satso iuraturus: videbis enim
illam non posse acquiescere, sed tumultuari, perturbari, seipsam in crimen
vocare, omni contumeliarum and co^^itioru^ genere vexari. Phil. Iu. de dec
praec.
both inwardly, and outwardly.

First, inwardly, with a wounded conscience (and that at the very act) which
whosoever feels, needs no other Iailor or Hangman. Do but look (says
Philo) into the mind of him, who is about to swear falsely, you shall see
that it cannot be at quiet, but vexed, troubled, of it self accused, and
tormented with all kind of checkes and rebukes.

Secondly, outwardly; and that diverse ways: as 2 Outwardly.
with loss 1 Of estate. 2 Of good name. 3 Of liberty. 4 Of life.


First, sometime with loss of Estate. 1 Sometime with loss of Estate. Zach.
5. 4.
And so much the Lord threatens, Zach. 5. 4. where he says that the curse
shall enter into the house of him that falsely swears by his Name; and it
shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it with the Timber
the cof, and stones thereof.

Secondly, sometime with loss of good Name; which the Wise man 2 Sometime
with loss of good Name.
tells us, is to be chosen above riches, Prou. 22. 1. Yet this has been so
Prou. 22. 1.
stained by Perjury, with such a blot and blemish of infamy, as could never
be wiped out until death; nay, has often remained long after death. And
surely it stands with And it stands with great equity.
great equity, that those who get credit to their falsehood by dishonouring
God, should have the dishonor turned upon their own heads.

Thirdly, sometime with loss of Liberty. And thus was King 3 Sometime with
loss of Liberty.
Zedechiah punished for the Oath broken with Nebuchadnezar: in regard whereof,
says the Lord, Ezech. 17. 19. As I live, I will surely bring mine Oath that
he bath despised, Ezekiel. 17. 19.
and my Covenant that he has broken, upon his own head. And so it came to
pass, for Nebuchadnezar by an Army ouer-tooke him, 2 Kin. 25. 5. 6. 7
slew his Sons before him, put out both his eyes, and carried him to Babell,
as it is in 2 Kings 25.

Lastly, sometime with loss of 4 Sometime with loss of Life.
Life. Thus did God punish the Oath broken with the Gibeonites, not only with
famine three years together, but with the death of Saul's seven sons, who
were hanged up 2 Samuel 21. 1. 9.
openly in the Mountain, 2 Samuel 21.

And to this purpose we may read of, and it were not amiss Examples hereof
have been in this our Land.
to mention some examples of latter times in this our Land. As of Earl
Godwine, who vvishing at the Kings Table, that the Bread might choke Earl
Godwine.
him, if he were guilty of Alphreds death, whom he had before slain, was
presently choked, and felldowne dead. So of a Widow in Cornehill, who having
sworn to Wid. Barnes, Corn. in Land. 1574.
deceive a poor Orphane of her right, within four days after, cast herself
out at a window; and brake her neck. So of the Woman without Aldersgate, who
having forsworn her self for Flax bought Anne Aueris, Wid. Feb. 11. 1575.
in Wood-streete, had (as she desired) Gods judgment showed upon A pitiful
example.
her, was suddenly stricken, continued some few days in grievous torments,
and so wretchedly dyed. Many such examples might be alleged; but to these give
me leave only to add one more, of which we read in Ecclesiastical
History, and it is worthy here to be recorded.

Eusebius reports of three lewd Three lewd varlets that falsely accused
Narcissus, Eus. Eccles. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 8.
varlers, that charged Narcissus, Bishop of Jerusalem, with a grievous
accusation, and the better to persuade it, confirmed it with Oaths. The first,
(if it wore not true) wished to be burnt to ashes: the second, to be tarmented
with some cruel disease: the third, to be smitten with blindness. Innocent
Narcissus, being too weak to resist them, removed, and hid himself in desert
places for many The justice of God against perjured persons.
years. In the mean time, this happened to those perjured persons. The first by
the fall of one spark 1
of fire in the night, had himself, house, and family consumed to ashes: The
second was tormented in his 2
whole body, with the same disease he wished. The third, seeing their 3
ends, and fearing vengeance, confessed the mischief, and for it mourned and
wept, till he lost both his eyes. A lamentable spectacle for false Witnesses,
and perjured persons. So we see how God punishes them here.

Secondly, much more severely 2 Hereafter.
hereafter: if he do not punish them temporally, then (which is worse)
eternally. Unless here they appease his anger (as Peter did) with Repentance
Mat. 26. 75.
and Tears, they may assure themselves of it, they cannot avoid it. Let them
in this life escape the Wound of Conscience within; and without, loss of
Estate, Unless they repent, they incur loss of Heaven.
Name, Liberty or Life: they cannot escape the loss of Heaven. But as they by
this sin have renounced God, and given up They shall be given up into the
hands of Satan:
themselves unto Satan: so for this sin God shall renounce them, and give
them up into the hands of Satan, the Prince of darkness. And no marvel: for
they far surpass Liars in iniquity, and therefore And have their portion
with liars in the Lake, etc.
may well look for the same portion and that I, in the Lake that burns with
fire and Brimstone. Revel. 21. 8.

And yet notwithstanding, how Application. A sin common.
common a sin? and how largely spread, over every part of this Nation and
every corner of this City, the eye of the Land, and beauty of the Kingdom?
In public Courts of Judgment, may not money hyre In Courts of Judge meant. In
shops and houses.
it* in private Shops, and Houses does not the dross of the world cause it?
In open Faires and Markets, In Faires and Markets.
do not our covetous Caitifes use it? In every trifling Bargaina, In every
trifling bargain.
will not many a wicked wretch (to make good sale of wares) by Perjury sell
his soul to Hell? In a word, may we not find in Heathens more certainty,
less perjury, More certainty in Heathens, swearing by false Gods: then in
Christians, swearing by the true God. Whence justly may God be at controversy
with this Land, City.

swearing by Jupiter, Apollo, and other false Gods, then in Christians swearing
by the true God? How justly then may God proclaim a Controversy with this
Land in general, with this City in special, which is become a Den for
these Wolves to lurk in, a Cage for these unclean Birds to keep in, (give
me leave to say) a Stie for these filthy Swine to lie in, which vvallow in
this sin, and will not part with it; either for God, to whom it is so
injurious: or for their Neighbor, to whom so pernicious: or for Themselves, to
whom so dangerous. So we see in the third place, Oaths are unlawful, when not
in truth.

Fourthly, unlawful when not in righteousness; and that is, when we 4
Unlawful, when not in righteousness.
swear either without just occasion, or when the Matter it self is not 1
just and lawful: but forbidden by 2
God, or else not in our power. And 1
this is a great and grievous sin, 2
for a man to swear not in a religious He that svveareth must take heed of
two things, said Sophocles, ne laedat amicos, ne peccet in De^^.
mind, to the glory of God, and good of Man, but that which is contrary to
Piety and Charity. So did Iezabel: she swore the death of Elias, 1 Kings 19.
2. So did Ahab: he swore the death of Elisha, 1 Kings 19. 2.
2 Kings 6. 31. So did the Jews: they 1 Kings 6. 31. Acts 23. 12. Thus do
those that swear revenge.
swore the death of Paul, Act. 23. 12. Thus also do many in these days, who
upon every little wrong, swear to be revenged of their neighbor, and to
recompense evil for evil, Romans 12. 17. 21
which they should overcome with goodness.

And in this kind also do offend The Monkish sort also offend in this kind.
those of the Monkish profession, who swear: 1 Perpetual Chastity. 2
Voluntary Poverty. 3 Regular Obedience.


All which offend against the rule of righteousness.

The first, Perpetual Chastity, because it is not in their power, nor Who
swear, 1 Perpetual Chastity, which depends upon the gift of God.
depends upon their will, but upon the gift of God. And in this regard,
says Paul, If they cannot abstain, let them marry. 1 Cor. 7. 9. 1 Cor. 7. 9.


The second, voluntary Poverty, 2 Voluntary poverty, which is a breach of
Gods ordinance.
and wilful beggerie, because it is a breach of Gods ordinance, which is, that
there should be no beggar in Israel, Deuteronomy. 15. 4. Deuteronomy. 15. 4.


The third, Regular Obedience to 3 Regular Obedience, which is a thraldom of
the conscience. Mark 7. 7.
the will of Superiors, because it is a thraldom of the Conscience to the
ordinances of men, when in regard thereof we are only bound unto GOD: in
which sense, says the Apostle, Be not 1 Cor. 7. 23.
the Servants of Men, 1 Corinthians. 7. 23.

All these kinds of Oaths are against Righteousness: and as in As the making
so the keeping of these Oaths are against righteousness. Quod male iuratur,
peius seruatur.
the making, so in the keeping: Nay, that which is ill sworn, is worse
observed. If the thing sworn be either unlawful, or impossible, (whether it
appear so at the first, or be discerned afterward) Unlawful Oaths bind not.
it is of no effect, and cannot bind us.

And here that rule of Isidore is to be remembered: In evil promises In malis
promissis rescinde fidem: in turpi vot^ (...) decretum: and quod in^aute
vouisti, (...) impia est promissio, quae scelere impletur. Isid Well did David
in breaking his Oath.
break thy faith: in a dishonest vow change thy decree: and do not that thou
have rashly vowed: wicked is the promise, that is performed with weekednesse.

Well therefore did David, who (in his rash passion) having sworn the death of
Nabal, did after, by the advice of Abigail, break it: 1 Samuel 25. And wickedly
1 Samuel 25. 32.
did Herod, (that Murderer and no Judge) who swore not so Wickedly did Herod
in keeping his Oath. Mark 6. 26.
rashly, but performed it as wickedly, Mark 6. 26.

It stands us then in hand to Iusiurandu^ vinculum iniquitatis esse non
oportet. Pet. Mart. loc. commun.
beware of swearing irreligiously, or unrighteously: (for an Oath must not be
the bond of iniquuie) as also having sworn so, to crave pardon for it, and not
to perform it: for that is, first, to make God an approuer To keep
unrighteous Oaths is:
of sin: secondly, to break our Oath of Allagiance, made to 1 To make God an
approuer of sin.
God in Baptism, whereby we have bound our selves to obey his will. So we
see in the fourth place, 2 To break our bond in Baptism.
Oaths are unlawful, when not in righteousness.

Lastly, unlawful, when not in 5 Unlawful, when not in Judgment. When
neither called thereto by order of Judgment: nor able with Judgment to
discern the nature of an Oath.
judgment, but rashly and unadvisedly: when neither called thereunto by order
of Judgment, nor able to discern with Judgment, and understanding, what we
do when we swear. Whence it comes to pass we take it in hand so
frequently, so irreuerently. A thing detested of the very Heathen. And
therefore it was an ancient Decree Plut. Quaest. Roman.
observed of the Romans, that when young men would swear by Hercules, they
should first go out of the house, wherein they A commendable order observed
of the Heathen.
were. A good means to keep them from swearing lightly, when they had such
time and leisure to bethink themselves. And surely, these Heathen may rise up
in Judgment against the men of They may condemn the men of this generation,
this generation, and condemn them, who take no space at all to deliberate,
but with less regard and reverence to the true God, then they had to their
false Gods, audaciously take his Name in their mouths, filling Who have less
regard to the true God then they had to their false Gods.
up ouery sentence in ordinary communication with idle, vain, and unnecessary
Oaths. So we see in the last place, Oaths are unlawful, when not in
Judgment.

And so much shall serve to have showed what Oaths are lawful, what unlawful.

Now come we to the use of Now follovveth the use of all the former doctrine.
the whole former doctrine concerning Oaths, both lawful and unlawful. And
it affords to us a twofold use: 1 For information. 2 For caution.


For information Use 1. For information.
1 Of our knowledge. 2 Of our practice.


And first, it serves to inform our knowledge, that in some cases 1 Of our
knowledge, that in some cases we may swear. Against the error of the
Manichees and Anabaptists, who altogether take away the use of an Oath. Their
allegations, Iam. 5. 12 Matthew. 5. 34. The answer.
we may swear. Contrary to the opinion of the Manichees, since renewed, and
taken up by the Anabaptists, who altogether reject the use of an Oath, and
refuse it, even when authority requires it: for the upholding of which
heresy, they cite for their authorit^e, not only the precept of Saint James,
Before all things, my brethren, swear not, Iam. 5. 12. but of Christ himself,
Swear ^o^ at all, Matthew. 5. 34. Whereas both S. James in the former and so
Christ in the latter does nor forbid it, but restrain it. So that we may not
therein understand The true meaning of our Savior.
the prohibition of every kind of Oath, but only of idle Oaths, and
collusion of Oaths (as Bucer,) or swearing lightly and loosely (as Gualther,)
Bucer in Mat. 5. Gual. in Mat. Zanch. in tertium praecept. Vrsin. Catechis.
pars 3.
or swearing in common talk (as Zanchius,) or rash and unnecessary Oaths. (as
Vrsinus,) or private and ordinary swearing, (as Ar^tius, and Melancthon,) or
swearing by the creatures (as Beza, and Pelican.) In a word, it is plain that
the scope of our Savior is only to tax the corruption of the Pharisees, who
thought in their judgment, and taught in their doctrine, that in the third
Commandment was only forbidden Perjury: and no Perjury but when 1
there was expressed the name of 2
God, or some other thing, immediately Matthew. 23. 16. 17. 18.
pertaining to his service. Otherwise, to swear and forswear by the
creatures, they thought no defiling Leuit. 19. 12.
his Name, nor taking of it in vain. Exodus 20. 7. Our Savior charge them of
a threefold crime:


But our Savior herein lays to their charge both Idolatry, Perjury, and
impiety. First, Idolatry, in swearing by them, whereby they much 1 Idolatry.
Hill. 4 Can. on Matthew.
dishonored God, in giving his worship to the creatures. Secondly, Perjury,
in confirming a falsehood by 2 Perjury. Neque enim Deus haret in verbio, sed
mentem iurantis spectat, nec tam in syllabis, quam in sententijs, honor and
contumelia nominis diuini consistit. Vrsin. Catechis. pars.
such an Oath, of it self no true Oath; yet so, in the opinion of him that
swears, who in this respect is counted guilty. 3 Impiety.
Thirdly, impiety, in Colligimus nullam creaturam tam paruo nobis estimari
debere, vt ipsam vano iuramento polluamus. Pell. in Matthew.
polluting the creatures, by rash and false swearing, and so (though not
directly, yet indirectly) polluting the name of God: in as much as Tantum
opificem designant a suis operibus, Calvin. in Iac. 5. 12.
by these works of his (says Calvin) 3. quaest. 102.
they point out the workman, whose glory and Majesty shines in them, and
thus the dishonor reaches to God himself.

Now whereas he says (...), Swear not at all, the word (...) (at all) is to
have reference to the forms rehearsed, as by Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem, and
such like, approved of the Pharisees, reproved of Christ.

Wherefore, his meaning is, Omnino 1. per vllam rem creatam, Beza Annot-Maio.
in Matthew. 5.
Swear not at all, that is, not at all by any creature, upon what pretense
soever: nor at all by God himself, falsely or unadvisedly; neither
disorderedly, Nec affectu, vt perturbati: nec imitatione, vt parvuli: nec
consuetudine, vt scelerati: nec fictitie, vt deceptores, Pell. in Matthew 5.
for affection: nor childishly, for imitation: nor desperately, for custom: nor
cunningly, for deceit: other Oaths, which fail not in the conditions
required, Saint James disliketh not, our Savior condemns not, vvhither they
be public Oaths, enjoined by authority: or Priuata iuramenta, quae sobrie,
sancte, reuerenter, necessarijs rebus adhibentur, damnare nimis periculosum
fuerit. Calvin. Instit. lib 2. cap. 8. sect. 27.
private Oaths, used upon necessity, soberly, religiously, and reverently, as
is plain by the examples of Genesis 31. 53.
Jacob to Laban, of 1 Samuel 20. 12.
Jonathan to David, of Ruth 3. 13.
Booz to Ruth, and diverse other.

We may say then to the Anabaptists, as Christ to the Sadduces, they are
deceived, not knowing the Scriptures. Were that misinterpretation of theirs
allowed, Christ should have condemned what his Father had ordained, and
destroyed the morral law, which he came to fulfill, Matthew. 5. 17.

In the second place therefore, it serves to inform our practice: and it does
instruct and teach us, not to Matt. 22. 29. Christus damnare nec voluit, nec
potuit, quod pater instituit. Pel. Mat. 5. 17.
2 For information of our practice: it teaches us not to fear to take an Oath
upon just occasion. Reason
fear to take an Oath, (when necessity requires) both public and private:
but willingly to do it, when there is sufficient warrant for it: so shall 1 A
good cause be furthered. 1
2 Authority obayed. 2
3 God himself much honored. 3

For it is a part of his service, and such a part as is 1 King. 8. 31.
sometime put for his whole service: and therefore to Psalm. 63. 11.
be refused no more then Prayer, or Esa. 48. 1.
any other worship of God. Rightly to swear is to sanctify his Name, for
which the religious swearer shall The religious svvearer shall be revvarded.
be rewarded, as surely as the profane swearer shall be punished. And so much
of the use for information.

Now as it serves to inform us, so withal to warn us: to warn us Use 2.
For caution. To bevvare of vain Oaths.
to beware of vain Oaths, and to take heed of unlawful swearing. And the
rather for these considerations.

First, because it is a transgressing Reason 1. It is a transgressing of the
Commandment:
of Gods Commandment. it is a statute enacted in the high Court of Parliament
in Heaven, by the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: Thou 1 Of God the Father.
shall not take the Name of the Lord Exodus 20. 7.
thy God in vain. Nay more: there is also a threatening annexed thereunto,
Reason. For the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his Name in
vain.
which there is to no other law, save only to the second: to show, that as
Idolatry, so the abuse of his name of all other sins shall not escape
judgment. And from the Father come we to the Son, who in his Gospel will
not have us to 2 Of God the Son.
swear at all, but to let our communication Matt. 5. 34. 35. 36. 37. Reason.
For whatsoever is more, comes of evil.
be yea, yea; nay, nay. And he is not without his reason: for whatsoever is
more comes of evil. And Saint James the Penman of the holy Ghost, is very
earnest in the same precept: before all things, my brethren, 3 Of God the holy
Ghost. Iam. 5. 12. Reason. Least you fall into condemnation.
swear not. And he also gives a good reason, least ye fall into
condomnatio^. It behooves us then to abstain from it, in regard of this Law,
and Statute, confirmed with such strong reason, both by God the Father, of whom
it was enacted; and by God the Son, of whom ratified, and by God the holy
Ghost, of whom renewed.

Secondly, it is a great vilifying of God: be it either by other things, or
Reason 2. It is a great vilifying of God.
by his Name: If by other things, we debase him, in preferring them before
him, and making him inferior Be it either by other things, Or by his Name,
to them. If by his name, we do also debase him, in making him a common
witness, and so profaning him. The Name of God is to be Which is not to be
polluted by common use.
had in high account, and great reverence; and therefore not to be polluted by
common use. Mercurius Trismegistus was in such respect amongst Mercu. Trisme.
Nomen eius pro prium ob reuerentiam quandam pronunciare vulgo, and temere non
licebat.
the Egiptians, that in reverence of him it was not lawful to pronounce his
name commonly and rashly. Claud. Min. com. in Alciat.
Haro, Duke of Normandy, would have his name so terrible, that Marsil. Ficin.
at the very hearing of it men should croutch. If the names of sinful men have
been had in such respect, what reverence may we think due to the name of God?

The Name of God (as one says) is a name to be feared, a name to be Nomen
terribile, admirabile. laudabile, terribile, quantum ad patentiam: admirabile,
quantum ad sapientiam: laudabile, quantum ad bonitatem. Bonauent. expos. orat.
Domin.
admired, a name to be praised: To be feared for power. To be admired for
wisdom. To be praised for goodness.
And therefore let this name be continually in thy mouth, but (ad precandum,
non iurandum) to pray to it, not to swear by it; for that is to debase, and
vilify his Name, who is Lyra in his Gloss, on Eccles. 23. 13.
a great God, and therefore fearful: a wise God, and therefore wonderful: a
good God, and therefore praiseworthy. Deuteronomy. 28. 58.
So says that sweet Singer, Psalm. 8. 1.
His Name is to be praised, from the Psalm. 113. 3.
rising of the Sun to the going down of the same, Psalm. 113. 3.

Thirdly, it peruerteth the use of Reason 3. It peruerteth the use of our
speech, Which was given us to glorify God.
our speech: for that was given of God to no other end but to speak the
language of Canaan, and to glorify our Creator. Now when it passes these
bounds, limited thereunto by creation, and takes his Name in vain: this
faculty of speech is abused to the dishonor of him By this, it is abused to
the dishonor of him that gave it.
that gave it. For, a wicked thing is it (says Philo) to speak filthily with
that mouth, wherein is uttered the most sacred name of God. It defiles Est
namque impium eo ore turpia loqui, quo sacratissimum nomen Dei profertur. Phi.
Iud. de dec praecep. Reason 4. It is the cognizance of Satan, and badge of
profaneness.
the mouth, it peruerteth the speech; it abuses the tongue, which by right of
creation should serve as a Trumpet to sound forth his glory.

Fourthly, it is the very cognizance of Satan, and badge of profaneness. And
such a one as uses it, may well be termed a wretched person: for he will make
no conscience of any sin, that makes no conscience of this sin, this vain
sin, Swearing, a more vain sin then any other.
for excuse whereof he has not any show of outward good to plead: neither
credit, as the malicious revenger: nor profit, as the covetous Usurer: nor
preferment, as the dissembling flatterer: nor pleasure, as the unclean
adulterer. We may well He that makes no conscience of this, will make no
conscience of other.
think then that the common swearer will not stick at any of these sins,
unless more for disgrace and danger, then for any fear of God. He that will
sin for nothing, will sin for something: and what dare not he do, that
dare profane Gods holy Name, wearing it, and tearing it like his old clothes?
It is therefore a sure sign, setdowne by Solomon, as of a godly Eccles. 9. 2.
man, to fear an Oath, so of a wicked man not to respect it. Eccles. 9. 2.

I have read of an Harlot, who having three sons, told her husband,
Destruct. vitioru^ pars 4. cap. 17.
that one of them only was A fit example for this purpose.
his: whereupon at his death he bequeathed his estate to him, who should be
found out to be his natural son. The Sons fell at contention: the matter
came to trial: The Judge to decide it, commanded that their Fathers dead body
should be set against a tree, and he that could shoot nearest his heart,
should be his Heir. The two Bastards shot, the third refused it, and was much
offended with the other for doing it. By which natural love they concluded him
the natural son, and gave him the inheritance, So they that truly love God,
and cannot endure but grieve to hear Those that grieve at the abuse of Gods
name, show themselves the sons of God.
his Name abused, show themselves to be the true Sons of God, Chosen in
Christ, called to Christ, justified by Christ, and to be glorified with Christ:
but those wretches that fear not to wound Christ, and Those that fear it not,
no sons, but bastards, and Satan's slaves. 1 Kings 3. 26.
to shoot at his heart with Oaths, as with Arrows, crying with the Harlot,
divide him, divide him, are no Sons, but Bastards; no Sheep, but Goats; no
Servants of God, but Slaves of Satan; no heirs of Heaven, but firebrarnds of
Hell.

Fifthly and lastly, it is a sin, that makes us liable to the wrath and
Reason. 5. It makes us liable to the wrath and judge meant of God.
Judgment of God. It is the Word of Almighty God himself; The Lord will not
hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain. And as surely as it is
threatened, so it shall Exodus 20. 7.
be executed. A Sword of vengeance hangs over their heads, and they draw
down Judgments upon themselves, both in this life, and in the life to come.

First, in this life, the Lord denounces many, great, wonderful, and long 1
In this life.
plagues, against those that fear not his glorious Name, Deuteronomy. 28. 58. And
Deuteronomy. 28. 58. 59. 60. 70. Zach. 5. 1. 2. 3.
this the Prophet Zachariah in his fifth Chapter saw in the vision of the flying
Book, in length, twenty cubits, in breadth, ten cubits, wherein A Book of
curses against the Svvearer.
were written the curses that go forth against the Swearer: which shall never
be forgotten, for they are They shall be remembered:
recorded in a Book: they are not few, but many; for it is a long and broad
Book: they come swiftly, They are many. They come svviftly.
not slowly: for, it is a flying Book. And what the Prophet says, has The
flying Book has been seen amongst us, in this Land.
not Experience found true? has not this flying Book been seen amongst us?
Beloved, this our Land has not wanted Examples.

Witness the Example of John Peter, Fox. Act. and Mon.
one Examples.
(of whom we may read in the Acts and Monuments) that being a horrible
swearer and blasphemer, it was usual with him to say, if it be not true, I
pray God I may rotere I dye. Thus commonly he took Gods Name in vain, and
yet not in vain: his wish was not frustrate; for he rotted away indeed and
so dyed in misery.

Witness the Example of the A Gentleman of Cornwall. Ibid.
young Gentleman of Cornwall, who in company with other Gentlemen, began to
swear and use ribauld speech: being reproved for In the time of King Edward.
it, he swoore the more, and raged worse and worse. At length, passing A
warning for Gentlemen.
over a great Bridge, and an arm of the Sea, he so spurred his horse, as that
he sprang clean over with the man on his back, who as he was going,
cried, saying, Horse, and man, and all to the Devil.

Witness lastly, the Example (to A Seruingman in Lincolneshire. Perk. Gou. of
Tongue.
name no more) of a Seruingman in Lincolne-shire, who for every trifle had an
use to swear no less Oath, then Gods precious blood: he would not be warned
by his friends to leave it. At last, he A warning for Seruingmen.
was visited with grievous sickness; in the time whereof he could not be
persuaded to repent of it; but hearing the Bell to toll, he did most hardly,
in the very anguish of death, start up in his bed, and swore by his former
Oath, that Bell tolled for him. Whereupon immediately, A lamentable spectacle.
the blood abundantly from all the joints of his body, as it were in streams,
did issue out most fearfully, from mouth, nose, wrests, knees, heels, and
toes, with all other joints, not one left free, and so dyed.

Me thinks, these, and such Fearful warnings.
like fearful warnings from heaven should sink into the hearts of those,
whose tongues being set on fire of hell, speak nothing without an Oath.

Oh then consider of these, ye Psalm. 50. 22.
that forget God, least he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver
you. Let these be Examples to you least you be made Examples to others.

And yet alas, here is not all. Might the Swearer here stay, and 2 In the life
to come.
dye like a bruit beast, well were the case with him: but here is only the
beginning of his woe. At the hour of death vengeance waits at the door: and
when his body shall be without life, his soul shall be without God. In this
life God is patient toward him, to lead him to Repentance. 2 Pet. 3. 9.
But if his long suffering be abused, GOD, sets it upon the God sets upon
the score.
score, and will one day call him to a fearful reckoning, the word is passed
out of his mouth, he shall not be held guiltless. He may here happily pass
without punishment; Exodus 20. 7.
nay, without controulement. But The Svvearer may pass without punishment
here:
if Magistrates (as Gods Jury on earth) forgetting the Judges charge, give up
false verdict, and cannot find him guilty, the chief Judge of the world,
when at his great general But not hereafter.
Assise of the whole earth, he sits in his Judgment Seat upon life and
death, will not hold him guillesse, but convict him, condemn him, The chief
Judge shall condemn him and commit him to perpetual imprisonment in the
dungeon of darkness. Mark 9. 44.
pronounce sentence against him, commit him close Prisoner to Satan: Take him
Iaylor, bind him hand and foot, cast him into the Dungeon of darkness, there
to remain (without bail or mainprize) in perpetual torments, where their
worm dies not, and their fire never goes out. There shall be the portion of
ungodly Swearers.

I speak not of those, that may seldom slip therein by infirmity, but of
those that practice it continually. In the one sort, it is as a rebellious
Servant: in the other, as a Lordly Tyrant. In some it is as a bad Tenant, that
will not depart 1
after many warnings; and as an unbidden Swearing is in some as a bad Tenant.
Or as an unbidden Guest.
guest, that intrudeth himself, and wants a room to sit in: these though
they fall, rise by repentance, and so escape Judgment. In others, it sits
as a King in his Throne, it reigns, it rules, and continues. Their
hardness of heart is such, 2
In others, as a King in his Throne.
they make even a trade of blaspheming God, and grieuing his Spirit by Hellish
Oaths: and for these Hell gapeth, the Devil wayteth. Hell gapeth They make a
trade of it.
ready to consume them: the Devil waits ready to devour them. If here
(while God offers grace) And these without Repentance fall into condemnation.
they quench not the flame of his wrath with the tears of Repentance, it shall
burn hot against them, and that in hell Fire: their tongues, and whole
bodies shall for ever be tormented; they shall continue to blaspheme God among
the damned; their portion is perdition; their end is condemnation, James James
5. 12.
5. 12.

These Reasons then may cause us to beware of vain swearing; which
transgresses Gods Law, vilifieth his Name, peruerteth our speech, is the
Cognizance of Satan, and forerunner of Judgments both temporal and eternal.

Now, because notwithstanding Now follovv to be ansvvered the chief
objections alleged in excuse of common swearing.
all this against it, Swearers think they have something to plead for it,
whereby (if not to defend it, yet) to excuse it: I shall here by your
patience, not think it amiss, to take away the chief objections alleged in
behalf of it. To let pass their Scriptures, which make not for them, but
against them, allowing only (as has been showed) of a lawful, and religious
Oath:

It will first be objected, that it graceth their speech, and is an ornament
Object. 1. It is a grace to their speech. Answer. Cursed be such grace, as
robs God of his glory.
to their phrases. But is it a grace to thy speech, to disgrace him that gave
it? Is it an ornament to thy tongue, to dishonor him that made it? Cursed be
such grace, woe to such eloquence, as robs God of his due glory. It is
loathsome in his eyes, harsh in his ears, stinketh in his nosthrils. And such
gain no credit, but lose reputation: lose it with God, lose it 2 Such gain no
credit but lose it.
with those that fear God, and show themselves to be no Gallants, but slaves
and servants, even to Satan himself the Prince of darkness.

It will secondly be objected to be a general custom; the most part use
Object. 2. It is a general custom.
it, few or none refrain it, unless a few singular spirits, too nice and
curious. But these must consider the precise charge of God himself, Answer.
Exodus 23. 2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. For by multitude
Exodus 23. 2. Multitudo peccantium peccatum exaggerat, non extenuat. Musc. app.
ad Psalm. 15. de Iur. Genesis 37. 20. 1 King. 18. 22. Ierem. 44. 15. Acts 7. 57.
Matthew. 27. 22.
of sinners, the sin is aggrauated, not extenuated. It excused not the
inhumanitie of Joseph's brethren, nor the Idolatry of Baal Prophets, nor the
obstinacy of those that withstood Jeremiah, nor the cruelty of those that
stoned Steven, nor the impiety of those that crucified Christ. In every one of
these, most voices carried it, yet was not the offense any whit the less.

And as it excuses not from sin, so it exempteth not from judgment. It
saved not the old World from Prou. 11. 21. Genesis 7. 23.
drowning, nor Sodom from burning, Genesis 19. 24. Numb. 15. 9.
nor the Israelites from perishing. Nay, the number in all these kindled Gods
indignation, and cried the louder in his ears for vengeance. In this case
then, that counsel of one is good, Live as a few, that with a few thou may
walk worthy of Gods Viue vt pauci, vt cum paeucis inueniri merearis in regno
Dei, Cassian. Matt. 7. 13.
Kingdom. And that of our Savior, Enter in at the straight gate. Allege not
the number of Swearers to justify thy swearing: though it be the broad way,
walk not in it. Cold comfort is it to go to hell for company: happier shall
it be for thee to be one of those few, that had rather have their souls drop
out of their bodies, then a vain Oath out of their mouths.

But it will thirdly be objected; they Object. 3. They have no evil mind or
intent.
do it from no bad mind, no wicked intent: but their hearts are good, they
mean well, and therefore to be borne with. But this excuse is both Answer.
This excuse is 1 Frivolous.
frivolous, and false. First, frivolous, and that to no purpose: for by thy
words thou shall be justified, and by Matthew. 12. 37.
thy words thou shall be condemned, Matthew. 12. 37. And if of every idle word,
then much more of idle Oaths must we give account at the day of Judgment.
Secondly, it is not only frivolous, but false: for our Savior 2 False.
tells us plain, that out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks,
Matthew. 12. 34.
Matthew. 12. 34. The Treasure will be known by the Metal; He that fears God
in heart, cannot abuse him in word.
the Fountain by the Water; the Fire by the heat; the Sun by the light, the
Tree by the fruit. Can thou fear God in heart, and abuse him in word? Can
thy mind bless him If the mind bless him, the tongue can not blaspheme him
Iam. 1. 26. Object. 4. They swear no deep but little Oaths. Answer. All
vain Oaths are condemned, be they great or small.
and thy tongue blaspheme him? No, If thou refrainest not thy tongue, thy
religion is in vain, Iam. 1. 26.

But it will fourthly be objected, they swear no deep Oaths, as by God
himself, or by the parts and adjuncts of Christ, but little Oaths, as by the
Mass; or, by our Lady; or, by faith, troth, and such like. But even these
Oaths will not excuse: for in a matter of importance, that requires Matt. 5.
37. (...). Basil. concion. in Psalm. 15. Swearing by Faith and Troth, a vain
thing.
an Oath, we must (as has been showed) use the Name of God. On the other
side, in a trifle we must not swear at all: our Yea and Nay, (says Christ)
must serve the turn. All vain Oaths are condemned, be they deep Oaths, or
little Oaths. And for these, if thou be not sorrowful, and God merciful,
thou will find none so little, but deep enough; none so light but heavy
enough, none so small, but great enough to send thee down into hell.

And as for that common swearing by our Faith and Troth; how vain a thing is
it upon needless occasion? For, our Faith and Troth, (as one says) are the
most precious Jewels we have. Now there is none A. Dent.
but a banquerupt that will lay the best Jewel in his house to pawn for
every small trifle. So when we lay It shows we are banquerupts in truth,
and of very small credit.
these to gage for every word we speak, it shows we are banquerupts in
truth, and that we are of very small credit. Otherwise we would not bring
forth these precious Jewels but upon some weighty occasion.

But it will fifthly be objected, they swear no lie, but that which is true,
Object. 5. They swear no lie, but truth. Answer.
and they know to be certain. To which I answer: first, if it be so, it
needs no Oath: our faithful word may serve in stead of an Oath. Euangelica
veritas non recipt iuramentum, cum omnis sermo fidelis pro iureiurando sit.
Hier. in Mat. 5. 34. Zach. 5. 4. Exodus 20. 7.
For God has threatened, as to punish him, that swears by his name falsely,
so not to hold him guiltless that takes his name vainly. So that there is a
curse for him that swears, Sieve mendaciter, sieve inutiliter. Lyra in his
Gloss on Eccl. 23. 10.
whither falsely, or to no purpose.

Secondly, I answer with Ex saepe, multumque iurando, nascitur and periuriu^,
and impietas, Phil. lib. de dee. praec.
Philo Iudaeus, that of much and often swearing comes both perjury and
impiety. And with that learned Father, S. Nemo est qui frequenter jurat, qui
aliquando non peierat: sicut qui consueuit multa loqui, aliquando loquitur
importuna. Au. in Mat. 5
August. none there is that often swears, but sometimes he forsweareth: even
as he that is wont to speak much does sometime speak out of season. And
therefore the safest course in this case is, to follow the precept of a very
Menander. (...) Peri^nder.
Heathen Poet, (...), Shun (says he) an Oath when thou may justly take it.
For swearing begets Aug. ad cons. de mend. c. 15.
facility, facility custom, custom perjury: the very Non penitus iurare
prohibuit sed occasionem periurij euitare docuit. Greg. in Mat. 5.
occasion whereof we should shun, says one. Now, Cesset ignis, and incendium
non fit subtrahe gladium, and hornicidium non permittitur sic toll iuramentum,
and periurium non fit. Chryl. om. 12. op. imp. cap. 52.
put out the fire there can be no flame: take away the sword, there can be no
murder: so swear not at all, there can be no perjury. Perjury is a
dangerous pit, says a Periurium praecititium est: qui jurat iuxta est, qui non
jurat, long. Falsa iuratio exitiosa, vera periculosannulla secura. August in
Jacob. 5. 12.
Father, He that swears is nigh to it, he that swears not far from it:
false swearing is deadly, true swearing dangerous, no swearing secure: we see
it true in 1 Samuel 19. 6. 15.
Saul, a horrible swearer, a damnable forswearer, 1 Samuel 19.

But it will Object. 6. They swear to be believed.
sixthly be objected, they are urged thereunto by necessity, they shall not
otherwise be believed.

I answer: first, shall there be Answer.
any necessity to move thee to grieve 1
and displease thy Creator? do Rather losecredit with men, then reputation
with God.
thou prefer thy credit with men, before thy reputation with God? Surely, in
this case thou should rather choose not at all to be credited. Better that
men unjustly suspect thee, then God justly condemn thee. 2


But secondly, in saying they will Aut parum been sentit qui jurat, de eo cui
jurat, aut diffidit is, qui iuramentum exigit. Pellic. super. Matthew.
not else believe thee, thou art uncharitable to others, and shamest thy self.
Uncharitable to others, in censuring them as distrustful and suspicious of
thee, which argues themselves also to be guilty of falsehood. 1
Shamest thy self, in that thy credit 2
is so cracked, thy word is not any It is a shame to our selves, that we are
not believed.
thing vvorth without an Oath. For therefore thou swearest, because thy simple
word is of no credit. And what is the cause men are so incredulous The cause
of others in credulity is our falsehood.
and suspicious of thee? It is thy wavering in thy words, thy deceit in thy
dealings, thy unfaithfulness in thy promises, thy falsehood in thy sayings, thy
inconstancy in thy speeches. No marvel then, thy saying is so little
respected: would thou on the other side have thy word credited? I shall
tell thee a far better The best way to be credited, is to be true and
unblameable in all our dealings.
way then swearing. Be true and unblameable in all thy dealings, and follow the
rule Saint Jerome gives (quae dixeris, putes iurata) that which thou have
spoken, suppose it as Hieron. ad Celan. Be true in Heart, Words, Works.

sworn. Mean not cunningly, speak not dissemblingly, deal not deceitfully:
but be sincere in heart, true in words, faithful in works. So shall men
credit thy bare saying, more then another swearing: for it is not the Oath
(says one) that gineth I. D.
credit to a man, but a man to his Oath.

So then, thy common swearing 1
is to no purpose at all: for if thou Quid enim opus est iuramento, vnoquoque
de alio optime and sentiente and sperante. Pellic.
be known to be upright in words, and deeds, thy word shall go current,
and decide any matter, inasmuch as thou make more account of that, then
another of his Oath.

If on the other side, to use double An honest man's word is better respected
then a double-dealers Oath.
dealing, that causes thy very Oath to be suspected, and not so much respected
as an honest man's Word. And surely we may well suspect a common Swearer: for
(qui deierat, peierat) He that often Ioh. Dow.
swears, often forsweareth. And we have little cause to believe such a one:
for (as W. W. on Hos. 4. 2. Swearing and Lying are Inmates.
one says well to this purpose) Swearing and Lying for the most part are
In-mates, and dwell both under one roof, and walk hand in hand, like the
Thief and the Receiver; or as the Usurer and the Broker. It is to be feared,
that a common Swearer is a Liar: he that fears not the one, fears not the
other: he that will dishonor God, He that will dishonor God, will deceive
his neighbor.
will deceive his neighbor: he that makes no Conscience of the first Table,
will not make any Conscience of the second. If thou be not then believed,
the more is thy shame, the disgrace is thine own, and blame thy self for it.

But it will seauenthly be objected of others, they confess this ordinary
Object. 7. They do it only in their anger.
swearing to be heinous and grievous: only now and then they are moved
thereunto in their anger, when they are crossed and offended, and then they
cannot refrain themselves.

But this is the worst excuse of all Answer. Such as plead this, are like
fools and madmen.
the former: and such as these I can compare to none so fitly as to fools or
madmen, who (as we say) if they be stricken, strike their next fellows.
These, in far worse For the wrongs they receive of men, they revenge
themselves upon God.
manner, do for the displeasure and wrongs they receive of men, revenge
themselves upon God. If upon the least occasion they be moved and provoked,
then by a multitude of Oaths, they set up (as it were) their Flagge of
defiance against Heaven, and proclaim war against Christ, it shall cost him
a Stab, as though he were the sole cause of their coffeehouse. The like
they do The like they do in their sports and recreations.
in their sports and recreations: let them be crossed in their carding, dicing,
bowling, or any other Pastime, they spit out their venom If they be crossed in
them, God shall be crossed in his honor.
against the Lord of glory: and if they endure any loss, they will make God
himself pay for it. So prone and ready they are to dishonor Tam facile, and
pronum est superos contemnere testes. Iuuen.
God.

But oh vile wretched Creature, whosoever thou art: why should thou thus,
like a mad Dog, fly Like mad-dogs they fly in their masters face who
feeds them.
in the face of thy Master that feeds thee, easing thy stomach upon his
sacred Name, whenever thou art grieved and offended? He never did thee hurt,
but has ever And never did them hurt, but good. Acts 17. 28.
been a gracious God unto thee, in whom thou live and mouest, and from whom
thou enioyest all things, and of whom, and whose mercy it is, that thou art not
consumed: Lamen. 3. 22.
and will thou make him this requital? Must others wrongs be revenged on him?
for by thy Hellish Oaths thou hurtest not them, By their hellish Oaths they
hurt not others but God and their own souls:
thou hurtest thinc own soul, thou hurtest and dishonourest God. He it is
that is provoked, and his holy Spirit is grieved, as thou shall one day know,
and feel to thy vvoe, without unfeigned repentance.

But it will lastly be objected, they utterly detest it, and when they have
Object. 8. They swear by reason of custom.
done it at unawares, they desire God to pardon it: but they have got a foolish
custom, and they cannot leave it.

I answer first, in that they say 1
they detest it, it appears to be Answer. Did they hate it, they would not
continue in it.
false. Were it so, they would not make a trade of such a known sin; nay,
they would never be at rest and quiet, until they were well wained from it.
And what if (when Their asking forgiveness shall not excuse them.
they have sworn) they desire pardon; will God hear and accept such a Prayer?
Can they hope, he will forgive it, when they still continue They are herein
like the Jews. Mark. 15. 18.
in it? what are they herein, but like the Jews who despightfully crucified
Christ, and yet in words salute him, with Hail King of the Jews. So for
these, to make a Prayer like a flash of Lightening, and yet continually It is
no other thing but a mocking of God. Gal. 6. 7.
without ceasing to grieve God by this sin; what is it else but a mocking of
God, who will not be mocked, Gal. 6.

Secondly, in that they plead 2
long custom, they do not at all Hoc est seipsum accusare, magis quam
excusare, etc. Musc. app. ad Psalm. 15. de Iur.
excuse, but the more accuse themselves. For, it is as if the Thief should
plead at the Bar, that he has been so long accustomed to robbing, that
he cannot leave it. Would the Judge take this excuse It will not excuse a
thief, but the sooner condemn him.
for good? or not rather the sooner condemn him, as more justly deserving to
be hanged? And can we think, that the Lord will acquit such notorious
Fellones, as make it a daily practice to rob him, and How then can God
acquit such as daily rob him of his glory?
to bereave him of his dearest honor? we cannot think it. If custom will
not excuse the Thief for his stealing, nor the Murderer for his killing, nor
the Adulterer for his whoring, how shall it excuse the Swearer for his
swearing? for every sin, by how much the Every sin, by how much the more
customable, by so much the more detestable,
more common and customable, by so much the more heinous and detestable. If
once to swear vainly be a sin, then is customable Swearing a crying sin,
and must needs (being a higher trespass) incur And the more damnable.
the higher condemnation. And so much for answer to such Objections as are
usual in the mouths of profane Swearers.

Wherefore seeing the Reasons Exhortation, To break off this sin.
are so forcible on the one side, and the Excuses so frivolous on the other
side; let every one endeavor to break off this sin by repentance, being
careful to leave it, zealous to hate it, resolute to forsake it; to which end,
use the best means against it: as, Means to be used against it. 1 Bevvare of
that which may give way to it, or cause it.


First, beware of any thing that may seem to give way to it, as the use of
earnest protestations, which is the next door to it: or any thing that may
seem to cause it. As if it be from a proud spirit, desire of glory; strive to
subdue it: if from a covetous 1
spirit, desire of gain; seek to suppress it: if from an impatient 2
spirit, outrageous fury; labor to contain 3
it. Take Saint James counsel, James 1. 19.
Be slow to Wrath. Take Saint Paul's counsel, Be angry, but sin Ephesians. 4. 26.
not.

Secondly, to the end this 2 Bridle thy Tongue, and be wary over it.
Sin may fall into a Consumption, Set a bit in thine own mouth, and curb in
therewith thy tongue, that slipperie piece of flesh, that in this kind thou
offend not with Psalm. 39. 1.
it. If thou were in suite of Law, for any matter that concerns thy estate,
how wary would thou be over thy words, least thou should any way wrong
thy self. In this matter that concerns thy Soul, be as wary and Be as
wary as thou would be in a suite of Law.
watchful, least thou wrong both GOD and thy self: GOD, of his Glory, and thy
self of Heaven.

Thirdly, haunt not the company of those that use it; but make choice 3 Haunt
not the company of those that use it.
of such company as will rather reprove it, and not at any time require it,
unless upon urgent necessity. It is a sin not a little contagious, the
plague it self not more infectious. The safest course to escape it, is not to
come within the air of it.

Fourthly, consider seriously the 4 Consider the grievous punishments of it.
grievous punishments that have followed vain swearers in all ages, which
(being Deuteronomy. 28. 58. 59. 60. 61.
threatened alike to all) our selves also may fear without amendment. Some
have had their tongues swelling, others their mouths burning, some have been
stroke mad, others suddenly dead. In a Of all other sins, it has not
escaped punishment.
word, of all other sinners, they have tasted judgments, many in number, great
in measure. And (which is vvorst of all) to make up their Woe, they have
plunged Body and Soul into eternal condemnation.

Lastly, commend thy self by 5 Desire God to keep the door of thy lips.
prayer unto Almighty God, for the help and assistance of his holy Spirit. He
it is, that works in us both Phil. 2. 12.
the will and the deed: and therefore let David's desire be ever thy desire, Set
a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips, Psalm. 141. 3.
Psael. 141. 3. By these means we shall be the better enabled to disinure our
tongues from the common use of Oaths.

And so much shall serve to have spoken of the one part of my Text, Because of
Oaths. It now remains that I hasten to the other: The Land mourns. In
which The second part; the effect, Mourning.
words, there is ministered an Ocean of matter, which I shall swim through
as fast as I can, and briefly run over it, lest the time ouerrunne me.

The Prophet tells us in this latter part, that the effect of swearing The
meaning.
is mourning; by which he understands not only Judgment, but He
understands not only judgment, but the grief, and bitterness that follovveth
it.
the very grief and bitterness that follows of it; because we are not so
sensible of the judgment it self, as of the pain that waits upon it. The
child would not care for the rod, were it not for the smart that comes
after it. No more would we at all fear judgments, but that they procure a
feeling, which is the cause of mourning. In this term then here used, he
gives us to understand, It is such a judgment, as leaves a sting behind it.
The doctrines.
that it is such a judgment as leaves a sting behind it. Hence observe the
reward: first, of sin in general: secondly, of vain Oaths 1
in particular. 2


First, the Prophet here shows 1 The revvard of sin in general. Sub
adulterijs, and periurijs comprehendit alia scelera Joan Calu. praelect. in
hunc locum.
unto us the reward of all sin: for under these (says Calvin) are other
sins contained: for which also he might truly say the Land mourns; for
what evil ever befell either Person or Nation, but wickedness brought it,
sin caused it? This was it that caused the Gen 7. 23.
Flood to destroy the old World, Genesis 10. 24.
Fire and Brimstone to consume Sodom, Exodus 14. 28.
the Sea to drown Pharaoh, the Numb. 16. 32
Earth to swallow up Chorah. This was it, that was the cause of Josh. 7. 25.
Achans stoning, Esth. 7. 10.
Hamans hanging, Dan. 5. 6.
Belshazzars trembling, Mat. 27. 7.
Judas despairing. This was it, that barred Dan. 4. 30.
Nebuchadnezzar out of men's presence, Genesis 4. 16.
Cain out of Gods presence, Genesis 3. 24.
Adam out of Paradise, 2 Pet. 2. 4.
Angels out of Heaven. And how often did it cause God to punish his own
people, this people of Israel, who were as the apple of his eye, and signet
upon his right hand? In a word, what need I travel far for examples? have
not our sins had the like effect? Sin has caused this our Land to mourn,
diverse vvayes:
have not they caused this our Land many times to mourn?

Has it not sometime mourned by the Sword, both (in time past) of enemies
openly assaulting it, and 1 By Svvord. Openly.
(since more lately) of enemies closely undermining it, attempting by Closely.
plots, treasons, and conspiracies, to subvert State and Religion, Church and
Commonwealth.

Has it not (a second way) mourned by Famine, as many a 2 By Famine.
poor Country soul can witness? has not GOD deprived them of the staff of
Bread, made our fruitful Ezekiel. 4. 16.
Land barren, and the Herbs Psalm. 107. 34.
of every Field to wither, for the Ierem. 12. 4.
wickedness of them that dwell therein?

Has it not (a third way) mourned 3 By Sickness.
by Sickness? even by the Pestilence, that walks in the darkness, and the
plague that destroys Psalm. 91. 6.
at noone day, with diverse other strange diseases, which have (as in David's
time) swept away thousands, and ten thousands in our streets?

Has it not (a fourth way) mourned by Poverty? What means 4 By poverty.
then such crying and complaining Psalm. 144. 14.
in our streets?

Look upon the general part of the Land, do they not want that abundance,
they have formerly inioyed? and what a number daily change, and fall from
prosperity to misery, from plenty to penury, from bravery to beggerie?

Has it not (a fifth way) mourned by unseasonable weather, quite contrary to
the course of nature? has 5 By unseasonable vveather.
not God one while made the Heaven as Iron, the Earth as Brass, and the Clouds
to deny their moisture? Leuit. 26. 19.
has he not another while (and that within the space of these few days)
caused the Heavens to mourn, and shed tears by immoderate showers, because
our hard hearts cannot mourn: and the earth to be overwhelmed with floods and
inundations, because of the universal flood, and deluge of sin?

Lastly, to let pass other judgments, and only to put you in mind By the
death of hopeful Prince Henry. Nouemb. 6. 1612.
of one more. Has not the Land mourned ever since November last, (my heart
melts to mention it) by the death of a Prince, the glory of Peers, and
pattern of Princes: Prince HENRY by name; a virtuous, a religious, a
courageous Prince, the very joy of our hearts, the hope of our Land, and our
very security, for the continuance of our peace. Well, notwithstanding; the
Lord has taken him from us, and for our sins we are of him deprived, For
our sins he was taken from us.
as of him unworthy. Thanks be unto God, there is yet a remnant There is yet a
remnant of that Princely progeny.
of that Princely progeny, which the Lord long preserve, and (no doubt) he
will preserve, if the crying sins of the Land, do not too And hope there is
of the continuance of it.
much provoke the fire of his wrath, to kindle against us. He has given us
hope of it, by the late marriage of that Freder: the 5. Count Palatin of the
Rheine, etc. Princess Elizab. Febru. 14. 16^2. But yet this is a fair
warning.
blessed couple, the noble Prince, and the virtuous Lady, whom the LORD
increase and multiply. But howsoever (Men, Brethren, and Fathers,) this is a
fair warning, and such a warning, as is not too lightly to be passed over, and
already to be And to be laid to heart of us.
forgotten, as generally it is: but rather to turn our feasts into mourning,
and our songs into lamentation: Amos 8. 10.
with Micah, lamenting like the Dragons, and mourning like the Ostriches:
Micah. 1. 8.
and taking up Ieremiahs mournful complaint, in the last of his Lamentations.
The joy of our heart is gone: our dance is turned into Lament. 5. 15. 16.
mourning: the crown of our head is fallen: woe now unto us that we have
sinned. Thus are we to lay it to heart, and make right use of it, that so God
may be pleased to double, and trible his blessings upon those So shall God
multiply his blessings upon those branches which remain.
goodly Olive branches which remain, and never proceed so far at
controversy with us, as to turn our Beth-el to Beth-auen, the house of his
Service, to a house of vanity.

And thus we see how sin has brought woe upon the Land; and how it has
been the cause of many a mourning, and is yet like (if it bear sway) to cause
many more.

What should all this teach us, Use.
but 1 to bewail it: 2 to prevent 1
it: bewail sin past; preu^nt it 2
for time to come. Let all Estates, and Callings, from the highest to
Exhortation to
the lowest, leave and forsake their darling sins: Magistrates their
Magistrates.
conniuence, and too much winking: Judges their partiality, and Judges.
too much favoring: Patrones their Patrones.
theft, and Church-robbing: Ministers Ministers.
their soothing up, and flattering: Lawyers their subtlety, and Lawyers.
delaying: Courtiers their policy, and Courtiers.
dissembling: Citizens their pride, Citizens.
and deceiving: Gentlemen their Gentlemen.
wracking, and oppressing: Countrymen Countrymen. All.
their lawyng, and contending: and every one of these their coveting.

So shall we have beauty for So shall we have joy for mourning, Isa. 61. 3.
ashes, joy for mourning, and the garment of gladness for the spirit of
heaviness.

If thus with Niniue we repent of Ionan 3. 10.
the evil against God, God will repent of the evil against us. If now with
the prodigal child we come to our Luke 15. 20. ^o shall God embrace us,
according to his promise without exception,
selue by repentance, our Father will embrace us, and have compassion upon us,
according to his promise, his promise without exception, either of time, or of
persons, or of sins. Without exception of time; 1 Of time. Ezekiel. 18. 27.
for he is ready to do it at what time soever, Ezekiel. 18. Without exception of
persons; for, come unto me 2 Of persons. Matthew. 11. 28.
all heavy laden, Matthew. 11. 28. Without exception of sins; though they be
crimson sins, or scarlet 3 Of sins. Esa. 1. 18.
sins, Esa. 1. 18.

But on the other side, if our Genesis 9. 22.
On the other side.
Chams continue their scoffing, our Heb. 12. 16.
Esaus their profaning, our Josh. 7. 21.
Achans their theeuing, our 1 Samuel 25. 11.
Nabals their coveting, our 1 Samuel 18. 9.
Saul's their hartburning, our 1 Kings 21.
Ahabs their oppressing, our 2 Kings 9. 22
Iezabels their whoring, our Dan 4. 27.
Nebuchadnezzars their vauntting, and all of us our sinning and rebelling
against the King of Heaven: our Land shall continue mourning, If we continue
sinning, our Land shall continue mourning.
God shall continue smiting: nay, he will bring a greater plague upon us,
which we shall not be able to escape: his eye shall not spare us, Ierem. 11.
11. Ezekiel. 8. 18.
neither will he pity us, and though we cry aloud in his ears, he will
not hear us. Pray we may with Dives, but not be heard: Weep we Luke 16.
24. Heb. 12. 17.
may with Esau, but not be pitied: Knock we may with the Virgins, Matt. 25.
12.
but be denied: Call we may upon him, but he will not answer: Early Prou.
1. 28.
may we seek him, but we shall not find him. And so much for the first thing
here observed; the reward of sin in general.

The time being almost spent, whispereth in my ear to fold up that which
remains in a narrow compass, and to wind up in a word. Many other points
there are behind: I shall but only name them.

From the reward of sin in general, we should have come to consider the
reward of Oaths 2 The revvard of vain Oaths in particular.
in particular, which is the very bitterness of judgment; they shall end in
mourning.

Let swearers be as jolly and merry, as they will, they must one Let svvearers
be as merry as they will, they must one day mourn: Unless they prevent it.
Matthew. 5. 4.
day mourn for their mirth; and happy shall it be for them if in this life
they may prevent it. Prevent it they may, if they mourn here. Blessed are
such, says our Savior, for they shall be comforted. Let them then lament it
for time past, let them avoid it for time to come, and they that fear to
taste of this mourning, let them fear to swear.

Hence also we may note, Doct. The ground of true mirth is not sin, but
piety.
(and I shall but note it) that the ground of true mirth is not sin, but
piety: for as sin is the cause of mourning, so is godliness of true
rejoicing.

Whence it follows; first, that Use 1. Only the godly may be truly merry.
only the godly may be truly merry: for, by Christ their debts are Psalm.
103. 3.
paid; their Bills are cancelled, and by Luke 12. 32.
God (the best play master) they are sure to be rewarded; whence their joy is 1
Pet. 1. 8. Phil. 4. 7. 2 The laughter of the wicked is as the crackling of
Thorns.
unspeakable, and passes understanding. Secondly, that the laughter of the
wicked is, but Eccles. 7. 8.
like the crackling of Thorns, soon set on fire, soon put out: and that
their Mirth is but Eccles. 2. 2. Their joy like the joy of a madman.
madness, as Solomon terms it: their joy like the joy of a madman, who
laugheth when others pity him. Woe to such says Christ: for they shall wail
and weep. Luke 6. 25. Luke 6. 25. The last thing, the generality of this
mourning.


But to hasten from the Passion to the Patient, the last thing to be observed,
is, the generality of this Mourning. It extends to the whole Land, it is not
personal but It is not personal but national.
national. Because of Oaths the Land mourns.

The reason is, first, because the nature of this sin is so horrible, that
GOD thereby is highly provoked to punish not only those that commit it, but
even those that tolerate it, whose sin also it is, being Reason 1. Quatenus,
the whole Land does tolerate it, it is their sin.
appointed to reform it. Secondly, because where there is false Swearing;
there the subject, and so consequently the whole Land, is wronged: and thus
Justice b^ing 2 Where there is false swearing the whole land is vvronged, and
it cannot stand.
subverted, the Commonwealth cannot stand. Hence may be inferred two
conclusions.

1 The greatness of this sin. 2 The danger of suffering it.
The greatness of it appears: Obseruat. 1. The greatness of this sin:
which appears, 1 By Gods great hatred against it. 2 By the great pollution
which it works.
first, by Gods great hatred against it, whose punishment thereof ouertaketh
the whole Land: secondly, by the great pollution which it works, in that it
makes all obnoxious, and is able to pull down the vengeance of GOD, not only
upon the Swearers themselves, but also upon the whole Land: and the like does
it also upon the It pulls down vengeance on the Land,
Family wherein they live: so says the Son of Syrach: The plague And on the
family where it is used.
shall never go from the Swearers house.

Secondly, as great is the sin, Eccles. 23. 11.
so great is the danger of tollerating Obseruat. 2. The great danger of
tollerating this sin in a Commonwealth.
this sin in a Commonwealth: for it eats like a Mothe, fretteth like a
Canker, and is the ruin of the whole State and Kingdom. Hence it follows,

First, that the Magistrate is by Whence it follovveth: 1 That the Magistrate
is by sharp laws to repress it, Sueton in vita August.
sharp laws to repress it Augustus the Emperor gave charge to the Pretors
of Rome (ne paterentur nomen suum obsolefieri) not to suffer his name to be
worn threadbare. Such care should Christian Magistrates have of the Name of
God, and not permit it to be polluted by common Swearing, a Sin usually
Notorious Svvearers punished of the Romans.
punished of all Rulers in all Nations: as of the Romans with throwing down
from a Rock: of the Egiptians with loss of head: of the Grecians, with loss
of Ears: Egiptians.
of the Scithians with loss of goods: Grecians.
Scithians.
of Maximilian the Emperor, with Maximilian.
forfeiture of money: of Justinian the Justinian.
Emperor, with putting to death: K. Jews.
of King Jews of France, with searing Henry the first.
their lips: lastly, of Henry the first of England, who ordained within his
own Palace, for every Oath a A Duke, 40. shillings; a Lord, twenty; a
Knight, or Gentleman, ten; a Yeoman, three shillings, four pence; a Page, to
be scourged.
payment to the use of the poor. It were in like manner to be wished some
sharp Law were now enacted against it, in every both public and private
government: that so our Senators might banish it out of the Land, and our
householders out of their Families, least themselves also come to smart for it.

Secondly, hence it follows, that 2 Svvearers in this kind are no good
Subjects.
Swearers in this kind are no good Subjects. Good Subjects they cannot be,
because they sin against the whole Land, take away the peace of it, bring
down Judgments upon it: and so commit Treason not They commit treason against
the King and State.
only against Christ, but against the King and State: the whole Land and
Kingdom fares worse for their sakes. So says the Prophet Jeremiah; Because
of Oaths the Land mourns.

And thus (Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and Well-beloued Christians)
you have heard this Complaint of Jeremiah plainly handled unto you: A Text
very This Text is needful to be handled in this Land. City. Place.

needful for these secure times. And therefore pardon me for making choice to
speak of no other; even in this famous Land, the glory of Europe: and in this
Mother City, the glory of the Land: and in this public place of assembly, the
glory of the City. And now give me leave to conclude with Application.

Notwithstanding this sin of Swearing, has been showed to be Application.
to our Souls a Dagger, to our Tongues a Canker, and both to our selves and
the Land every way so dangerous: yet if we take a suruay of the state of our
times, we shall find that herein we come not short We come not short of
Israel in this sin. Mat. 26.
of Israel. Nay, contrariwise we find, that it was usual with them to rend
their garments when they heard Gods name blasphemed, which thing (as one says)
if we should Ioh. Dow. lect. on Hos. 4. 2.
do in our days, we should never go in whole apparel, and the whole
wealth of the Land were scarce sufficient to cloth the people of it. So It is
a sin largely spread and commonly used.
largely is it spread, and so commonly is it used: 1 In all Places. 1
2 In all Businesses. 2
3 Of all Persons. 3



First, in all Places: it abounds in 1 In all places.
the Court, swarmeth in the City, reigns in the Country. Secondly, 2 In all
businesses.
in all Businesses: Men cannot meet and part, eat and drink, buy and sell
without it; it is the Seal of every Bargain. Thirdly, among all 3 Among all
Persons.
Persons, of all callings and conditions whatsoever: Noblemen, who Noble men.
should show by their Virtue true Nobility, and shine by their example to many
other, dishonor GOD, and debase themselves, becoming slaves to Satan by this
odious sin. Magistrates do not draw out the Sword against it; it walks
Magistrates.
unpunished, uncontrolled: nay, themselves are guilty of it, when as they
should correct it. And herein the Turks do much outstrip us, who Guliel.
Tripol.
admit no idle Swearer, of what quality soever, to any office of Government.
From Magistrates I had like to have come to blame the Tribe of Leuy; and I
would to God Ministers.
it were not to be found in some of us: reformers of others; herein to be
reformed; Oh tell it not in Gath, nor 2 Samuel 1. 20.
publish it in the Streets of Asskalon, least the Daughters of the Philistines
rejoice, least the uncircumcised triumph. Pass we on to Gentlemen, it is
Gentlemen.
their greatest glory: the way to show themselves generous and valorous, is by
setting their Tongues against Heaven, and abusing that Name, at which they
should tremble. Their Seruingmen herein math them, if Seruingmen.
not exceed them: the multitude of Oaths (and that from the basest of them)
pierces the Heavens, and cries for vengeance in the Ears of the Lord of
Hosts. Come we from them to Tradesmen both in Tradesmen.
City and Country, how do they seek by this sin to gain the world, and to
lose their own Souls? Mar. 16. 26.


In a word, whom may not God All sorts of people.
summon to his high Court for this sin? young and old, high and low, rich and
poor, men and women, masters and servants, fathers and Children, I, and that
young Infants before Young children.
they can go perfectly, or speak plainly, or scarcely tell their own names,
they can readily swear by Gods Name; and in this they grew faster then in
their stature. Thus all kinds of persons season their mouths with Oaths:
this plague is rife in every part of the Land: Where shall a man pass, but he
shall hearethem sent forth out of men's mouths (like a flock A man cannot
pass, but he shall hear Oaths in every place.
of Birds) by hundreds together? enough to make the ground to cleave asunder,
and the clouds to fall upon their heads, were not God wonderful in patience.
If they were gathered together as the frogs of Egypt swept up into an heap,
the Land would stincke of them. Our Oaths, if they were registered would fill
many volumes: no marvel, God has Volumes of Oaths.
for us a volume of Curses. And how does the Land abound with new Zach. 5. 2. 3.
fashions of Oaths, as well as of clothes: no marvel, we are punished New
fashions of Oaths.
with new and strange diseases. What should I say more of this sin? Pardon
me if I cannot part with it. If we should hold our peace, the stones would
speak. What good Mind can but grieve to conceive it? what Heart but bleed to
think upon it? what Eye but weep to see it? what Ear but tingle to hear it?

Well, (to draw to a conclusion) let graceless Ruffins run on in Exhortation.
this finne, let the most part of men go on this broad way, beloved (Brethren
Mat. 7. 13.
and Fathers) We have not so Ephesians. 4. 20.
learned Christ. For us then, that profess our selves Christians, let us
suffer the words of exhortation.

And you (my Lord, with your To the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs of
London.
Honorable Fraternity on the Bench) let me the vnworthyest of Gods
Messengers, in the fear of God exhort you: and let God and his ordinance
prevail with you for the Reformation of this sin, which you have heard to be
no small sin, but a Crimson Sin, a Scarlet Sin. First, be careful to
refrain it in your selves: then bend your Authority to restrain it in
others. You are Gods Leiuetenants here on earth, whom God has much advanced,
and highly Psalm. 82. 6.
honored. Show your selves truly zealous to honor him again, in drawing the
sword against such as dishonor him. So shall he put up his Sword drawn
against the Land.

And you (Right Worthy Citizens) whom God has wonderfully To the Citizens.
blessed with means both for this life and a better; be exhorted to reform
this heinous sin: Cleanse it out of your Streets: sweep it out of your
Shops: banish it out of your houses: and grieve not hereby Ephesians. 4. 30.
the holy Spirit of God, by which you are sealed unto the day of Redemption. To
Courtiers.


In a word, Courtiers, Students, Students.
Gentlemen.
Gentlemen, Country men, All, let Countrymen. All.
me beseech you in the Name of God, and in the bowels of Christ Jesus, as you
tender the Glory of GOD, the Peace of the Land, and the Salvation of your
Souls; do not run on headlong in this Sin of Vain Swearing: neither Non
libenter cum voluntate, frequenter cum assiduitate, mendaciter. cum falsitate,
inutiliter sine necessitate, fallaciter cum art verborum, praecipita^ter sine
discretione, nequiter ex liuere.
wilfully, nor customably, nor falsely, nor vainly, nor deceitfully, nor
rashly, nor wickedly: Jacob. de Gor.
but fear the Glorious Name of GOD, and use your Tongues, as Trumpets of his
Praises. So shall the Land cease mourning, your selves escape punishing, and
the Gates of Heaven shall be set open unto you, to the unchangeable happiness
of your souls. Which the Lord God grant unto us all, to our eternal joy and
comfort.

And we beseech thee, O Lord, who workest in us both the will and the deed,
Set a watch before our Phil. 2. 13.
Psalm. 141. 3.
Mouths, keep the door of our Lips: Bridle our Tongues with the Bit of thy
Fear: Cause us to make account of thy holy Name, and in this Life to honor
thee, that in the Life to come, we may be honored of thee, in thy eternal
Kingdom.

And Lord, be good unto our Nation, visit thy Vine, thou have planted amongst
us. Let not the Psalm. 80. 3.
wild Bore out of the Wood destroy it, nor the wild Beasts of the Field eat
it up: But spare us, O Lord, spare us, and lift up the light of thy countenance
Psalm. 4. 6.
upon us. Pour out thy Ier. 10. 25.
Wrath upon the Heathen, that have not known thee, and upon the Familes that
have not called upon thy Name: but prosper them that seek the prosperity of
Sion: hear those Psalm. 122. 6.
that pray for the Peace of Jerusalem: forgive the crying sins of the Land,
remove thy Judgments that hang over it: and walk thou Revel. 1. 13.
in the midst of the Golden Candlestickes: let the Bells of Aaron ring long
amongst us: still continue 2 These. 3. 1.
and enlarge the free passage of thy Gospel. Crown with Blessings our
Sovereign, and his Seed for ever, that so thy Glory (O GOD) may rest in our
Land, till we all come to rest in the Land of Glory. Sanctify the Court,
bless the City, be good to the Country, be merciful to us all, that when we
come to the end of our days, we may receive the end of our hope, the
salvation of our Souls. These things we beg in the Name of thy Son and
our Savior, to whom, with thee, and thy holy Spirit, be ascribed all praise,
honor, and glory, now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

