Of the end of this world, and second coming of Christ, a comfortable and
necessary Discourse, for these miserable and dangerous days.

1. Pet. 4. The end of all things is at hand, be ye therefore sober, and watch
unto prayer.

Luke. 21. Watch continually and pray, that ye may be worthy to escape al these
things, that shall come, and that ye may stand before the Son of man.

Imprinted at London, nigh unto the three Cranes in the Vintree, for Andrew
Maunsell, dwelling in Pauies Churchyard at the sign of the Paret. Anno
Domine. 1577.

To the most reverend Fathers in Christ, Edmond by the permission of almighty
God, Archbishop of Canterbury. etc. and John Bishop of London, Thomas Rogers
wishes the true felicity of this life, and eternal happiness by the coming
of Christ.
IT was the saying of Cambyses, (reverend, and in Christ most honorable
fathers) that Cities would floorish well in prosperity, if the inhabiters of
them were watchful, and still imagined their enemis to be at hand. That which
he said for the prosperous estate of a common weal, Matthew. 14.25. Mark. 13.
Luke 21.
did our Savior say, for the happy success of all Christians. And both
tend to show, that, whether we respect the safety of our bodies here on
this earth, or the salvation of our souls in the kingdom of Christ, we may
not be in our callings either idle, careless, or secure. But yet, such is our
nature, we rather obey the words of Cambyses, for temporal prosperity,
than the warnyng of Christ, for eternal happiness. W^ereby it comes to
pass, that we have commonly fair bodies, but deformed souls: much goods,
but little goodness: and glorious we seem in the sight of men outwardly, but
odious inwardly in the eyes of God. For it is hard to find a man (says
Aristotle, Aristot lib. 2. Rhetor. ad Theodecten. cap. 10.
) which in prosperity is not proud, disdainful, and arrogant, of which sort
are they, whom strength, whom riches, who^ clientes, who^ authority, who^
favor of me^ has exalted. And so inioying their hearts desire, they are of
this mind, that no adversity ca^ hurt them. And what is that, but as David
said, The ungodly has said in his heart, tushe, Psalm. 10.
I shall never be cast down, there shall no harm happen unto me. But the
fairest Oak is soonest cut down: the fattest Ox is readyest for slaughter:
Proverb. 1.
and the felicity of fools, is their own destruction. For how suddenly do
they consume, vanishe, Psalm. 73.
and come to fearful end: yea, even as a dream are they, when one awaketh.

As our Savior thought the doctrine against security, most profitable for his
Disciples, and all mankind: So has his faithful servant the Author of this
book, supposed the same most necessary to be spoken of, in these miserable
days. And this was the cause and end wherefore this Treatise was first
written, namely, that by reciting the signs and tokens of dangers imminent,
and of the worlds destruction, he might draw the wicked from security, and
drive them to a care of godliness and virtue. A godly, zealous, and learned
work, and grateful, no doubt, to all good men. Hippocrates forewarned the
Grecians of a grievous plague, which was nigh at hand, and for his good
admonition he was honored as Hercules, and obeyed as a god. The Athenians for
telling them the perils which they were like to fall into, Cardanus de rerum
varieta^e.
erected to Berosus a goodly Image with a golden tongue. The Grecians to
Hippocrates, and the Athenians to Berosus were never so bound, as all
Christians to Schelton, for this learned book. For herein the tokens of the
ruin, not of one City, as of Athens: nor of one Country, as of Greece: but
of all the world, are set down. And here may be seen the ways to prevent
the destruction, not of body alone, as were those of Hippocrates and Berosus,
but of body and soul from everlasting pain in the pyt of hell. So that more
cause have Christians to be thankful to this author, than were the Athenians
and Grecians to both them. Notwithstanding he desires not (though his deserts
be unspeakable) to be honored with the rites of Hercules (such idolatry he
abhors) nor to be kept in memory with a glorious Image (such memorial he
misliketh) he only craves that Christians would weigh what is said, and look
to them selves: he seeks the salvation of all, not his own glory. But how
soever he be esteemed of others, I trust your Lordships will like of this
work: and so like it, that ye will allow it: and so allow it, that ye will
both against the evil words of the envious, and the captious tongues of
malicious persons, willingly protect it. It pleased the Author, to choose for
Patrons, at the first, two noble Earls: but me thinks none so meet for
defense thereof, being a Spiritual Discourse, as Spiritual men: and because
it tendes to the cutting away of security, who better Patrons than they, whose
office is to be vigilant, whereof they have their names? And among Bishops,
who fitter than they, whose authority is such, as none may better, and zeal
so great, as none will sooner seek, and promote the glory of God? Wherefore I
trust, both because it is divine, your Lordships will vouchsafe: and because it
was well accepted by two worthy men, but yet Temporal, your honors will much
more willyngly allow the same, being Spiritual. And that you may do so, God,
for whose glory it was first made, and is now translated, put into your minds.

Your Graces, and Lordships most humble, at commandment, Thomas Rogers.

To the universal Church throughout the world, the most holy and chaste
daughter of Sion, and entirely beloved Spouse of Jesus Christ the Son of God,
King of all Kings, Health, and comfort in the holy spirit, and the speed^e
coming of her Bridegroom. etc.
I Am not ignorant (sweet Sion daughter of the celestial Jerusalem, and
entierly beloved spouse of Christ) in how great miseries thou have been
plunged now a long time for the lack of thy kind and loving husband. Canti.
Cant.
Which, notwithstanding thou art black and brown by reason of the extrem^ heat
of the Sun, and light of God the father, to which (as yet) thou can not
approach, yet only, wythal his heart embraces the, as his friend for fairnes
peereles, Psalm. 51.
and as his wife, for beauty, surpassing. For thy blacknes, by his holy
spirit, he has turned into beautifulnes, and thy unseemly spots of sin, by
his precious blood are no whit seen, and by his holy spirit he has wonderfully
adorned thee within, and endued thee with the holy Ghost, and the seal of
belief, so that now thou can not doubt but that he is both faithful, Ro^. 8.
and favors thee with all his heart. And yet it greatly greeues thee that thy
glory which thou wishest for, thy comfort, which thou hopest for, and thy King
and bridegroom for whom thou so lokest, and longest for, is so long from thee:
And no marvel, for it is the property of a faithful lover, not quietly to
bear the absence, but ardently to desire the presence, the pleasant speech,
and loving, embracings of her beloved. And yet most of all it greeues thee to
see the shameless boldness of that abominable strumpet the whore of Babylon,
which blusheth not to call her self the only spouse of thy Christ: and to
call thee an harlot: to boast of her external beauty, and to cast in thy
teeth thy outward deformity: to brag of her antiquity, fame and glorious
estate, and to tell thee of thy novelty, poverty, and misery. Hence it
comes, that thou art no where in quiet from such taunts and chidings, nor thy
members any where safe from her bloodye persecution. Hence it is, that before
the world, which is the Son of this naughty houswife, thou art contemned,
hated, and afflicted: and she as the Queen of heaven is adored, loved, and
advanced: with her have all nations committed fornication, and the Kings of
the earth have become frantike with Idolatrous wine of her poisoned doctrine.
And hence comes thy deep sighs, thy mournful countenance, and the
intolerable vexation of mind which thou art in. Hence it is that thou can
not be merry. But comfort thy self, faint not (thou beloved of Christ) for thy
husband for thy sake has made her naughtines to be known, Apoc. 17,
and she which was so loved is now hated, and was glorious for her external
fairnes, is now become odious to many, for her spiritual filthiness. Have
patience therefore but a little while, and thou shall see her, to be of none
account: for thy lover in whom thou delightest, shall bring her to such shame,
as she shall not be able to show her head out of hell, when thou shall be in
glory with thy beloved. Now will I make thee privy, with whom this
naughtiepacke (which now is many ways known to all the world) has had to do
a long while since, first she left to favor the, and began to fancy the
wicked doctrine of the Gentiles: her baude, and thy sworn enemy. John a very
friend of your hu^^andes, and most familiar with him, John in his Revelation
did foretell, that immediately (after he had seen an Angel flying through the
midst of heaven, crying with a loud voice, Woe, Woe, Woe, to the inhabitants
of the earth, from the other voices of those three Angels, which were yet to
sound, the fifth Angel did first sound, and he saw a star falling upon
the earth, which was the fall of the Popes holiness, from celestial, to earthly
things, and having the keys, not of heaven, nor of Peter, (as he does
vainly boast) but of the bottomless pit, the pit of hell, Which when he had
opened there came out great abundance of Locustes into the earth, and had for
their King one whose name was in Hebrew Abaddon, in Greek Apollyon. To this
wicked king did that whore of Babylon plight her faith, join her self, and
altered the name of the Empire, so that at length the flourishing estate of the
old Empire vanished, and he became the chief among al Christian kings. But
what happened afterward? These Locustes, to wit, that infinite and horrible
crewe of idle prelates, Priests, and Friars, with their abominable king, the
Pope of Rome, whom Paul does call (...), the son of perdition, ascended
from hell, and brought with them not the pure doctrine of Gods word, but the
poisoned lessons of devils, and so by the filthy smoke of false opinions,
obscured the Son of righteousness, and infected the wholesome air of Christ's
Gospel. But now would you have them better described? Forsooth they are for
their intolerable pride, and threatenings, like unto horses, prepared to the
battle, women's hear they have, because they are in dealinges light, in
behauior wanton: Lions teeth, for their cruelty, shieldes as it were of iron,
to note their obstinacy* In words they seemed courteous, and therefore they
had the faces of men, but in deed they proved villainous, and therefore they
had in their tails the sting of Scorpions. These made a noise as it were of
many wings, which noted the fame of the Popes holiness. And these had power
to hurt, and yet not all things, but only men, and yet not all men, but those
which had not the mark of God in their foreheads. And yet they could not
plague at their pleasure, but in certain months: and those not in Winter, but
in Somer. So thou see O daughter of Sio^ pure, and unspotted Virgin, to whom
this vile st^umpet Rome, which according to Sybils prophecy is become Rume
(that is violence or cruelty) has coupled herself, Lact. lib. 7. cap. 25.
with whom she has played the harlot, and is become drunken with the blood of
Martyrs, sitting upon that seven headed beast horrible in sight, and in deed
most cruel.

Now mark I beseech thee, and call into mind the words of thy beloved,
which gave his Apostles to understand, that before his coming (meaning before
he celebrates his marriage in the kingdom of his almighty father) the sound
of the Gospel as it were by a Trumpet, Matthew. 24.
should be heard throughout all the world, that so, both the number of thy
friends might be greatly multiplied and, this child of perdition by the final
end of al things, and his famous coming utterly abolished. Which things to thy
comfort thou may perceive to be com to pass already even about the sixth
hour or middle of of the sixth day, or six thousand year of the worlds
creation. Thou see how the voice of the Gospel has sounded in all quarters
of the world, thou see how that son of perdition with the whore of Babylon
sitting upon a purpled and bloodye beast, is by the breath of Gods word
confounded: thou see also (which is most to thy glory, and their perpetual
praise) how the Kings of the earth (which were sometime the ten horns and
vpholders of that beast, by whom she received both such authority that she
might persecute, and such titles, that she was honored as a Goddess, and
reverenced as the Queen of heaven) thou see I say, whom they did honor as a
Queen, how they do hate for a Queen: and whom they did reverence like a
Goddess, how they renounce as the greatest enemy to godliness: and whom they
did by an ignorant zeal enrich with all things that might cause her to be in
the eyes of all me^ glorious, how they worthily impouerish, and endeavor by all
means to make her odious. So that the number is great which know, and confess
thee to be the true and faithful spouse of Christ. Which, God grant as they
in mouths confess to favor thee, so in manners they may express
Christianity, and as they speak well, so at no time they may be seduced
either by the vain pleasures of this world, or by subtle snares of the devil
from loving thee. Wherefore triumph now thou daughter of Sion, rejoice daughter
of Jerusalem, thou daughter of peace rejoice. Lactan. 9.
For behold thy husband, the King will come, thy savior will come to thee, and
that certainly, and shortly he will come: but not poorly, and like a servant
as before, but lik a Soueraygne, like a King of all Kings in majesty
triumphing, in much glory accompanied with Archangels, and all the host of
heaven in the Clouds he will come, that so he may be revenged upon his
enemies, and headlong cast that harlotte, and that King of Locustes, the son
of perdition, the image of the beast, and false Prophet, into that burning
furnace of unquenchable fire* but his chiefest coming shall be to draw thee
unto him, and to bring thee into his bed chamber, where all sorrow and sighing
be laid a part, thou shall enjoy the pleasant speech, and sweet embracementes
or thy loving husband, and sh^lt be b^wtified with all cel^^tiall bene^^tes
which have been appointed for thee since the beginning of the world. Which being
so, I thought nothing would be more grateful unto thee, nor better recreate
thee in these thy troubles, than to learn some certain tokens, and hear
infallible tidings of thy husbands return. The consideration whereof, has
caused me for your comfort by writing to place before your eyes such undoubted
signs of his coming, although I will not take upon me to tell the very hour,
day, and year, which is known to God alone) that easily you will believe and
persuade your self that it will not be long before he come: this day will he
visit thee before the Sun be set, of which the most part is consumed, noone
is past it is now one of the clock, and therefore his coming must needs be
nigh. These and such like things you shall perceive to be handled in this
book. Where I have erred, amend the fault, and forgive the maker: (for to your
judgment I submit me) which is the only thing I desire, after I have obtained
your ernest prayers to your beloved, in my behalf, that I may accompany you in
the faith, and spiritual blessings, with which in Christ through the mere
grace of God the father you are especially adorned: and that with you I may
have the same communion of all celestial benefits, and be partaker of the
kingdom of Christ, and God the father. Fare you well, and God grant you now
and evermore the quietness of mind, and perpetual delight, with everlasting
comfort in Christ by the holy Ghost. Amen. From Emden.

THE PREFACE.
AMong al sins, none is more odious before God, then is incredulity,
doubting both of divine promises and threatenings, notwithstanding that the
world and hypocrites (placing al religion in external behavior and ceremonies,
think the contrary. Because that from that do spring al sins, ^f doubting
both of God, and in God, and al wickedness else whatsoever: so that we may well
affirm, mistrust to be the cause of all evils. For who is there so extremely
mad, that willingly would defile himself with any sin, if he gave sufficient
credit to these words of Christ: Come ye blessed of my father. etc. Again:
Matthew. 25.
Depart from me ye accurs^d into that eternal fire which is prepared for the
Diu^ll and his Angels: Or to those words of Paul where he says: 2. Cor. 5.
We must all appear before the tribunal seat of Christ, that every one may
bear away those things which he has in his body done according to that which
he has committed, be it good or bad? Wherefore of these may certainly be
gathered that none of them believe either the sweet promises of God, or severe
and horrible threats, which stubbornly resist his commau^dements, and do not
obey them. For it cannot be that either believers should live after the flesh,
Romans 8. Luc. 16.
or lyuers after the flesh, should be believers: because, not believers, but
lyuers after the flesh, shall dye. And of this we have a manifest example in
that rich man, crauyng of Abraham, that he would send Lazarus to his five
brethren, to warn them, least they came into that place of torment. By which
no doubt he would signify, that they would more esteem the authority of
Lazarus coming from the dead, then Moses and the Prophets. And therefore what
marueyle if he contemned charity, when he cared not for faith? That when he
flowed with such abundance of all things, yet nothing at all favored poor
Lazarus lying miserably before him? And therefore, because he was without faith
and charity, being departed from this world, was cast headlong into hell. And
as this unbelief is the very spring of sin, and of all ungraciousness the
gulf, in which, all unregenerated are drowned: so contrariwise, true and
Christian faith (by which we have a sure trust to Gods mercy, and free
remission of our sins, promised to us through the merits of Christ the son
of God) is the lively fountain in Christ, by the help of the holy ghost, of
love both of God and our neighbor: and it is (at one word) the cause of all
spiritual good, which follow her as necessarily (as heat does fire.) Because
it is meet (if believers live after the spirit) that the holy ghost stir in
them like motions, to him self. But yet alas, great infirmity and weakness
is in the faithful, although regenerate, so that not seldom they stand in
doubt of Gods promises, and therefore have great need of proppes, to keep
them from falling: for we are more delighted with apparent and present things,
than with future and invisible. For naturally those things which are object
unto us, do more move our senses, Hebr. 11.
than those which are of faith, which is the substance of things to be hoped
for, an argument of things not appearing, whose little spark sometime appears
in us, and is much to be raised by the word of God, that it may the more
increase, and quicken our dead members with the heat of the holy Ghost. Also
in our greatest temptations, and most cruel persecution, the Devil, together
with our vile flesh, bring great doubts into our minds, of the promises of
God, especially when we behold the ungodly to live in this world in all pleasure
to their hearts desire, joyfully: which thing that kingly Prophet David in his
Psalms does at large and plainly teach us. Psalm. 73*
And therefore the miseries of this life are the more easily borne, when we do
as it were behold the end of them before our eyes. Of which it comes, that
to the godly (truly thinking them selves to wander in this world, not to live
in their own country) the remembrance of these euylles is pleasant, and is a
great comfort in all miseries, to think by death, in that last coming of
Christ, at the length that they shall have a most free entrance into that
celestial Jerusalem, sweet, and eternal Country, of which, in a most
assured hope by faith, they know them selves citizens.

Wherefore I have thought it very expedient, by certain arguments, to set
against all infidelity, the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, concerning
the last coming of Christ to the universal judgment, before which, in the
ruin of this wretched world, shall in a moment appear the resurrection of the
flesh, and a sudden change of all men living. So that all mistrust and
unbelief, the Quagmyre of all manner of wickedness (in which many men lie t^
great slumber, and sleep securely) may earnestly be cast away, true faith in
divine promises may be r^ised, our hope of attaynyng an happy life, and
deliverance from all troubles, may be nourished, and we the more vigilant,
least upon a sudden that great day of the Lord (horrible to the ungodly, but
to the godly comfortable) unawares oppress us, and the spouse find us sober,
wise, and prepared to the feast, not without oil in our Lamps. For his
coming in this last age of the world, without doubt is not far, and makes
great have, and will not (as many suppose) linger.

Wherefore, in this little work, I have determined by some evident places of
the Scripture, The argument of the book.
first to prove, that there shall be one day a general destruction of this
world and an universal and last judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ the son
of God, in which all the promises of God shall to the uttermost be fulfilled,
and his great threats shall take effect. Then by the testimonies of holy
Scripture we will show, that the age of this world shall not be more then six
thousand years: and that the sixth thousand (in which we now live, whose time is
more than half past) because of intolerable wickedness, and shameless
security of men, shall not be fully finished. And to this shall be added
certain singular signs by course of time, and years woonderfully agreeing
with the inclinations of the Stars, (if credit may be given to
Mathematicians) which things notwithstanding I refer to the judgment of the
Church, and doctors of more discretion. Last of al, certain proofs out of
Scripture shall be brought of the manner of Christ his coming, and of the effect
of the last judgment: with an exhortation to watchfulness, for that most
joyful coming of our bridegroom.

That there shall be a destruction of this world, a resurrection of the flesh,
and a general judgment of all mankind.
ESpecialy (setting apart al other dark significations of the world, which in
holy Scripture are to be found every where) in this place talkyng of his
destruction, we take the same (as Aristotle does in his book of the World)
for a knittyng together of celestial and inferior bodies disposed by Art,
which does contain living creatures, and all other things which are engendered
and remain in every part. And because in the same is to be seen a wonderful
show, therefore do the Latins very well take his denomination from fayrenes,
so that they call the world, as the Grecians do, (...), a goodly show, or
ornament, from the perfect excellency thereof, as Pliny writes: which
woonderful piece of work (as appears by the manner of his creation, and
holy Scripture does plainly and sufficiently avouch the same) was only to that
end builded, that it should be a house or dwelling place for mankind. For
when our most mighty and eternal God by his word of power, had created of
nothing, all things, as well senseless, as having life, at length he made Adam,
whom he appointed Lord of al creatures, and possessor of Paradise, situated in
the mydst of this goodly and glorious world: and fashioned him also upright,
and innocent (according to his own likeness) that the Lord God of him might
worthily be worshipped. Here the unspeakable love of God toward mankind is
most diligently to be considered. For if the Lord God for our sakes h^th
erected this famous and excellent piece of work, to be an abiding place for
mankind, of which he would gather to him self a perpetual Church: how fair
and glorious shall we think that everlasting Temple to be, which he has
prepared for his elect in Christ, and for his heavenly and celestial warriors?
In which place we shall enjoy the sight of our everlasting God, and shall know
him in majesty and glory even as he is. Truly no comparison of excellency
between these can so much as in imagination be conceived, although the beauty
of this world and university be such, as man's wit cannot sufficiently think
of the same. Because as between the creature and the creator there is no
equality, so great is the odds between visible things created, and
supercelestiall to us altogether invisible, where the son of God with all
Saints, in the circuit of all Angels with God the father has his eternal
seat and continual abiding. But all men through the fall of Adam are become
unworthy of that place which was appointed for Adam being pure from sin and
unspotted. Neither had the world any more borne him according to this immutable
sentence of God (at what time thou shall eat of the tree of k^ow^ledge of good
and evil, Gene. 1.2.
thou shall die the death) had not that over merciful God through his deep and
secret counsel, received him and all the elect into favor by the promised
seed of the woman, by Christ the son of God, which was to come in the flesh.
And therefore if the world have hitherto, and as yet shall continue, it is only
done for their sakes which are chosen in Christ: whose number being full, the
world must of necessity fail, and fall down flat: for which cause the Lord
has a certain time of the worlds destruction: because by the sin and
wickedness of ungodly men being marueilously polluted, and accursed, it does
together with all other creatures (as Saint Paul says) subject to the same
corruption, desire a deliverance from evil. Romans 8.
And therefore that this universal world may be brought to his former
integrity, it must of necessity be consumed, and burn with fire in the
coming of the Lord, as Esaias witnesses, saying: Behold, Esaias. 66.
the Lord will come in fire, and his chariot shall be like a whyrlewynde, that
he may render his indignation in heat, and his correction in flames of fire:
because the Lord will judge in fire. And S. Peter says: The day of the Lord
will come like a thief, 2. Pet. ^
at which time the heavens with great speed shall vanish, the Elements with
that heat shall be dissolved: and the earth, with all contained in the same,
shall be consumed with fire. No marvel then though Ethnikes and most famous
Philosophers following the devises of their own brain, strangers altogether,
and ignorant in Scripture, have had very many profane cogitations, of the
world. Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers, dreameth; Aristotle*
that the world never had beginning: because (as he says) the gods in this
infinite eternity have not been idle. But Plato: being of another mind, Plato
in Tim^*
will that the world was made, yet he thinks the same to be Animal immortale:
A creature which shall not dye, but remain for ever. Plinius not. hist* lib.
2. cap. 1.
Pliny believes the world to be an eternal and unmeasurable godhead, neither
begotten at any time, nor shall be destroyed. Others (as Epicures) imagine that
there is not one world only, Epicures*
but infinite, whereof some take place, as others avoid. Plato also iestingly
says, Plato in At^^^^tico.
that before nine thousand years past, there was another manner of Athens,
and far better citizens.

Aegiptians.
Herodotus says, that the Egyptians have made mention of ten thousand
years and above, of the worlds continuance, and yet they have observed, that
the places of the rising and going down of the Sun have been twice changed,
so that where now it falls, there it has risen twice, and has twice there
gone down, where it rises now. But more woonderful and execrable is it, that
among the people of God should be Saduceis, Saduces.
and among Christians should be such men, which of set purpose, against the
manifest word of God dare boldly say, and persuade them selves, that the world
neither had beginning, nor shall have end, Esaias. 56. S^pi^n. 2.
that there shall be no resurrection of the flesh, no life after this life, no
rewards for well doing, no punishment for sin: and that the world, as it is
now, so has it been, and shall continue for ever. which kind of men are
plain (...), men which neither believe there is any God, or divine providence
at al. And I fear me, the most part of mankind (such as are called in the holy
Scripture, worldly minded, and carnal, although they seem never so spiritual,
catholic, and would be counted Gospellers) by the like fictions, and daily
suggestions of the Devil (although not so wilfully) flatter them selves, and
gladly would be brought into that opinion: that so in a desperate security
they may spend their days, and augment their impiety.

Diverse profes ^ut of the word of God.
Against which apparent dotage, and wicked cogitations of naughty men through
want of true knowledge, by the instinct of Satan, and corruption of the mind
of man, it stands us upon to arm our selves with the word of God, and
confirm our consciences by the testimonies of Christ, of the Prophets, and
Apostles. The holy scripture in many places does plainly tell us, that one day
the son of God Christ, shall come to judge the quick and the dead, all
flesh shall rise, and the world shall be consum^d with fire, as the above
recited testimonies bear witness. To prove the resurrection of the flesh, 1.
Cor. 1^*
very many proofs may be alleged both out of the old and new testament. But
amongst al, the disputation of Paul may suffice us, where, by many arguments he
confirms the resurrection of the flesh, and copiously and sufficiently does
also prove, that we must all stand before the tribunal seat of Christ, to
receive eternal rewards for our deeds be they good or bad. And Christ says:
John. 5.
Marvel not at this, for the day will come in which al which are in the graves
shall hear the voice of the son of God, and those which have done well
shall come fort^ to the resurrection of life, but those which have done evil
to the resurrection of judgment. To this purpose may be recyted other infinite
places of holy scripture, and also the creed of Thapostles, Nicene, and
Athanasian: But I pray you what auailed religion, faith, hope, and that great
patience of Christians in all their troubles, and cruel persecutions, if this
doctrine of the consummation of the world, and of the coming of the Lord with
that which belongs thereunto (which of all others may most absurdly be
thought) were but a vain imagination of the Prophets, The testimony of the
^rophets, ^f Christ, and Apost^e^, ^o^firm^d by the bloo^ of Martyrs.
of Christ and the Apostles, and of all the Martyrs in the Church, when as no
cause can be supposed, which might drive them to the loosing of their fame,
their goods, and their life? So that truth is so plain and apparent, that a
godly and well disposed mind makes that a sure argument of the worlds decay.
For these godly me^ of al others in the world most miserable, suffered those
grievous and direful things, not for the hope of vain glory, or desire of
riches: but for the love of Christ through the secret motions of the holy
Ghost, persuading themselves that in Christ was hid the treasure of true riches
and eternal glory. Proof from the testimony of the holy ghost.
Wherefore it behooves us vndoubtingly to think their doctrine to be true and
celestial, and not to proceed from their own brain, but to be delivered
unto them by Christ, and his holy spirit: and the rather because Christ of
himself does say, that he is the truth, and the life, and that he tells us
from the bosom of his father. Christian authority.
and the father says (in the presence of three Apostles) from heaven: Matthew.
17.
This is my beloved son, in whom I am pleased, hear him: which voice of God
was also heard in Jordan when John was baptising him. Luc. 9. Math. 3.
This coeternall son of God, word of the everlasting father, creator of all
things, our redeemer Christ, of set purpose taught his Apostles certain
tokens of the worlds destruction, and his coming to judgment. And also in his
last Sermons (before he yielded himself in our behalf to the cross) he
plainly does as it were depainte and set the same before their eyes, and
counsels them, and among them especially those which were to live in all
times, to be watchful, sober, prepared, and ready, least in his terrible
visitation (whose differring bringes too much security to the reprobate, and
condemned persons) upon the sudden they be entrapped, and as it were taken
in the snare. Ma^^. 24.25. Mark. 13. Luke. 21.
All which Matthew, Mark, and Luke, do abundantly set forth. So that the truth
teaching the same, nothing ought to be more credible and certain to a Christian
man, then that the world (his full time being expyred the providence of God the
eternal father so disposing the same) shall pass away: and that Christ our
Lord shall come in the the clouds of heaven to the last and universal
judgment.

The holy Prophets likewise have by divine inspiration foretold many things,
Proof from Prophesies.
of the coming of Christ in the flesh, of his doctrine, death, and
resurrection, also of the change of Empyres, and of the ruin of many towns,
all which are fullye come to pass: so that now they may seem not by event to
have foretold, but to have drawn a true and certain history of these
things. How lively Esaie does express the nativity, person, doctrine,
miracles, ^^ay. 9.11.35.40.53.
death and resurrection of Christ, it is well known unto all though but
meanly read in the Scriptures. Likewise Daniell, Daniel. c^p. ^.7.8.9.11.
in many places seems now to have prophesied, but orderly to have written
things already done of the continual alterations of Empyres, and of the
coming of Christ, that well he may be called the great Historiographer. Now
what shall we say. Sith in these and all other things their prophesies have
taken effect, and since they by one and the same spirit have signified of the
second coming of Christ, in which he shall declare himself to be an eternal
king of all kings and principalities, that these ought not to be finished? Yes
undoubtedly: so that he shall put all kingdoms of this world under his feet,
and shall hew them like a stone, which is cut from the mountain. He appeared
unto King Nabuchodonozor without hands to bruise that great Image which offered
it self unto the King in his sleep: Daniel. 2.
under which according to the interpretation of Daniell, were fygured all the
Empyres of the world. Daniel. 7.
And the same heavenly Prophet by the same spirit did foretell that God would
raise up an everlasting, and perpetual kingdom, which all the Saints of God
after judgment shall possess world without end. Now what let is there? Why
by like certayntie those things shall not be fulfilled which have been spoken
before, of the destruction of this world, and eternal government of Christ.
Since that kingdom is perpetual, and not to be overthrown, prepared for the
Saints of God from everlasting, as faith and Christian Religion do confirm.
And from the same spirit of truth are these things uttered: Gods providence
also is certain. His eternal pleasure not chaungeable: and in his power, which
of nothing created the world, nothing is wanting. Where of those things none
except either a mad man, or possessed with some wicked spirit, can raise any
doubt.

Proof from the justice of God.
Besides, the eternal justice of God the ryghteous judge does greatly exact,
that every man be rewarded according to his deserts, of which must needs be
gathered, that the state of good men must be glorious, of wicked, most
miserable. Which comes to pass clean contrary in this wretched world, where
most commonly good and well disposed persons are with troubles tormented, with
bani^hment molested, with loss of goods vnpuni^hed, and with all miseries
overwhelmed: but the wicked are with delicious fare nourished, with goods
enriched, with offices preferred, and for aucthotitie honored. As David in
these words does bitterly complain: My feet were almost gone, Psalm. 73.
and my treadings had welnigh slipped. And why? I was grieved at the wicked, when
I saw them in such prosperity: For they are in no peril of death, but are
lusty and strong: They labor not like other men, neither are they plagued
like other folk: And therefore pride compasses them as does a chain: and
they have put on the garment of cruelty: Their eyes are swollen with fatness,
and they do what they list: They mar others, and speak marueilously, yea
they blasphe^e the most highest. And a little after. Behold, these ungodly
prosper in the world, and enriche themselves greatly: and I said, then have I
cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence: All the day long
have I been punished, and chastened every morning: yea, and I had almost said
even as they: but lo, then should I have condemned the generation of thy
children. And therefore there must of necessity be another life after this, in
which, according to the just judgment of God, every man must receive eternal
and worthy recompense for their works be they good or bad: eternal glory,
or eternal infamy. Even as David also in the same Psalm to the comforting of
himself and the Church, tells us in these words: Then thought I to
understand this, but it was too hard for me, until I went into the sanctuary
of God, then understood I the end of these men. Namely, how thou have set
them in slipperie places, and wilt make them fall down into desolation. O how
suddenly do they consume, vanish, and come to a fearful end: yea even as
a dream are they, when one awaketh: Lord when thou raisest the dead, thou will despise their image. And besides especially it agrees to the divine
justice (after all good works, or bad committed in this body) that all bodies
knit with their souls, do rise, and receive that which they have deserved.
Esaias. 66.
Which thing Esaias most plainly does signify in this manner: All flesh shall
come to worship before my face, says the Lord: And they shall come forth, and
see the dead bodies of men, which have done wickedly against me: there worm
shall not dye, and their fire shall not be extinguished, etc. And Job in plain
words does witness, Job. ^ 9.
that those bodies which we now have, we shall receive again. For thus he
says: I know that my redeemer lives, and that I shall rise in the last day
from the earth, and shall be clad again with my skin and in my flesh, I shall
see God, whom I my self shall behold, and mine eyes shall see, and none other.
Then (as Esaias writes) shall death be utterly devoured, Esai. 25.
and the Lord God shall wash away al tears from every face, and will take the
reproach of his people from the earth, because the Lord, has spoken it.
Neither (as John says in his revelation) shall their be death any more, nor
weeping, nor cry, neither any more grief, because the former things are past.

Proof^ from the divine truth.
Moreover, the Lord God is not only just, but also truth it self. And
therefore all those things which by the Prophets and Apostles through the
instinct of the holy Ghost he has revealed touching the end of the world, the
Resurrection of the flesh, the last judgment of Christ, and the eternal life
of the godly, and the eternal death of the wicked which is to come, shall so
certainly come, as nothing ought to be more certain unto us, notwithstanding
that man's reason, and the doctrine of the Philosophers cannot sufficiently
conceive the same. For if he be truth, how can he lie? Or, since all which has
been spoken before of Christ's coming in the flesh, of his death, and
resurrection, of alteration of Empires, be sufficiently fulfilled: How can we
otherwise think, but that these things which of the ruin of the world, and of
Christ's eternal kingdom, revealed unto us of our most mighty and blessed
God, must likewise come to pass? Especially sith all which has been spoken,
was to no other end spoken, but to prove this: and the sum of Christian
religion consistes in these things.

Which demonstration going before, and true testimonies of holy Scripture, in
my judgment may suffice both to the strengthening of our faith, and cutting
of all doubting of that noble coming of Christ our Lord to judgment, of the
end of this sinful world, of the glorious exhortation of his Church, and of
the vtrer damnation of the reprobate. Wherefore now I will endeavor by
testimonies of divine Oracles, probable reasons and conjectures, to show that
the world cannot pass the time of six thousand years.

Of the second coming of Christ a comfortable Discourse.
That the world shall not endure above six thousand years.
SAint Austine, August. in hi^ 12. book against Mat.
and many more of antiquity, together with most learned men of our time, and
my masters, excellently seen in all things Philip Melancton, and Regner
Predin a man of ripe lerning and judgment, Moderator of Groningane, have been
of this opinion, that that Prophecy of Elias concerning the worlds continuance
six thousand years, is without all doubt true, and to be credited.
Notwithstanding that Prophecy is not to be read in the holy scripture, but in
the books of the Rabines, as in the first Chapter, and first book Abodazara:
also in the fourth part of the Thalmudician work, in the Sanhedrin book, and
last Chapter of the same and other places, where that is alleged of the
Rabines for the true saying of Elias. The words are these: Elias prophecy.
Two thousand vain, Two thousand the Law, Two thousand Christ. And for our
sins which are many and marvelous, some years which are wanting shall not
be expired.

By which saying the world is notably divided into three ages, or especial
courses, and does show both when Christ should come, and how long the state of
this world should continue. Two thousand years was the world without any
laws, ordained expressly by the word of God, which being finished,
Circumcision, and afterward the Law was given, and a certain government, and
true manner of woorshipping of God, was instituted by the word of God. But
about the middle age of the world, when as three thousand years were past, to
wit, in the time of Iosaphat King of Judah, and Achab King of Israel, did this
divine Prophet utter this Prophecy, by which he did signify the true and
certain time of Moses government, and of the coming of the Messiah or son
of God, which should manifest himself, preach, and be crucified of the Jews.
And he showed, that almost a thousand years did remain, before Christ should
come and the Gospel begin to be preached: and about two thousand years after
his coming, the world should perish and come to naught. Now since according to
this Prophecy of Elias, the event has proved two thousand years to have
been past before Circumcision, and manifesting the law, and two thousand
also to have passed when Christ came, (for until the thirty year of Christ's
age, at which time John did prepare the way to the Lord, and Christ began to
accomplish the will of his father, did the fourth thousand continue) it is to
be thought undoubtedly, that now in the old age of the world, the event will
answer to his prophecy, and that as in the middle, and flourishing state of
the world, God carried Elias by a fiery chariot into heaven, so in the end and
vanishing time thereof, he will exalt us with him self into the celestial
habitatio^, of which no doubt Elias was a figure co^stituted of god. But (as
Elias says) some years shall be wanting. For the Lord God, because of wickedness,
shall hasten his coming, so that six thousand years may not fully be
expired. Which prophecy was uttered by Elias, through the holy ghost, and is
no fiction of the Rabines, as are many things in those Thalmudician books,
and may in my judgment, be confirmed by the answer of Vriel the Angel unto
the demands of Esdras, although Hierome, and those which follow him, doubt
hereof. But Theodore Bibliander in the explication of Esdras his dream, does
say, 4. Esdras. 4.
that Hierome did rather imitate the rashness of the Jews, than probable
reason. The judgment of Bibliander concerning the fourth book of Esdras.
And proves by many most plain arguments, this fourth book to be Esdras
own book, Prophetical, and divine: and says: That marueill it is not though
this divine book (because it most plainly tells of the reign, and
chiefest, lawful, and everlasting kindome of Jesus Christ, and also of the
refusal of the Jews, and conversion of the Israelites unto Christ the Lord)
be despised of the blinded synagog of the Jews, which do wilfully set
themselves against their savior: And also adds that this book is yet extant
in the Hebrew tongue, The answer of Vriell to Esdras.
and was translated out of the same. To this Esdras (demanding of Vriell the
Angel, whether the time past, be greater than the time that is to come, or
whether that which is to come, exceed the time past?) the Angel does answer
by two similitudes. And does show unto him first a burning furnace, and
afterward, a watrie cloud, and says, Mark whether the fire do overcome the
smoke, and the shower the drops? or otherwise? To whom Esdras says: I see
Lord, that a very great smoke does pass away, I see also a great shower to
come pouring down: but afterward I perceive the flame to overcome the smoke,
and the drops the shower. Then says the Angel. Now judge of the continuance of
the world. Even as first the smoke vanquished the fire, and the drops the
shower: so the years of the time past, shall exceed the time which is to
come. But now, according to the computation of years, it is evident that
Esdras lived about the third thousand and fi^e hundred year after the
worlds creation, and a while after Cyrus death: from which time, above two
thousand years are consumed. Wherefore, we do see this prophecy
marueilously to agree with that of Elias, and the end of the world to be nigh
at hand.

Psalm. 90. 2. Pet. ^.
Moreover, because the holy scripture does witness, that a thousand years,
with God is but as one day, and also that the Lord God six days was occupied
in framing the world, but the seventh day rested, therefore Melancton,
Osiander, and others, have put a great mystery in the same, and have
persuaded themselves, that from this number of days, Con^ect^re from the syx
days of creation.
that saying of Elias was borrowed: which me thinks to be true. For even as
God in six days made all things, and rested the seventh: so by the ministry
of his word in this life within the compass of six thousand years he will
gather his Church, with which in the seventh he will celebrate and keep holy
his everlasting Sabbath. Caspar Peucerus thinks Orpheus to have been of this
opinion, whose words Plato did thus recite: (...).

Although in all the sacred scripture there be no place as touching the
determination of any certain time, more agreeing with Elias Prophecy, then
that answer of Vriell unto Esdras: yet will we prove the same to be most
true by things alredie paste, by the state of things present, and other tokens
as hereafter in their place orderly shall be showen. Neither is it to be
doubted, but that by the certain providence, predestination, and wisdom of Go^
al things for his glory, and the safety of his Church be marueilously
maintained, and to a far other purpose then any man can imagine. And therefore
under the che^f histories of the old testament, we see our most blessed and
mighty God to have hidden great Mysteries to be types, figures, and shadows,
of the life, death, resurrection, and reign of Christ, as the story of
Abraham's offering of Isaac, of Joseph the Patriarch, of the brazen Serpent, of
Samson, David, Jonas the Prophet, which was three days in the belly of a
whale: and so likewise some other learned men, very probably have reasoned,
that Henoch, being from Adam the seventh, Conjecture of Hench by generation the
seventh from Adam.
was a figure of the last judgment, and of our ascending into heaven. For even
as the corporal death because of sin forceably did reign, and bear swaye
over the six fathers of the Church, to wit, over Adam, Seth, Enos, Kenan,
Mah^laliel, and Iared, but upon the seventh, which was Enoch, could exercise no
force or power at all: so likewise by the space of six thousand years, which
time the world shall endure, death shall bear a sway, but in the seventh
thousand, which shall be the beginning of the celestial and euerlas^ing life,
his force and sting being lost, he shall utterly be abolished. To which thing
Judas in his Epistle had respect, which says, that this Henoch the seventh
after Adam, did foretell of the last judgment. Which judgment is given of
Elias, Elias.
that he should be a type and figure of his own prophecy. And it is said,
that as Henoch in generation, so Elias in co^putation of years, was the seventh
after Adam. For it is reported, that next unto Adam, was Methusalah: next to
Methusalah, Sem: to Sem, Jacob: to Jacob, Amram: to Amram, Ahia: and to Ahia,
Elias the Prophet. Now if this account of Elias be altogether true (as many do
conjecture) there is no doubt but the Lord God, would in his wonderful woorks
declared to his Saints and chosen, have many secret mysteries, that in the
consideration of them, we might be inflamed with desire of the celestial and
most blessed life. Here let us consider, that before the seuen^h thousand
year, we shall be taken up, to meet the Lord in the clouds, even as Elias by a
f^rie chariot and horse^, was lifted up to heaven.

Finally also the Evangelists and Apostles, call the time from Christ's
incarnation until the end of the world, 1. Peter. 1.
the last hour, or last times. Saint Peter says: Christ was manifested in
the last times. And to the Hebrews Paul writes: Heb. 9.
Christ once was offered in the end of the world. Neither is this time of the
Apostles therefore called the last, because that certainly the end of the world
is at hand: but because, according to Elies distribution, it is the last of
the three ages of the world (which without all doubt they respected.) Neither
is it to be deemed, that this prophecy was unknown to them, but rather that
by revelation of the holy Ghost, it was singularly renewed: and therefore in
deed they call this last age of two thousand years, (in the beginning of
which all prophecies and visions, by Christ were to be fulfilled) the last
times, and hour. These now be the testimonies, and conjectures, by which I
have studied to prove, (and have satisfied my self) that this world shall not
continue above the space of six thousand years. Now follow those things,
by which I mean to show, that the sixth thousand year shall not be expired.

That the world shall not endure six thousand years.
Now that the sixth thousand year shall be shortened, it is apparent, and may
be proved for order sake, first, by those words of Elias the Prophet,
above recited, in this manner: And for our sins which are many, and
marvelous, some years which are wanting, shall not be expyred. Which words
do not much disagree from those of Christ, where he says: And except those
days were shortened, Math. 24.
all flesh should perish, but for the elects sake, they shall be cut of. And
although there peradventure the Lord does properly talk of the ruin, and
overthrow of Jerusalem (as may easily be gathered by the circumstances of
that place) yet may it seem, that he would speak the same of the utter
destruction of the world, because in that place he gives certain and most
evident signs thereof (of which hereafter more at large) and also does
foretell both of the overthrow of Jerusalem, and by a certain confusion of
words, of the worlds destruction: so that for the perfect understanding
thereof, great judgment is to be required. And because the former is a figure
of that which is to follow, I persuade my self, that as well by the words
of Christ, as by the prophecy of Elias, it may be gathered, that for the
electes cause, those miserable days of the utter overthrow, and ending of
this wicked world shall be shortened, and cut of. Conjecture from the
constitution of the Sabbath.
Others by probable reason endeavor to prove the same through consideration of
the Sabbath day, which is a true figure of the eternal Sabbath. For in the
Law it was prescribed, that about the evening of the sixth day, the Sabbath
should take his beginning. And therefore their conjecture is not unlike to be
true, which think that the eternal and superexcelle^t Sabbath of the Lord shall
begin, not at the end of the last thousand year, but a little before.

Here be some other conjectures brought forth, which willyngly I pass over,
and the rather, because I know them to be of no great force. The preaching of
the Gospel, the chiefest sign of Christ's coming to judgment.


But those tokens are dilgentlie to be marked, which Christ did foretell should
go before the co^summatio^ of the world: that by them we may the more
certainly think and persuade our selves, (time present, and tokens foretold
being compared together) that the end of the wo^lde hangs over our ne^kes.
Among other signs (in my judgment) the preaching of the Gospel is not the
least, but most cheefely to be noted, as rhat by which all other tokens both
going before, and following, in those words of Christ are known to be true
tokens of his coming. The words of Christ telling us how to know when the
Gospel is preached, are these: Math. 24.
And this Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached through the universal world,
for a witness to all nations, and then shall the end come. By which words the
son of God Christ does plainly teach, that about the time of the worlds
destruction, the true doctrine of Christ should be preached. By which is
gathered, that the same was obscured, defaced, and almost not spoken of, by
reason of false prophets, before that time. And Christ said, that in those
days should arise many false Prophets, and by saying themselves to be Christ,
should seduce many. Now what is more evident in these our days? Has not the
true and sincere doctrine of the free pardoning our sins by Christ, lien hid
these many years, and under the tyranny of Antichrist marvelously been
obscured? And the Pope arrogantlie vaunted himself to be Christ, or at least
his vicar? What promising of pardoning sins, and redeming souls out of their
fained purgatory, by their wicked Bulies, and blasphemous Mass? what
idolatry in woorshipping, and impiety in receiving Christ in the sacrament?
Finally what diverse and diuilish supe^stitions have been practiced, so well it
is known unto all men, that I need not to reckon them. And now again ^y the
unspeakable grace and mercy of God, we plainly perceive such a clear light
of the Gospel to shine over the whole world, that in spite of the devil and
all his adherentes, it castes his b^ames over all nations. And therefore what
other things shall we look for, but as Christ did foretell, a sudden downfall
of this wretched world? For if we read either the holy Bible of God, or
historical books of profane men, we shall find that God has always
followed the example of a ryghteous judge, God does first accuse before he
condemn.
which before he condemn a man for his offenses, will first accuse by
witness: so God, before he send plagues and punishment for our transgression,
does first put us in mind of our wickedness by preaching of the Gospel, and
declaring his divine pleasure: that by consideration of our disobedience, we
may turn to the Lord by repentance and live. First we have a notable example
here in Noes preaching, Genesis 6.7.
by which the Lord God did first accuse the world of disobedience, before he
drowned the same for lack of repentance. So likewise he did not bring the
ten Tribes of Israel into captivity, 4. Reg 17.
before he had sent Esaias, Osee, and other Prophets to call them from iniquity.
The like a hundred and four and thyrty years after happened to the Jews, 4.
Reg. 24.25.
when by the preaching of Jeremy, Ezechiel, and other Prophets of God, they
would not beware of disobeying Gods majesty. At the length, many ye^res being
spent, our merciful father God almighty, sent first John Baptist, after him
Christ his only begotten son, then the Apostles, to call them to repentance,
and to open the way to salvation in Christ, promised before by the Prophets,
then performed, and willing to be received, if they would embrace him. But they
were so far from believing them, that their preaching they lothed, John they
beheaded, Christ was crucified, and the Apostles either by shameful death
cruellye murdered, or at least, by ill entreating miserably tormented. I^sephus
Egesippus.
And therefore not undeservedly was that famous City of so infamous a people,
by the Romans utterly subverted, Josephus. Egyptus.
and the Jews made a pray to their enemies, and odious to all the world:
which shame of theirs and subversion of their city (as Daniell before, Dan. 6.
and our Savior a^terward did prophesi^) does and shall continue, till the
world hau^ an end. After this, Paul preached to the Coll^ssi^^s, Laodicians,
and Hierapolians, but they contemned, and cared not for his words: Orosius.
lib. 7. Chap 5.
and therefore (as Orosius witnesses) the earth opened and swallowed them up.
And hitherto also does that doctrine of Paul tend, teaching that the wicked
son of perdition should be discovered, and by the spirit of the month of God
defaced, and afterward, by the glorious coming of the son of God, utterly
destroyed. Now who is that same desperate son sitting in the temple, as God
himself, it is easy to be known: and how he by the preaching of the Gospel
has been discovered, experience does show: and we hereafter at large will
prove, that he is, and has of long time continued, the Bishop of Rome. Now
since we behold his doctrine, and authority by the force of Gods word to be so
overthrown, (as they are judged almost mad me^, which seem any way to favor
him,) what other thing can follow, but that God is ready to come upon us, and
stands at our doors? And that not only his hauty courage shall be abated, and
his execrable cruelty altogether abolished, but also that the whole and
universal world, for all sins committed since the beginning, be accused, and
so condemned to eternal torments: because wickedly they have contemned the
grace of God offered unto them continually, and wilfully refused to taste the
sweetness of the Gospel, and forsake their sins and wickedness by
repentance.

Besides, Christ has given many other signs and tokens of his coming: Of
other things following the preaching of the Gosp^ll.

Ma^h. 24. Luke 21.


as rumors of wars, famine, pestilence, earthquakes, and that country shall
rise against country, and that cruel persecution shall be exercised: also that
in those days shall be signs in the Sun, Moon, and Stars. etc. Al which
cannot be tokens, unless the preaching of the Gospel go before. For Signs,
except they be known, cannot be signs: because in all times, those aforesaid
euylles have appeared either more or less, and therefore of themselves can not
be signs. But when al those euyls immediately after the preaching of the
Gospel, have come on heaps abundantly upon us, and more than ever they did in
any age long before us, no doubt they do prognosticate and foretell us, of the
consummation of this most wicked world. Besides, that these tokens which
Christ did recite, do foreshewe the worlds destruction, and not the subversion
of the Temple, it is apparent, because he says, that people against people,
and kingdom against kingdom shall arise. Which thing was not done before the
destruction of Jerusalem, that ever I could read. For then, An answer unto
certain objections.
what kingdom against kingdom? what people against people: what, and how
great wars were then? All which we do not only see to have been done, but
also to our pain feel them, besides more grievous things not yet heard of,
but more to be feared, and circumstances bring us to that mind, to think that
more intolerable things are prepared to vex us, both of Turk and Papist. And
that also in the same place (as appears) the Lord understood the last
preaching, not the beginning of his Gospel, thereof it is evident, because by
and by he adioyneth, That the Gospel beginning to shine every where, a
visitation shall come, and end of all things. Otherwise, if this place were to
be understood of the first openyng of the Gospel, by the Apostles, no doubt
this end had been come many hundred years ago. Besides, the Evangelist
returns to the former question of the Temples, and Hierusalems destruction,
from whence he digressed. Peradventure also the Evangelists have confounded
these two, that not by the same words they might finish now that, now this
particularly: because peradventure they were of this opinion, that they
thought, that after the subversion of Jerusalem, should immediately follow the
destruction of the world: whose end (as Christ said) should be so sudden, as
nothing could be more. But Christ our Lord could of his own accord
disioyne those things, to make them dark for a time, which he would not have
to be known, and could make them manifest, when it were for his glory, and our
profit, at a time convenient.

But to make of these tokens foretold of Christ, any long discourse, it were a
great labor, and peradventure tedious to the Reader, because the thing it
self, and experience do sufficiently prove, these signs after the manifesting
of the Gospel, to have been fulfilled, except only those in the Sun, and
Moon, and other Stars, as yet have not appeared, which Christ does tell,
should either show them selves a little before, or in his very coming. The
Mathematicians and Astronomers judgment notwithstanding is, that in many
hundred years past, were never seen so many Eclipses in the Sun and Moon,
nor yet so strange copulations of Planets as will appear within few years,
which no doubt are to threaten unto us dangers and miserable days, as
hereafter shall be showed. Here I will not speak of the prodigious Comets, and
Meteores, which many times have been marked in this our age. Neither will I call
to mind the judgment of Astronomers, and chiefest Divines upon that Star,
which within these three years, showed her self certain months together,
as the very messenger, and warner of Gods coming to judgment: and the rather,
because it seemed to be of the same nature and qualytie with that which
foretold the birth of Christ the king of the Jews, unto the wysemen. Also I
will in silence pass over the strange earthquakes, which in our days have
happened in many places (as of late at Ferraria in Italy) and in Friseland,
the nature of which Soil is left subject to the same. But (I beseech you) let
us call to our remembrance, all those evils, which as yet we do as it were
behold and have tasted, not heard of, do see with our eyes, and to our great
grief suffer them continually. What a grievous pestilence and plague these
many years, both with us and in other places has reigned, and tyrannically
does exult over all persons, and bring very many to their graves, and
according to the judgment of the learned (which are in opinion that it will and
must continue yet more years) will dispach many more? What a long dearth of
Corn, and great scarsitie of all things? What a multitude in the cause of
religion, have suffered the loss of life and living? What theft and robberyes
on al sides, both on sea and land? What an infinite company have in cruel
fight been miserably slain and murdered in France, Flaunders, and Friseland?

But I am troubled, and that greatly, to think on and recite the calamities
which Frisela^^ by strange and unaccustomed ouerflowings o^ waters has felt:
especially by the two later, whereof one happened in the year of our Lord.
1574. the fourth of November, in which men and beasts in number infinite, were
drowned, and was of such a great depth, as almost it might be called the
Frisian flood. The other chanced in a more dangerous and worse time, three
days before the Feast of Saint Bartholomewe, in the year of our Saviors
incarnation. 1573. the which in many places brought more hurt to many men, than
the former, because by the same, all corn on the ground, and other fruit
perished miserably, by reason whereof, great dearth and penury ensued. So
that in those Countries, it might well be said that those words of Christ were
fulfilled, saying: The people shall be at their wits ends, Luke 21.
at the roaring of the Sea and salt Waters. Wherefore let us give credit unto
those words of Christ, and let them be unto us for most certain tokens of the
suddayne coming of our Savior to judgment.

There are besides these, other signs of the oldnes of the world, and of his
overthrow: because we playnlie perceive al things daily to wax worse and
worse, and decrease in their virtue. The air is oftentimes corrupt, sometime
with untimely showers, sometime with unprofitable dryness, now with too much
cold, now with extreme heat. The fruitfulnes of the feilde is not such as it
has been aforetime: Riches and substance we see consumed: The Progeny of
great and Noble men, we perceive daily to be multiplied, but their patrimony
is no whit increased, but impaired by discord. By which it comes to pass,
that many great men and Lords, bend all their cogitations to the oppressing of
their poor Tenantes, and by often fines, and exactions, bring honest men to
beggerie, and by the example of Pharao, make slaves of their seruan^^s and
subjects: as though they were appointed of God, ^om. 13.
to live, not for the defense of the good, punishment of the wicked, and
preservation of justice, but to them selves, and to pamper their bellies with
good cheer, and their backs with brave apparel. And therefore do those
Empires now show themselves to be as cancred and rustie Iron, which in times
past were as bright Silver, or glittering Gold. But I do not speak these
things of true noble men, and of good Princes, which do exact things
necessary to the defense of the common weal, and for the conservation of
their Majesty, which things without all controversy the word of God does
allow them to have. Now it is not to be doubted, since for the sins of the
people such tyranny is grown to the top, From Pharoe^ Example.
but these Pharaoes with sudden destruction of the world, shall be overwhelmed,
even as that Pharao in persecuting the people of Israel, Exodus 14.
(which for a time he had with grievous yoke of slavery oppressed,) was with
all his host drowned in the red sea. The reason is not unlike, he is a figure,
and the same God is now which then was, ready to deliver his people from
calamity, and to take revenge on the wicked, for their cruelty. Contempt of
knowledge.


Another great argument of the worlds consummation, is, because all good arts,
and learning, have these few years been so contemned, and Universities and
schools, and scholasticall discipline (which are the causes and fountains of
knowledge) almost in every place come to decay. For God in this last age has
showed his singular and marvelous goodwil toward mankind: especially (in that
so great barbarousnes of our Predecessors, when all arts and liberal learning
was hid, and known to sewe, the Latin tongue polluted, small cunning in the
Greek:) by raysyng up some Vall^, Agricola, Erasmus, Melan^ton, and others,
which with great study and pains, have brought al sciences, and knowledge of
the tongues to their purity, and delivered unto us a more easy way to the
attayning the perfect knowledge of them all: by which, almost all Europe is set
free from rude barbarousnes. Afterward, when our most bountiful God had given
us such helps to the understanding of the Scripture, by and by he set on fire
the Beacon of true doctrine, which of all other gifts and graces of God, is,
and ought to be embraced as chiefest.

But by experience we see these gifts of long time to have been at the full,
All gifts at the ^^ppe of perfection.
and now decrease. For not adu^s^d judgment, not that sharpnes of wit, not
that great industry, and exercise in studies are now, which have been.
Contempt of learning.
To this does appertain the marvelous contempt of all kind of knowledge,
especially of Diu^nitie: (...). Also the small regard of godly and faithful
Ministers: by which they are brought to such pouerti^, or almost beggary, that
their wives and children must be enforced to live upon alms. But what is the
cause of this misery? Is not that intolerable tearyng, and spoiling of Church
goods the chiefest? Is it not to be imputed unto those Magistrates, whose care
is such over Ministers, that they will not allow them abundance of worldly
wealth, least happily by possessing much, they taste of covetousness the root of
all mischief, and so desire more? or else fall into ryotousnesse, and so become
Epicures? Or if that be not in their mind, they do imagine them selves to be
such Lords of body and soul, as was of late that Romish Tyrant. This may very
well without offense be coniectured, although it may be that their insaciable
desire of worldly promotion, which by riches without virtue may be gotten, is
the root from which so devilish fruit does proceed. How much better were it
if in these things a mean were observed, and that Church men had wherewithal
to live honestlye, with keeping hospitality, and if that which were thought
too much for them, were Christianly bestowed either on those which live in
poverty, or carefully reserved to some other good use? For as plentye brings
pride and hautines of mind: so poverty ingendreth contempt, not only of
Ministers, but of the Ministry also, which being disdayned for lack of
preferment, men's cogitations are so turned, that rather they had to bynd their
sons to some servile occupation, then bring them up in liberal instruction:
by which, must needs follow not only the great scarsitie of learned men,
Contempt of the ministry.
but also grievous want of godly Ministers, and so consequently, the miserable
estate and overthrow of the Church. Now what remains but that we certainly
persuade our selves, that rhese are plain and evident signs and testimonies
of Gods great displeasure against us for dispising his Ministers, whose
contempt he neither can for his holiness, nor will for his justice suffer any
time, as the the manifold miseries and plagues that be every where, do show
unto us. And as the son of God Christ said before, that after the preaching
of the Gospel, destruction should follow, I hope the time is so far from
being differred, that it will spedely come upon us. For it cannot be but that
the prophecy of Christ should be true: which could not be, if those days of
barbarousnes and ignorance of true religion (which we are like to fall into)
were not by his speedy coming prevented.

Moreover, we should think the worlds foundation to be worn out, and the
same to be falling upon our shoulders, when we sensiblye perceive our selves to
live in those days, whereof Christ foretold, saying: Math. 24.
The coming of the son of man shall be as were the days of Noe. For then were
men eating, drinking, marrying, and were married, until Noe entered the Arc.
And they perceived nothing until the flood came, and overwhelmed them all: and
such shall be the coming of the son of man. By which no doubt the lord would
signify, Security of life.
that in the latter days there should be a marvelous security, whereby there
should arise not only unspeakable wickedness against God, but also a lamentable
disorder and confusion in commonweals, for lack of discipline. Now, if we
will compare time present with that which is past, and set the manners of all
men before our eyes, we shall perceive wickedness to have come to his ripenes,
and to reign almost without controlment. For, (notwithstanding that God
through his unspeakable mercy in these latter days has given us his
Gospel, whereby we should frame our affections according to his will, and live
in unity and peace with all men according to his word,) what desire of
righteousness, or zeal in religion is there to be found? Yea who is not in
Christianity either cold, or careless? Many desire to be religious, and
think they are so, if only for a fashion they frequent Sermons, and come to
ordinary service and Ceremonies, supposing themselves in doing so, to be
sufficiently religious, although their hearts do burn with desire of
transitory things. and they swel through the poison of al ungodliness. Many
also think they do marvelous well, in making the doctrine of love, peace, and
unity, the occasion of strife, contention, and heresy. And suppose they do
serve God very well, if, knowing some of a contrary opinion, though not in the
chiefest point of Religion, they do with words condemn them, and with curses
commit them to the Devils punishment: themselves in the mean while, in a
certain spiritual pride gotten through a vain opinion of learning puffed up,
do, resting upon the authority of others, not with arguments answering to
Gods word, take heart of grass, their adversaries oftentimes defending the
better part, and more agreeable to the pleasure of the high^st. And yet forsooth
must this so great injury and shameless reproach, be called, not the spirit of
sin, but a godly zeal. O dangerous days, and diuelishe behavior. Some
there be also which think well of themselves, and would be numbered among good
Gospellers, because they have learned, without knowledge busily among their
pottes, to inueygh against the papisticall superstition, themselves being
unjust, thieves, oppressors, and most wicked rouers: such as at this day men
call the Guisians, worse (speaking after the manner of men) then civil
Papists. What should many words do? We plainly now perceive greatest vice,
for chiefest virtue to be counted: and those men, through a fained show of
simplicity to be most commended, which of all other for impiety, ought most
to be dispraised. For crafty and deceiptful, are wise: covetous, good
husbands: prodigal, liberal: and rich men are deemed the best men. These
have promotions, and though by wicked means they attain them, yet dives
clarus erit, fortis, iustus, sapiens, etiam and Rex: Et quicquid volet, Horace.
lib. Sermon. 2.
as Horace said: The rich man shall be noble, valiant, upright, wise, yea and
king, and what he will. And in another place: Aurea nunc vere sunt saecula,
plurimus auro Horace. lib. 1. Episto.

Venit honos, auro conciliatur amor:
Auro pulsa fides, auro venalia iura,
Aurum lex sequitur, mox sine lege pudor:
Scilicet vxorem cum dote, fidemque and amicos,
Et genus and formam Regina pecunia donat.
Now are the brave, and golden days,
Now fame with gold we gain:
And gold can show us many ways men's favor to attain.
By Gold we hear the Music sweet, and laws we b^ie with gold:
Law seeks for gold, and straight unmeet our name by it is sold.
Yea wife with wealth, and faith, and friends, and kin, with comely hew,
Does money Madame, Prince, and Queen most mortal men endue.


Boethius lib. 2. ante prosam. 3.
And Boethius. Vnde habeant cura est paucis, sed oportet habere,
Per scelus atque nefas, pauper vbique iacet.
How they do get few folks do care, but riches have they must:
By hook, or crook, we daily see, so weak to wall be thrust.


Those and the like vices have Poets and Philosophers in their days, when
wickedness did but spring, (as themselves have testified) reprehended. And
therefore is our Lord God earnestly to be desired, that all these evils by his
speedy coming may take an end. For although al manner of wickedness in this
age, have ascended marvelous high, yet are they not so come to the top, but
that more strange ungraciousness, and wonderful deceiptes, and more horrible
confusions in commonweals through evil government of them, may to the grief
and vexation of good men be seen, then ever were. For we see continually that
many through their cogging, prating, pride, and flattery, without all
honesty, learning, or Christianity, in hope of profit, and preferment, pricked
thereunto, beat their brains, and bend al their studyes, to be gracious in
their eyes, which sit in chiefest place above other men. By which it comes to
pass, that for a time they are well accepted even of the best: but good
Princes can smell them out, and will banishe them their company, persuading
themselves that that friendship is not of continuance, whose end and ground
is not the setting forth, and increase of virtue. Wherefore it is to be
wished, that al Christian Princes would carefully commit these words of Christ
to continual remembrance, saying: You shall know them by their fruit. Math.
7.
Do men gather of Thorns grapes, or figs of Thistels? And again, A naughty
tree cannot bring forth good fruit. An admonition to Prince^.
For those words of Christ are to be understood not only of false Prophets,
but also of all men, and especially of such as bear authority. And therefore
ought a good Prince thus to reason with himself, what goodness may be looked
for at their hands, whose delight has always been from their youth in
wickedness? How can it be, Since unto a vile nature not regenerate with Gods
holy spirit, a wicked custom and delight, as it were another nature, is
adjoined? Is this mixture commendable? Nay truly: if to this diuilish
behavior dignity and honor (which seldom make us better) be linked, what
can be looked for else, but even prodigious monsters, hurtful to all men, and
execrable before God? according to that. Asperius miser^ nil est dum surgit in
altum. For their great preferment, is the greatest punishment that may be. And
whether that, (Nulla fides pietasque viris, qui castra sequuntur Lucan. lib.

Venalesque manus: ibi fas, vbi maxima merces.)
(No faith nor fear of God have they,
Which do the wars pursue:
Their hands are given to sell and spoil,
Their gain they call their due.)
of Lucan, speaking of Warriors brought up in spoils and wickedness, be
altogether false: which undoubtedly we believe, having learned the same by
reading and experience, to be true: and yet in this place, we confess the
same to be spoken somewhat hyperbolically. Besides, how can they be profitable
to their Princes, to their country faithful, and careful of keeping justice
and the laws, which in all their life, have been faythlesse to the king of
kings, and so far from a care of keeping of justice, that they never had any
sure knowledge of the same? What agreement or good mixture can fire have with
water: Hotnes with coldness? Equity with vnright^ousnes? How can it be, that
me^ should have a care of that countries prosperity, in which they are
strangers, and is not their native soil? Ovid. lib. 1. fast.
Again, can men drowned in voluptuousnes (whose study is, querere vt
absumant, et absumpta requirere certa^t: to seek that they may spend, and
strive to find that naughtely is spent: (...), ambitious, and lovers of
themselves,) with honesty prefer the Princes prosperity, before their
private profit? And the commonweals good, before their own gain? So that
to place these men in authority, is it not to yield the simple sheep to the
cruelty of ravening wolves? These men O virtuous Princes (if stories of al
times were noted) should appear of all troubles the authors, in every common
weal the ouerthrowers of every kingdom, always betraiers of their Princes:
as might be proved by many examples, and those not far fecht, were it my
mind to fraught my book with histories. Wherefore O ye Princes and rulers of
the earth, which desire (as indeed you ought) to be the parents of your
people, use greater heed, and more judgment in choosing them which either
shall be of your counsel, or bear authority in your names: for the common
felicity, does most redounde to your glory. And also be you always ready
and prepared then to give an account of your stewardshippe, when the king of
kings (whose vessel, is every Monarch) shall come: of whose sudden coming,
out of the word of God here I give true and certain tokens. For if then he
shall epsy his beloved sheep (of which if but one be found which was lost,
Luc. 16.
the whole troop of Angels do rejoice) by your negligence and fault, to be
committed as a pray to wolves and wicked beasts, evil shall it be with you,
and then without all doubt in his rage, he will cast you headlong into hell
and extreme darkness. The almyghtye God by his holy spirit and grace, grant
unto all good Princes, and their counsailers, wisdom and prudence from above,
that in deed they may be the good lights, both in establishing that which is
profitable for their people, and executing of justice, and preserve, defend,
and keep them, and all his elect from utter destruction, to the glory of his
name and felicity of his Church. Amen.

Finally also out of the seventh Chapter of Daniell, a notable conjecture of
the suddayne coming of the son of God, may be taken: For in that Chapter, be
described four Monarchies of the world, and where, in what Nation, they shall
be from time to time, until the resurrection of the dead. By which, the ends
of the ages of this world may after a sort be noted. But these Monarchies being
destroyed, there shall spring (says Daniell) a mighty kingdom, myghtier than
those, immediately before him, and shall change the religion of Christ, and
shall have wonderful success, and shall wage battle with holy men. Now what
kingdom he understands, it is apparent by the event, which is the Turkish
Empire. But (as the Prophet says) Putabit quod possit mutare tempora etc. He
shall think that he is of power to alter times and laws: Of the success^ of
the Turk,
but judgment shall come, and he shall be taken away, his power shall be weakened,
and come to naught. Daniel. 7.
These words do plainly yenough declare, that an alteration suddenly shall be
in those days, when the Turkish Empire does come to the highest, and
promises himself an everlasting dominion over all the world. And straight way
shall that most comfortable day show it self, in which the son of God
shall raise the dead, and render to his Church life, and eternal glory: but the
wicked he shall cast headlong into everlasting torments. With this prophecy
let us compare the times of our predecessors, and our own together, and we
shall evidently perceive the Turk to have prevailed mightily against the
Christians, and to possess not only all Asia, but also a great piece of
Europe. And (that I may use the words of Lactantius) Vere vorauit omn^m
terram, Epito. diuinar. instit. Chap. 11.
leges nouas statuit, Rempublicam suam fecit, nomen Imperij, sedemque mutauit.
that is: the earth he has devoured, new laws he has established, the common
weal is to himself impropriated, the name and seat of the Empire he has
changed.

Also what success within these few years he has had, it is well known. A
great part of Hungary he enjoys, from the Venetians* he has taken Cyprus:
now from the King of ^payne, Tunetum: and (as I hear) whatsoever he has
enjoyed hitherto in Africa, is taken from others: and as yet he is in armor,
with all worldlike provision, with ship and soldier prepared against the
Spanish king, and threatens utter destruction to all the world. And therefore
we do plainly perceive, the state of these times marueilously to aunsweare
unto the Prophecy of Daniell. And it appears (if by probable reasons any
thing may of lykelyhoode be gathered) that the Turk thorough the civil
dissentions of people, and continual wars of Princes, to the overthrow of
the Gospel by the Popes setting on, will subdue all kingdoms. But (I trust)
the Lord God by his speedy coming, will bring to naught these endeavors of
Turk and Pope against his Church, and will cast that beast with the little
horn, which has mightily increased, and all those ungodly and dragonish
kingdoms arising from the sea, and that false Prophet, into that furnace which
burns with fire and Brimstone.

Many reasons and probable conjectures from the course of time.
Hitherto by mean diligence I have recited those fore tokens of the enduring
of times, which Christ has taught us. And also I have showe^ other signs and
conjectures out of Gods word and condition of the time that now is, by which
we may know the oldnes, and sudden finishing of times, to which when they come
to pass, the Lord commands us to look back, and lift up our heads. For
in that the Lord God declares his most ardent goodwill toward us, in that he
would not signify the day and hour, but foreshewed the tokens going immediately
before the same. And therefore since by these it is manifest, that it is the
express will of our Savior, that out of the written word of Christ we should
with all diligence search out the last time of our redemption: I doubt not but
I shall do a good deed, and grateful both to God and his Church, if I utter
forth some cogitations of mine, fetched from the course of time, yet agreeing
to the holy Scripture, for the proof of the opinion about the speedye
conclusion of time. Not that I am in that mind that I think these to be
Demonstrations which through a necessity of that which is to come must needs
be, but as probable things so long to be embraced, till we learn more
certain. And therefore in these and the like things, I submit my self to the
better judgment of the Church and of the learned: and I persuade my self that
these and other singular Prognostications which follow, whereby somewhat
^igher I approach, than as yet I have done to show the sudden coming of the
Lord, shall be so far from terryfying of the godly, that the consideration of
these things will be most pleasant and comfortable. But yet I take not upon
me (as before also I have protested) to know the day, which Christ says
himself he does not know, (as he like a man bears the office of an
Apostle.) For the signs foretold we may know, but not the day and hour: not
the very moment of his coming, but the tokens of that moment do we search
out, as far forth as it is lawful for man so to do.

The holy Scripture every where makes some collation between the first Adam
the sinner, and the son of God Christ our Savior, Romans 5. 1. Cor. 15.
the second Adam: also between the flood, the utter overthrow of the world,
even as Christ does signify in these words: Et erit sicut in diebus Noe,
etc. And it shall be as in the days of Noe, Mat. 24.
etc. Wherefore I fell first into this consideration, and afterward, from one
to another, into those which ensue, whether the times past in equality of the
same number aunsweared alike. For the Lord God has ordained all things by a
singular and everlasting wisdom, and experience does teach, by a certain
concurring of the Stars, that in such things, e great lykenes of times is
wont oftentimes to happen: as in the birth of Isaac, and of his offering,
which is a figure of Christ, there is a great concent of the time. For from
Isaac until Christ, were two thousand years fully expired. But, when from
Adam orderly until the flood, we do consider the years of the generations of
all the fathers, and gather them all into one sum, (laying aside the false
computation of Eusebius, and others following the Greek translation of the
seventy Interpreters) from the first year of the worlds foundation to the
flood, are judged to be a thousand, six hundred, fifty and six years. From
this number, the years of Christ's birth, unto this present year a thousand,
five hundred, seventy and five, do differ eighty and one year, if truly
that number were filled. But I do not think the world shall continue so long,
that the latter time should in number exceed the former, for many conjectures
which follow: but what may come to pass, the Lord knows.

Likewise, Moses is a figure of Christ, that marvelous delivering of Israel
by Moses out of the hands of Pharao, is a figure of the victory of Christ,
which in our behalf he has by his death on the Cross, and resurrection from
the dead, obtained against the devil, and death: and the whole government of
M^yses, is a shadow of Christ's kingdom: His destruction, and the Jews, is
no doubt a token of the worlds overthrow. And here we shall see a wonderful
concente, and agreeing of times, that so by things past, we may look for the
event of things to come, undoubtedly by the singular providence, counsel, and
ordinance of God. For no other reason can I render, since I cannot persuade my
self, that these things, can by chance so wonderfully agree together. First,
by the true account of years, it is plain, that from the coming out of
Egypt, and publishing of the law, unto the Nativity of Christ, are numbered a
thousand, five hundred, and nine years. Now if the years from the Nativity of
Christ, until this time, in which Christ began again to be borne to the
world, and to be brought into the light as it were through the preaching of the
Gospel, by Luther, and other famous men, were numbered, they are in sum, a
thousand, five hundred, and seventeen. Again, from the departure out of
Egypt, until the death of Christ, the years are accounted to be a thousand,
five hundred, forty and two. And this number also does marueilously agree
with that general Persecution in Germanye made by Charles the fifth, and the
Pope, which happened in the year a thousand, five hundred, fortye and seven.
So that these numbers of years being compared together, will be found not much
to differ in quantity of number.

But from these poor mentions, I will go higher to those things, which
especially do agree to our purpose. It is manifest, that Moses government,
until the last destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, did stand in all, one
thousand, five hundred, eighty and three years. Neither is it to be doubted
of any, but that that destruction, and wasting (of Jerusalem) is a manifest
figure of the last ruin of this world. And therefore does our Lord speak of
these things together, and says: those days were the days of Noe in respect
of manners, and the security of man's life. Now at length, what shall we
gather of these things? That the term of the worlds destruction should agree
with the former number of years of Moses government? Which not the son of an
Emperor, or chiefest Monarch, as was Jerusalem: but the son of God much
mightier than all Emperors, an everlasting king, can bring to naught.
Melancthonin vita Vaspatiani.
Which thing Melancthon seems plainly to point at in the life of Vespasian in
his Chronicles: and the like reason is here, which is in the former comparison
of numbers, if things to come may be gathered by things past already. The
figure does altogether in this place agree, and the chiefest sign of Christ's
coming, to wit, the preaching of the Gospel has gonne before, and we to
stick in the midst of all the other foretold calamities, and every year
expect more misery.

Finally also, the Astronomers write (if every skillful man in his own
faculty is to be credited) that the stars in the beginning of the thousand,
five hundred, eighty and four years, (which almost altogether does agree
with the number above mentioned) do threaten very fearful and horrible
things, either a grievous alteration of Empires, and other wonderful things:
or else an utter destruction of this world. The words of Cyprian Leouitius a
Bohemian, Ciprian L^ouitius of the strange conjunction of Planes.
a most excellent Mathematician, in a certain book of Prognostications for
twenty years, from the year sixty four, to the eighty four, be these:
Anno Domini.1583. mense Maio. etc. Which is, In the year of our Lord 1583. in
the month of May, there shall happen a great conjunction of the superior
Planets in the last end of Pisces, after which straightwayes in the year
eighty four, shall ensue a wonderful mixture of all the Planets almost in
Taurus, about the end of March, and beginning of April. And which is more: a
little after that shall be seen, an Eclypse of the Sun in the twenty degree of
Taurus, about the head of Algol, a most cruel and hurtful fixed star,
governed by Venus, which shall be linked to five Planets in Aries, tending toward
the twelfe. Here (says he) must we watch: and I think it meet that all
earthly cogitations be cast of, least we be destroyed being unready: for this
great conjunction is of all the la^t, which shall happen in the end of watrie
Trigon, and watrie Trigon shall perish, and be turned into fire. Neither any
more it the space of eight hundred years the end of watrie Trigon shall be
nigh. But because about the end of watrie Trigon this Monarchy shall begin,
it is likely, that the same also in the end of the same ^rigon shall have an
end, since the son of God himself Jesus Christ our Lord even in the end of
watrie Trigon took upon him the nature of man. For six years before his
most glorious Nativity, the same very conjunction in the extremity of
Pisces, and in the beginning of Aries happened. Neither came the like from
since that time, but when Charles the Great held his Empire, which was in the
year of our Lord seven hundred, eighty and nine. And now the second time,
such a great and strange coniunctio^ shall come, which undoubtedly does
foreshewe the other coming of the son of God and man, in Majesty of his
glory, at which time we must render an account of our life and conversation.
And a little after he says: But under Charles the great the end of the world
could not be, because at that time, five thousand years were not expired. But
now the operations of this great conjunction continuing, the number shall tend
to six thousand years: which agrees with the holy Prophet, affyrming, that
this world should stand six thousand years, of which sum of years the
son of God shall take somewhat, saying: the last time for the elected of God
shall be shortened. But if there remained yet another conjunction of the former
Planets like to the first, then should there be required almost eight hundred
years more: which added to the times of this great conjunction, do make the
number of six thousand, and almost four hundred years, which is plainly
against that prophecy. These conjectures howsoever they are I thought good to
recite, which do agree with the learned Prophesies of most ancient
Astrologers. Hitherto Cyprian: which also by his Latin verses does show that
old and common prophecy turned into Germanical Rhythmes by John Stoffler,
which also above nineteen years ago I have heard recited by Melanthon. The
words in the Germane tongue be these: Tawsent fnuffhundert achtzich acht.
Das is it das Iar, das ich betracht.
Geeth im them de Welt nitt under.
Geschicht doch grosz mercklich wunder.


The Latin verses are thus Post mill expletos apartu virginis annos,
Et post quingentos rursus ab orb datos,
Octogesimus octauus mirabilis annus
Ingruet, is secum tristia fata feret.
Si non hoc anno totus malus occidet orbis:
Si non in nihilum terra, fretumque ruet:
Cuncta tamen mundi sursum ibunt, atque retrorsum
Imperia, and luctus vndique grandis erit.


In English thus. When after Christ's birth there be expirde
Of hundreds fifteen, years, eighty and eight,
Then comes the time of dangers to be ferde,
And all mankind with dolors it shall freight.
For if the world in that year do not fall,
If sea and land then perish ne decaie:
Yet Empires all, and Kingdoms alter shall,
And man to ease himself shall have no way.


Now by this it appears, how the number of years of Moses government, which
endured a thousand five hundred eyghtie and three years, and of this year a
thousand five hundred eyghty and four, in (whose beginning that prodigious
conjunction of the Planets in the end of watery Trigon does happen,) agree
together: so that the quantity and number of the times foretold, the signs
and stars seem to agree together, and without all doubt to pretend the same
thing. In like manner may we bring forth other comparisons of time, which by
reason of like euentes, agree together wonderfully. Of which this one is not
of least wayght: To wit, that same time from the nativity of Christ unto the
overthrow of Jerusalem, is almost equal with that, when Luther first of all
set himself against the Popes Indulgences, and began to preach the Gospel to
this year eyghty and eight, in which or about the same, by this marvelous
joining together of Planets, which shall be four years before, by the singular
providence of God, so direful destinies of the world shall meet together. For
from the birth of Christ until the destruction of Jerusalem, are numbered
seventy and three years: and from the time Luther and others first began to
preach Christ and his Gospel, until the eyghtie and eight year, are acompted
seventy and one. The number is just with that before, (and speaking
allegorically,) the^ may Christ be said to be born again, when as his
doctrine, so long by Papisticall dreams darkened, and fond illusions so deeply
buried, is as it were borne anewe, and does clearly shine among us. But if
those years from the birth of Christ until his preaching, and suffering of
death, with that general persecution done by Charles the fifte and the Pope:
and again those years from the death of Christ until the destruction of
Jerusalem, with these years, which came since that general persecution,
until the eighty and eight year, were compared: we shall see also that in
number of years they do not much differ. For between Christ's birth and his
preaching, there was thirty years: and so to his death.33. years, and
somewhat more. But from that seventeen year, when the Evangelical doctrine
began to shine again, until the forty and six year in all, when Charles
the Emperor began to arm himself against the states of the Empire, so to
abolish the doctrine of Christ, are numbered twenty and nine years. Again,
from the death of Christ to the overthrow of Herusalem, there was forty
years. And from that general persecution, which happened in the forty and
six year, until the eighty and six year, are accounted forty years:
which is the middle year between the eighty four, when that exceeding
strange uniting together of the Planets shall appear, and the eyghtie eight,
about which that conjunction shall take his full force.

Moreover, I find, that these times, in which those two wonderful conjunctions
did appear, six years before the birth of Christ, and in the days of
Charles the Great, and the third, and last, which shall happen before the full
expiryng of six thousand years, the thousand, five hundred, eighty and four
being at hand, do fill the same number. For Cyprian Leouitius does write, that
that other vnityng of Planets in the time of Charles the Great, chanced in the
year, seven hundred, eighty and nine, after the nativity of Christ. If to
this number so many more were added, the years would be, one thousand, five
hundred, seventy, and eight. Now, if to these were added, those six years
before Christ was borne, when the first of these three conjunctions happened,
there shall arise, countyng from the Nativity of Christ, as it were from an
effect of the former conjunction, the same number of years in full quantity
agreeing with that dreadful year, eighty four, above a thousand five
hundred: only that first, from this last, which is to come, differyng those
six years before Christ's birth.

I confess my self not to be skillful in Astronomy, although I do greatly
esteem that Art (if it be soberly used, and not vainly abused) which some,
because they are not acquainted therewith (as commonly it happens) do not
only despise, but also with evil words, because it is abused of some,
deface. But if the writyngs of Leouitius, and which was a great while before
his time, John Stoffler, and other Astronomers judgments, of those rare
conjunctions of all the Planets in the end of watery Trigon, be true: (as
certesse I believe, and verily persuade my self) I say plainly, it is a thing
greatly to be marueyled at, that those collations of times (in which the Lord
God either has bestowed singular benefits upon his Church, and also will
bestow, or altered kingdoms, and will alter) by such a certain wonderful
equality, and quantity of number should answer between themselves, even as
those causes of Astronomers in every respect have done. Of which it is most
euid^ntly gathered, that the Lord God, by a singular providence, and eternal
Counsel, does guide and govern all things. And also it is plainly to be
seen, that he has made the Stars, and the course of them to be as it were
Clockes of his eternal counsel, and governments of such things in his
Church, Praise of Astronomy. Genesis 1.
and commonweals, even as the Lord God also does witness him self, that
those lights in the Firmament of heaven, should be for Signs of times, and
days, and years.

And therefore from these things do cunnyng Astronomers fetch their
conjectures, because through a certain order which the Stars do keep, they
have by long use observed very many things, that so, from a true observation of
principles, they may bring forth general conjectures, whose events do
marvelously agree together. And that there is a certain order, or a true
course of the Stars, that wonderful agreeyng together of years,
continually in great alterations of Kingdoms, and Religion, which has been
marked, is a great proof: as by that which is already spoken, shall more
plainly appear. Truly, as often as I consider these things, I am not only
exceedingly troubled in mind, but as it were compelled to believe, that that
especial time of the end of this world, is nigh at hand: because the Lord
among other things also has given as certain tokens, these to wit: that
before his coming, there shall be a darkenyng of the Sun and Moon, and that
the qualities of the heavens shall be troubled. By which words no doubt he would
signify, that the whole Firmament of Stars should be altered, and as it were
threaten a destruction.

An application of Histories, and other Testimonies, with a short repetition of
that which is spoken.
THerefore, in my judgment, herein is contained a wonderful Mystery, yea
greater then may be uttered by any man, in that our merciful father (if any
credit may be given to Mathematicians) to these three times, between those two
thousand years of the last age, which (according to Elias Prophecy) were
appointed to Christ, has annexed the same conjunction of all the Planets,
under the same Signs. Because, if these Mathematical observations, together
with that agreement of times already spoken of, were compared with the
Prophesies of the Prophets, of Christ, and of Paul, we shall find a
marvelous concent of al these things. Which thing by the Prophets, by Christ,
and by the Apostles (the Stars signifying the same, through the unspeakable
love of God toward his Church) is therefore done, that these three times, as
it were by a most necessary observation, should be marked: to wit, about what
time Christ took upon him our nature, also about what time, by the coming of
Antichrist, the true doctrine of Christ was obscured, and that son of
perdition obtained the chief place in the Church, and Empire of the world: and
finally, about what time that glorious coming of the son of God to
judgment, is to be looked for. But that we may the better open these things,
let us consider, after what manner the events of those two former times have
happened, in which the same constellation of the Stars, according to the
opinion of Cyprian Leouitius, did come, that of those two past, we may the
better judge of that most joyful coming of the son of God, to all his
elect, and may certainly persuade our selves, that he will make have, and come
shortly, and with speed: and also let us consider that time, in which the same
constellation shall appear again, which was twice before, and in multitude of
years (as is above said) is like these past.

Of the coming of Christ into the flesh,
When the godly about Christ's time did see the government should be taken not
only from the stock of David, but also from the Jews, and translated to
strange rulers, to wit, to the house of Antipater the Idumite, no doubt they
supposed that Christ's coming into the flesh was then at hand: and the rather
they did so think, Gen, 49,
because Jacob, the Patriarch had long before prophesied that the Scepter
should not be taken from Judah, Dan. 9.
nor the captain from between his feet until Silo came, or he which was to
be sent: and also these seventy weeks of Daniell, drew well to an end,
which being expired, the ruler of the people, should show himself. Neither
did that undoubted hope deceive the godly: for the son of God Christ at that
time took our flesh upon him truly and in deed, he was a Sacrifice for our
sins, and and rose from death for our deliverance, so that those Prophecies
were fully expited and took their effect. And that then all the Jews thought
their Messiah should be borne, which they dreamed should be a mighty Monarch,
and rule over the world, Suetonius Tranqu^llus does evidently show in the life
of Vespasian, Of the coming of Antichrist.
the fourth Chapter.

Likewise Saint Paul did foretell a most certain argument of the coming of
the son of perdition. For in the time of Paul there were some in so wicked
an opinion, that they thought the coming of the Lord even then to be nigh at
hand, 2. Thessa. 2.
which Paul endeuoreth to bring from that error, teaching that the lord should
not come, before that wicked man an enemy to God, were first revealed, and
that he should not be revealed, except first that ancient and present Empire
of Rome were utterly abolished. Which thing he does signify in these words,
saying: He only which keeps, let him hold presently, until he be taken
away, and then that wicked man shall be made open. Hierome followed the same
sense, writing unto Algasia in this manner: Quae causa sit, etc. That is: You
know very well, what the cause is, that Antichrist now pres^ntly comes not.
He will not plainly say that the Roman Empire must be destroyed, which the
governors thereof suppose shall continue for ever. Wh^reof it is that
according to John's Revelation in the forehead of that purpled Harlot, there is
written a name of blasphemy, of everlasting Rome. For if he had plainly said,
Antichrist shall not come, except first the Roman Empire be abolished, a just
cause there might arise of persecuting the East Church which then was. And a
little after he says: The Roman Empire, which now keeps all Nations in
subjection, must be overthrown, and then shall Antichrist come the fountain
of iniquity. The same sense does Tertullian, in his treatise of the
resurrection of the flesh, and Lactantius treat of, in his seventh book, and.
25. Chapter of Institutions.

But if we would compare the Prophecy of Paul, with the deeds of Charles the
Great, we shall find that prophecy in those days marueilously to have taken
effect, and then the ancient Empire of the Romans altogether to have come to
naught, and the title of the Empire, which was the image of the Beast, to be
translated to the Frenchmen, and Germans, and afterward by little and little
especially to have come to the Pope of Rome, which at that time began plainly
to show himself to be very Antichrist, and that damnable child. Platina.
Because he was not only content to be (...), or the head of the universal
Church (as Phocas before above two hundred years, had appointed him) but also
the lord of lords. For Charles now being anointed and crowned Emperor by the
Pope, Krants. 2. Cap. 18. Ganguinus. lib. 4.
(because he had luckely overcome Desiderius king of the Longebardians, which
ambiciously sought the Emperorship of all Italy) and afterward his son
Lodouicus Pius from whence also he received that name, to be called Lodouike
the Godly, granted unto him the government both of Rome and of many other
Provinces: and this gift of Lodouike has Raphaell Velateran in the acts of
Pepine and of the Emperors, faithfully committed to posterities by writing. So
the power and malice of the Bishops increasing by little and little, the whole
world came under their subjection, and all Emperors, Kings, and Princes became
as it were their Clients, or (as I may say) their Vassalles: and they yet in
name the servants of Slaves, but indeed as it were chief Monarchs of all
Kings, serving at their beckes. Of these we have a notable testimony of that
most noble, and worthy Salisburgan Archbishop Eberhardus, which about the year
of the Lord.1240. in the open counsels of the king, Lib. 7. Ann^l. Joan.
Auen. in exemplari Ensta^^i impresso. an. 1554. fol. 684. and 685.
is reported to have spoken these words ensuing: Flamines illi Babyloniae
regnare cupiunt etc. That is, Those Babylonian Priests desire to reign,
equals they cannot abide: they will not leave of, until they have trodden al
things under their feet, and sit in the temple of God, and be exalted above
all that which is worshipped. The desire of riches, and thirst for preferment
is insatiable. The more you give to a covetous man, the more he gapes. Show
your singer, and he will desire the hand. Through liberty we are all the
worse. He which is the servant of servants, coueteth to be Lord of Lords,
as if he would be God himself. The holy assemblies and meetings of his
brethren, yea of his Lords, he condemns. He is in fear, least he be
compelled to give an account of those things which daily he does more and more
against the laws. He speaks wonderful things, as if he were God. New
devises are in his mind, whereby he may impropriate the Empire to himself. He
changes laws, his own he establishes, he abuses he spoyleth, deceyueth,
slays. This man of perdition which is called Antichrist, in whose forehead it
is written, I am God (and cannot err.) He sits in the temple of God, and
bears sway far and wide. But as it is in holy scripture: He which reads,
let him understand. The learned shall understand, all the ungodly shall do
wickedly, and shall not perceive. And a little after, Romani maiestas populi.
etc. The Majesty of the Roman people, which sometime ruled the whole world,
is taken from the earth, and the Empire is returned into Asia. Again, the East
shall bear sway, the West shall be in subjection. The kingdom shall be augmented,
the chief power of things, by many shall be scattered, divided, diminished, I
will not say, teared, civil dissension for ever is sown, neither shall we
perceive the end of bloody batayles. The Emperor is a vain appellation, or
name, and is only a shadow. Ten Kings are together, which have divided the
world, sometime the Empire of Rome, not for the defense, but dectruction of
the same. etc.

Finally also, even as the Pope in power and authority has increased, so
likewise in blasphemies and impetie has he abounded: insomuch, that at length
he has usurped the power of God, inuerted the face of all true Religion, and
defiled the same with his filth: which thing no wise man can deny. The
blasphemous a^rogancie of the wicked Pope.
Therefore does he sit in the Temple of God, chalengyng to him self the
authority of the highest: and as Paul speaks, boasting him self to be God,
as may be proved by the Decrees and Decretals of the Popes, if any man think
we say not the truth. Hear what his most impudent favorers on his behalf
have reported: The Pope (say they) is called as it were wonderful, from Pape
the Interiection of woondring, because he is Christ's Vicar and Gods, whose the
fullness of the earth is. And John Andr. upon this word Pope, in the Proeme of
Clement, speaks thus: Papa dictus est quasi pater Patrum. etc. The Pope is
called as it were the father of all fathers, having only the fullness of
power. 2. Distin. 44.
Also Thomas of Aquine says, that in spiritual matters, and temporal, he
has the chiefest degree, equally to Peter the Apostle. At a word, they make
him a Mungrell, as partly God, and partly man. They call him, The Spouse of the
Church, The mother of the faithful, which cannot err, whose voice is
heavenly, even as Peter's was, and therefore that he is the chiefest Judge: whose
wickedness, as the murders of Sampson, the spoils of the Hebrews, the adultery
of Jacob, are to be judged of none: for there is one and the same seat (say
they) both of God and the Pope. The Popes will is said to be a heavenly will,
and therefore is of power to change the nature of things, to apply that unto
one, which belongs to another, and of nothing, to make somewhat. Are not
these and such like Rules of the Canonistes formally recited, marvelous
things? which with blasphemous and wicked lyppes under the Popes person,
according to Daniels Prophecy, speak against the God of Gods. And as the
Occidentall Empire of the great Pope, in the time of Charles the Great, was
divided from the Oriental: so likewise the Empire at Constantinople, which
sometime was called also the Oriental Empire of Rome, afterward was greatly
diminished by the great Turk and Sarasins, whose power afterward increased
more and more, and that mightily. Afterward, a little before the reign of
Carolus Caluus, Cousin to Charles the Great, the Tartarian Turks, by occasion
they were requested to assist the Persians against the Sarasins, obtained all
Asia: and these embracing the Mathematical sect, at the length came to be of
greatest power. So that these two wicked and Antichristian kingdoms took
their beginning, when the Roman Empire in Phocas time and Heraclius was
impaired: and in the reign of Charles the Great, the Empire almost subverted,
they daily more and more mightily increased, in this weak and divided
kingdom, whose feet were become partly of iron, and partly of earth.
Afterward, by lies, backslidings, and slaughter (which are the properties of
the Antichristians) their rulyng and Religion was confirmed, and the Saints of
God, by myngling earthly with heavenly things, were vexed: as Historiographers,
and the Chronicles of John Auentine every where do witness. And therefore both
of them by the glorious coming of the Lord, shall be abolished, and shall
receive one, and the same destruction.

If therefore to the consolation of all the godly, and confirmation of our
faith, the holy Ghost has had a great care to d^liuer unto us by the Prophets,
Of the coming of Christ to judgment.
certain foresignes, by which might be coniectured, when the coming of Christ
in the flesh was nigh at hand: whose coming should yet before the world, be
base and very simple, and yet of sufficient power to save our souls from the
heavy curse and displeasure of God: And if the holy Ghost has been so careful
in giuyng to the Church, and the chosen of God, certain signs and tokens of
the coming of Antichrist, no doubt he did the same, that the better they might
shun and forsake all his untrue teachings and blasphemies, by the help of Gods
word. And therefore has the holy spirit of God been the more diligent to show
to the Church, many and manifest signs of the Lords coming to judgment, that
so he might drive us from all security of this life, and wake us out of the
deep sleep of our deadly sins, least by the speedy coming of the Lord to
judgment, we suddenly perish: and that in all afflictions, with which the
Church is continually vexed, we might have a sure trust and confidence in the
mercy of God. And therefore the son of God him self, in the last preaching
before his death, through a great goodwyll gave us many signs, and earnestly
charged us, taking his parable from the Fyg tree, that beholding those tokens
immine^t, we should carefully and readily, attend the coming of our Brydgrome.
For that coming to all the godly and chosen of the Lord, shall be joyful and
comfortable. In which the Son of God shall appear in power mighty, in glory
wonderful, and show him self to his foes terrible, to us comfortable: to
them severe, gentle to us: to them a Judge and condemner: to us an Advocate and
Redeemer: to them an enemy and destroyer, to us an assured friend and defender:
so that he shall recompense them with fire continual among the Devils, but us
he shall reward with his favor perpetual, in the society of Angels, and
celestial habitation. And therefore does Joel call that day of the Lord, a great
day, Joel. 2.
and terrible (to the wicked) when all from the worlds creation, shall be made
to stand before the tribunal seat of God.

Above I have showed, that the chiefest sign of the coming of the son of
man was the preaching of the Gospel, which Paul terms the spirit of the
Lords mouth: also I have declared how that sign is evident in these days, and
that Antichrist by the breath of the mouth of the Lord is overthrown, and
strangled with lynnin, as Sebyl Erithraa speaks (that is with interpretations
of holy Scripture imprinted in Paper made of linen) it is manifest to all
godly, Lib. 8.
and men instructed in true religion. Now what what other thing remains? But
the consummat^on of the world, and that glorious coming of the Lord, by which
that wicked and damned son shall be abolished, according to Christ's words.
Hitherto that conjunction of all Planets which was a little before the birth of
Christ, and in the time of Charles the great in the beginning both of the
Turks tyrannical dominion, and the Popes Antichristian religion, which shall
ensue very shortly, does belong. As if the Lord would say: Behold the
chiefest sign of my coming, according to my promise, the preaching of the
Gospel is come already, you see the power of Antichrist my sworn enemy is
greatly weakened, now shall you see the very signs in heaven, which foretold my
former coming in the flesh, and the coming of my adversary, by which you may
gather my coming, whereby I will utterly abolish his usurped government, and
abandon him from the godly, to that bottomless pyt of hell. And therefore take
you heed, and be circumspect, for the time of your deliverance is at hand.
Neither can we doubt (since the Stars are of the Lord God created for signs
unto us) but that marvelous conjunction of the Planets, does foreshew a
wonderful and incredible alteration of all things. And what other change may
we look for, I pray you? But even the utter destruction of the world, and the
triumphant appearing of the Lord. For the six thousand year, which is the
last day, draws to the evening, course of times, and their foretold
agreement, declare the end to be at hand: the preaching of the Gospel shines,
the Pope of Rome by the breath of the Lord perishes, and we are in Religion
cold, careless, and contemn his preachers, which the Lord God cannot suffer
long to go unpunished. Also this fearful inclination of the Stars, the daily
talk of wars, the direful civil contentions, the cruel dissension in
Religion, the great plagues, the miserable hunger, the strange tempests, the
wonderful risings of the Sea, and other signs, which many times have come
after the preaching of the Gospel, and daily do more increase, are out of
doubt the evident signs of the worlds speedy overthrow, and hasty coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ the son of God, to judge the quick and the dead.

Of the fifteen hundred years after the Apostles time until the last
judgment.
THere are besides these, many other sweet, and very probable conjectures of
the sudden coming of the Lord to judgment. Which contain many and
profitable instructions, and will be wonderful, and strange perchance to
many, for the small consideration they have of them, which if they were well
wayed, Plato. 8. Polytic A^istotel^s 5. pol.
might bring us into a great admiration of Gods providence. It is well known
to all the learned, and not doubted, but that all governments, according to the
Princes of Philosophy Platoes and Aristotle's doctrine, have their certain
conclusions, and it may be for truth; that every five hundred years there
happen wonderful alterations both in Religion and commonweals, as there
appeared three in Moses Kingdom. For from the coming out of Egypt unto
Solomon, there was about five hundred years, from thence unto the captivity
at Babylon, other five hundred: and from the returning unto the last
subversion, five hundred more: which last periode does greatly agree with those
seven weeks of Daniell, because they are in number four hundred four score,
and ten. And therefore by a brief marking of the times and things brought to
pass, we will make it evident, that the last five hundred years from the
Apostles time, fully shall be expired in this Monarchy of the Pope, which now
threateneth a great ruin and perchance an utter downfall about the eighty
eight, and ninety three year, the former inclinations of the stars and
other ensuing, foreshewing dyrefull things even until the six thousand and a
hundred year. Apo. 13.
Which Monarchy is called of John in his Revelation, the image of the beast,
by reason of a certain likeness it has with the old Monarchy, which by a
like tyranny against the Christians, and manner of government by their
ecclesiastical Senate, and by the secular power (as they say) to the
satisfying of their minds in oppressing the Christian verity through all the
world, they do exercise. So that by a great and infallible supposition it may
be gathered, that the noble coming of the Son of God is nygh at hand: since
the preaching of the Gospel now goes before, by which this Monarchy having
his authority from the Dragon, at the length ruinous begins to stoop, but
cannot utterly be abolished, according to Paul's doctrine, until the Lord come
for altogether. For by histories we know, John the Evangelist to have lived
longer time than any of the Apostles, and to have written his Gospel at
Ephesus, and afterward when as none of the Apostles were, ^usebius.
no not many days before living, it is well known that he was sent of
Domitian into the Island Pathmos, where he committed his Revelation to writing,
and that was about the days of Traian the Emperor, which the hundred year
from Christ's nativity being adopted by Nerua, came to the Imperial throne:
from whom, for causes ensuing, I will begin to recite three notable chaunges,
and alterations both in Religion, and in the Empire, which differ one from
another according to the true account of years, but five hundred years a
piece.

Now these hundred years from the birth of Christ unto the time of Traian
being expired, so strange things and myraculous both in the Church and commonweals happened, as from the beginning of the world such and so great neither
have, neither shall come to pass, except only in the last coming of the
Lord, at what time he shall call the dead before his tribunal seat, that so
the whole ungracious world may be brought unto perpetual shame, and the
virtuous to everlasting glory: for first o^r Lord and Savior Christ was borne
of a virgin, perfect man, the Messiah promised to the Patriarchs, the son of
one substance with his eternal father, by whom God has made of nothing, al
things both in heaven above, and in earth below, and redeemed mankind which
was fallen, from sin, and wickedness: for in the behalf of us all, he has
suffered a most reproachful death of the Cross, to that end, that death, and
the Devil being vanquished, he might rid all believers from eternal death,
and the intolerable yoke of Satan. He has also risen like a conqueror in
glory from the dead, and ascended into heaven, that he might prepare a way for
us to his almighty father, whose anger by his righteousness he had appeased,
and reconciled him unto us.

Finally also, at the feast of Penticost, God miraculously and without mean
(according as it was long before promised by the Prophets) did power out his
holy spirit full of all grace, and goodness upon his Apostles, that in all
Nations they might be able to glorify God, and by every speech declare their
message of glad tidings: as also Mangre the devil and his Adherentes the same
(notwithstanding the outrageous cruelty of Nero and Diomitian,) was preached
and published throughout all the world.

Lastly, what wonderful things have happened from the birth of Christ unto the
hundred year after the same, at which time Traiane first received the
Imperial Di^deme? I mind not to prosecute every thing particulerly, least by
that means contrary to my purpose I proceed. Amongst other things, those
words forespoken of Christ and the Prophets, teaching the overthrow and
utter destruction, of the Jews and Jerusalem, take effect: and also under
Traiane the Emperor there happened a great alteration in religion. For
although the Empire was of Rome, yet was not the Emperor a Roman borne but a
Spaniard, and adopted to that dignity, of Nerua which was a Roman. And
therefore by these it plainly does appear, that the Apostles being dead, there
was now a new face of the Church, and that nothing so beautiful as the former,
and also new state of Empire presignifyed of John in his Revelation. Because
that Traian was the eight from the seventh who was Nerua, which was the seventh
from Nerc the last of the stock of Caesar's, from whom John begins to number
the seven Kings, which were the seven heads of the Beast. And therefore he
says: Apo. 17.
Bestia quam vidisti, fuit, and non est, that is, The Beast which thou saw,
was, and is not, that is, the Roman Empire is, but not such an Empire, as that
was which came of the stock of Caesar's, and decayed, when Nerua dyed. And now
i^ the time of Domitian, of those seven, five were dead: but the seventh which
was Nero, was not yet come. And cum venerit, opportet eum breue tempus manner,
nec diu imperare: when he comes he must tarry a short time, and govern but a
while: which also came to pass, because he reigned but one year and three
months. But Traian was the eight, a Spaniard no Roman borne, and adopted by
the seventh. Wherefore to the purpose says the Angel to John in this manner:
Bestia que erat, The beast which was, to wit, the Roman Empire, and non est,
and is not the Roman, but a Romanspanish Empire, is octauus erit, that shall be
the eight, from Nero^ and e septem est, and is of the seventh, to wit, adopted
of Nerua.

Wherefore because of this alteration in the Empire, and mournful countenance
of the Church, by reason that her chief Rulers, and Apostles were dead, The
first Pe^^ode.
we will here begin to account the first five hundred years, even unto the days
of Heraclyus and Phocas, which chanced in the.604. and.602. year from Christ's
Nativity. About which time Boniface the third was confirmed universal Bishop
of all the world, and manifested the forerunner of Antichrist, as likewise
Gregory the great not many years before had pronounced of the Patriarch of
Constantinople, which ambitiously sought to be Private, or chief Bishop of the
rest. About this time, the Roman Empire was much weakened, and the Turk began
to be of power. This first periode, may well be referred to the Church of
Christ, in whose beginning (as it were) she suffered most grievous persecution
of the Roman Empire, that cruel and blooddie beast, and had many godly and
learned men, which entered most dangerous and continual conflictes for the
overthrow of heresies: and yet notwithstanding by little and little many
Ceremonies were brought into the Church, by which at length she was
marueilously polluted: the chiefest bringer of those ceremonies into the
Church, was Gregory the great, until Boniface by the help of Phocas, did
plainly declare himself to be Antichrist in deed.

From this time until the reign of Henry the fourth, The second^ Period.
we reckon the second periode of five hundred years: in which all Papisticall
superstitions, Idolatry, blasphemy, orders of Monks, power of the Pope, with
the chief Senate of Cardinals, did above measure increase, and in the time of
Henry, that impiety came to ripenes, even as also afterward did the Turks
tyranny and blasphemy. Before about a two hundred and fifty years numbering
from Phocas the Emperor, which also have their end, to wit, in the days of
the Emperors, the Pope of Rome was licensed to be a civil Magistrate,
received his chief authority from Pipine; and afterward from Charles the
Great, and Lodouike the Godly, and was endued with many Provinces, and adorned
with double power, or with both Swords both of ruling the Spirituality (as
they say) and Laity: which he obtained under the pretense of Religion: and
therefore John in his Revelation gives to this Beast two horns like unto the
Lamb. Apo. 13.
About which time, both the Turkish Empire (as in his place it is said) daily
increased, and the old Roman Empire continually decayed, and was diuid^d in
the Oriental and Occidentall Empire. Yet notwithstanding the Occidentall
Emperors in respect of the others, had full power to create, and confirm what
Bishops they would. But in the time of Henry the fourth, that order was
altogether changed. Because the Bishops at the length had brought unto
themselves all power and authority, both of ordaining and choosing Bishops,
Lanf. de Sacra. Virgi. de in^entione; libr. 4. capi. 10.
and Emperors to, and made a new Ecclesiastical or Cardinals Senate to the
which was given full power, to choose whom they would to the Papacy, the Pope
being dead: and reserved to themselves all authority of choosing and crowning
Emperors. Against this unspeakable ambition and mighty power of the Pope, did
for the maintaining of his Imperial authority, according to the decree of
his father Henry the Black, though in other things he did overmuch submit
himself to the Popes authority, Henry the fourth, stoutely (as became a good
Emperor) resist. For which cause, afterward Pope Hildebrande, otherwise
called Gregory the seuenrh, Krantz. lib. 5. ca. 8.

Blondus. Krantz. li. 5. ca 7.


a wicked and infamous Magician, did excommunicate him, and raised great and
grievous wars against him by others, in so much that he displacing him, chose a
new Emperor named Ralfe, to whom he sent a crown of Gold, with this
inscription: Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Radolpho: but at length
vanquished by Henry, having lost his right hand, he died miserably.

But Henry being dead, The last Peryod.
when as now the second Period of five hundred years, from the time of Phocas,
was perfe^tly finished, the ungodly Pope by his craft and subtlety, at the
beginning of his reign, obtained easily of Henry the fifth, (too wicked a son
for so godly a father) all his desire. So that, that divine Revelation of John,
did fully take effect: because that Image of the Beast with two horns, does
exercise all the power of the former beast, and calls al kings his sons and
slaves, and earnestly does keep the manner of the Gentiles in all kind of
Idolatry, only having altered the names of things. Lastly also to this Image
of the Beast by the Dragon (because he speaks like a Dragon) that power is
given, that he may quicken the other image of the Beast, that is, this
Germanicall Empire, which rather ought to be termed a shadow of the old
Empire, than an image of the same. For the Pope did give life to the image of
the Beast by his election. For unless the Pope did confirm the election, Apo.
13.
none was worthy of the name of an Emperor. Therefore under the pretense of the
keys of the kindo^ of heaven, this ungracious fellow has marueilusly abused
this power of the Dragon, which power now by the preaching of the Gospel,
through the grace of God does threaten an utter and last destruction: whose
longest term of five hundred years, about the year a thousand, six hundred,
(or there about) is fully finished. Wherefore (since this damnable child, and
the image of the Beast with the Dragon in that perfect wickedness must be cut
of, and cast hedlong into hell) a great and infallible argument is it, and
agreeing to Gods word, and to the course of time, that this certain
computation of years does signify the Lords coming to be very nigh at hand.

Of things past already, things to come are marueilously gathered,
BY that which has been spoken, as well as a brief annotation of times, and
things that have been done, could show, it after a sort appears, how, after
the death of Henry the fourth, the Pope became the chief Monarch of all the
world, ruled all kings, and obtained all authority of choosing Bishops. Also
how that third Periode of five hundred years, about the year of our Lord,
one thousand and six hundred should be fully perfect, that so without all
doubt we may look for a new Metamorphosis of these things, if things to come
may well be gathered of things past already. And what other (I beseech you) can
we look for, but even that which was seen, and heard of John in his
Revelation, from him which sat on the Throne among the four and twenty
Elders, saying; Behold, I make al things new, a new heaven, a new earth:
behold the Tabernacle of God with men, and he shall dwell with them, Apo. 21.
and they shall be his people, and he shall be a God with them, even their God.
But when those ungodly Decrees and blasphemies, which the Romans from the
fifty seven, unto the thousand one hundred year (in all the time that Henry
the fourth reigned) by little and little brought in, are considered, and withal
compared with our days, we shall find all those things continually to have had
(as it it were peculiarly) their five hundred years a piece. Wherefore, in my
judgment, by the times past, and state of things present, I am the more
confirmed to think the full and perfect end of all ungodliness, to be very
nigh at hand, after which shall ensue that perpetual and everlasting world, in
which the Lord God shall reign and rule in justice, truth, and mercy, for ever.

In the time of Henry (as out of histories we gather) these Decrees of the
Bishops were published: first, Decret^ Pontificum. Pla^ina. Sabellicus.
Krantz. lib. 5. ca. 6.

Cause. 16. q. 7. Si quis de inceps.


that the Emperors should have no authority to choose Bishops, nor Pope:
for which cause the Senate of Cardinals, to whom was given that power, was
instituted and preferred to great honor: then also they took upon them to
choose, and refuse Emperors at their pleasure, as plainly appeared by
Hildebrandes electing of Rodolph, and displacing of Henry. Moreover under this
Emperor, that horrible Idolatry of the woorshippyng and carrying about of the
bread, came into the Church.

Lastly, in the year one thousand, nyntie, and three, all the laws of Popes
were gathered and set forth by one Iuon B. of Carnot. And therefore no doubt,
but the Lord God also at his certain time, will bring to naught, cut of, and
by his coming to judgment, to the perpetual shame of all papists, utterly
abolish all that impiety and wickedness, which the Devil by his ministers, to
the reproach of God, has caused, increased, and confirmed. For we have examples
both in the people of the Jews, and Gentiles. For when as their superstition,
and obstinate ungodliness was come to the top, then sprang up the true doctrine,
and preaching of the Gospel, by which their false doctrine was reproved, yet
in the mean while, through the just and horrible displeasure of God against
them, most grievously were they plagued, even as also happened to the Jews, by
Ierusalems destruction, and also to other nations, and lastly to Rome, in the
miserable spoiling of the Goths and vandolles.

But if the time since the preaching of the Gospel were well marked, we shall
see most evident beginnings of the ruin and overthrow of the Pope, and
Papacy, which perchance either shall go before the last end of time, or else in
that third space of five hundred years, or somewhat after, by the Lords coming
shall come to naught. So do I persuade my self: think you what you will, at
your pleasure, and yet take heed ye rhinke not falsely. But if in other places
I err, the matter is not great. For it is certain out of the word of God, that
this error shall not long continue. For Christ is the very truth, and cannot
err. But let us note what has happened, and daily does happen among
Christians in this our age, and plainly and evidently, we shall see all things
(forespoken) to have, and daily to come to pass, about this very time of five
hundred years. For we have a notable example hereof in the Electors, and
states of the Empire, which in the year one thousand, five hundred fiftye and
eight (which was about the five hundred year after the Popes began their
tyranny over Kings and Princes) did choose Ferdinandus the Emperor maugre the
Pope, and for ever disanulled that decree of the Cardinals, for the
confirmation of his election. How (I beesech you) has Lotharinge a Guisian
Ca^dinall in France, and Granuellus another Cardinal in Belgia for all their
Cardinalshippes prevailed, in their laboring to confirm the Popes authority,
and to bring in the Spanishe Inquisition? have not the Frenchmen, and Belgians
by that mean rather rebelled against them, and cast from their shoulders that
intolerable yoke of the Popes bondage? By which no doubt it is evident, that
that space of five hundred years in which the Cardinals bare the swaye, is now
passing, and will shortly be expired, even as the other peevish, and idolatrous
doctrine of the Papists is well, and to their perpetual praise banished out
of the Dominions of many good Kings and Princes. An admonition to P^inces.
And now ye Princes deal wisely, and with judgment, consider how that
Antichrist of Rome has most shamefully abused your authority to the
suppressing of the truth, and persecuting of innocents: Bear in mind how
long you have been Ministers and slaves to that blooddie beast, in crucifying
Christ again in his members. Be learned ye Judges of the earth, be sorye for
these things: An admonition to kings.
Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice with trembling. For the horrible day of
the Lord hangs upon your shoulders. Therefore kiss the Son least he be
angry, Psalm. 2.
and so ye perish: when his fury shall be but a little kindled, Blessed are all
they which trust in the Lord.

Now if in that spoken already, and other particular laws, the number of five
hundred years be so rightly filled, what shall we judge of the whole body of
all the Popes decrees? Functi. Chron*
which afterward by Iuon Bishop of Carnot (after whom Gratian followed) in
the year of the Lord one thousand nintie and three, at the commandment of
the Pope was truly collected into one book, as it were by imitating Justinian
the Emperor, which by the aid of Tribonianus and other noble men, gathered
the Civil law into an order, and made thereof a new book. But how with
absurdities in number infinite, and blasphemies not to be uttered, those
decrees of the Pope do filthily deface the word of God, none of a right
judgment is ignorant. And yet alas these have had more authority now many
years, than the very immutable word, and will of God. Which things although
they do agree very well together, yet for the sakes of the ignorant we will
prove the same both by a Canon of holy Scripture, and the Popes decrees,
manifestly contrary between themselves. Paul says to Timothy: 1. Tim. 4.
Spiritus diserte dicit, fore, etc. That is, The Spirit says plainly, that in
the latter times some shall depart from the faith, lystening to false spirits,
and to the doctrine of Devils by the hypocrisy of vain speakers, whose
conscience is marked with a hot iron they forbid to marrye, they command to
abstain from meats, which are created of God to be eaten of the faithful,
and of those which know the truth with thankefulnes. 1. Tim. 3.1. pa^s did,
32.
And a little before he taught, a Bishop must be the husband of one wife. To
these words of the Apostle, the decrees of Popes are clean opposite, which
do forbid Bishops, Priests, and all the Clergy to marry, with this
interdiction, that if they do so, they must be removed from the
Ecclesiastical calling, and, which is more, if they have already contracted
Matrimony, without any respect of irregularship they must be separated, and
shall be compelled by the Ordinary, and remedies of excommunication to refuse
their wives. etc. By which it is apparent, that the Papists are those, which
in the latter days should depart from the faith, and by the Devils provoking
under hypocrisy, and with many of the chiefest of them have not under the
cloak of overmuch chastity forbid pure and chaste Matrimony, which the holy
ghost does singu^arly commend: and also receiving of certain meats, which
(as Paul does witness) God has created for the faithful to be eaten with
thankesgeuing. And yet notwithstanding these, as I said before, decrees of
Popes, although they be clean contrary to the will of God, have had more
authority among men, than the eternal word of God. Because those, although
in deed wicked and ungodly, yet have been called holy, and Catholic, and they
which have been conversant in them, our chief masters, and doctors were
counted, to whom the sacred Scripture was most unsavory. So that to take an
honest woman to wife (which Paul commanded his Bishops to do) was
dishonestie, and more dishonestie than either openly to use a concubine, or
secretly to commit adultery. Also on the Friday to eat flesh, was a great
sin and heresy: and yet on that day to follow drunkenness and carnalitie, was
no shame, but highly commended. Likewise to hear the blasphemous Mass, to
reverence an Idolatrous piece of bread, and to carry the same about with a
pompous Procession, was no impiety but good Religion, and yet to celebrate the
Supper of the Lord soberly according to his institution, was no godlynes, but
great abomination. At a word, the doctrine of Christ, a good and godly
conversation, was of them suspected, as erroneous: and yet forsooth their
deuilish decrees, and damnable doctrine was holy, and nothing pernicious. Their
impuritie, great piety: their hypocrisy, great holiness, their damnable
ceremonies, was the divine service of God. So that all Christian Religion was
utterly banished, and no token of the true service of God could be seen. But
now in the year of the Lord a thousand five hundred ninety and three after
Christ's birth, which is the five thousand, five hundred, and five year after
the world was made, that expiring of five hundred years draws nygh, in which
these decrees of Popes gathered together by public authority to the great
defacing of Gods word, and the merits of Christ, shall have their end.
Wherefore a wonderful and undoubted hope of things to come may be conceived
of things past, that about that time shall be that universal destruction of all
the world, and glorious coming of the Lord. by which all these Popish
decrees shall come to naught, and by the just judgment of God, as erroneous,
and blasphemous, be cast into eternal fire, because they have wickedly burned
all the true interpretations of the Prophetical, and Apostolical scriptures,
and cruelly martyred the learned ministers, and true professors of Christ's
Religion. Undoubtedly that number of five hundred years in like manner as the
others spoken of before, do presage the same like thing: the Prognostications
of the stars (as may be gathered by that which is spoken) take their effect
about the same time: The preaching of the Gospel, and other tokens mentioned
of Christ is gonne before: and the Justice of God especially does exact the
same.

Of the double equality of numbers which is represented in the number of
years of the world happening ^n the eyghtie eight, and ninety th^^e year
next ensuing.
Now what should I think, and say of that course of years, from the
beginning until the ninety three now at hand? Which is the year of the
world five thousand, five hundred, fifty and five: does it foreshowe any
wonderful, or signify any perfect thing or no? Certainly I find the same to
be altogether of like proportion as by that which is spoken may appear, even
with the eighty eight now at hand, because it is in his quality the five
thousand, five hundred, and fifty year. The Pythagorians, and Platonistes,
men of great authority, have thought many things to consist in these, and
have wondered thereat: for the lowest number in the highest, has in it self a
perfect Arithmeticall proportion, and from the lowest to the highest, it
comprehends with in it a perfect Geometicall equality. And Pl^to in another
place, I^ Epinemid^ and Philosopho
greatly does wonder at the Arithmeticall, and says that the same does make
the mind apt for al^ speculation, and practice. And he does add moreover,
that numbering is given of God himself to man, as a necessary instrument of
reasoning and discoursing, without which, the mind should appear without a
mind, and all arts and knowledge would vanish. Here I confess my self to
have certain singular imaginations, and those not vain, but of weight, and
agreeable to the word of God, as I think. And therefor for the profit of all,
and that I may give an occasion to the learned more deeply to think of this
matter, I will not bury this my talent whatsoever it be, but will set it abroad
for commodity, and bring it forth without any regard of the over curious, and
the rather because I know that these things (if else where perchance I slide)
do contain no danger, or heresy within them, but rather by occasion many
profitable instructions, and those sweet and necessary.

And (that we may return to Plato) he says in another place very well: De re
pub. lib. 2.
That God is an eternal spirit and cause of all goodness in the world. Because
in the creation of good things he showed his unspeakable power, wisdom, and
goodness: and i^ the conseruatio^ of things created, his eternal providence, and
a wonderful consent and order of al things: that by the contemplation thereof,
man which was made to the image of God, should also continue, according to the
word reue^led, in acknowledging, and calling on his Majesty: and not as a
brute beast, beholding the earth, should seek after vain and transitory
things, but should in mind ascend into heaven to behold things celestial and
of continuance, as also the Scripture every where does teach us. Also, what
kind of me^ would Plato in his Phedrus and Phedon, have in his common weal?
Forsooth even such, as through contemplating of heavenly things, should rather
seem to live without, than in the body, and rather to God, than themselves,
and be delyghted in him alone. But that we may go higher, to the manifesting of
that which I am about, Let us behold how all things in the world do stand, and
we shall find them in a certain order, measure, and number, to be so linked
together, that they cannot be separated. The Heaven, the Planets, and the
Stars keep their certain order, and time, and they appoint the certain
course of every thing: and cause the change and alterations in the bodies both
of men and beasts, and in his due time every herb, is brought forth. Al which
things are so apparent in our eyes, as of them we can not doubt. And yet all
these things, by the incomprehensible wisdom and providence of almighty God,
are kept in their certain measure and number. For God by a certain measure
(as it were) has placed the earth, like a round Globe in the myddle (so that
no way it can fall) the which the whole Firmament of heaven does compass, and
in the space of twenty and four hours is carried round about the same. Also
he has appointed a certain and just number of all things: to wit, the four
seasons of the year, and their months, days, the certain hours of every
day, the minutes of every hour, and lastly the certain ends of time, by a
certain incomprehensible consent of the Stars, and numbers among them
selves. Not as though the Stars and numbers without the first cause, can
bring any thing to pass, but because in their government, and second operation
of the Stars, they represent before our eyes, ^he immeasurable wisdom, and
eternal providence of God. Because God is not a God of confusion, that he can
do all things at his pleasure, by a certain inordinate affection as men do:
but he is a God of order, a keeper of order in his things created, from which
he does not rashly digress, although he tyeth nor him self thereto, that he
will not, or cannot alter it (when his glory by his secret counsel, and the
safeguard of the Church, require the same.) For in the staying and going back
of the Son in the time of Joshua, and Ezechias king of Judah, and by other
divine miracles, he shows the contrary. And yet without all controversy, the
eternal providence of God, and Predestination has appointed by a certain
measure and number, from the beginning of the world, to the end of the same, as
it were by rule, certain terms in the course of the Stars, by which, great
ability is given to a skillful and learned man, to judge of things to come,
even as by a Dyall made by a woorkman in proportion and number, things to come
are foreseen, because Art, as nigh as may be, imitateth God and nature. Yea,
and these exce^lent fellows, Plato and Aristotle, do place all wisdom,
knowledge, and virtue, in the proportion of number: for Virtue and Justice they
set in the myddle, by which, to every man is given his own, by a double
equality, and is measured by a proportion Arithmetical and Geometrical.

Now, sithence this instant number of the years of the world, does so exac^ly
compreh^nd in it self all those things mentioned before, as from the beginning
of things, and in this last age, in like quantity, and so perfectly did never
appear, (as hereafter more plainly we will prove) I suppose the Lord God a
maker and governor of all things, by this proportionable agreeing of number,
will, (as it were by the hand) lead us to a certain deep consideration of a
perfect expiring, and end of all things: especially in as much as the direful
Destinies, the Stars, and damnable Decrees of Popes do fulfill the whole
number of five hundred years. So that I trust, that the coming of the Son
of God to judgment, will shortly ensue, in which, all impiety, lying, and
doing of wrong, through the tyranny of Antichrist, the Devil, and his
members, shall be taken away: and the euerl^styng kingdom of Christ in truth
and equiti^, shall be confirmed, that so to every one shall be given his reward,
either good, or bad, according to the true Geometrical proportion, which is
the rule of Justice in God, to whom all believers in Christ are like.

But that more plainly these things may be understood, it must be known what
we call Arithmeticall proportion, and Geometrical, according to justice: and
also how these two proportions are perfectlye contained in this year of
the.5555. which in the year.95. ensuing, The definition of Arithmetycall
proportion.
shall be the the years since the worlds foundation. Arithmeticall proportion is,
when as three, or more numbers being set, all without any respect of proportions
do differ by equal ods, as.1.2.3.4.5. Here continually one number differs
from the other but in unity, as also.2.4.6.8.10. in which one differs from
another, but the number of two. Melant. in Epit. mo. Phi.
And therefore we see in the fifth number which is the last, an Arithmeticall
proportion to be contained, because it has in it this excellency, that it
comprehends in it self, and that fitly, all unities, of which all other
numbers do consist, be they even or odd, to the which no natural, be he
never so talkatiue, can attain by numbering. This Arithmeticall proportion,
Aristotle ascribes to the exchangeable justice. For even as every number
plainly does differ from other in equal sum: so a great equality, there
must be between the ware, and the price, least while one is injured, the other
by his loss and damage become rich. The Geometrical proportion is,
Geometrical proportion whar,
when as three or more sums being set, we consider not the difference of
numbers, but mark the equalities of proportion. For even as five referred
to.50. has the proportion of quantity, so has.50. to.500. and as.50. to.500.
so.500. to.5000. all which are in the proportion of ten. But Plato said, that
this Geometrical proportion can do much, In Gorgia.
both between God and man: and that the state of a common weal is then best,
when it consists of a Geometrical equality, which appoints persons, and
ordains offices according to the greatness and worthiness of gifts, and
bestows rewards to worthy persons, whereof it is well called of the
Philosophers a distributive Justice. For examples sake, as in the governing of
a ship, the ruling of the same is not committed to any man, but unto him which
is skillful, and for his cunning, and well guiding thereof he receives a better
stipend than other which are unskillful: so also to a virtuous, cunning, just,
constant, and grave person, the administration of the common Weal is to be
committed, and withal a worthy honor: least by a government, which is rude,
wicked, and tyrannical, the common weal be brought to destruction. Also in
the affairs of private persons, this Geometrical equality is to be observed.
For a greater honor and reverence is due to the Magistrate, than to an other
man, to our parents than to strangers: to an old man, than to a young, to a
learned, than to an ignorant. Also we ought more entirely to love our wives and
children, than other folks, as likewise according to the doctrine of Paul,
G^l^. 6.
we should more make of, and cherish those of the household of faith, than
strangers from the Church.

But alas, we to too well do know, that no equality according to the
Arithmeticall proportion is kept at all, no not of those, which are accounted
the most holy among the members of Christ, and in the same greatly delighting
themselves, as though then they were the best Christians, if they lead a c^uil
and politic life without any public reprehension. The which as it is rare, so
is it much to be commended: because to do so, is the property of a good
citizen. But it follows not by and by that they are good Christians: because
they are good Citizens. For godliness, humanity, bounteousnes, fidelity,
vprightnes and true religion, stretche farther than does outward behavior the
rule of the law, and hypocrisy. A true Christian
For the true disciple of Christ being of one mind and meaning with his master
Christ, will be so far from enriching himself by empouerishing another, and
hyding that which may hurt his neighbor, that by no means he will prefer
his own private prosperity, before the common profit.

And rather will forgo life, and living, then do that which is not seemly
for any man, much less for him which is by calling holy, and by professing a
Christian. Good God, how far from this mind and purpose are most of our
buiers, and sellers estranged? For as yet we talk not of those which are well
known to deceyptfull, faithless, abominable, and common vserers, but of such
as in the sight of al men seem and be accounted honest, and good Citizens. For
even these do persuade themselves that they deal uprightly, if only they
give true measure for their money, not considering at all, that to take
excessive gaynes, is to do wrong, and altogether against justice: not
considering, that it is all one in respect of equality (from which all justice
does spring) to set too great a price, and to sell by false waightes and
measures, by which reason the vnequalnes of price and and ware, may well be
called false measure: for if it were demanded of them, whether it were meet
to bring him into the right way, which is out of the way? or to show him the
ready way, which is altogether ignorant of the same? or if he were not much to
be blamed which seeing his neighbor go astraye, will without calling him
back, let him go on forward? I am sure they will confess, both him to be a
noughty man, and this no honest man, for his labor. And yet forsooth, is it a
false opinion which we are in, when from a general proposition, we come to a
particular contrary to their minds: in deed it is more agreeable to justice,
not to hurt a man by the purse, or loss of goods, than to show him the ready
way, which knows it not. But I pray you, what is the cause of these sinister
opinions? since the reason is alone, and nothing more agreeing with justice.
Truly self love, covetousness, and an over great care of this life, from which
Christ earnestly does call us. But let us think that saying of Cicero, to be
most true: Quum quid quispiam sciat, etc. I^ is not the part of a plain,
Cicer^. lib, 3. Orli^i.
simple, ingenious, innocent, and honest man, but rather of a subtle, vile,
wyly, deceiptfull, malicious, crafty, and dubble dealer, for his own profit
sake to hyde that which he knows from any man, which should understand the
same. And moreover he says: Si vituperandi sunt qui reticuerunt, quid de his
existimandum est qui orationis vanitatem adhibuerunt? That is. If they are to
be dispraised which keep a thing close, what shall we think of those which
have used vain words? And therefore says Syrach very well: Syrach. 27.
As a nail in the wall sticks fast between two stones, so does sin
stick between the buyer and the seller.

Likewise, much less is the Geometrical proportion kept in this wicked world.
For the wicked and unlearned being in face impudent, and in behavior egregious
Parasites, are exalted to great honor, and glorious offices, when as men
famous, as well for learning, as Religion, be either in Court contemned, or of
Sycophants defaced, or unworthily disgraded, for some light offense: as
happened to Beliserius, who by Justinian lost his eyes: For darkness cannot
abide the light, and bold ignorance through her marvelous impudency, does set
her self against learning and knowledge. For as Quintilian does witness, Quo
quisque minus valet, hoc se magis attollere, et dilatare conatur: The least of
power, Quintil. lib. 2. Cap. 3.
the most vaineglorious. And again: Quo minus sapiunt, minus habent pudoris:
The more fool, the more impudent. Now therefore, since among the learned, or
(as Plato says) among Philosophers, the contrary does happen, no marueyle if
the unlearned have them in contempt. Yet Plato would have it otherwise in his
common Weal, Plato de Ropub. lib. 5.
where either Philosophers should bear the sway, or those which ruled, should
be learned in Philosophy, or (which we do add) at the least have such about
them, whose counsel they might use and follow. Moreover, since the Lord God,
for his electes sake (for whose cause all things are kept) has created all
things, it follows out of the word of God, and his divine Justice, that al
things in the world are due unto the elect and godly, not to the wicked and
reprobate. But it falls out far otherwise in the world, where the wicked
do flourish in riches, and are preferred: but the godly do perish with
poverty, and are left as a pray to their enemies. Also Christ the only
begotten son of the everlasting God, which is the maker both of heaven and
earth, and Lord of Lords, has witnessed of him self, that in this world he
had not where to hyde his head, but was before the world, a very abject, Matthew.
8.
and made away by a most odious death, even the death of the Cross: Yet
notwithstanding his adversary, that son of perdition, sits (as God) in the
temple, ruling with two swords: flourishing with riches, power, and glory, and
is with all reverence called our Holy father, and worshipped as the deputy of
Christ him self. And therefore by these we plainly perceive, that in this world
no Geometrical equality according to the distributive justice (which is the
best) is any where observed, But yet (since God is just) all kind of justice
necessarily to all must be extended, so that to the worthy, all things must be
given, but from the wicked, all things which falsely they have taken to
themselves, and abused to the molesting of the godly, shall utterly be taken
away. Wherefore needs must there be another life after this, and therefore for
those reasons alleged we set down, that the Lord God does foreshowe to the
studious, by this dubble proportion or equality of numbers, a certain
finishing of things with an utter destruction of this wicked world, and
withal, he undoubtedly does give us to understand, and signifies the
beginning of the building anewe of the eternal kingdom of Christ, which with
upright judgment, and by equality in every respect, he will establish
perpetually, and make it endure world without end.

Of the number of five, the fiue-folde form, and of the Greek letter chapter
Since by that which is uttered we have showen, that even five hundred, and
every 50. year, there do commonly happen some singular alterations in the
Church, and commonweals, it follows very likely, that the eighty eight
yeeare now at hand, which is the year of the world.5550. shall be fully perfect
to which if but five were added, it comes to pass (as a little before it is
said) that the whole number, in the year.93. will be proportionable, according
to Arithmeticall and Geometrical equality. And therefore they do seem to
presage unto us a golden world in deed, and everlasting to come, in which all
the justice of God shall be fulfilled, and have her full strength, and virtue.
Yet I do not deny, but it is my saying, that the lowest number of five from
the first and last, do offer unto us many things agreeing very well to our
purpose: especially since which has been said so meet in one, and many things
else both in the Bible, and Sibillian Oracles are to be found like unto them:
all which we plainly see are grounded in the perpetual ordinance, and
providence of God, not by chance.

Of the number of five is termed the fiuefold form, which of all other,
Quintil. lib. 8. cap. 3.
(as Quinctilian records) in setting of trees, makes the fairest Orchard,
and is such, as howsoever one behold the same, it is direct and and strayte.
Then is a thing said to be fiuefoulde, or of five manner of ways, when the
disposition thereof is such, as two parts thereof together with the third of
another sort, opposite to themselves by equal space, do seem (howsoever you
turn your self) to have the form of five, or this letter V, by which the
Latins do note five. But if five in number were set down by other figures,
or by the same, in like order underneath, they do represent the Greek letter
chapter and the lattine ch, which does signify ten. From thence I thought, since
in the fore mentioned proportionable number of years, the number of five is
lowest, and besides does represent these two letters, from which also by an
equality of Geometrical proportion, it goes foreward by the distance of
ten, I thought I say, whether this also did signify any singular thing
worthy to be marked? For the Greek letter chapter is the first letter in the name
of Christ (...): Of the greek letter. ch
and John in the Revelation by (...), commands all of understanding to count
the coming of the Beast rising from the earth, and having the two horns of
the Lamb, which are.666. years, so significant are these Greek letters. But
in the explications of this place Bullinger teaches, that the account of.666.
years must begin, when John saw his Revelation about the end of the reign
of Domitian, which was from the birth of Christ the.97. year: so that to the
filling of the first hundred year from Christ's nativity three years be
wanting. If therefore these years were added to an hundred, and they added to
the number of the Beasts name.666, and three years were taken from the first
hundred, we shall have the year of the Lord to be.763. which was the.13. year
of Pepines reign: about which time Pepine granted unto the Pope, his chief
power and authority, contrary to the mind of Leo Isauri^us, which the
Papists extremely did hate, for casting their images out of his temples, and
therefore they called him (...) or enemy to images. Therefore by these letters
we know the time of the coming of the beast with two horns like unto the
Lamb: even as Henry Bullynger does prosecute the same more at large, and
proves the same by Sibyls Oracles. Moreover when we count all marks of the
letters in this name (...), Of the word (...)
if (as it is in Sibyls verses) E. be added, we shall plainly find that in
these also the beginning of the time when the kingdom of Christ should be
preached, and also the beginning of the fall of Antichrist also in the former
his coming was signified. All the Greek letters in this name, express this
number.1485.

Now if the years, which come from that year, in which Jesus, by his
resurrection from the dead, and ascension into heaven, he had declared him
self to be Christ the king of the Jews, and the son of the eternal God,
were compared to this time, when Luther and other learned men did by the pure
Evangelical doctrine of the free remission of sins in Jesus Christ, drive
away the gross darkness of papisticall ignorance, and made the son of
righteousness Jesus Christ our Lord, to shine again, we shall evidently
perceive this time rightly to be comprehended in these numbers. For if to this
number.1485. the years from the Nativity of our Lord, to his resurrection,
which were.33. were added, then shall the year of our Lord, a thousand, five
hundred, eighteen arise, in which, and afterward, many learned men began to
set them selves against the darkness of Papists. Now because this lowest number
of five, a perfect Arithmeticall, to that Geometrical proceeding by a fiuefold,
and very goodly form, does as it were in colors, place before our eyes, the
Greek Letter chapter which is the first Letter in the name and office of our
eternal king, and also being a little turned, represents the Cross, that is,
the badge and noble sign of Christ, whose last letter of the Nominative case
is X: by those things I fall into this consideration, that about these times
foretold, the coming of the Lord to judgment, is presignified, by which he
shall show him self to all the world, to be Christ the son of God, promised
to the fathers, afterward seen of the Jews, whom they did abhor, and at
length crucify, whose token (according to the judgment of the Fathers, and
Sibylles prophesies) also in the coming of the Lord to all the faithful,
shall be like a comfortable Trumpet, but in the sight of the world a (...), or
stumblyng block to the world. That this is no vain imagination, although it
be no certain demonstration, many such like reasons and examples cause me to
think. For in many places of the Scripture, we often find, that the Lord has
been greatly delighted in geuyng them, either by plain words, or secret
providence, fyt and proper names, by whom it has pleased him, for the glory of
his name, to bestow upon his Church any great benefit. Hereof is Abram
called of God, Abraham, and the forerunner of the Son of God, is called John,
and the Son of God him self received a name from the Angel, and was called
Jesus, that is, a Lord, and Savior, redeeming the world from sin: which
afterward received a name, according to his office* and was called Christ, that
is, Anointed, annoynting us with his holy spirit, that so we might acknowledge
him to be our Christ. Wherefore let it not seem strange unto us, if those
letters, by the divine providence of God, do contain many and great mysteries
within them. For the Lord God by a certain incomprehensible providence, not
according to man's wisdom, or foreknowledge of things to come, does gogouerne
the thoughts and tongues of men, that many men, and Cities, in which the Lord
God will show either his singular favor, and marvelous works of mercy, or
his anger and heavy displeasure, should receive fatal names accordingly. And
therefore by this reason it came to pass no doubt, that king David, which
signifies well beloved, should receive a proper name: as also the Prophet
Daniell his, signifying the judgment of the Lord. Because in him the Lord God
did show forth his singular kindness many ways, and in this his secret
judgment concerning the Empyres of the world, and their ends, and of the two
commings of Christ, the first vile in the flesh, the second victorious, to
judgment. So likewise Babylon, received a fit name, but in a diverse respect,
not only because that in her there was made a confusion of tongues: but
especially because of the confounding of manners, and wickedness, of Religion,
and Idolatry together. Wherefore at the length it utterly came to naught, and
there is become a mere confusion in deed of all beasts and serpents. By a
contrary end Jerusalem took her name, because she should see the peace of God
in Christ, which afterward she did furiously despise, I have heard moreover of
Melanthon, which also in a certain book he did publish, that that name Emda,
a town of the Oriental Frisia, and my native country, has her d^riuation
from truth, and firmenes, according to the force of the Hebrew word: Est enim
illa vrbs amans veritatis For (says he) that city is a lover of the truth.
Eme^, verit^^. Eman, stabilis.
And how this name agrees to that City in these our days, the Lord God has
abundantly declared in this, that he has myraculously kept us among these so
dangerous tempests, constant in the true doctrine of his Gospel, against the
manifold subtil^ies of the Devil: God grant we may persevere to the end in
all truth and simplicity of heart, and that this natural falling, may firmly
be vpholden and stayed, least otherwise it pretend an evil fortune and so we
be called no longer Emdani, that is, constant in the truth, but Valdarini* that
is Babilonians, which thing God of his mercy turn away from us. Sib^l also
Erithina, plainly tells of Rome, that her name does comprehend many woeful
destinies, and that in these verses, translated out of Greek into Latin by
Castilion. Porro quater decies complebis, terque trecentos Libro. 8. (...). 948.

Annos, atque octo, cum te pertingere metam
Tristia fata* tuo completo nomine cogent.
Thy end, thy name fulfyld, and fates shall cause then for to come:
Of years nine hundred forty eight,
When seen shall be the sum.


Now after what sort that Prophecy is fulfilled Castalion shows in his
annotations upon the same place, to which I send the Reader. And that Rome else
where has a name according to her nature, it is apparent by a certain answer
of Pasquil: Roma quid est? quod te docuit praeposterus ordo.
Lo. Vulteii.
Quid docuit? iungas versa elementa, scies.
Roma amor est, amor est? qualis? praeposterus. vnde hoc?
Roma mares. Noli dicere plura, scio.


Hereof also in respect of her outward whoordome, which is linked oftentimes
with the spiritual fornication, she is worthily called in holy Scripture, an
Harlot, and Babylon, Sodom, and Gomorrhe, secret malice, and a people
rebellyng against God.

Of the round and square figure, of the Climacterian years, and of the Golden
number.
IF now these, and that which folowes be rightly considered, and compared
together, they will sufficiently show themselves to be neither contrary to the
Scriptures, nor impertinent to my purpose, but rather such, as (if they be
compared with that before mentioned) may well bring us into the remembrance of
the latter days: especially since they do, as it were in colors, lively place
before our eyes, the perfect end of this world, and coming of the Lord to
judgment: 2 1 5 3 4


As also the fiuefold figure does not only represent the Greek letter chapter or
being somewhat turned, the cross: but also both the squate figure, and the
round. For the cross by equal distance in the plain, does fill the circle,
and representes the round form: but the Greek letter chapter rather betokens
the quadrangle figure.

But (this I speak by the way) if unto the fiuefolde figure, noted by five
unities on either side, 1 2 5 4 3


contrary to the myddle number of five, the four figures comprehended in the
fifth, even to the perfect number, were set under, then these nine unites, may
so by Art be disposed, that every way we may see fifteen, as by the figure
here underneath may appear.

15 15 15 15 15 2 9 4 15 7 5 3 15 6 1 8 15

So that this number of five in the threefold, according to Arithmetike, may
seeeme the most perfect, and by many figures as it were to represent those
three alterations of time, of which, before we made mention, whose end in a
just quantity of numbers, perfectly set of God him self, ought certainly to
be looked for. Neither can any doubt, but that this figure contaynyng a
marvelous equality, and agreement of numbers, in a very great inequality (as
it may seem) does signify some great mysteries, as well Divine, as
Philosophical, the which, (least in these which may percha^ce seem more dark,
then many of Platoes numbers, I be over tedious to the Reader) I leave to the
consideration of the studious. But (that we may somewhat return to that we
have in hand) although the circular and round figure, be of all others, in
sight most fair, yet (as is the whole world) is it very unstable, subject to
alteration, and full of troubles. But the square form is firm, constant, and
stable: and how soever it be placed, is always one and the same. And
therefore does Aristotle compare the same to a good and honest man, Arist. li.
^. Eth^h^t. 3.
whom he calls (...), the which, howsoever with Aristotle we imagine him, we
shall not find, Christ only the Rock, and true corner stone, refused of the
buylders and workmen of this world, Psalm. 17. Mat. 21. Apo. 21.
only excepted: but in the life to come, we shall be such with Christ him
self. And therefore does John describe the holy Jerusalem, descending from
heaven, to be four square: in which, her perfection, constancy, and
continuance,, Apo. 21.
is noted. Because by no ill fortune it shall be weakened, there shall be no
lamentation, no sorrow, no death: but perfect joy, great mirth, and a life
endued with all spiritual riches, and everlasting, of which the faithful, in
the coming of the Lord, shall be partakers. Whose most joyful coming about
those notable times above mentioned, we look for, and long exceedingly for our
redemption.

Of the Clemitarian ye^es
To these may be added, that in the year.88. which is the year of the world,
5550. such a year shall ensue, as it is from the creation of the world, by
seuens, as it were by degres and steps we may ascend: as also the year before
that, 87. which is the year.5549. to which number ancient writers have
ascribed much: partly because it is a square number, of which above it is
spoken, partlye also, because it arises of seven, seven times dubbled. But
experience, and the assertion of the learned, proves, that every seven year
from their birth, to their death, is very dangerous, contrary to noble wits,
and notable men of the best nature by a certain agreement they have with their
maker. For since all that is made has been created by the wonderful wisdom
of God, and by a certain secret power ingrafted, tendes to his natural
conservation, and seeks that is best for his good estate, it very likely
appears, that famous men, have a more affinity with their second birth, the
most artificial nature being made of God, than either beast, or beastly men:
and therefore that they are of God more tied with nature her self to a certain
time. But these are counted especially climacterian years, which by seuenfolde
ascend, as is the 21. year, which does consist of three times seven. such
be.42. and 63. years, counting as well by nynes, as by seuens, and therefore be
they judged to be very hurtful to notable fellows. For in that year of their
life dyed Luther, Melanthon, Martyr, and other excellent men in all ages: as
also Erasmus is thought to have left this world in the 70. year of his age.
But whether the like years be fatal to all the world as they are to
particular men, we leave it to the judgment of others. Yet if these things
mentioned for a certain like proportion of members, do include any secret
reason, because (as Pliny says, harmonia rerum natural sibi ipsam congruere
cogit: Libr. 2. ca. 10^.
the concente of things makes nature to agree to her self: it is credible and
lykely, that the last end of the world and of all mankind, does consist of
like proportion of numbers, as does a part. Because man is in deed a part of
the world, and therefore is rightly called of the Philosophers (...): Again of
things past, things to come are gathered since the course of time, the
inclinations of the stars, the circuit of five hundred years, and that
singular proportion of numbers, in the number of five (of which hitherto we
have spoken) come to pass about the same time altogether, and consist of one
reason. All which (to speak the truth) were conjectures of no weight, and
could prove nothing, did not Christ and Paul in plain words signify unto
us, that the worlds end, together with the glorious coming of the son of
God to judgment are at hand: and as it were at our doors, when we shall
plainly perceive the Gospel of the kingdom of Christ to be preached
throughout all the world, and the son of perdition by the spirit of Gods
mouth to be so confounded, that nothing shall seem to be behind, but his utter
defamation: and to this purpose finally do serve other conjectures, as is
above declared.

Here by reason of numbers, one thing more worthy to be marked, because it
agrees with that above mentioned, comes into my mind, the which was told me by
an honest man, skillful in Astronomy, and Geometry, and of good credit. For he
said, that in the.1568. when Ericus King of Suethland (which then was in arms)
had by force taken from the Liuonians, a certain Castle situated in the Island
Osila, called Sonenborch, he by good fortune, was lodged with a certain noble
Astronomer, Of the golden number.
with whom by reason of their studies he was very familiar. Being in talk one
day, he brake out into these words, and said, O miserable, and hotrible days,
which from the year.1570. now at hand, shall ensue, and continue many years.
His guest asked him how so? He aunsweared: Because, when the number of the
years of Christ's Nativity does contain within it, for certain years the
Golden number of every year, which is seldom seen, then it has of long time
been observed, and histories do witness the same, that infinite calamities, and
intolerable troubles have chanced. But now from the 70. year now at hand,
until the year.77. there shall be among the years of the birth, of Christ, and
between the golden number of every year such an agreement: as.1.5.7. which
being joined together by addition, do make.13. Now this number.13. is the
Golden number of the year 1570. and in the six other immediately ensuing. And
therefore he did affirm that in that year the watrie Element should govern,
and should presage great ouerflowings of water. But in the year 73. which is
the middle of these seven, the Earthy Element, for some notable cause, should
lose of his virtue, by reason whereof, a wonderful scarsetie of all things
should ensue, as afterward it came to pass. Moreover, he said, that in.76.
year, the air should be corrupt, and the plague should be in every place.
After which should succeed three years, the first of which.1577. does by the
fore said reason comprehend in it twenty in number, and if from this
number.19. which is the chiefest golden number, and the golden number to the
year going before, were taken away, then one, which is the beginning of the
number, and the golden number of this year does remain, and so in the other
two following, and no further. And therefore in the year.77. the fiery Element
shall try his force, and breed discention and wars, and again in the
year.78. a grievous pestilence shall dispatch very many. And in the year.79.
again shall come great scarsetie of all fruit. Finally he said, because.19. is
the highest golden number, it shall be found that that number from the.70. year
(when this first agreement began (counting.19. shall as it were by a finger,
point unto the.88. year. For from the.70. year to the.88. so many years come
between: about which time (according to the opinions almost of all
Mathematicions) very dyreful, and miserable things shall be come to pass.
Because by good experience, he boldly said, that the Lord God maker and keeper
of all order, did orderly by a certain number, measure, and aspect of the
stars, rule and govern the whole Firmament of heaven.

And therefore, because of these things which have been spoken we do well enough,
and sufficiently know, that the kingdom of God is at hand: let us lift up our
heads to heaven, let us contemn all worldly things: let every man cast away
security and desire of pleasure, by whose inticementes, the mind is
suppressed: let every man frame himself to learn what is good, and godliness:
let him prepare himself to the Cross, let him profit in good woorking, in
true calling vppyn the name of the Lord, and put on the armor of righteousness,
that if the adversary challenge us into combat, we may by no flaterie, by no
force, by no terror, by no torments be drawn and plucked away from Christ.
The almighty God be present with us continually with his divine asistance, and
defend us evermore against all the invasions of the devil by which he would
bring us from our faith, drive us out of hope, and so bar us from our kingdom
which is in heaven.

Of the manner and effect of the Lords coming to judgment, with an
exhortation to watchfulnes.
Hitherto by divine testimonies it has been showed, that certainly the world
must be destroyed, and also by Oracles, and probable reasons and conjectures it
has been proved, that the glorious coming of the Lord is at our doors and
cannot be far of, although we know not the certain year, day, and hour
of his coming. It follows therefore, that both for the edifying of the
Church, and refourming of our manners, that we allege testimonies out of
holy Scripture both of the manner of the coming of the Son of God to
judgment, and of the effect of the same. After that the Son of God Christ
our Lord and Savior, by the secret counsel of God the Father, had
determined for our saluations, and satisfying the wrath of God, to suffer
death, he took upon him the shape of a servant, was in the world poor and
miserable, took patiently all tauntes and mockes, and suffered himself to be
condemned though unjustly, and shamefully to be crucified: but in his second
coming he shall not only appear like a chief Monarch of this world, but
shall show himself to be a King since the beginning of the world, and him
which cast the myghtiest from their seat of Majesty, and exalted the humble,
Daniel. ^. Lu^ae. 1.
and turned Empyres at his pleasure. Also he shall declare himself to be the
Son of God, coequall in dietie with God his eternal Father: so that then the
course of things shall be changed, for he in that day shall be judge, and
justly condemn those, of whom he was judged, and against all equity together
with his members condemned, and which have obstinately and without reason
persisted in impiety. For the words of Christ in the.25. of Matthew, by which
according to the capacity of man, the last judgment is depainted, are these:
Cum venerit silius hominis in maiestate sua, and omnes angeli cum eo, tunc
sedebit super sedem maiestatis suae, and congregabuntur ante eum omnes gentes
(Nemo enim qui vnquam vixit, Math. 25.
est, and erit, hoc iudicio eximetur) and separabit eos ab i^uicem, sicut
pastor segregat oues ab hoedis, and statuet oues quidem a dextris suis. Tunc
dicet Rex his qui a dextris eius erunt: Venite benedicti Patris me^, possidete
paratum vobis regnum a constitutione mundi, etc. Et his qui a sinistris, dicet:
Discedite a me maledicti in ignem aeternu^, qui paratus est Diabolo and Angelis
eius. That is, When the son of man shall come in his majesty, and all his
Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his majesty, and all
Nations shall be gathered tegether before hm, (for none which ever was, is, or
shall be, from this judgment shall be exempted) and he shall separate them, even
as a shepherd does segregate the sheep from the goats and shall place the
sheep on his right hand. Then shall the King say unto those which are on his
right hand: Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the kingdom prepared for
you, from the beginning of the world. etc. And to those which are on his left
hand, he shall say: Depart from me ye accursed into everlasting fire, which is
prepared for the Devil, and his Angels. Because these have done no deeds of
charity, but have continually rebelled against God: but these have done much
better, because by reason of their faith, they have fulfilled all works of
mercies and have been with one mind with God.

In which Sermon, Christ does apply himself to man's capacity, and borrows
his similitude from an upright King and Judge of this world, which does
pronounce lawful sentence, whether it be of absolution, or condemnation,
according to our works be they good or bad, and by and by does execute the
same. Likewise Paul does show the manner, how Christ in his last coming
shall appear to all the elect which ever were, or shall be, in these words. Hoc
enim vobis dicimus in verbo Domini, quiae nos qui viuimus, quiresidui sumus in
aduentu Domini, non praeuentemus qui dormierunt. Quoniam ipse Dominus in iussu
and in voce Archangeli, and in tuba Dei descendet de caelo, and mortui qui in
Chri^^o sunt, resurgent primi. Deinde nos qui viuimus, simul rapiemur cum illis
in nubibus, obuiam Christo in era, and sic semper cum Domino erimus. This we
say unto you in the word of the Lord, 1. These. 4.
that we which live, and are the remnaunt in the Lords coming shall not go
before the^ which sleep. Because the Lord himself, in the commandment and
voice of an Archangle, and in the trumpet of God; shall descend from heaven,
and they which are dead in Christ, shall first arise. Afterward we which do
live, shall together with them be carried in the Clouds to meet Christ in the
the air, and so shall be with God for ever. Also Paul teaches: that in a
moment, in the twinckeling of an eye, in the last sound of the Trumpet the dead
shall rise vncorrupt, 1. Cor. 15.
and those which are living shall upon the suddayne be changed to
incorruption, and immortality. Apo. 20.
John also sees all the dead standing before the great and white Throne in the
sight of God, and the books to be opened, and the dead to be judged out of
that which was written, according to their works. And he which was not found
written in the book of life, was cast into a burning lake. But Sybyll
Erithraea in in her verses called Acrostichides, Cice. lib. 2. de diuinatione.
which were read (as it seems) but not well understood of Cicero, does
notably depaint the last coming of Christ, and destruction of the world. Which
verses were greatly esteemed of the Fathers, E^sebius in vita Constantini
August. lib. 18. ca. 25. de ciuit Dei.
as appears both out of Eusebius and Augustine. For out of these Authors,
which were before the birth of Christ, as also it is evident in Varro and in
Virgils. 4. Eglog, that these Oracles were of great antiquity, in so much as
they were accounted as divine revelations, and therefore will we join those
Latin verses underneath, and the rather, because in them nothing can be found
which is dissonant from the word of God. Acrostichian verses are those whose
first letter of every verse necessarily depends one of the other. The letters
in Greek were these, (...). In Latin these.

JESUS CHRISTVS DEI FILIVS SERVATOR CRVX. Which verses of Sibyl, were thus
turned into Latin.
Iudicij signum tellus sudoribus edet,
Exque polo veniet Rex tempus in omne futurus,
Scilicet vt carnem omnem, vt totum iudicet orbem.
Vnde Deum fidi, diffidentesque videbunt,
Summum cum sanctis in secli fine sedentem,
Corporeorum animas hominum, quo iudicet, olim
Horrebit totus cum densis vepribui orbis.
Reijcient and opes homines, simulachraque cuncta,
Exuretque Ignis terras, coelumque, salumque.
Incendetque fores angusti carceris Orci.
Sanctorumque omnis caro libera reddita, lucem
Tunc repetet: semper cruciabit slamma scelestos.
Vtque quis occulte peccauerit, omnia dicet.
Sub lucemque Deus reserabit pectora clausa.
Dentes stridebunt, crebrescent vndique luctus:
Et lux deficiet, solemque nitentiaque astra.
Inuoluet coelos, and Lunae splendour obibit:
Fossas attollet, iuga deprimet ardua montes.
Impedietque nihil mortales amplius altum.
Longa carina fretum non scindet: montibus arua
Ipsa aequabuntur: Nam fulmine torrida tellus
Vnaque and sicci fontes, and flumina hiabunt.
Sidereisque sono tristi tuba clanget ab oris,
Stultorum facinus moerens, mundique dolores.
Et chaos ostendet, and tartara, terra dehiscens
Regesque ad solium sistentur numinis omnes.
Vndaque de caelo fluet ignea sulphur mixto.
Atque omnes homines signum praesigne notabit
Tempore eo lignum, cornu peramabile fidis
Oppositus mundo casus, sed vita piorum
Respergenda lauans duodeno font vocatos,
Compescetque pedo ferrata cuspide gentes.
Rex tibi nunc nostris descriptus in ordine summo
Versibus, hic noster Deus est, nostraeque salutis
Conditor aeternus, perpessus nomine nostro.
Now I hope these testimonies alleged, may suffice to prove unto us, the
manner of the coming of the Son of God, and of the worlds overthrow. For it
is not for man to speak more of the same, then he has learned out of holy
Scripture. Yet somewhat longer will we tarry in the greatness of an happy
life, and pains of the ungodly: and yet no further will we go, then the holy
Scripture does lead us to consider. Certain it is, and without all
controversy, that nothing can be imagined of greater happiness, and better
estate, than is God the chiefest good: and that that felicity which is in God,
is as great and insearchable, as is his omnipotency, by which he created both
heaven and earth of nothing, by his word alone. And therefore it follows,
that those which are of one mind in Jesus Christ with God, be also partakers
of those goods which are in God, be also as beloved children in Christ, and
heirs of all their fathers riches, which are infinite and incomprehensible.
And therefore Paul says out of Esaias: 1. Cor. 2. Esaias. 64.
That the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, nor has it entered into the
heart of man, what God has prepared for such as love him. But those celestial
and invisible are not so apparent, and shine before our eyes, as do earthly and
visible things, to which we are too too greatly addicted, and therefore the holy
Ghost by John in his Revelation, helping the weakness of our judgment, does
liken the kingdom of God to a certain great and large city, which he does
call the holy Jerusalem, Apo. 21.
whose gates are of precious stones, and whose walls and streates are of pure
gold, then the which nothing is more excellent in the sight of men. And he
does also call that city, (of the which all the elect shall be perpetual
citizens) Tabernaculum Dei cum hominibus, and habitabit cum eis, and ipsipopuli
eius erunt, and ipse Deus cum eis erit: The Tabernacle of God with men, and he
shall dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and he shall be their God.
Finally, that there is the fullness of all felicity, where God is all in all,
in which place we shall know him perfectly even as he is. And therefore true is
that voice, which John in his Revelation heard from heaven: Beati mortui qui in
Domino moriuntur: Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord: or those are
blessed, which the Lord at his coming shall find vigilant, wise, and sober.

Now, if nothing be more happy (as in deed nothing is) the^ to inioye the
sight of the ever living God, and to be inheritours of eternal life: certainly
by a contrary, nothing can be imagined more wretched and miserable, then with
Devils to be cast for ever out of the sight of God, into eternal torments and
pains of hell, at whose very remembrance, the Devil him self in an horrible
rage does quake and tremble. For since God is altogether infinite, and his
justice incomprehensible, and sins be clean contrary to his unspeakable
justice, it must needs follow, that they also must be punished with eternal
pains. And that this is true, our heavenly father shows most plainly in his
only begotten son, which for our sake he sent into the flesh, that he might
take upon him the form of a servant, and suffer death for our offenses. For
the justice of God, for our sins in our flesh, did exact sufficient
satisfaction, and his divine pity an infinite mercy toward all the elect. And
therefore the Son of God, of one substance with his eternal father, and
clearenesse of his glory, was almost compelled to subject him self under him,
that so he might pacify Gods anger, and publish his unspeakable mercy toward
al mankind: especially toward al them which would with a lively faith take
hold, and embrace him. Now that the mind of man might conceive the greatness of
Gods displeasure, against our sins, the holy Scripture fetchyng similitudes
from sensible things, does lively set the same before our eyes, that so if our
fleshly and flexible hearts give any credit to the manifest word of God, and be
not hardened like stones, we might conceive the greatness of the same. For
Christ does compare that eternal casting out of his favor, Math. 25. Lucae.
13. M^tth. 13. Apo. 20.21, 22.
to a very dark prison, to everlasting fire, and unquenchable, to extreme
horror, with perpetual gnashing of the teeth: And John in his Revelation says,
that the ungodly shall be throwe^ into a fiery lake, full of Brimstone, in which
they shall be continually for ever tormented:: than the which, man's mind can
think nothing more horrible, more intolerable. All which Sibyl in her Oracles
comprehended in these verses translated out of Greek.

Nec erit modus vllus eorum
Ploratus, neque vox tristes distincta querelas
Diuersas referet: verum sub nocte profunda
Tartarea nigra, laniante dolor, profundum
Clamorem tollent: atque in regione profana
Ter tantum soluent, quantum fecere malorum,
Igni confecti multo: tum dentibus omnes
Stridentes, acri tabescent vique, sitique
Optandum mori dicent. fugientque vocantes,
Non iam mortis enim requiem, non noctis habebunt.
Multa quidem frustra supremi numina Patris
Orabunt: sed eos tunc auertetur aperte.
O that blyndnes of man's mind, and that mad doubting of these divine
promises of eternal life: O that hardened and flintie heart of ours, which is
not moved, no not with these horrible threats of Gods heavy displeasure, but
continuing securely in all impiety, never asks pardon for such wilful
offending, and amendeth: even as though the scripture were but lies, and these
divine Oracles and profane fables. For by those things which have come to
pass, and by true demonstrations of Gods holy spirit, it is apparent, that
nothing is more certain than that the end of all things ha^geth o^ our
shoulders. Truly great is the force of sin, and marvelous is the rage of
Satan in these latter days, he endeavors by all means that possibly he can
to bring the whole world into a desperate security of life, that so he may
have many partakers of his torments in hell, from which there is no
redemption. But how much better had it been, we had either never been borne, or
at the least been void of reason with beasts and serpents, or else been
dispactht as soon as we were borne, if either we enjoy not that place, for
which we were created, or come not to the celestyall Paradyse, and to the
marryage of our Spouse our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, where shall be the full
abundance of all delights, and perfection of all pleasure.

Wherefore let us cast from us, both our careless security, and mistrust of
the promises of God, An exhortation to watchfulnes.
let us renounce the devil, and all the works of the flesh, which are not
sufferable by the word of God, and let us liste^ to the friendly admonition of
our Savior Christ, Lucae. 21.
warning us in these words. Take heed, least at any time your minds be
ouerladen with surfeiting, and dronkennes, and cares of this life, and so the
suddayne day of the Lord take you unawares: for even as a snare, it shall come
upon all which sit upon the face of the earth. Be ye watchful therefore at
all times: (and as Matthew adds, Math. 24.
because ye know not the hour in which your Lord will come) praying, that ye
may escape all these things which are to come, and may stand before the Son
of man. For if the coming of thieves and stealers of our earthly goods be to
be feared, with how great care, with how great diligence and watchfulnes,
should we seek to escape those enemies which would spoil us of our eternal
riches, and kingdom of heaven. Here we use great heed and wisdom to
preserve our mortal bodies from hurt and danger: but to save our souls which
are immortal from eternal pains in hell, we are altogether careless, nothing
circumspect. And yet more would it beseem the children of light, to be more
careful in seeking and keeping those things which are celestial, than are
wordlings paynfull in enriching themselves with such things as they are neither
sure to enjoy while they are alive: nor can assure them of any joy when they
are dead. Yea let us think and persuade our selves, that in the sight of God
it is not shameful, but abominable, that the elect or chosen people of God
which should be wise and circumspect, shall in this care be surpassed of wicked
worldlings, and the more hyghly we displease our god, by how much the things
which we so little esteem, are more excellent than that which they so hunt
after, between which (so surpassing is the treasure prepared for the godly)
that there is no comparison. This exhortation though it pertayne to all men at
all times, yet now especially in these dangerous days, in which, every where
we see so many by suddayne and strange ends to be taken out of this world. and
because every man shall die (though the certain hour and day none does
know) and shall either woofully be sent among the devils in hell, or joyfully
be received into the fellowship of the faithful in heaven.

Wherefore since the spirit in the faithful is willing, but the flesh very
weak, and blind in heavenly things, we are to beseech our heavenly father in
continual prayers, that by his holy spirit he would daily more and more
increase, and strengthen our weak and feeble faith. And therefore we heartily
desire thee O eternal father, that thou will not utterly break us, though we
bow not as we should, neither deal with justice, though we do not our
duties, according to thy will: but keep us good God in thy well-beloved son,
illuminate our minds with thy holy spirit, by which we may be prepared to all
good works, in true holiness, and newnes of life: that so with Paul we may
desire to leave this world and to be with Christ, and so in the coming of the
Lord, being found ready with oil in our Lamps, and adorned with our wedding
garments, we may find entrance to the Lords marriage, which thou for thy son,
and his beloved spouse the holy church have prepared, and appointed, from the
beginning of the world. To thee therefore O heavenly father, to thy only
begotten son, and to the holy Ghost our comforter, be all praise, honor, and
glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London, nigh unto the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas
Gardyner, and Thomas Dawson, for Andrew Mumsell, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard.


