THE Famous History of Friar BACON. Containing the wonderful things that he
did in his Life: Also the manner of his Death; With the Lives and Deaths of the
two Coniurers, Bungye and Vandermast. Very pleasant and delightful to be read.
Of the Parents and Birth of Friar Bacon, and how he addicted himself to
Learning.
HE was borne by most men's opinions on the West part of England, and was son
to a wealthy Farmer, who put him to School to the Parson of the Town where
he was borne: not with intent that he should turn Friar (as he did) but to
get so much understanding, that he might manage the better that wealth he was
to leave him. But young Bacon took his Learning so fast, that the Priest could
not teach him any more, which made him desire his Master that he would speak
to his Father to put him to Oxford, that he might not lose that little learning
that he had gained: his Master was very willing so to do: and one day meeting
his Father, told him, that he had received a great blessing from God, in that
he had given him so wise and hopeful a child, as his son Roger Bacon was
(for so was he named) and wished him withal to do his duty, and to bring up
so his Child, that he might show his thankfulness to God, which could not
better be done then in making of him a Scholar; for he found by his sudden
taking of his learning, that he was a child likely to prove a very great
Clerk: hereat old Bacon was not well pleased (for he desired to bring him up
to Plough and to the Cart, as he himself was brought) yet he for reverence
sake to the Priest, showed not his anger, but kindly thanked him for his pains
and counsel yet desired him not to speak any more concerning that matter; for
he knew best what best pleased himself, and that he would do: so broke they
off their talk, and parted.

So soon as the old man came home, he called to his Son for his books,
which when he had, he locked them up, and gave the Boy a Cart whip in the place
of them, saying to him: Boy, I will have you no Priest, you shall not be better
learned then I, you can tell now by the Almanac when it is best sowing Wheat,
when Barley, Pease, and Beans: and when the best libbing is, when to sell
Grain and Cattle I will teach thee; for I have all Faires and Markets as
perfect in my memory, as Sir John our Priest has Mass without Book: take me
this whip, I will teach thee the use of it, it will be more profitable to thee
then this harsh Latin: make no reply, but follow my counsel, or else by the
Mass thou shall feel the smart hand of my anger. Young Bacon thought this but
hard dealing, yet would he not reply, but within (...) the whole world had bin
there prepared in the best manner that Art could set them out: whilst he
feasted thus their smelling, he waued his wand again, and there came diverse
Nations in sundry habits (as Russians, Polanders, Indians, Armenians) all
bringing sundry kinds of Furs, such as their Countries yielded: all which
they presented to the King and Queen: these Furs were so soft in the touch,
that they highly pleased all those that handled them, then after some odd
fantastic dances (after their Country manner) they vanished away: then asked
Friar Bacon the Kings Majesty, if that he desired any more of his skill? the
King answered that he was fully satistied for that time, and that he only
now thought of something that he might bestow on him, that might partly
satisfy the kindness that he had received. Friar Bacon said, that he
desired nothing so much as his Maiestice love, and if that he might be assured
of that, he would think himself happy in it: for that (said the King) be
thou ever sure of it, in token of which receive this Jewel, and withal gave
him a costly Jewel from his neck. The Friar did with great reverence thank
his Majesty, and said: as your Majesty's vassal you shall ever find me ready
to do you service, your time of need shall find it both beneficial and
delightful. But amongst all these Gentlemen, I see not the man that your Grace
did send for me by, sure he has lost his way, or else met with some sport that
detaines him so long, I promised to be here before him, and all this noble
Assembly can witness I am as good as my word; I hear him coming: with that
entered the Gentleman all be durted (for he had rid through ditches, quagmires*
plashes, and waters, that he was in a most pitiful case) he seeing the
Friar there looked full angerly, and bid a pore on all his Devils, for they had
led him out of his way, and almost drowned him. Be not angry Sir (said Friar
Bacon) here is an old friend of yours that has more cause; for she has
tarried these three hours for you (with that he pulled up the Hangings, and
behind them stood a Kitchin-maide with a hasting ladle in her hand) now am I
as good as my word with you: for I promised to help you to your sweetheart,
how do you like this? So ill, answered the Gentleman, that I will be revenged
of you. Threaten not (said Friar Bacon) least I do you more shame, and do you
take heed how you give scholars the lie again: but because I know not how
well you are stored with money at this time, I will bear your wenches charges
home; with that she vanished away: the King, Queen, and all the company
laughed to see with what shame this Gentleman endured the sight of his greasy
sweetheart: but the Gentleman went away discontented. This bone, Friar Bacon
took his leave of the King and Queen, and received from them diverse gifts (as
well as thanks) for his Art he showed them.

How Friar Bacon deceived his Man, that would fast for his conscience sake.
Friar Bacon had one only man to attend on him, and he too was none of the
wisest, for he kept him in charity, more then for any service he had of him.
This man of his (named Miles) never could endure to fast as other religious
persons did, for always he had in one corner, or another, flesh, which he
would eat when his Master eat bread only, or else did fast and abstain from
all things. Friar Bacon seeing this, thought at one time or other to be even
with him, which he did one Friday in this manner. Miles on the Thursday night
had provided a great blacke-pudding for his Frydayes fast; this pudding put he
in his pocket (thinking belike to heat it so, for his Master had no fire on
those days) on the next day, who was so demure as Miles, he looked as though
he would not have eat any thing: when his Master offered him some bread, he
refused it, saying, his sins deserved a greater penance then one days fast
in a whole week: his Master commended him for it, and bid him take heed that
he did not dissemble: for if he did, it would at last be known; then were I
worse then a Turk said Miles: so went he forth as if he would have gone to
pray privately, but it was for nothing but to prey upon his black pudding;
that pulled he out, (for it was half roasted with the heat of his bum) and
sell to it lustily; but he was deceived, for having put one end in his mouth,
he could neither get it out again nor bite it off, so that he stamped out for
help: his Master hearing him, came, and finding him in that manner, took
hold of the other end of the pudding, and led him to the hall, and showed him
to all the Scholars, saying: See here my good friends and fellow Students what
a devout man my servant Miles is, he loves not to break a fast day, witness
this pudding that his conscience will not let him swallow: I will have him to
be an example for you all, then tied he him to a window by the end of the
pudding, where poor Miles stood like a Bear tied by the nose to a stake, and
endured many floutes and mockes: at night his Master released him from his
penance; Miles was glad of it, and did vow never to break more fast days
whilst that he lived.

How Friar Bacon saved a Gentleman that had given himself to the Devil.
IN Oxfordshire there lived a Gentleman, that had through his riotous expenses
wasted a fair Inheritance that was left him by his father: After which he
grew so poor, that he had not wherewith to buy himself so much bread as
would maintain his miserable life: the memory of his former state that he had
lived in, and the present want that he now sustained, made him to grow
desperate and regardlesse both of his soul and bodies estate; which gave the
Devil occasion to work upon his weakness in this manner following.

On a time, he being alone full of grief and care, (grief for his follies
past, and care how to get a poor living for the remainder of his days) the
Devil came to him and asked him what he wanted (he came not in a shape
terrible, but like an old penny-father.) This Gentleman was amazed at his
sudden presence, but hearing him demand of his wants, he took to him courage
and said: I want all things, I want money to buy my apparel, money to buy me
meat, money to redeem my Land, and money to pay my debts: Can, or will you
help me in this misery? I will, answered the Devil, on some conditions help
you to money for to supply all these wants, and that suddenly. On any
condition, said the Gentleman, help me, and I swear for to perform them: I
take no oaths (answered the Devil) I must have bonds, if you will do so,
meet me by the Woods side to morrow morning, and there I will have the moneys
ready: I will, said the Gentleman (for he poor man was glad of it on any
conditions, as he said (before.) The next day he went to the Wood where the
Devil had promis^d to meet him: long had he not been there, but he beheld
the Devil coming, and after him two other like Seruingmen with Bags of
money: this rejoiced the poor Gentleman's heart to think that he should once
again live like a man. The Devil coming to him said: son I will perform
my promise unto you, if that you will seal to the conditions that I have here
already drawn: willingly said-the Gentleman, I will, I pray read them The
Devil read them to this effect; that he lent him so much money as he should
have need of, to be employed to these uses following: First, to redeem his
morgag'd Land; next to pay his debts: lastly, to buy him such necessaries as
he wanted: this to be lent on this condition, that so soon as he had paid all
his debts, that he should be at the lenders disposing, and without any delay,
freely to yield himself to him upon the first demand of the aforesaid lender.
To this the Gentleman sealed, and had the money carried to his Chamber, with
which money he in short time redeemed his Land, and bought such things as he
needed, and likewise paid all his debts, so that there was not any man that
could ask of him one penny.

Thus lived this Gentleman once again in great credit, and grew so great a
husband that he increased his estate, and was richer then ever his father
before him was: but long did this joy of his not continue, for one day he
being in his Study the Devil appeared unto him, and did tell him that now his
Land was redeemed, and his debts paid, and therefore the time was come that he
must yield himself to his mercy, as he was bound by bond. This troubled the
Gentleman to hear, but more to think how that he must become a slave to a
stranger that he did not know (for he knew not as yet that he was the Devil)
but being urged to answer for himself (by the Devil) he said that he had
not as yet paid all his debts, and therefore as yet he was not liable to the
bonds strait conditions. At this the Devil seemed angry and with a fearful
noise transformed himself to an ugly shape, saying: Alas poor wretch, these
are poor excuses that thou framest, I kn^w them all to be false, and so will
prove them to thy face to morrow morning, till when I leave thee to despair:
So with great noise he went his way, leaving the Gentleman half dead with
fear.

When he was gone, the Gentleman reviving bethought himself in what a
miserable state he was now in, then wished he that he had lived and died
poorly, then cursed he all his ambitious thoughts, that led him first to
desire again that wealth which he had so vainly by his riot lost: then would
he curse his prodigal expenses that were the original of all his misery:
thus was he tormented along time in his mind, at last he fully resolved to end
his wretched life by some violent death, and to that end he went forth thinking
to kill himself, which he had done, had it not been for the Friar: for as he
was falling upon his sword, Friar Bacon came by and called to him to hold,
which he did. Friar Bacon demanded of him the cause why he was so desparate
that he would run headlong to hell? O sir, said he, the cause is great, and the
relation is so terrible to me, that I would entreat you not to trouble me any
more, but to leave me to my own will: his answer filled the Friar with
amazement and pity both at once, which made him to urge him in this manner.
Sir, should I leave you to his wilful damnation, I were unfit ever hereafter
to wear or touch any robe that belongs unto the holy Order, whereof I am a
Brother; you know (I doubt not) that there is given power to the Church to
absolve penitent sinners, let not your wilfulness take away from you that
benefit which you may receive by it: freely confess your self (I pray) you
unto me, and doubt not but I will give your troubled conscience ease: Father
(said this Gentleman) I know all that you have spoken is truth, and I have many
times received comfort from the mother Church, (I dare not say our, for I fear
that she will never receive me for a child) I have no part in her
benediction, yet since you request so earnestly the cause, I will tell you,
hear it and tremble. Know then that I have given my self to the devil for a
little wealth, and he to morrow in this Wood must have me: now have you my
grief, but I know not how to get comfort. This is strange (quoth Friar Bacon)
yet be of good comfort, penitential tears may do much, which see you do not
spare: soon I will visit you at your house, and give you that comfort (I hope)
that will beget you again to goodness: the Gentleman with these words was
somewhat comforted and returned home. At night Friar Bacon came to him and
found him full of tears for his heinous offense, for those tears he gave him
hope of pardon, demanded further what conditions he had made with the Devil:
the gentleman told him, how that he had promised himself to him so soon as he
had paid all his debts: which he now had done, for he owed not one penny to any
man living. Well, said Friar Bacon, continue thy sorrow for thy sins, and to
morrow meet him without fear, and be thou content to stand to the next man's
judgment that shall come that way, whether thou do belong to the devil or
no: fear not, but do so, and be thou assured that I will be he that shall come
by, and will give such judgment on thy side, that thou shall be free from
him: with that Friar Bacon went home, and the Gentleman went to his prayers.

In the morning the Gentleman (after that he had blessed himself) went to the
Wood where he found the devil ready for him, so soon as he came near, the
devil said: now deceiuer are you come, now shall thou see that I can and will
prove that thou have paid all thy debts, and therefore thy soul belongs to
me. Thou art a deceiuer (said the gentleman) and gave me money to cheat me of
my soul, for else why will thou be thy own Judge: let me have some other to
judge between us. Content said the Deui^l, take whom thou will: then I will
have (said the gentleman) the next man that comes this way: hereto the Devil
agreed. No sooner were these words ended, but Friar Bacon came by, to whom this
Gentleman spoke, and requested, that he would be judge in a weighty matter
between them two: the Friar said, he was content, so both parties were agreed:
the Devil said they were, and told Friar Bacon how the case stood between
them in this manner.

Know Friar, that I seeing this prodigal like to starve for want of food, lent
him money, not only to buy him victuals, but also to redeem his lands and pay
his debts, conditionarily that so soon as his debts were paid, that he should
give himself freely to me, to this here is his hand (showing him the Bond)
now my time, is expired, for all his debts are paid which he cannot deny.
This case is plain, if it be so that his debts are paid: his silence confirms
it said the Devil, therefore give him a just sentence. I will said Friar
Bacon: But first tell me (speaking to the Gentleman) did thou never yet give
the Devil any of his money back, nor requite him any ways: never had he any
thing of me as yet (answered the Gentleman) then never let him have any thing
of thee and thou art free: deceiuer of mankind, said he (speaking to the
Devil) it was thy bargain, never to meddle with him so long as he was
indebted to any, now how can thou demand of him any thing, when he is
indebted for all that he has to thee, when he pays thee thy money, then
take him as thy due; till then thou have nothing to do with him: and so I
charge thee to be gone. At this, the Devil vanished with great horror, but
Friar Bacon comforted the Gentleman, and sent him home with a quiet conscience,
bidding him never to pay the Devils money back as he tendered his own safety:
which he promised for to observe.

How Friar Bacon made a Brazen head to speak, by the which he would have
walled England about with Brass.
Friar Bacon reading one day of the many conquests of England, bethought
himself how he might keep it hereafter from the like conquests, and so make
himself famous hereafter to all posterities: This (after great study) he
found could be no way so well done as one; which was to make a head of Brass,
and if he could make this head to speak (and hear it when it speaks) then
might he be able to wall all England about with Brass. To this purpose he
got one Friar Bungey to assist him, who was a great Scholar and a Magician,
(but not to be compared to Friar Bacon) these two with great study and pains
so framed a head of Brass, that in the inward parts thereof there was all
things (like as is in a natural man's head: this being done, they were as far
from perfection of the work as they were before, for they knew not how to give
those parts that they had made motion, without which it was impossible that it
should speak: many books they read, but yet could not find out any hope of
what they sought, so that at the last they concluded to raise a spirit, and to
know of him that which they could not attain to by their own studies. To do
this they prepared all things ready and went one Evening to a Wood thereby, and
after many ceremonies used, they spoke the words of coniuration, which the
Devil straight obeyed and appeared unto them, asking what they would? know,
said Friar Bacon, that we have made an artificial head of Brass, which we
would have to speak, to the furtherance of which we have raised thee, and
being raised, we will here keep thee, unless thou tell to us the way and
manner how to make this Head to speak. The Devil told him that he had not
that power of himself: beginner of lies (said Friar Bacon) I know that thou
do dissemble, and therefore tell it us quickly, or else we will here bind
thee to remain during our pleasures. At these threatenings the Devil consented
to do it, and told them, that with a continual sum of the sir hotest Simples
it should have motion, and in one month space speak, the Time of the month or
day he knew not: also he told them, that if they heard it not before it had
done speaking, all their labor should be lost: they being satisfied, licensed
the Spirit for to depart.

Then went these two learned Friars home again, and prepared the Simples
ready, and made the fume, and with continual watching attended when this
Brazen head would speak: thus watched they for three weeks without any rest,
so that they were so weary and sleepy, that they could not any longer retain
from rest: then called Friar Bacon his man Miles, and told him, that it was not
unknown to him what pains Friar Bungy and himself had taken for three weeks
space, only to make, and to hear the Brasen-head speak, which if they did
not, then had they lost all their labor, and all England had a great loss
thereby: therefore he entreated Miles that he would watch whilst that they
sleep, and call them if the Head speak. Fear not, good Master (said Mailes) I
will not sleep, but harken and attend upon the head, and if it do chance to
speak, I will call you: therefore I pray take you both your rests and let me
alone for watching this head. After Fire Bacon had given him a great charge:
The second time, Friar Bungy and he went to sleep, and left Miles alone to
watch the Brazen head: Miles, to keep him from sleeping, got a Tabor and Pipe,
and being mercy disposed, sung this Song to a Northren tune,

Of came thou not from New Castle.
To couple is a custom,
all things thereto agree:
Why should not I then love?
since love to all is free.
But I Will have one that is pretty,
her cheeks of scarlet die?
For to breed my delight,
when that I ligge her by.
Though virtue be a Dowry,
yet I Will choose money store:
If my Love prove untrue,
with that I can get more.
The fair is often unconstant,
the black is often proud.
I Will choose a lovely brown,
come fiddler scrape thy crowd.
Come fiddler scrape thy crowd,
for Peggie the brown is she,
Must be my Bride, God guide
that Peggie and I agree.


With his own Music, and such Songs as these spent he his time, and kept
from sleeping, at last, after some noise the Head spoke these two words, Time
is. Miles hearing it to speak no more: thought his Master would be angry if
he waked him for that, and therefor he let them both sleep, and began to
mock the Head in this manner: Thou Brazen-faced Head, has my Master took all
this pains about thee, and now do thou requi^e him with two words, Time is:
had he watched with a Lawyer so long as he has watched with thee, he would
have given him more, and better words then thou have yet, if thou can speak no
wiser, they shall sleep till doomes day for me: Time is: I know Time is, and
that you shall hear good man Brazen-face.

To the tune of Dainty come thou to me.
Time is for some to plant,
Time is for some to sow;
Time is for some to graft
The horn as some do know.
Time is for some to eat,
Time is for some to sleep,
Time is for some to laugh,
Time is for some to weep.
Time is for some to sing,
Time is for some to pray,
Time is for some to creep,
That have drunk all the day.
Time is to cart a Bawd,
Time is to whip a Whore,
Time is to hang a Thief,
And time is for much more.


Do you tell us Copper-nose, when Time is, I hope we Scholars know our Times,
when to drink drunk, when to kiss our Hostis, when to go on her score, and
when to pay it, that time comes seldom. After half an hour had passed, the
Head did speak again, two words, which were these: Time was. Miles respected
these words as little as he did the former, and would not wake them, but still
scoffed at the Brazen head, that it had learn no better words, and had such a
Tutor as his Master: and in scorn of it sung this Song.

To the tune of a rich Merchant man.
Time was when thou a Kettle
were filled with better matter:
But Friar Bacon did thee spoil,
when he thy sides did batter.
Time was when conscience dwelled
with men of occupation:
Time was when Lawyers did not thrive,
so well by men's vexation.
Time was when Kings and Beggars
of one poor stuff had being:
Time was when office kept no Knaves:
that time it was worth seeing.
Time was a bowl of water,
did give the face reflection,
Time was when women knew no paint:
which now they call Complexion.


Time was: I know that Brazen-face, without your telling. I know Time was, and
I know what things there was when Time was, and if you speak no wiser, no
Master shall be waked for me. Thus Miles talked and sung till another half
hour was gone, then the Brazen-head spoke again these words; Time is past:
and therewith fell down, and presently followed a terrible noise, with strange
flashes of fire, so that Miles was half dead with fear: At this noise the two
Friars awaked, and wondered to see the whole room so full of smoke, but that
being vanished they might perceive the Brazen-head broken and lying on the
ground: at this sight they grieved, and called Miles to know how this came.
Miles half dead with fear, said that it fell down of it self, and that with
the noise and fire that followed he was almost frighted out of his wits: Friar
Bacon asked him if he did not speak? yes (quoth Miles) it spoke, but to no
purpose. I Will have a Parret speak better in that time that you have been
teaching this Brazen head. Out on thee villain (said Friar Bacon) thou have
undone us both, had thou but called us when it did speak, all England had
bin walled round about with Brass, to its glory and our eternal fames: what
were the words it spoke? very few (said Miles) and those were none of the
wisest that I have heard neither: first he said Time is. Had thou called us
then (said Friar Bacon) we had been made for ever: then (said Miles) half an
hour after it spoke again and said, Time was. And woulst thou not call us
then (said Bungry?) Alas (said Miles) I thought he would have told me some long
Tale, and then I purposed to have called you: then half an hour after he
cried Time is past and made such a noise, that he has waked you himself me
thinks. At this Friar Bacon was in such a rage, that he would have beaten his
man, but he was restrained by Bungey: but nevertheless for his punishment he
with his Art struck him dumb for one whole months space. Thus that great work
of these learned Friars was ouerthrown (to their great griefs) by this simple
fellow.

How Friar Bacon by his Art took a Town, when the King had lain before it
three months, without doing to it any hurt.
IN those times when Friar Bacon did all his strange tricks, the Kings of
England had a great part of France, which they held a long t^me, till civil
wars at home in this Land made them to lose it: it did chance that the King
of England (for some cause best known to himself) went into France with a
great Army, where after many victories, he did besiege a strong Town, and
lay before it full three months, without doing to the Town any great damage,
but rather received the hurt himself. This did so vex the King, the he
sought to take it in any way, either by policy or strength: To this intent he
made Proclamation* that whosoever could deliver this Town into his hand, he
should have for his pains ten thousand C^ownes truly paid. This was
proclaimed, but there was none found that would undertake it: At length she
news did come into England of this great reward that was promised. Friar Bacon
hearing of it, went into France, and being admitted to the Kings presence, he
thus ^pake unto him: Your Majesty I am sure, has not quite forgot your poor
subject Bacon, the love that you showed to me being last in your presence,
has drawn me for to leave my Country, and my Studies, to do your Majesty
service: I beseech your Grace, to command me so far as my poor Art or life
may do you pleasure. The King thanked him for his love, but told him, that he
had now more need of Arms then Art, and wanted brave Soldiers more then
learned Scholars. Friar Bacon answered, Your Grace says well; but let me
(under correction) tell you, that Art oftentimes does those things that are
impossible to Arms, which I will make good in some few examples. I will speak
only of things performed by Art and Nature, wherein shall be nothing Magical:
and first by the figuration of Art, there may be made Instruments of Navigations
without men to row in them, as great Ships to brook the Sea, only with one
man to steer them, and they shall sail far more swiftly then it they were
full of men. Also Chariots that shall move with an unspeakable force, without
any living creature to stir them. Likewise, an Instrument may be made to fly
withal, if one fit in the midst of the Instrument, and do turn an Engine, by
which the wings being Artificially composed, may beat air after the manner of
a flying Bird. By an Instrument of three fingers high, and three fingers broad,
a man may rid himself and others form all Imprisonment: yea, such an
Instrument may easily be made, whereby a man may violently draw unto him a
thousand men, will they, nill they, or any other thing. By Art also an
Instrument may be made, wherewith men may walk in the bottom of the Sea or
Rivers without bodily danger: this Alexander the Great used (as the Ethnic
Philosopher reports) to the end he might behold the secrets of the Seas. But
Physical Figurations are far more strange: for by that may be framed
Perspects and Looking-glasses, that one thing shall appear to be many, as one
man shall appear to be a whole Army, and one Sun or Moon shall seem
diverse. Also perspects may be so framed, that things far off shall seem most
nigh unto us: With one of these did Julius Caesar from the Sea coasts in France
mark and observe the situation of the Castles in England. Bodies may also be
so framed, that the greatest things shall appear to be the least, the highest
lowest, the most secret to be the most manifest, and in such like sort the
contrary. Thus did Socrates perceive, that the Dragon which did destroy the
City and Country adjoining with his noisome breath, and contagious influence,
did lurk in the dens between the Mountains: and thus may all things that
are done in Cities or Armies be discovered by the enemies. Again, in such wise
may bodies be framed, that venomous and infectious influences may be brought
whether a man will: In this did Aristotle instruct Alexander; through which
instruction the poison of a Basiliske, being lift up upon the wall of a City,
the poison was conuayd into the City, to the destruction thereof: Also
Perspects may be made to deceive the sight, as to make a man believe that he
sees great store of riches, when that there is not any. But it appertains to
a higher power of Figuration, that beams should be brought and assembled by
diverse flexions and reflections in any distance that we will, to burn any thing
that is apposite unto it, as it is witnessed by those Perspects or Glasses that
burn before and behind: But the greatest and chiefest of all figurations and
things figured, is to describe the heavenly bodies, according to their length
and breadth in a corporal Figure, wherein they may corporally move with a
daily motion. These things are worth a Kingdom to a wise man. These may
suffice, my royal Lord, to show what Art can do: and these, with many things
more as strange, I am able by Art to perform. Then take no thought for winning
this Town; for by my Art you shall (ere many days be past) have your desire.

The King all this while heard him with admiration: but hearing him now say,
that he would undertake to win the Town, he burst out in these speeches:
Most learned Bacon, do but what thou have said, and I will give thee what thou
most desire, either wealth, or honor, choose which thou will, and I will be
as ready to perform, as I have been to promise.

Your Majesty's love is all that I seek (said the Friar) let me have that,
and I have honor enough, for wealth, I have content, the wise, should seek no
more: but to the purpose. Let your Pioners raise up a mount so high (or rather
higher) then the wall, and then shall you see some probability of that which I
have promised.

This Mount in two days was raised: then Friar Bacon went with the King to the
Top of it, and did with a perspect show to him the Town, as plainly as if he
had been in it: at this the King did wonder, but Friar Bacon told him, that
he should wonder more, ere next day noone: against which Time, he desired him
to have his whole Army in readiness, for to scale the wall upon a signal
given by him, from the Mount. This the King promised to do, and so returned to
his Tent full of Joy, that he should gain this strong Town. In the morning
Friar Bacon went up to the Mount and set his Glasses, and other Instruments up:
in the mean time the King ordered his Army, and stood in a readiness for to
give assault; when the signal was given, which was the wauing of a Flagge: Ere
nine of the clock Friar Bacon had burnt the State-house of the Town, with
other houses only by his Mathematical Glasses, which made the whole Town in
an uproar, for none did know how it came: whilst that they were quenching of
the same, Friar Bacon did wave his Flagge: upon which signal given, the King
set upon the Town, and took it with little or no resistance. Thus through the
Art of this learned man the King got this strong Town, which he could not do
with all his men without Friar Bacons help.

How Friar Bacon ouer-came the German Coniurer Vandermast, and make a Spirit of
his own carry him into Germany.
THE King of England after he had taken in the Town, showed great mercy to
the Inhabitants, giving some of them their lives freely, and others he set at
liberty for their Gold: the Town he kept as his own, and swore the chief
Citizens to be his true Subjects. Presently after the King of France sent an
Ambassador to the King of England, for to entreat a peace between them. This
Ambassador being come to the King, he feasted him (as it is the manner of
Princes to do) and with the best sports as he had then, welcomed him. The
Ambassador seeing the King of England so free in his Love, desired likewise to
give him some taste of his good liking, and to that intent sent for one of his
fellows (being a Germane, and named Vandermast) a famous Coniurer, who being
come, he told the King, that since his Grace had been so bountiful in his
love to him, he would show him (by a servant of his) such wonderful things,
that his Grace had never seen the like before. The King demanded of him, of
what nature those things, were that he would do? The Ambassador answered,
that they were things done by the Art of Magic. The King hearing of this,
sent straight for Friar Bacon, who presently came, and brought Friar Bungey
with him.

When the Banquet was done, Vandermast did ask the King, if he desired to see
any Spirit of any man deceased; and if that he did, he would raise him in such
manner and fashion as he was in when that he lived. The King told him, that
above all men he desired to see Pompey the Great, who could abide no equal.
Vandermast by his Art raised him, armed in such manner as he was when he was
slain at the Eattell of Pharsalia: at this they were all highly contented.
Friar Bacon presently raised the ghost of Julius Caesar, who could abide no
Superior, and had slain this Pompey at the Battle of Pharsalia: At the sight
of him they were all amazed, but the King who sent for Bacon: and Vandermast
said that there was some man of Art in that presence, whom he desired to see.
Friar Bacon then showed himself, saying; It was I Vandermast, that raised
Caesar, partly to give content to this royal presence, but chiefly for to
conquer thy Pompey, as he did once before, at that great Battle of Pharsalia,
which he now again shall do. Then presently began a fight being Caesar and
Pompey, which continued a good space, to the content of all, except Vandermast.
At last Pompey was overcome and slain by Caesar; then vanished they both away.

My Lord Ambassador (said the King) me thinks that my Englishman has put
down your German: has he no better running then this? Yes, answered
Vandermast, your Grace shall see me put down your Englishman, ere that you go
from hence: and therefore Friar prepare thy self with thy best of Art to
withstand me. Alas, said Friar Bacon, it is a little thing will serve to resist
thee i^ this kind. I have here one that is my inferior (showing him Friar
Bungey) try thy Art with him; and if thou do put him to the worst, then will I
deal with thee, and not till then.

Friar Bungey then began to show his Art; and after some turning and looking on
his Book, he brought up among them the Hysperian Tree, which did bear golden
Apples; these Apples were kept by a waking Dragon, that lay under the Tree: He
having done this, bid Vandermast find one that durst gather the fruit. Then
Vandermast did raise the ghost of Hercules in his habit that he wore when that
he was living, and with his Club on his shoulder: Here is one, said Vandermast,
that shall gather fruit from this Tree: this is Hercules, that in his life time
gathered of this Fruit, and made the Dragon couch: and now again shall he
gather it in spite of all opposition: As Hercules was going to pluck the
fruit, Friar Bacon held up his wand, at which Hercules stayed and seemed
fearful. Vandermast bid him for to gather of the fruit, or else he would
torment him. Hercules was more fearful, and said, I cannot, nor I dare not;
for here great Bacon stands, whose charms are far more powerful then thine,
I must obey him Vandermast. Hereat Vandermast cursed Hercules, and threatened
him: But Friar Bacon laughed, and bid him not to chafe himself ere that his
journey was ended; for seeing (said he) that Hercules will do nothing at your
command, I will have him do you some service at mine: with that he bid
Hercules carry him home into Germany. The Devil obeyed him, and took
Vandermast on his back, and went away with him in all their sights. Hold
Friar, cried the Ambassador, I will not loose Vandermast for half my Land.
Content your self my Lord, answered Friar Bacon, I have but sent him home to
see his wife, and ere long he may return. The King of England thanked Friar
Bacon, and forced some gifts on him for his service that he had done for him;
for Friar Bacon did so little respect money, that he never would take any of
the King.

How Friar Bacon through his wisdom saved the endangered lives of three
Brethren.
THE Peace being concluded between the King of England and the King of France;
the King of England came again into his Country of England, where he was
received very joyfully of all his Subjects: But in his absence had happened a
discord between three Brethren, the like has not been often heard. This it
was: A rich Gentleman of England dyed, and left behind him three Sons. Now
for some reason (which was best known to himself) he appointed none of them
by name to be his heir, but spoke to them all after this manner: You are all
my Sons, and I love you all as a Father should do, all alike, not one better
then the other: and cause I would always do rightly so near as I can, I
leave all my Lands and goods to him that loves me best: These were his last
words that he spoke, concerning any worldly affairs.

After he was dead and buried, there arose a great controversy betwixt them,
who should inherit their Fathers Goods and Lands, every one pleading for
himself, how that he loved his Father best. All the cunning Lawyers of the
Kingdom could say nothing to the purpose, concerning this case, so that they
were enforced to beg of the King a grant for a combat: for they would not
share the Lands and Goods amongst them, but eu^ry one desired all or else
nothing. The King seeing no other way to end this controversy, granted a
combat; the two eldest being to fight first, and the conqueror to fight with
the youngest, and the suruiuer of them was to have the Land.

The day being come that was set for these combatants, they all came in armed
for the fight, Friar Bacon being there present, and seeing such three lusty
young men like to perish, and that by their own flesh and blood, grieved very
much, and went to the King, desiring his Majesty that he would stay the fight,
and he would find a means without any bloodshed to end the matter: the King
was very glad hereof, and caused the Combatants to be brought before him, to
whom he said: Gentlemen, to save the blood of you all, I have found a way, and
yet the controversy shall be ended that is now amongst you: Are you contented
to stand to his Judgment that I shall appoint? They all answered, that they
were. Then were they bid to return three days after. In that time Friar Bacon
had caused the Body of their deceased Father to be taken out of the ground, and
brought to the Court: the body he did cause to be bound to a Stake, naked from
the middle upwards, and likewise prepared three Bows and Shafts for the three
Brethren: all these kept he secretly.

The third day being come, came these three Brethren, to whom Friar Bacon in
the presence of the King, gave the three Bows and Shafts, saying, Be not
offended at what I have done, there is no other way but this to judge your
cause: See here is the body of your dead Father, shoot at him; for he that
comes nearest to his heart, shall have all the Lands and Goods.

The two eldest prepared themselves, and shot at him, and stuck their Arrows
in his Breast. ^^en bid they the youngest to shoot: but he refused it, saying,
I will rather loose all, then wound that body that I so loved living: Had you
ever had but half that love (in you) to him that I have, you would rather have
had your own bodies mangled, then to suffer his liuelesse Cops thus to be
used; nay, you do not only suffer it, but you are the actors of this act of
shame: and speaking this, he wept.

Friar Bacon seeing this, did give the Judgment on his side, for he loved his
Father best, and therefore had all his Lands and Goods: the other two Brothers
went away with shame for what they had done. This deed of Friar Bacons was
highly commended of all men; for he did not only give true Judgment, but
also saved much blood that would have been shed, had they been suffered to
have fought.

How Friar Bacon served the Thieves that robbed him, and of the sport that his
man Miles had with them.
IT was reported about the Country, how that the King had given Friar Bacon
great store of Treasure. The report of this wealth made three Thieves plot to
rob Friar Bacons house, which they put in practice one Evening in this fashion.
They knocked at the door, and were let in by Miles: No sooner were they in, but
they took hold of him, and led him into the house, and finding Friar Bacon
there, they told him that they came for some money, which they must and would
have ere they departed from thence. He told them, that he was but ill stored
with money at that time, and therefore desired them to forbear him till some
other time. They answered him again, that they knew that he had enough, and
therefore it was but folly to delay them, but straight let them have it by
fair means, or else they would use that extreamitie to him that he would be
loath to suffer. He seeing them so resolute, told them that they should have
all that he had, and gave to them one hundred pounds a man. Herewith they
seemed content, and would have gone their ways. Nay said Friar Bacon, I pray
Gentlemen at my request tarry a little, and hear some of my man's Music; you
are hired reasonable well already, I hope in courtesy you will not deny me so
small a request. That will we not, (said they all.)

Miles thought now to have some sport with them, which he had, and therefore
plain lustily on his Tabor and Pipe: so soon as they heard him play (against
their wills) they fell a dancing* and that after such a laborious manner, that
they quickly wearied themselves (for they had all that while the bags of
money in their hands.) Yet had Friar Bacon not revenge enough on them, but bid
his man Miles lead them some larger measure as he thought fitting, which
Miles did. Miles straight led them out of the house into the fields, they
followed him, dancing after a wild Anticke manner: Then led he them over a
broad dike full of water, and they followed him still, but not so good a way as
he went (for he went over the Bridge, but they by reason of their dancing,
could not keep the Bridge, but fell off, and dancing through the water) then
led he them through a way where a horse might very well have been up to the
belly; they followed him, and were so durtie, as though they had wallowed in
the mire like Swine. Sometime gave he them rest only to laugh at them: then
were they so sleepie when he did not play, that they fell to the ground. Then
on the sudden would he play again, and make them start up and follow him.
Thus kept he them the better part of the night. At last he in pity left
playing, and let them rest. They being asleep on the bare ground, he took
their money from them, and gave them this Song for their farewell, To the tune
of, Oh do me no harm good man.

You roaring Boys, and sturdy Thieves,
you Pimpes, and Apple-squires:
Lament the case of these poor knaves,
and warm them by your fires.
They snorting lie like Hogs in stie,
but hardly are so warm:
If all that cheat, such hap should meet,
to true men 'twere no harm.
They money had, which made them glad,
their joy did not endure:
Were all Thieves served as these have been,
I think there would be fewer.
When that they awake, their hearts will ache,
to think upon their loss;
And though the gallows they escape,
they go by weeping cross.
Your Trulls expect your coming home
with full and heavy purse:
When that they see it is nothing so,
oh how they will rail and curse.
For he that loves to keep a whore,
must have a giving hand:
Which makes a many knaves be choakt,
for bidding true men stand.
They were scarce any thing the better for this Song, for they slept all that
while: so Miles left them at their rest; but they had small cause to sleep so
soundly as they did, for they were more wetter then ere was Scold with cucking.
Miles gave his Master his money again, and told the story of their merry
pilgramage: he laughed at it, and wished all men had the like power to serve all
such knaves in the like kind. The thieves waking in the morning and missing
their money, and seeing themselves in that plight, thought that they had been
served so by some divine power, for robbing a Churchman, and therefore they
swore one to the other, never to meddle with any Church man again.

How Vandermast, for the disgrace that he had received by Friar Bacon sent a
Soldier to kill him; and how Friar Bacon escaped killing, and turned the
Soldier from an Atheist to be a good Christian.
Friar Bacon sitting one day in his Study, looked over all the dangers that
were to happen to him that month, there found he, that in the second week of
the month, between Sun rising and setting, there was a great danger to fall
on him, which would without great care of prevention take away his life. This
danger which he did foresee, was caused by the Germane Coniurer Vandermast, for
he vowed a revenge for the disgrace that he had received. To execute the same,
he hired a Walloon Soldier, and gave him one thousand crowns to do the same,
fifty before hand, and fifty when he had killed him.

Friar Bacon, to save himself from this danger that was like to happen to him,
would always when that he read, hold a ball of Brass in his hand, and under
that ball would he set a basin of Brass, that if he did chance to sleep in
his reading, the fall of the Ball out of his hand into the Basin, might wake
him. Being one day in his Study in this manner, and asleep the Walloon
Soldier was got in to him, and had drawn his sword to kill him: but as he
was ready for to strike, down fell the Ball out of Friar Bacons hand, and
waked him. He seeing the Soldier stand there with a sword drawn, asked him
what he was? and wherefore he came there in that manner? The Soldier boldly
answered him thus: I am a Walloon, and a Soldier, and more then this, a
villain: I am come hither, because I was sent; I was sent, because I was
hired; I was hired, because I durst do it; the thing I should do, is not done;
the thing to be done, is to kill thee: thus have you heard what I am and why I
come. Friar Bacon wondered at this man's resolution; then asked he of him, who
set him on work to b^e a murderer? He boldly told him, Vandermast the Germane
Coniurer. Friar Bacon then asked him what Religion he was of? He answered, Of
that which many do profess, the chief principles of which were these: to go
to an Alehouse, and to a Church with one deuation, to abstain from evil for
want of action, and to do good against their wills. It is a good profession
for a devil (said Friar Bacon) Do thou believe hell? I believe no such
thing, answered the Soldier. Then will I show thee the contrary, said the
Friar: and presently raised the ghost of Julian the Apostata, who came up with
his body burning, and so full of wounds, that it almost did affright the
Soldier out of his wits. Then Bacon did command this spirit to speak, and to
show what he was, and wherefore he was thus tormented? Then spoke he to it
in this manner: I sometimes was a Roman Emperor; some count greatness and
happiness: I had a happiness beyond my Empire, had I keept that, I had been
a happy man: would I had lost my Empire when I lost that, I was a Christian,
that was my happiness; but my self love and pride made me to fall from it;
for which I now am punished with never ceasing torments, which I must still
endure: the like which I enjoy is now prepared for unbelieving wretches like my
self, so vanished he away.

All this while the Soldier stood quaking, and sweat as he had felt the
torments himself; and falling down on his knees desired Friar Bacon to
instruct him in a better course of life, then he had yet gone in. Friar Bacon
told him, that he should not want his help in any thing, which he performed,
instructing him better: then gave he him money, and sent him to the wars of
the holy land, where he was slain.

How Friar Bacon deceived an old Usurer.
NOt far from Friar Bacon, dwelt an old man that had great store of money
which he let out to use, and would never do any good with it to the poor,
though Friar Bacon had often put him in mind of it, and wished him to do some
good whilst he lived. Friar Bacon seeing this, by his Art made an Iron pot,
which seemed full of gold, this being done, he went to this rich Usurer, and
told him, that he had some gold which he had gathered in his time that he had
lived; but it being much in quantity, he feared that if it were known, it
would be taken from him, because it was unfitting a man of his coat should have
so much: Now he desired him that he would let him have some hundred pounds,
which was not the six part of his gold, and he should keep it for him. The
Usurer was glad to hear of this, and told him that he should have it, and that
he would keep his gold as safe as he himself would: Friar Bacon was glad to
hear of this, and presently fetched the pot: at the sight of which the Usurer
laughed, and thought to himself, how all that gold was his own, for he had a
determination is gull the Friar, but he gulled himself. See here is the gold
(said Friar Bacon) now let me have of you one hundred pounds, and keep you this
gold till I pay it back again: Very willingly (said the Usurer) and told him
one hundred pounds out, which Friar Bacon took, and delivered him the pot, and
so went his way. This money did Friar Bacon give to diverse poor scholars, and
other people, and bid them pray for old Good-gatherers souls health (so was
this Usurer called) which these poor people did, and would give him thanks
and prayers when they met him, which he did wonder at; for he never deserved
the prayers of any man. At last this old Good-gatherer went to look on this
pot of gold, but instead of gold he found nothing but earth at which sight he
would have died, had not his other gold hindered him, which he was to leave
behind him: so gathering up his spirits, he went to Friar Bacon, and told him
he was abused and cheated; for which he would have the law of him, unless he
made him restitution. Friar Bacon told him, that he had not cheated him, but
bin his faithful steward to the poor, which he could not choose but know,
either by their prayers, or their thank: and as for the law he feared it not,
but bid him do his worst. The old man seeing Friar Bacons resolution, went his
way, and said, that hereafter he would be his own steward.

How Miles, Friar Bacons man, did conjure for meat, and got meat for himself
and his Host.
MIles chanced one day upon some business, to go some six miles from home,
and being loath to part with some company that he had, he was belated, and could
get but half way home that night: to save his purse he went to ones house
that was his Masters acquaintance: but when he came, the good man of the house
was not at home, and the woman would not let him have lodging. Miles seeing
such cold entertainment, wished that he had not troubled her, but being now
there, he was loath to go any further, and therefore with good words he
persuaded her for to give him lodging that night. She told him that she would
willingly do it, if her husband were at home, but he being now out of town, it
would be to her discredit to lodge any man. You need not to mistrust me,
(said Miles) for I have no thought to attempt your chastity: lock me in any
place where there is a bed, and I will not trouble you till to morrow that I
rise. She thinking her husband would be angry if she should deny any of his
friends so small a request, consented that he should lie there, if that he
would be locked up: Miles was contented, and presently went to bed, and she
locked him into the chamber where he lay.

Long had not he been a bed, but he heard the door open; with that he rose
and peeped through a think of the partition, and saw an old man come in: this
man set down his Basket that he had on his arm, and gave the woman of the
house three or four sweet kisses, which made Miles his mouth run with water
to see it: Then did he undo his Basket, and pulled out of it a fat Capon
ready roasted, and Bread, with a bottle of good old Sack: this gave he unto
her, saying: Sweetheart, hearing thy Husband was out of town, I thought good
to visit thee, I am not come empty handed, but have brought some thing to be
merry withal: lay the cloth sweet Honey, and let us first to Banquet, and
then to bed. She kindly thanked him, and presently did as he had her: They were
not scarce set at the Tadle, but her husband returning back, knocked at the
door. The woman hearing this, was amazed, and knew not what to do with her
old Lover: but looking on her apron-strings, she strait found (as women use to
do) a trick to put her self free from this fear; for she put her Lover
under the bed, the Capon and Bread she put under a Tub, the buttle of Wine she
put behind the Chest, and then she did open the door, and with a dissembling
kiss welcomed her husband home, asking him the reason why that he returned so
quickly. He told her, that he had forgot the money that he should have
carried with him, but on the morrow betimes he would he gone. Miles saw and
heard all this; and having a desire to taste of the Capon and the Wine, called
to the Goodman. He asked his wife who that was? She told him, an acquaintance
of his, that entreated lodging there that night. He bid he open the door,
which she did, and let Miles out. He seeing Miles there, bid him welcome, and
bade his wife to set them some meat on the table: she told him, that there was
not any ready, but prayed him to keep his stomach till to morrow, and then
she would provide them a good breakefast. Since it is so Miles (said the
goodman) we must rest contented and sleep out our hunger. Nay stay, said
Miles, if that you can eat, I can find you good meat; I am a Scholar and
have some Art. I would feign see it (said the goodman) You shall, quoth Miles,
and that presently. With that Miles pulled forth a book out of his bosom, and
began his Coniuration in this fashion:

From the fearful Lake below,
From whence Spirits come and go;
Straightway come one and attend
Friar Bacons man, and friend.
Comes there none yet, quoth Miles? then I must use some other Charm.

Now the Owl is flowne abroad,
For I hear the croaking Toade,
And the Bat that shuns the day,
Through the dark does make her way.
Now the ghosts of men do rise,
And with fearful hedious cries,
Seeks reuengement (from the good)
On their heads that spilt their blood,
Come some Spirit, quick I say,
Night's the Devils Holy Day:
Where ere you be, in dens, or lake,
In the Iuy, Ewe, or Brake;
Quickly come and me attend,
That am Bacons man and friend.
But I will have you take no shape
Of a Bear, a Horse, or Ape:
Nor will I have you terrible,
And therefore come invisible.
Now he is come, (quoth Miles, and therefore tell me what meat you will have
mine Host? Any thing Miles, (said the Goodman) what thou will. Why then (said
Miles) what say you to a Capon? I love it above all meat (said the Goodman.)
Why then a Capon you shall have, and that a good one too. Bemo my spirit that I
have raised to do me service, I charge thee, seek and search about the
earth, and bring me hither straight the best of Capons ready roasted. Then stood
he still a little, as though he had attended the coming of his spirit, and
on the sudden said: It is well done my Bemo, he has brought me (mine Host) a
fat Capon from the King of Tripolis own Table, and bread with it. I but where
is it Miles (said the Host) I see neither Spirit nor Capon. Look under the
Tub (quoth Miles) and there you shall find it. He presently did, and brought
(to his wives grief) the Capon and Bread out. Stay (quoth Miles) we do yet
want some drink that is comfortable and good; I think (mine Host) a bottle
of Malligo Sack were not amiss, I will have it: Bemo, haste the to Malligo,
and fetch me from the Governors, a Bottle of his best Sack. The poor woman
thought that he would have betrayed her and her lover, and therefore wished
that he had been hanged, when that he came first into her house.) He having
stood a little while, as before, said: Well done, Bemo, look behind the
great Chest (mine Host:) He did so, and brought out the Bottle of Sack. Now
(quoth he) Miles sit down, and welcome to thine own Cheer: You may see Wife
(quoth he) what a man of Art can do, get a fat Capon, and a Bottle of good
Wine in a quarter of an hour, and for nothing, which is best of all: Come
(good wife) sit down, and be merry: for all this is paid for, I thank Miles.

She sat, but could not eat a bit for anger, but wished that every bit they
did eat might choke them: Her old Lover too that lay under the bed all this
while, was ready to bepisse himself for fear, for he still looked when that
Miles would discover him. When they had eaten and drank well, the goodman
desired Miles that he would let him see the Spirit that fetched them this good
cheer: Miles seemed unwilling, telling him that it was against the Laws of
Art, to let an illiterate man see a Spirit: but yet for once he would let him
see it, and told him withal, that he must open the door, and soundly beat
the Spirit, or else he should be troubled hereafter with it: and because he
should not fear it, he would put it into the shape of some one of his
neighbors. The Goodman told him, that he need not to doubt his valor, he
would beat him soundly, and to that purpose (...) in all have went to Friar
Bacon, and desired of him some help to recover his Love again, whom he feared
was utterly lost.

Friar Bacon (knowing him for a virtuous Gentleman) pittyed him; and to give
his griefs some release, showed him a Glass, wherein any one might see any
thing done (within fifty miles space) that they desired: So soon as he looked
in the Glass, he saw his Love Millisant with her Father, and the Knight,
ready to be married by Friar Bungye: At the sight of this he cried out that he
was undone, for now should he lose his life in losing of his Love. Friar Bacon
bids him take comfort, for he would prevent the marriage; so taking this
Gentleman in his arms, he set himself down in an enchanted Chair, and
suddenly they were carried through the air to the Chapel. Just as they came
in, Friar Bungye was joining their hands to marry them: but Friar Bacon spoiled
his speech, for he struck him dumb, so that he could not speak a word. Then
raised he a mist in the Chapel, so that neither the Father could see his
Daughter, nor the Daughter her Father, nor the Knight either of them. Then
took he Millisant by the hand, and led her to the man she most desire: they
both wept for joy, that they so happily once more had met, and kindly thanked
Friar Bacon.

It greatly pleased Friar Bacon to see the passion of these two Lovers, and
seeing them both contented, he married them at the Chapel door, whilst her
Father, the Knight, and Friar Bungye went groping within, and could not find
the way out. Now when he had married them, he bid them get lodging at the next
Village, and he would send his man with money: (for the Gentleman was not
stored, and he had a great way to his house) they did as he had them. That
night he sent his man Miles with money to them; but he kept her Father, the
Knight, and Friar Bungye till the next day at noone in the Chapel, ere be
released them.

The Gentleman and his new married wife made that night a great Supper for joy
of their marriage, and bid to it most of the Village: They wanted nothing but
Music, for which they made great moan. This want, Friar Bacon (though he was
absent) supplied: For after Supper there came such a Mask, that the like was
never seen in that Village: For first, there was heard most sweet still
Music, then wind Music: Then came three Apes, and three Monkeys, each of
them carrying a Torch: after them followed six Apes and Monkeyes more, all
dressed in Anticke coats: these last six fell a dancing in such an odd
manner, that they moved all the beholders to much laughter: so after diverse
Antic changes, they did reverence to the Bridegroom and Bride, and so
departed in order as they came in. They all did marvel from whence these
should come: but the Bridegroom knew that it was Friar Bacons Art that gave
them this grace to their Wedding. When all was done, to bed they went, and
enjoyed their wishes. The next day he went home to his own house with his
Bride; and for the cost he had bestowed on them, most part of the Townes-folke
brought them on their way.

Miles made one amongst them too; he for his Masters sake was so plied with
Cups, that he in three days was scarce sober: for his welcome, at his
departure he gave them this Song: To the tune of, I have been a Fiddler, etc.

And did not you hear of a mirth that be fell,
the morrow after a Wedding day:
At carrying a Bride at home to dwell,
and away to Twiuer, away, away?
The Quintin was set, and the garlands were made,
it is pity old custom should ever decay:
And woe be to him that was horst on a Jade,
for he carried no credit away, away.
We met a Consort of Fiddle-dedees,
we set them a cock-horse, and made them to play,
The winning of Bullen, and Vpsie-frees,
and away to Twiuer, away, away.
There was never a Lad in all the Parish,
that would go to the Plow that day:
But on his Fore-horse his Wench he carries,
and away to Twiuer, away, away.
The Butler was quick, and the Ale he did tap,
the Maidens did make the Chamber full gay:
The Seruing-men gave me a Fudling Cap,
and I did carried it away, away.
The Smith of the Town his Liquor so took,
that he was persuaded the ground looked blue,
And I dare boldly to swear on a book,
such Smiths as he, there are but a few.
A Posset was made, and the women did sip,
and simpering said they could eat no more:
Full many a Maid was laid on the lip:
I Will say no more, but so give ore.
They kindly thanked Miles for his Song, and so sent him home with a Fox at
his Tail. His Master asked him, Where he had been so long? He told him, at
the Wedding. I know it (said Friar Bacon) that thou have been there, and I
know also (thou beast) that thou have been every day drunk. That is the worst
that you can say by me, Master, for still poor men must be drunk, if that
they take a cup more then ordinary; b^t it is not so with the rich. Why how is
it with the rich then? I will tell you (said Miles) in few words:

Lawyers they are sick,
And Friars are ill at ease;
But poor men they are drunk,
And all is one disease.
Well sirrah (said Friar Bacon) let me not hear that you are infected any
more with this disease, lest I give you sour sauce to your sweet meat. Thus
did Friar Bacon help these poor Lovers, who in short time got the love of the
old man, and lived in great joy: Friar Bungye his tongue was again let loose,
and all were friends.

How Vandermast and Friar Bungye met, and how they striued who should excel
one another in their Coniurations; and of their deaths.
VAndermast thinking that Friar Bacon had been dead, came into England, and in
Kent met with Friar Bungye: he owing him no good will for Friar Bacons sake,
took his horse out of the Stable, and in stead of it, left a Spirit like unto
it. Friar Bungye in the morning rose, and mounting this Spirit (which he though
had been his Horse) rode on his journey: but he riding through a water, was left
in the middst of it by this Spirit; and being thus wet, he returned to his
Inn, At the Inn door, Vandermast met him, and asked


