THE Mirror of Alchimy, Composed by the thrice-famous and learned Friar, Roger
Bachon, sometimes fellow of Martin College: and afterward of Brasen-nose
College in Oxenforde.

Also a most excellent and learned discourse of the admirable force and
efficacy of (...) written by the same Author.

With certain other worthy (...) the like Argument.

Vino (...).

LONDON. Printed for Richard (...) 1597.

The Preface.
IN times past the Philosophers spoke afters diverse and sundry manners
throughout their writings, since that as it were in a riddle and cloudie voice,
they have left unto us acertaine most excellent and noble science, but
altogether obscure, and without all hope utterly denied, and that not without
good cause. Wherefore I would advise thee, that above all other books, thou
should firmly fix thy mind upon these seven Chapters, containing in them
the transmutation of mettalls, and often call to mind the beginning, middle,
and end of the same, wherein thou shall find such subtilitie, that thy mind
shall be fully contented therewith.

The Mirror of Alchimy, composed by the famous Friar, Roger Bachon, sometime
fellow of Martin College, and Brasennose College in Oxenforde.
CHAP. I. Of the Definitions of Alchimy.
IN many ancient Books there are found many definitions of this Art, the
intentions whereof we must consider in this Chapter. For Hermes says of this
Science: Alchimy is a Corporal Science simply composed of one and by one,
naturally conioyning things more precious, by knowledge and effect, and
converting them by a natural commixtion into a better kind. A certain other
says: Alchimy is a Science, teaching how to transform any kind of metal
into another: and that by a propermedicine, as it appears by many
Philosophers Books. Alchimy therefore is a science teaching how to make and
compound a certain medicine, which is called Elixir, the which when it is cast
upon metals or imperfect bodies, does fully perfect them in the very
proiection.

CHAP. II.
Of the natural principles, and procreation of Minerals.
SEcondly, I will perfectly declare the natural principles and procreations of
Minerals: where first it is to be noted, that the natural principles in the
mines, are Argent-uiue, and Sulphur. All metals and minerals, whereof there be
sundry and diverse kinds, are begotten of these two: but I must tell you, that
nature always intends and strives to the perfection of Gold: but many
accidents coming between, change the mettalls, as it is evidently to be seen
in diverse of the Philosophers books. For according to the purity and
impuritie of the two aforesaid principles, Argent-uiue, and Sulphur, pure, and
impure metals are inge^dred: to wit, Gold, Silver, Steel, Lead, Copper, and
Iron: of whose nature, that is to say, purity, and impuritie, or unclean
superfluity and defect, give ear to that which follows.

Of the nature of Gold.
GOld is a perfect body, engendered of Argentuiue pure, fixed, clear, red, and
of Sulphur clean, fixed, red, not burning, and it wants nothing.

Of the nature of Silver.
Silver is a body, clean, pure, and almost perfect, begotten of Argent-uiue,
pure, almost fixed, clear, and white, and of such a like Sulphur: It wants
nothing, save a little fixation, color, and weight.

Of the nature of Steel.
Steel is a body clean, imperfect, engendered of Argent-uiue pure, fixed and
not fixed clear, white outwardly, but red inwardly, and of the like Sulphur.
It wants only decoction or digestion.

Of the nature of Lead.
Lead is an unclean and imperfect body, engendered of Argent-uiue impure, not
fixed, earthy, drossie, somewhat white outwardly, and red inwardly, and of such
a Sulphur in part burning. It wants purity, fixation, color, and fiering.

Of the nature of Copper.
COpper is an unclean and imperfect body, engendered of Argent-uiue, impure,
not fixed, earthy, burning, red not clear, and of the like Sulphur. It wants
purity, fixation, and weight: and has too much of an impure color, and
earthinesse not burning.

Of the nature of Iron.
IRon is an unclean and imperfect body, engendered of Argent-uiue impure, too
much fixed, earthy, burning, white and red not clear, and of the like Sulphur:
It wants fusion, purity, and weight: It has too much fixed unclean
Sulphur, and burning earthinesse. That which has been spoken, every Alchimist
must diligently observe.

CHAP. III. Out of what things the matter of Elixir must be more nearly
extracted.
THe generation of metals, as well perfect, as imperfect, is sufficiently
declared by that which has been already spoken. Now let us return to the
imperfect matter that must be chosen and made perfect. Seeing that by the
former Chapters we have been taught, that all mettalls are engendered of
Argent-uiue and Sulphur, and how that their impuritie and uncleanness does
corrupt, and that nothing may be mingled with mettalls which has not been
made or sprung from them, it remains clean enough, that no strange thing
which has not his original from these two, is able to perfect them, or to
make a change and new transmutation of them: so that it is to be wondered at,
that any wise man should set his mind upon living creatures, or vegetables
which are far off, when there be minerals to be found nigh enough: neither may
we in any wise think, that any of the Philosophers placed the Art in the said
remote things, except it were by way of comparison: but of the asoresaid two,
all metals are made, neither does any thing cleave unto them, or is joined
with them, nor yet changes them, but that which is of them, and so of right
we must take Argent-uiue and Sulphur for the matter of our stone: Neither does
Argent-uiue by it self alone, nor Sulphur by it self alone, beget any
metal, but of the commixtion of them both, diverse metals and minerals are
diversely brought forth. Our matter therefore must be chosen of the commixtion
of them both: but our final secret is most excellent, and most hidden, to
wit, of what mineral thing that is more near then others, it should be made:
and in making choice hereof, we must be very wary. I put the case then, yt our
matter were first of all drawn out of vegetables, (of which sort are herbs,
trees, and whatsoever springs out of the earth) here we must first make
Argent-uiue and Sulphur, by a long decoction, from which things, and their
operation we are excused: for nature herself offers unto us Argent-uiue and
Sulphur. And if we should draw it from living creatures (of which sort is man's
blood, hair, urine, excrements, hens eggs, and what else proceed from living
creatures) we must likewise out of them extract Argent-uiue and Sulphur by
decoction, from which we are freed, as we were before. Or if we should choose
it out of middle minerals (of which sort are all kinds of Magnesia,
Marchasites, of Tutia, Coppres, Allums, Baurach, Salts, and mary other) we
should likewise, as asore, extract Argent-uiue and Sulphur by decoction, from
which as from the former, we are also excused. And if we should take one of
the seven spirits by it self, as Argent-uiue, or Sulphur alone, or Argent uiue
and one of the two Sulphurs, or Sulphur-uiue, or Auripigment, or Citrine
Arsenicum, or red alone, or the like: we should never effect it, because since
nature does never perfect anything without equal commixtion of both, neither
can we: from these therefore, as from the foresaid Argent-uiue and Sulphur in
their nature we are excused. Finally, if we should choose them, we should
mix eueriething as it is, according to a due proportion, which no man knows,
and afterward decoct it to coagulatio^, into a solid lump: and therefore we
are excused from receiving both of them in their proper nature: to wit,
Argent-uiue and Sulphur, seeing we know not their proportion, and that we may
meet with bodies, wherein we shall find the said things proportioned,
coagulated and gathered together, after a due manner. Keep this secret more
secretly. Gold is a perfect masculine body, without any superfluity or
diminution: and if it should perfect imperfect bodies mingled with it by
melting only, it should be Elixir to red. Silver is also a body almost
perfect, and feminine, which if it should almost perfect imperfect bodies by
his common melting only, it should be Elixir to white, which it is not, nor
cannot be, because they only are perfect. And if this perfection might be
mixed with the imperfect, the imperfect should not be perfected with the
perfect, but rather their perfections should be diminished by the imperfect, and
become imperfect. But if they were more then perfect, either in a twofold,
fourfold, hundredfold, or larger proportion, they might then well perfect the
imperfect. And forasmuch as nature does always work simply, the perfection
which is in them is simple, inseparable, and incommiscible, neither may they by
art be put in the stone, for serment to shorten the work, and so brought to
their former state, because the most volatile does overcome the most fixed. And
for that gold is a perfect body, consisting of Argent-uiue, red and clear, and
of such a Sulphur, therefore we choose it not for the matter of our stone to the
red Elixir, because it is so simply perfect, without artificial mundification,
and so strongly digested and sod with a natural heat, that with our
artificial fire, we are scarcely able to work on gold or silver. And though
nature does perfect any thing, yet she cannot thoroughly mundifie, or perfect
and purify it, because she simply works on that which she has. If therefore
we should choose gold or silver for the matter of the stone, we should hard and
scantly find fire working in them. And although we are not ignoranr of the
fire, yet could we not come to the through mundification and perfection of it,
by reason of his most firm knitting together, and natural composition: we are
therefore excused for taking the first too red, or the second too white, seeing
we may find out a thing or some body of as clean, or rather more clean Sulphur
and Argent-uiue, on which nature has wrought little or nothing at all, which
with our artificial fire, and experience of our art, we are able to bring unto
his due concoction, mundification, color and fixation, continuing our
ingenious labor upon it. There must therefore be such a matter chosen,
wherein there is Argent-uiue, clean, pure, clear, white and red, not fully
complete, but equally and proportionably commixt after a due manner with ye like
Sulphur, and congeled into a solid mass, that by our wisdom and discretion,
and by our artificial fire, we may attain unto the uttermost cleanness of it,
and the purity of the same, and bring it to that pass, that after the work
ended, it might be a thousand thousand times more strong and perfect, then the
simple bodies themselves, decoct by their natural heat. Be therefore wise:
for it thou shall be subtle and witty in my Chapters (wherein by manifest
prose I have laid open the matter of the stone easy to be known) thou shall
taste of that delightful thing, wherein the whole intention of the Philosophers
is placed.

CHAP. IIII. of the manner of working, and of moderating, and continuing the
fire.
I Hope ere this time thou have already found out by the words already spoken
(if thou be not most dull, ignorant, and foolish) the certain matter of the
learned Philosophers blessed stone, whereon Alchimy works, whilst we
endeavor to perfect the imperfect, and that with things more then perfect. And
for that nature hash delivered us the imperfect only with the perfect it is
our part to make the matter (in the former Chapters declared unto us) more then
perfect by our artificial labor. And if we know not the manner of working,
what is the cause that we do not see how nature (which of long time has
perfected metals) does continually work? Do we not see, that in the Mines
through the continual heat that is in the mountains there of, the grosnesse
of water is so decocted and thickened, that in continuance of time it becomes
Argent-uiue? And that of the fatness of the earth through the same heat and
decoction, Sulphur is engendered? And that through the same heat without
intermission continued in the^, all metals are engendered of them according to
their purity and impuritie? and that nature does by decoction alone perfect or
make al metals, as well perfect as imperfect? O extreme madness! what, I
pray you, constraines you to seek to perfect the foresaid things by strange
melancholicall and fantastical regiments? as one says: Woe to you that will
overcome nature, and make metals more then perfect by a new e regiment, or
work sprung from your own senseless brains. God has ginen to nature a
strait way, to wit, continual concoction, and you like fools despise it, or
else know it not. Again, fire and Azot, are sufficient for thee. And in an
other place, Heat perfecteth althings. And elsewhere, sees, sees, sees, and
be not weary. And in an other place, let thy fire be gentle, and easy, which
being always equal, may continue burning: and let it not increase, for if it
do, thou shall suffer great loss. And in an other place, Know thou that in one
thing, to wit, the stone, byone way, to wit, decoction, and in one vessel the
whole mastery is performed. And in an other place, patiently, and continually,
and in another place, grind it seven times. And in an other place, It is
ground with fire. And in an other place, this work is very like to the
creation of man: for as the Infant in the beginning is nourished with light
meats, but the bones being strengthened with stronger: so this masterie also,
first it must have an easy fire, whereby we must always work in every
essence of decoction. And though we always speak of a gentle fire, yet in
truth, we think that in governing the work, the fire must always by little
and little be increased and augmented unto the end.

CHAP. V. Of the quality of the Vessel and Furnace.
THe means and manner of working, we have already determined: nowewee are to
speak of the Vessel and Furnace, in what sort, and of what things they must
be made. Whereas nature by a natural fire decocteth the metals in the Mines,
she denies the like decoction to be made without a vessel fit for it. And
if we purpose to immitate nature in concocting, wherefore do we reject her
vessel? Let us first of all therefore, see in what place the generation of
metals is made. It does evidently appear in the places of Minerals, that in
the bottom of the mountain there is heat continually alike, the nature
whereof is always to ascend, and in the ascension it always dries up, and
coagulateth the thicker or grosser water hidden in the belly, or veins of the
earth, or mountain, into Argent-uiue. And if the mineral fatnes of the same
place arising out of the earth, be gathered warm together in the veins of the
earth, it runs through the mountain, and becomes Sulphur. And as a man may
see in the foresaid veins of that place, that Sulphur engendered of the
fatness of the earth (as is before touched) meets with the Argent-uiue (as
it is also written) in the veins of the earth, and begets the thickness of
the mineral water. There, through the continual equal heat in the mountain,
in long process of time diverse metals are engendered, according to the
diversity of the place. And in these Mineral places, you shall find a
continual heat. For this cause we are of right to note, that the external
mineral mountain is every where shut up within it self, and stony: for if
the heat might issue out, there should never be engendered any metal. If
therefore we intend to immitate nature, we must needs have such a furnace
like unto the Mountains, not in greatness, but in continual heat, so that
the fire put in, when it ascends, may find no vent: but that the heat may
beat upon the vessel being close shut, containing in it the matter of the
stone: which vessel must be round, with a small neck, made of glass or some
earth, representing the nature or close knitting together of glass: the mouth
whereof must be signed or sealed with a covering of the same matter, or with
lute. And as in the mines, yt heat does not immediately touch the matter of
Sulphur and Argent-uiue, because the earth of the mountain co^menth every where
between: So this fire must not immediately touch the vessel, containing the
matter of the foresaid things in it, but it must be put into another vessel,
shut close in the like manner, that so the temperate heat may touch the matter
above and beneath, and where ere it be, more aptly and fitly: whereupon
Aristotle says, in the light of lights, that Mercury is to be co^cocted in a
threefold vessel, and that the vessel must be of most hard Glass, or (which
is better) of earth possessing the nature of Glass.

CHAP. VI. Of the accident all and essential colors appearing in the work.
THe matter of the stone thus ended, thou shall know the certain manner of
working, by what manner and regiment, the stone is often changed in dccoction
into diverse colors. Whereupon one says, So many colors, so many names.
According to the diverse colors appearing in the work, the names likewise
were varied by the Philosophers: whereon, in the first operation of our stone,
it is called putrefaction, and our stone is made black: whereof one says,
When thou find it black, know that in that blackness whiteness is hidden,
and thou must extract the same from his most subtle blacknes. But after
putrefaction it waxes red, not with a true redness, of which one says: It is
often red, and often of a citrine color, it often melts, and is often
coagulated, before true whiteness. And it dissolueth it self, it coagulateth
it self, it putrifieth it self, it colors it self, it mortifieth it self,
it quickneth it self, it makes it self black, it makes it self white, it
makes it self red. It is also green: whereon another says, Concoct it, till
it appear green unto thee, and that is the soul. And another, Know, that in
that green his soul bears dominion. There appears also before whiteness
the peacocks color, whereon one says thus. Know thou that all the colors in
the world, or yt may be imagined, appear before whiteness, and afterward true
whiteness follows. Whereof one says: When it has bin decocted pure and
clean, that it shines like the eyes of fishes, then are we to expect his
utility, and by that time the stone is congealed round. And another says:
When thou shall find whiteness a top in the glass, be assured that in that
whiteness, redness is hidden: and this thou must extract: but concoct it
while it become all red: for between true whiteness and true redness, there
is a certain ash color: of which it is said. After whiteness, thou can
not err, for increasing the fire, thou shall come to an ash color: of which
another says: Do not set light by the ashes, for God shall give it thee
molten: and then at the last the King is invested with a red crown by the will
of God.

CHAP. VII. How to make proiection af the medicine upon any imperfect book.
I Have largely accomplished my promise of that great masterie, for making the
most excellent Elixir, red and white. For conclusion, we are to treat of the
manner of proiection, which is the accomplishment of the work, the desired and
expected joy. The red Elixir does turn into a citrine color infinitely, and
changes all metals into pure gold. And the white Elixir does insinitely
whiten, and brings every metal to perfect whiteness. But we know that one
metal is farther off from perfection then another, and one more near then
another. And although every metal may by Elixir be reduced to perfection,
nevertheless the nearest are more easily, speedily, and perfectly reduced,
then those which are far distant. And when we meet with a metal that is
near to perfection, we are there by excused from many that are far off. And
as for the metals which of them be near, and which far off, which of them I
say be nearest to perfection, if thou be wise and discreet, thou shall find to
be plainly and truly set out in my Chapters. And without doubt, he that is
so quick sighted in this my Mirror, that by his own industry he can find out
the true matter, he does full well know upon what body the medicine is to
be proiected to bring it to perfection. For the forerunners of this Art, who
have found it out by their philosophy, do point out with their finger the
direct and plain way, when they say: Nature, contains nature: Nature
overcomes nature: and Nature meeting with her nature, exceedingly rejoices,
and is changed into other natures. And in another place, Every like reioiceth
in his like: for likeness is said to be the cause of friendship, whereof many
Philosophers have left a notable secret, Know thou that the soul does quickly
enter into his body, which may by no means be joined to another body. And in
another place. The soul does quickly enter into his own body, which if thou
go about to join with another body, thou shall loose thy labor: for the
neerenesse it self is more clear. And because corporeal things in this
regiment are made incorporeall, and contrariwise things incorporeal corporeal,
and in the shutting up of the work, the whole body is made a spiritual fixed
thing: and because also that spiritual Elixir evidently, whether white or red,
is so greatly prepared and decocted beyond his nature, it is no marnaile that
it cannot be mixed with a body, on which it is proiected, being only melted.
It is also a hard matter to project it on a thousand thousand and more, and
incontinently to penetrate and transmute them. I will therefore now deliver
unto you a great and hidden secret. One part is to be mixed with a thousand of
the next body, and let all this be surely put into a fit vessel, and set it
in a surnace of fixation, first with a lent fire, and afterward increasing
the fire for three days, till they be inseperably joined together, and this is
a work of three days: then again and finally, every part hereof by it
self, must be proiected upon another thousand parts of any near body: and
this is a work of one day, or one hour, or a moment, for which our wonderful
God is eternally to be praised.

Here ends the Mirror of Alchimy, composed by the most learned Philosopher,
Roger Bacon.
The Smaragdine Table of Hermes, Trismegistus of Alchimy.
THe words of the secrets of Hermes, which were written in a Smaragdine Table,
and found between his hands in an obscure vaute, wherein his body lay buried.
It is true without leasing, certain and most true. That which is beneath is
like that which is above: and that which is above, is like that which is
beneath, to work the miracles of one thing. And as all things have proceeded
from one, by the meditation of one, so all things have sprung from this
onething by adaptation. His father is the sun, his mother is the moon, the
wind bore it in her belly. The earth is his nurse. The father ofallthe telesme
of this world is here. His force and power is perfect, if it be turned into
earth. Thou shall separate the earth from the fire, the thin from the thick,
and that gently with great discretion. It ascends from the Earth into Heaven:
and and again it descends into the earth, and receives the power of the
superiors and inferiors: so shall thou have the glory of the whole world.
All obscurity therefore shall fly away from thee. This is the mighty power
of all power, for it shall overcome every subtle thing, and pearce through
every solid thing. So was the world created. Here shall be maruailous
adatpations, whereof this is the mean. Therefore am I called Hermes
Trismegistus, or the thrice great Interpreter: having three parts of the
Philosophy of the whole world. That which I have spoken of the operation of the
Sun, is finished.

Here ends the Table of Hermes.
A brief Commentary of Hortulanus the Philosopher, upon the Smaragdine Table
of Hermes of Alchimy.
The prayer of Hortulanus.
Laud, honor, power and glory, be given to thee, O Almighty Lord God, with
thy beloved son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and the holy Ghost, the comforter. O
holy Trinity, that art the only one God, perfect man, I give thee thanks
that having the knowledge of the transitory things of this world (least I
should be provoked with the pleasures thereof) of thy abundant mercy thou
have taken me from it. But for so much as I have known many deceived in this
art, that have not gone the right way, let it please thee, O Lord my God, that
by the knowledge which thou have given me, I may bring my dear friends from
error, that when they shall perceive the truth, they may praise thy holy and
glorious name, which is blessed for ever.

Amen.
The Preface.
I Hortulanus, so called for the Gardens bordering upon the sea coast, wrapped
in a Iacobin skin, unworthy to be called a Disciple of Philosophy, moved
with the love of my well-beloved, do intend to make a true declaration of the
words of Hermes, the Father of Philosophers, whose words, though that they be
dark and obscure, yet have I truly expounded the whole operation and practice
of the work: for the obscurity of the Philosophers in their speeches, does
nothing prevail, where the doctrine of the holy spirit works.

CHAP. I. That the Art of Alchimy is true and certain.
THe Philosopher says. It is true, to wit, that the Art of Alchimie is given
unto us. Without leasing. This he says in detestation of them that affirm
this Art to be lying, that is, false. It is certain, that is proved. For
whatsoever is proved, is most certain, And most true. For most true gold is
engendered by Art: and he says most true, in the superlatiue degree, because
the gold engendered by this Art, excels all natural gold in all
proprieties, both medicinal and others.

CHAP. II. That the Stone must be divided into two parts.
Consequently, he touches the operation of the stone, saying: That which is
beneath, is as that which is above. And this he says, because the stone is
divided into two principal parts by Art: Into the superior part, that
ascends up, and into the inferior part, which remains beneath fix and
clear: and yet these two parts agree in virtue: and therefore he says, That
which is above, is like that which is beneath. And this division is necessary,
To perpetrate the miracles of one thing, to wit, of the Stone: because the
inferior part is the Earth, which is called the Nurse, and Ferment: and the
superior part is the Soul, which quickens the whole Stone, and raises it
up. Wherefore separation made, and conjunction celebrated, many miracles are
effected in the secret work of nature.

CHAP. III. That the Stone has in it the four Elements.
ANd as all things have proceeded from one, by the meditation of one. Here
gives he an example, saying: as all things came from one, to wit, a confused
Globe, or mass, by meditation, that is the cogitation and creation of one,
that is the omnipotent God: So all things have sprung, that is, come out from
this one thing that is, one confused lump, by A daptation, that is by the sole
commandment of God, and miracle. So our Stone is borne, and come out of one
confused mass, containing in it the four Elements, which is created of God,
and by his sole miracle our stone is borne.

CHAP. IIII. That the Stone has Father and Mother, to wit, the Sunue and Moon.
ANd as we see, that one living creature begets more living creatures like
unto it self: so artificially gold engendereth gold, by virtue of
multiplication of the foresaid stone. It follows therefore, the Sun is his
father, that is, Philosophers Gold. And as in every natural generation, there
must be a fit and convenient receptacle, with a certain consonancie of
similitude to the father: so likewise in this artificial generation, it is
requisite that the Sun have a fit and consonaunt receptacle for his seed
and tincture: and this is Philosophers silver. And therefore it follows, the
Moon is his mother.

CHAP. V. That the conjunction of the parts of the stone is called Conception.
THe which two, when they have mutuallic entertained each other in the
conjunction of the Stone, the Stone conceiueth in the belly of the wind: and
this is it which afterward he says: The wind carried it in his belly. It
is plain, that the wind is the air, and the air is the life, and the life
is the Soul. And I have already spoken of the soul, that it quickneth the
whole stone. And so it behooves, that the wind should carry and recarry the
whole stone, and bring forth the masterie: and then it follows, that it must
receive nourishment of his nurce, that is the earth: and therefore the
Philosopher says, The earth is his Nurse: beeause that as the infant without
receiving food from his nurse, should never come to years: so likewise our stone
without the firmentation of his earth, should never be brought to effect: which
said firmament, is called nourishment. For so it is begotten of one Father,
with the conjunction of the Mother. Things, that is, sons like to the Father,
if they want long decoction, shall be like to the Mother in whiteness, and
retain the Fathers weight.

CHAP. VI. That the Stone is perfect, if the Soul be sixth in the body.
IT follows afterward: The father of all the Telesme of the whole world is
here: that is, in the work of the stone is a final way. And note, that the
Philosopher calls the work, the Father of all the Telesme: that is, of all
secret, or of all treasure Of the whole world: that is, of every stone found
in the world, is here. As if he should say, Behold I show it thee. Afterward
the Philosopher says, VVilt thou that I teach thee to know when the virtue of
the Stone is perfect and complete? to wit, when it is converted into his
earth: and therefore he says, His power is entire, that is, complete and
perfect, if it be turned into earth: that is, if the Soul of the stone
(whereof we have made mention before: which Soul may be called the wind or
air, wherein consists the whole life and virtue of the stone) be converted
into the earth, to wit of the stone, and fixed: so that the whole substance of
the Stone be so with his nurse, to wit earth, that the whole Stone be turned
into ferment. As in making of bread a little leaven nourishes and sermenteth a
great deal of Paste: so will the Philosopher that our stone be so fermented,
that it may be ferment to the multiplication of the stone.

CHAP. VII. Of the mundification and cleansing of the stone.
COnsequently, he teaches how the Stone ought to be multiplied: but first ne
sets down the mundification of the stone, and the separation of the parts:
saying, Thou shall separate the earth from the fire, the thin from the
thick, and that gently with great discretion. Gently, that is by little, and
little, not violently, but wisely, to wit, in Philosophical doung. Thou
shall separate, that is, dissolve: for dissolution is the separation of parts.
The earth from the fire, the thin from the thick: that is, the lees and
dregs, from the fire, the air, the water, and the whole substance of the
Stone, so that the Stone may remain most pure without all filth.

CHAP. VIII. That the vnfixed part of the Stone should exceed the fixed, and
list it up.
THe Stone thus prepared, is made fit for multiplication. And now he sets
down his multiplication ct easy liquefaction, with a virtue to pierce as well
into hard bodies, as soft, saying: It ascends from the earth into heaven, and
again it descends into the earth. Here we must diligently note, that although
our stone be divided in the first operation into four parts, which are the
four Elements: notwithstanding, as we have already said, there are two
principal parts of it. One which ascends upward, and is called vnfixed, and
an other which remains below fixed, which is called earth, or firmament,
which nourishes and firmenteth the whole stone, as we have already said. But
of the vnfixed part we must have a great quantity, and give it to the stone
(which is made most clean without all filth) so often by masterie that the
whole stone be carried upward, sublimating and subtiliating. And this is it
which the Philosopher says: It ascends from the earth into the beauen.

CHAP. IX. How the volatile Stone may again be fixed.
AFter all these things, this stone thus exalted, must be incerated with the
Oil that was extracted from it in the first operation, being called the water
of the stone: and so often boil it by sublimation, till by virtue of the
firmentation of the earth exalted with it, the whole stone do again descend
from heaven into the earth, and remain fixed and flowing. And this is it which
the Philosopher says: It descends again into the earth, and so receives
the virtue of the superiors by sublimation, and of the inferiors, by
descention: that is, that which is corporal, is made spiritual by
sublimation, and that which is spiritual, is made corporal by descension.

CHAP X. Of the fruit of the Art, and efficacy of the Stone.
SO shall thou have the glory of the whole world. That is, this stone thus
compounded, thou shall possess the glory of this world. Therefore all
obscurity shall fly from thee: that is, all want and sickness, because the
stone thus made, cures every disease. Here is the mighty power of all power.
For there is no comparison of other powers of this world, to the power of the
stone. For it shall overcome every subtle thing, and shall pearce through every
solid thing. It shall overcome, that is, by ouercomming, it shall convert
quick Mercury, that is subtle, congealing it: and it shall pearce through
other hard, solid, and compact bodies.

CHAP. XI. That this work imitateth the Creation of the world.
HE gives us also an example of the composition of his Stone, saying, So was
the world created. That is, like as the world was created, so is our stone
composed. For in the beginning, the whole world and all that is therein, was a
confused Mass or Chaos (as is above said) but afterward by the workmanship
of the sovereign Creator, this mass was divided into the sour elements,
wonderfully separated and rectified, through which separation, diverse things
were created: so likewise may diverse things be made by ordering our work,
through the separation of the diverse elements from diverse bodies. Here shall be
wonderful adaptations that is, Is thou shall separate the elements, there
shall be admirable compositions, fit for our work in the composition of our
Stone, by the elements rectified: V Vherof, to wit, of which wonderful things
fit for this: the means, to wir, to proceed by, ishere.

CHAP. XII. An enigmaticall insinuation what the matter of the Stone should be.
THerefore am I called Hermes Trismegistus. Now that he has declared the
composition of the Stone, he teaches us after a secret manner, whereof the Stone
is made: first naming himself, to the end that his scholars (who should
hereafter attain to this science) might have his name in continual
remembrance: and then he toncheth the matter saying: Having three parts of the
Philosophy of the whole world: because that whatsoever is in the world,
having matter and form, is compounded of the four Elements: hence is it, that
there are so infinite parts of the world, all which he divides into three
principal parts, Mineral, Vegetable, and Animal: of which jointly, or
severally, he had the true knowledge in the work of the Sun: for which
cause he faith, Having three parts of the Philosophic of the whole world,
which parts are contained in one Stone, to wit, Philosophers Mercury.

CHAP. XIII. Why the Stone is said to be perfect.
FOr this cause is the Stone said to be perfect, because it has in it the
nature of Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals: for the stone is three, and one
having four natures, to wit, the sour elements, and three colors, black,
white, and red. It is also called a grain of corn, which if it die not,
remains without fruit: but if it do die (as is above said) when it is joined
in conjunction, it brings forth much fruit, the before named operations being
accomplished. Thus courteous reader, if thou know the operation of the Stone, I
have told thee the truth: but if thou art ignorant thereof, I have said
nothing. That which I have spoken of the operation of the Sun is finished:
that is, that which has been spoken of the operation of the stone, of the
three colors, and four natures, existing and being in one only thing,
namely in the Philosophers Mercury, is fulfilled.

Thus ends the Commentary of Hortulanus, upon the Smaragdine table of
Hermes, the father of Philosophers.
The Book of the Secrets of Alchimie, composed by Galid the son of Iazich,
translated out of Hebrew into Arabic, and out of Arabic into Latin, and out
of Latin into English.
The Preface of the difficulty of the Art.
Thanks be given to God the Creator of all things, who has conducted us,
beautified us, instructed us, and given us knowledge and understanding: Except
the Lord should keep and guide us, we should be like vagabonds, without
guide or teacher: yea, we should know nothing in the world, unless he taught
us: that is, the beginning, and knowledge it self of all things, by his power
and goodness over his people. He directs and instructs whom he will, and with
mercy reduces into the way of justice: for he has sent his messengers into
the dark places, and made plain the ways, and with his mercy replenished
such as love him. Know brother, that this our mastery and honorable office of
the secret Stone, is a secret of the secrets of God, which he has concealed
from his people, neither would he reveal it to any, save to those, who like
sons have faithfully deserved it, knowing both his goodness and greatness:
for to him that desires a secret of God, this secret masterie is more
necessary then any other. And those wise men who have attained to the knowledge
hereof, have concealed part thereof, and part thereof they have revealed: for so
have I found my wise predecessors agreeing in this point in their worthy
books, whereby thou shall know that my disciple Musa, (more honorable in my
eyes then all other) has diligently studied their books, and labored much in
the work of the mastery, wherein he has bin greatly troubled, and much
perplexed, not knowing the natures of things belonging to this work: the
explanation whereof, and direction wherein, he has humbly begged at my hands:
yet I would afford him no answer therein, nor determine it, but commanded him
to read over the Philosophers books, and therein to seek yt which he craved
of me, and he going his way, read above a hundredth books, as he found them
even the true and secret books of noble Philosophers: but in the^ he could not
find that which he defired: so he remained astonished, and almost distracted,
though by the space of a year he continually sought it. If therefore my
scholar Musa (that has deserved to be accounted among ye Philosophers) have
been so doubtful in the composition hereof, and that this has happened unto
him: what shall the ignorant and unlearned do, that understands not the
nature of things, nor is acquainted with their complections? But when I beheld
this in my choysest and dearest disciple, moved with pity and compassion
toward him, or rather by the will and appointment of God, I made this book at
the hour of my death, wherein I have pretermitted many things, that my
predecessors have made mention of in their books: and again, I have touched
some things which they concealed, and would by no means open and discover:
yea, I have expounded and laid open certain things, that they have hidden
under dark and figurative speeches. And this my book I have called the Secrets
of Alchimy: in which I have spoken of whatsoever is necessary, to him that is
studious of this Art or masterie, in a language befitting his sense and
understanding. And I have named four masteries far greater and better, the^
other Philosophers have done: of which number is Elixir, one Mineral, the other
Animal: but the other two are minerals, and not the one Elixir: whose office
is to wash that, which they call the bodies: and another is to make gold of
Azotviue, whose composition or generation, is according to the generationor
order of generation in the mines, being in the heart and bowels of the earth.
And these four masteries or works, the Philosophers have declared in their
books of the composition of this mastery: but they want much: neither would
they show the operation of it in their books: and though by chance he found
it out, yet could he not understand it: so that he found out nothing that was
more troublesome to him. I will therefore in this my book declare it, together
with the manner how to make it: but let him that will read it, first learn
Geometry, and her measures, that so he may rightly frame his furnaces, not
passing a mean, either by excess or defect: and withal, he must know the
quantity of his fire, and the form of the vessel fit for his work.
Moreover, let him consider what is the groundwork and beginning of the
mastery, being to it, as the matrice is to living creatures, which are
fashioned in the womb, and therein receive their creation and nourishment: for
if the thing of this mastery find not that which is convenient for it, the
work is marred, and the workmen shall not find that which they look for,
neither shall the thing it self be brought to the effect of generation: for
where one cannot meet with the cause of generation, or the root, and heat it
self, it will fall out, that the labor shall be lost, and the work naught
worth. The like mischief will happen in respect of weight, which if it be not
aright in the compound, the parts of the same nature, passing their bounds by
augmentation, or diminution, the property of the compound is destroyed, and
the effect thereof void and without fruit, whereof I will give you an example.
Do not you see that in Soap (with which clothes are washed clean and made
white) there is this property if it be rightly made, by reason of equality,
and one proportion, which participate in length and breadth? whereupon through
this participation they agree, and then it appears, because it was truly
made, and so the virtue which before lay hid, is now made known, which they
call a property, being the virtue of washing engendered in the compound: but when
the gravity of the compound passes his bounds, either by addition or
diminution, ye virtue it self breaks the limits of equality, and becomes
contrary, according to ye diste^pera^ce of the co^pound. And this thou must
understand to happen in the composition of our mastery.

CHAP I. Of the four Masteries, or principal works of the Art, to wit,
solution, congelation, albification, and rubification.
NOw begin I to speak of the great work which they call Alchimy, wherein I
will confirm my words, without concealing ought, or keeping back any thing,
save that which is not convenient to be uttered or named. We say then that the
great work contains in it four masteries (as the Philosophers before us have
affirmed) that is to say, to dissolve, to congeale, to make white and red. And
these four quantities are partakers, whereof two of them are partakers
between themselves, and so likewise are the other two. And either of these
double qua^tities has another quantity partaker, which is a greater quantity
partaker after these two. I understand by these quantities, the quantity of
the natures, and weight of the medicines which are orderly dissolved and
congealed, wherein neither addition nor diminution have any place. But these
two, to wit, solution and congelation, shall be in one operation, and shall make
but one work, and that before composition: but after composition, their works
shall be diverse. And this solution and congelation which we have spoken of,
are the solution of the body, and the congelation of the Spirit, and they are
two, yet have but one operation. For the Spirits are not congealed, except the
bodies beedissolued, is likewise the bodies is not dissolved, unless the
spirit be co^gealed: and when the soul and the body are joined together,
either of them works in his companion made like unto him: as for example,
when water is put to earth, it strives to dissolve the earth by the moisture,
virtue and property which it has, making it more subtle then it was before,
and bringing it to be like it self: for the water was more subtle then the
earth: and thus does the soul work in the body, and after the same manner is
the water thickened with the earth, and becomes like unto the earth in
thickness, for the earth is more thick then the water. And thou must know
that between the solution of the body, and congelation of the spirit, there
is no distance of time or diverse work, as though one should be without the
other, as there is no difference of time in the conjunction of the earth, and
water, that one might be known and discerned from the other in their
operations: but they have both one instant, and one fact, and one and the same
work contains them both at once before composition: I say before
composition, least he that shall read this book, and hear the names of
resolution and congelation, should suppose it to be the composition which the
Philosophers entreat of, for so he should fowly err in his work and
judgment: because composition in this work or masterie, is a conjunction or
marriage of the congealed spirit, with the dissolved body, and this
conjunction or passion is upon the fire. For heat is his nourishment, and the
soul forsakes not the body, neither is it otherwise knit unto it, then by
the alteration of both from their own virtue and properties, and after the
conversion of their natures: and this is the solution and congelation, which
the Philosophers first spoke of: which nevertheless they have hidden in their
subtle discourses with dark and obscure words, that so they might alienate
and estrange the mind of the reader from the true understanding thereof: where
of thou may take this for an example. Annoint the leaf with poison, and ye
shall approve there by the beginning of the work and mastery of the same. And
again, labor the strong bodies with one solution, til either of them be
turned to his subtilitie. So likewise in these following, except ye convert the
bodies into such subtilitie that they may be impalbable, ye shall not find
that ye look for: and if you have not ground them, return back to work till
they be ground, and made subtle: which if you do, you shall have your wish.
And many other such sayings have they of the same matter. The which none that
ever proved this Art could understand, til he has had a plain demonstration
thereof, the former doubt being removed. And in like manner have they spoken of
that composition, which is after solution and congelation. And afterward they
have said, that Composition is not perfect without marriage, and putrefaction:
yet again they teach solution, congelation, division, marriage, putrefaction,
and composition, because composition is the beginning, and very life of the
thing. For unless there were composition, the thing should never be brought to
pass. Division is a separation of the parts of the co^pound, and so separation
has bin his conjunction. I tell you again, that the spirit will not dwell with
the body, nor be in it, nor by any means abide with it until the body be made
subtle and thin as the spirit is. But when it is attenuate and subtle, and
has cast off his thicknes, and put on thinnes, has forsaken his grosnesse and
corpority, and is become spiritual, then shall he be mingled with the subtle
spirits, and imbibed in them, so that both shall become one and the same, and
they shall not be severed, like as water put to water cannot be divided.
Suppose that of two like quantities, that are in solution and congelation, the
larger is the soul, the lesser is the body: add afterward to the quantity
which is the soul, that quantity which is in the body, and it shall
participate with the first quantity in virtue only: then work them as we have
wrought them, and so thou shall obtain thy desire, and Euclide his line shall
be verified unto thee. Afterward take his quantity, and know his weight, and
give him as much moisture as he will drink, the weight of which moisture we
have not here determined. Then again work them with an operation unlike the
former, first imbibing and subliming it, and this operation is that which they
call Albification, and they name it Yarit, that is, Silver, and and white
Lead. And when thou have made this compounde white, add to him so much of the
Spirit, as makes half of the whole, and set it to working, till it wax
read, and then it shall be of the color Alsulfir, which is very red, and the
Philosophers have likened it to gold, the effect hereof, leads thee to that
which Aristotle said to his Disciple Arda: we call the claye when it is
white, Yarit, that is Silver: and when it is red, we name it Temeynch, that is
Gold. Whiteness is that which tincteth Copper, and makes it Yarit, and that
is redness, which tincteth Yarit, that is silver, and makes it Temeynch, that
is Gold. He therefore that is able to dissolve these bodies, to subtiliate
the^, to make them white and red, and (as I have said) to compound them by
imbibing, and convert them to the same, shall without all doubt attain the
masterie, and perform the work whereof I have spoken unto thee.

CHAP. II. Of the things and instruments necessary and fit for this work.
IT behooves thee to know the vessels in this masterie, to wit Aludela, which
the Philosophers have called Churchyards, or Cribbles: because in them the
parts are divided, and cleansed, and in them is the matter of the masterie made
complete, perfect, and depured. And every one of these must have a Furnace fit
for it, and let either of them have a similitude and figure agreeable to the
work. Mezleme, and many other Philosophers, have named all these things in
their books, teaching the manner and form there of. And thou must know, that
herein the Philosophers agree together in their wrytings, concealing it by
signs, and making many books thereof, and instruments which are necessary in
these four foresaid things. As for the instruments, they are two in number.
One is a Cucurbit, with his Alembick: the other is Aludel, that is well made.
There are also four things necessary to these: that is to say, Bodies,
Souls, Spirits, and Waters: of these four does the masterie, and mineral
work consist. These are made plain in the Philosophers Books, I have
therefore omitted them in mine, and only touched those things, which they
passed over with silence: which he shall easily discern, that is but of
indifferent judgment. And this book I have not made for the ignorant and
unlearned, but for the wise and prudent.

CHAP. III. Of the nature of things appertaining to this work.
KNow thou, that the Philosophers have given them diverse names: for some have
called them Mines, some Animal, some Herball, and some by the name of Natures,
that is Natural: some other have called them by certain other names at their
pleasures, as seemed good unto them. Thou must also know, that their Medicines
are near to Natures, according as the Philosophers have said in their books,
that Nature comes nigh to nature, and Nature is like to nature, and Nature is
joined to nature, and Nature is drowned in nature, and Nature makes nature
white, and Nature does make nature red, and generation is retained with
generation, and generation conquereth with generation.

CHAP. IIII. Of Decoction, and the effect thereof.
KNow thou that the Philosophers have named Decoction in their Books, saying,
that they make Decoction in things: and that is it that engenders them, and
changes them from their substances and colors, into other substa^ces and
colors. If thou transgress not, I tell thee in this book, thou shall proceed
rightly. Consider brother, the seed of the earth, whereon men live, how the
heat of the Sun works in it, till it be ripe, when men and other creatures
seed upon it, and that afterward Nature works on it by her heat within
man, converting it into his flesh and blood. For like hereto is our operation
of the masterie: the seed whereof (as the learned have said) is such, that his
perfection and proceeding consists in the fire, which is the cause of his
life and death, without somewhat coming between, and his spirituality, which
are not mingled but with the fire. Thus have I told thee the truth, as I have
seen and done it.

CHAP. V. Of Subtiliation, Solution, Coagulation, and commistion of the Stone,
and of their cause and end.
KNow, that except thou subtiliate the body till all become water, it will not
rust and putrify, and then it cannot congeale the fitting souls, when the
fire touches them: for the fire is that which congealeth them by the aid
thereof unto them. And in like manner have the Philosophers commanded to dissolve
the bodies, to the end ye heat might enter into their bowels. Again we return
to dissolve those bodies, and congeale them after their solution, with that
thing which comes nigh to it, until we join all those things which have
been mingled together, by an apt and fit commixtion, which is a temperate
quantity. Whereupon we join fire and water, earth and air together: when the
thick has bin mingled with the thin, and the thinner with the thick, the one
abides with the other, and their natures are changed and made like, whereas
before they were simple, because that part which is generatiue, bestows his
virtue upon the subtle, and that is the air: for it cleaves unto his like,
and is a part of the generation from whence it receives power to move and
ascend upward. Cold has power over the thick, because it has lost his heat,
and the water is gone out of it, and the thing appeared upon it. And the
moisture departed by ascending, and the subtle part of ye air, and mingled it
selse with it for it is like unto it, and of the same nature. And when the
thick body has lost his heat and moisture, and that cold and dryness has
power over him, and that their parts have mingled themselves, and be divided,
and that there is no moisture to join the parts divided, the parts withdraw
themselves. And afterward the part which is contrary to cold, by reason that
it has continued, and sent his heat and decoction, to the parts of ye earth,
having power ouerthem, and exercising such dominion over the cold, that where
before it was in the thick body, it now lurketh and lies hid, his part of
generation is changed, becoming subtle and hot, and striving to dry up by his
heat. But afterward the subtle part (that causes natures to ascend) when it
has lost his accidental heat, and waxes cold, then the natures are changed,
and become thick, and descend to the center, where ye earthly natures are
joined together, which were subtiliate and converted in their generation, and
imbibed in them: and so the moisture coupleth together the parts divided: but
the earth endeavors to dry up that moisture, co^passing it about, and
hindering it from going out: by means whereof, that which before lay hid, does
now appear: neither can the moisture be separated, but is retained by the
dryness. And in like manner we see, that whosoever is in the world, is
retained by or with his contrary, as heat with cold, and dryness with
moisture. Thus when each of them has besieged his Companion, the thin is
mingled with the thick, and those things are made one substance: to wit, their
soul hot and moist, and their body cold and dry: then it labors to
dissolve and subtiliate by his heat and moisture, which is his soul, and
strives to enclose and retain with his body that is cold and dry. And in
this manner, is his office changed and altered from one thing to another. Thus
have I told thee the truth, which I have both seen and done, giving thee in
charge to convert natures from their subtilitie and substances, with heat and
moisture, into their substances and colors. Now if thou would proceed aright
in this mastery, to obtain thy desire, pass not the bounds that I have set
thee in this book.

CHAP. VI. The manner how to fix the Spirit.
Know also, that when the body is mingled with moisture, and that the heat
of the fire meets therewith, the moisture is converted on the body, and
dissolueth it, and then the spirit cannot issue forth, because it is imbibed
with the fire. The Spirits are fugitive, so long as the bodies are mingled with
them, and strive to resist the fire and his flame: and yet these parts can
hardly agree without a good operation and continual labor: for the nature of
the soul is to ascend upward, whereas the center of the soul is. And who is
he that is able to join two or diverse things together, where their centers
are diverse: unless it be after the conversion of their natures, and change of
the substance and thing, from his nature, which is difficult to find out?
Whosoever therefore can convert the soul into the body, the body into the
soul, and therewith mingle the subtle spirits, shall be able to tinct any
body.

CHAP. VII. Of the Decoction, Contrition, and washing of the stone.
THou art moreover to understand, that Decoction, contrition, cribatio^,
mundification, and ablution, with sweet waters is very necessary to this secret
and mastery: so that he who will bestow any pains herein, must cleanse it very
well, and wash the blackness from it, and darkness that appears in his
operation, and subtiliate the body as much as he can, and afterward
mingletherwith the souls dissolved, and spirits cleansed, so long as he think
good.

CHAP. VIII. Of the quantity of the Fire, and of the commodity and
discommoditie of it.
FVrthermore, thou must be acquainted with the quantity of the fire, for the
benefit and loss of this thing, proceeds from the benefit of the fire.
Whereupon Plato said in his book: The fire yields profit to that which is
perfect, but domoge and corruption to that which is corrupt: so that when his
quantity shall be meet and convenient, it shall prosper, but if it shall
exceed measure in things, it shall without measure corrupt both: to wit, the
perfect and corrupt: and for this cause it was requisite that the learned
should pour their medicines upon Elixir, to hinder and remove from them the
burning of the fire, and his heat. Hermes also said to his father. I am
afraid Father of the enemy in my house: to whom he made answer, Son take the
dog Corascene, and the bitch of Armenia, put them together, and they shall bring
a dog of the color of heaven, and dip him once in the sea water: for he shall
keep thy friend, and defend thee from thy enemy, and shall help thee
whersoeuer thou become, always abiding with thee, both in this world, and in
the world to come. Now Hermes meant by the dog and bitch, such things as
preserve bodies from the scorching he ate of the fire. And these things are
waters of Calces and Salts, the composition whereof, is to be found in the
Philosophers books, that have written of this mastery, among whom, some have
named them Sea-waters, and Birds milk, and such like.

CHAP IX. Of the Separation of the Elements of the Stone.
THou must afterward bother, take this precious Stone, which the Philosophers
have named, magnified, hidden and concealed, and put it in a Cucurbit with his
Alembick, and divide his natures: that is, the four elements, the Earth, the
Water, the Air, and the Fire. These are the body and soul, the spirit and
tincture. When thou have divided the water from the earth, and the air from
the fire, keep both of them by themselves, and take that which descends to
the bottom of the glass, being the lees, and wash it with a warm fire, til
his blackness be gone, and his thickness departed: then make him very white,
causing the superfluous moisture to fly away, for then he shall be changed
and become a white calx, wherein there is no cloudie darkness, nor
uncleanness, and contrariety. Afterward return back to the first natures,
which ascended from it, and purify the^ likewise from uncleanness, blackness,
and contrariety: and reiterate these works upon the^ so often, until they be
subtiliate, purified, and made thin: which when thou have done, thou shall
acknowledge that God has bin gracious unto thee. Know brother, that this work
is one stone, into which Gatib may not enter, that is to say, any strange
thing. The learned work with this, and from hence proceeds a medicine that
gives perfection. There must nothing be mingled herewith, either in part or
whole. This Stone is to be found at all times, in every place, and about every
man, the search whereof is not troublesome to him that seeks it, wheresoever
he be. This Stone is vile, black, and stinking: It costeth nothing: it must
be taken alone: it is somewhat heavy, and it is called the Original of the
world, because it rises up like things that bud sorth. This is his revelation
and appearance to him thut makes inquiry after it.

CHAP. X. Of the nature of the Stone, and his birth.
TAke it therefore and work it as the Philosopher has told you in his book,
when he named it after this manner. Take the Stone, no Stone, or that is not a
Stone, neither is of the nature of a Stone. It is a Stone whose mine is in the
top of the mountains: and here by mountains, the Philosopher understands
living creatures, whereupon he said. Son, go to the mountains of India, and
to his caves, and pull out thence precious stones which will melt in the water
when they are put into it. And this water is that which is taken from other
mountains and hollow places. They are stones Son, and they are not stones,
but we call them so for a Similitude which they have to stones. And thou must
know, that the roots of their mines are in the air, and their tops in the
earth, and it will easily be heard when they are plucked out of their places, for
there will be a great noise. Go with them my son, for they will quickly
vanish away.

CHAP. XI. Of the commistion of the Elements that were separated.
BEgin composition, which is the circuit of the whole work, for there shall
be no composition without marriage and putrefaction. The Marriage is to mingle
the thin with the thick, and Putrefaction, is to roast, grind, and water, so
long till all be mingled together and become one, so that there should be no
diversity in them, nor separation from water mingled with water. Then shall
the thick labor to retain the thin: then shall the soul strive with the
fire, and endeavor to bear it: then shall the Spirit labor to be drowned in
the bodies, and poured forth into them. And this must needs be, because the
body dissolved, when it is commixt with the Soul, it is likewise commixt with
every part thereof: and other things enter into other things, according to
their similitude and likeness, and are changed into one and the same thing.
And for this cause the soul must partake with the commodity, durablenesse,
and permanencie, which the body received in his commixtion. The like also must
befall the Spirit in this state or permanencie os the soul and boby: sor when
the Spirit shall be commixt with the soul by laborious operation, and all his
parts with all the parts of the other two, to wit, the soul and body, then
shall the Spirit and the other two, be converted into one indivisible thing,
according to their entire substance, whose natures have been preserved, and
their parts have agreed and come together: whereby it has come to pass, that
when this compounde has met with a body dissolved, and that heat has got
hold of it, and that the moisture which was in it appears, and is molten in
the dissolved body, and has passed into it, and mixed it self with that which
was of the nature of moisture, it is inflamed, and the fire defends it self
with it. Then when the fire would been flamed with it, it will not suffer the
fire to take hold of it, that is to say: to cleave unto it with the Spirit
mingled with his water. The fire will not abide by it until it be pure. And in
like manner does the water naturally fly from the fire, whereof when the fire
has taken hold, it does forth with by little and little euaporate. And thus
has the body been the means to retain the water, and the water to retain
the oil, that it should not burn nor consume away, and the oil to retain
tincture, and tincture the precise cause to make the color appear and show
forth the tincture, wherein there is neither light nor life. This then is the
true life and perfection of the work and masterie which thou soughtest for. Be
wise therefore and understand, and thou shall find what thou look for, if
it please God.

CHAP. XII. Of the solution of the Stone compounded.
THe Philosophers moreover have taken great pains in dissoluing, that the body
and soul might the better be incorporate, for all those things that are
together in contrition, assation, and rig ation, have a certain affinity and
alliance between themselves, so that the fire may spoil the weaker of nature,
till it utterly fade and vanish away, as also it again returns upon the
stronger parts, until the body remain without the Soul. But when they are
thus dissolved and congealed, they take the parts one with another, as well
great as small, and incorporate them well together, till they be converted and
changed into one and the same thing. And when this is done, the fire takes
from the Soul as much as from the body, neither more nor less, and this is
the ceuse of perfection. For this cause it is necessary (teaching the
composition of Elixir) to afford one chapter for expounding the solution of
simple bodies and souls, because bodies do not enter into souls, but do
rather withhold and hinder them from sublimatio^, fixation, retention,
commistion, and the like operations, except mundification go before. And thou
shall know, that solution is after one of these two ways: for either it
extracteth the inward parts of things unto their Superficies, and this is
solution (an example whereof thou have in Silver that seems cold and dry,
but being dissolved, and that his inwards appear, it is found hot and moist)
or else it is to purchase to a body an accidental moisture, which it had not
before, and to add hereunto his own humiditie, whereby his parts may be
dissolved, and this likewise is called solution.

CHAP. XIII, Of the coagulation of the Stone dissolved.
SOme among the learned have said, Congeale in a bath with a good congelation
as I have told thee, and this is Sulphur shining in darkness, a red Hiasinth,
a fiery and deadly poison, the Elixir that abides upon none, a victorious
Lion, a malefactor, a sharp sword, a precious Triacle, healing every
infirmity. And Geber the son of Hayen said, that all the operations of this
masterie are contained under fix things: to put to flight, to melt, to
incerate, to make as white as Marble, to dissolve and congeale. That putting to
flight, is to drive away and remove blackness, from the spirit and soul: the
melting is the liquefaction of the body: to incerate belongs properly to the
body, and is the subtiliation thereof: to whiten, is properly to melt speedily:
to congeale, is to congeale the body with the soul already prepared. Again,
flight appertains to the body and soul: to melt, whiten, incerate, and
dissolve, belong unto the body, and congelation to the soul. Be wise and
understand.

CHAP XIIII. That there is but one Stone, and of his nature.
BAuzan a Greek Philosopher, when it was demanded of him, whether a stone may
be made of a thing that buddeth, made answer, yea, to wit, the two first
stones, the stone Alkali, and our stone, which is the life and workmanship of
him that knows it: but he that is ignorant of it, and has not made it, and
knows not how it is engendered, supposing it to be no stone, or that
conceiueth not with himself whatsoever I have spoken of it, and yet will make
a trial of it, prepares himself for death, and casts away his money: for
if he cannot find out this precious stone, another shall not arise in his
place, neither shall natures triumph over him. His nature is great heat with
moderation. He that now knows it, has profited by reading this book, but he
that remains ignorant, has lost his labor. It has many properties and
virtues, for it cures bodies of their accidental diseases, and preserves
sound substances, in such sort, that their appears in them no perturbations
of contraries, nor breach of their bond and union. For this is the soap of
bodies, yea their spirit and soul, which when it is incorporate with them,
dissolueth them without any loss. This is the life of the dead, and their
resurrection, a medicine preserving bodies, and purging superfluities. He that
understands, let him understand, and he that is ignorant, let him be
ignorant still: for it is not to be bought with money, it is neither to be bought
nor sold. Conceive his virtue, value, and worth, and then begin to work:
whereof a learned man has said: God gives thee not this masterie for thy sole
audacity, fortitude and subtilitie, without all labor, but men labor, and God
gives them good success. Adore the^ God the creator, that has vouchsafed
thee so great favor in his blessed works.

CHAP. XV. The manner how to make the Stone white.
Now therefore when thou will enterpise this worthy work, thou shall take the
precious stone, and put it in a Cucurbite, covering it with an Alembicke, being
well closed with the lute of wisdom, and set it in vorie hot dung, then shall
thou distill it, putting a receiver under it, whereinto the water may distill,
and thus thou shall leave it, till all the water be distilled, and moisture
dried up, and that dryness prevail over it: then shall thou take it out dry,
reserving the water that is distilled, until thou have need of it: thou shall
take (I say) the dry body that remained in the bottom of the Cucurbite, and
grind it, and put it in a vessel, in greatness answerable to the quantity
of the medicine, and bury it in very hot horse-dung as thou can get, the
Vessel being well shut with the lute of Wisdom, and so let it rest. But
when thou perceyuest the dung to wax cold, thou shall get thee other that is
fresh, and very hot, and therein put thy Vessel. Thus shall thou do by the
space of forty days, renewing thy dung so oftenas occasion shall serve, and
the Medicine shall dissolve of it self, and become a thick white water: which
when thou beholdest to be so, thou shall weight it, and put there to so much of
the water which thou have kept, as will make the half of his weight, closing
thy Vessel with the lute of Wisdom, and put it again in hot horse-dung,
for that is hot and moist, and thou shall not omit (as I have said) to renew
the dung, when it begins to cool, till the term of forty days be
expired: for the Medicine shall be congealed in the like number of days, as
before it was dissolved in. Again, take it, and note the just weight of it, and
according to his quantity, take of the water which thou made before, grind
the body, and subtiliate it, and pour the water upon it, and set it again in
hot hors-dung, for a week and a half, that is to say, ten days, then take it
out, and thou shall see that the body has already drunk up the water.
Afterward grind it again, and put thereto the like quantity of that water,
as thou did before: bury it in dung, and leave it there for ten days more:
take it out again, and thou shall find that the body has already drunk up
the water. Then (as before) grind it, putting thereto of the foresaid water,
the foresaid quantity, and bury it in the foresaid dung, and let it rest there
ten days longer, and afterward draw it out, so shall thou do the fourth time
also: which being done, thou shall draw it forth, and grind it, and bury it
in dung till it be dissolved. Afterward, take it out, and reiterate it yet
once more, for then the birth is perfect, and his work ended. Now when this is
done, and that thou have brought this thing to this honorable estate, thou
shall take two hundred and fifty drams of Lead, or Steel, and melt it: which
being molten, thou shall cast thereon one dram of Cinna. barus: that is, of
this Medicine, which thou have brought to this honorable estate, and high
degree, and it shall retain the Steel or Lead, that it fly not from the
fire: it shall make it white, and purge it from his dross and blackness, and
convert it into a tincture perpetually abiding. Then take a dram of these two
hundred and fifty, and project it upon two hundred and fifty drammes of
Steel or Copper, and it shall convert it into Silver, better then that of the
Mine. This is the greatest and last work that it can effect, if God will.

CHAP. XVI. The conversion of the foresaid Stone into red.
ANd if thou desire to convert this masterie into Gold, take of this
medicine (which as I said, thou have brought to this honorable estate and
excellency) the weight of one dram (and this after the manner of thy former
example) and put it in a vessel, and bury it in hors-dung for forty days,
and it shall be dissolved: then thou shall give it water of the dissolved body
to drink, first as much as amounts to half his weight, afterward until it
be congealed, thou shall bury it in most hot dung, as is above said. Then thou
shall orderly proceed in this Chapter of Gold, as thou have done in the former
Chapter of Silver: and it shall be Gold, and make Gold God willing. My
Sonnekeepe this most secret Book, and commit it not unto the hands of
ignorant men, being a secret of the secrets of God: For by this means thou
shall attain thy desire. Amen.

Here ends the secrets Alchimy, written in Hebrew by Calid, the son of
Iarich.
An excellent discourse of the admirable force and efficacy of Art and Nature,
written by the famous Friar Roger Bacon, Sometime fellow of Merton College,
and afterward of Brasen-nose in Oxford.
SOme there are that ask whether of these twain be of greatest force, and
efficacy, Nature, or Art, whereto I make answer, and say, that although
Nature be mighty and maruailous, yet Art using Nature for an instrument, is
more powerful then natural virtue, as it is to be seen in many things. But
whatsoever is done without the operation of Nature or Art, is either no humane
work, or if it be, it is fraudulently and colourablie performed: for there
are some, that by a nimble motion and show of members, or through the
diuerfitie of voices, and subtillitie of instruments, or in the dark, and by
consent do propose unto men diverse things, to be wondered at, that have
indeed no truth at all. The world is every where full of such fellows. For
Iuglers cogge many things through the swiftness of their hands: and others
with variety of voices, by certain devices that they have in their bellies,
throats or mouths, will frame men's voices, far of, or near, as it pleases
the^, as if a man spoke at the same instant: yea they will counterfeite the
soundes of bruit beasts. But the causes hidden in the grass, or buried in the
sides of the earth, prove it to be done by a humane force, and not by a
spirit, as they would make men believe. In like manner, whereas they affirm
things without life to move very swiftly in the twilight of the evening or
morning, it is altogether salse, and untrue. As for concent, it can faigne any
thing that men desire, according as they are disposed together. In all these
neither Physical reason, nor Art, nor natural power has any place: and for
this cause it is more abominable, since it contemns the laws of Phylosophie,
and contrary to all reason, inuocateth wicked Spirits, that by their help
they may have their desire. And herein are they deceived, that they think the
Spirits to be subject unto them, and that they are compelled at men's
pleasures, which is impossible: for humane force is far inferior to that of
the Spirits. And again, they fowly err, to dream that the cursed spirits
are called up, and figured, by virtue of those natural means which they
use. Moreover, they notoriously offend when they go about by inuocations,
deprecations, and sacrifices to appease them, and use them for the benefit and
commodity of man. For this were without all comparison more easy to be
attained at the hands of God, or of good spirits. But vet the malignaunt
spirits will not yield unto us in those things which are very hurtful and
dangerous, save so far forth as it pleases God (who rules and governs
mankind, for the sins of men to permit and suffer them. These ways and
means therefore are besides the rules and precepts of Wisdom (nay rather
they are contrary unto them) and the Philosophers did never make account of
them.

Now concerning Charms, Characters, and such like trumperies that are used in
these days, I adindge them to be all false and doubtful. For some are
without all show of reason, whereof the Philosophers have made mention in the
works of Nature and Art, to the end they might conceal secrets from the
unworthy, as if it were altogether unknown, that the Lodestone could attract
Iron: and one desirous to work this feate before the people, should make
Characters, and pronounce Charms, that by this means he might bring it to
pass, this work of his should be erroneous and deceitful. After this manner
there are many things hidden in the Philosophers books, wherein a wise man
must beware, that neglecting the Charms and Characters, he only attend and
make trial of the work of Nature and Art. And then he shall perceive things
living, and without life, to concur and agree in Nature, for the conformity
and likeness of their Natures, and not by virtue of the Charm or Character:
whereas the simple people suppose many things to be wrought by Magic, which
are nothing else but the secrets of Art and Nature. Yea, the Magitians
themselves do vainelie repose such confidence, in their Charms and
Characters, as though they should receyne power from them, that in the mean
time they sorsake the work of Art and Nature. And by this means both these
kind of men are depryued of the benefit of Wisdom, their own follye so
constrayning. Nevertheless, there are certain deprecations long since, sramed
and instituted by faithful men, or rather ordained by God himself, and his
Angels, that may retain their pristine and ancient virtue, as it is yet to be
seen in many Countries, where they make certain prayers over Iron red hot,
and over the water of ye river, and such like, there by to approve the
innocent, and condemn the guilty: and these things are thought to be brought
to pass by the authority of the prelates. For eue^ the priests them selves do
use Exorcismes, as we may read in the consecration of blessed water, and the
old law of the water of purification, whereby adultery and breach of wedlock
was fifted out. And there are many other such like things. But as for those
things that are contained in the Magicians books, we must utterly reject them,
though they be not altogether deuoyde of truth, because they be so stuffed
with fables, that the truth cannot be discerned from fall shoold. So that we
must give no credit to such as say, that Solomon and other learned men made
them: for these books are not received by the authority of the Church nor of
wise men, but by Seducers, that take the bare ietter and make new books
themselves, and fill the world with their new inventions, as daily experience
teaeheth us. And to the end men might be the more thoroughly allured, they give
glorious titles to their works, and foolishly ascribe them to such and such
Authors, as though they spoke nothing of themselves: and write base matters in
a lostie style, and with ye cloak of a text do hide their own forgeries. But as
for Characters, they are either words under the sorme of some letters,
containing in them the matter of a praver, or else they are made sor the
service and worship of certain Stars at special times. Of Characters, in the
first sense, we are to judge in the same sort, as we did of prayers: but as for
these latter figures and Characters, it is well known that they have no virtue
nor efficacy at all, unless they be sramed in their proper seaso^s. For which
cause he that makes them as he finds them, in the books, observing only the
figure wherein he solloweth his sampler, is judged by all wise men to do just
nothing. But contrariwise, he that works according to the aspect of the
heavens, in due constellations is able not only to dispose of his Characters,
but even of all his works, as well artificial as natural, agreeable to the
influence of the heaven. Nevertheless, for so much as it is very difficult to
perceive the certainty of heavenly bodies, many are overtaken with gross
errors, and few there are that can truly and profitably order any thing. And
hence it is that the common Mathematicians judging and working by Magic
Stars, and by works, as it were judgments at choice times, become nothing
famous, although they be right cunning, and thoroughly acquainted with the
Art, and are able to bring many things to pass. But it must not be forgotten
that the skillful Physician and any other, of what profession soever may to
good purpose use Charms and Characters, though they be fained after the
opinion of Constantinus the Physician: not as though Charms and Characters
could work any thing, but that the Medicine might be the more willingly and
readily received, and that the mind of the patient might be excited, become
more confident, and be filled with joy: for the Soul thus affected, is able
to renew many things in his own body, insomuch that it may recover his former
health, through the joy and hope it has conceived. If therefore the Physician
for the magnifying of his work, do administer any such thing, that his
patient may not despair of his health, it is not to be abhorred if we will
credit the said Constantinus. For he in his Epistle of those things which
may be hanged about the neck, grants that Charms and Characters may thus
be used, and in this cause defends them: for the soul has great power over
the body through his strong and forcible operations, as Auicennae says in his
Books of the Soul, and in his eight book of living Creatures, and in this
point all wise men agree: and for this cause sick folks are suffered to see
plays, and pleasant things are brought unto them: yea, oftentimes following
their humor, we give them many contrary things, because the affection and
appetite of the soul overcomes sickness. Now for so much as the truth must
in no wise be empayred, The quan(...) is called by Logitians (...)sion, or
passible quality, An example of a passible quality, is sweetness in honey, or
coldness in ice: of passion when we bl(...) for shame, or wax pale through
fear
we are diligently to consider that every Agent (not only substances, but
likewise Accidens of the third kind of Qualities works a virtue, and makes
an appearance in the outward nature, and that there are certain sensible virtues
in things. This therefore may work a virtue and kind out of it self, and the
rather because it is more excellent then other corporal things, but cheesely
for the worthiness of the soul. And men do not exercise only through heat,
but their spirits are stirred up within them, as they likewise are in other
living creatures. And we see that some creatures are changed, and do change
such things as are obedient unto them: as for example: The Basiliske slaieth a
man if it do but behold him, the wolf makes a man hoarse, if it spy him
first: and the Hyena (as Solinus reports in his wonders of the world and
other Authors) will not suffer a dog to bark within his shadow. Yea, Aristotle
says in his book of Vegetables, that the fruits of the female Palm trees wax
ripe by the smell of the male Palms: and in some regions, Mares conceive with
young through the very sent of the horses, as Solinus records: and many such
things happen through the kinds and virtues of creatures and plants, even many
strange and wonderful things, as Aristotle affirms in his book of Secrets.
Now if plants and living creatures cannot attain unto the excellency of man's
nature, they shall much less be able to work virtues and kinds, and send
forth colors for the alterations of bodies without them: whereupon Aristotle
says in his book of Sleep and Watching, that if a menstrous woman behold her
self in a looking glass, she will infect it, so that there will appear a
cloud of blood. And Solinus reports, that in Sythia there are women which
have a double Ball or Apple in one eye (which caused Ovid to say, Nos quoque
pupilla duplex) who when they are angry, slay men with the very looking on
them. And we know that a man of an ill complexion, having some contagious
disease, as the leprosy or falling sickness, or a sharp ague, or very bad
eyes, and the like, poysoneth and infecteth others that are in his company: but
contrariwise, men of a good and healthie complexion, especially young men, do
comfort others, and make men joyful with their presence, which comes to
pass by reason of their delicate Spirits: their holsom and pleasant vapors:
their kindly and natural heat: I say it is by means of the spirits and
virtues which proceed from them, as Galen teaches us in Techin. And these
things become hurtful, if the soul be corrupted with many gross sins, being
coupled with a diseased body of an evil complexion: and in like case is it, if
there be a fervent appetite, and vehement desire to hurt and mischief. For
then the nature of the complexion and soundness woorketh more forcibly by the
cogitations of the soul, and longing desires that it has. For which cause the
Leper that earnestly wishes, and with exceeding carfulness intends to
infect some body that stands before him, does both more speedily and
dangerously infect him, then he could have done if he had not before hand
thought hereof, desired and purposed it. For Nature (as Auicen teaches, in the
foresaid places) obeys the thoughts, and vehement desires of the Soul: yea,
there should be no operation at all in men, if the natural virtue in the
members did not subject it self to the thoughts and desires of the soul. For
(as Auicen teaches in the third of the Metaphysickes) the first moouer is a
thought, and the next a desire conformable to the thought: And last of all, the
virtue of the Soul in the members, which yields obedience to the desire and
thought, and that both in evil and good. VVhereupon when these things are to
be seen in a man, a good complexion, health of body, youth, beauty, comely
proportion of the members, and a Soul free from sin, an earnest thought and
vehement desire to someworke, then whatsoever may be effected by the kind and
virtue of man, by the spirits and natural heat, it must of necessity be more
forcibly and thoroughly wrought by these and such like Spirits, Vapors, and
influences, then if any of these were wanting, especially if there be an
earnest desire and forcible intention. So then many strange matters may be
brought to pass by the words and works of man, when all the forenamed
caules do concur and meet together: for words proceed from within by the
thoughts of the Soul, and desire, comes by the motion of the Spirits, heat
and vocal artery- And the generation of these things has open ways,
through which is a great passage of Spirits, heat, euaporation, virtue and
kinds, which may be made by the Soul and heart. By reason whereof, there are
alterations and chaunges made in things spiritual (other things being
answerable) by words according to that natural power which is due unto them.
For we see that by reason of these and such like arteries, gaspings and
yawnings, and many resolutions of the Spirits, and of heat arise from the
heart in the inward parts: which sometimes hurt us, when they proceed from a
crazie body, that is, of an evil complexion: and again they greatly profit
and comfort us, when they come from a pure and sound body of a good
complexion. In like sort therefore, there may be some natural operations in
the generation and pronunciation of words, with an intent and desire of
working: so that not without good cause we use to say, that a linely voice is
of great efficacy, not because it has that virtue, which the Magitians dream
of: or that it is able to make and alter as others think, but because it is as
nature has ordained. We must therefore be very circumspect in these things:
for a man may easily tread awry, and many err in both parts. Some deny that
there is any operation: but others exceed and fly unto Magic. And hence it
is, that there are so many books in the world of charms, and characters,
prayers, coniurations, sacrifices, and such like, that are mere Magic: as
the book of the offices of Spirits, the book of the death of the Soul, the
book of Art notorie, and infinite more of the same kind, that contain not in
them the power of Art or Nature, but are wholly stuffed with the idle denises of
vain magitians. Yet it must be remembered, that many books are ascribed to
Magitians, which in truth are not such, but contain in them the excellency of
wisdom. Now amongst these, which are suspected, and which not, every man's
particular experience shall instruct him. For if in any of them we can meet
with a work of Nature or Art, let us make choice of that: if not, let us leave
it as suspicious, and ill beseeming a wise man. It is the part of a Magitian so
to handle things needless and superfluous: for (as Isaak judges in his book
of Fevers) the reasonabie Soul is not hindered in her operations, unless it
be detayned by ignorance. And Aristotle says in his book of Secrets, that
in such matter a sound and healthy person may do any thing that is expedient
for men, though not without the influence of divine virtue: and in the third of
the Meteors, he says, that there is no virtue, but it comes from God: and
about the latter end of his Ethics, he affirms, that there is no virtue,
neither Moral, nor Natural, endued with acelestiall virtue, without a divine
and celestial influence. So that when we speak of the power of particular
agents, we do not exclude the regiment of the vniuerial agent, and first cause.
For every first cause has a greater influence in the thing caused, then the
second cause, as it appears by the first proposition of causes.

Now will I begin to recount unto you strange things, performed by Art and
Nature, and afterward I will show you the causes and manners of things,
wherein shall be nothing Magical: so that you shall confess all Magic
power to be inferior to these, and unworthy to be compared with them. And
first of all by the figuration of Art it self: There may be made instruments
of Navigations without men to row in them: as huge Ships to brook the Sea,
only with one man to steer them, which shall sail far more swistly then if
they were full of men. And Chariots that shall move with an unspeakable
force, without any living creature to stir them: such as the crooked Chariots
are supposed to have been, wherein in old time they used to fight, yea
instruments to fly withal, so that one sitting in the middle of the
Instrument, and turning about an Engine, by which the wings being artificially
composed may beat the air after the manner of a flying bird. Besides, there
may be made a small Instrument in quantity, to lift up, and let down
things of great' weight, then which there is nothing more commodious to weigh
with. For by an Instrument of three fingers high, and three fingers broad and
less quantity, may a man rid himself, and his companions from all danger
of imprisonment, and lift them up, and let them down. Yea such an Instrument
may easily be made, where by a man may violently draw unto him a thousand men,
will they, nill they, and any other thing.

Moreover instruments may be made where with men may walk in the bottom of
the Sea or Rivers without bodily danger, which Alexander the great used, to the
end he might behold the secrets of the seas, as the Ethick Philosopher
reports: and these have bin made not only in times past, but even in our
days. And it is certain that there is an instrument to fly with, which I
never saw, nor know any man that has seen it, but I full well know by name
the learned man that invented the same. In a word, a man may make an infinite
sort of such things: as bridges over Rivers without posts or pillars, and
instruments and engines never heard of before.

But physical figurations are far more strange: for in such manner may we frame
perspects and looking-glasses, yt one thing shall appear to be many, as one
man shall seem a whole army, and diverse Suns and Moons, yea, as many as
weeplease, shall appear at one time: for in such wise sometimes are the
vapors figured, that two or three Suns, and two Moons appear together in
the air, as Plynie witnesses in the second book of his natural History. For
by the same reason that one thing may seem to be many things, it may likewise
seem to be infinite things because that when once it has exceeded his virtue,
there is no set number to be assigned: for thus Aristotle reasons in the
Chapter Devacuo. So that by this means a man may strike infinite terrors into
any city or army, insomuch that either through the manifold apparitions of
stars, or of men gathered together against them, they should utterly perish,
but in especial, if there follow such an instrument whervvith at the first
they may be had. For so may the perspects be framed, that things most far ost
may seem most nigh unto us, and clean contrary. So that we may read very
small letters, an incredible distance from us, and behold things how little
soever they be, and make stars to apseare wheresoever we will. And it is
thought that Julius Caesar did from the Sea coasts in France mark and
observe the disposition and situation of the Castles and Cities of the lesser
Brytannie by the help of great glasses. Bodies also may so be framed, that
the greatest things shall appear to be the least, the highest to be the
lowest, the most secret to be the most manifest, and in like sort the
contrary. Thus did Socrates perceive that the Dragon (which dest oied the
City and country adjoining with his noisome breath, and contagious influence)
did lurk in the dens between the mountains. And thus may all things that are
done in cities or armies be discovered by ye enemies. Again, in such wise may
bodies be framed, that venomous and infectious influences may be brought
whither a man will. And thus it is reported, that Aristotle instructed
Alexander: through which instruction, the poison of a Basiliske being list up
upon the wall of a city against an army, brought it into the City. And
besides all these, we may so frame perspects, that any man entering into a
house, he should indeed see gold, and silver, and precious stones, and what
else he will, but when he makes haste to the place, he shall find just
nothing. But it appertains to higher powers of figurations, that beams
should be brought and assembled by diverse flexions and reflections in any
distance that we will, to burn whatsoever is opposite unto it, as it is
witnessed by those perspects that burn before and behind, according as
certain authors teach in their books treating of these matters. But the
greatest and cheifest of all figurations and things figured, is to describe the
heavenly bodies according to their length and breadth in a corporal figure,
wherein they may corporally move with a daily motion. These things are worth a
kingdom to a wise and discreet man. Let these things suffice for examples of
figurations, though many other wonderful things might be produced. Now
hereunto there are certain other, to be annexed without figurations. In any
distance that we will, we may artificially make a burning fire of Salt Peeter
and other things, as also of oil, red Petrolium, and such like: and moreover
of Amber, of Naptha, white Petrolium, and the like: according to that which
Pliny reports in his second book, namely that in a certain City he
defended himself against the Roman army: for he burnt an armed souldior
with diverse things which he cast at him. The Greek fire is not much unlike
these, and many other burning things.

Besides, there may be made perpetual lights, and bathes burning without end,
for we have known many that are not burned, but purified. But over and besides
these, there are other things of Nature that will amaze and astonish us to
hear of them: for noyses may be made in the air like thunders, yea with
greater horror then those that come by Nature: for a little matter fitted to
the quantity of a thumb, makes a horrible noise, and wonderful lightning.
And this is done after sundry fashions, whereby any city and army may be
destroyed, after the manner of skillful Gedeon, who having only three hundredth
men, discomfited the hosts of the Madianites, with broken pitchers, and lamps,
and fire issuing out with an unspeakable noise. These are maruailous things,
if men knew how to use them effectually in due quantity and matter.

But now I will propose many strange things of another kind, which although
they have no great profit, yet are they a most apparent demonstration of
wisdom, and may be used for the proving of any secet things, which the rude
multitude gainsay, being like to the attraction of Iron by the Adamant. For who
would believe such an attraction, unless he beheld it? and there be many
wonders of nature in this drawing of the Iron, that are unknown to the common
people, as experience teaches the studious. But these things are greater and
more in number: for there is the like attraction of all metals by the Stone of
gold and silver: and the Stone runs to Vinegar. Yea plants, and the parts
of living creaturs being locally divided the one from the other, will not
withstanding by a natural motion concur and come together again. Now when I
had beheld these and such like things, and considered them well, I thought
nothing incredible, neither in divine nor humane things. Yet there are greater
behind then these. For the whole power of the Mathematickes (according to the
practice of Ptolomy, in the. 8. de Almagesto) sets but an instrument upon
the superficies, wherein all things that are in the heaven shall be truly
described with their lengths and breadths: but that they should naturally move
with a daily motion, is not in the Mathematicians power. Yet does the faithful
and industrious practisioner, earnestly desire to make it of such a matter and
after such a manner. That the heavens should be naturally moved with a daily
motion, seems impossible unto him, because many things are carried with the
motion of the heavenly bodies, as Comets, and the sea when it flows, and
other things: either wholly or in part: for then should all instruments of
Astrology be in vain, as well those which have been invented by the learned,
as those that have been devised by the common sort, neither should a Kings
treasure be skant comparable. Moreover, there may yet greater things be
performed, though not in respect of their strangeness, yet if we regard a
public or private commodity, namely, to get as great plenty of gold and
silver as we list, not by a possibility of Nature, but by the perfection of
Art, for as much as there are seventeen manners of gold, whereof eight in
number have a commixtion of Argent-uiue with gold. Now the first kind of gold
is made of certain parts of gold, and some parts of silver, until we reach
unto the two and twentieth degree of Gold, always augmenting one degree of
gold with one of silver: and there are as many more of the admixtion of Brass
with Gold. So that the last manner consists of four and twenty degrees of
pure gold, without the admixtion of any other metal: and nature cannot
proceed any further, as experience teaches. But Art may augment gold very
much in the parts of purity, and likewise accomplish it without fraud or
couine. But this is a greater matter then the former, that although the
reasonable soul cannot be constrained, yet may she be effectually disposed,
endued, and provoked, freely to change her manners, affections and desires,
according to another man's pleasures: and this may be effected, not in one
particular person alone, but in the whole body of a City, or people of a
Kingdom. And such a matter Aristotle teaches in his book of Secrets, as well
of a nation, as of an army or private person. These things are almost as much
as nature or Art are able to perform. But yet the last decree, wherein the
perfection of Art can do oughts with all the power of nature, is the
prolonging of life for a great space, and the possibility hereof is approved
by many experime^ts. For Plynie reports, that there was a Soldier lusty
and strong both in body and mind, that continued healthy beyond the accustomed
age of man, who when Octauianus Augustus asked him what he did that made him
live so long, made answer in a riddle, that he used oil outwardly, and sweet
wine inwardly. But afterward there sell out many such things: for on a time,
as a husband man was plowing, he chanced to find a golden vessel with a
precious licour, which he surmising to be the dew of heaven, washed his face
with it, and drank thereof, and was incontinently renewed in Spirit, in body,
and in quickness of wit: for which cause, of a plowman he was made porter
to the King of Sicily: and this happened in the time of king Ostus. Besides, it
is confirmed by the testimony of the Popes letters, that Almanichus being
Captain among the Saracens took a medicine, by the benifit whereof, he
prolonged his life five hundred years. For the king to whom he was prisoner,
received Ambassadors from king Magus with this medicine, but forasmuch as he
suspected it to be poison, he would needs make a trial of it in this Captive.
In like manner, the Queen of Tormery in great Britany, seeking after a white
Heart, lighted upon an Ointment, wherewith the Keeper of the forest had
noynted his whole body, the soles of his feet only excepted: he lived three
hundredth years without corruption, save that he was troubled with the gout
in his feet. And we have observed many Contrymen in our days, who,
without the counsel and adulse of Physicians, have lived a hundred and three
score years, or there abouts. And these things are approved by the works of
bruit beasts, as namely in the Heart, the Egle, the Serpent, and many other,
that by the virtue of herbs and stones renew their youth. For which cause
wise men have addiected themselves to search out such a secret, provoked
thereunto by the example of brute Beasts, deeming it to be possible for man
to obtain that which is not denied to unreasonable creatures. And hence is it,
that Artephius in his Book, entitled the Wisdom of Secrets, diligently
observing the force and power of living creatures and stones, and such like
things, to the end that he might be acquainted with Natures Secrets, but
especially to attain the knowledge how to lengthen the life, boasts of
himself that he lived a thousand and five and twenty years.

And the possibility of the prolongation of life, is hereby confirmed, because
the soul is naturally immortal, and able not to die: for even after it had
bin polluted with sin, it was able to live about a thousand years, and
afterward by little and little the length of life was abbreuiated and waxed
shorter. Now this abbreueation must needs be accidental, and therefore it
may either in the whole or in part be prolonged. And if we will seek out the
accidental cause of this corruption, we shall find that it proceeds not
from the heaven, nor any thing else, but for lack of a due regiment of
health. For in this age of ours, the fathers are corrupted, and therefore
begette Sons of a corrupt complexion and composition, and their Sons for
the same cause do corrupt themselves, and this corruption descends from the
fathers into the Sons, so long, till at the last, the shortness of life does
continually prevail, as it appears this day. Nevertheless, it cannot hence
be necessarily inferred, that life shall always be shortened, because there is
a time appointed for humane things, and for the most, what men live seventy
years, and the rest of their days are altogether labor and sorrow. But there
may a remedy be found out for the particular corruption of every man, that
is to say, if every one for his part from his youth upward, will exercise a
perfect government of health, which consists in meat and drink, in sleep
and watchfulness, in motion and rest, in euacuation and constriction, in the
air and in the disposition of the mind: for if any man would observe this
manner of government from his nativity, he should live as long as his nature
(which he received of his parents) would permit him, and be brought to the
farthest end of that nature fallen from original justice: but this he can no
way pass: for this regiment affords no remedy against the ancient
corruption of parents. Yet it is impossible that a man should with such
moderation carry himself in all these things, as the rule of health
requires: and therefore it is of necessity that the abbreuiation and
shortning of our days should spring from this head also, and not only from
the corruption of our parents. But the science of Physic does sufficiently
prescribe and determine this manner of regiment: though neither rich nor poor,
learned nor unlearned, no not even the Physicians themselves (how absolute so
ever they be) are able indifferently to observe these things in themselves,
nor in other men. Notwithstanding, Nature fails not in things necessary, nor
Art being perfect and compact, yea rather it is able to break out against
accidental passions, and either wholly or in part to abolish them. And in the
beginning when the age of men first began to decline, a remedy might easily
have been found out: but after six thousand years and more, it is a
difficult matter to prescribe a remedy. Nevertheless, wise men moved with
the foresaid considerations, have endeavored to find out ways, not only
against the defect of every particular man's regiment, but also against the
corruption of Parents: not that men should be able to reach unto the life of
Adam, or Artephius, by reason of the corruption which daily increases, but
that they might prolong their lives for a hundred years or somewhat more,
beyond the common age of men now living, so that the diseases usually
accompanying old age, might be kept back for a time, and though not utterly
prohibited and taken quite away, yet they might be mittigated and diminished,
that the life might be profitably prolonged beyond the expectation of men, but
always within the utmost bounds and limits. For there is one term of Nature
appointed to the first men after sin entered into the world, and another
allotted to every man by the proper corruption of his parents. These two we
cannot pass: for though we may pass the latter, yet are we not able to
arrive unto the former: I am of opinion that a wise man may in this age attain
thereto, the possibility and aptness of humane nature, being the same now
that it was in the first men: and no marvel, seeing that this aptness
extends it self to immortality, as it was before sin, and shall be after
the resurrection. But if you say, that neither Aristotle, Plato, Hippocrates,
nor Galen, attained hereto. I answer, that they were ignorant even of many
mean virtues, which afterward were familiar to those that were studious.
These therefore might easily be hidden from them, though they labored to
find them out: but they busied themselves too much in other matters, and waxed
old in a trice, spending their life in base and vulgar things, and yet they
were acquainted with many secrets. For we know that Aristotle says in the
Predicaments, that the quadrature of a Circle may be known, although it be
not yet known. Whereby he confesses, that both himself, and all men till
his time were ignorant of it. But now a days we see that the truth is known,
so that Aristotle might well be ignorant of the greatest of Natures Secrets.
And again, wise men are at this present ignorant of many things, which the
common sort of Students shall know hereafter. So then this objection is
altogether vain and foolish.

Thus having produced certain examples declaring the power of Art and Nature,
to the end that out of those few we might collect many, out of the parts gather
the whole, out of particulars, infer universals, we see how far forth it
is altogether needless for us to gape after Magic, when as Nature and Art
are sufficient. Now I mind to prosecute every one of the foresaid things in
order, and deliver their causes, and the ways how to work them particularly.
And first of all, I consider that the secrets of Nature contained in the skins
of Goats and sheep, are not spoken of, least every man should understand them.
As Socrates and Aristotle wills: for he affirms in his book of Secrets,
that he is a breaker of the celestial seal that makes the secrets of Art
and Nature common: adding moreover that many evils beride him that reuealeth
secrets. And in the book entitled Noctes Atticae, in the comparing of wise
men together, it is reputed a great folly to give an Ass Lettice, when
Thistles will serve his turn: and it is written in the book of Stones, that
he impayreth the Majesty of things, that diuulgeth mysteries. And they are no
longer to be termed Secrets, when the whole multitude is acquainted with
them, if we regard the probable division of multitude, which evermore gainsay
the learned. For that which seems unto all, is true, as also that which is so
judged of by the wise, and men ofbest account. Wherefore that which seems to
many, that is to the common people, so far forth as it seems such, must of
necessity be false. I speak of the Common sort, in that Sense, as it is
here distinguished against the learned. For in the common conceytes of the
mind, they agree with the learned, but in the proper principles and
conclusions of Arts and Sciences they disagree, toyling themselves about mere
appearances, and sophistications, and quirks, and quiddities, and such like
trash, whereof wise men make no account. In things proper therefore, and in
secrets, the common people do err, and in this respect they are opposite to
the learned, but in common matters they are comprehended under the law of all,
and therein consent with the learned. And as for these commyn things, they are
of small value, not worthy to be sought after for themselves, but in regard
of things particular and proper. Now the cause of this concealment among all
wise men, is, the contempt and neglect of the secrets of wisdom by the
vulgar sort, that knows not how to use those things which are most excellent.
And if they do conceive any worthy thing, it is altogether by chance and
fortune, and they do exceedingly abuse that their knowledge, to the great
damage and hurt of many men, yea, even of whole societies: so that he is worse
then mad that publishes any secret, unless he conceal it from the multitude,
and in such wise deliver it, that even the studious and learned shall hardly
understand it. This has been the course which wise men have observed from the
beginning, who by many means have hidden the secrets of wisdom from the
common people. For some have used Characters and verses, and diverse others
riddles and figurative speeches, as Aristotle witnesses in his book of
Secrets, where he thus speaks. O Alexander, I will show thee the greatest
secret in the world, God grant thou may keep it close, and bring to pass
the intention of the Art of that stone which is no stone, and is in every man,
and in every place, and at all seasons, and is called the end of all
Philosophers. And an infinite number of things are found in many books and
sciences obscured with such dark speeches, so that no man can understand them
without a teacher. Thirdly, some have hidden their secrets by their manners of
writing, as namely by consonants only: so that no man can read them, without
he know the signification of the words: and this is usual among the Jews,
Chaldeans, Syrians, and Arabians, yea, and the Grecians too: and therefore
there is a great concealing with them, but especially with the Jews: for
Aristotle says in the above named book, that God gave them all manner of
wisdom, before there were any Philosophers, and all nations borrowed the
principles of Philosophy of them. And thus much we are plainly taught by
Albumasar in his book named the larger Introductory, and other Philosophers,
and by Josephus in his eight book of Antiquities. Fourthly, things are
obscured by the admixtion of letters of diverse kinds, and thus has Ethicus
the Astronomer co^cealed his wisdom, writing the same with Hebrew, Greek and
Latin letters, all in a row. Fifthly, they hide their secrets, writing them in
other letters then are used in their own counrty, to wit, when they take
letters that are in use in foreign nations, and feign them according to their
own pleasures. This is a very great impediment, used by Artephius in his book
of the Secrets of Nature. Sixthly, they make certain forms, not of letters, but
such as are used by diuiners and enchanters, which according to the diversity
of prick and notes, have the power of letters: and these likewise has
Artephius used in his science.

Seventhly, there is yet a more cunning sleight of occultation behind by the
help of Art notory: an art whereby a man may write or note any thing, as
briefly as he will, and as swiftly as he can desire. And in this sort have the
Latin authors hidden many secrets. I deemed it necessary to touch these
tricks of obscurity, because happily my self may be constrained through the
greatness of the secrets, which I shall handle, to use some of them, that so at
the least I might help thee to my power. I give thee therefore to understand,
that my purpose is orderly to proceed in the exposition of those things,
whereof I made mention before: as to dissolve the Philosophers egg, and search
out the parts of a philosophical man. And this shall serve for a beginning to
the rest. Take salt, and rub it diligently in water, and purify it in other
waters, after by diverse contritions, rub it with Salts, and burn it with
sundry assations, that it may be made a pure earth, separated from the other
Elements, which I esteem worthy of thee for thestature of my length.
Understand me if thou art able: for it shall undoubtedly be composed of the
Elements, and therefore it shall be a part of the stone, which is no stone, and
is in every man, which thou shall find at all times of the year in his own
place. This done thou shall take oil after the manner of a searecloath, and of
viscous cheese, not able to be cut at the first, whereunto all the fiery
virtue must be divided, and separated by dissolution (now it must be
dissolved in a sharp water of an indifferent sharpness, with a light fire)
and decocted until his fatness be severed, as the fat in flesh, by
distillation, that no part of the oylinesse and black virtue, wherein the
urine is distilled, may get out. Afterward let it be decocted in Vinegar, till
it be dried into a coal (which is the cause of addustion) and that his black
virtue do appear. But if it be not cured thereof, let it be done again: be
watchful and attentive, for my speech is difficult. The oil will dissolve,
both in sharp waters, and in common oil, that works more apparauntly, or in
a tart oil of Almondes over the fire, so that the oil may be sundred, and
the hidden spirit remain, both in the parts ofliuing creatures, and in
Sulphur, and Arsenicke. For the Stones (wherein there is an Oil of a
superfluous humiditie) have certain bounds of their humors: partly because
there is no strong union, since one may be dissolved from the other, by
reason of the nature of the water, which is put to liquefaction in the Spirit,
which is the mean between his parts and the oil. Dissolution therefore
being finished, there will remain a certain pure humiditie in the spirit,
which though it be thoroughly mixed with the dry parts, which are moved to and
fro in it, yet is the fire able to resolve it, being called by the Philosopher
a melting Sulpur, and sometime Oil, sometime an ayrie humor, sometime a
comunctiue substance, which the fire does not separate, sometime Camphora,
and wash it. This is the Philosophers Egg, or rather the end and
accomplishment of the Egg. And let so much of the Oils as comes to our
hands be reckoned among Seeny seed, which must be separated from the water,
or Oil wherein it is purged.

Moreover, the oil is putrified as thou know, by braying it with drying
things, as with salt and vitriall, and by burning it, (though passion arise
from the contrary) and afterward it must be sublimed, until his oylinesse be
quite taken away, and that the water be like Sulphur or Arsenicke in the
minerals: for it may be prepared in the same manner that they are.
Nevertheless, it were better to decoct it in waters of a temperate
sharpness, until it be purged or made white. And yet there is another
profitable concoction in a dry or moist fire, where distillation must be
renewed (if you would have your work come well to pass) and the matter
rectified: of which rectification the last signs are to be white, and clear
as Crystal. And where is. other things grow black in the fire, this waxes
white, is purified, and even shines again through the notable clearnes and
brightness that is in it. Of this water and earth is Argent-uiue engendered,
being not unlike the Argent-uiue that is in the Mines. Now when the matter is
waxed hot after this manner, it is co^gealed: but the ayrie stone (which is no
stone) must be put into a Pyramid in a warm place, or (if you think good) into
the belly of a horse, or ox, and so be changed into a sharp fever. And when
it has passed from this itno 10. and from that into 21. so that the lees of
the oiles are dissolved in their water, before it be separated, they do so
often reiterate dissolution and distillation, til at length it be rectified.
And here ends this intention. But thou must remember that when thou have made
an end, thou art then to begin a new again.

Now will I hide an other secret from thee. Prepare Argent-uiue by mortifying
it, with the vapor of Steel for Margarites, and with the vapor of Lead for
the stone Iber: and rub it with drying things, and atraments, and such like
(as before) and boil it: this done, let it be sublymed: is for union, 10. if
for redness, 21. until the moisture be consumed in it. Neither is it
possible that the humiditie should be separated for the vapor (as the
foresaid oil) because it is very strongly commixt with his dry parts,
neither does it set any bound, as we have already taught in the foresaid
metals. In this chapter thou may easily be deceived, except thou perfectly
understand the signification of the words.

Now it is high time obscurely to entreat of the third chapter, to the end thou
may behold the very key of the work thou look for. The calcined body is
sometime put to (which is done to this end, that the moisture in it might be
consumed by salt, and Sal Armeniack and Vinegar) and again, sometime it is
nourished with Argent-uiue, and sublimed by them, till it remain as powder.
These then are the keys of the Art, Congelation, Resolution, Induration,
Proiection, and this is both the end and the beginning: but as for
purification, distillation, separation, sublimation, calcination, and
inquisition, they are fellow-workers with the former, and now thou may sit
down and take thine ease.

Six hundred and two years of the Arabians being accomplished, thou did
ask me of certain secrets. Take therefore the stone and congeale it with a
gentle boiling, and strong contrition, but without sharp things. And in ye end
mix it a little with sweet water: and make a laxatiue medicine of seven
things, if thou think good, or of six, or of five: or of as many as thou will,
but my mind is content with two: whereof the better shall be in six, rather
then any other proportion, or there abouts, as experience may teach you.
Neuerth elesse, resolve the gold by the fire, and restrain it better. But if
you will believe me, you ought to take but one thing. This is a secret of
Natures secrets, able to work wonders. It being therefore mixed with two things
or more in number, or with the Phoenix (which is a worthy creature) at the
fire, and incorporated by a strong motion, and that hereunto you put warm
liquor, four or five times you shall be master of your hearts desire. But
afterward the celestial nature is weakened, and waxes feeble, if thou pour
warm water into it three or fouretimes. Thou must therefore divide the weak
from the strong in diverse vessels if thou dare credit me, and draw out that
which is good. Besides thou shall take the powder, and thoroughly press out the
water that remained: for certainly it will make the parts of the powder
spiritual: for which cause thou shall save this water by it self, because the
powder dried up herewith, has the force of a medicine in a laxatiue body,
Work therefore as thou did before, until thou have removed the weak from
the strong, and put the powder thereto three, four, or five times, or oftener,
always working after one and the self same manner. And if thou can not
work with warm water, thou shall offer violence. But if it be broken by
reason of the tartness and tenderness of the medicine, together with powder
thou must very warily put more Gold to, and mollify it: but if the plenty of
the powder cause it to break, thou shall give it more of the medicine, and if
it be long of the strength of the water: water it with a Pestill, and gather
together the matter so well as thou can, and separate the water by little and
little, and it will return to his former state. This water thou shall dry up,
for it has both the powder and water of the medicine, which are to be
incorporate as dust. Be not asleep now, for I have told thee a great and
profitable secret. And if thou could tell how to place and set in order
the parts of a burnt shrub, or of a willow, and many such like things, they
would naturally keep an union. Beware at any hand that thou forgettest not
this, because it is very profitable for many things. Thou shall mingle the
Trinity with the union being first molted, and they will rise up as I suppose
like unto the stone Iberus: doubtless it is mortified by the vapor of the
lead, which lead thou shall find if thou press it out of the dead body, and
this dead body thou shall bury in a stillitory. Hold fast this secret, for it
is naught worth. And in like manner shall thou deal with the vapor of a
Margarite or the stone Tagus, burying the dead as before thou art commanded.

And now forsooth the years of the Arabians being accomplished, I make answer
to your demand after this manner. You must have a medicine yt will dissolve in a
thing that is melted, and be anointed in it, and enter into his second degree,
and be incorporate with it, not proouing a fugitive servant, and change it, and
be mixed with the root of the Spirit, and be fixed by the calx of the metal.
Now it is thought that fixation prepares, when the body and spirit are laid in
their place, and sublimed, which must be so often reiterated, til the body be
made a spirit, and the spirit become a body. Take therefore of the bones of
Adam, and of calx the same weight, there must be six for the rocky stone, and
five for the stone of unions, and these you must work together with Aqua vitae
(whose property is to dissolve all other things) that it may be dissolved and
boiled in it. And this a sign of Inceration, if the medicine will melt, when
it is poured on an Iron read hot. This done, pour water into it in a moist
place, or else hang it in the vapor of very hot and liquid Waters, and
congeale it in the Sun (...) thou shall take Saltpeter, and convert
Argent-uiue (...) lead: and again, thou shall wash and (...) therewith, that
it may come nigh to Silver, and afterward work as thou did before. Moreover,
thou shall drink up all after this sort. Notwithstanding, thou shall take of
Saltpeter, Luru (...), and of Sulphur, and by this means make (...) thunder
and lighten. Thus shall thou (...) work. Now consider with thy self (...)
speak in a riddle, or tell thee the plain (...) be some that have bin of
another mind: for it was said unto me, that al things must be resolved to the
matter, whereof you may find Aristotle his judgment (...) vulgar and unknown
places, and therefore (...) my peace. Now when thou have them, (...) have many
simples and equals, (...) shall effect by contrary things and (...) which
before I termed the keys of (...) Aristotle says that the equality of the
(...) contain in it the action and passion of (...) this likewise is the
opinion of Auerroes reproving (...). It is thought that this is the most simple
and (...) medicine that may be found: It is good (...) the feauers and passions
both of mind and bodies, more cheap then any medicine whatsoever. (...) these
things shall have the key that opens and no man shuts, and when he has
shut, no man is able to open it again.

FINIS.
Printed at London by Thomas Creed. for Richard Olive. 1597.


