THE LIFE AND DEATH OF Mr. Edmund Geninges PRIEST, Crowned with Martyrdom at
London, the 10. day of November, in the year M. D.XCI.

Pretiosa in conspectu Dni^, Mors Sanctorum eius

Psalm. 115. AT S. OMERS by Charles Boscard.

S. Cyprianus Epist. 9. in fine. O beatam Ecclesiam nostram, quam temporibus
nostris gloriosus Martyrum sanguis illustrat! Erat antea in operibus Fratrum
candida; nunc facta est in Martyrum cruore purpurea.

Happy is our Church, which the glorious blood of Martyrs does in these our
days illustrate! It was made white before in the works of our Brethren; but
now is become purple in the blood of Martyrs.

THE AVTHOR TO HIS BOOK.
GO mournful Muse the trumpet of my cares,
Sound out aloud this doleful accident;
Tell all the world how ill the matter fares,
It Is hard if none will help thee to lament.
A Tigers heart such sorrows will deplore,
His tears I wish that never wept before.
When as the noble Romans made return
From forrayne conquests, and great victoryes;
They on their Altars sacrifice did burn,
Their famous acts thereby to memorize.
And thus they left unto posterity,
The due reward of worthy chiualry.
Shall then the sufferings of our Champion sleep,
His glorious combats and victorious strife?
No, no (dear Muse) thy pen thou now must steep,
In bloody accents of a martyrs life.
A life indeed, for when his days had end,
Eternity of life did death amend.
THE BOOK TO HIS READER.
AFfected words, or Courtly complement,
Do not expect, who ever reads this story;
Vertu's my ground, it needs no ornament,
And to deceive you so, I should be sorry.
If any such there be, post to King a Book so called.
Liere,
He has applause, seek not contentment here.
Poets may paynt, and diuersely adorn
Their feygned passions, and Chymera's strange;
Teaching their pens to weep as one forlorn,
And up and down in barren deserts range.
But if true grief do once possess their mind,
They feel their combats in another kind.
My author's plain, nor is his grief a fiction,
The world can witness what himself does prove;
Read that ensues, it is writ for thy direction,
And ease thy passion, as desert shall move.
It it be penned according to thy fancy,
Then learn to suffer by his constancy.
To the very R. my ever Dear, and Worthy Friend, Master I. G. P.
WORTHY SIR,
This ensuing Relation, which of late I received from you in written hand, I
now return again in Print by way of dedication. My reasons (for so unusual a
thing) are two. First, for that I judge your self (before all others only
Worthy to patronize the same; it being the subject of him, in whom (before all
others) you ever had, and have still most right and interest. Secondly, that as
in his virtuous life time, you were nearly conjoined unto him both in Affection
and Blood: so now after his glorious death, his memory might be lively
represe^ted unto you both in Heart and Mind. The which I have here endeavored
to express to my best power. Turn then over the leaf, and behold that
mirror, wherein you most delight. And so I rest,

Yours ever most assured I. W. P.

Edmundi speciem spectat quicumque Geningi,
Robora, virtutem, spectet et ille fidem.
IpsVM ter DVrae fera LeX, fera neXVe bearVnt,
Terque cruenta dies dena Decembris erat.
Numque tenet raptum dum cor e corpore lictor,
Gregorij e caelis numina lingua petit
Huic dens ex proprio vix nato nascitur ore,
Roboris hoc signum proque fideque
Deo. Mart ba^f.



THE PREFACE.
SACRAMENTVM REGIS caelare bonum est: Job. 12
opera autem Dei reuelare, and co^fiteri honorificu^ est. It is a good thing
(says the holy Scripture) to co^ceale the secret of a King: but it is most
honorable to reveal and confess the works of God. Like as this sentence
(Courteous Reader) is verifyed, touching all the divine works of Almighty God
himself in general: so the truth of it is most apparent, concerning his
admirable works in just men and Saints in particular. The reason of this is
manifest, because the relation of such works does not only tend highly to the
honor of God, who by this means is showed to be admirable and prayse-worthy
in his Saints; Psalm. 67
but also to the glory of the Saints themselves, and of Gods militant Church
on earth, of which, whiles they lived, they were lively members.

Hence it has been ever a laudable custom of living Christians to report and
make known to the world, the noble acts of Gods Saints departed cut of this
vale of miseryes. But is this the only good, that arises of such endeavors?
No, for the historyes of the Lives of Saints do confirm our faith, stir us
up to imitate them, and have sundry other most profitable effects. And although
these motives may suffice to persuade any Christian to pen, and publish the
famous acts of holy Martyrs: yet not only these, but others also move me to
undertake this labor, touching the life and death of Edmund Geninges Priest,
who amongst many others, in defense of Christ's Holy and Apostolic Church, not
many years since has in this our Island most gloriously shed his innocent
blood, and lost his temporal life, to gain eternal.

Of which motives, one is my own exact knowledge of many particulers, Motives
that induced the Author to write this discourse.
concerning this Blessed man, whereof others, better able to perform this
matter then my self, perhaps are ignorant: which particulers being memorable,
would peradventure thereby be buried in perpetual oblivion, if I should not
deliver them thus in writing to posterity. Another motive is, my particular
love, and deserved affection to the party of whom I am to treat. The third is,
the persuasion and entreaty of some special friends, whose requests in such a
matter I cannot well either neglect or withstand. Finally some secret motives
have often assaulted my mind, and invited me to this enterprise, which in
mature consideration seem to me to have proceeded from God himself, who would
not have the memory of his Saints so long obscured and forgotten.

These reasons as they urged me forward, so others also contrariwise hitherto
kept me back, Why this Book was not published before this day.
and dissuaded me from such proceedinges. First a fear or suspicion of being
accounted over partial, by reason I have been so much linked unto him in
friendship and favor, for which cause my Relation perhaps unto some, might
seem in part faygned through affection, and consequently of doubtful truth.
Secondly my own insufficiency and want of experience in penning such a worthy
discourse as this deserves. These two conceits have hitherto kept me back
from publishing of this intention. But now the former motives are demeed by me
more forcible, and weygh down these opposite objections, especially seeing that
both these letts and obstacles in the sight of an indifferent Reader, may after
a sort be either much weakened, or altogether removed. The one by a
protestation of truth and sincerity. The other by another mean of like quality.

First therefore the censure of Solomon is not unknown to me, who auoweth,
that, He who speaks lies shall not escape unpunished, but shall perish.
Prou. 19 cap. 6. Sap. 1
That, God hates a lying tongue. and, That a mouth which lies kills the
soul. Unto whose sentence that of the Psalmist is conformable, telling us,
that our Lord will destroy all those that speak lies. Psalm. 5 Joan. 8.
Nay our Savior himself affirms, the Devil to be a liar, and the father of
lies. These things (I say) I know. What then will it profit me to seek to
honor a Martyr, by faygning and forging a lie? Does the glory of Gods Saints
need any such foul and dishonest helps? No surely. But I will say, as holy
Job said: Job. 12.
Numquid Deus indiget nostro mendacio, vt pro illo loquamur dolos?

Therefore to clear my self from this suspicion, I protest, that I will make
mention of no one thing, which I have not either known to be true my self, or
heard from his mouth whose life and martyrdom I write, or have not received as
true, by relation from very honest, virtuous, and sufficient persons, whose
tender and Catholic consciences (as may justly be thought) could not bear the
burden of uttering such untruths.

Now touching mine own insufficiency, I hope that the best minded Readers,
whom principally I desire to profit and pleasure, will not so much exact, or
expect at my hands (discoursing of such a matter) Eloquence and Rhetorical
figures, as truth and the plain delivery of things, tending to Gods glory,
and their own edification. And thus having delivered unto thee (gentle Reader)
the motives of my writing, and the drift of mine intent, humbly beseeching God
to assist me with the aid and direction of his holy spirit, craving both thy
patience and pardon for such faults as shall escape me either in words or
style, I will enter upon my foresaid intended Relation.

Nuntia Christicolis venturae cladis, inermes
Aethere ab armatis nocte perire videt.
M. b. f

A BRIEF RELATION OF THE LIFE AND DEATH OF M. EDMUND GENINGES, ALIAS Ironmonger
Priest and Martyr, who suffered in Grayes-Inne fields the 10. of December in
the year of our Lord 1591. and 34. of the raygne of Q. Elizabeth.
OF HIS BIRTH, CHILDhood, and Education. CHAP. I.
ACCORDING to the laudable, and euer-vsed custom, practiced by the Writers of
Saints lives, in all ages throughout the Christian World, who in recounting
their memorable acts and deeds, do commonly use to lay open, as their first
groundwork, their offspring, birth, and education, to the end, that as well
the secret and hidden decrees of God Almighty ( apud quem nulla est acceptio
personarum, with whom there is no acception of persons) might be made manifest:
as also to convince the blind errors of humane rash judgments, whose censures
are commonly according to the outward appearance; and every thing that is
unlikely, by them is deemed impossible, His parents their names concealed for
special reasons.
quia vana sunt iudicia hominum, because the judgments of men are vain. I had
thought to have declared at large the birth, and education of this our thrice
happy Martyr, leaving the world to judge of his miraculous alteration; but for
diverse respects, persuasion forces me to silence at this time. And behold in
limine, at the very first, I will not say a miracle, yet at least a wonder; for
scarce had Nature cleansed his sylly corpse from such uncleanness as it brought a
maternis visceribus, from his mothers bowels, but presently within an hour or
two appeared a sign of the magnanimity and great courage which he was
afterward to set forth to the view of the whole world. And this it was.

The Midwyfe and other women having accomplyshed every thing belonging to their
office in the birth of the infant; the Nurse sat her down by the fire, to
give the child his first food; and directing her dugge into his mouth, he
presently bitt the same. At which unexpected pain, the simple woman sent forth
loud scrikes and cries, which she no sooner had done, but the child bitt her
again. Which unwonted accident so bereft the Nurse of all patience, that she
was ready to have done the child some mischief had not the women then
accompanying his mother ran to succor him; He was borne with a tooth in his
head.
who inquiring the cause, they perceived the lamb to have played the lion, and
searching his mouth they found him to have a very fair white tooth in the
forepart thereof. Which strange spectacle worthily put them all into admiration:
and after a day or two, when his weak mother had somewhat recovered strength,
they related unto her the whole matter which had happened, who what with grief
and wonder was so perplexed, as being not able to conteyne herself within the
limits of temperate motherhood, she brake forth into deep passions.

At which time it chanced that a venerable old man, a Doctor of Divinity
lodged in her house, a Catholic (as I my self have heard her say) who hearing
and seeing what had happened, and grieuing for her impatience came in to visit
her, or rather to comfort and content her. The Doctor was no sooner entered the
chamber, but she began to relate the whole discourse, A prophetical speech
foreshewing his end.
as if he had known nothing thereof. Which done, the grave Doctor began to use
many spiritual and comfortable words, and in the end uttered (if I may so
term it) these prophetical speeches. Be of good cheer (said he) your Son
is, and shall be very well: and concerning his tooth, assure your self it does
foretell, that he shall travail further, then the Queen has any land, and at
the length return again to the unspeakable joy and comfort of all that love
him.

These words of the Doctor were often rehearsed in the hearing of many, long
before his going over the seas, by his mother: the effect of which saying I
leave to the indifferent Reader to consider, whether it be not altogether
accomplished, and whether his glorious Martyrdom, and great courage in the
same, foreshewed by his tooth, was not a comfort to all that loved him or
favored the Catholic cause. But let us return to our Infant, who until he
was two years old had the same tooth in his head, but then he lost it, and it
vanished away without pain, trouble, or any advertisement.

With no less admiration may I report unto you his admirable ripenes and
gravity even in his infancy, His gravity in his childhood.
who was never delighted with childish plays, or any thing that might seem
toyish: no, he would never be enticed to play at any time with like aged
children, but loved greatly to behold the heavens, and therefore he usually went
forth in the evening to delight himself with the sight of the skies bedecked
with stars. And on a time in these his tender years going forth at night
according to his custom, this strange spectacle appeared to him in the air.
He saw, as it were, armed men with weapons killing and murdering others that
were disarmed, and altogether destitute of like furniture, and great store of
blood running every where about them.

This strange sight put the child into a great fear, A vision foretelling our
Countries persecution.
which caused him to run in hastily to tell his mother, being then a Widow,
what he had seen, and she presently went forth with three or four of her
neighbors, who that night had supped with her, and they were all eyewitnesses
of the same spectacle. Thus much I my self have heard them report, who also
affirmed, that my self was then present, but being very young, I cannot remember
it. This happened in the beginning of our chiefest persecution, not long before
the glorious death of B. Father Campian, and the rest, about the year 1581.

Seruit hero, duce hero, Christi fit seruus Vterque,
Fidus proque hero agit maxima, proque Deo.
OF HIS CONVERSION to the Catholic faith. CHAP. II.
NOW GROWING further in years, frequenting the Shooles until he was 13.
years of age, in which process of time he attained to so great virtue of
obedience toward his mother, of modest behavior toward all, of reverence
toward his elders and betters, His virtuous educatio^.
and profited so much in learning, that he was not only worthily admired and
beloved of many, but especially of his Schoolmaister above others, who had
greatest trial of him, who now began to affect him so much, and to conceive
such an opinion of him, as he would often use S. Paul's words unto him, Gratia
Dei es id quod es, and gratia eius in te vacua non est. Through the grace of
God thou art that which thou art, and his grace in thee is not void.

Now I cannot here but much admire the providence of Almighty God, who by his
secret and unexpected means brings ever that to pass which he has
preordayned. This youth during all this time, was no member of the Catholic
Church, but frequented the Protestants Conuenticles, with the rest of his
friends. How then was he drawn to the true faith and religion? Oh God, that
orders all things sweetly, disposed this accordingly: for it happened that a
Gentleman coming to the place where he was taught, and lodging at his
Scoolemaisters fathers house, How he became (...) to Catholic Gentlemen
who kept an Inn in the same City, and by chance, or as God would have it,
meeting the Schoolmayster there at supper, after other ordinary communication,
inquired of him, whether it were not possible to get in that City a handsome
youth to ride with him as his page, whom (quoth he) I will mantaine like a
gentleman, if he have learning, nourture, and behavior beseeming such a
person. To which the Schoolmaister made answer: Such a youth there is here,
Qui virtutem in vultu gerit, who carries virtue in his very countenance: but
(says he) he is the child of a widow, who I much fear will not easily be
persuaded to depart from him.

Whereupon the Gentleman much desiring to have a sight of the youth, obtained
that he should be sent for to his lodging, at whose coming he found the
Scoolemaisters words most true, His leaving of his Friends.
and therefore would not cease his suite until he had obtained his mothers
consent, which by long entreaty and large promises, and an assured speedy
return (the Iunekeeper and Schoolmaister being his suretyes) at length he
enjoyed. And so this our young man being aged about 16. years, upon a sudden
willingly left both mother, friends, and Country, and with all alacrity put
himself into the government of a master, that was unto him a mere stranger.
But here I must advertise my Courteous Reader, that this good Gentleman was a
Catholic, and very much persecuted for his religion in his temporal fortunes,
M Rich. Sherwood.
and therefore made seldom any long abode in one place, for the better
preservation of his living. The same man afterward went beyond the seas, and
was made Priest, so that the man became fellow and brother to his master, as
shall be related hereafter.

This Gentleman at the first had a watchful eye over his new servant in all
his actions, because he knew all his friends to be earnest Protestants, but in
short time he found him so trusty, so secret, Hi fidelity to his master.
and so diligent in all his business and affairs, that he began to deal with
him touching religion for the salvation of his soul: and perceiving him both
tractable, capable, and willing to hear, he so far instructed him, that at
length the youth blushing at his own ignorance, earnestly desired to be
reconciled, and made a member of the Catholic Church, from which he promised
he would never swerve, Deo adiuuante, with Gods assistance. Which pious request
was not long denied him to his exceeding comfort and consolation.

Behold here his first entrance into the way toward heaven, his first stepp
to his glorious martyrdom, His first step toward heaven.
whose devout beginning made him gracious both to God and man. For as before he
was diligent in all his masters affairs; so now he was most fortunate in what
he took in hand, which caused him to be loved of every one, with whom he
conuersed. I cannot here let pass one thing amongst many which this our pious
young Man did in the service of his foresaid Master, which I relate the rather,
because the Gentleman himself, being a Priest in Bruxells of Flanders, told it
afterward unto me; and this it was.

The foresaid Gentleman having dealt in matters of great importance with many
Recusants of our Country, it so fell out, that one of them (whom for many
respects I forbear to name) was taken and committed close prisoner in London;
and because weighty matters had passed betwixt the prisoner and the foresaid
Gentleman touching lands, and other affairs, and thereby was like to ensue
some damage extraordinary to the Gentleman, His Masters confidence in him.
if some means were not wrought to advertise the prisoner how to answer to
those accusations which would be laid against him; and having by himself
sought all the means that he could, to have access to the said prisoner, and
perceiving no hope thereof without eminent danger, desisted, determining at last
to send this his trusty servant, confiding more to his approved wit and lucky
success in all his actions, then to any probability of accomplishing the same.
And (thus resolved) he sent Edmund who was not yet 17. years of age, to effect
that enterprise which himself could not perform; and this he only imposed
upon him, not directing him how it was possible to be atcheiued.

The youth having his charge, went with all readiness, committing his cause to
God, Quia non erit impossible apud Deum omne verbum, for that nothing is
impossible to God. His happy success in his Masters business.
Determining therefore to do (as a trusty servant) what did lie in him, and
thinking on no other means, he took up his lodging near to the prison,
hoping in time to get acquayntance with the keeper or his man, and so to bring
to pass his intended purpose. Neither was his hope frustrate, for within few
days he so ordered the matter, as he fell into great familiarity with the said
keepers man, who (as God would have it) had the charge of the forsaid close
prisoner: and to be brief, in short time he dealt so iudiciously in his
business, that he did not only procure to speak with the said prisoner, but
also to have access unto him three or four times with paper and incke, to
write his mind; and in the end concluded all things so effectually, as if his
master had been present, which was no small marvel to all those that were
in danger, or privy to the same.

Patria' deseritur tellus regit alter in arts
Procliuem retrahit corpora languor edens*
OF HIS GOING BEYOND the seas, and of his behavior there. CHAP. III.
THIS OUR INgenuous youth, having acquitted his master and others of much
trouble and danger imminent by his fortunate dispatch with the close prisoner,
his master having resolved to forsake the Realm, and to retire himself, and
live within the compass of a religious life, His Masters going beyond seas.
determined to place his man with some one of his acquayntance, least perhaps
he should return not without some danger of his soul to his own friends who
were Protestants. This his purpose he disclosed unto his man Edmund, with good
counsel and persuasion to remain firm in his faith and religion.

But when our youth understood his Masters resolution, he cried out with like
words to those of S. Laurence, Quo vadit Magister sine seruo? quo Pater sine
Filio? Whither goes my master without his man? In vita Sancti Laurent
Whither goes my father without his son? And with tears distilling from his
eyes he humbly entreated he might go together with him; Saying as it were with
S. Peter; Domine, Luc. 22.
tecum paratus sum, and in carcerem, and in mortem ire: Master, I am ready to
go with you any whither, to prison, yea to death. But the good Gentleman
forecasting his future ability, His grief that he must forsake his Master
as also to try his spirit yet a little further, made him answer, that it was
impossible. To which our Edmund replied. Alas! and is it impossible? Shall my
native soil restrain freewill? or home-made laws alter devout resolutions?
Am I not young? Can I not study? May I not in time get what you have gotten?
learning for a scholar? yea virtue for a Priest perhaps, and so at length
obtain that, for which you are now ready? Direct me the way, I beseech you,
and let me (if you please) be your precursor. Tell me what I shall do, or
whither I must go, and for the rest, God, who knows my desire, will provide
and supply the want. Can it be possible that he that clotheth the lyllies in
the field, and feeds the fowls of the air, will forsake him that forsakes
all to fulfill his divine precept. Seek first the Kingdom of God, and his
justice, Matt. 6.
and all other things shall be given unto you? Finally he ended (to the
admiration of his master) recyting the words of our Savior: Qui reliquerit
domum, vel fratres, aut sorores, aut patrem, aut matrem etc. propter me,
centuplum accipiet, Matt. 19 Luc. 18.
and vitam aeternam possidebit: Whosoever shall forsake house, or brethren, or
sisters, or father, or mother etc. for my sake, shall receive a hundredth fold,
and possess life everlasting.

By these motions repeated with great fervor of spirit, his Master well
perceived God Almightyes calling in him, and therefore willingly condescended to
let him take his adventure. And so procuring him commendations to the English
Seminary at Rhemes in France, and furnishing him with money sufficient for such
a journey, His passing over the seas.
he dismissed him to shift for himself, his master being not able to warrant
his own passage. And thus in all love and affection, the master and man
parted. At which time he was little above 17. years of age, and presently
without the knowledge of his other friends, he went to Grauesend, and there he
used such diligence (God Almighty withal concurring) that he passed the seas,
and safely arrived at his intended port, from whence he trauayled to Rhemes,
being the shelter of all his comfort; so forcible was the hand of God. And
there he found that Right Worthy President D. Allen (afterward Cardinal) ready
to intertayne him with all fatherly affection.

No sooner was he received into the College, but with all diligence and
alacrity, His virtuous conversation at Rhemes.
he applied his studyes, mixing with his serious thoughts great desires and
endeauours to obtain virtue, and religious devotion. Neither labored he in
vain, for in short time he so much profited, that as of many he was affected
for his amiable and outward behavior; so was he for his true zeal, and inward
virtues, of most entirely beloved and admired, but of none misliked. It were
too long to show in particular his perfect obedience and resignation of himself
to the will of his Superiors, his humility annexed with his exceeding
patience, as I my self have heard his said Superiors make report of him; one
amongst others by occasion trayting of him in writing, gave this Censure.

Edmundus Geninges erat prouidus ad consulendum, His praises written by his
Superiors
humilis ad obediendum: erat in Christo deuotus, in fide firmus, in bonis
operibus promptus, in sermon verissimus, in bonitate conspiouus, and in
charitate praeclarus: Vexabatur frequenter, tolerabat patienter: Erat in eo in
cunctis operibus discretio, and imitabilis erga omnes dilectio.

Edmund Geninges was provident and wise to give or ask counsel, humble to
obey: he was devout to Christ, in faith firm, prompt in good works, most true
in his word, in goodness conspicuous, and in charity excellent: he was often
vexed and sick, he suffered all patiently; there was ever in him, in all his
actions discretion, and toward all sorts of people love, worthy of Imitation.

He was indeed of a very weak constitution of body, and not able thereby to
endure any great hardness, by means whereof at the first, by taking some
extraordinary pains, partly in his study, and partly in his spiritual
exercises, he fell into great sickness, for which visitation he was much
pittyed, His sickness at Rhemes.
and his case greatly lamented by many. And being not able to go forward in his
Course by reason thereof, by the direction of his Superiors, he had thought to
have abridged his longer Courses of study, and only have heard Positive
Divinity and Cases of Conscience. But as he changed his mind, so did a
continual ague, and other infirmityes still molest him, which at length
brought him into a most dangerous consumption; in so much as the Physicians
despayred of his recovery. This when the President understood, he thought it
best, and for the youths greatest good, to send him into England, in hope that
change of air would work some new effect. And so resolving, he furnished him
with all things necessary for his journey.

The young man yielded willingly to the advice of his Superior for obedience
sake, but with much grief, and anguish of mind, that through want of age and
learning, His departure toward England.
he could not enjoy so great a benefit, as was holy Priesthood, the only thing
he came for. He also much feared his own weakness, least his Protestant
friends should by their dangerous snares, and allurements entangle him in his
Religion. Nevertheless he departed toward England, and came to Newhauen, in
France, where finding 2. or 3. banished English Priests (to whom he was
commended) he stayed with them expecting passage.

But listen I pray you a while, what befell unto him. Did he attain England,
the intended scope of his travail? No verily, for then had not the Doctors
Prophecy been veryfied, His lying sick at New haven.
to wit, that his return should be a comfortable joy, and a joyful comfort
to all that loved him. But what befell him? These religious Priests labored
earnestly to obtain passage, the passenger prayed devoutly for health, or safe
conduct: and thus spending the restless time for the space of one fortnight,
at the length they chanced upon a ship fraught for London, in which they
procured him passage, and preparing him victuals, and all things necessary
for his journey, acquaynted him therewith, that he might be ready, when the
Master of the ship should call.

But on the other side, although whiles he made his abode in this place, he had
been assaulted with diverse fitts of intolerable griefs, as themselves had been
eye witnesses, yet now upon the suddayne he desired a little longer respite to
debate and waygh the matter, for that he himself (as he said) greatly amended:
and if (quoth he) there be any hope of recovery, I would be very loath to hazard
my self in so great ieopardy, especially being not armed with the armor of
proof, which I came for, His earnest desire not to go back into England.
to wit Priesthood. These virtuous men aforesaid having bargayned with the
shipper for his passage, half displeased, persuaded him earnestly to take that
good opportunity: but he with bashful modestye, craved their patience,
declaring what extraordinary motions had caused that unaccustomed kind of
dealing, protesting that he found himself at that instant greatly amended, and
almost as well as ever he was. Which strange speeches not without great
admiration, enforced them to cease their suite, and break out into these
terms: Digitus Dei hic: haec mutatio dextrae Excelsi. Exodus 8. Psalm. 76.
The finger of God is here: this change comes from the right hand of the
Highest.

Hence admiring his Saintely affability, and mild behavior, with all
contentment they condescended to his desires. His sudden recovery of a
languishing disease.
And he truly on the very next day, made such a show of recovery, that he was
able with a stomach to eat his meat, to go a good long walk, and such like
tokens he gave of health, by doing much more then he was able to do before,
that it was wonderful. Whereupon the said good Priests resolved to cherish him
a while, and so to send him back again to Rhemes. And finally, within another
fortnight, he was so strong, that he departed toward Rhemes, where not long
after he arrived to his own unspeakable joy, and the comfort of his
Superiors, and friends in the College.

O that I could here declare, or as it were rudi Minerua express the
inscrutable determination and proceedings of God Almighty toward this his
chosen Martyr! Is it not true that holy David says, Behold the eyes of our
Lord, are ever over those that fear him, Psalm. 3.2.
and such as hope in his mercy? And is not that of the Wiseman veryfied, Sap.
81.
Wisdom disposes all things sweetly? Who ever saw, or heard of a disease
so incurable as was his, being that he was far spent with a long consumption,
recovered naturally without a miracle in so short a time, and altogether cured
without any help of physic? But, Opera Dei admiratio nostra, Gods works are
our wonders. Well let us return to our new recovered Champion, His zeal
toward his afflicted Country.
who shaking of all fear of a new fall into sickness, and having expelled all
the cold fits of a shiuering fever, with other languishing griefs of body,
began now in soul to burn with exceeding charity, and religious zeal toward
his Countries good. Wherefore taking to himself a strong resolution he
determined to arm himself with such furniture, as time and place would
affoard, and so to give a present onsett to his enemies, neither fearing their
new-made Laws, nor other torments whatsoever, but blazing this for his poesy,
Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos? If God be with us, who can be against us?

O how often have I heard his Collegian fellows recite unto me his ever used
phrase when occasion was offered him to talk of England, and Martyrdom
therein, which was, Viuamus in spe, Viuamus in spe: let us live in hope, let us
live in hope! But his inward sweet inspirations being unknown to his
Governors, they now again began by all means to persuade him to take his
whole time in the course of his studies, showing him that want of years must
needs be his hinderance from being Priest so soon as he desired, His earnest
desire of Priesthood.
which impediment being by him perceived, his intention of a speedy course
(proceeding from his fiery flames of burning charity toward his Country) was
thereby a little assuaged, yet the cause being not extinguished, it brake forth
again within a while after with such vehemence, as being not able repress it
any longer, he began a new, and more earnest suite to the President, to obtain
Priesthood. And to excuse his want of years he alleged such reasons, that the
said President with the Seniours of the College debating and discussing the
matter maturely, thought it expedient, considering on the one side his decayed
body, and on the other his unquenchable thirst of mind to gain souls to God
in our unfortunate Country, to procure him a dispensation to be made Priest,
which in short time they performed to his unspeakable comfort.

Accipe Verbipotens calicem ritusque Sacratos,
Sanguine Sacra tuo conficienda manent.
HOW HE WAS MADE Priest being but 23. years of age: and of his preparation
to the same. CHAP. IIII.
NOT LONG AFter that the President and Superiors of the College (as we have
said) had thought it convenient, A dispensatio^ obtained from Rome for his
Priesthood.
that a dispensation should be procured for Edmund Geninges to be made Priest
before he was of full years, the said Edmund understanding that letters were
now returned from Rome, made repair to M. D. Barret who was then President,
and his loving good-father (D. Allen being then sent for to Rome) to receive
his long expected answer; and being by him advertised, that his dispensation
was obtained, and that he should presently be promoted to holy orders; being
also exhorted with many spiritual admonitions, to make a due preparation for
the receiving of so great a function as is holy Priesthood, he was almost cast
into an ecstasy of joy, all his thoughts now chiefly tending to nothing else, but
how he might obtain the perfection of virtue, that being the chiefest armor
of a religious Priest, whereby his actions should be wholly devoted to the glory
of God, and the profit of his afflicted country.

Now he began more carefully to gather up fragrant flowers of diverse colors,
to bedecke his English garland. Humility by due desert chalendged the first
place. Patience inflamed with burning Charity possessed the next. Now long
prayer, and other virtuous acts besought Perseverance, and that his unworthiness
might in no case infringe his future good purposes. Now he began to meditate on
the exceeding dignityes, and prerogatives of Priesthood, of the great charge he
was to undertake, and of the exact account he was to render; yea he shaked and
trembled at the words of the Prophet Malachy, Labia Sacerdotis custodient
scientiam, His strange apprehension of the worthiness of Priesthood.
and legem requirent ex ore eius; quia Angelus Domini Exercituum est. The
lips of the Priest shall keep knowledge, and men shall require the law of God
from his mouth; because he is the Angel of the Lord of Hosts. The
apprehension of which thing was so vehement, that it put him into a continual
shaking of his flesh, as it were a palsy, which continued with him even to his
dying day. And many there did note the cause, but more here in England did see
the effect, and I my self at first sight did wonder at the same.

It were to long to recite all and every one of his particular preparations to
holy Priesthood, especially he having learned S. Augustines lesson; In via
virtutis non progredi, regredi est: not to go forward in the way of virtue, is
to go backward. And therefore he spent no day without some act of virtue, either
of charity or humility: at night he used to exclayme against himself, and say
with that renowned king, O diem perdidi! Alas I have lost the day! His
preparation to Priesthood.
Good God how he embraced every occasion offered, for the exercise of any
virtuous action, was it never so base and mean: which being perceived by the
Persident, for his greater exercise of humility, patience, and charity, he made
him Prefect of the Infirmary. This office he very thankefully undertook, and
having now matter to work upon, he so labored about the sick Students, even
in the basest offices, that he was called the very pattern of piety, and
humility: his commiseration was so great, as he might well have said with holy
Job, Miseratio ab infantia mea creuit mecum: Job. 31.
mercy and pity has grown and increased with me even from my infancy.

Time being now come that he should be made Priest, with all humility, tamquam
inutilis seruus, as an unprofitable servant, yet cherefully he embraced it,
quia iugum Christi suaue est, and onus eius leave, because Christ's yoke is
sweet, and his burden light. His exceeding devotion and careful recollection
in celebrating Mass, His devotion in celebrating Mass.
imprinted in the hearts of all his Collegian fellows, an everlasting memory of
him; and they generally would report his extraordinary pious, and comely
behavior at the Altar, to the great comfort and edification of all: for
although he was by nature very affable and merry, desirous of good and virtuous
company; yet before and after Mass, he was seldom or never seen, for the
space of one whole hour, to laugh, play, or spend any time in talk, except
some urgent occasion compelled him to speak, but in continual prayer and
meditation, in which he so behaved himself, as if with the Psalmist he had
made a perpetual league, and said, Meditabar in mandatis tuis, quae dilexi
nimis: I did meditate on thy commandments, which I have exceedingly loved. By
this his piety was much noted, and was very exemplar throughout the whole
College.

Mittitur ad patrios socio comitante Penates;
Ad Thamesim cautus separat ambo timor.
M. b. f.

OF HIS MISSION AND departure toward England: his shipping, and ariuall there.
CHAP. V.
LONG HAD NOT our virtuous Priest been invested with holy Orders, but that
Apostolical faculties were given him, and so with some others he was sent for
England, departing from the College, Act. 8. Romans 8.
tamquam ouis ad occisionem, and sicut agnus ad victimam, like a sheep to the
slaughter, and like a lamb to be sacrificed. And thus wholly mortified, he
took his leave of all the Superiors, and Scholars, who weeping even as those
good Christians did for the departure Act. 20.
of S. Paul, and procumbentes super collum eius obsculabantur eum, falling upon
his neck they kissed him with tears, and deducebant eum ad portam, and many
of them brought him forth of the gates of the City, with diverse others his
Companions in that journey, as F. Tho. Stanney of the Society of Jesus, M.
Doctor Singleton, M. William Mush, and M. Robert Clinch all Priests. Within
few days they came to Treport in Normandy, His taking of ship.
where presently they endeavored to procure a speedy, and (if it might be) a
safe passage. And behold after two or three days abode there, they found an
unexpected and altogether unwonted vessel fraught for England, whose master
was a Frenchman, and in religion well affected. This man imagining (as it may
be supposed) what they were, offered them unrequested safe passage, and to set
them a shore by night, if they so pleased: who with joyful hearts accepted of
his motion, yielding hearty thanks to God for his goodness, and care toward
them, as also to him for his friendly offer.

On the next day committing themselves to the tuition of their high Protector
God Almighty, they took shipping; and wind and weather being both prosperous,
they sailed along the coast of England, and meant to have landed on Essex side:
but for their sakes the Master of the Bark lingered that evening, until it
was two hours within night, and being come near unto Scarbrough, there came
out a little boat with diverse Rouers, or Pirates in it, to have surprised
them, who shot at them diverse times with muskets, but had no harm; for the
wind being then somewhat contray, the master turned his ship and sailed back
into the main sea, where in foul weather they remained three days; and so at
last being driven Eastward, they landed near unto VVhitby in Yorkshire, on
the side of a high Cliffe, with great danger of their lives. At last they came
to VVhitby, How he was set on shore
where going into an Inn to refresh themselves, they found there one Ratcliffe
a Purseuant, who after an exact view of them all, questioned with them about
their ariuall in that place, whence they came, and whither they would? They
answered, that coming from Newcastle, they were by tempest driven thither. And
so after refreshing of themselves, they went all to a Catholic Gentleman his
house (whose name for diverse respects I suppress) within 2. or 3. miles of
VVhitby, by whom they were directed some to one place, some to another,
according to their own desires.

Being thus each one sent to several places, M. Geninges with one other kept
together, who trauayling by the way, How they separated themselves for fear.
determined at last to separate themselves also for fear of suspicion, and so
severally to commit themselves to the protection of God and their good Angels.
And whiles they thus resolved, they came to two fair beaten ways, the one
tending Northeast, the other Southeast: and even then, and there (it being in
the night) they stayed, and fell both down on their knees, making a short
prayer together, that Almighty God of his infinite mercy would vouchsafe to
respect his humble Servants, and send them peaceable passage into the thickest
of his vineyard. Then rising up, they embraced one another with tears
trickling down their cheeks. Thus Edmund took his leave.

Seeing (quoth he) we must now part, through fear of our enemies, His departure
from his Companion.
and for our greater security, farewell sweet Brother in Christ, and most
loving Companion. God grant, that as we have been friends in one College, and
companions in one wearisome, and dangerous journey: so we may have a merry
meeting once again in this world to our good comfort (if it shall please him)
even amongst his, and our greatest adversaries. And that as we undertook for
his love and holy name sake, this meritorious course of life together: so he
will of his infinite goodness, and high clemency make us partakers of one hope,
of one punishment, of one and the self same reward. And also as we began, so
we may end together in Christ Jesus. Thus being not able to speak one word
more for grief and tears, they departed with mutual silence, the one
directing his journey toward London, because he was borne there, the other
Northward, because he was affected that way.

Bis sequitur Frater, bis cor exaestuat, horr et,
Bis coma sic Fratrem nouit adesse suum
M. ba^f

OF HIS COMING TO London, and the strange finding out of his natural Brother.
CHAP. VI.
ALMIGHTY GOD the author of all good motions, by his holy spirit, first
directed this our blessed Priests will and purpose to draw near to his own
proper Country, that he might profit and take some care of his own particular
friends, His repayring to his own Country.
and kinsfolks. Coming therefore to the City where he was borne, half a
year after his ariuall, he found most of his nearest friends and allies to be
all dead, except one brother, whom he heard to be in London, but in what place
he could not at that time conveniently learn. And though he feared least that
too much enquiry should breed suspicion, yet brotherly charity could not
forbear, but provoked him forward to seek his lost-sheep whom he well knew to
be infected with a contagious disease of his soul. Hence presently he went to
London, where like a good shepherd he left no place unsought, where he might
suspect his said Brothers abode. And thus spe^ding a month at the least, and
seeing no hope to prevail, he resolved to leave the City for a season. But God
whose secret providence passes all human understanding (when the time of his
departure drew near) unexpectedly, and as it were digito, with his finger,
directly pointed him to the object that he so long sought to behold, yet very
strangely: and thus it was, as I have heard from his own mouth.

Having (as I have said) a determination to leave London for a while, he walked
forth of his Inn one morning (certain days before he had purposed to
travail) to visit a friend of his on the other side of the City, he lying
then in Holborne; and passing by S. Paul's Church, when he was on the East side
thereof, he suddaynly felt a great distemperature in his body, in so much as his
face glowed, and as he thought his hair stared, and all his joints trembling
for fear, his whole body seemed to be bathed in a cold sweat. A sudden fear
came upon him as he went in the streets at the sight of his Brother.
This strange accident of the alteration of his body causing him to fear some
evil to be imminent toward him, or danger of taking, he looked back to see
if he could espy any to pursue him: but perceiving no body to be near, but
only a young youth in a brown colored cloak, making no reflection who it
should be, he went forward to his intended place, to say Mass that day; taking
comfort in that saying of the Psalmist, Iacta cogitatum tuum in Domino, and
ipse te enutriet: put thy trust in our Lord, and he will nourish and protect
thee.

Behold here the love of Almighty God, who gave him a sight of his brother
whom he sought for, though he passed by him without salutation, the one of
them not knowing the other. But was this all the favor that God showed to this
his elected Martyr? Had he only a bare sight without knowledge? No, no. Attend
the sequel. Not long after, the very morning before he purposed to depart out
of the town, the blessed man recollecting himself in his devotions, seriously
prayed, that his departure without finding of his desired brother might
increase his patience: and although it grieved him sore yet did he cry, Fiat
voluntas tua, my will is thy will, The second time of the same fear.
sweet Lord, thy will be done. His devotions being finished, he went abroad to
another place where he had promised to celebrate Mass that day before his
departure: which done, as he was returning homewards toward his Inn, upon
Ludgate hill, suddaynly as he was going, he felt the same motions as he had
done the time before: for heat striued to expel cold, and cold heat, all his
joints trembled, as dreading some great trouble, or misfortune to ensue: and as
always the silly lamb naturally fears the ravening wolf; so his innocence
fearing the worst, looked back to see who followed him. And behold no man of
mark, but a youth in a brown colored cloak: and at the same instant
reflecting on the time past when he suffered the like perplexity, and
steadfastly viewing the young man, presently he was stricken with this
cogitation, This (quoth he) may be my brother.

And let no man marvel that he could not know him by his favor, for he had
not seen him in the space of eight or nine years before, His first knowledge
of his brother.
and he left him a very little boy in the Country, and then was much altered
(as I have heard) almost from white to black. Well, the aforesaid apprehension
was so vehement, that it caused him to approach the youth, and being come unto
him he courteously saluted him, and enquired what Countryman he was; and
hearing he was a Staffordshire man, gently demanded his name? Who made
answer, his name was Geninges, by which he knew certainly he was his brother
so long looked for. Then with a glaunce toward heaven, in lieu of loving
thanks, and with a smiling countenance upon the party, he told him he was his
poor kinsman, and was called Ironmonger, and that he was very glad to see him
well: and thus they walked down Ludgatehill, he questioning of al his friends,
and in particular about himself, asking what was become of his brother Edmund.
The youth not suspecting him to be the same man, told him, he had heard he was
gone to Rome to the Pope, and was become a notable Papist, and traitor both to
God and his Country, and that if he did return and were taken, he would be
hanged infallibly.

Our sweet Martyr hearing this, and smiling at the boys folly, told him,
Edmund was his eldest brother, His communication with his brother.
and therefore (quoth he) you ought to speak well of him: he added, that he
himself had heard, that he was a very honest man, and loved both the Queen
and his Country, but God above all: yet tell me good cousin John (quoth he) do
you not know him if you see him? To which John answered, No, he could not
remember either visage or stature. Notwithstanding then he began to suspect and
fear that he was his brother, and a Priest: yet nevertheless not knowing what
a Priest was, boldly told him, he could not tell what he was, yet that he
greatly dreaded, he had a brother a Papist Priest, and that he was the man;
swearing withal, that if it were so, he would discredit himself and all his
friends, if he were so proved, and protesting in that he would never follow
him, although in other matters he would greatly respect him.

Which words Edmund hearing, could no longer conceal himself from his
suspicious brother, but told him truly, he was his brother indeed, and for his
love, had taken great pains to come to seek him, persuading him to keep in
secret the knowledge of his arrival. To which the youth answered, he would not
for a world disclose his return, His brothers fear to incur the law for not
reueling him
but yet he desired him to come no more unto him, for that he feared greatly
the danger of the law, that being he was his brother, he should incur the
penalty of the Statute newly made in concealing him. The good Man hearing this,
thought it neither time nor place convenient (being then in a tavern) to talk
of religion, he being but a waggish youth: only he told him he was deceived,
for that he was no such manner of man as he took him for: neither was I (says
he) ever at Rome, or with the Pope, but only have trauayled in other Countries,
for which fact there is no such punishment appointed by the law.

To conclude, much talk they had about diverse things, by which the good
Priest well perceived his poor brother far from any good affection to
Catholic religion, but rather wilfully given to persist in his Protestancy,
withour any hope of a present recovery. And therefore declaring unto him his
present departure out of town, took his leave, assuring him, that within one
month or little more he intended to return, at which time he would see him
again, His departure from his brother, and farewell.
and confer with him more at large about some necessary affairs which
concerned him very much. And thus the two brethren parted, the one to do his
function, in converting of souls, the other to meditate how to corrupt his
own; and so the one went to spend his time in studying how to persuade; the
other how to withstand: the one purposed to make have back again hoping to
save a soul, brothers love him thereunto provoking; the other wished his
brothers never return, through fear of conversion, licentious liberty
brothers love perverting.

Cum veteri peragit Missa pia Sacra sodali.
Jnfestat turbam turba profana piam.
OF HIS RETVRNE TO London: and the manner of his taking, imprisoning, examining
etc. CHAP. VII.
THE TIME APappoynted being expired, our Godly Champion, having labored in the
Country by exhorting, instructing, and exercising amongst Catholics his
Priestly function, withal diligence, according to his promise make to God,
returned to London, to the end he might visit, and confer with his brother. The
same night on which he came to the City, he repaired to a Catholics house in
Holborne, where he found M. Polidore Plasden, a very virtuous and godly Priest.
After a friendly and kind congratulation with some discourses of each others
success in the harvest of England, His meeting with M. Plasden.
they began to confer of that which ever was and still is the chief joy to all
true zealous Priests, and their only felicity, to wit, touching the offering
of the dreadful Sacrifice, where they might serve God together the next day,
and say Mass. At length they concluded to say their mattins together and
celebrate the next morning at M. Swithin Welles his house, being in the upper
end of Holborne.

They also made some acquaynted with their meeting there, whom they wished to
be present; and this they did the rather, because it was the Octaue day of the
feast of all Saints, to the end that their good friends as well as themselves
might on that great feast be partakers of so worthy a benefit. Their conference
of spiritual matters.
They themselves that night kept together, preparing to solemnize the morn
according as the dignity thereof required, and their poor abilities affoarded.
Wherefore they heard Confessions, and did such like acts of devotion, as became
such mortal men as Almighty God in his secret wisdom had chosen as Saints,
and had determined on the feast of all Saints to mark as his own Saints, to
the view and sight of the whole world, by beginning their Saintly co^bat to the
glory of all Saints.

O that I could here express the devotion and consolation which these good men
had all that night powered and infused into them, His preparation to Mass and
celebrating of the divine Mystery.
they not knowing what should befall them on the morrow! Day being come they
lifted up their souls to heaven, and reco^mending their good purposes with the
sins of the people to the holy suffrages of all Saints they went so to Mass,
no doubt accompanied with troops of Angels and Saints coming to behold and
succor them in the Tragedy which here ensues: for now M. Geninges being at
Mass, there were present as hearers, the foresaid M. Plasden, M. Eustach White
Priests, M. Bryan Lacy Gentleman, John Mason, and Sydney Hodgson lay men with
Mrs. Welles, whose house it was, and and other devout people who came thither
on that day for the same purpose, M. Welles himself being from home, and out
of the town.

But behold when he was even at the Consecration of the holy body and blood of
our Savior, one M. Topliffe with other officers knocked at the door. Which
suddayne noise stroke fear and terror into the hearts of all that were
present. But the forenamed good Priests with the rest arose from their
devotions, and drawing out their weapons, (as S. Peter did to defend our
Savior) were ready at the chamber door when their enemies had burst it open,
His saying of Mass and the officers entrance.
bidding them to stand, not suffering any one of them to enter until the
Priest had finished his Mass. At which time, either John Mason, or Sydney
Hodgson came unto them, and seeing them so maliciously bent that they would not
expect, one of them ran upon M. Topliffe to have thrown him down the
stayres, and with such vehemence, as they tumbled down both together.

Then M. Plasden having appointed the rest to keep the broken door, went to
the Altar, and bad the good Priest go forward without fear, and finish his
Mass, to the greater glory of God, and honor of all his Saints: and after
returning to the door, he espied M. Topliffe hastening up the stayres with a
broken head, His manner of taking.
and fearing he would have raised the whole street for help, the more to
pacify him, seeing no means to escape, he told him, that he should come in
presently, and they would all yield: which promise was accomplished by and by;
for no sooner was the Mass ended, but he with the rest rushed in, and took M.
Geninges, and all the rest, men and women, with Church-stuffe, books, beads,
and all things that they could find. They carried them all to Newgate, and
were not ashamed to lead M. Geninges through the streets in his Priestly
vestements, for greater show of this their insulting triumph, and the more to
make him a laughing stock to all the beholders, who are commonly ready (as
they well knew) exceedingly to scoff at such an unwonted spectacle.

Thus these devout Catholics to the number of ten, or thereabout, were
committed close prisoners. His examination before Justice Young.
They used them very hardly, according to their accustomed manner, and within
few days after, they were brought before Justice Young, and examined very
strictly upon points and articles set down in the Edict lately before
published. Finally they being all examined, were set back to the prison whence
they came, there to expect the trial of the law, and execution according to
the same, if they altered not their minds.

In the mean time M. Swithyn Welles came home to his own house, in which (as
is aforesaid) all these Priests and Catholics were apprehended, Master Wells
his apprehension.
he not knowing what had happened; and finding his doors shut up, and all his
people gone, inquired of his neighbors the cause of this suddayne alteration,
who told him that his wife was prisoner in Newgate, with many other Papists
taken by M. Topliffe and others of the Queens Maties. officers. M. Welles
hearing this, and being a man of great fervor and courage, went forthwith to
Justice Young, and debated the cause of the ransacking of his house in his
absence, demanding his wife and keys of his lodging. But the Justice presently
sent him unto his wife with a pair of iron boltes on his legs, promising him
audience on the morrow concerning his suite.

The next day, as he promised, the Justice came to the prison with diverse other
officiers and examined the said Gentleman concerning his inward dispositions
and intentions, His imprisonment and examination.
because they had nothing to lay to his charge touching the rest which were
taken in his house. They pretended indeed much matter against him, but he
boldly answered that he was not acquainted with their doings: Notw^^^^^^nding
(says he) since I must needs suffer in so good a quarrel, I will now willingly
be partaker of their merit. Whereupon he affi^^ed he thought his house the
better, that so (...) a Sacrifice had been there celebrated, and wished that
himself had been present when it was offered, to the glory of his Savior Jesus
Christ, and profit of so many souls that heard it. Then the Justice began to
storm when he found him so resolute, and therefore told him in plain terms,
he came time enough to taste of the sauce, although he were ignorant how the
meat sauoured. And so for that time they departed, leaving him in prison
whereto he was committed.

Vinctos sanguineum stiterunt ante tribunal,
Mitibus assignat vox rabiosa crucem.
OF M. GENINGES HIS Arraygnment, and Condemnation: and what happened therein.
CHAP. VIII.
AFTER MANY examinatio^s, threats, and devises used to withdraw these good
Priests and Catholics from their Religion, the fourth day of December the
Officers came with bills, halbards, and other weapons to the prison, His
arraignement
and so conveyed them from Newgate to the Sessions House in the old Baily, as
if they had been so many incorrigible felons, or heinous Traitors. There they
were arraygned, and indighted of grievous crimes, and a Jury was impanelled to
find them all guilty of high treason, and yet all that they could prove
against them, was no more, then that one of them had said Mass in M. Welles
his house, and the rest had heard the said Mass. But M. Topliffe made a long
exclamation against M. Brians man for tumbling him down the stayres (as is
said before) and plainly told him before all the people, he should he hanged
for it.

Many bitter words, and with some derision also, passed from the Judges, How
the Judges put a fools coat on his back at the Bar.
and Justices against the said persons arraygned, a great part whereof touched
M. Geninges, and M. Welles: but especially M. Geninges was scorned and
reviled, because he was a very young man, and had angered them with disputes.
Nay the more to make him a scoff to the people, they vested him again, not
with his priestly garments, but (almost as King Herod and Pilates soldiers
did our Savior) with a ridiculous fools coat, which they found in M. Welles
his house, and when they had so altered him, they laughing told him, he was
more fit in that attire to be presented to the Queen for a iester, then to a
Nume for a Confessor.

Moreover they most slanderously affirmed, that it was impossible for him,
being a young man, fair and fine, and as they termed him frolic, Falsely
^laundered.
not to break the bands of vowed chastity, by being naught with those
beautiful young women with whom he had daily conuersed. But our chaste Priest,
Sapiens in bono, and simplex in malo, wise in good, and simple in vice, well
knew they judged according to the grounds and principles of their own
Religion, and the custom of many of those which do profess it; and therefore
meriting thereby very highly, took all things with exceeding great patience,
and replying nothing to such calumnious slanders: only with S. Stephen he
said, Act. 7
Domine ne statuas illis hoc peccatum; Lord lay not this sin unto them.
Nevertheless in the mean time he called to mind, what his Lord and Master
had suffered before him for his example, and imagined all those calu^niations
by him now suffered, to be lively representations of the Jewish slanders
toward Christ our Savior, although in a far inferior degree.

He also firmly fixed in his tender heart, the memory of our Lords wrongful
condemnation, His patience in suffering injurious words.
and bitter Passion, as a sure bulwark for his defense agayinst the assaults
of all their bitter accusations. I cannot here recite all the occasions of
merit offered to these blessed Confessors by the Iuges. Neither is it my
purpose to set down in particular, all the taunts, threats, calamniations, and
exaggerations which against every one of the^ they thundered out. But any man,
but of a mean understanding may easily imagine them to be great, seeing that
they who uttered them were thoroughly practiced in such like exercises. To
conclude they spent that day in nothing else: so that it being late, they
commanded the prisoners back to the gayle, and took order that the Jury on
the next day should be ready at Westminster-Wall by 8. of the clock in the
morning: which done they departed for that night.

On the morrow, the prisoners were carried through the streets with a great
train, every one being led between two men with halbards on their shoulders
to Westminster, where before some of the Privy Counsel, and certain Judges,
His seconds arraignme^t at Westminster.
they were again arraygned, and the same Jury the day before impanelled was to
give up their verdict. But now began a new combat. M. Topliffe to show himself
diligent, and Justice Young vigilant, left none of the former calumniations
vnrepeated, with additions and digressions, as best liked themselves: so that,
what between the Counsels sharp admonitions and rebukes, the Judges
explications of Statutes, and Justice Yonges and M. Topliffes slanders, they
passed all the forenoone, determining no one thing against the prisoners, but
arose and went to dinner, without doing any more.

They were no sooner departed, but the glorious Confessors all embraced one
the other, His encouragement of his fellows in the Combat
and mutually encouraged themselves to sustain the future assault, as they had
done the combat already past, to the great edification of many standers by. But
M. Geninges especially persuaded them all with a pleasant sweet speech (in the
hearing of many Catholics) not to yield one jot to any of their enemies
allurements, animating them with the saying of S. James, Appropinquate Deo, and
appropinquabit vobis: Approach to God, and he will approach to you. And so they
passed all the time of the Counsels dinner within the bar in prayer and
exhortation to perseverance. In the mean time their adversaries hard hearts
affoarded them not one bit of bread, or drop of drink for their sustenance, so
that they stood all that day without any refreshing, or bodily nourishment.

After dinner the Lords and Judges repaired again to the Bench, His final
condemnation with the rest.
and there again also using long discourses of treasons, they affirmed the
Priests to be traitors, and returned Renagates, Seducers, Plotters of
Conspiracyes, and the like, which those guiltless souls never dreamed of. To
be brief the verdict was given up, and the Priests were all found guilty of
high treason for returning into the Realm, contrary to the law provided in
that behalf; and all the lay people both men and women were found guilty of
felony for religious causes. M. Welles also, though he proved himself not to
have been in town when this Mass was said, yet was he rancked amongst the
rest, only because it was his house, and for allowing the same afterward O
beati qui persecutionem patiuntur propter iustitiam, Matthew. 5
quoniam ipsorum est regnum caelorum! O Blessed are they that suffer
persecution for righteousness sake, because theyrs is the kingdom of heaven!

The sentence of death was pronounced against them thus, that they should all
die at Tyborne, except M. Geninges and M. Welles, who should by executed before
M. Welles his own door in Grayes-Inne fields. Their ^laces of Execution
appointed.
Then the Judges began to persuade them, being condemned, by all means
possible they could, to conform themselves to the present Protestant Religion,
by going to their Churches and Service, to acknowledge themselves guilty, and to
submit their fault to the mercy of the Queen; and they did assure them, that
so they should obtain mercy, else nothing was more certain then an untimely
death. But now the elect of God calling to remembrance the saying of S. Paul:
Cord creditur ad iustitiam, ore autem confessio fit ad salutem; with the heart
we believe unto justice, but with the mouth confession is made to salvation;
seeing no means to escape, but by denying both God and their Religion humbly
beseeched them to cease their suite, and not to endeavor to remove what was
(by Gods grace) immovable. They affirmed stoutly they would live and die in the
true, Roman, and Catholic doctrine, which they and all antiquity had ever
professed: and denied boldly to go to their Churches, or once to think that
the Queen could be the spiritual head of the true Church, or Clergy of
England: the same they pronounced touching their opinions in such like matters.

The night drawing near they sent them to Newgate, from whence they came, with
troops (as they were brought) or officers, Offer (...) unto him of (...) go to
Church.
there to expect death at the Counsels pleasure. M. Geninges and the other two
priests were cast into the dungeon. In the mean while twice or thrice Justice
Young, M. Topliffe, and others came to the prison, and calling M. Geninges from
forth the dungeon where they had laid him, they promised him both life and
liberty, if he would go to their Church, and renounce his Religion. And
although they found him ever in his answers both then and at the bar, very
constant and resolute; yet they ceased not still to pursue their intentions,
hoping at length to gain him, because they imagined his tender years could
not still withstand their forcible charms: forcible I say, for what sweet
allurements can be more forcible then life, liberty, living, and promotion to a
condemned captive?

But this our constant Confessor remembered the words of our Savior, Luc. 9.
Qui me erubuerit, and sermones meos coram hominibus, hunc filius hominis
erubescet, cum venerit in maiestate sua, and Patris, and sanctorum Angelorum.
He that shall be ashamed of me, and of my words before men, him the Son of
man will be ashamed of, His constancy after his condemnation.
when he shall come in his own Matie, and of his Fathers, and of the holy
Angels. And always he pondered deeply with himself this other sentence of our
Lord, Quid prodest homini si vniuersum mundum lucretur, animae vero suae
detrimentum patiatur? What does it profit a man, if he gain the whole world,
and sustain the damage of his own soul? Hence he resolved and was able to
withstand a million of like batteryes, if they could had happened. At length
they finding him so constant, and immovable, waxing angry, they furiously put
him into a certain hole within the prison, whence he could neither get up, nor
down without hazard of breaking his neck, which was also so dark that he
could not see his own hands. There he remained in prayer and contemplation
without all food or sustenance to the hour of his death, desiring God of his
infinite godnesse to give him constancy and perseverance (as he had done in his
former co^flicts) to the end which near approached, and not to forsake him now
in his greatest agony.

Vitae norma decens pariter mors iunxerit Vna.
Haec duo Thesea pectora noxa fide.
M. ba^. f.

OF HIS EXECVTION; and what happened therein. CHAP. IX.
VHEN THE HAPPY hour of his passion was come being 8. of the clock on friday
the 10. day of December, M. Plasden, M. White, and the rest were carried to
Tyborne, and there executed. Mistress Welles to her great grief was repriued,
and died in prison. M. Edmund Geninges, and M. Swythune Welles, as is
aforesaid, were condemned to be executed in Grayes Inn fields on the North
side of Holborne, over against his own door. When they were brought thither,
after a few speeches of a Minister or two that were there present, M. Geninges
was taken of the fledd, whereon he lay. In the mean time he cried out with holy
S. Andrew: O bona Crux diu desiderata, and iam concupiscenti animo praeparata,
securus and gaudens venio ad te; ita and tu exultans suscipias me discipulum
eius qui pependit in te! O good gibbet long desired, and now prepared for my
heart much desiring thee, being secure and joyful I come unto thee; so thou
also with joy, I beseech thee receive me the disciple of him that suffered on
the Cross.

Being put upon the ladder naked to his shirte, His words to M. Topliffe on the
ladder.
many questions were asked him by some standers by, whereto he answered still
directly. At length M. Topliffe being present cried out with a loud voice;
Geninges, Geninges, confess thy fault, thy Popish treason, and the Queen by
submission (no doubt) will grant thee pardon. To which he mildly answered; I
know not M. Topliffe in what I have offended my dear anointed Princess, for
if I had offended her, or any other in any thing, I would willingly ask her,
and all the world forgiveness. If she be offended with me without a cause,
for professing my faith and religion, because I am a Priest, or because I will
not turn Minister against my conscience, I shall be I trust excused and innocent
before God: Obedire (says S. Peter) oportet Deo magis quam hominibus; I must
obey God rather then men, Act ^
and must not in this case acknowledge a fault where none is. If to return
into England Priest, or to say Mass be Popish treason, I here confess I am a
traitor; but I think not so. And therefore I acknowledge my self guilty of
these things, not with repentance or sorrow of heart, but with an open
protestation of inward joy, that I have done so good deeds, which if they were
to do again, I would by the permission and assistance of Almighty God
accomplish the same, although with the hazard of a thousand lives.

Which words M. Topliffe hearing, being much troubled therewith, scarce giving
him leave to say a Pater noster, bad the Hangman turn the ladder, His casting
off the ladder and vnbowelling
which in an instant being done, presently he caused him to be cut down, the
Blessed martyr in the sight of all the beholders, being yet able to stand on
his feet, and casting his eyes toward heaven, his senses were very little
astonished, in so much that the Hangman was forced to trippe up his heels from
under him to make him fall on the block. And being dismembered, through very
pain, in the hearing of many, with a loud voice he uttered these words, Oh
it smartes; which M. Welles hearing, replied thus: Alas sweet soul thy pain
is great indeed, but almost past, pray for me now most holy Saint, that mine
may come. He being ripped up, and his bowelles cast into the fire, if credit
may be given to hundreds of People standing by, and to the Hangman himself,
the blessed Martyr uttered (his heart being in the executioners hand) these
words, Sancte Gregori ora pro me, which the Hangman hearing, with open mouth
swore this damnable oath; Gods wounds, See his heart is in my hand, and yet
Gregory in his mouth; o egregious Papist! Thus the afflicted Martyr even to the
last of his torments cried for the aid and succor of Saints, and especially
of S. Gregory his devoted patron, and our countries. Apostle that by his
intercession he might pass the sharpnes of that torment.

And thus with barbarons cruelty our thirce happy Martyr finished the course of
his mortal life, and purchased no doubt a crown of immortality in the
glorious Court of heaven. Wherefore now he triumphs with all unspeakable joy,
and eatitude amongst the number of those blessed martyrs who have in this world
suffered all torments of persecution, His felicity in heaven
and have withstood Princes and Potentates, laws and lawmakers, for the honor
and glory of their Lord and Savior, and therefore have found true the
confortable saying of holy David, Psalm. 126.
Qui seminant in lachrymis, in exultatione metent: They who sow in tears,
shall reap in joy. Now so much the more is our Saint glorified, by how much
the more he was tormented, according to that saying of S. Cyprian: Quo longior
vestra pugna hic, corona sublimior; praesens tamen confessio quanto in passione
fortior, tanto clarior and mayor in honor. By how much your combat is the
longer, by so much your crown shall be the higher; so that by how much
stronger the present confession is in suffering, so much more glorious and
greater it shall be in honor.

Jussit amor pietasque sacram me tangere dextram:
Cede loco pollex; cedere iussit amor.
OF A CERTAIN MIRAcle that happened at his death. CHAP. X.
THVS HAVE I expressed, and related in a rude style the life and death of
Edmund Geninges Priest, Many particulers of his life omitted for breuity sake
omitting for breuity sake many particulers; yet what I have written does
sufficiently manifest his exceeding great virtue and happiness, who by so
glorious bathing of his body in his own blood, washed away all other defects
of humane frailty, and who by approved constancy and patience, passing
courageously, as it were, through fire and water, attained to a Paradise of
everlasting pleasure and rest. So his own Country which first sought to bring
him to perdition by her infectious doctrine, brought him at last to heaven by
her severe persecution.

But now attend, I beseech you, how the glory of his martyrdom was declared
and confirmed by an evident sign, The veneration of Relics.
showed by the hand of Almighty God, who by divine testimony manifested to the
world the truth of his cause, and the greatness of his reward, making known
also how acceptable a thing it is in his sight to esteem highly and reverence
the sacred relics of his chosen Saints. And truly even in this his Martyr to
the confusion of our Adversaries he gave great solace and comfort to Catholics
concerning that point. And this it was. At the massacring of his body, as there
were many Protestants who came rather to behold the spectacle the^ to pity
the innocent: so were there many Catholics present also, who resorted to his
execution, partly to see this good pastor, Qui pro ouibus suis animam suam
posuit, John 10
who gave his life for the love of his sheep, partly by the sight thereof to
confirm their faith, and increase their charity, and to get courage to embrace
all like assaults and combats, if like occasion should be offered: and partly
to participate, although not in act, yet at least in desire, with him in his
martyrdom; yea and to animate our Champion now in the lists to greater
magnanimty: for amicus praese^s consolatio est afflictis, a present friend is a
comfort to the afflicted, and S. Paul commands us, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
consolari inuicem, to comfort one another.

Amongst the rest there was a Virgin who had wholly dedicated her self to the
service of God. She being desirous to be partaker of so great a merit, Desire
to get some of his Relics.
and to get if it were possible some little part or parcel of his sacred
flesh, or guiltless blood, powered on the ground, to keep as a perpetual
relic for her private devotion, used all diligence to draw near to the
Gibbet, that she might obtain her desire: but seeing her self frustrated of
all in that kind, through the press of people, and also through danger of
being discovered, devotion being her guide, she followed his quarters, as they
were drawn back again to be boiled at Newgate, hoping there at the least to
touch them, before they were dispersed to hang on the gates of the City, being
as it were in despair of any greater benefit.

And coming to the prison, the people flocked together to behold the fresh
bleeding quarters, according to their wonted custom, when any such thing is to
be seen, before they were carried up to boiling, His quarters showed to the
people.
desiring the executioner to show them piece by piece, that so their curiosity
might give censure (as they said) whether he was fat or lean, black or fair.
To satisfy their request, by chance Bull the Hangman took up one of his
forequarters by the arm, which when he had showed to the People, he
conte^ptuosly flung it down into the baskett again wherein it lay, and took
up the head that they might see his face. And (as God would have it) both arm
and hand of the foresaid quarter hung out over the sides of the basket, which
the said virgin espying, drew near to touch it, and approaching warily with
fear lest any should take notice of her so doing, having a determination and
vehement desire to touch his holy and anointed thumb which then appeared next
her, if it were possible; and because it was a part of his hand which so often
had elevated the immaculate body of our B. Savior Jesus Christ, she purposed
not to leave it unhandled for her last farewell.

This her determination and purpose she presently performed, A miracle.
and taking the thumb in her hand, by the instinct of Almighty God, she gave
it a little pull, only to show her love and desire of having it. The sequel
was miraculous: for behold she not imagining any such matter would have
followed, by the divine power, the thumb was instantly loosed from his hand,
and being separated she carried it away safely both flesh, skin, and bone
without sight of any, to her great joy and admiration. O strange and miraculous
separation! O benefit past all requital! The thumb of a man newly dead and
quartered, to depart from the hand, as it were, sponte sua, of it own accord,
to pleasure a friend, that loved him so entirely, and that in the midst of so
many hundreds of people, of a different Religion, yet not espied by any. But
the strangnes thereof I leave to your pious consideration, confessing my self
altogether unworthy, and not any ways able to explicate the worthiness of the
same.

The Virgin upon the forsaid miracle became a Nu^ne.
This young Gentlewoman presently upon this miraculous purchase, having fully
resolved to forsake the vanities of the world, and especially this our
troublesome Country, went not long after beyond the seas, carrying with her
this precious Relic, which she much esteemed. There she devoted herself to
S. Augustine, and is since become a venerable Nun of the same Order.
Afterward she hearing of this Martyrs own brother to live in the Seminary at
Doway, sent him for a token, a little piece of the same thumb, enclosed in a
letter written with her own hand, protesting the verity of all the aforesaid
narration.

Jam Virtus, pietas, redeunt iam saecula prisca
Tu Stephanus, Saulus dum tibi frater erat!
OF THE CONVERSION OF his Brother to the Catholic faith. CHAP. XI.
SEEING I HAVE now again made mention of this our Martyrs brother, I think it
will not be ungrateful to the Reader, if I relate briefly how he came to be a
Catholic, The manner of his brothers Conversion.
and how afterward he took his journey to Doway, and there put in practice such
his good purpose, as was to follow the stepps of his dear brother, whose life
and death I have rehearsed. Verily whosoever reads it, shall find the
intercession of this Saint to have been the only cause (next after God) of all
his good. I have declared already how little hope there was of his Conversion,
when his brother was living: for although he was young, yet was he obstinate,
and rather inclyned to a Puritanicall spirit, then any way fauouringe the
Catholic doctrine, nay he was ever brought up where he never heard any good
report of a Catholic, no not so much, as that they were honest men.

I have likewise showed the great desire the blessed Martyr had to bring his
Brother to be a member of the Catholic Church, The obstinacy of his brother
before his Conversion
and the great care he took for his conversion. I have further set down the
Martyrs strange manner of finding him; and being found, the unbrotherly
salutation he gave the finder, whose behavior was such, as time and place
would not give leave once to speak of Religion. Finally I have mentioned, that
the cause of the holy Martyrs coming to London when he was taken, specially
was his brother John's love: but indeed he was martyred before ever he could see
him, and so he never used unto him any persuasions or reasons for Religion, nor
yet commended he him to any one friends care, so hastened was his unexpected
death. Now I will truly relate the manner of his Conversion, being it cannot
but redound highly to the glory of God, and honor of the blessed Martyr, who
by his prayers obtained that in heaven, which he himself could not effect on
earth. Thus then it happened.

This Martyrs Brother called John Geninges being in London at the very time of
our Cha^pions apprehension, condemnation, and execution, hearing of the same,
rather rejoiced, then any way bewailed the untimely and bloody end of his
nearest allied, hoping thereby to be rid of all persuasions, which he mistrusted
he should receive from him touching Catholic religion. The occasion of his
brothers Conversion.
And through blind wilfulnes intending to withstand all spirit of grace, he
therefore neglected, yea rather scorned to go to see his brother, either
imprisoned, arraigned, or martyred; such was the froward blindness of his
heresy. But about ten days after his execution toward night, having spent
all that day in sport and ioylity, being weary with play, he resorted home,
where to repose himself he went into a secret chamber. He was no sooner there
set down, but forthwith his heart began to be heavy, and his head melancholy,
and he began to waygh how idly he had spent that day. When he was entered into
such conceits, there presently was represented unto his mind a strange
imagination, and apprehension of the death of his Brother, and amongst other
things, how he did forsake not long before all worldly pleasure, and for his
Religion only endured intolerable torments.

Thus within himself he made long discourses concerning his Religion and his
Brothers, comparing the Catholic manner of living with his, and finding the
one to desire pain, the other pleasure, the one to live strictly, the other
licentiously, the one to fear sin, the other to run into all kind of syn,
being stricken with exceeding terror and remorse, he wept bitterly, desiring
God, after his fashion, to illuminate his understanding, that he might see and
perceive the truth. O what great joy and consolation felt he at that instant!
Nay what reverence on the suddayne began he to bear to the B. Virgin and the
Saints of God, which before he had never scarce heard talk of! What strange
motions, as it were inspirations, with exceeding readiness of will to change
his Religion, possessed his soul! And what a heavenly conceit had he now of
his dear brothers felicity! He imagined then he saw him; His brothers vow and
perfomance
he thought he heard him. In this ecstasy of mind he stayed not long, before he
vowed, as he lay prostrate on the ground, to forsake kindred and Country to
find out the true knowledge of his brothers faith, which he soon after
performed (although with much difficulty) and departed England without
aduertising anyone of his friends, and went beyond the seas to perform his
former promise. Finally he attributed his Conversion wholly (next after God) to
the intercession of his blessed brother.

And truly no man according to reason can otherwise imagine, seeing of a
Protestant he became a Catholic in faith, without persuasion or conference
with any one man in the world. His final Conversion.
But sanguis Martyrum (as Tertullian says) est semen Ecclesiae, The blood of
martyrs is the seed of the Church of Christ. Therefore we may now cease to
marvel, seeing all England has been sowed with like grain, that it has
already reaped at the least twenty for one, our spring still continuing, our
harvest ever increasing. And seeing Almighty God has vouchsafed to honor our
Nation with so many glorious Martyrs, it remains that we beholding the manner
of their conversation, may imitate their faith, and endeavor to follow their
happy footsteps. In the mean time it behooves us Catholics touching our
selves to pray for grace and perseverance in that which we have begun.
Touching others, Charity cannot but enforce us to pray for their conversion.

Let us therefore daily and hourly with the Prophet Jeremy cry out unto our
Lord: Recordare Domine, quid acciderit nobis: Intuere, The Conclusion.
and respice opprobrium nostrum: haereditas nostra versa est ad alienos: domus
nostrae ad extraneos; pupilli facti sumus absque patre: matres nostr^e quasi
viduae. O Lord remember what has happened unto us: behold and see our great
reproach; our inheritance is gone to strangers; our houses to aliens; we are
become children without a father; our mothers are made as it were widows. Let
us moreover in our private devotions, implore the suffrages of such holy
Saints, who in our miserable Country have lost their lives for Gods quarrel.
And let us finally follow the counsel of holy S. Ephrem, saying: Imitemur
Sanctos, vt per eorum merita cum ipsis in regnis caelestibus gaudeamus: Let us
imitate Saints, that through their meritts, we may joy with them in the
heavenly kingdom. Which God of infinite goodness grant, for Christ Jesus sake.
Amen.

FINIS.
THE APPROBATION.
VITA Sancti huius, ac constantissimi Martyris, and Sacerdotis, cuius pugna
plurimum creuit and pugnantis gloria, hoc libello sincere descripta, proelo
digna est, vt eius intuentes exitum, conuersationis fidem imitentur.
Audomaropoli 10. Feb. 1614.

Ioannes Redman S. Th. D. librorum Censor.

A BRIEF RELATION BY WAY OF APPENDIX, Concerning the Life and Death of M.
Swithune Wells Gentleman, companion and fellow-Martyr to the foresaid M.
Edmund Geninges Priest.
ALTHOUGH I have already briefly touched the euer-worthy Martyr M. Swithune
Welles, Chap. 8. and 9.
yet having now received a more a^ple Relation of his excellent virtues,
shining both in his life and death, I am invited to set the same down by way
of Appendix word for word as it came to my hands, that the blessed memory of so
renowned a Champion of the Catholic faith may remain consecrated to all
posterity.

He was the youngest son of Thomas Welles Esquire, and brother to that
Worthy Confessor Gilbert Welles Esquire, whose immovable constancy a midst so
many, His birth and family
and so great persecutions under the late Queen Elizabeth, has been highelie
Honorable unto the Cath. Cause, establishing a happy posterity behind him,
enriched with the ample inheritance of his approved virtues.

This Swithune being virtuously educated from his infancy, and carefully
instructed in all manner of learning fitting that age, as he was very pregnant
of wit and understanding; so by his especial industry and diligence he became
so singularly qualified, especially in the studies of humanity, His virtuous
education
as he not only equalled, but far excelled most of his fellows. He was kind
of nature, pleasant of conceit, courteous of behavior, generous in courage,
affable in speech; briefly all his deportment was so prudently seasoned with
vrbanitie, that he delighted his familiars, gained friends, and quailed his
enemies.

From studies he fell to other laudable exercises fitting his degree, but being
now grown to some riper years, he took to wife a virtuous Gentlewoman, who
together with himself being most unjustly condemned to death, after a long
and hard imprisonment yielded her blessed soul into the hands of her Creator,
in the constant confession of our Holy Faith, in the prison of Newgate, in the
year of our Lord 1602.

In this estate as he grew more mature in age, so he did in virtues. To the
provident care of a good master of a family he adjoined many other excellent
employments, highly to his praise and honor. For although he were much
delighted in hauking, hunting, and other such Gentleman-like sportes, yet he so
soberly governed his affections therein, His exercise in riper years.
that he was content to deprive himself of a great part of those pleasures,
and retire to a more profitable employment of trayning up young Gentlemen both
in virtue and learning: wherein he had such happy success, that his School
has been as it were a fruitful Seminary to many worthy members of the Catholic
Church, whereof one has already gained the crown of martyrdom, others yet
remain, some industrious and paynefull workmen in the happy harvest of souls,
and some continue strong and immovable pillars to support the Cath. Cause
against to many grievous storms, and tempests as are daily raised against it.

I shall not need here to speak how temperate he was in prosperity, how
contented in adversity. You shall hear himself an undoubted witness heerof,
excellently expressing the same in his own words, taken out of a letter of
his, directed unto a worthy Gentleman M. Gerard Marin his brother-in-law, whose
virtuous life and death in the constant profession of our holy faith deserves
also great praise and renown in the Cath. Church. His imprisonment.
Thus then he writes, being now a prisoner in the Clincke.

The Comfortes which Captivity brings, are so manifold, that I have rather
cause to thank God highly for his Fatherly correction, then to complain of
any worldly misery whatsoever: Dominus de caelo in terram aspexit, vt audiret
gemitus compeditorum. Exaudiuit pauperes, and vinctos suos non despexit.
Introcat in conspectu tuo gemitus compeditorum. Potius mihi habetur affici pro
Christo, quam honorari a Christo. These and the like cannot but comfort a good
Christian, and cause him to esteem his captivity to be a principal feedome,
his prison a heavenly harbor, and his irons an ornament, and comely badge of
Christ himself. These will plead for him, and the prison will protect him. God
send me withal the prayers of all good folks to obtain some end of all
miseries, His courage and co^stancy in the Catholic faith.
such as to his holy will and pleasure shall be most agreeable. I have been
long time indurance, and endured much pain, but the many future rewards in
the heavenly payment make all pains seem to me a pleasure. And truly custom
has caused, that it is now no grief to me at all to be barred from company,
desiring nothing more the^ solitariness; but rather I rejoice that thereby I
have the better occasion with prayer to prepare my self to that happy end, for
which I was created, and placed here by God, assuring my self always of this
one thing, that how few soever I see, yet am I not alone: Solus non est, cui
Christus comes est. When I pray, I talk with God, when I read he talks to
me, so that I am never alone. He is my chiefest companion, and only comfort:
Cum ipso sum in tribulatione.

I have no cause to complain of the hardness of prison, considering the effects
thereof, and the rather because I fasten not my affection upon worldly
vanities, whereof I have had my fill, to my great grief and sorrow. I renounced
the world before ever I tasted of imprisonment, even in my Baptism, His joy in
suffering for Christ.
which being so, how little does it import in what place I be in the world,
since by promise I vowed once never to be of the world, which promise and
profession how slenderly soever I have kept heretofore, I purpose for the time
to come, God assisting me with his grace in my commenced enterprise, to
continue to my lives end. Mu^dus mihi crucifixus est, and ego mundo. Absit mihi
gloriari, nisi in cruce Christi. I utterly refuse all commodities, pleasures,
pastimes and delights, saving only the sweet service of God, in whom is the
perfection of all true pleasures. Vanitas vanitatu^, and omnia vanitas praeter
amare Deum. Bound I am, and charged with guyes, yet am I loose and unbound
toward God. And far better I account it to have the body bound, then the
soul to be in bondage, living at liberty. His hard usage in prison.
But what mean I to make so many words to you that know this better the^ my
self. Bear with me I pray you for my boldness, and pardon me if I be over
tedious. Hoc solum efficit amor. To conclude with some other matter: So it is
that I have here enclosed a Letter of a contrary effect to this, directed to
a man of a contrary Religion, wherein you may peruse my estate and understand my
request. In case you shall so think good, you may deliver the same, and
further the matter. I would not have sued to be ryd out of this most vile and
chargeable prison, if I had wherewith to defray so exceeding great expenses:
for the more vile and hard usage, the more merit. I am hardly threatened which
danger of death. But if it be no worse, I will not wish it to be better* God
send me his grace, and then I waygh not what flesh and blood can do unto me I
have answered unto many curious and dangerous questions, but I trust with good
aduiseme^t, not offending my conscience. What will become of it, God knows
best, to whose holy protection I commit you. e Carcere and Catenis ad Regnum.

Tuus dum vixero, Sw. VV.

Lo here the Heroical resolution of this noble mind! see to what sublimitie
of Christian perfection his holy sufferinges soon advanced him! Briefly his
ever memorable deeds far surpassed his words. His resolution to die for the
Cath faith.
How unconquerable was he in the greatest heat and fury of his persecutions!
How undaunted at the dreadful sentence of death, of all terribles the most
terriblest? How religiously disposed! how zealousely prepared! how completely
armed did he enter the field to fight the battle of our Lord; like a vailiant
captain of Christ's well-ordered Army! For even in the way to his execution
seeing by chance an old aquaintance of his, he could not forget his wonted
mirth, but saluted him in these words. Farewell dear friend (says he)
farewell all hauking, hunting, and old pastimes, I am now going a better way.

Finally being now come to the place of execution (which for his greater
terror, and reproach was contrived before his own house, in Grays-Inne-field,
His martyrdom
on the North side of Holborne) as one ouerioyed with the burning desire of
holy martyrdom, he was so far from entreating any least respite of life, as
that he rather hastened the executioner to accomplish his greatly expected
death. Dispatch M. Topliffe (quoth he) dispatch, are you not ashamed to suffer
an old man to stand here so long in his shirt in the could? I pray God make
you of a Saul a Paul, of a Persecutor a Catholic Professor. And in these and
other like sweet speeches, full of Christian piety, charity, and magnanimity,
he happily consummated the blessed course of this his mortal life, with the
Crown of a glorious Martyrdom, the 10. day of December, in the year 1592.

O blessed life! O happy death! The whole Church triumpha^t of heaven rejoices
in your victories: An Apostophe to the Cath. of England
the whole Cath. Church militant on earth exulteth in your triumphs. Let then
our Cath. Nobility and Gentry emulate, and imitate this rare example. Hence may
they learn how sweet the yoke of Christ is, which seems to worldly minds
so hard and difficult; how easy and light the burden is, which seems so
heavy and insupportable. This magnanimous spirit and inflamed zeal our holy
martyr learned in the school of tribulation and persecution, growing with the
great Apostle, then most strong when he was most weakened, then most cheerful
when he was most afflicted; then most courageous, when he was most fiercely
assaulted. Let not then your generous hearts be dismayed, let not your noble
courages be quayled: cast your selves securely and confidently into this
heavenly furnace, where your faith and constancy being once tried, shall like
most pure and refined gould give a far more glorious luster, shining before Men
and Angels, to the greater glory of your eternal Father, who graciously
vouchsafes magnificently to Crown all these transitory and momentary
sufferinges, with eternal rewards.

FINIS.

