An answer to the deuillish detection of Stephane Gardener, Bishop of
Wynchester, published to the intent that such as be desirous of the truth
should not be seduced by his errors, nor the blind and obstinate excused by
ignorance.

Compiled by. A. G.

Iudicum. vi. Oh let the^ perish from the earth, and from under the heaven, all
the Idols that have not made the heaven and the earth, destroy you their
groves and altares, If they be gods let them reueng them selves.

Anno. 1547. the. 24, of January

In the viii. leaf i. page and xiiii. line: for stain mne, read, same mine.

To the Reader.
Dearly beloved (bought with the same blood, and therefore part takers of the
same kyngedome) because the Lord our God is the God of knowledge, and will
have such servants as by knowledge in truth without fleshely fantasies,
either of fained gods or any fond worship of man's mad brain (who always
from the beginneinge has run after vanities) will be radie to give answer
of their faieth in him, the God of life and of the hope conceived by his only
word: it becomes all his ^o labor for knowledge, that they may walk
upright in the way of their Lord, and by no halting ignorance to slide forth
of the same and so to provoke his worthi displeasure. And as he is the God of
love, peace, unity and concord, and will have us al tied together with the
bond of love and made thereby (in him) all one body: so does it become us
with open hertes, without all doubleness, one to enstructe an other, to the
edifiynge of our brethern, that in sure grownded faith we may love together
and so enjoy the hope of our vocacion. Therefore, though mi talent be very
small and no principal gift either of eloquence or learning, but only a love
of the truth given unto me, yet saying the world is so blinded with
Idolatry, and so beewitched with popish sophistry, and even now the
spirittes and powers of darcknes work the chief mystery of iniquity and
wickedness, to set up and maintain the most weak Idol that ever was in the
world, in the stead of the most mighty and euerliuinge God: I could think
it no less the^ my most bounden duty, openly to bear witness unto the
truth. And where as the words of truth, have been slandrously and spitfully
named the saieinges of the devil by the spiritual craft of a soldier of
Satan, which by painted words would transform him self into an angel of
light. Whose book is spread every where, and received in many places more
reverently then the blessed bible, the holy word of God. Yet no man has (so
far as I know) once opened his mouth or taken pen in hand, to make answer
to this blasphemouse messenger of the proud Senacherib neglectinge the
liueinge God, for the littel I dole that he makes God or no God at his
pleasure, who suffers Mise to eat him and the wicked to devour him. Let
all other men do as they shall thyncke good, with silence to let such things
slip. Truly if I could say nothing thereunto but only nay, denienge
Idolatry and renouncing all supersticion therein maintained: I judge it my
part to publishe my faith, rather then by my silence to seame to consent to
such diuillishe doctrine. So also do I esteem it the duty of the faithful in
this perilous time, plainly to profess the Lord the liueuinge God, to be the
only God in heaven a boue and in the earth beneth: lest by our silence for
sakinge his cause here upon earth, we be forsaken in his heavenly palace. For
like as in heart we do believe to our righteousness: so must we necessarily
confess to our salvation, as Paul teachethe. ii. Corh. xi.


We must beware (as Paul warnethe, and the bishope takes the same text) first
ofal, that our senses be not corrupted from the simplicite and sing lenesse
that is in Christ, as the serpent begiled Eua. We know but one God. We are
married unto one. We know but one Christ made man and none other creature for
ourcause. This thing as we believe it in heart: so must we in mouth ^o^fesse
the same, if we will walk in the simplicity and sing linesse that is in
Christ, as becomes christians. For if the heart and mouth go together, then is
it sing lenesse, otherwise it is doubleness and dissembling. But there is one
other simplicity (as it has been compted, and as the word has been abused)
which is very folishnes. This may we call the simplicity, that Antichriste
would have still to reign among us, and therefore his champion, when he
brought in the text of Paulle: left out the principal words (Que est in
christo) Which is in Christ, as their old text has it. And through out his
whole book, he would drive us to be simple. That is to say, to follow as we
be led like blind men: that the proud papisticall prelates, still leadeinge
us into the pit of perdicion, abuseing our wines and goods, may say in
their connentes. Let them alone, let them offer still unto Imeages, a pice of
bread or any thing else of a good intent, all is well done that is done of a
good intent,

They may worship a stock or a stone, let them follow their ancient fathers.
They are good simple souls. They do as we and our doctors teach the^. If we
let the^ know al truth: they will be as wise as we, and then they will smally
regard us. This is their workeinge, these are their words, how so ever they
have clok^d hertofore, all the word now sees it. Let us beware therefore, of
this their simplicity, and let us no longer think that this their doctrine
is'true, that al should he well done that is done for a good intent, and that
it is well done in all things to believe their doctors. For this ignorante
opinion that they have grounded in their hertes has hitherto stopped the way
to all knowledge, and now lets faith to be grounded and causes men to
continue still in their old errowres, without any desire to come out of
blindness. Consider therefore (good reader) a gaynste their blind lessons:
that Saull was cast from his kyngedome, for his good intent, even because he
intended to do sacrifice unto the Lord, of the best and fatteste of the
Amalechites. And yet may this seem a gloriouse intent.

The bishops of the Jews and the Idolatours of al ages followed their good
intent: even when they put Christ and all his prophets and Apostles to death.
The bishop of Norwich when he burned pore Bilney, followed his good intent our
other byshopes also, burneninge and murtheringe their brethren in prisone and
out of prisone: followed their good in tents, But God is the judge of the
inte^tes and thoughts of us al, and sercheth the very rain and the holes of
our hertes. Yea the lord our god abhors and the prophets reprove us
always: because we will do every man that seems good in his own eyes

Says not the Lord by his prophet Esaye. Mine intentes are not your in
ente^s, and mi ways are not your ways. But ^o, so far as the heaven is from
the earth, so high are my ways above your ways, and mine intentes above your
intentes. For the belief of their doctors and the prelates of the church
(which thing the bishop labors always to establish) remember that
Christ says, if the blind lead the blind: boeth fall into the pit. And
thou must doub tlesse co^mpt their writtinges eue^ very blindness, in regarde^
of the light of gods most certain word which must be the rule of thy life,
the fou^dacion of thy faith, and the light unto thy feet. As for their
auncientie: be sure to take Christ for they guide, who was before all. And say
with S. Paul, faith is of heariuge, not of the word of any man: but of the
word of God.

Therefore says God the father with open voice from heaven. This is my
dearly beloved son in whom is my delight, hear you him.

Now if any be so fainte herted and so deluded by other, that they thyncke they
may still disseinble with the hypocrites in their owtwarde doetnges: I send
them to the exemple of Daniel, who prayed with open windows, and (with his
three companions) refused to honor the golden Image, and would not dissemble
outward worship, another content them selves with the pureness of their own
hertes (though they might thereby have escaped the fire) consideringe that the
glory of God could not be so fo^dered, but rather hindered by their walkeinge
in the way of the wicked. Therefore says the prophet David. Happy is he that
nether stands sits nor walks (that is to say) has nothing Psal^.
to do with them, other openly or privily, by any color or dissimulacion.

Eliazar had such like counsel of his friends, that he should eat flesh
only which ii. Match. vii.
was lawful, and dissemble to eat the unlawful. But he said it was not
lawful for him to dissemble, and so cause many to be deceived through his
hypocrisy: for so he might escape the death of the body, but the hand of God
he could not avoid. For this cause did Paul reprove Peter for his
dissemblinge be fore the gentiles. And he teaches the Corinthians Galat. ii.
again, that there is no company of light and darckenesse, no dessemblinge to
be partaker boeth of the cup of Christ and of deuilles.

Our members must be the weapons either of rightuousenes, other else of
vnrighttuousenesse, there is no mean for still and ware politic persons. And
therefore says our master Christ, he that is not with me is against me. And
he that does not gather, does scatter. These words of Christ and such
like, and none other cause (whatsoever any man shall imagine) have compelled me
to publish my faith, and in the name of the liueinge God, to make answer to
one book, which of all other I esteemed most perilouse and poysonful, boeth for
the authorite of the writter, and the subtle handellinge of his mattier in the
maytaineinge of that Idol, which all the world has worshipped so many years.
The name of the book is the detection of the diuillysh sophistry. The author
that made it is Stephaue Gardener, bishop of Winchester, the chief mantainer
of the popeishe tradicions, as appears by all his deeds and writings. How I
have used my self in the same: I shall show at few words.

Because I did take upon hand to confute his book: I could keep no comely
order but as the words do lead me, so am I compelled to go forward. Yet have
I not written his whole text in my book (because it would* have been to much
tediouse and over long but only his* chief, mattier and principal
arguments, whereof I trust not one has escaped untouched. I lest of the
residue, thinkeing it a very vain thing to contend about trifles, as I
should have done of necessi^e, in waigheinge every word and ponderinge every
sentence. The book is so far spread a broabe, that I can not belie him but it
shall be a witness against me, in every corner. For it was plentuousely
imprinted by John Herforde in aldergate street at London, and is to be sold at
the sign of the bell in poules church yard. I have principally and chief
labored to establishe the true fayeth in the liueinge God: by the reproueinge
of the false and fained goods. Secondly, I have taught the trwe understanding
of the words of the supper of the Lord, and the right use of the same. Which
two my chief purposes how faithfully I have done them: the fathfull shall
judge, knowing the voice of of their shepeherde.

In mine answer to his words, I trust no man shall be offended with any
vnchrist an rayleinges, though great accasio^ be offerred on his part,
bringeinge our arguments so spitfully in the name of devil, with yea, says
the deuell, as though the deuell where a destroier of Idols, wh^e only has
been their mainetainer and vpholder, from the be geninge of the world unto
this day. Yet I do think nothing less, then to satisfy all men with my
writtinges, more then other have done before mi time, with theirs, much more
witty, more learned and godly. No, I do suppose, the hight learned may find
many fautes there'with, as I* acknowledge mi self far under the perfection of
their high lerninge. Nevertheless, I trust in God that it is not all together
so rude nor unfruitful: but that the unlearned (for whom it is chief lie
written) shall increase by it in knowledge, cast of much supersticion, and
take conforte of conscience. Whom also I beseech, even for the love* of God,
and* as they tender their souls health: not to cast away this bokethough
they read something therein that they never hard before, but rather desire of
their most merciful father, that their old errors wherewith they have been
deceived by blind teachers, may be taken away. And if there be any that can
not sodaineli cast of the old skine with the serpent and forsak their old
ignorance confirmed with long custom: let the^ desir of God so much grace
that they may more quietly then has been accustomed, hear men talk of the
faith they have conceived in the liueinge God. For than shall it be well with the
christian religion: when the one part may boldly, and will redily give
answer of the hope they have conceived, and faith whereby they trust to be
saved, and the other part will mekeli hear what is spoken, and quietely
suffer the lambs to feed of their sweet pasturs. So shall the prophecy be
fulfilled. The lamb shall lodge with the woulfe, the leoparde and Esaye. xi.
the go^e shall lie together. The calfe, the lion and the sheep shall dwell
together, and a little child shall be their herd and drive them, which thing I
trust partly shall be fullfilled in our time under our little Josias, to whom
God grant the abundaunce of his grace. And most fully under the true Josias
Christ Jesus our savior, who only is the end of all prophecies, in whom
they al are made perfect, with whom we shall enjoy this perfect peace, so
many as defire to know the living God, and whom he sent down to save the
world Jesus Christ, now sitting at his right hand, to whom be glory For
ever and ever. So be it

John. iiii. Episto. i. Who so knows God hears us. An^ he that is not of
God hears not us. And herby do we know, the spirit of truth, and the
spirit of errowre.
The Prologue.
GRace and peace from the Lord the liueinge God, who has all our hertes in
his hand to move and stere to what shall like him best, who only knows the
hertes of men, and therefore oneli is the judge of the thoughts and intentes
of us all, what or when so ever we speak or think. whose day and judgment is
without regard what man (which is but flesh and blood, and therefore full of
error and blindness) shall dispute, and determine and judge. I patiently
look for and a bide when as all darnell, drake and weed shall be cast into
the hell fire and all the good grain shall be gathered into God his own
garner, unto whom we live all the time that we walk upon the earth. And when
we die yet are we sure that we are his own, by the ransom that his dearly
beloved sone Christ (our Lord and head) has paid geueinge the holy ghost into
our hertes as a most suer witness of the same, teacheinge us to cry. Aba
father, whereby we know that though we die, yet we die unto him to live ever
after cowpled and joined in one kind and nature unto our head Christ, who as
he is fully God, and of equale power with his father, so shall he make us like
unto him when he shall appear (after our portion and measure) partakers of his
godly nature, like as he has in his world (though but in a shadow and cloud,
in regard of the fullness that shall be declared) be gonne al ready to regenerate
and begete us a new* creature, by the holy ghost workinge by the word of his
truth, that we now resembling the image of God whereunto we were made, may
be continually occupied in the works of his kingdom, as be these. Justice,
peace* and joy in the same holy ghost, geuear of al goodness. For he that by
these works serves Christ is acceptable to God and conmended of men This
some ^^e ever lasteinge God without begininge and without endinge, he give me
grace (to the fortheraunce of his glory) to make answer to that deuellishe
detection the sophistry of Satan published by Stephane Gardener bishope of
Winchester, for the maintenance of the popish Idol, the dombe God, and
poetical chaungling, where by, not only the true living God is neglected his
true honor obscured and defaced, the preachinge of his word almost set at
naught: but also, all kinds of popery, as images, blessing, kissinge,
shaueinge of crowns, supersticio^ of garmenets and such like, are craftily, by
subtle points of the popes sophistri and words filthy, framed for such
merchaundise, confirmed and established, as thought all the whole heap of these
triffes heaped up together were the religion of a Christian man: where as to
know God for our true God, and whom hehath sent, Jesus Christ, and by this
knowledge to be borne a new and to keep our self immaculate and vnde filed
from the world is: the true and perfect religion demanded of us true
christians. The other is but countrefaite what so ever ^his sophistry does
name it) because our master christ (who can not lie) does say full plain.
(...).

They worshipe me in vain, teacheinge the doctrine and precepts of men etc.
And where he brings in this text in the end of his book, nothing so full as
our savior Christ did speak it (as he knows well inowgh if he have so much
Greek as he braggeth abroad) he adds thereunto his own gloss, as though he
could utter the words of christ the sone of God, much more wisely by his
babbling. Yet am I content to let his own gloss be his own judge in these
matters. His words be these. They worship me in vain, with the teachinge
of such as remain in the estate of men only, and the^ teach their own and
for the^ selves, for all such teachinge is like the teachar that is to say
carnal. Let eueri man (that has not his conscience al ready brenned with the
hot pro^e) mark whether his own gloss make against him, and all the
ceremonies that his father the pope, being (I trow) but in the estate of a
man, and that a carnal man, has made, though Winchester go about craftily
(according to the cannon law whereof he is sworn by solemn oath doctoure
and teacher) to make him more the^ a man. And mark again good christen
hertes, what they win by their gloses and multiplied words, whereby in faith it
were very easy to confute them all, even by the testimonies of their own
doctors (as Bucere, Ecolampadius, and Frith have done perfectly well, if
these men would suffer there books to come to light) For these papists do so
mixte the truth and salsehed together (for without some ground of truth noman
would believe them) that the one piece of the tale stands commonly with the
truth and the other utters their salshed.

And therefore speak they long matter and are not content to say plainly a
spade but they must necker it as they do in their mattens and say, spa^a
a^ade. As for me I have learned to call bread, bread, and to speak althinges
plainly. Therefore by the open scriptures, will I make them answer to their
questions. For all the scripture inspired from God, is profitable boeth to
teach and to reprove, to correct and to instruct in righteousness, that the
man of God may be perfect and fite for every good work.

So that if there be any* good work* to be taught or ill worck ^o be rebuked we
must go to the scripture only, as to the toutchstone and only trial of al
truth.

For with scriptures did Christ drive away the devil, and not with holy
water, as you are reported to say that the devil greatly dreadeth it, and so
do ye still command that it shall be made a coniured water every sonnedayes
in* every church, to drive forth deuilles. But he though he were boeth god
and man, alleges scriptures always to confirm his saienges, and commands
his hearers to sherch the scriptures. So do Peter, Paul, James, and John.

Whereas Paul being brought up at the fete of Gamaliell the great lawier, was
ready inoughe to have disputed out of the Thalmud of the tradicions of their
fathers, which he says he has ernestely studied being ou^ of the
phariseies, and interpretour of that law, and such one as by the outward words
of the law could not be found fantie, Gala. i. Phili. iii.
Yet did he acco^pte all this, boeth lerneinge and outward holiness (which
other men did take as no small gainne and ^^cre) to be damage and hindrance for
Chirst, whom so sone as he was called to publishe and preach he did not compare
with the docters of the Jews, neither with Gamaliell, Annas or Laiphas. But
knoweinge his learneinge to be more lively than was theirs (which being but
f^esh and blood, could teach only carnal and f^eshly things) went straight
in to Arabie, there to publishe this glade tidinges, ever teachinge by the
scriptures that Christ, did come this to suffer in the flesh, and that he was
after that, entered into his glory.

So do I intend (after the measure of my talent) to answer by the lernige of
my master Christ, whom only. I do take to be al sufficiens in all truth, so
that he can neither be deceived nor deceive, to whose wisdom no man can add
one jot or title to make better that he has made, to institute or ordeine
(whose whether you will call it, because ye are so contenciouse, about trifles
that you may seem to say some what) better then he him self has* instit^ted
and ordained, or yet in speak better then'he has spoken. And in this be
half, I must (even of brotherly love) desire all indifferent arbitours and
judges of my writings, that if they do read any bitter word or hear any
sharp sentence against the mainteiners of this Idol: they do not impu^e it
to any pride or arrogancy but to the unworthiness of the matter, that man
should be so mad to set up a creature most vile and most weak in the stead
of the Lord of hosts whose pouer is incomparable. In the which thing, being a
cause (...) so great importance, and weight if I should coldely or faintly
speak or write I might well be thought worthy to be one of them whom John
prophecieth, for their faynte hertes, worthy to be v^etted up again, being
nether hot nor cold. I do fear me the plage of God has worthyly commen upon
many in this same royalme, for this only vice. But God, he is merciful if we
will repent.

As for me O Lord thou knoweste al things, thou knoweste mine heart, and
serchestmy thoughts. Thou woteest that it is neither of malice nor presumption
that I do write any word in this book, but only for the pride of the papists,
and especially for the wicked malice of proud A man, which seaketh how to
destroy thy servants, labourethe to oppress thy light sent now in these
la^er days at the time appointed, into the world, provoke us with bitter
words, to make answer in thy cause, calling us diueles, and the reasones made
against Idolatry for the an anseinge of thy glory, he calls the dy^eles
words and saieinges, which blasphemies cause me that I can not give place but
something answer to his worthiness, and not give place to such shameless
writings.

Though I could be content (and that with good will so that it were no
derogacion to thy glory) not only to pass with silence all tau^tes, rebukes,
che^kes, and raileinges, yea and to suffer all cruelty and tirannus torments
that he does excogitat or find out against us: but also to kiss his very
footsteps, and call him Lord at every word, to kneel and lowte as do his
flatterers. But then l^^e we forsake thy cause, we can not have thy word in
worthy reverence, magnifieinge thine enemy.

Take thou in good worth therefore (O Lord (these our doings. Make the^
serve thy glory. Be merciful to thy servants, and stop the mouth of thine
enemies that thy will may, be known and fulfilled among us in erath, as it is
among thin angels in thine heavenly palace So be it.

To your first words therefore (bishope Stephane, pardone me I pray you that
I do not call you Lord, boeth because I have learned by scripture that Christ's
byshopes Math. xxiii.
may take no such vain titles, and also that you ought to calenge no such
authorite of James. iii.
Lordeshipe over your lotte and people appointed unto you, and Peter and Paul,
the i. Peter. v.
good shepeherdes do we name without such vain titles of Rabby) you will have
us consider i. Chap. How full of iniquity that time is.
how full of iniquity this time is. Let us consider it for the love of God (O
bishopes) but not takeinge iniquity as you do, to be what so ever thing is
against the tradicions of your Romish father, who now works the chief
mystery of iniquity, and every one of you helps after to his pour, in
kepeinge down the word of God, clokeinge your hypocrisy with contrefaite
holiness, and tourneinge backewarde so far from Christ: that every man
may see who is the wicked man, and the adversary or Antichriste, lifteinge
him self against every thing that is God or godly, So that now your
shameless writings of your doctors and maintainers: do record how you can
make God, create the creatoure of heaven and er^h, and so make him a creature,
that where he has but once created the, thou maiste be out of his det and cre^
him a thousand times. Oh abominable blsasphemie A man to make God, at whose
terrible majesty, heaven and earth do tremble. Oh shamlesse iniquity, to
create thy creatoure without whom thou falleste in to duste and ashes. But
you will say (O bishope) that there is no such blasphemy in your books,
neither can you perceive the wickedness of the popes pardones, and pilgrimages
which are destroyed in this time, The Sodomatrie babilonical bondage,
supersticiouse blindness of the Abbaies, which our king has most
christenlyke confounded. But for this our mattier, I say. I plucked half a
leaf out of a book lieinge tied in chains for a Jewel in the great
cathedral church, Lincoln minstre, which has this plain greare, by these
plain words. O sacerdos, nonne creaui te, et dedi tibi potestatem creaudi me?
quare si non sacrificas, et c. O priest, have I not created the, and given the
pour ^o create me? And such other shamful gear.

There is none so blind as they that will not se. And saying such blindesse is
in you bishopes, who should have hade the eyes to have espied this ware long
before it hade ben brought into the churches contrary to the word of God: how
can it be but by your careless negligence, the world is waxen full of
blindness, misery and all kinds of iniquity, for the which you shall
answer at the dreadful day when the blood of every one of your sheep that
perishes shallbe required at your hand. Let us consider yet if you please,
this wickedness some thing more deaplye.

Paul in his first Epistle to the bishop Timo. i.
Timothe, says that the spirit tells for certain, that in the latter
days, some shall depart that diuil^ sophistry
from the fayeth, attendynge unto deceptfull spirits and doctrine of diuelles,
speakeinge falsely by dissemblinge hypocrisy haueinge their consciences marked
with the hot yrone.

And that we should not doubt of this devilish sophistry and open iniquite:
he adds two special properties, that is, to prohibit or forbid marriage, and
command to abstain from meats which God has created to be received with
thanks geueing, as the good ceatures of God. Who follows the diuelles
doctrine most in these to points: is not hard to be judged of all the world

Yet must we futhermore consider the spirit^es you say which thing we* are
not loath Believe not e^ie spirit. John. iiii.
to do (for John teaches us so) mistrusteinge our own judgment. And John
says that every spirit that confesses Jesus Christ to be come in the
flesh, is of God. This do we all confess, whom you call at your pleasure
heretics, and say that we will doubt in all together. But we knoweinge
certenlie John. i. Timo. iii.
by the scriptures, that he was manifestely declared in the flesh to be very
man, and perfectly declared in the spirit to be God in the wonderouse workinge
of his miracles, was seen among the angels, was believed in the world, and
received into glory, where he reigns equale with his father, sittinge at the
right hand of God, from whense we no thing doubt, but we shall se him come down
as the apostles did se him go up into the heauenes. Act. i. In the mean season
we believe steadfastly that he is with his faiethfull church by his holy spirit
even to the worlds Ephe. v.
end. For the which he gave him self to sanctify it and cleuse it, in the
fountain of water by the word, to make it unto him self a gloriouse
congregation without spot or wrynckle or any such thing, but that it should
be holy and without blame, Where contrary wise, you (which account your
selves only, men of the church) and spirirituall men, as the only partakers
of the spirit (do with out scripture or reasone) teach us lay and lewd men
(as ye call us) only with sword and fire, that Christ was not very man
haueinge a natural body. For you say that this his body that he had may be
in. x. thowsande places at once. Which property, how well it agreth with a
natural body: all that have any knowledge may decerne. Again you say that
this body of the same lengeth and breadeth that it hanged upon the cross:
may be closed in a little box, contrary to the ordinance of man's natural
body in the creacion. And where we se nothing but a piece of bread (for you
can not teach us by the scriptures that the bread is changed) we must neades
believe, that their is a body, besides the bread because you say so thought
there can be perceived neither quantity nor quality, that is to say,
nothing parteininge to a body. As for your answer of fayeth constrained to
believe this without either scripture or* reasone, that it may have merit, and
that all these be natural reasons: I shall answer when I come at those words.

In the mean time mark your own maliciouse wickedness, how you will have*
Christ to have a body, nothing like the natural body of man, but insensible
and infinite yet by your subtilties to be comprehedend, and within your listes,
bands and boxes, to be contained and have his measure appointed, but in no
part agreeable to our natural bodi which he did voultchsalfe to take upon him.

Thus after you have denied him (by your wicked enue^cion) to be a very man,
like one of us (sin only excepted) which the scripture teaches plain:
After you have denied christ to have a very natural body and very flesh,
then proceed you to teach how he comes in bread. And because you ^et Christ's
religion in your ceremonies as farthynges that make the heap: you set Jesus
our saniour, to come in all trifles and baggage, Yet to cloak your false speech
with hypocrisy, you say properly, that Christ consecrateth him self Folio.
lvi.
in those forms of bread and wine, with which word consecrate, you ingle by
your di^ilish sophistry. For if ye mean, he haloweth him self into bread and
wine (which your word consecrate does signify) as lewd as you take us, we
would laughed at your folly. If you would say by that word, he tourneth him
self into the form of bread and wine: so then your doctrine is that Christ
comes unto us in bread and wine. And we say that he is comen all ready in
the flesh, and in the same flesh is gone up to heaven, and from thense shall
come to judge all flesh. You say lo, here is Christ. Lo, there is Christ.
Look whose spirits you be. You are of the world and therefore speak you of the
world, and the world hears you. And like as by faieth so also by love,
says John, is the spirit of John. iiii.
truth and of errowre known asu^der. Therefore let us love together, for love
is of God, and every one that loves is borne of God.

He that loves not knows not God, for God is love. If we love together God
dwells in us, and his love is perfece in us. If any man say, I love God, and
does yet hate his brother: that man is a lier. For he that loves not his
brother, whom he sees: how can he love God whom he sees not: How your hot
bourneinge love (which causes you to bourne men that can not understand your
gloses) can be of god I know not: but this wotte I well that when the people of
Samaria would not receive Christ, his Luke (...).
Apostles would have had fire from heaven to bourne them. But Christ
answered. You know not, whose spirits you are. The son of man did not come
to destroy the souls of men: but to save them. And you bishops have your
authority to edify and not to destroy. But the old serpent and his first
begotten caine, the^ Pharao, next, Herod and the phariseis, the old byshopes
condemninge Christ, and you their successors, banisheinge his word with
cruelty: are of a contrary spirit. And where you bid us take Take heed of
carrion.
head of cario^, surely your gloss is a very carrion, and the word of God which
you take a way from al men save ge^tleme^ and merchants is the only fode and
life of the soul, where it lives as Christ him self wittnesseth. Not Mathe.
iiii.
by bread only lives man, but by eueri word that proceadeth out of the mouth
of God. But the black birds and rauenes, the pies and deuoreinge flesh
crows, they feed upon flesh, and theafore upon carrion. My words (says
Christ) are spirit and life. My spirit says God shall no longer remain
with man, because he is flesh. Therefore when the word of God and the spirit
of life are not with your fleshly teachinge: it must needs be carrion. Such is
your flieinge about the dead as about carrion, for filling of your paunches. For
the dead carions have made you rich in your monasteries, chauntries and
perpetuities. The dead carions of Becket, Benno, and darnel Gader, of Dunstane
woulstane, Audrie and such other have filled your wide throtes so full, and
you carry your pray so gredily in your months: that you are become dome
dogs that you can not barcke but only at them that would reine you of that
foul carrion, and lead you home to take heed of your masters fold. And to
teach plainly what is carrion: we do take it to be, what so ever you do bring
into the church of Christ (as his religion) without his holy word and the
lively spirit of God. The same I say, is that stinckinge carrion that Paulle
calls Anathema, and the prophet warns us we touch it not. And John bids
us that we do not so much as say Ane and salute the bringers thereof, lest we
be compted partakers of their iuell works. I will pass with silence the roten
rags and carrion bones of your relics and such like ware, that sauoure
little of the spirit of life, and of the worshipeing of god in spirit and
truth. But for this thing we have in hand, lettinge slip all other your
unsavory cerimoneis, and carianlyke relyques: more stinckinge carrion surely,
and more poisenfull sophistry causeinge death and murren of so many souls
was there never in the world: then the gloses and dreams of your idle brains
about this mattier that we shall now handle, as shall be proved plainly by the
grace of the liueinge God. Your terms of realities qualites, accedentes and
dimencions, savor nothing of the spirit of God: and therefore are they
flesh and carrion. The whole course of your book labouringe to make Christ
really and naturally present under these fourmes, qualites and qua^tities:
sauoureth of the rotten pastures, and stinckinge fleshli brains of your
dreameinge doctors. Dunse, Thomas de Aquino, and petrus Lombardus. Therefore is
this the carrion, whereof we must be ware This is the diuellishe sophistry
wherwyth the world has been so long bewitched in such sort, that in the
stead of the lively feading of their souls by the word of God, the bread
of life: you have filled their ears and eyes with darcke terms, dombe
signs, and deceivable shadows, allwaies beateinge and burninge the poreshep
bleatinge a gainste the filthy stinckinge carrion, of your popeishe and I
dolatrouse tradicions. What other thing (let all men judge betwexte us) are
these sophistical terms of realitie, quantity, accedentes, dimentions and
alteracions which are the only foundation of your book, and the
establishement of this fleshly doctrine: but the usual terms of the subtle
sophistes of Cambrige and exforde, and the Sorbonistes of parise? They can not
be found in the books of the holy spirit of the holy scripture of God* and
therefore are they fleshely sophistry and stinckeinge carrion. This your book all
grounded upon man, which is but flesh, upon the darcke sentences and blind
terms of blind teachers, as John Damascene and such other: can be likened to
nothing so well as to carrion. The which mattier is picked out of the master
of the sentences or carionouse sophismes, chouse whether you will call him. And
where you would seem to be most spiritual about the words of Christ, Hoc est
corpus meum: there you are all to gether carnalle and fleshly.

You will have a carnal change, a carnal presence, a carnal sacrifice, A
piece of paste (as we say) flesh and blood (as we say) to be carnally
worshipped with fond gestures. A creature to be made the creatoure. A vile
cake, to be made God and man. Which doctrine (being examined by the spirit of
God the triar of all truth) shall be found Idolatrouse carrion.

The residue of your preface would have us captive to you Christ's vikeres, to
your Seek the truth, at the ministers of the church.
doctors and mainteners. These have you always heretofore called the church
of Rome. But now that you may deceive (if it be possible) the very elect:
by a false name calling it Christ's church. But in very deed it is the
sinnagog of Satan and the church of Antichriste: because you are in liueinge
so contrary to Christ, and because you set* and establish therein the
ceremonies of Antichrist and bannishe the pore sheep from the word of their
shepherde, seldom or never preacheinge unto them Christ, but your own
baggage, nor yet sufferinge the pore lambs to read and feade of his word and
pasture. But we all are not so folishe thus to be enchaunted. We have Jesus
Christ before our eyes crucified, by your predicessours, which boasted them
selves to be the church* Whom alone we learn to know, to hear and to follow
now in these latter days, because your fathers, boeth of Rome and of
England: have led us out of the way un whoreinge in to Babylon, and have
hitherto taught us to worshipe such things as by their nature are no gods,
But now seeing that we know God (yea rather saying that we are known of God)
we will not return again to your weak Idols and your beggerie ceremonies, to
the which you would have us slaves and do service a fresh. But mark and
take it for an answer. We have Gala. iii.
begone in the spirit, and we nether will nor can be made perfect by the
flesh. We will make subject our senses and captive our understanding to all
truth of gods holy word, but to no lies of your idle brains and covetous
conspiracy, We are no longer under the schole of your popeish tradicions, for
we are all the children of God because we have beleaued in Christ Jesus

For so many of us (says Paulle) as are baptized, we are clade with Christ,
so that there is no Jew nor Greek, no exception of yoman from Ientleman, or
man from woman but we are all one in Jesus Christ, Therefore will we stand in
the liberti wherein Christ has delivered us, and we will no more be wrapped
with your servile bondage, knowinge that whosoever trobleth us shall receive his
judgment who so ever he be. Therefore, all the fruits of the flesh, and all the works of darckenesse set a part, adultery, Idolatry, and such like: we
will walk in the works of the spirit, love, Joy, peace, gentleness,
liberality, goodness, faith, mildness and sobrenesse. And we will glory in
nothing, ^aue only in the crose of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the
world is crucified unto us, and we unto the world, being fully parswaded
that Christ is the good shepeherde that puts his soul for his sheep, and
that John the x.
al you bishopes are but hirlinges, workyng for wages, which scatter the
f^oke, and barcke not for the sh^pe. But he knows his sheep and is known of
them. His voice only, will they hear, him only, will they follow, and he only
gives unto them everlasting life, they shall never perish. No man shall be able
to take them out of his hand: for his father and he be all one. Thus are we
(being grounded upon our head and master Christ, by faieth) the very true
church of Christ against the which the gates of hell can not prevail.

An answer concerneinge the true vnderstandeinge and wisdo^e that God gives
to all men that ask it in sure fayeth wherein is declared the true
understanding of these words. Hoc est corpus meum.

Winchesters text.
THe first chief and principal point of deceit, is to make every man think
of him self, further then is in deed in him, by this persuasion that God
grants true vnderstandeinge and wisdom, to him that would have it, has
need of it, and axethe it in his name. Which thing is true, but not as the
unlearned take it.

In make answer by scripture to your The answer
first Chap, and so to enter into your book: we are taught by our savior
Christ (the only Authoure of all truth) that what so ever we ask the father
in his name, that same shall be given us. And James the holy Apostle and
openare of his will toward us: says. If any of you lack wisdom, let him
ask of him that gives, even of God which gives to all men indifferent lie
and casts no man in the teethe, and it shall be given him. But let him a^ke in
faith and waver not, Forhe that doubts is like the waves of the sea tossed
with the wind and carried with violence, neither let that man think that he
shall receive any thing of the Lord, This most sure fayethe and trust that
we have conceived of our Lord and father: you go about, spedilie at the
beginning, to extinguish by your blind sophistry: casteinge this bone in our
way, that it is not so as we unlearned take it. Oh Lord, shall not we believe thy
word and most open promises, till some one of Antichrists schole have set to
his glo^es. If this be not wranglinge sophistry to go about to dark these so
open scriptures: what shall we call sophistry? Must we go seek some subtle
doctor, to teach us the sense and meaning of these the plain words? Yea and
tha^ some bishope to open the meaneing of this doctor? for our senses and
vndersta^deyng be captiuated unto the^. Nay nay (oh heaue^li father) we are thy
children and the sheep of thy fold* heareing thy voice and none other, and
fulli contented with thy teacheing. Wherefore we clean only to this thine open
word, and say with. S John that we have this full trust in it, that what so
John. v.
ever we shall ask according thereunto, thou hearieste us. And saying we know
that thou heareste us: we know also that we have the peticions that we have
asked of the.

You say we will ask it out of order, as a new miracle, as to have heruelle
in february, so properly can you judge our thoughts. We say, we will* ask
it first and principally, by our faieth, of God the father for the love of his
son Christ accordeinge to his commandment, knoweinge that it is the gift
of God only, and that flesh and blood can not reueile this unto us. Never
the less, we do use the mean and order of the studining of gods holy
scriptures, which being enspired by the holy ghost: are able to lead us into
all truth. We exercise our selves in the word of God (I say) wherein this
wisdom and knowelege of God lies hid: so far and so much as we may and
dare by your cruel forbydinge us the same. Wherefore, if either part be about to
drive Christ to a new miracle out of order: it is you, forbydinge us pore men
to look on the scriptures, that the scriptures may shortly be found true,
which do promise, that the stones by miracle* shall bear witness against you,
and God will make perfet his praise by the mouth of young sucklinges and babes.

We are as Hieremie was, not all together dombe and speachelesse, al thought
(partly your wichednesse oppressinge us, and our weakness puttinge us to
silence) we dare do nothing until the Lord say unto us as he did to
Hieremie. Thou shall go to all Hieremi. i.
that I shall send the, and what so ever I shall command the that shall thou
speak. Be not a fraide of their faces, for I am with the says the Lord.
When we hear this spoken in our hertes, by the spirit of God who continues
with us unto the worlds end: then lo with heart do we believe to our
rightuousenes, and with our mouth do we confess to our salvation. Lo this is
the continual course and miracle without misorder that Christ works in the
hertes of his faithful, though your eyes dimmed and daseinge with popeishe
madness, can not epsy it.

Fo^der, you say that we make this sophistical reasone. Because God can
always work by miracle: therefore he will always do it* But you may perceive
by this that I How the papists do reason, A posse ad ^sse.
have spoken: that it is none of ours, neither did you ever here it of any of
our mouths, but yours it is, and the chief of your arguments wherwyth you do
(all the sort of you) establishe your purpose. For thus do you reason. Nothing
is impossible unto god. God can change him into bread, therefore is he
changed into bread. Oh devilish sophistry and subtlety of Satan.

By this possibititie you may change him into a very vine tree, a stone, or
a material door. For you have boeth the word possible for you* and these
plain words also, I am a very vine. Ego s^m vitis vera. Petra fuit Christus.
Christ was the stone. Ego sum o^, I am the door. Or to go further as some of
your own doctors do door: Deus potest suppositari mulierem, equum, asinum.
God can chaung him self as subject into a woman, an horse or an ass* which
words of your maddesse, when I did wrute: mine hand did tremble. They are so
lewede that a reverent heart can not hear them, that God immortal and
vnchaungabel (whose majesty fills the heauenes and the earth should be
changed into any vile creature, worsse then ashes, yea leaseth nothing
compared to his highness.

With like fondenesse do you dispute for your Sodomiticall chastity, being
geiuen up into minds reprobat because you Romans. i.
would turn the glory of God immortal unto the corruptible creature. You
say it is possible for God to give all your mark chastity, and to make them
Ennuches. And straight way you conclude that you have the gift, and do swear
that you will live winelesse. Though all the world may se it to be possible
in the cause and impossible in the effect, because God does it not nor will
not do it: yet in your (...) against the Godly man bucere, you are nothing
ashamed, to maynetayne with much bablinge that this saieinge of Christ (Capiat
qui capere potest) spoken of the gift of chastity, is to be understand,
Capiat qui capere vult. Thus do you always dispute sophistically your self, A
potentia ad ac^u^ A. posse, ad velle et esse, like a crafty sophister, and call
other me^ by the name that you your self are worthy to bear, as Mockus did
when he cried, stop the theafe.

Therefore, take this answer as a full solucion to your sophistry, set forth
by your own sophisters. A posse ad esse non est bona onsequencia.

Because it is possible, to prove therefore it is so, is very slender reasone. I
pre^e you therefore (if there be any regard of gods dread full majesty left
in your hertes) leave this argument. Nothing is impossible unto god therefore
is he chainged. Or because it is possible that he will come down into the
chalice when every whoremongar does call him, therefore he doethe fo: lest
peradventure you hear ploumen tell you that it is dyue^she sophistry.

It pleases God to show us over much of your liueinge to be blinded* any
longer with you. We read in the gospel, that God hears no sinnars. How
shamles in all parrishes they live which ar^ the only God makers: all the
world seth, and cries out thereupon. Such whordome has not ben hard of.
Such dru^ckenes has not been seen Al are drowned in couetousenes, from the
bishope to the parishepriste. And that feel we por^ peopel being polled and
pilled by your p^s and pro^tomes, and haueing nothing of your lands for all our
swear and labors but a bl^de heap of do^be ceremonies. God (as al thing is
possible unto him) can make ^o^ God shepeherdes. But yet I dare not rou^ ude
that he has done it. Neithere what he will do dare Ia^e, you are so linked
with Antichriste. Whose pride intolerable to boaste him self to have power in
heaven, in earth, and in the thread place (I not where) I need not confute. This
holy mother church is ashamed of hi^ children and brain^e ^encious, though
she durst never in all her pride, make any ^o articles of the faith then. xii.
all grounded upon scriptures. But now your ^itle bishop church, or rather
co^ne^tikle of. xii. or. xiiii. bishops must be so highly enhau^ced, that it
may increase other. vi. or rather ^o which we daily look for, in prejudice to
other contries, which shall be more strongely established with the sword, and
more sore punished by fire (if they be violated) than any of the commandments
of God: vseinge such proud bragges, racking and burninge, that no man dare
say but it is trwe how so ever it please you bishopes to gloss the scriptures
and make uewe articles, and new faieth anewe for to be believed in pain of
death and burneinge. Such authority use you over the scripture as your father
did before you, who did first devise this your diuellishe law, that no man
should be so bold to interpretate the scripture any otherwise the^ he and his
doctors had authorized and assingned. Where coutrariwise, Paul wylleth that
in the congregation or church of Christ: ii. or* iii. prophets should speak
and the residew should judge Then if any thing were reueiled or disclosed to
him that sits: the first should hold his peace, that all might prophecy
one after an other, that al might learn, that al might take conforte, and that
the spirits of the prophets might be subject unto the prophets. If this
mildness were a monge us: that one of us might and would hear an other then
should Christ's doctrine and religion flourishe, whilse we were ready* to give
answer every one* of the faieth that we have conceived, accordeinge to the
commandment of Peter. Where now there is nothing but, these heretics are
proud and arrogant, Wynchester.
they have no leruinge, they have not studied for knowledge. And we do answer
again (as we may justly) that we have labored for knoweledge, as diligently
and with as hum ble hertes as you have done. God has indu^ed us with the
knoweledge of the latin, greek, and hebrew and al other sciences, far, abou
that you had when you were in the schools

This can you not deny for shame. Why than may it not be, that he has sent
these godly gifts, his worthy instruments: for to reueile, open and declare,
the hid mysteries of his word which he said should flow like a water
stream in these later days, that they should know him from the loweste to
the highest. Do not you se by the course of time that god opens many things
of the pope, pardons, pilgrimages, and such like Idolatrouse vsages: Has there
been no blindness in the world these thousand years, that the deuell has been lewse (because you do so much account the wickedness of this time) or
could the pope (who is the undoubted an tichriste) reign so long in men's
hertes and consciences, and leave no poison behind him? Nay rather we must
call into question and examinacion, all such things as he left behind him,
because he being the very wicked man, we may be sure he would sow no good
corn, but darnell and wede. Then, what was the greateste power he had, whereby
he wroght, in heaven, in earth and purgatory: but the mass, and this holy
sacrament of ou^e redemption so abused, that he might by the body of Christ,
sacrified upon the aultare: open the way to heaven, and spar the way The
priest can not sacrifice any more.
to hell, as surely he, or any of you might do if he could sacrifice Christ
again, for christ our savior did come down from heaven to do sacrifice for
this purpose, and all the sacrifices of the old law d^d sewe in shadows,
that the sacrifice of Christ, should take away sin, the unspotted lamb
should deliver from the helli fornaice of Egypt and optaine passage to the
country promised, So that if either pope, bishop or priest, can prove that the
very body of Christ, is really present in his sacrifice of the mass, and
there offerred up to the father for a sacrifice (as you have caused Sharton to
confess) surely you may conclude (as you do, and as your father and fou^der
of this article did before) that the mass takes away sins* and profits
the quick and the dead. So shall you build your pardones again for the mass
of scala celi, and all your abbaies praieinge for their foundars, that the
noble king Henry the eight (whom surely God appointed to beat down popery
and Idolatry, long preserved him from your manifold treasones, and at the
length now when his good will was? has taken him to his mercies) may he
thought the greatest malafactour upon earth and (as some of you have rayled
most vilauously the great turk, and very Antichrist causeinge the daily
sacrifice to cease, destroieynge so many holy masses and hindering so many
souls, that should by them have relief and succor. But that this body of
Christ our lamb unspotted, can be no more sacrified, boeth in the defense of
Christ from their blasphemies, and our nobel prince from rai huge tongues: I
desire all Christen hertes to marcke what Paul writes to the Hebrews which I
shall truly report without any gloses or far fetched arguments. The whole
Epistle does show that all sacrifices did cease, that this our only byshope
might make one sacrifice for all. The priesthode, says Paul, appointed by
God, only to do sacrifice: ceased. And in the. vii. Chap he says, that our
bishop abides for ever, haueinge and everlasting priesthode, whereby he may
fully make saulfe them that go unto God by him, liueinge for ever that he may
pray for them. And again, Haueinge no need (as other byshopes have) to offer
for his own sins, and then for the sins of the people, for he has done
that once, when he offerred him self. Again, in the. ix. Chap By his own
blood went he in once into ^he holy place, euerlasteinge redemption
op^ained. The which euerlasteinge redemption, if we have optained al ready in
that he offerred him self by spirit euerlasteinge) as Paul says) without
spot unto God, and so has purified our conscience from dead works: what
neade we an other pope, Byshope or priest to offer him again? Has he not
sufficiently, and abundantly offered him self for the sins of the whole
world? How can the priest then offer him to take a wa^e sins, or profit
quick and dead? For those self same sins were taken away before by Christ,
or else shall they never be taken way by the p^istes. Therefore is this but
vain iug linge for money and for the maintenance of your dignities. Again,
Christ is gone into heaven, that he may appear now in the sight of God for
us, not that he may often offer him self (what authorite than I pray you has the
priest often to offer him) for than must he often have suffered since the world was
made. But now once at the later end of the world for to drive away sin,
did he appear, by the offeringe of him self.

And where as all men once must die: and after receive judgment: so also
Christ is once offerred up that he may take away the sins of many. Again
in the. x. we are made holy by the offeringe of the bod^ of Christ once
done. What it is that yo^ priests do offer so often, I shall tell you ano^

Every priest (says Paul) stands day* ly doing sacrifice and offerringe
the sa^ oblacions often times, which never can take away sin. Which words,
^houghe they (...) spoken only of the priests of the old law yet co^parynge
that which follows, it shall be proved true in you of the new law. For Christ
after one offeringe offerred for sins: ^^tteth for ever at the right hand of
god. A gain. By one only offerringe, has he made pe^fecte for ever, so many
as are made holy. I^ he have made us perfect by one only offeringe: whereto
serve the priests* that we may conclude as Paulle does. Where there is
remission of and forgiveness of sins (be (...) in the old testament or the
new) ^h^re remains no farther oblacion or offerringe for them. Contrariwise
(as Paulle reasone the with them, so may we reasone with you) if this
offeringe might take a way sin, or make the^ perfect that use it: would
they not have lest of the offerringe of it for them self, their foundars, and
all such as they used it for? Because now they should have had no conscience
of their sins which hade thus sacrified and been once purged. Therefore
(says Paul) in the sacrifices of The priest must do this in the
remembrance of Christ.
the old law (which were not done with out blood) was only the
commemoracion and remembrance yearly of sins. And Christ him self says
of this our sacrament. Do this in the remembrance of me. Like as in the
passover (which was the figure Exodus xii.
of our deliverance by Christ the un spotted lamb) yearly remembrance was
commanded to be done.

Though by the open word of god (who is able to change what lyketh him, whose
power no man ever doubted of, that had but the gift of reasone) the ceremony
of our redemption, which they had but in shadow and we have in truth (and
therefore it ceased when the body, that is Christ, did come and offer the true
passover lamb) though, I say, this ceremony of the Jews, be by these open
words of God thus named. This is the passover of the Lord: yet was there never
any of the Jews priests so mad to say that God changed any substance The
verb est, has no power to change substance
by this word (is) yet were they all baptized by Moses (as Paul witnesses)
in the cloud* and in the sea. And they all did eat the same spiritual meat
and drink the same spiritual drinck, for they did drink of the spiritual
drink which followed them. The stone was Christ. But we more gross and
carnal by much, in all our doeinges, blow inges and bl^ss^i^ges then were
^he pharisees (though Christ s^ke such worshipers as shall worsh^e him in
spirit) not contented wy^h the spiritual fode of the soul wherwi^^ only he
feadeth the soul: because it is also a spirit, and therefore takes no fode,
but only Christ and his word spiritually ministered, which are spirit and
life, where as ^he flesh profits nothing, ^oeth as we read in the sixth of
I^h^, and the manifest example of the old byshopes haueinge him carnally
present among them* (and as you will have it) Judas and all the wicked, do
carnally and fleshely eat him, and yet do not abide, in him, but have
damnacio^ contrary to the sainge of Christ. He that eats John. vi.
my flesh and d^h my blood has everlasting life, and I shall raise him up
at the la^^e day. And again. He that eats mi flesh and drincketh my*
blood abides in me and I in him.

And as John says in his first Epistle. God has given us everlasting life,
and this life is in his son. He that has the son, has life, and he that
has not the son of God has not life. All which, scriptures, ^oeth they
that teach us that Christ can no more nether neadeth again in body to be
offerred and sacrificed: and therefore compel us to grant that these words
(this is body which shall be given for you were never meant so carnally, that
every priest ^blinge these words in a strange language with breathing and
bloweing: should cause Christ to come down from the right hand of the father
to be changed into bread, that he might sacrifice him new again to take
away sins.

In like manner do those scriptures that teach all sacrifices to be perpetual
commemoracions and remembraunces of the spiritual eateinge of Christ among
the fathers of the old testament: and that Christ likewise will have this
sacrament ministered in the Matxxvi
remembrance of him in the new testament, where as the speech may feme very
idle to say, make me in the remembrance of me, althought it so were that it
might be so said without intolerable arrogancy, as it can not in any wise,
whether you say you make him by his word or no, as shall appear afterward.
Those scriptures also which teach that we have life euerlasteinge, so ^^^y of
us as eat h^s flesh and drink his blood yea that we shall never be hongrie
or ^hirstie John. vi.
again, so many of us* as once do ta^e of this bread coming from heaven.
Finally, alscriotures that teach how and after what sort Christ is profitable
unto us, for they are the chief establyshementes of our fayeth, that were not
present with him at such time as he was budilie upon the earth.

That is to say, that the flesh profits no thing. The words that I speak,
are spirit and life Where upon Peter said. Lord, why there s^hal we goo^thou
have the words of everlasting life. And these are the waters that Christ will
give, after the which no man shall ever thirst. But the water which I John.
iiii.
shall give him (says Christ) shall be made in him a fountain of water,
springeinge into ly^^e euerlasteing.

Blessed be they that hear the word of God and keep it, which was sharply
answered against them which did so highly advance to know God in the
flesh. Against whom also Paul says, we know none ii. Corhi. v.
after the flesh. etc.

Moreover (says he) though we have known Christ after the flesh: yet now
do we not know him so any longer. But he that is in Christ must be a new
creature in the John. iii.
spirit, accordeinge to the saieinge of Christ to him N^codemus. Except a
man be borne a new from above from heaven, even of the spirit the can not
enter the kingdom of heane^

That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and that which is borne of the
spirit, is spirit

Again, it is profitable that I go from you, John. xvi.
for it I go not, the spirit of confort shall not come unto you but if I go I
will send him unto you, and he shall lead you into al truth. Therefore should
you rejoice because I say that I go unto my father. This profit of John. xv.
the bodily departeing to have the confort of the spirit, did appear
manifestelie in Petre and the other Apostles, who deniynge and forsakeinge
their master whom they hade bodily present: did nothing doubt to die for him,
when he was in body absent. Besides that, this bodily presens in every
corner to take away sin: is prejudicial to the lively fealeing of our faith.

First for that he is very man in all things, haueing a natural body as we
have, sufficiently paiyng our ra^^some to his father upon the cross.

Secondly, it may cause us to doubt whether we shall say that he has ascended
into heaven and there sits at the right hand of the father, and from thence
shall come to judge the quick and the dead: other else say with you, that the
priest must daily offer him a sacrifice here upon earth for us, and that he
must keep him hear still in a box, to ware mouldie and mustie and then
change him for a new Christ being infinitely created. Who shall at the day
of dome, starte forth of all these boxes at once (into a new shape I trow^) to
judge all the e^^h, or elfe must you ^des confess, that they shall al be
judged and ^ned where they lie in their boxes. The scripture I say, the lively
s^a^eing of my fayeth grounded only upon the spirit of Christ^ and your own
madness, that I have read in your own books, and no pride or arroganci^,
what so ever you say I take god to record, ca^se me that I dare not, so
carnally and grossly understand the words of Christ, as you do. And I da^e
maintain (...) I have many of your own doc tours, whose testimony either in
this point or any other (vn^es they bring open scripture w^h them) I do not
greatly regard, but to your confution. Yet have I the better part of them
which do spiritually understand and interpret this scripture with me* How be
it I know we shall never make a^ end (...) we bring doctor upon doctoure To
answer therefore to this text (this is my body) which is your only
sho^eaukere. And to (...) a^ your wode words and tau^tes that flow from your
eloquet mouth as smoke does from a lake of brimstone.

But first I will bring forth the whole text of Mathewe, Mark and Luke. And
by the open word of God, I trust I shall declare the true sense and meaneing
to him that with a spiritual eye shall judge thereof.

Christ in the xxvi. of Mathewe, when he was together with his Apostles,
eateinge the passover (which was the most live like figure in the old law,
now making an end in Christ the lamb without all spo^e and blemishe) did
ordeine this godly sacrament, for the remembrance of him self to the world
folowinge: and that his death might be showed and published unto the worlds
and, like as in the passover was continually mentioned and declared, to the
posterity foloweinge, the benifite of God in the deliverance from Egypt. And
as that ceremony (the eateinge of the lamb) was called the passover, and he
him self called the lamb of god so like wise calls he this hight mystery
and sacrament, his body, and a new testament in his blood. That as truly as
the Israelites were delivered forth of Egipte the angel passing by not hurting
the people of that house (the door posts whereof were sprinkled with the blood
of that lamb) so verily should Christ deliver us out of the Egypt of sin,
and perform the thing before figured. For this cause says John, behold
the lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world. And Luke xxii.
Christ says. This is my body which is given for you. And this cup is the
new testament in my blood, which is shede for you. By the which words it
may appear that Christ did mean no change of natures, or
traunssubstancion, but only that where the blood of the lamb in the old
testament was sprenkled on the posts to save from the aduengeinge angel so
many as should be saved: so likewise this blood of Christ in the new
testament should be shede to save us, so mani as have our souls sprink led
with the blood of this lamb Christ Ies^. Therefore, in like manner as the
fathers of the old law drank of the spiritual ston that followed them*
(which was Christ) even so are we all commanded to drink of this blood,
none other wise then the children of Israel were commanded, that the blood
of the lamb should be their token in all the houses where they were. There was
(...) man so mad to say that these words (this cup is ^he new testament in
my blood) did change the substance of the cup into the new testament. And
yet are they christ's own words who can not lie, If you therefore, be driven
to your* gloses tropes and figures, in the words spoken of this sacrament: why
should we be condemned to death because we can not understand your carnal
gloses* You must neades have one gloss to declare what is me^t by the cup.
Whether the wi^e the blood, or the cup it self: either else a sign and
sacrament of the new testament or a performeinge of the same in the blood of
Christ, as Luke teaches, you to speak, and as Matthew and Marcke boeth do
witness. This is my blood of the new testament which is shed for many to
the remission of their sins. Thus were the Apostles nothing curiouse in
words, as they ought to have been if the words had made the cup or the wine
God, changing the substance thereof so sone as they had^ ^e^ spoken.

Thus you (haueinge but one text thorough out all the Bible, that makes for
your purpose) do swareue from that, and put there unto your gloses, which do
also drive you from the first text (this is my body) when you write that it
is in form of bread and under the accidents and qualites of bread. For
Christ did not say in this is my body, or under this is mi body. But this
is my body. Wherefore, now (...), ^e you should slander us no more with
denieing of the scripture, for we deny but your gloses. It is scripture that
we strive for. It is scripture that we desire. It is scripture that you deny
us, under the degree of ge^tile men. Wherein doublesse, if we boeth had our sen^
diligently occupied and ex^sed spiritually* n^ doubt, not only this text but
all the mystery of redemption should be so well known, that we would no
longer seek our redemer upon ever here nor there, but only at the right hand
of his father, from wh^^e sendeing^ his spirit, he maxe save us at the f^ll so
many as by him will go to God. We do believe with our heart, and must plainly
and simplye confess with our mouth, that this is the body of Christ this is
the blood of Christ, this cup is the new testament, that the flesh of
Christ is very mea^e and his blood very drink. That Christ is the way,
the truth and the li^, the do^e and the good shepeherde. Christ is the very
true vine, and we the braunchese That all we are one bread and one very body
so mani as be partakers of one bread. And al these things I do believe more
surely then if I did se them with mine eyes or perceive them with any other
sense, because the knowledge of the spirit far passes all other knowledge,
and the heavenly things are sure, when the other are but dec^euable shadows.
It is neither Manna that fed the fathers, neither any other thing or name
under heaven, but only the bread coming down from heaven, that is the
very true mea^e geueinge life to the world.

Thus are we fully taught in the text of John, where we may most plainly se
this sp^ual eatinge, whereof only: all confort, life and fode of the soul, do
arise and stowe forth. In that Chap, we learn, that the people (folowinge
Christ for the hope of meat, because he had fed them a little before, were by
him called (according to the whole course of the scriptures, as may appear
specially to him that has been diligently exercised in the mysteries of the
prophets) from the sensible and outward bodily things, to things inward
and spiritual. For the beauty of this kings daughter (as David says) is
inward. And therefore does our savior admonish them that sought him for
meat that before all things they should work the meat that never
perishes.

Thus goes he from the meat that nourishes the body: unto the meat of his
heavenly word that nourishes the soul. This meat he calls the heavenly
meat that gives life unto the world, and that so abundantly, that who so
eats it shall never be hungri again. This meat, as the manner of the Hebrews
is to call all kind of meat, (...): (...) so doothe he same time call it
bread, (...) meat. When they hearing this, did imagine bodily meat, as
Manna that Moses gave, he opens this meat saying. I am the bread of life.
He that comes to ^^e, shall not be hungry, and he that believes in me shall
never be thirsty. By the which words, he meaueth none other thing, but that
those that come unto him, that is to say believe in him (for so are the words
folowinge, they can none other ways be wrasted) Qui veuit ad me non esuriet,
et qui credit in me, non sitiet vnquam.

They shall seek none other food but only this very bread that comes down
from heaven. The Jews, astonished that he called him self the bread coming
down from heaven, and the lively meat: said. Is not this the son of
Joseph: But Christ admonished them again, byddinge them not grudge at this,
for it stands not in the capacite Esai. liuf. Hiere. xxxi
of man, but by the inspiracion of the spirit, as the prophet said. They
shall be al taught of God. Wherefore, it is not possible for any man to believe
that Christ was borne from heaven (the meat of the soul) except the father
draw him. Then goes he farther to show how he is the meat of the soul,
and how he should be eaten. For the first, he says thus. Verily I say
unto you He that believes in me has everlasting life. I am the bread of life,
which came down from heaven, that men might eat of this bread and not dye.
But to tell the wattier plain. This bread that I will give you is my flesh,
which I will give for the life of the world. This offeringe of my self for
you: shall reconcile the world unto my father, and thereby give it life. This
therefore is it that I have spoken so long unto you, when I shall be offerred up
for the world, and dye for the sins thereof: than shall I be the meat of
souls, whereby they live ascerteined of the mercy of God, who now can deny
nothing unto man saying he has given his own son for him. Thus therefore is
my flesh the meat of the soul, being flaine for the dead that they might
live. Not as you think, geueing it unto you as I am counersant among you (for
that which is engendered of the flesh, is flesh, and therefore my flesh
carnally eaten, can bring forth nothing but flesh) but contrariewise, the
flesh of Christ ^ge for us, makes us spiritua^^, (...) and therefore the
childre^^ of God. On this sort it is very mea^e and very drink. But the
Jews could not perceive this, but said again. How can he give us his flesh
to eaten unto (...) Christ says, again except (...) the flesh of the son
of man and drink his blood you shall no^ have life in you. What Lord, has no
man life but that denoureth the wy^h his te^h, and swaloweth the down his
throat? Or has every such everlasting life, as does eat the carnally and
bod^^e, even the same body wherein thou liuedest, when thou saidest. He that
eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has everlasting life, and I will
raise him at the last day? Nay surely. For than every. Idolatour and
whor^^onger (who can have no part in thy kingdom) might make them self sure
of life by their own work. For they say they eat the carnally and bodily,
flesh, blood and bones. But, o men, over much carnal and fleshlye, and yet
not once understanding what should follow of the co^mone judgment of the
senses. B^t as Judas prop^ecied upon you, eve in such things as you have the
knowledge of by the course of nature, commune with brute beasts, in the same
you are corrupted. Ipraie you therefore, suffer me to reaso^e with you
accordeinge to your own, grossenes.

How dare you for shame name this christ's Note.
body that you do eat and say that you eat it bodily? May any thing be
called a body but that may be perceived by some of our outward senses? For by
the^ only (as by corporal instruments, appointed of God to the same purpose)
may we judge what so ever is a body. Saying then our senses and bodily
instrumen^es, perceive no such body, the work being inward by the
spirit: what neade we to speak grossly and carnally of the body, or wha^
profit can come by that strange doctringe: Saying then that Christ is not the
meat of the soul that way; it is to much shame thus to contrefaite a Christ
in the bread good for nothing. But we (beleueinge that Christ has died for
us) have all the conforte that may be, continually refreshed with the body
and blood which are the only food of the soul.

For of this spiritual eateinge the spirit increases, like as of the carnal
eateing, flesh only can be cherished and increased. For this word must ever
stand true. That which is borne of the flesh is flesh and that which is borne
of the spirit: is spirit. And for this cause does Christ understand a
spiritual eateinge. But how I pray you: That (...) may be eaten carnally and
bodily? Then shall it be al one thing to eat him bodily (...) spiritually,
which (even by your sophistry) you must needs judge impossible. If the ea^^ng
of Christ be spiritual* why do you say that you eat him bodilye: If it be
bodily: what other thing can it confort butthe bodi Christ says that except
we eat his flesh (that is believe that he died and shed his blood for us) we
cannot have life in us. Again, if we (...) his flesh (that is believe that it
was slain for us) and drink his blood) that is, believe shed that his blood
is shed for us (than is Christ in us and we in him. But is Christ in any man
corporally and bodily: Nay ve rily. What neadeth it us than to make any ^o
doubts of cateinge him bodily, for tha^ do we eat his body when we believe
that it was slain for us. It is faith therefore, and ^e other eateinge, where of
Christ speaks for man consists of two parts, body, and soul. The body
nether can nor dare by any means eat him, because it is horrible and a
gainste nature. No though it could and would eat him: it should avail him
no more then the bodily kiss of Judas and the handeling of the Jews auailed
them. It remains therefore, that the soul shall eat him Learn to eat the
flesh and blood of Christ.
which can be none other ways but by lively faieth in the body and blood*
offerred for us unto his father. The soul has no teth, and therefore none
other manner of eateinge.

Thus do we conclude, that the soul being a spirit and the meat spiritual:
no man ought to seek for to eat Christ in this sacrament, bodily, really,
and carnally, but only spiritually, as his word is spirit and life.

But still you will use your eloquence and say. This is spoken by intolerable
arroyancie, deuillishe sophistry, carnal reasones Winchesters eloquence.
deceitful expositions, crooked arguments, contrefaite contradictions, by the
spirit of the deuell, it is lies, error and blindness. Captive your wits
unto us of the clergy Christ speaks still in the priest at the aultare,
and says. This is my body. And therefore it is his natural body.

This is it that you have to say. Oh, how full of Christ's holy word and the
conforte of the scriptures, is this blessed bishop? These are the blesseinges
that flow from the so sone as they wagge their pope holy members. I will not
rail again to your worthynesse. But as I have begoue I Jacob. iij.
will answer with scriptures.

The tongue is a world of wickedness. So is thetonge set in our members, that*
it defyleth the whole body, and sets on fire, all that we have of nature,
and is it self set onfire, even of hell. Therewith do we bless god and curse
men made to his own Image. Out of one mouth proceeds blesseinge and curseinge
where it is contrary by course of nature, that one fountain should bring
fourth both sweet and bitter water. If any man be wise and endued wythknowledge
among you: let him show his worckes out of his good conuersasion with
meekness and wisdom. But if you have bitter envy and striffe in y our
heart: rejoice not, neither be ye liars against the truth. For such wise dome
desceudeth not from a boue: but is erthly, natural, and deuellishe. For where
envy ann strife are: there is unstableness and all manner of iuell works. But
the wisdom I would wish my Lord this wisdom
that is from above: is first pure, than peaceable, gentile and easy to be
entreated, Full of mercy and good fruits, without iudgeing without
simulacion. Yea and the fruitte of righteousness is sownein peace, to them that
maintain peace,

But to go forth with our purpose, No arrogancy, no deuellishe spirit or
sophistry, can have the whole course of scriptures, thus to maintain their
cause. To prove farther therefore, that we be taught the spiritual worship only
and not the s^eshely and carnal that perishes and consumes by time: mark
the scriptures. First, how Christ con maundeth to work the meat, not that
perishes: but that remaueth into life everlasting, which the son of man
shall give you Now Christ did give us none other meat (wherbye we live for
ever) but this gospel Mark what meat Christ gives us.
and glade tidinges, that he freely has sufferred death for us. Again, this
is the work of God. To believe in him whom he has sent. Lo the plain words of
christ. Fayeth in him whom the father has set: works the meat that never
perish. It is fayeth therefore in Christ crucified, that makes us* blessed:
and not to eat the body carnally, bodily and naturally. For then should we
have two ways The way t^ life is but one.
to life. The one by faith, and the other by this bodily eateinge, which no
man I trow will grant.

Again, Christ says that it is the true bread that comes down from
heaven, and gives life unto the world. So that Christ is the lively fode, as
he is God and gives life unto the world, as he is God the son of God, not as
he is flesh. For if the bodily meat that we do eat, be but a burden unto
^s, till, it be changed i^to spirit and altered from the gross substance to
nourish the lively spirits and spiritual parts what do we so grossly
thyncke that the flesh of christ swalowed into our bealies shall do us so
much good* This opinion is very gross. Therefore says Christ to the
Capernites in the same blindness. What if you shall see the son of man go up
where he was before? It is the spirit that gives life, the flesh profiteh
nothing. The words that I speak unto you, are spirit and life. Thus does
John. vi.
he call from the earth to heaven, from the flesh to the spirit, like as in
all his other preacheinges and scripturs: so hear he calls to the heavenly
^ateinge, whereby we have life, and at once stops the mouth of carnal
judgments. How you do examine this text, it shall be opened when we come to
the place. In the mean ceason, we will take this text (the flesh avails
nothing) with out any contencion, only to drive away the gross opinion of
the Capernits and all such as styke to much to the flesh and can not Be not
Capernites any longer.
lift up their heads to the mysteries of the spirit, for the which purpose
these words were spoken by Christ: and not to think that Christ (whose
worckes were al ways profitable) would teach any such ways, or do any
such deades as were nothing profitable unto man. For no man (I dare well
say) is able to prove any more profit by the flesh bodily eaten in the
sacrament: than we have in scripture granted unto us, which do worshipe him
and eat him, in spirit and truth

Let us therefore consider the great goodness of our savior Christ in this
sacrament Take this profit of the sacrament.
Who being the very lamb that takes away the ^es of the world: caused all the Jews ceremonies to cease, and their passover to have an end, and
therefore says that he has greatly disired to eat this passover that the
promises of God the father (concerne^ge this new testament) might be
fullfilled. Namely, that the sede of the woman, should break the head of the
serpent.

That by this sede all the nations of the earth shall be blessed. That the
salvation and savior of the world, should be declared, the light of the
heathen and the glory of Israel published, Al these things were fulfilled in
his passion and suffereinge, according to his own saieinge. When I shall be
exalted from the earth, I shall draw all unto my self. And when he had
dronken that bitter drink upon the crose: he said that all was finished and
fulfilled. All these things together do we receive in the supper of the Lord,
which he did therefore celebrate and make, the night before he suffered, for to
enstructe his Apostles more deapelie in these great mysteries of the salvation
of the whose world by his death, wherein he would give him self freely unto
them, and therefore did he testify unto them the self same thing be fore
hand in this holy sacrament. And because the life of the rightuouse stands
here in, that they believe in the same: he gives charge that they have his
death in remembrance, sai^inge. This is my body which is given for you do
this in the remembrance Luke. xxii.
of me. Likewise the cup after he had supped s^^einge. This cup is the new
testament in my blood, which is shed for you. That like as by this sensible
meat and corporal lamb, which they had eaten in their supper, their bodies
was nourished, cherished and streghned* so by this spiritual lamb and heavenly
meat by this blessed memory* I say whereby we know that our savior and
redemer Christ Ie^^ died for us, that we might live) are our souls certified,
that the same our savior did so clearly take away our trespasses, that his
father will now take us for his children and heirs, and give us freely
euerlasteinge lyffe. With this therefore, we may continually feed our souls,
that they encreaseinge in full fayeth of gods mercy (which is the life of
the rightuouse) might be nourished, grow and increase, to the full age of a
perfect man in Christ Jesus. If you mark the words of Christ with a singular
eye: you shall be compelled to grant these two things only to be taught
therein. That Christ gave his body for us: and eo^maunded us to do this thing.
That is, to take and to eat this.

Accipite et manducate. The words are plain do this in the remembrance etc.
For by what scripture may it be found true that you do gloss saieinge? God
did consecrate him self into accide^tes and qualites of bread And that you
should make God in the remembrance of God, in mine opinion is against
reasone. I may say and rail not, it is a made heresy.

Christ says. Take and eat. He gives Go no farther the^ your commission.
no priest power to consecrate and to make his body, neither with his word
nor by his word And this which is the chief point of your new beldame
(which you establishe with the fire) we require you for the love of Christ
(if you ^eale any thing of his mercies) either to prove it by some scripturs
(which I know is impossible for you) or else to call back your tiranye. You
have no word of God) where up on only, fayeth may be g^ownded (that
commands you once to repe^e these words again (This is mi body) much
less are you able to prove that these words at any time repeted and rehearsed
by any one of you: should chaung the nature of things, and not only work in
creatures, but also in the creatoure and maker of all (God and man) whose
majesty ought rather to be praised and had in admiracion, than thus
vnreuerenly to be taingled with your transsubstanciacion, which is much after
the art of magike, thus by prescript words to work wonders. God has
appointed his holy word to be preache^ to us reasonnable creaturs, and that
most especially in this sacrament, as the most sure token of our salvation. As
it is plain by the words of Paul. So often as you shall eat (...). Corin. xi.
this bread (says he) and drink of this The receiueyng of the sacrament, is
the preacheing of the death of Christ.
cup: you shall show, forth the death of the Lord unto that he come. So that
it is over much shame to use Christ's word as an enchauntme^t over dead
creaturs to chaung them (no man can tell how) to call down Christ into
bread, to bring him into the chalice. Where he, being a while blessed and
blowene with your stinkeinge breathes shall ta^ie so long a god, as it shall
please man yea and that scant an honest man sometimes. Surely, it makes us
leude people, to think that you do not take him as a God when we se you so
irreverently, breathe oa him, make him^eape about the chalice, break him and
that nothing after the institucion wherein we should all together be
partetakers of the bread and cup of Christ for the food of our souls. And
where as the stength of your sophistry lies in the blind word consecracion
(which you do not le^ne here of Christ, but you think you may have some cloak
because it is read that Jesus when he did take the bread in hand, blessed
Christ ^yd not ^rate the (...).
and break it) you shall hea^ an answer, I trust, that may satisfy any
heart that is not bent upon contencion.

In all places where Christ did take bread in his hands: he blessed and gave
thanks, as it appears John. vi. and Luke. ix. where as we read the same
words that he has at this supper (as the tread of his commone usage) whereby
we shall learn to bless, renown and praise god always, and to give him
humble thanks when so ever we do use any of his benifites. That this
blesseinge is nothing but a thanks geueinge to God the father and no such
co^secracion as you do mataine: Mathewe and Luke may satisfy you. Who have,
(...), that is, geueinge thanks. Whereas Mark has (...). And again, when he
spoke of the cu^ he has (...). So that (...), And (...), to bless and to give
thanks: are all one. Wherefore such cousecracion as you make (when you say
God consecrateth him self) can not be grounded here. But you blind the people
with your darcke terms, to blind us still captives un, der your tirannie.

The word of this heavenly supper, may clearly drive away al dreams, if
they were deapely considered without your gloses. Wherefore I will rehearse them
out of the evangelists and the Apostle Paul, the wonderful opener of gods
secrets.

First Christ (when the Apostles were Math. xxvi,
eateinge) did take the bread, and when he had given thanks, he did break
it, and gave it to his disciples and said. Take, eat, this is my body. And
when he took the cup also he did give thanks and gave it unto them saieing
drink al of this. This is my blood which is of the new testament, which is
shed for many in the remission of sins. I say unto yon, I will not after
this time drink of the fruit of the vine, unto that day that I shall drink
it new with you^ the kyngedome of my father. Mar. xiiii.


Again, As they did eat (says Mark) Jesus took the bread, gave thanks,
and brake it and said. Take, eat, those is my body. And he took the cup,
thanked, and gave it them, and they did all drink thereof. And he said unto
them, this is my blood of the new testament, which shall be shed for many.
Verily I say unto you that from heuse fourth, I will not drink of the fruit
of the vine, unto the day that I drink it new in the kingedome of God.

In Luke, thus we read. I have with great Luke. xxii.
desire desired to eat this passover with you be fore I suffer. For I say
unto you, that heuse forth I will no more eat thereof, till it be fulfilled in
the kingdom of God. And he took the cup, gave tha^ges and said. Take this and
divide it among you. For I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit of
the vine: unto the kingedome of God do come. And he took the bread, and gave
thanks, and brake it, and gave it unto them and saiede. This is my body
which shall be given for you. This do ye in the remembrance of me. Likewise the
cup after they had supped and said. This cup is the new testament in my
blood, which shall be shed for you.

Here be all the words of the Evangelists concerning the last supper of the
Lord, wherein you do not hear one word, that the priest by reherseinge of these
words shall make God, either that Christ is materially and bodily turned
into a form of bread: or that God does turn him self and consecrate him
(as you call it) into the quantities of bread neither any other of those
blaphemies that you defend so with tirany. That the lewd man should receive
it but in one kind, upon pain of death, though you have No marvel though the
^ple saiede (...) when they ^e me^ bur^ for sayng yea.
pertily excused the matier, saie^ge that we ^ewde soles will not have it, Ah
shall we suffer you thus to captive us still: We are captives in deed? For we
must ransom full largely, if we either speak, writ or kept aany book of
christian religion contrary to your popeishe doctrine. But as you tender the
health of your souls (dear brethern) who so ever shall read this: speed you
to the scriptures of God, and make them judges, boeth of those men's gloses and
my writtinges When they would iuggle with this word Learn to re^ sophstrie
consecrate: remember* the words of the Euan gelist, that he blessed or gave
thanks, for all is one thing, as it is proved. Wha^ they will say no more
but, this is my body, and leave out the chief purpose and conforte set forth
in this supper, that is, which is given for you: then say. We will eat hear
the body that was given for us unto death, which Mari Magdalen might not
touch, which is gone into heaven and (as you say your self) is not come
down again, But there sits at the right hand of the father (as the
scripture records and faith believes) from whence he shall come to judge the
quick and the dead* In whose remembrance we must do this, sheweinge forth
his death (as Paul says till he come. The which words (until In these.,
i^. words lies the whole matter.
he come, and doe^ge it in the remembrance of Christ) may plainly declare
what is meant by all to gether.

Besides this, when it is named bread, wine and the fruit of the grape, after
that Christ had blessed: why shall one set Christ to the schole and tell him
he lies: But if he come into England a monge the popeishe prelates: they will
teach him to learn it other wise. Hear is no sophistry: but eternal tiranie
Mark therefore, the end, intent and purpose of these Christ's words and
doeinges and the^ shall eueri thing be easy and plain un to us. This may be
showed by these words in boeh the par^es of the mysteries, plainly added,
which was given for you. Which shall be shed for the remission of sins. By the
which words we can not deny, but that Christ taught that he would die for
us. And where he adds (as the end of altogether) do this in the
remembrance of me this is the cup of the new testament in my blood what other
thing can we learn, but that this is the new testament and covenant of grace
bitwen God and us, that he will have mercy upon his, for the blood of his
son* And that we ought to keep this in perpetual remembrance. Now se^ge
that these words do lead us unto these things: his deads must of good
congruence, work the same. And Two manner of teachinges By words, and bisigues
therefore does the break bread and give it to be eaten commaundeinge the
cup to be drunken. Which deades did in manner represent before the eyes of
the disciples: the things that he had spoken, even in like manner as we se it
generally used in all contractes and couenauntes of great wayght and valewe,
which are made without ward signs as represe^tations of the same to the eyes
of all men and clear testimonies for remembrance of couenauntes to be
performed.

Now where as they will not speak all the text, but stick in these. iiii.
words oneli (this is my body) answer thou again, that thou beleuest it to
be the very body, even as thou beleuest the cup to be the new testament.
But for as much as the change of any of these creaturs can not be taught ^i
any scriptures: thou can in no case believe it. For thy faith asks the word
of god. Wherefore, say thou I will stick to the word of Christ that the flesh
profits nothing thought it were eaten every member after other, But the
spirit gives life. Who leads us to the fode that brings life
euerlasteinge. And thus by the spirit (which only isprofitable) we under
stand these words. Take and eat, this is my body which is given for you.
That like as I give the bread to be eaten with the bodily This similitude
deesareth all the mattier.
tethe: so do I give mi body to be eaten by faith, and that of the spirit.
For now shall it be given unto the death: that you may have life. And thus is
my flesh very meat and my body, bread and fode, which may be taken and
received only spiritually and not carnally, bodily or really. In like manner
therefore, as you do bodily take this brad at my hand, eat it with your
mouth, and so receive it into your stomach and body for the fode and
sustentacion of your natural life: so must* you by faith (the only mean
whereby ye may eat or have me present upon earth) receive my body, beleueing
that my body is given for you, that where you were dead from God by your
sins, I have brought youfurth to leave in good works unto my father, who
compteth you now a^ children an he^ers prepared to euerlasteing^ life, so many
as believe and trust in my death^

Thus does Christ give the bread to b^ eaten bodily with the mouth, but his
bodi^ to be eaten spiritually in the spirit by faith. And this is it that good
bishop Augustine says. What do thou prepare thy teeth and thy beali^
Believe and thou haste eaten. It is flesh (as I have said before) what so ever
bringeh not life, and therefore it profits nothing: so ar al things that are
don without faith, wherefore if christ might be eaten with the mouth, as he
might be in deed, if he were bodily in the bread (which boeth fayethfull and
unfaithful do eat) then might Christ be eaten without fruit, which is
contrary to the manifest word of God, which affirms, Christ cannot he
eaten with out fru^te*
that who so ever eats him has euerlasteinge life.

We do conclude therefore, that there is but one only eateinge of the body of
Christ which is perceived of the faithful only: none otherwise, then these
words (which is given for you, and, which is shed for the remission of
sins) are proper and peculiar unto them only. And to tell you somewhat of
your sophistry. Wha^ you reasone in this Sophistry.
wise. This is the body of Christ, therefore (...) is naturally, really, and
bodily his body. It is a fallax or deceivable argument of sophistry,
affirminge that simpliciter, quod est modo aliqu^. This c^n every sophiste of
Cambridge tell you. And we know that it is small reasone, to conclude that
John baptist was the same Elias that was dead many hundred years before his
time, because Christ sa^ed that he was Elias: except we should be of the
opinion of the fond Philosophers, who held that the souls of men Pithagaras
departed went into other new bodies, and so continued still immortal. In like
manner, wha^ Iosephe says, that the. vii. fat oxen are. vii. good years, and
the. vii lean one (...), vii. yuell years* we may not conclude, that ox^ or
^ie^ a^ natural years. More over, when Christ says that the word of God is a
sede: it is but a slender argument to say therefore it is a bodylye sede. An
hundred such places may be brought. And yet, if they can bring but one place,
where God has said, This is such a thing, and would have at corporally so
to be: I will gladly give place unto them, though it be so that the thing do
not appear to be as God has said it is. But I do know ^m certain in my
belief: that all the works of the Lord be truth. And as he has said that
they be: so shall they be and are in deed, either in spirit, or else in the
sight of all men bodily.

An answer co^cerneing the knowledge of The se^ses, and a declaracion of all the. xii. Articles of the faith, which every true Christian man must believe
in heart and Confess with moUth.
THus far have I brought in mi faith plainly, contrary to no place of
scripture (except you call Your gloses scripture) And where I might have your
own doctors to confirm the same, yet will I not stir contencion so far.
Knoweinge that no thing has been so popeishlie By these fruits you may
know my Lords doctors.
thaught, neither worshipping of Images and Idols, praieing to saints and fond
pilgrimages, nor yet monasteries, monks, purgatory and the poppe him self,
but it has been by the^ and their subtle arguments divised: and by their
writeinges set forth and maintained. With dainger therefore, have we followed
them over long. But now you may not thyncke, still to lead us captives from
Christ, whom we look for spedilye to come into judgment with us, when we
shall be judged by his word, and not by their writeinges. We have followed you to
long (being but blind guides) gropeinge after your blind ways, in the
darcke, without wit, reasone, or faith, but only because your holy father of
Rome, and that holy mother church, did so believe and teach (and now at
lengh, as our holy mother church of England does lead) and therefore may you
worthyly call us (as you do) beastely blind, and therefore far from the
knowledge of our religion.

But now that your father is fallen and weseke for our father in heaven
desireinge his kingedom to come upon the earth, and praieing for the food of
our souls (his heavenly bread) which you have so long banished, and neither
would your self enter into his kingedome, nor suffer them that would to
enter, accordeinge to the sayeinge Math. xxiii.
of Christ our savior: we (knoweynge; that what so ever is not of faith is
sin, and that faith is of heareynge, not of you Bishops and your doctors,
but of the word of God which can deceive no man nor yet be deceived, desire
and require you to beat into our heads no longer (as articles of our faith)
your change of su^ sta^ your accidents, qualities and qua^tities, in form
and under the form of dread, to go away from it when the bread musteth and
brenneth you know not how. For this your answer is an evident argument: that
you know as little how it came there. And think not much (I pray you) that
we do (in this mattier) ^ye your craft ^d falsehode, not only with
scriptures. but also with our reasones and outwar^e senses The which three,
that is to say, Fayeth grownded upon the word of God, reasone that ca^^e not
be resisted, and the senses, as sight, tasteinge, smellinge and felinge, which
can by no learneinge (but by your schole be deceived. Yet you would have us
wholely captiuated unto you in all these things, that you might lead us where
you list, to make vnse^sible chau^g where you blow and bless cross and
kiss.

No fail, in things far distant (as is the* sin, move and sterres and
diverse other (...) wherein the senses are deceived.
things) he senses may be deceived, without the help of reasone set in man
to be their lady and masters, and with her help, they may judge of all bodily
and sensible creatures, much more are they able to judge of bread, their
continual object daily offered unto them, wherein, not one sense, but the sigh
taste, smelle and feleinge, do witness together, reasone approves and
allows their judgment, and faithfully established in the word of God:
affirms the same.

Christ him self (as we have said) calls it ^reade and win. Paul to the
Corth* Math. xxvi. Mark. xiiii. Luke. xxii. i. Corh. x. et. xi.
calls it bread that we break, and says that wea^e one bread, and one
body, so many as are pertakers of the same bread. Again in the. xi. So often
as we ^ate th^s br^ode and drink this cup: we show the death of the Lord
unto he come. Therefore, who so ^ateth this bread and drinks this cup
unworthily: is gilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

Let a man prove him self therefore, and so ea^e of this bread and drink of
this cup. Again, in the Acts of the Apostles. They co^ed in the doctrine of
thapostles. In feloweshipe and breaking of bread. Again Act. ii.
he was known unto them in breakeinge of bread. Luke. xxiiii. daily
continuinge with one accord in the temple, and brake bread from house to
house, our senses also do (one after other) bear witness hereunto. We hear
Christ and his apostles say. This is bread. We smell, taste, and feale it to be
bread. We se it is bread, and so conclude ^i reasone, after this sor^e. The
baker did bake it as bread before it was put to this use, and in this use it
is nothing changed from the kind of bread (for it musteth, mouldeth, and will
be eaten of ^sse as other bread will) Wherefore, we be inge enstructed, first
by li^ fayeth, and tha^ by our senses ruled by reasone: dare boldelye conclude
this same to be bread. If you might lead captive all these three* then
should we follow where you would have us, as our fathers have done before.
As for the mysteries and principles of our religion (whereof you say we stand
great neade) to be taught* (you teach f^ll slender lie, that is to say,
only with a sentence of doctor, and a verse song in the church. But we
know that so many of them as be corporal The senses are witnesses to the
truth of sensible things
(and therefore sensual) it has pleased God so to wrocke them, that the very
senses may perceive them, and therefore be as a testimony of our fayeth
beareinge witness of their truth. Now, as for the mystery of the Trinity
and the unity of godhed, you do know full well, they are not in the number of
sensible and bodily things, and therefore can in no wise be offerred unto the
s^ses: wherefore it is no good proffe, to judge them unable to declare unto our
reasone, what is bread and what is wine, because the can not attain to that,
wherwyth they may by no means meddle. Or to think them not murtified in
other things, because they witness hear against you. But you go aboutte to
slander us as thought we did not believe.

We know by our fayeth grounded upon the book of Genesis, and all other
scriptures settinge forth the almyghtie power of God, teacheinge us to believe
in God the father almyghtie, maker of heaven an earth, and in his only begotten
son our Lord Jesus Luke. i. Math. i. Mark. i.
Christ, who was co^cerned by the holy ghost and borne of the virgin Marie,
wherein rests the chief point of religion and only salvation.

So sone as he came into the world, there were called to wittenesse three
herdemen or Luke. ii. Mar. ii.
shepeherdes: and three wise men out of the east, to se with their eyes and
testify unto other, this the chief mystery of our religion, that Christ
was come in the flesh: bisides the resort of the men of Bethlehem, to se
their savior with their eyes, and the plain testimony of Simion saieinge.
Now Luke. ii.
have mine eyes seen thy saueing health. More over Christ thus comeinge in the
flesh was bodily present in the sight and eyes of all the world, the space of.
xxx. years, and what so ever miracle he wrought in the dodient appeared to the
eyes and outward senses. As John. ii.
when he changed water into wine: streigh way it appeared wine to all the
outward senses. Inlyke manner, such as Christ healed bodeli, were they lame,
blind or lazar: streigth way they appeared whole. And so conseqe^tly in all
the miracles that Christ wrought in sensible things bodily: they so appeared
unto our senses. When he raised Lazar us from death to lyffe, it was not
countertaite: for he John. xi.
did eat and drink in the sight of all men. So likewise, when Christ
suffered most paynefull death in the sight of the whole world under ponce
Pilate, he was crucified, dead and buried, that no eye or tongue shoud
witness the contrary. He desended into hell (as Peter witnesses) in spirit,
which falls not under the knowelege of our senses, because 1. Pet. iii.
the spirit goes and comes, man knows not how. Than have we witnesses
Act. x Luke. xxiiii. Math. xxviii. Mare. xvi. John. xx.
that God raised him the third day, and showed him to all the people, but
first to his witnesses appointed for the same purpose, which did eat and
drink with him after he was risen from death.

Moreover, that we should nothing doubt of this mystery, so darcke unto
reasone: christ appeared unto them again, and commanded. Thomas Didimus (who
was before in doubt to put his finger in his side, to see John. xx.
h^s hands and the wounds of the nails, that they al might know it to be
his natural body thus risen from death, yea a body which has flesh and
bones, contrary to Luke. xxiiii.
your doctrine, which will have ve believe in a body, that has neither
flesh nor (...), quantity nor quality, that is as much to ^aie as no
propretie of a body, except it be borrowed of the bread, But we beieue
according to the ^e spirit, that John describes: that Jesus Christ is comen
in the flesh, and has died in the same (according to the saieinge of Mar.
vi. Act vii. Act. x.
Paul and testimonies of al scripture) in the which he is also raised again,
and ^owe sits at the right hand of God the father, from whence he shall come
to judge the* quick and the dead. Unto whom all the propheres give witness,
that who so ever believes in him: Genesis ii. Esai. liiii
shall have remission of ^ynnes by his name.

We believe in the holy ghost one God with the father and the son even from the
beginning, as appea^eth by the first creacion of the world. Now that the
euerlasteing Lord and ever liueinge God, has created al things by his word,
our Christ and savior, with so uniform power of this holy ghost that
nothing could come forth to any shap or form, until this spirit procedeing
from them boeth, did moan upon the walte deep or unformed waters.

Wherefore, this almyghtie power, of the Genesis i.
tr^ and ever lasting God is in Hebrew called (...) (plurallye for the
diversity of perso^es) throughout the old testament, where the Idols of the
heathen ar named in the singular (...) And (...) and yet for to sett^ forth the
unity of the godhead: alwaie with this word (...) of the plural nu^bre, is
adioined a verb of the singular as (...). And also in the high name of God
which the Jews had in so high estimacio^ (...)? which does sig^ifie unto us
that only euerlasteing power, wherbi al things have their being: is
manifestli ope^ed the unity indi^sible. Of this spirit is it written thus Romans
viii.
He that has not the spirit of Christ, is none of his, And again. Who so
ener are led by the spirit of God, they are* the children John. iii. John, ii.
of God. So* that as we can not be without God or Christ: su can we not be
without this spirit proceadeinge from them boeth, as Christ him self
witnesses, saieinge, The conforter, even the holy ghost, whom my John. xiiii.
father shall send in my name. Again. Wha^ the holy* ghost shall come, whom I
shall send from my father. Of this spirit did the prophets Esai. xliiii
speak much under the name of water and fire, as Esaie. I shall pour forth
my spirit upon the thirsty, and mi^floudes upon the dry land, I shall pour
forth my spirit upon thy sede and my blesseing upon thy buddes, and the same
shall say. I am the lords Like unto these are there other places as in Esaie
xii. Eze. xxxvi. Psalm. C. xlvi. lxiii. This spirit together with the father and
the son, this Trinity and Unity that can not be divided: do we believe and
teach, not by a blind saiynge of any doctoure (as you do) but by the word of
God and the work of his spirit, which is able to lead us into all truth,
and never fails his church builded upon the rock Christ, against the which
the gates of hell can not prevail, For by this spirit, thus workyng Math. xvi.
faieth in Christ, and love to God and man: is known the true church, as John
says. By this do we know that we dwell in him and he in us: because he has
given us John. iiii.
of his spirit. And Paul says generally to al^ the faithful. Do you not
know that you are the church of God and the spirit of God dwells in you. If
any man do defile the temple i. Corh. iii.
of God: him will God destroy. This church of God is holy which you are, where
he does not mean of the Popes Church though it were builded of v. M. proud
cardinales and bishopesse, much les of our english church built upon the blind
ignorance and sinful lyueing but of. x. o^ xi. horned. Miters (for three or
four of you would all were well, so it were not long of the^) but of that
only Church which does always know hear, and follow the voice of Christ
the^^ head and shepeherde, and will not harke^ to the voice of any stra^nger.
Who though they be but. ii. or. iii. gathered together in the name of Christ
(being always dispersed abroad, by the Idol shepherde) yet is Christ in the
mids of them, and shall at the length gather them all in one that there may be
one shepherde and one fold. This church is washed, this church is sanctified
and made holy John. x.
This church is justified by the name of the Lord Jesus and by the spirit of
our God, says Paul. Christ so loved this church that he spent him self
for her to make her holy, i. Corh. vi.
clen^ed through the fountain of water by his word, that he might make her
unto him self, a gloriouse church haueinge no spot, blemish or wrinckle or
any such thing Ephe. v.
But you will doubt still (O byshopes) whether of us be this church. Whether you
gloriouse in the world: or we despiced. First therefore, mark the fou^dacio^s
of this church for there can no man lay any other then that is al redye laid,
the Lord Jesus Christ. (...). Corh. iii. Esai. xxviii* i. Petr. ii.


The first foundation.
Whom the fayeth has set as the chosen sto^, for the fou^dacio^ of the true
church Sion

The second foundation.
Christ is the head of this church. Ephe. i.


The threde foundation. i. Peter. v.

And head shepeherde of this fold.

For the first, all men judge that you (al: ledgeinge so much man's lawa^es,
establisinge and buildinge your fayeth with man's ^^ra^y, settinge your
cousciences upon your doctors, who are but flesh and blood) do not so
greatly regard Christ as we do which will have him our only foundation,
and will admit nothing, but that is spoken by his spirit in his scriptures.
This fail you in your first foundation.

Secondelye, if Christ be head and master, who did come humble, meke and
pore, rideinge upon an ass, not having an house ^ach. ix.
where to ^aye his head, dispisinge al worldly an outward glory, when the
people would have made him a king: why do you ride on mules trapped with
goulde? Why John. vi.
have you such castelles, holds, parckes and palaices? Why will you be Lords
worldelie, and take to you such outward glory?

Christ said that his kyngedome was Ihon. i. viii.
not of this world, and why will you bear such rule hear: Yea Christ
forbade you to be called master: and why will you be called Math. xxiii.
Lord: On the contrary part, we have the word of Christ (our head) for us.
Who says. There is no servant greater then his Lord and master. If they
have persecuted me: they will persecute you. If they have kept John. xv.
my word: they will keep yours. If the world do hate you: know that it did hate
me before it did heat you. If you were of the world the world would love
that which is his own. But because you are not of the world, but I have
chosen you forth of the world: therefore the world hates you. Yet do I leave
you peace, and my peace do I give unto you, but not as the world gives do I
give it unto you* Yea more over they shall curse and excommunicate you (which
was your old practice o prealates) and not only John. xiiii.
that but the time shall come, that who so ever sleath you: shall think that
he does high sacrifice unto God. And this shall they do because they neither
know my father, nor pe^ John. xvi.
me. Tyrdlye, If Christ be the head shepeherde, and did (for your exemple)
say, that the learneynge which he taught, was not John. xiiii.
his but his fathers that sent him: how da^e you be so boulde to grownde so
many things on your doctors. Christ commands you to feade his flock, but
you ^ea them. ii. Corh. x.
Christ commands you to edify but you distroye. Christ byddeth you go into
all the world, and to preach his word to all the world, and to preach his word
to al creatures: but you say nay, none shall have it but ge^tleme^ the other
pore knaves, shall have a sophistry book of your gloses. I pray you, who^e
make you the head shepeherde in this and al your doeinges? Not Christ, but
your doctors and Idle brains. To be short, let any indifferent person take
in hand, to judge the life, trade, and learneinge of you byshopes, and compare
it with the doeinge of Christ: and he shall find so much diversity, as
between Christ and Antichrist. To compare them also to Peter an Paul and other
of the Apostles, would s^ne declare the one part to be naught, they are so
contrary, but they shall be found the folowers of Christ, and therefore of the
trwe church, and you the* contrefaites, The folowers of Christ are the trwe
church.
yea the very folowers of the Romeish Antichrist, and therefore the sinnagoge
of Satan. As for us, we will hear the voice of our shepeherd only. We will
hear* no stranger, and therefore we have no need of any testimony of man: For
the very anointe inge teaches us to call Father, father. And the same
spirit, witnesses unto our spirit: that we are the children of God. For he
that confirms us to gether in Christ, is God who has also sealed us, and
given the erneste of his spirit in our hertes.

And as Paul says, in the first to the Ephesians (to so many as do believe
in the word of truethe and the gospel of health) Ephesians. i.
you are sealed up by the holy spirit a fore promised, which is the ernest of
our heritage. Therefore says he aga^ne, draw no p^cke with the vnfayethful.
For what company can there be, between the ryghteouse and the vnrigh^^ouse, or
wha^ par^etakeing of the light with darckenesse: What concord with Christ
and Belial? Or what part can the fayethfull have with the vnfathfull, or how
can ^he church of God agree with Idols. For you are the ^emple of the
liueynge God as God sayede I will dwell in the^ and walk in them, and I will be
their God and they shall be my people. etc. ii. Corh vi.


And this is the universal church scatered thorough out the world, which we
believe (not the church of Rome, France and Act. x.
England) as Peter confessethe sayeinge I persei^e in deed that with God there
is no regard of persons: but in every nation, he that fears him and
works ryghtuousenesse: he is acceptable^ unto him This church sufferreth
always with her head Christ, wherefore she shall also reign with him always
and be glorified. Romans v^iii.


This is eue^ the fellowship of saints, that we do suffer together with our
head, and make perfect the afflictions which lacked unto his body, which is
the church, haueing Coloss. i. Ephesians, iiii.
one only father in heaven, one only savior on earth, one fayeth grounded on
his only word, one baptism of the spirit, one hope of our calleing, one
heritage commune from Christ to all the whole feloshipe of saints and member^
of his body. Haueinge the remission and forgiveness of our sins, as Luke
xiiii.
the whole scripture witnesses and be leueinge stydfastely the riseinge again
of the flesh i. Corh. iii. i. These. iiii. i. John. v.
as is most plainly taught, and euerlaste^nge life, as John witnesses, that
God has given euerlasteinge life. And this life is in his son. He that has
the son: has life. The spirit is it that witnesses these things for the
spirit is truth, and he that believes in the son of God has this
testimony wit in him self: and he that does not believe makes God a liar.

These things have I written that al men might know our faith not to be
grounded on man, but on gods holy word, and that we doubt in noparte of the
old fayeth, but only upon your new articles and gloses

The resolusion of certain doubts contained in Winchesters book
THus have I put you out of doubt* that we doubt in no article of the
christian faith. But I doubt that you b^e not yet out of doubt in those
things that you doubt of in your detection, amongst which this is the
greatest doubt. You doubt (you say) how the son of god whom you call Jesus)
should be contained in the womb of the virgin. Unto this your boubt, I
answer, that as he was and is God: so was* he and is without beginning and
end. And the heaven, yea the heaven of Apocal. xxii. iii Reg. viiii.
al heavens, can not contain him (much less a littlle box to be shut therein
(but as he was very man, so was it true that the prophet did speak. That a
woman should compass a man. And this body (that was borne of of the woman)
can you not prove to be scatterred throught out all corners of the earth and to
be in heaven also. For so should you make him a spirit and no body (yea all
together God and no crature, for no creature can be in ^o places the^ one at
one) co^trari to the chieffest article of our faith, which is that he was
incarnat and became man like unto us in all things (sin only excepted) and
that in the same flesh he dyed once, rose again, and ascended into heaven,
and there sits at the right hand of God the father, from when (...) he
shall come even very man as he asended, Acto. i.
having all the propreties of an incorruptible body, that is to say, being
visible and local, haueing quantity and qualities as his fayethfull disciples
and Apostles saw and perceined him to have after his resurrection which
proprites declared him to di^^er from a spirit (much more from God) as
concerneinge the body wherein these qualitites be. The godheade differs and
is known from the body by that it is immense, and can be contained in no
place neither is it sensible, nor can be perceived by any of the senses. Where
as contrariwyse, the body is sensible and may be boeth felt and seen, and
must needs be always contained in some one place, other else is it no body.
And thought by miracle, God have carried any corporal body from place to
place, contrary to the course of nature as he did Elias, in the firely chariot.
Or as iiii. Reg. ii.
he carried Abacuke for the confort of daniell, and as the spirit of God took
away Philip, when he had christened the Ennuche of queen Candaces, and set him
at Azotu^. And Acto. viii
as by the spirit, Peter was brought out of prisone, taken from the four
quaternians of soldiers, his body lowsed forth of all the chains and
prisons sodaynelye, yea the Act. xii.
^ate of Irone openeinge against him, contrary to the natural order: yet can
no man prove by these or any like miracle, that one body has been in. ii.
places at once, much les that any of these bodies may be eueri where, as you
do maynetayne (by miracle of Christ comeinge into the house when the Apostles
had shette the doors and wyndowes, for the fear of the Jews) that the natural
body of Christ may be in ten thousand boxes and aultres, when you do not
know whether the doors did open against Christ as the Iron gate did against
Peter. But you bring in your sophistry against al reasone, with out any
scripture, and therefore without any fayeth, affirmeinge that. ii. bodies are in
one place together and occupi the same place at one time, which neither faieth,
reasone, nor any of the se^ses (that ought by the ordinau^^ of God to judge of
all bodily things) could at any time, either by miracle or otherwise
perceive. Act. v.


We read in the. v. of the Acts, that the sect of the Sadduceis, did cast
the Apostles into prisone, and that they were brought fourth by an angel. Yet
when the ministers were sent to bring them to examinacion, they found the
prison diligently shot and the kepers standeinge at the gates. But now it
were a very slender reason, to prove that the bodies of the Apostles may be
in many pla^^es at once. And yet is this even like matter with the entering in
of Christ to his Apostles when the doors were shette. But boeth these miracles
were wrought to confirm the faith of the Apostles, not that Christ might lie
hid in a little bread, for they never taught this fayeth to the world. But
this was their doctrine, that their God could deliver from prisone, and raise
from death, for as much as he was the trwe God, even Christ Jesus the soune of
the lyueinge God, whom they preachede to be as then risen from death.

But you are not contented with this because it has some shadow of the of the
truth your purpose is to deceive by snbtyle words, But now you myxt open
falsehod and say that Christ did rise out of the grave the same being still
shet, where all the four evangelists do witness against you sayeing that the
stone was taken away or roled from the door of the grave or monument. It is no
marvel therefore, thought you would banishe as many as is possible from
readeinge of the scripture, for if no man might read the scripture but you and
your co^pleis then might you lie at the large without ^heke, and play your
legerdemayne without being esspied of any man. First John, the John, xx.
chief secretary of God, writteth thus. The first day of the Sabuthe, Marie
magdalene did come perlie when it was yet darely unto the grave: and she did se
the stone tak^ away from the grave. And Matthew tells* how the stone was
taken away* The Angel of the Lord (says he) did come dow^ Mat. xxviii.
from heaven and did roll the stone from the door and sit upon it.

In Mark and Luke (good christians) yo^ may read (if the bishop will give
you leave to look on Christ's holy word) that the stone was rolled a way, and
the women went into the grave. By this may all men se that lust, that you ar
better seen in the popes lerning the^ inthe gospel of Christ. Who so lists to
be deceived: let them trust such byshopes

More over, lest it should seem strange to you that the graves should open:
we read in Mathewe, that the graves were opened Math. xxvii.
and many bodies of the saints which were dead did rise, and after the
resurrection of Christ, did come into Jerusalem and appeared to many. What if
one of your doctors lay that Christ's grave did not open wha^ he rose: must
you gather thereof a new article of our faith, to be defended with fyr^, and
conclud, that eithere there were. ii. bodies together in one place, and occupied
the same place at one time (which is but a sophistry mattier, which if you
could prove we care not greatly) or else (which is like madness) that one
body natural, may be in. ii. thousand places at once?

In the. viii. leaf of your book, where you labor a bout certain reasons
that have been made coucernemge your God these be your words. Winchesters
words in the viii. leaf of his book.


If it were true that is taught in the sacrament of the aultare by the papists
(which term serves ^or a toke^ to them to prove the mattier naught) such and
such inconnenie^ces should not follow to our senses. By these words you do
minister occasion to speak The answer
of. ii. things. One is, wh^ you donot call this the sacrament of Christ, and
the rema^braunce of his death and passion, accordeinge to the Luke xxii.
scriptures, which say. Do this in the remembrance of me. And agaiue. So often
as ye i. Corh. xi.
shall drink of this cup and eat of this bread: you shall show the Lords
death till he come or else the supper of the Lord, as Paul calls it in the
same Chap, or else as Luke. xxiiii. Acto. ii.
Luke calls it, the breakeinge of the bread. But gods holy word you care
not for, your own gloses delight you so much. The cause is, that you are
papists and do as your father has done before you. Who (as he is the very
antichrist and the wicked man sowing the iuil wede, which you would feign deni
and you durst be so bold) so likewise must ii. Tehss. ii Math. xiii.
you lift your self a boue that which is God or godly, and think that you
can name al things better and teach, enerie thing more wisely then the
spirile of God could do it in his holy scriptures. For this do you call it
the sacrament of the Aultare, and do hang it up in a band, full
vnreuerendelie (if it be a god) sheweing the shame of your god (as Baruch
says) that can not stand alone. This must we worship with al godly honor
(say you) and so forth in all other cere moneys, bloweing, blessing,
crosseing, kissing and other mad gestures. All this must we do even as your
father the pope taught. Are ye not worthy to be called papists, when you rage
and revel, burn and broyle, boeth the word of God and the mayntainers there
of because you can not have the poppe and his name still, and for that you
perceive that the people begin to loeth the baggage brought in by his subtle
legerdimayne? Do ye not declare your selves hearein to be righ papists: All
that is crept into the mas (more then the Epistle and Gospel, and these words
Hoc est corpus meum, with a few wodes fuloweinge) for the which you prouid^
very well that we shall neither hear them nor understand the^.) what other
thing are they then the documentes of your father the pope: Not of Peter, but
of his superstitious successors and vieares as you call them.

Each of the^ cobbled on his cloute. As Celestinus A rehersall of the
benefactours and founders of the mass.
for his part, or deined the prayers that the priest says when he rauisheth
himself to mass (as you place your terms) Damasus ordained Confiteor.
Gregory caused Kirie lesone to be said. ix. times together. Gregory and
Gelasius gathered the collectes, whereof many are plain heresy if they were
waighed to their worthiness. They ordained also the grayle. The tracte was
divised by Telesphorus. And the sequences were first invented by one Notherus
an Aabbt Anasta sius, commanded that men should stand up at the Gospel.
Eutichianus, did ordain the offertorie to be song whylse the people offered
for the conforte of the poor, Gelatius made the preface, and sextus put to the
sanctus. Pope Leo the threde ordeyneh the in sense. The secrets of the mass
called the cannon (which is made gear) was patched up by diverse. Gelasius
made Teigitur. Siritius added communicantes and pope Alexander made qui pridie.
Leo made Hancigitur Gregory patched the peticions, diesque nostros.
Innocentius the first ordained that the priest should kiss, and the paxe
should be given* to the people. Sargins ordained the agnus dei. Alexander the
first did ordeyne that the bread should be unleavened, and water should be
mixed with wine. In your secrets, you have a beadrol of benefactors, and
another of halowes* makeinge your mas a memory of the^, and not of christ, so
that in good faith we think in conscience that we can not have a fi^ter term
to handle our matter with all, the^ to call this mas of yours popeish, for upon
the pope it is grounded, he was wo^tte to be named in the middle of it, and was
the only maker of it, Popeishe is the fitteste name that can be given to the
mass
and in his remembrance it is done. Chrisogonus and other popeishe have it
done in their remembrance, what better name (therefore) can we give it then
popeishe: You also, mayntayneing the same, in mine opinion can have no fitter
name given you then papists, for the fautours and maintayners* of the same
sects and religions are named after the authors of the same sects and
religions, as well in the good part as in the ill. If the pope therefore were
author of these things: the^ is it but reason that you (the mayntayners thereof)
be called papists. And I think not contrary but you like the name very
well, for you renownce it not at all, neytther do you mislyke any thing that
subtyle Antichriste did invent but do stiffly take part with the cruel
papists in the defense thereof I think you are ashamed or else your heart will
not serve you, to renownce that your profession perchance the oath that you
made of old does somewhat trouble your conscience. Well ye pass it over with
silence, so that we may Silence betokens consent of the mind or co^sience.
take you as you are and be nothing deceived in calleyng you papiste. For if
we were deceived in you: you would neither maintain popeishe mattiers so
styfelye, nor yet accuse so greuousely, the wickedness of this time, wherein
men labor so greatelye to de face the Popes doeynges. Yea ye would (at the
least way, once in so long a book) have taken occasion to speak against
some popeishe madness. But clean contrary, the more do ye establysh the
popes kingdom.

And at the lenght in the end of your book to declare your self a sworn
papiste: you make the popeishe ceremonies, as gown, crown, and other baggage
of popeishe inventions: the farthynges whereof your religion wholely stands.
Let them that have eyes to se and ears to hear: judge what you ar. Tha^ bring
you a proof, made by reasonne Winchesters words.
and senses of man, against your God.

That the papists call their God some time is eaten of a mouse, sometime
waxes grene mould, red moulde, and blewe mould and so forth. Therefore it is
no God.

Al this you solute with the diuill says, the devil refreshes his
yongelynges, and The answer
still your tongue renneth upon the devil, wherefore I fear me he is with in you
For, of the a boundaunce of the heart, does the mouth speak, says Christ.
It would become a christian bishop to name Christ more often then the deuell.
You confess afterward that these thiges be true: and yet your solucion is
hear that the devil says it. Than add you this reasone of the Deuel you
say.

God is impassible, incorruptible and Winchesters words.
immortal. But that which the papists make their God is corruptible (for the
mouse does eat it, the hands do break it man's teeth may tear it, It may
also be burned, Ergo it is no God, but an Idolle.

Then go you about to illude this with The answer
a like argument (which is very crafty sophestrie) sayeinge that you will
reasone after the same sort and say,

God is impassible, Christ was God, ergo he suffered not. Or thus. Winchesters
words.


God is impassible. Christ suffered, ergo he was not god.

Surely you are a subtle Sophiste, and The answer
full able to deceive. But take your solution with you. You do reasone (as the
sophisters say) a simuli, but not a sufficienti simlitudine. The sufferinge by
a mousse is nothing like the sufferinge of Christ who must needs Luke. xxiii.
thus suffer for us and so enter into his glory. In whom no thing was doene,
but that his father did decre before

That by death (as Paul says) he might Act. iiii.
do away him that had the authority over death, even the deuell, who could
not keep Hebru. ii. Coloso. ii. Psalm. xv.
him captive, but he did rise again and triumph in the flesh, neither could
his fleshese corruption. Thus are you deceived double. First for that you have
no scripturs whithys your handyworke should be called God. Secondly because it
can by no ordinance, profit or commodity: suffer of the mouse or corruption
as Christ has done for our si^nes. So that I marvel greatly you be not a
shamed to compare it with Christ either in calleinge it God, or in the
suffering of it by a mouse. Is the passion of Christ our) only, salvation) no
more regarded of you, but that you dare couple it with such similitudes? Christ
(as he was God) could not suffer, but in his flesh he suffered for us, and
yet* could not that same flesh of his se corruption, as David wittnesseth.
But this your white^ and rownde thing does daiely corrupt and perish^
wherefore it is not Christ's flesh. Wherefore, if I might optaine so much fa^e of
my prince and people, as did Ih^ among the Israelites: I would boeth destray
this your Idol, and his groves of ceremones wherein you hid him, and bid Ba^ll
aue^ge him self. But your God is so Iudic. vi.
weak that you must desende him with fire. Let him do but so much as a
snayle does, and put o^t his horn forth of his shall to afayre his enemies:
and we will say he is God and all together that you desire. But the backs,
cattes and birds are not afraid of him in the church. Therefore, as Baruch
says, he is no God. But we will leave all the revenge aunce, boeth of this
Idol it self and you the makers thereof: unto our Lord the liueinge God, for
he promyseth he will repair it, and so has he doene even from the beginning
of the world, and Romans xii.
yours is at hand.

Your book (byshopye Stephane) is very long and tediousel, and your talk
subtyle, that if I should to your worthynesse examine every sentence: it
would not be answered in few words. Yet I trust your mattier and arguments
shall be sufficiently open ned, and your popeishe heart vtterred, and your
sophistry confuted in this mine answer of my fayeth and hope which I have
conceived of the liueing God and his son Christ our savior.

In your tenth leaf, you do vehemently provoke unto fayeth, grounded upon the
word of God and his omnipotency. For the omnipotency, you are alredie
answered, that it is no good argument, to say that because God is almighti, he
is a piece of bread duste, ashes or such vile thing. No you do blaspheme the
majesty of God in compareinge him to such vile creatures. As for that he did
become very man, it was for this purpose to advance this his noble creature
the whole kind of man (accordeinge to his promise) even a bone the angels,
whom we i. Corh. vi.
shall judge, for they are all spirits, and are sent forth to do service unto
them which are the heirs of salvation. Again, he did not take the angels,
but the seade of Abraham. Hebru. i.
Therefore ought he in all points to be like his brethren. If there were any
such worthynesse to be looked for unto the creature of bread, by the word of
God after this life, then lo, we would grant that he had assumpted this
form of bread with him* But oh thou man, thou vile wretch and caytife to thy
maker. Was it not enough was it not enough, I say that Christ did come down
from the bosom of the godheade, and the glory of his father, to take the
form af asernaunte, refuseinge the form of angels, and did be come (for a
space) inferior unto them, very man of the sede of Eua Me^.
subject unto al humane misery (sin only excepted) humbled unto the
death, even the spitful death of the cross? That he now in his manhood
exalted above all things heavenly, erthelye, and infernal: should sit at
the right hand of his father aperpetuall mediator and peace maker between us
an his father, were not this inoughe man for his humblinge him self, unto the,
unless thou call him down into other vile creatures (bread and wine) and make
him assu^pt a new form of bread, with a mernaylouse Metamorphosis, a
sudden and insensible chaung, to make. ii. sponeful of wine a God for to be
worshipped with all godly honor (as your statut of the. vi. articles of the
faith of your English church does blaspheme) to make a littell bread, the
whole natural and real body, flesh, blood and bones and all as he hanged on
the cross, or as he was borne of the vergine marie:

Truly, truly I say unto the, because he (...) omnipotent he will not be
changed into any new forms, by the mu^bling and breathing of an whormo^ger
or sodomitical priest that you may se your own reasone of the om^ipote^cie to
be clear against you whose omnipotente power if you did once dred or fear his
majesty, you durst never vt^er this blasphemy. Now, our whole contention and
strife is about the faith g^d upon the word of god. All the world may judge
that we seek and requier none other thing.

You have but one scripture, which is this. Hoc est corpus meum. The Arrieus
(whom you mention very often) had as much as that for their purpose, that is
to say this text.

Pater mayor me est. They had as plain words in that text as you have in
yours. John. xiiij.
They have the Verb est (or is) that you make of so great strength. But yet
you are in your proceading upon your text somewhat worse the^ they. For where you
say that this faith is groundid upon the word of god whereby we believe every
word that proceeds from the mouth of God, as be these. This is my body
which is given for you.

And this cup is the new testament in thy blood, which shall be shed for many
to the forgiveness of their sins* you say but right and we believe no les. But
when you proceed with your sophistry and philosophy of the body really and
carnally, substancially (and naturally? consecrated, altered and changed i^ to
the form of accidents, qualities, and qu^tities: Then go you farther then did
the Arians. For herein you bring with you a rabble of terms, fetchide forth
of the bottom of sophistry and philosuphy, and this deuilishe gronde must we
either believe or else be brent.

It is for these terms, for these your gloses that you do strive and make your
cruel laws For you never despred nor procured Act of parliament, that he
which had not, or understood not the word of god. should be brent, nor yet
lose one farthynge.

But many times have you bisshopes burned (and do daily) both the new
testament and the old (all that we have left of the word of life) together
with the maynteners and professers of the same, and all them that will not
maintain your gloses. That you bisshopes, the blood sheders of the new
testament may follow the trade of your holy ^athers of the old law, who did
slay Christ him felfe as you do his beloved members. But our living god is the
revenger.

This Arius did draw unto his wicked opinion, the emperor* Constantius, the
excellent learned bisshope Eusebius, and many other excellent bisshopes and
learned men.

Then god stired up, Athanasius, who confuted, his error with the hole course
of scripture, as many godly men have done yours, if you had grace to se it.

But lo, then did Arius seek for false accusers, to have caused the Emperor
to have put this good man to death, but god did preserve him in his
innocentie, and showed his vengeance upon, Arius, so that he died most
shamfully, his intralles and guts fallinge from him in to a preuie in the
Sinode of Nece (as Athanasius does writ) upon the psalm. Quicu^que vult.
Beware, you are admonisshed.

Where as you reason, that your god must mould and putrify, must be devoured,
and corrupt, to the open confusion of your senses, because your faith ca^ not
other wise merit, verily, it is done to the confusion of your fond brains
and madness, that will make so vile a creature (as can not help it self) your
god honouringe with all godly honors, the thing that is weaker and worse the^
a worm or mouse that wastes it. Not only leaving the everlasting and
almyghti god your self (who has your breath in his hand to take it from you
or lend it you so long as it lykethe him) but also teachinge other alwais that
this cu^iured ^ake is god. And yet so sone as you put him to your mouth, your
breathe only (which can hurt no other creature) chaungethe him into clammy
past, that cleaves by the ro^fe of your mouths.

Have you not learned, that the thing which goes into the mouth does nether
make the man holy, nor unholy.

But god lokethe upon the hertes the ground of all holiness. For the beauty of
this Kings daughter, is inward. Can you not perceive how shamful a change
you make from the almighty to him that can do nothing. From him that sauethe
al, to him that can not save him self. From the strongest creator, and maker
of al, to the weakest of al creatures. From the hest to the worst.

Surely your senses be confounded, and you may worthily be ashamed, yea, you
your selves and your god shall be confounded and ashamed, when the wrath and
vengeance of god shall come down upon al Idols and Idolatours, which is at
hand be ye sure. But you say that this must moulde and putrify that your
faith may merit. What shall it merit for this lewdly estemynge god and his
son Christ, but everlasting damnation For this is life Everlasting to know
the true God and who^ he has sent Ihesu Christ The^ must it needs be
everlasting death, thus John. vi.
blasphemously to Judge of them both.

He that beleuethe in me has Everlasting life (says Christ) we do thus
believe on the John. v.
sone of god therefore have we this witness within our selves.

And seeing we have life everlasting and are made the children of God by the
testimony Romans viij.
of the spirit, we do seek no farther merit. But this word merit is one of
our iugling terms, wherewyth you blind the people You promise merit for your
matte^s, merit for your mass, merit for your eating of fish, merit for all
manner holiness that you haunte. Worshippinge of, Images, Creping to the cross,
Setting up of Candles, and all our works must be done for our merits so that
the merits of Christ (who only has deserved everlasting life for us) is
clean for gotten and fordone. Again you say.

A good true christian beleuinge man, knows Winchesters words.
this by faith, that god is inviolable impassible, incorruptible, immortal,
and that our savior the second person in trinity, very god, haueing the
humayne nature now unite to the godhed, which being glorified can not any
more suffer violence or corruption nor be violated or brought to mortality.

All this is plain against your own The answer.
doctrine, for saying that the body of bread is clean gone, and yet there
remains a body that the mouse or ape catches in his mouth (or e^s they
could not carry it awey) What shall we conclude by your doctrine: but that the
mouse or ape runs away with that body which by your enchauntment, is
conceived into the place of the bread, which (blasphemously) do name the body
of Christ consecrated into the form of bread? But, you do answer, that like
as Christ when he was here in the flesh, did first escape the hands of
Herod, when he slew the children, and afterward the furious Jews, when they
would have precipitate him: transiens per Math. iij. Luke. iiii.
medium illorum ibat. Christ escapped through the midst of them. So does he
now say you. Your similitude is evil applied. For besides that there is no
comparison of Christ coming in the flesh for the wealth of the world, unto
the bread thus altered for your pomp and pride: we know, and Joseph and Mary
do witness unto us that they knew and perceived by the benifite of their
senses, that this same our Savior Christ was in shape a very man. And we
know also (by the testimonies of the scriptures) that he continued here very
man in form and shape, being subjected unto all our infirmities (sin
always excepted) for the space of. xxx. years and more, and that then he
suffered death and rose again, his flesh neither being consumed nor
putrified, but still remains flesh incorruptible and immortal. Where as in
the form of bread (wherein you say we see him and eat him) we perceive
neither incorruption nor immortality. For it never continues paste the date
of one month (if you incur not the danger of your fathers decrees) and
commonly not one quarter of an hour, much after the rate of the daily new
created monstros, of who^ Aristotle makes mention. Who doubtless if he had
hard of these monstrous gods (made and marred all in an hour) would have
written wonders unto his posterity. If the cakes were preserved from
corruption and did continewe still immortal, as Christ his flesh did: then
would your similitude (in these two miracles) serve you somewhat better. But
seeing that your cakes do mould and corrupt, and his flesh escaped Herod, and
the hands of his enemies, and could Psalm. xv.
never see any corruption: this your similitude proves, that those cakes of
yours can by no means be his natural body. These two miracles therefore (as
all his other) were done to declare him to be subject to no power of man, but
to work all his works so, that no man can let and hyndre ought that he has
determined to be done, but you must wrest all that you can, to cloak your
Sophistry wythall.

Now, your affirmation of. xv. hundred years without any proof, but only
because you say so: has been answered by many learned men. As ^adinius,
Ecola^padius, Zwin glius, and other: proving by your doctors, that the true
faith and spiritual understanding of this mattier, continued long in the best
sort of them. How be it, surely I will grant this much unto you, that this
blind, gross and carnal opinion of the carnal eating of Christ, has been
crept up ever sense the devil was lowsed. This thousa^de years that this enemy
has troubled the world with popish pomp and pride, keepynge and lockyng up
the word of God from us: God has not destituted and forsaken, but has
always, from time to time, steared up witnesses of his truth, whom partly the
popish have slain, but some God has reserved, and always the good simple
people have had their eyes unto the living God in heaven, what so ever the
priest did babble of this his own ha^dy work. Neither could those terms of
your strait laws really, and substa^tially, the change of the bread so that
^here remain only accidents without subject, and consecration into the
quantity and quality of bread) ever be understand of the pore simple
people. For those terms do spring and have their beginning of the schole
learning and Sophistry (as all men of knowledge can testify with me) and were
never given in commandment to this bloody generation, to be delivered under
pain of death. It were but folly to strive with you concerning your doctors.
How they have in order and course, by little and little, fallen from the truth
in this and other things. For it is no merueile though you ca^ expound your
doctors to maynteyne your opinion, saying you dare be so bold to cause
Christ's words to serve for your carnal purpose. I entende not therefore, to
bring in any proof of doctors but only of the word of God, leauyng you to
your doctors to try them at leisure. But this one thing I shall desire you.
To bring some apparent proof of your terms: and I promise you it shall be
answered.

Good men be never offended with the Winchesters words in his. xiij. leaf.
breaking of the host, being persuaded Christ's body to be present in the
sacrament really and materially, whereunto with worshippinge, they did lift up
their hands, and nothing doubted but God was impassible, ^e used not to
mist^uste God his immortality, when they have seen a sick man receive the
sacrament a quarter of an hour before his natural death, as though in that
man the host consecrated wherein the body of Christ is present) should with
Gods injury, moulde or corrupt, wast or consume.

Here is much mattier offered, but that I The answer.
perceive my self to tarry somewhat to long upon your occasions. Who shall try
the^e good men therefore, but eue^ the book of wisdom: where it is said.
Blessed be the good man for he has no Idol. I know there have been good men,
which have hated all Idolatry, and the persecution of al ages can report the
same. The books also of their faith (so many as have escaped your hands) do
yet testify that they were sore offended with this blind change of these
dead ceremonies, in the steed of the lively feast of the Lord where al men
should be fed with the body and blood of Christ the son of God not turned
into bread but lively workynge by the spirit in our souls. And they do a^he
this question, why you do break his body in three, and why you do put one
piece into the chalice to the wine: saying you d^ teach that the wine alone is
flesh and bones, though you do put, no grosser substance thereunto. For
because it is liquidum, you can make it what you lust, and dare enter some
deal far there then Christ did, for he at the uttermost made it but blood,
but you will make it blood, bones and flesh, and say we shall be bre^t if we do
not believe you, and yet for all the stickinge to the bare letter, you have not
one word through out the whole Bible, whereby you may clooke this matter, that
the wine shall be the whole body, flesh, blood and bones: though ye cry. The
word, the word. Faith, fatyh. These heritickes will not believe the word of
God.

For your term really present: you shall understand When realitie was inverted.
that after Bonifacius the third, about the year of our Lord. vi. C. and.
iij. obtained of Phocas the false Emperor, to be the head of the church (by
the crafty practice of the monks, Paschasius, Humbertus, Guimundus, Algerus,
Rogerus, Frauciscus Anselmus and such other) was realitie inverted, and termed
to the sacrament: Before that time, the spiritual eating only was magnified
among the old doctors. But then began the church of Rome to be given over
to al po^pe. wickedness and Idolatry, the mother church of al mischief. The
bishop and his adhere^tes of the Antichistes generation, are now fully bent to
lift up the^ selves against every thing that is good and godly, commanding
Images, and other vile creatures to be worshypped. But the Emperor Leo the.
iiij. gathered a counsel at Bysantium, of CCC. bishops, which decreed that
only God ought to be worshypped, and caused the Images to be bre^t and
destroyed. Then Damas^en becomes their proctoure, stubburnely resistynge the
Emperor so long: till he had his right hand cut of, how he gatte it again
(you must bring some credible authoure, or else we will not believe you) long
after, when Idolatry had gotten the upper hand, then did Petrus Lombardus,
(master of your sophistical sentences) bring up your transmutation, and
transaccidentatio^ (About the year of our Lord, M. Cxlvi) gathered out of
certain blind words of the doctors before his time. Then Pope Innocent the
third gave it this new name, that you maynteyne with fire. He called it
Accidens sine subiecto. Of the which Sophisme, doctoure Duns, doctoure Dorbell
and doctoure Thomas de Aquino, do dispute very subtilely. Their terms you may
see more at large, by the most diligent confounder of their errors Ihou Bale
in his book named the mystery of iniquity. Then followed the blind rabble of
Scotistes, and Thomistes, and they have brought the world into this
contention, that we now hear and are busyed with all. Thus was this high
mystery of man's salvation, and most comfortable sacrament, clean changed
from the institution of Christ, which was to be taken (with thankesgyuynge)
in common amongst christian men, that (with open heart) every man might
rejoice in the death of his Savior, and give thanks for his redemption, that
thereby, faith might be established, and brotherly love nourished. But now it
is become a vain gasyng and staring upon the sacrament in the steed of the
Savior, taking the sacrament, for him that made it a sacrament. Worshippyng
the creature in the steed of the creatoure, as we see now this blind swarm,
which for the lively preaching of the death of Christ to be the life of the
soul: do cause mumbling al in a strange tongue, that the people might surely
be kept from the consideration of the mystery.

And where Christ commands us to divide it amongst us, and that we should
all dry^ of the ^^ppe: the popish priest must get him into a corner alone,
and there so many shall be part takers of the merits of his blowing, blessyng
and other coniuringe, a^ will give him any thing. They shall be prayed for in
the midst of his Mass, and shall have their sins taken away. This win^ they
that will be the priests benefactou^s. The other shall see Christ really (they
say) but because he is dombe there and can not speak, and the pristes lesson
is no penny, no Pater noster: they may knock hand on breast and worship they
wot not what, lift up their hands and stroke their heads, like the Popes
own dear children: but they shall have no part there, neither of the
sacrament (whereof they are appointed to be part takers, by the open word of
Chiste (eat and drink of this you all) nor yet of the remission of those
sins that the priest wor^heth for, ^nlesse they give some money.

This money it is that causes it to fight so sore against Christ's
institution, and to maynteyne your gaynful sacrifice and real presence. This
money, for the maynteinaunce of your dignities and Lordelyke port: has caused
you ever since you were first poisoned therewyth, to magnify your own handy
work. But the God immortal will aduenge his injuries upon al Idols, and
Idolatours.

Now, to mistrust the immortality of the everlasting God (as you lay unto
our charge) by whom all things endure: were extreme blindness. And so
likewise, to count your God (which never had breath of life) immortal, when
the priest that has made him, and perchance eaten him, the same day that he
dies, is mortal, and goes to the grave, with his new made God, and many
other me^ (as you say) that dye within a quarter of an hour after they have
eaten him. In who^ you make the doubt whether the host consecrate, shall
mouide, corrupt or consume, lyinge in their bodies, being dead, for you are
the first (to my knowledge) that ever moved that question.

To call this immortal, I say, that never lived, and lies in the ground
with the dead man: may well be called fo^de Sophistry. But to toutche your
words a little more. You call this the host wherein the body of Christ is
present. You begin (me thinks) to wax ashamed to call this your host the
body of Christ, contrary to your plain text of scripture. This is my body. I
must also lay this unto your charge. Why you dare call him host, by a new
term, and not bread by the old term. Some think it is because you take
your own words to be wyser then the words of Christ and his chosen
Apostles. And surely it is needful that you bishops, which buyld your
selves a new church, clean coutrar^ (both in life and learning) unto the
church o^ Christ: should have al things new changed, both rites or
ceremonies and words, the things them selves and their names. An^ yet in the.
xiiij. leaf, you say thus.

The true church has taught playnely^ that the substance of bread is
changed in^ Winchester. words.
to the substance of Christ's natural body.

Is it not the church of Rome that you mean? I am sure it is. For unto such
time The answer.
as your holy father Bonifacius and Innocentius (Bishops of Rome) became the
universal heads and fathers, and their stout cha^pion Peter the Lo^barde and
other worldly clerks, blinded with ambitiou, and bewitched with schole
learning and such like doctrine of the Devil, Sophistry and contentious
babblynge: this change of substaunces was never imagined. But clean contrary
wise. The true church, even from the beginning, has fed of the spiritual
meat that followed them, that is, has had their comfort in Christ, being
the lamb all ready slain before the beginning of the world. The promised
seed of the woman, who should break the serpents head. The seed in whom
all nations of the earth should be blessed. They have, I say, by their faith,
eaten the same spiritual meat, and dru^cke^ the same spiritual drink, and
therefore have been fed with this only fode of the soul, and have gotten the
forgyuenes of their sins, and therefore life everlasting, by the same faith
in the death of Christ that we have. Who if he be a sufficient Savior, in
that he did come in the flesh, and thereby only takes away sin: you shall
never drive us to seek him (as a savior and rau^some for syn) in your
^o^iured bread, and vnse^sible change of substance.

This spiritual feadeinge of Christ crucifiede: you may learn in Augustine,
Chrysostom and all the old doctors, saueinge that some of the^ (in all
things that they will magnify) do speak so at learge: that they open many
holes to subtle sophisters. to establyshe their craftily invented sophismes
of sacrifice and realitie. And some of them slide from the spirit, to the
flesh, both in this and other mattiers.

A declaracion of the true church, what, sort of people have been the same
church even from the beginning.
TO try therefore, this true church, which has continued in the doctrine (not
of the flesh) but of the spirit even from the the beginning Who, also did
not know any other way to heaven then Christ: not eaten (flesh, blood and
bones) but hoped for and beleaued upon to be the light of the heathen, the
glory of Israel, and the salvation of the whole world. That like as by
flesh and by man (even the first man Adam) all the world was lost and
dead: so by Christ, taking the flesh of man (named the secound Adame) all
should be saved and have life.

Understand, that the true church has always had this belife of Christ.
First that he was to come, and now that he is come in the form of man, and
in none other form of any other creature. And this church, though it were
always a little flock, as Christ our head calls it: yet was it never
destitute either of this spiritual knoweledge, or yet of trwe teachers and
maintainers of the same.

But God, allwaies of his goodness, has God has never forsaken his church.
continually stirred up his faithful witnesses of his truth, to the
co^de^nacion of the world, which can go no farther then the flesh leads.

First had we Adame, who lived many years after Abel was slain, and taught
his posterity of this sede promised by God. For he perceived by the death of
this innocent, that* a lamb should be slain (as John says he was Nain even
from the beginuing of the world) and did firmly believe, because of the
promise made, that by the sede of the woman, and none other creature, the head
of the serpent should be broken. After these we had Seth, Enoch, Mathusalem,
Noe and Sem.

After them, or rather in the time of Sem, so sone as wickedness did begin to
spring again: God sent faithful Abraham and taught him the sacrifice of his
son Christ. In whom (taking the nature of man, and so offered a sacrifice unto
his father, lest we should seek any other sacrifice but Christ comeyng in the
flesh, and dieyng for us in the same) the true faith, has this only foundation.

Than followed Isac, Iacobe and Iosephe Men taken forth of their own kinredes
and Mark how God provided his church of true preachers
^ontries, and but a few and small number in regard of the great multitude
that might be laid against the^, if any multitude might appres the truth, yet
did they spread and leave behind them the true trade of the spiritual worship
of God and full trust in him only unto the worlds foloweinge. Than when
Joseph was almost forgotten (not of the faith full but of the Egiptians) God
stirred up Moses, and he teaches plainly, that the lord shall raise up a
man, even like him, and he that will not hear him, shall dye.

Thus teaches he life by the spiritual* eating of Christ, that is to say, by
the hearing of his word and receiueinge him into our hertes by says,
acknoweledgeing, that by the death of his flesh, all flesh lives. Yet for
all the wonderful worckes that this Moses wroughte, for all the plain
teacheinges that he taught, so that he was worthyly called the faithful
minister of the house of God: only Iosue, and Caleb, are allowed of God, among
the great nombre of many thousands that Moses led, that it may clearly
appear, that many are called, and few found fayethfull witnesses of Few are
found faithful.
the truth to his chosen church, which hangs only on the hand of the
liueinge God not regardeing flesh or any outward thing but only the work of
the spirit and the promise to be performed by Christ (GOD and manne) in all
things.

After all these, God sterred up Gedeon, (the beater down of Idolatry) and
other such judges unto the time of Samuel, David and Elias, who made his
complainte sayeinge, Lord, they have destroyed thine altares, and slain thy
Prophets, and I am left alone, and they seek my life. In this man's stead
was Eliseus taken from the (...) low, to be an ernest witness. After him
followed Esaias, and streighte after him Hiere^ias. Than Daniell and after him
Zacharias, Onias, and the faithful witnesses of the Machabees. Than Simion,
Zacharias, and John Baptiste, who always called upon the living God, and
trusted upon him: so that no man can deny me but that this your God impanate,
is your God only, whom our fathers knew not at any time Worthy therefore, is
he to be stoned to death that teaches any such new God to the posterietie.

All these had the same spiritual meat and the same spiritual drink for
the refreshing of their souls, that we now have: because they were of the
true church whereof Christ is the head, of whom (as of the first begotten) all
spiritual kinreddes have their begin ninge, who coming down from our
heavenly father did declare him self to be the head corner stone of the true
church, though the bishops refused him in their buildeinge.

And when he ascended up again, leading capteyue with him, captivity hyrselfe:
he Ephesians. iiii.
gave gifts unto men, making one sort Apostles, an other sort Prophets,
some other Evangelists, some Shepeherdes, and ^eachers. These only be
appointed to be the ministers of his church in the new testament that they
should all together in spirit and truth, boeth worship him and cause other
to do the same, for the spirit is the worcker of al, dividing to eueri one as
pleases him. i. Corh. xii.


The body of this church then, is not one membre, as of long time you have
named your selves only to be the church, but it is many members, as the
Apostle witnesses, among the which members, I fear me you shall not be
worthy to be numbered onles you do amend your life, so contrary to Christ the
head of this church. For this church has he begotten unto him self by his
word, as the parent and only mother thereof: that it should be without spot or
wrinkle, gloriouse, holy, and without blame, and especially, says, Paul, the
bisshope must be i. Corh. iiii, Ephesians. v. i. Tunoth. iii. iiii. T^tus. i.
such a one that no man should find, any fault with him. Thus writethe he to
his dearly beloved Timothe and Titus: making it most evident and plain unto
us, that you bishopes and prestes, teachinge for your gain sake, or else
teachinge nothing at all: are not the true byshopes and members of the true
church, but the hierlinges and hypocrites, that have no part in the Kingdom
of God and his Christ, who did come* pore, not having where to lay his head,
and did choose pore sheperdes to be his first witnesses, and after them fishers,
toulers, and tentmakers, And the words that he spoke to his disciples are far
over hard for you byshopes to bear Who so does not (says he) for sake
father Mathe. x. Luke. xiiii.
mother, goods, life, and al together for my sake and the Gospel: can not be
my disciple

Moreover, where as the bishops of the Jews Iereme. vii. Mathe. xx.
and chife priests do cry Te^plum domini, Templum domini, As though they
them selves and none other were the true church: Christ answers that the
son of man shall be betrayed to the chief priests and they shall condemn him
unto the death, so that they were none of the trwe church, though they were
of the seed of Leui, to whom the governance* of the church was promised and
performed. In like manner you, so long as you persecute Christ his members and
burn his word: cry you holy church never so much, you shall be no more of the
true church then* they were For there is all one work and purpose in you
boeth, that is to say, to miantayne your pomp and estimacion, your power and
your holiness before the people. But now is the time come that the thing
which* was most holy in the sight of the world (as you and your jewels Luke.
xvi.
have been) shall be abominable* unto God.

Yet one other thing, nothing pleasant to your lordlike stomakes. He that
will be the chief in this church must be the seruante of al, Like as the son
of man did come, not that he should have service done unto him: Luke. xx.
but that he him self should serve, and give his soul for many. Learn to
know the members of christ's church, A^to. ^i.


As many therefore, as we find agreeable with this head Christ, as were the.
xij. Apostles and all the true disciples, who continued together in the
breaking of bread and prayer, acceptinge none of the possessions of this
world as their own, but making all that was theirs commune to the necessity
of their brothers: we esteem to be the true and faiethful members of this
church. Paul also, geueinge him self (for the Gospel) to be imprisoned,
stoned and slain: was of this church. Stephane also, stoned for the defense
of GOD his glory, and Antipas, the true and fayethfull witness of Christ,
slain at Pergamis, Ignatius the scholar of John, who suffered for the Gospel.
Ignatius I say, Who so ernestly desired the bread of God the heavenly bread
of life, which is the flesh of Jesus Christ, the son of the living God who
was borne in the last end of the world of the seed of David and Abraham, and
desired to drink the blood of him that is without corruption, and the life
everlasting All these, I say we know to be the lyuelye members of Christ's
true church, but not these only which sufferred under the Romish tirantes:
but them also the which in all countries and at al times have witnessed and
suffered for the truth* of God his word for all are created for his glory,
and God has not at any time or in any place ben altogether without his
witnesses, if the world would receive them. He sent into our na^ion,
Iosephe of Aramathia. He stirred up Gildas, he enstructed the plowemen o^ kent
and other contries of whom we have the monumentes.

After ward did he send Robert Grosheade, who boeth by word and by writing
did rebuke the world of blind judgment Then came the great clarke, that
wrate so mani godli books, John Wicklife, of whose Fire can not prevail
against God.
works though Subincolepus the bishop of Prage, did bren to the uombre of two
hundred: yet are there many of them reserved un to this day, by the provision
of God, to the confusion of the kingdom of Antichrist, and clear testimony
that the world before us, has not ben utterly destituted of true know ledge,
though from time* to time when the lyghtte has come into the world, the
kingdom of darckenes, the children of prid^ have loved darkness better then
light, and therefore have labored to extinguishe it and have prohibited these
bright, sterres to geu^ light, save only to a few whom he had chosen and
long a fore appointed, even to the weak abiectes and cast awaies in the
sight of the world, of the which sort, part were slain, and part lived
unknown to the world, for this little flock even from the beginning, has
not been of the wife and stout worldely men: and therefore says Christ I
thank the father that thou haste hid these Luke. x.
things from the wise and prudent, and haste showed the same to littleones
smallye regarded. And Esaie says, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise,
and the understanding Esai. xxix.
of the prudent will I cast away. And again. Where is the wise: Where is the
scribe and interpreter of the law? where is the Esai. xxxiii.
disputer of this world? Has not the Lord made folyshe the wisdom of this
world? For after that the world by her wisdom, could not know God, in his
wisdom: it pleased god by the folishenesse of preachinge, to i. Corh. i.
make salfe them that believe.

This preachinge, of the living god (which sent his son, an everlasting
sacrifice for the life of the world) caused the sacrifices to wax cold, and
that was it that caused the priests of the Jews, to persecute the christians
so sore, that not only the Apostles, were scaterid among the heathen, but also
Joseph of Arimathia (a capitain that buried Christ) did fle, as our old
cronicles do report by the prouide^c of and god brought the faith into this
realm of England, then called Bretan.

This persecution of the true church (which Mark who have been the co^tinuars
of persecucion.
was the flock dispiced) was still increased by the bisshopes of the Jews,
criynge that the disciples of Christ were disceyuers teaching a new faieth,
errors and herisies going about to withdraw from the law of Moses as
aperithe throughout the book of the Acts of the Apostles, And this endured
xlii. years, until the Jews were co^pellid to forsake their own country,
being vanquishide and overcome, and by the great and just punisheme^t of god,
distroyed by Titus and vespasianus.

The disciples also, being scatered through the heathen, but few in number, and
as yt were a sede for harvest apointyd, did so preach the only and
everlasting god and his sone Christ sent in the flesh to gyne light unto the
world: that Idols began to decay, so that the priests of the Idols and the
work men and makers of al such Idols, yea and their own brethern the Jews,
did in all places move and sterre persecution. Thus was this pore church,
being but here and there an hanfull to gether, carried before kings and
Emperowres, scourged, imprisoned, stoned, beheaded, but in all this did they
over come through their head Christ, who gave the^ such spirit and wysedom
that no man could resist. So that the more christian men were put to death, by
fore and cruel torments: the more boldli and ma^fulli did new soldiers
arise in their stedes.

Now when the helly power can not prevail by this way of open tyranny,
against Christ's true church: then does the deuille send forth the disciples
and shcolars of the The sophisters are the deuilles messengers.
preistes of these Idols, which were the subtyle philosophers and especially
the Greeks of Athens who bringgynge forth reasones of Aristotle and such
other: did subtly dispute against the resurrection. In so much that in his
time Paul said. we do preach Christ crucified, to the Jews an occasion of
falling and to the greeks, folishnes.

The Romans also, were at that time, both enstructed with the Greeks
sciences and puffed up so proudely, with their great conquestes^: that they
accounted all other men barbarouse and foleyshe in regard of them selves. So
that they smalli regarded this weak and wearish company of Christ and his
scholares, that the saying of Christ might be true, the world loves his own,
and though the sound of their voice went through the world, and they did
continually grow and increase: yet did the world persecute them for the space
of. iii. hundred years And at that time were they most cruelly handled, by
Maxentius, the tirant. Then god stirred up Constantine who showed great
favor Maxentius the tirant.
to christian men, suffered them freely to preach, gave them leave to build
churches, and at the later end of his life was christened in Nicomedia. Now
persecution of the church began to cease and than straight began the name of
christen men and Christ's church to be common to many, but so many heresies,
sects, and dissentions did arise up by subtelite of the devil, and by this
craft stopped the truth in such sort that the true church was but in few.
Even then the chief of your doctors (men suerly whom I never do despise, but
when you do bring them as witnesses against the truth) the best learned I sai,
of al your doetours, partli blinded by the greek philosophy, wherein they were
noselled even from their infancy, and partly driven thereunto by the subtle
arguments of the crafti heretics. Arius, Macedonius Nestorius, Eurites and
such other. were compelled to write many such things, as they did afterward
retracte and recante (as their own works do sufficiently witness) testifyinge
of them selves that they were fa^e to take such weapons in hand, some time,
as had but small ground in holy scripture.

But to go forth with our purpose, thus was the church of Christ in the time
of Constantinus (even in the dispite of the wicked) groune up into estimation,
and made so general of so small beginning: that all the children of god might
openly behold, that the folyshenes of god is wiser then men, and the weakness
of god is stronger then men. But such is the estate and condition of men again
(by the providence of God) that nothing The church of christ shall not
continne ^onge in the prosperity of this world
should long continewe in prosperity. And if at any time it chance so to do:
we wax over proud, and so forget, who is the geuer thereof.

Yet did the church flourish so long as the bishopes did preach the gospel of
Christ in poverty, so long as the bishope of Rome was not lord over the
empier, but a feder of Christ's flock, so long as al other bishopes were no
lords, but pastors and herd men watching carefully up on their fold, not de
sirynge dominion, rule, and worldly governance, neither sekyng their own
honor and gain? But teachinge their britherne the kingdom of God. Such
good bisshoppes were Athanasius and Epiphanius.

Such good bisshopes were the members of the true church, for yet were they not
so proud to name them selves God makers, but ministers of God, servants
appointed to bestow his treasures. And as they were begotten children of the
church of Christ by the word of truth: so did they live and grow up by the
same word and by no man's doctrine.

Thus continued they in christian poverty, to the year of our Lord. ccccc.
xix. When Behold how God strikes and heals a gain.
Iustinius the Emperor of Constantinople did call them forth again, being
long disquietid and sore oppressed by the continual wars of all realms and
provinces, and boeth he and Iustinianus his sisters son, did show unto the^
great be^euolence and favor. He gave them great gifts and appointed them
salares and wages. The^ was Agapitus bishop of Rome sent to the emperor by
Theodocius, to bring al things un to a christian unity. This Agapitus was so
holy a man, that as he entered the gates of Co^sta^tinople, a certain blind man
received his sight. Then followed Gregorius magnus, after whom we read of no
true preachinge of the word of god by any bishops. And therefore did the
bishopes and their scholars (from that day forward) grow into a S^nagoge of
satan, first gounded in pride and ambicion (as appears by their own
histories) Bonifacius the third optaiueinge of Phocas to be bishop of all
bishopes, and to be the spiritual head of the church, puttinge Christ from
his office, whom only al christian me^ must acknolege the spiritual head
Bonifacius puts christ out of office.
of his church, though all Kings and governors be by god appointed the civil
heads of the body politic. This did he grow up by little and little, he I
say and his successors, even to the highest estate of Antichrist, banisheinge
Christ, his word, and his form of liueinge, seting him self in the hertes
and consciences of men (the uerie true church of God) nameing him self an
erthly God, that could not err ^deceiued, yea offerring his shoes to be ki^
kings and Emperors.

Thus, I say, this Romeish church changed from poverty to pride, creepeinge
up, like the Iuie by the roots of the great trees began to over run and
subdue kingedo^es and empieres, yea to put down kings and Emperors.

For the mainteners of this diuellishe life and doctrine, they had ta^ken such
away and order: that if we take them and their adherentes, that is to say
all their sworn doctors, anointed bishops, and shaven priests for the true
church: we must neades by their learning, lyuinge and all their works
condemn Christ and his members. The true church remains still pore,
persecuted and sore oppressed all the time of their tyranny, which could
never beriefe Christ of his witnesses, for in all times and ages there have
Persc^usion can not spoil Christ of his witnesses.
ben faitheful witnesses of the truth, though their names and doctrine have
always been obscured and sclaundered by these papists who were allwaies both
the Judges and accusers, the scribes and reporters of their doeynges.

This church as it was alwaie ruled by the spirit of Christ: so did it
understand the scripture spiritually by the spirit of god and worship him in
spirit and truth.

Like as among the fathers of the old testament, the ambitiouse scribes and
phariseis and the fleashly minded both priests and people: did know non
other holmesse by the circumcision of the flesh and the bodily sacrifices
(where contrary wife. Moses and David and the little chosen flock, led by the
spirit of god, did know circumcision of the fleashe to be nothing^ without
the circumcision of the heart, and the sacrifices to be but shadows of our
Christ upon whom all ways they did feade and s^tt their delyght knowing him
to be the vnspoted lamb and red heyfer offered for the finnes of the people
even so the hole popeyshe church (clean contrary to the doctrine of the
spirit) has fol lowed fleashely Imaginations of their own brain in all
their doctrine, and sete up their own works and sacrisices to take away sins
(as did the old phariseis) whereby it commethe to pass that al Idolatry i^
stablished their own doctors and decres strongly maintained, and the word of
god ^alli regarded

The pore sheep of Christ, fisshers and Mi Lord will ha^ no^e but gentlemen
shepherdes, plowemen, and all under the degree of gentilmen, are (by your
decrees) banished from the sweet pastors and fode of they^ souls. And if it
chance any of the^ to break in to the pleasant banks of Christ his do
trin, and fead on the hills of salvation: the popysh bishops can smell him. xl.
miles from the^ and then shall the innocent lamb be burned and suffer death,
for the reding of this word for the which Christ his shepeherde and head
died, for the establisheynge thereof by the sh^adynge of his heart blood.

Judge now who is the true church. for Christ did not cheuse the wise, nor
the men of power, nor many men of noble birth. But the eternal wisdom of
god chose that which was foleishe before the world, that he might shame the
wise, And those that are weak in the world: did he cheuse to shame the mighty
and strong powrs. And those that are vile and despised and of no reputacion.

The vtteringe of the popeyshe Sophismes.
But to return to your words, and to consider how you of this popeish church
would captive our wits about this sacrament: thus you say and writ.

There is in the sacrament of the altar non other substance, but the
substance of the Winchesters words.
body and blood of our savior Christ, and yet remaynethe the form and
accidents of bread and wine, not altered by this miracle from knowelege of
the senses, wherewithe they were before known, and also by god his
sufferaunce, subjects to the passibilitie that they were in before.

Oh when will you wax^ ashamed: The The answer
mouse may eat yt (as you say your self) (...) yet it must be the self same
substa^nce of the body of Christ, were it not for shame to babble long in this
matter: I would bring in the scriptures that prove all them to have
everlasting life, that eat his flesh and drink his blood, But go to, I will
stope your monthe with your own madness. Pope Victor the third was poisoned in
this sacrament. and yet must it be the body of Christ, which can bring
nothing but health and life. The Emperor Henry the seventh was poisoned by a
Dominik friar, named Barnardinus de The sacrament may be poysone.
monte policiano, in receyuinge the sacrament and yet may it be non other
substance but the body and blo^de of our savior Christ God and man, where if
he had been man they had poisoned him first, but if he had been God he would
first have espied their poison by cause he can not be deceived, and because he
can not deceive, he would not have poisoned the Emperor, who mistrustid no
thing. But let them pass, they be the learning and practices of your
church. You goo on still with the same Sophistry of the form and accidents
of bread and wine. Always synginge one song, that with often rehersall, you
may bring it into credence. If you preach this form, these accidents,
(...) this passibilitie, to the pore people: they may well wonder at your high
learning, but they can know little what you mean. These things I have somewhat
touchide, and shall d^ more here after. You say that these accide^tes are not
altered unto the senses but are subject to the same passibilitie. I pray you
what sophistry has taught you, that accidents are become subjects of
passibilitie? If ever you learned Logike or philosophi: you know that the
subject to passibilitie must neades be a substance. Wherefore, seeing you will
have such passibilitie, such chaunges, both corruption of the cake, and
generation o^ anewe body: you must confess some other substance in these
chau^ges that sustaynethe the accidents after the Accidents must have
subjects.
change, for the infallible rule of Logike is this There is no accident without
his subject and periculiar substance. And co^seque^tly, if you will wade in
these dark terms of sophistry* you shall be compelled to grant an other
substance (which sustayneth the accide^tes) bysides the body and blood of
Christ. And seeing that Godhath created none other substance, which has these
peculiar qualities, that we feel, smell, se and taste still to remain, but only
bread and wine: we must needs by the properties by god only attributed to these
creatures, conclud against you? that here be the two substa^tes and creatures
of bread and wine, unto whom God did in their creation, attribute and give
these qualities, these accidents, these self same properties, the self same
form and shape that we se does still remain vuchainged, under your fingers and
in your mouths. As for your holy entralies: I know not what passibilitie they
suffer there. In this place of your book, I must pas over with scilence
certain of your words as are these

The creator of al is present, the substance of the body and blood is
received: under Winchesters words.
accidents and the true feast and feadinge is in the mass.

For this your assersion, I demand some The answer.
scripture wherbi you may declare it to be of Christ. And for the later part
thereof: I utterly deny that in your mass is any ^uche feast or feading: for
it is but a gaping upon shadows and dombe cerimoneis. Again, where the
Apostles call it the breking of bread you call it the breaking of accidents, or
of the host for you ar fa^ to sheft your termis for shame, because never man
yet could handle an accedent, nor break it handsomely, except it had a bodi
or a subject. As for you, I trow you be Iuglars, for you will have the body of
Christ there present, you will handle it, make it hop about your chalice, tear
it in ij. or iii. pieces, but yet you will not break it, for you say it is
impassible and can not be broken, nor can suffer any violence. But I shall tell
you If you were not plain Iuglars and coniurers, we would swear (so many of us
as stand by you) that you do break the same thing that you handle. ^ou swear
nay by the holy mass, for you break (you say) but a few accidents, under
which the body lurk the, and that the same precious bodi is after in each of
the parts wholly, and whole Christ in the pieces The iuglers are not so
daungerouse.
broken without increase of nombre, you will not give an a^^e leave to tell,
one, two three, as Inglers will, I am ashamed that I have occasion thus to wr^^.
But ^alde propositions, must have balde solutions.

And now (say you) men ash how a mouse Winchesters words.
can eat God: And how can God corrupt and wax moulde: how can god be broken
in pieces,

We demand the same questions still, and The answer.
warn you that give the occasiion of such questions to repent you. For as
Bell in Babylon and all the other Idols were by the wrath of God destroyed:
so shall you with your false god, be consumed, excuse the mattier with
accidents as long as you list And this causes us to speak of your Idol as
Baruche the prophet did. But you make a godly answer or twain.

Believe (say you) that a mouse can not devour Winchesters words.
god, believe that god can not corrupt Believe that god can not be broken. All this do we believe, and therefore* we co^cl^ that this your cake is no God. And
where you add yet one other precepte, and bed, us believe, that Christ god and
man is naturally present in the sacrament of the aultare: if you were a right
bishop of Christ, you would be A right bishop will not belie Christ.
ashamed to belie your master, for he says in no place of the scripture, that
he is naturally present. Be ware therefore for you may not add unto the words
of Christ: lest he do ad and increase your plages. Liars, worshy ppars of
Idols, sleiars of me^, sorcerers and dogs are judged without the gates of
the new Jerusalem. But you have a co^mone refuge, the church (you say) says
it. And when you will bite us, tha^ the devil says it. But it is no new or
straing thing to hear this of your mouth, seeing that the sam your mother
holy church: multiplieth like language against ^ure master Christ. He is mad
(said the phariseis) he has the great devil Beelzebub. And by the prince of
devils, casts he Marc. iii.
forth deuels (said the Scribes) Iufine, they al agred that he had a wicked
spirit. Thus can you not gofro^ your nature, and we must needs be like our
master in sufferinge your reproach Then (upon other men's reaso^ing with you,
you proceed thus.

If hear be nothing but this body: the^ either Winchesters words.
it corrupts, or else when goes it away: or where have you scripture to
declare the going away of Christ from this host.

This ca^ you not answer, and therefore are you feign to dal^ie in words. But I
shall answer The answer.
for you. He renneth away when he spieth the mouse coming, and all the
strength of your God is lost, wha^ he once begineth to mould, for it is no
more able marchaunte or man's meat, after it is mouled and corrupted Than speak
you gravely, acknowledginge your ignorance: sayeinge.

Shall the true faith perish, because I or such Winchesters words.
other can not answer thy sophistical reasone:

We answer, that you blind bishops The answre.
ought to thruste nothing with so great violence of sword and fire (into your
churches but that you can fulli give answer unto, by the word of God. For if
you do not bring i. John. ii.
this doctrine in all your lessones: we are commanded not to receive the^, nor
to say a^e unto the^, lest we be partetakers of your il works. For the
scripture of god is able to teach to reprove, to correct and enstructe in
righteousness: that the man of god may be perfect and redi to eueri good work.
And you bishops are commanded wha^ you teach: that you teach i. Timo. iii.
the word of god* yea christwold say nothing but that which he had hard of his
father.

Some scripture in deed you bring for your purpose (and you have it in Paul)
that i. Corh. ii.
men's words do not persuade our fayeth, Which saying makes so clear
against you, that nothing can be more evident.

For you go about to establishe a fayeth, with natural, real, accidents,
quantities, qualities, and such philosophy terms, taken forth of the wisdom
of the subtle book of the greek sophistes, which had much disputed with Paul
and were highly esteemed in Corhinth. And therefore (says he* I do not come in
such high and darcke terms of wisdom. Paul a^o^h not these terms.
No I do judge my self to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified.
You might and would have answred (I dout not) that you did know him naturallye
in the bread and the chalice^ if your generation had the^ ben spronge up. And
think you this gear had not ben ^ete for Paul to preach, if it had been so
necessary as you make it: But Paull preached such wisdom as none of the wise
of this world knows. For if they had they would never have crucified the
Lord of glory, neither would you persecute him still in his me^bres. He
spoke words that he learned not of man's wisdom, but such as the holy
spirit teaches, so that he co^pareth spiritual things unto spiritual things,
and not (...) you do heap up flesh and carnal doctrine unto the spirit,
making the bodily eatinge and the spiritual, to be all one thing hear you
accuse us of our belief, to bring us into slander, as though we were
warueringe and unstable. But what our belief is in god we have alredie showed.
And whether our religion be wavering or no, God shall judge. Our religion is
grounded on the word of God, that can not stacker nor change. And wherther
bishopes, or else we pore abiectes By the works you shall know them.
do live as there were no God (which thing you lay to our charge) all the
world may judge As for Augustine and Solomone, for sercheinge the majesty of
God: are nothing for your purpose. For we seek out your vile Idol as the
prophets have done in their time. And to that thing which is more vile the^
man, we may not loute unto because god has set us in earth to bear his
se^blauce, and ^o be masters and Lords over al his creatures, and obeie him
and his commandments.

Should Moises have suffered the calfe to have remained still because Israel
called it their God, that brought them out of Egypt, as you call this your
maker which was made but the last day.

Was it not lawful for Daniel to break bell in pieces because the Babilonians
(...) led it a God, and to destroy the dragon w^ they compted the liueing God:
Thus may the Idolatrouse priests of all ages, stop the mouths of the
prophets, saying as you done. Beware that ye search nothing of God: least
thou be oppressed with his glory. But always at his time appointed, by the
spirit that can not be resisted, God stereth up his vessels, who know that
the Idols (whom you call gods) are nothing and that there is but one ever
liueinge God: by whom we live and are moved, and have our being, without the
knowledge of whom we can not live unless we will be worsse the^ He that knows
not God is wor^ then a beast
beasts, altogether careless of his benifitesso plentuouselye set forth in
the wonderful workemanshippe and creacion of the world wherein his
everlasting power and godhead is so plain, that all men are without excuse
(as Paul faieth) that will not se it, be thank full for it, and glorify him
as God, but deceived by their own thoughts, sticking to their own wisdom,
which is uerie foleishe, do change the glory* of the immortal God, to the
mortal and corruptible creature. And though Augustine (speakeinge of the
trinite) do did us remember our own weakness, and though Solomon say, that
who so shercheth the majesty, shall be oppressed of the glory^ yet ought we
not thereby to be driven to the duluesse of asses and daweishe doteage of
Idiotes, so that if any profitable thing be propouned, we should not regard it,
if any holy thing be reueiled and disclosed, we should despise it. If the
father of life do co^municat and show any thing, that we should rather ren to
the darckenesse, then to the light which he publishes at his time appointed.
You are very fond therefore, if you reasone thus. Thou may not search such
things as pass man's capacity? therefore thou may not meddle with the
sacraments that we priests do minister. You must first prove that the
sacraments which were instituted for the knowledge of man to enstructe him in
high mysteries: be impossible for man to co^prehende, wherein you shall adioyne
and co^pel to gether. ii. co^traries that is to say, to make that impossible
to be known which Christ commanded al me^ not only to know, but also to do
the same* in his All me^ must know the sacraments.
remembrance. But this is the iugling of the^ that will blind their scholars,
to bind the^ to be beliue whatsoever they shall hear the^ babble. And if any
man ask the^ a reasone of their saieinges: they will stop their mouths with
so it is, and thus it is, but we know not how. These are high mysteries, they
are not to be serched, but it is enough for the to believe as our holy father of
Rome and mother holi^ church has believed these thousands yer^ If thou ask
still, how can this be* thou shall be called an heretik a Caparnaite, and yet
does Christ (our savior and good schole master (bid us search the
scriptures, for they This shall be our schalemaister still.
bear witness of him and his doctrine. By searcheinge the scriptures: our
faith is estashed, and our knoweledge increased in all such sacraments as are
given for the exercise of our ^ayeth, and confession of the same. For this were
to open a lie to report any man to ^fect in the christian faith, and yet the
same ^weth not what is done in the chief sacrame^t^s and ceremonies of
Christ's religion. For seeing that the sacraments are set up for our learning,
as things whereby we may be led as it were by ^he hand and sensibly, from
things sensible, unto things that are insensible, and can not be comprehended
by the power of the senses. How can our minds be stirred up by such things as
ar and must be hid and unknown unto us? Yea how can it be unknown that is
done in the sacraments saying that we our selves bring the substance of the
sacraments. We make the prayers in the sacraments and Christ, the author of
the sacraments, has taught us what they do mean and signify.

Again, you bring for your purposse against us* the sayng of Ecclesiasticus.
Search not things that thou canste not reach, and such as be above thy
strength. But what so ever God commands to do, think on the^ ever, and in
many of God his worckes, be not over curious.

Verily, we know not that your Idol All the works of God be good.
has any work of God in it, as Baruch says. As for our strength and
capacity, first the spirit and the spiritual co^pareinge of the scriptures
and spiritual things: do teach us that your cake is not God. Then the mouse
and muldynge, do testify unto reasone and senses even the same thing. So that
now, our talk is about avile creature, whom you call the creatoure of al, the
most weak Idol that ever was named in the world, whom you call God and man.
In comparison there fore, of our liueing God and savior Christ Jesus: we abhor
and deteste, what so ever you name God upon earth. And therein do we follow the
first commandment, which is that we shall have none other God, upon earth, but
the Lord, that liueinge God, who appeared never in any similitude or Image:
because the fond Brain of man should worship him in no such Image, and so
deceived, be driven from the true worshipping in the spirit And for that cause
does he in the second commandment give great charge, that man make no manner
of Image, similitude or likeness of any thing in heaven earth or the seas, and
that in no wise he fall down and Deuteronomy. vi.
worshipe them, being deceived by the vanity of his mind. Than if this bear
any similitude or likeness of any earthly thing: how dareste thou worship
it, seeing that thou art comanded by the mouth of god (the lord thy god) that
thou worship, and serve him oneli

As for captiueing our se^ses, which you labor so sore about, know it for
certe^tie, that we know our selves to have been far to long captives under the
whore of Babylon your mother of Rome, the head spring of Idolatri. (...) that
is ^e^ be^ of ^^u ^e wise
And now we thank our almighty and ever liueing God, for our deliverance,
and will no longer be led with traditions and doctrines of ^e^, which have the
outward similitud of wisdom, by supersticious humblinges our selves to the^
that cause us to shote at a wrong mark, by an humblenes and holiness as it were
of Angels, in the things they se not being pu^fed up (without cause) through
their own fleshly minds, not haueing the head whereof the whole body by
ioincies and co^plings (receives nourisheme^t and is ^^it together and
encreseth with the e^creasing that co^ith of god

Of this kind is al your doctrine, because it is not grounded on the word of
God. I mean vain superstition and blind holiness. Eue^ very belyed and
misnamed knowledge, as this is which follows concerning Judas and the wicked.
For you say.

Judas and evil men, having the Devil Winchesters words.
in them, have yet received into their bodies, the host consecrate, wherein
was the body of Christ God and man.

Now must we of necessity demand of The answer.
you, what fellowship there could be of light and darkness, life and death,
Christ and Belzabub, God and the Devil. Scripture teaches us, that the
wicked have the Devil dwelling in them, and the faithful have Christ and the
spirit of Christ dwelling in them. But how Christ and the Devil can dwell
together: I am right sure you can not declare. The good spirit departed from
Saul, and the wicked did enter into him. Likewise the Devil possessed Judas
wholly when he ran busily about his mischief, for God departed from him
immediately after the soppe was given him. We must therefore at al times make
our bodies temples of the holy go^te, and our members the weapons of
ryghtuousnes, or else are we a dwelling place for the Devil, and our me^bres
prepared for unrighteous. For there is no couplynge of good and evil
together, heat and cold, fire and water. This is our doctrine that we have
learned of the word of God contrary to that you teach by your Pope holy
Doctors. We affirm that no wicked man (much less any unreasonable beast)
can eat the body of Christ. Our reason grounded upon scripture is this? No
wicked ^ii. Syllogismosses.
man or brute beast has faith. But Christ can not be eaten otherwise then by
faith: no wicked man therefore, or brute beast, can eat Christ. Again. He that
eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has everlasting life, John. vi.
and I will reyse him at the last day. But the wicked have not everlasting life,
neither shall any unreasonable beast be raised again to life: wherefore neither
of them does eat the flesh of Christ. Again. He that eats my flesh and
drynketh my blood, dwells in me and I in him. But no beast or wicked man
can dwell in Christ, or have Christ dwelling in him: wherefore they eat him
not. Again. He that eats me, he lives for me. And he that has the son
has life. (...). John. v.


An hundrede places mo there be which move us to speak more reuere^tly of
Christ then you do (that is) that the true fayethfull man only may be part
ta^ar of the body, blood and death of our Savior Christ. Who as they only
are part takers of the life everlasting: so are they only: and continually
fed with the fode, which fedeth into the life everlasting, with this bread
that comes down from heaven, whereof who so eats shall never dye: who John.
vi.
so eats or drinks thereof: shall never be hun grie or thirsty.

Now for your substanciall solution, for the subduinge of the senses. You say
thus.

The true church of Christ, has subdued Winchesters words.
their senses: that they have continually seen such notable repugnaunce to
their senses, and yet were not moved in their faith.

For this cause ought we not to believe The answer.
their tales. This is like as the Pharisees might have answered Esaye,
Hieremie, and other of the Prophets, cryinge out on their Idolles, saying
that they had eyes and could not see, ears and could not hear, mouths and
could not speak. And feet and could not go.

They might have answered as they did to Jeremy. Templum domini, templum
domini.

The church of the Lord, chosen by God forth of the stock of Levy, has so
captiuated their senses that they have seen continually these Idolles to be
such as you speak, and yet were they never moved with them. Let these tales
pass therefore. For thus did the priests keep the Israelites captyue in the
time of Christ to their own damnation. We are the disciples of Moses (say
they) and God did speak unto Moses. But we know not this Christ from whence
he comes. None of the princes or heads of holy church believe in him, nor yet
any of the Pharisees, but only this unlearned multitude. The Rabbis see his
miracles, they The Rabbis hear and se but believe not.
hear his preachinges: but they captive their wits and say that he is a
sinner, and all that confess his name, they cast out of their churches.

This church, adourned and decked with much outward holiness, having their
office or duitie prescribed or appointed unto them by the word of God, long
time together: rebuked the poor blind man that reasoned the cause of Christ
with them, saying. Thou art borne all in sin, and will thou teach us? Now
because in all ages this cloak and crafty argument has deceived many,
wherefore we will are no more what you of the church do say: but what Moses,
the Prophets, the Apostles, the scripture of God, and Christ him self, do
say. Of who^ with clear voice and manifest miracle, it was heard from
heaven. This is my dearly beloved son in who^ I delight, hear you him. For if
we should hear you in this reason, Mark the fruits of my Lords opinion.
you would by the same bring upon our necks again, the Pope, his Pardones,
Pilgrimages, Abbayes, yea the filthy Stews, maynteyned continually in your
eyes, and under your nose, so long. And yet in all these things you gentlemen
of the church, have so well captiuated your wits: that you have believed and
thought the open mainteinaunce of whoredom (both bodily and speritually) to be
worthily cherished, and that the one was seruiseable for the commune wealth:
the other profitable to Christ's religion.

You have so long deceived us, that unless You shall mock us no longer
you do bring the word of Christ with you: we dare not trust you any longer
under the name of Christ's vicares, and Christ's church, which terms you do
use (as appears by your books) not for any love you have unto Christ, for
then would you persecute no man, professing Christ and cleaving unto him only
and his word, but be ready to e^ danger your soule^ for you^ therne. And by
this badge of love should we know you to be Christ's disciples. In the mean
season we will follow the commandment of Christ, we will not follow the
voice of any stranger, we will plainly proteste our faith in the simplicity
of lambs or doves. Yet will we always have regard unto our head Christ.
And that is the propriety of the serpente. And we will stop Math. x.
our ears when you bring in your inchauntmentes. For those words of yours
are of wouderfulle force. First you do by them, call down into a little cake,
or (as you do gloss it more fynely) into a few accidents: God the second
person in trinity, who sits at the right hand of the father. Then, when
you have wroughte so wittily and myghtely with Christ: you take man in hand,
and would bewitche him to believe that, that cake is no cake, and that the
bread is flesh, blood and bones. You tell him his eyes be blind. His taste
and senses deceive him. His reason is nothing worth in your mattiers. For
though all the miracles of Christ did eue^ apeare as he wrought them. As if
they were spiritual, they so appeared unto the soul of man, and were felt
spiritually, as the forgyuenesse of sins, the healynge of souls and such
like: so doubtless, the miracles that Christ wrought bodily, did appear in
the bodies wherein he wroughte them. But this strange miracle of yours. must
clearly mock and delude all our senses and understanding, and lead us
captyue to believe that you can make God by his word, of a vile piece of paste.
Yet surely (in conscience I think it) your selves do not believe that there is
so great power in the words of God For if you did: surely you could not be
so bold as to burn it. For no fail, if it can make God, it can destroy
wicked men, yea though they be bishops. Moreover you say.

Two things are to be considered in Winchesters words
the Sacrament of the aultare, one that it is a Sacrament. An other that it
is the thing it self of the Sacrament, that is to say Christ's most
precious body and blood.

Upon this I demand, what you do The answer.
mean by this term Sacrament. If you say that a Sacrament is a sign or
remembrance of an holy thing (as all your own Doctors have defined a
Sacrament) then will we say (as the truth is, and as we have taught
heretofore) that this is the most holy sign, and blessed remembrance of
Christ our Savior, which offered his body for our sins, and commanded us
to frequent and use the same in the remembrance of him, who dyed once for us,
and sits now at the right hand of God, a perpetual mean between God and
man. And hear is the full profit, use and commodity that any man can have by
this Sacrament. Yet this will not satisfy you, unless you have us so
captive, that we will say after you. The Sacrament is the self same thing
that it signifies. Christ must be made in the remembrance of Christ. I
demand of you in all other things, be they holy or profane, where you ca^
find me one thing that is both the sign and the thing it self. The holy
Sacrament of Baptism is not so. The holy Sacrament of circumcision was not
so. The holy Sacrament of the Paschal lamb, was never named so in the old
testamente. Yet had they as plain words for them, as you have for yours. For
the circumcision is called the covenant, and the lamb is called the
passeo^er. But you will have the Sacrament to be the thing it self, and the
sign to be the Savior. For this intent no fail, that you being but the
signs and shadows Marcke my Lords intent
of true Bishops, your two forked cappes and labelles, the signs of much
holiness and knowledge in both the testame^tes, your white raichet, the sign of
chastity and pureness, your precio^s shoes, the signs of precious fnote
steps in preaching the Gospel: may be accounted the very things the^ selves
that be signified. So should we neither look into heaven for our only Savior
sitting at the right hand of his father, nor yet for true holiness in you upon
earth, being satisfied by your signs and shadows, your lyinge Poprie, dombe
and deceyueable ceremonies. It follows in your text.

When we call the Sacrament of the aultare God, we understand the substance of
Winchesters words
the Sacrament, which is Christ God and man there present. And according to
that understanding, we attribute al goodly honor unto it. And in this speech,
the word Sacrament, signifies and gives understanding by a special
significacion, and by excellency (as learned men speak of it) the thing
signified, being there present, that is to say, the body and blood of our
Savior Christ, which can not be broken with hand, ca^ not be torn with
teeth, or denoured of beasts, or putrified. Neither can the bodily senses,
herein bear any witness to the contrary, for they can not atteyne that. But
when we use the word, Sacrament, or the word, host, and apply the speech
of it to such a matter as may not be said of the natural body of Christ:
then the speech is verified in those forms of bread and wine, under the
which the most preciouse body and blood of Christ is covered, as when we say
the sacrament is broken or molded, or altered, it is only understood of the
said form of bread and wine, being the outward accide^tes as the qualities
or dime^tio^s, which god there preserves not otherwise by outward miracle,
being the^ sustained: by his most preciouse bodily substance. Then when they
be naturally joined to the substance of bread, whereof that God thus does not,
man's senses (because those accidents be sensile) may Judge for we se it so and
those accidents be perceptible, by the bodelie sight and sense* and with the
eye of the soul in faieth, we se the presence of our most blessed savior
Christ, who there is the only substance of the sacrament, so long remayninge
under those accidents, as the form of bread and wine, under which (by the
omnipote^cie of his word, it pleases him to exhibit him self unto us) do
remain and contynewe.

In your first lives (wherein is taught, that The answer
the sacrament is god and man, and therefore must be worshipped with all godly
honor is intolerable blasphemy. For neither have you any scripture to prove
it to be God, nor yet that ever Christ or his dearly beloved apostles, taught
that it should have al godly honor. At his holy supper he co^man^ded the^ al
to eat this bread and drink this cup dividing it among the^. To set up
any new God therefore, not taught in the scriptures, is blasphemy* and the
setting up thereof, deserves stoning to death by the law of Moses. And Paul
byddeth that if an Angel Deuteronomy. xiij.
come down from heaven, to preach any other Gospel then that which the
Apostles have preached; we should take him as accursed.

And is not this a new Gospel, to teach a Sacrament to be a God? to teach
that the bread (which is a vile creature) is very God, and that it ought to be
worshypped with all divine honor and worship? The sacrament that Christ made
and ordained to be a memorial of his death and redemption by him: to be made
Christ him self, is it not blasphemy? A piece of past which was made but
yesterday, can it be made a sacrifice to take away sin without blasphemy?
If a man should call the sacrament of baptism god, and do al godly honor
thereunto: would you not say he were mad? And yet is Baptism the chief
sacrament, both because it is the first sacrament (...) sign wherein the free
mercy of God is declared and opened unto us: and that in it no les, the^ in
the other, we do receive the promises of God, and his holy spirit, to the
confirmation of our faith and sure trust in him.

Moreover our Savior Christ says thus of Baptism. John baptized you in
water, but I will baptize you in the name of the holy ghost. And for a plain
evidence and toke^ of the same he sent down the holy ghost in a visible
form, both upon the Apostles and them that they baptized in his name.

If you had so much in the scripture for the divinity of the other
Sacrament: I would not so greatly wonder if your fleshly judgment did take
it for a very God.

But saying that with these scriptures you Baptism is not esteemed as it is
worthy.
esteem the one little or nothing at al, and yet without these or any other
like scriptures, you maynteyne and defend (yea and that with sword, fire and
faggot) that the other is God and worthy of all godly honor: I can not but
merueile, and that greatly. Yea and much the more, for that you having the
experience of the feyned miracles that have been wroughte for the establishynge
of the fleshly presence of Christ in this Sacrament (as I am sure you had by
one Nicholas Geruis priest, who pricked his fingar in the time of his mass
that the blood might seem to fall from the bread, upon the corpresse and
aultare cloth, as appeared at Paul's cross, within the. v. years last paste)
should yet so blindly and tira^nously maynteine this deuelishe and most wicked
error, I mean the deity and godly honor that you attribute to this sign
or Sacrament.

If the whole course of your tale (which I have rehearsed) be not altogether
Sophistry: surely, I never learned Sophistry: For when you come to tell us
what is broken, Mark my* Lords Sophistry.
what is molded, and what the mise do eat: then say you that the Sacrament is
the host, the form of bread and wine, and the vtwarde accidents, as the
qualities and dime^sions. And this form, these outward accidents, these
qualities, these dimensions, are broken, are molded, are altered, and must no
more be God.

Thus you would blind us with your Sophistry, and make us to believe that it
is God when you call it so: and no God but accidents, qualities and
dementions, when you will have it so. Again notwythstandyng you do eat the
same thing that you do break, and break the same thing that you do eat:
yet when you eat it, it must be God, and when you break it it must be but
accide^tes and no God. Moreover, if it chance you to touch it with your
teeth, and swalowe it down your throat, make it suffer heat in your stomach,
and become passible otherwise: then is it only the form, the outward
accidents, the qualities, and dime^sio^s, and no God. But you deceive your
selves with vain words, and therefore, like as you do break the outward
things: so do you eat and are fed with the same sophistical ware, where of ye
dream. This is much like a man that dreameth a^ the night long. that he has
eaten, quail, rail, and cur lewe, and that he has droke^ pleasant wine his
fill: and yet in the morning he is never the less hu^gery and thurstie,
because he had nothing, but the fourmes, shadows, outward accidences, and
qualities. But the little mouse Learn wit at the mouse.
is much wyser, then you make your selves. For she can know the form of
your cake from the cake it self. Paynt it in form and qualities as craftelie
as you can, she neither will nor ca^ feed upon any such qualities or fourmes.
Neither is she so folishe to be mocked with any such dreams. I speak plain
english now: yea I can not nor will not use any sophistry. And we all that be
english men, do earnestly desire you, to tell us in english, what you do
mean by those terms, accidents, qualities, and demensions, which I do know
you ca^ never do, onles you do reign in the bowelles of sophistry. For they
are the peculiar terms of that deuelishe art. Yet amongst so many your
subtlie terms you have one good sentence, how it escaped you I can not tell.
With the eye of The Lord open the eye of your soul
the soul (you say) in faith we see the presence of the most precious body
of our Savior Christ. These your words are eue^ the very words of our
belief. This is the thing only and wholly that ca^ work in this sacrament. For
if it be the fode of the soul only (as doubtless if is) the^ ca^ not the
bodily instrument meddle therewith. It must be received by the powers of the
soul only, which are spiritual. But no bodily and carnal thing ca^ be eaten
of the spirit for the spirit must be borne and nourrished of the spirit,
likeas the flesh is borne and norished of bodily things. I conclude therefore,
that in the sacrament, we do not eat bodily, carnally and really the bodi of
christ, but only spiritually as you have in this place said full well (with the
eyes of our soul in faith) for the soul has none other instrument, whereby it
may take fode of life, but faith and the knoledge of god which fedeth
everlastingly as Christ says. This is the will of him that sent me, that every
one that sees the son and believes in him, shall have everlasting life. And I
shall reps^ him at the last day. God send us soul priests that will teach
us this fode of the soul more diligently the^ you bishops have done. For you
have always told us a crafty tale, saying that Christ remains so long
under the accidents, as the form of bread and wine does remain.

Lo this is it that you doubt upon, fearing to make such play^e answer when you
bring in these doubts, in the sixtene leaf of your book.

If there remain no substance but the Wynchester in the. xvi. leaf of his
book.
substance of the body and blood of Christ, it must needs be then, that the
same corrupts, or else when goes it away? or where have you scripture to
declare the goinge away of Christ from the host?

Before you answer subtly like a Sophister, The answer.
saying. What if I and such other prelates can not tell, deludynge one
question with an other (as the master of Sopistrie Johannes de lapide teaches
to delude arguments) but now boldly like a bishop with out'any scripture,
only because your father and mother church of Rome does say the same: you
affirm that Christ remains so long as the form of the bread remains,
that is, from the time it is made, to the time it is devoured either by man or
mouse, or else ^oth by other miss fortuue, or by mouleyng miscarie.

Oh foleishe and blind guides. To what filthy absurdities must ye of necessity
be driven by this fond opinion that here is no substance but the substance of
Christ: and that this substance remains so long only as the form of bread
remains: For this form remaynethe even when the mouse rennethe away with
it. The form of bread remains, when it is broken, eaten, and mouldeth. And
what so ever goes into the mouth (says Christ) the same goes into the
bealie, Mathe. xv.
and so is conueighed farther. So that this which you teach of the real,
carnal, and bodily presence of Christ, may well be called deuellish
sophistry. For seeing that al lies are of the deuell (as the father and
authoure of them) these lienge blasphemies must neades be of him, and very
dyuellesh sophismes to set forth his kingdom of darkness.

The spirit of God, and the spiritual doctrine of the holy ghost, can not
dwell in you because you be fleashe. The spiritual eating of the body of
Christ by fayeth.

How Christ, who sits now at the right hand of his father and has by his
death and passion paid sufficient ransom for all our sins, has pacified
the wrath of his ^ather, by the taking our sins on his back has gotten us
life by his death, and wh^^ so ever benefit we have received by the death of our
savior Christ, this will you never teach and preach unto us in the
ministering of the Sacrament and in your Pope holy Mass: but you teach us to
gase and galpe at a thing we know not, which you say is in your chalice and
is holden up betwexte your fingersto be worshipped with all godly honor under
the form of bread under outward accidents, qualities, and dimensions And
thus do you bliude us with your sophistry terms, that we can not perceive
what you mean. But if you would answer simpliciter (as you are wont to lay
to our charge) either that this sacrament is Your own sword stryketh of your
^eade.
Christ God and man, or that it is not Christ him self, really, carnally, and
naturalli: then should this strife be son^at an end. But seeing that it shall be
Christ, God, and man bodily present when you will name it so, and qualities,
accidents, and dimensions, when you will have it so: surely we can not but of
force call you sophisters. Again when Christ must be in the form of bread,
and under the form of bread, I can not tell what scripture you have for you,
you go from your she ^nchor (this is my body) and other handfast I can se you
take no^e. Then proceed you with your sophistry and thereby charge us with the
things in this wise.

i. First you say that we would have all in out ward miracle. ii. The^, that
if accide^tes were made imp^ssible, the deuell would require that man's body
should be imp^ssible. iii. Thirdly, that the senses may not empayre our
fayeth.
For the first, we answer, that we do re^ier no miracle other wise the^ wha^
we sa^ that Christ is the lamb of God. But you would have such a miracle
daily wrought is Christ never did upon the earth even such ^ne as (...) her
scripture testifies, nor any common sense, wit, nor reason, should perceive. A
miracle good for nothing, but to maintain your power. A miracle that no man
ca^ epsy but priests and such as give ears to pophish li^. A miracle much
more blind then Magipharaonis, for theirs did at the lestway s^ appear as
they enchaunted it to be.

Secondly, that man's body should be impassible* you ar the first that named
it. Wherefore if it be of the deuel (as I think no less) take it to your
self, for it is your own term

(...) ^^l the se^s^^ and reaso^^ to do service and bear witness unto our
faieth, i^ like manner as the Apostles do witness the things that they saw
with their eyes, hard with their ears, and handled with their ha^d^

We ask no forder sign nor miracle but (...). John. i.
those that Christ has wrought alredie. But you must have ^ie new miracles to
stre^gthe^ your faieth, co^tinualli* making this cake of yours, Christ, boeth
God and man. And besides this (which is more like madness the^ miracle) eue^
whoremoungar, dr^ckarde and Idi^ shall have a God of his own making, so sone as
he has ^nbled* up. iiii. latin words. And that the devil may play his
pagia^t among the children of darcknesse, he helps you forth with many
pretty miracles, both by the appearau^ce of the deed and other ways, as your
lieing books do testify.

Thus may you worthily be called Gens incredula que signum querit, et signum
non Math. xii^j. and. xvi. Marc. viii. Luke. xi.
dabitur ei nisi signum Ione prophet.

You have the sign of Jonas the prophet that is to say, of Christ lieinge in
the earth and riseing again. Yet this will not serve you unless you have him
impanate, and bodily, carnallye, reallie, by a wonderful miracle in an hundred
thousand places at once. Whether of us twain is now more like the
capparnites? You that will eat christ flesh, blood and bones as they required,
and may not abyd that we should ^eke in this supper, only the bread that did
come down from heaven, as Christ taught: or we that have abundantly found
this bread into life everlasting, and do co^^esse with Peter that the words of
Christ are l^fe everlasting, and not the ^heli eat inge of his body* We
believe Mosses and the prophets, for they have given clare testimonies of this
that I do writ, in that they teach one Messiah and savior of the world* We
believe also, that which Paul does say of them all, that all the fathers
were under the cloud. They were'al Baptized in the sea, they did all eat of
one spiritual meat and drink one spiritual drink, for they drank of the
spirttual stone which followed them, the stone was Christ. i. Corh. x.


We do believe al things that are written tuen from the first beginning of
Genesis to the last word of the reuelasions. But as you say we can not beliue
your new miracles, nor the appeareing of the dead. No nor yet you bishopes,
pristes, nor any of your doctoures forther then you bring the word of God in
your inouthes So long will we say Ane unto you, and receive you most willing
lie. For our faieth has her only ground upon hear Romans x.
inge, not of every fable, but only the word of God. Now bishopes
consider, that if you will have us hear any doctrine that is not grounded on the
scripture (as your doctors, you^ dreams, and visions) you cause us to sin
For that which is not of faith is sin. Again Romans (...).
without fayeth it is impossible to please god and as fa^e impossible is it to
have faith and to believe the doctors. For they are one co^trari to an other,
so that no faith can be grounded upon the^. Yea they the^ selves would not be
believed father the^ they bring the scripture for them. Their own confession
therefore and the co^trarietie that is in them, declares them to be flesh, and
we were accursed if we should make flesh our arm and settle our Romans iii.
faith upon ma^s words, for every man is a lia^

Of the words and the meaneinge, wherein the meaneinge of Christ is declared
at large by the manifold circumstances and certain other things, towcheing
the occasion offered.
AN other point of the diuelles sophistry Winchesters words.
is between the words and the meaneinge, wherein the deuell shifteth the
mattier thus. Where the words of scripture be plain, evident, manifest, and
confirm the catholic truth: there the devil diuiseth an other meaneing, and
adu^eth his scholars that the words be nothing without the meaning, and
therefore says he we must understand Christ's words as he ^eut the^, and
therefore says the devil, be ware of the words and take heed to the meaning.
Christ (says) the devil) says this is my body. But take heed (says the
devil) what Christ me^t.

Thus far you bring in the words of the The (...)
devil, you say. Now if you will give me leave to bring in your words
following a litel after: they will declare the meaning of these faithful
interpretours of Christ's words, whom you do slander by the name of satan
and the devil: for non other cause (as I suppose) but for that you lack
mattier scriptures and substa^cical arguments. Your words be these

Who so has the words of scripture per Winchesters words.
uersely taken: is therewith infected and poisoned to his confusion, as the
Arians and Sabel lia^s, and an infinite number of heretics have been. So that
it must needs be granted that in the meaning of scriptur, is the marow and
kenel, the swetenes, the fode and the honey of scripture without which the words
be bitter shale and an hard bone without fode or sustinance This must needs be
confessed of al men as an evident truth. Hitherto you agree full well, The (...).
but now, lo you braste fourth into your father like eloquence, and say.

The devil abuses this by ca^ellacio^ and Winchesters
sophistry, to ouertourne the truth in the most bessed sacrament of the
aultare.

It is a more ready manner of sophistical solusio^, The answer.
tha^ substa^^ical, form of artificicial co^futacion, to cry cauillation,
cauillacio^, sophistry, sophistry, the devil saeth it, when you your self
do speak the same thing. Forther more, you add herunto, these words.

It is in deed a true lesson that the very word Winchesters words.
of God is the true meaning of scripture.

If you would speak plainli and say, the co^paring The answre.
of scriptures which are the very word of god, utters the will, meaning, and
pleasure of God unto us: you should make much for our purpose. If you say
otherwise that the word is the meaning: you make the letter to be the spirit,
the bitter shale to be the kernel it self for such is your own similitude.
Yea If the very word be the meaning so that we may weigh no farther (which
thing if you be^ed in heart, you would not stick so much to your own
interpretacio^s (I could drive you to much inconvenience. But how and whau the
scriptures ar to be examined and the true meaning, as the kernel, to be tried:
the old rule of al ages, may lead and teach sufficiently. That is that no one
place of scripture be set or aledged contrary to other. But if such one place
be alleged, it ought to be declared and made plain, by the co^pareing of mo
places more plain, and by the sense and understanding agreeable unto the
faith gethered of other. Read the rule of Augustyne for that same purpose,
how scripture (which commands any absurdity) is to be understood The^
say you.

But for the opening of this sophistry: Winchesters words.
it is to be considered, that sometime in scripture the words be so placed and
ordained, as the meaning is uttered and opened with the words at once and
has such light of the words, as they appear both to gether, and without
farther search, be strayte conveyed to our understanding. The answer.


If these words. This is my body, and this cup is the new testament were
so plain for your purpose, that they neded no farther search or
interpretacion: what neded it you to seek these gloses. The body is in the
qualities, accidents, qua^tities, dime^sions ann other pretty words which I
am sure can not be found among the words of god noz his son Christ. really,
carnally, naturally, and other terms of tra^substa^ciasio^, bisides other
wrasted gloses. That the cup is not the new testament, but the whole bod^
flesh and bones as well as it is in the bread, and such like But by your strait
slightes and subtle interpretasio^s, it may be percey^ed, that these word^ are
such as follow.

Sometime again, the words be such and so placed, that they bring not their
meaning Winchesters words.
straight with the^ in the same light: but more darkely and as it were hyd
under the words

Your scripture Humiliauit, hespethe to The answer.
fill your book, more over you say.

When we read of Christ, that he said him self, I am a way, I am a door, I
am a Winchesters words.
vpne: here should the meaning be callid for and here should good men say,
these words must be taken as Christ meant them, For the meaning is hyden and
apeareth not straight with the words, which be such as in their common
known sens? be not spoken of Christ but by a similitude, and in an other
meaning as the circumstances of the place do declare b^ which circumstaunces,
the words vary from their common significacion.

So likewise must we like good men: call The answer.
for the meaning of these words (This is my body, This cup is the new
testament) seeing we know perfectly that in the ^o^mune seus and signification:
nether the bred is Christ's body, nor the cup the new testament. And seeing
that we have so just occasion offered of the circumstances: First let us look
what Christ did intend at his last supper when he spoke the^e words. Truly
his intent was to admonish his disciples, that all the old sacrifices of the
old testamente (which were but shadows) should in this only offeringe of his
body upon the cross: have an end, as he him self says unto the^ Luke.
xxii.
before he goes from supper. The things that were of me have an end, according
to the psalm. Sacrifice and oblatio^ thou would Psalm. xxx^
not: but a body thou have ordained me. And also to arm them with comfortable
words a against the daingers that were at hand, boeth of his betraynge by him
that did eat of the same dyshe with him self: and of his death and departing
forth of the world as appears in all the Euaugelistes, but especialli in John
the. xiii. xiiii. xv. xvi. xvii. Chapi.

I beseech al christen herts to mark the circumstances, and judge whither they
do lead Christ says in the. xxi. of Luke. With great desire have I desiered
to eat this passover with you before I suffer. Christ joins together, this
old sacrifice of the passover, and the geuyng of his body in this only
ceremony. Wherefore, we may not part them in searchinge the meaning of his
work and words: saying that, he him self coupled the^ to gether, both in
deed and speech.

We must therefore consider and mark, how and after what manner Christ and his
disciples are named to eat the passover: when they eat the lamb only,
which was only the sign or remembrance of the passover. In the passover,
they gave thanks for their deliverance, when the Egyptia^s and the kings
seed were slain. In this sacrament thanks are given that the son of the
high king is slain for the salvation of the world.

The lamb and the feast itself are called The lamb is called the passover.
the passover. The one was but a sign, the other was but the remembrance of
the passing angel. So likewise this bread or sacrament is called the body of
Christ, when it is but the remembrance and thanks geuynge, for the death
which Christ suffered in his body The cupe also he calls the new testament
in his blood, where the blood of the lamb sprynkled upon the posts was but a
shadow of the old testament and a token to the angel of gods favor. And this
blood of our savior Christ is a co^firmacio^ and establisheme^t of his
testament, as both the epistle to the galathians and the Hebrews do witness.
and the testament so long before promised was this

I wylbe their God and they shall be my Iherem. xxiiii (...). v^i. Exodus xiii.
people. Again, In the book of Exodi, he commands them to tell their
children of that great benifite.

So now when they shall no leuger speak of their delyuerau^ce forth of Egypt,
but of a far greater deliverance from all the infernal powers by his death.
He commands them to do this in the remembrance of him. Thus he going from
the old testament to the new, from the old passover in shadow to the body
which is Christ our passover i. Corh. v.
off^ed for us (as Paul says) uses the same phrase in speaking. And after
that he had eaten this passover which he desiered so greatly, he preached of
his betrayeing and departeynge, saiynge. The son of man must go as it it
wryte^. But woe unto that man by who^ he is betrayed. It had be^ better for him
that he had never ben borne.

This text may somewhat make for the declaracion that Judas, though he were par
Judas did not eat the body of christ
takare of the same bread and cupe: yet he did not eat the fleashe and blood
of Jesus Christ which he must neades have done, if the things had been
changed, and therefore have had euerlasteynge life, as it is said in John the
vi. cha. Who so eats my fleash. etc so that he had been happy that ever he
was borne. The most part of the long^ sermon that John reherseth, is
concerning his departing from his disciples, where as after your doctrine) he
mygh have comforted them with one word, sayeinge. I will not depart from you,
but will be inuiseble with you unto the worlds end in a little cake. But he
says plainly that he must go from the^, and that he will no more drink of
that fruit of the vine, unto he drink it new again in the kingdom of his
father where he manifestly Mathe. xx. vi
calls it the fruit of the vine even after the co^secrasion (as you call it)
and that the very same thing that you call the blood, the bodi, the flesh and
altogether. Christ says this is my body. You mark no circu^stau^ces, but
Luke. xxii.
add her unto, realli, naturally, carnalli christ says do this in the
remembrance of me. You say, Naie, we will make a little cake to be Christ God
and man. Christ says, this is the cup of the new testament in ^bloud You
say Nay we will make. ii. sponeful of wine, whole Christ, body, blood and
bones John. ^iii.
Look your Estatute of. vi. Articles, Christ says, my little children, yet a
little while am I with you. The papists do say, we have him hear still. Christ
says, you shall seek me, but you can not come to me. The papists d^ say they
make him and have him in there hands, there may thou seek him. But I believe
thou can not find him there, for Christ did M^. xxiiii
give warneinge alitle before his death, that there should arise false Christ's
and false prophets to deceive the elect (if it were possible) with false
miracles and wonders. They shall (...). ^o hear is Christ and there is Christ But
believe them not (says Christ) for like as the lightning comes from the east,
and appears unto the weste: so shall the comeinge again John. x^
of the son of man. Let not your heart be troubled, believe in God, and believe
in me. I go to prepare you a place, and though I go yet I will come again and
take you unto me. The papists say, believe in the bread that we have
co^scerated, for it is boeth God and man. Christ shall not go away. We will have
it so that every shauelinge shall ma^e him a place in a round cake and break
one pice of him into the chalice and drink it and rate the residue dry. I am
the way, the truth the life (says Christ) no man comes to the father but by
me. Yes marie, ^aith the bishop of Winchester (bringeing in the blind lesso^s
of Damascen, concerning the worshipeinge of Image^) by the intercessione of
saints come we to God. And by the sacrament of the a^^tare are we made
partetakers of the god head of Jesus Christ.

Christ goinge from the earth says (for the c^forte of his disciples) what
soever ye ask in my name, I will do it. But the papists will have us as^e in
the name of other, and by the prayer of saints do they promise many ver^* but
without any word of scripture, and therefore ought we not to believe them.
Christ promises none other co^forter but the spirit of truth which shall
dwell with us for ever. The papists promise comfortin al dead creatures.

Again Let not your heart be troubled (says Christ) nor be ye afraied though I
go: I do lean my pease with you, I give you my peace. Not as the world gives,
do I give it unto you. Well say the papists If thou say that Christ is gone:
thou shall have little peace among us, keep the peace of Christ as well as thou
can. For we have him when we lust, bodielie, reallie naturallye, carnally,
present. But O you papists, all your words end in a lie. For Christ says,
You My Lords words end in lie.
have heard that I have said unto you I go and come again to you. And if you
loved me suerli you would rejoice: that I said, I go unto my father. You
papists (I say) do ye not believe that Christ died, did rise again, ascended
into heaven and there sits at the right hand of the father bodily, really
naturally, carually, that is to say in plain euglishe, in body: in substance
as he was a natural man and very flesh taken of the virgyne Marie? If you did
believe this thing you would rejoice that man is so highly exalted, that our
kind is so far above, the angels auaunced that we have our bishop not in
the earth but in the heavens, not offering often times for our sins (which were
imperfection) but once for all making perfect for ever, so many as by him will
go unto the father.

Again Christ says. I am the very Christ is the very vine.
vine, and my father is the housbande man* I am the vine, and you are the
branches. And continuinge in these parables (which he accustomed his speech
unto in all his sermons, and now most specially toward his death) he opened
his mysteries, for to rauishe the minds of his disciples, that he might
prynte them the better in their memory, and contrariwyse that the wicked
should hear with their ears and not understand, see with their eyes and not
perceive, as Christ alleges out of the. vi. of Esaie: in the. xiii. of Math.

Thus is the high wisdom of God, always used from the beginning. In Moses
with his figures. In Solomon with his Proverbs. And right so in all the
scriptures, to the intent that the preciouse Margarite should not be cast to
the hogs. He wonderfully enstructed his disciples of his departing. Sometime
in parabbles, sometime without parables, in this and the. ii. chapters following.
Whereas he might have conforted them substancially ^t one word (as you teach)
if he had said. I will not go from you, for always when you will have me, do
only blow these. iiii. words (this i^ my body) over a little bread, and you
shall have me straighte ways at hand. But oh blind guides, Christ tells
you, that the flesh profits nothing, though you have it John. vi.
present, as the Jews, Judas, and the bishops had. Yea though Judas had
eaten it (as you write that he did) in the supper. No though he had eaten him
alive when he kyssed Folio. x.
and betrayed him. Though he had then eaten Christ, I say, even as he went on
the ground, which is the thing that you do so sore strive about, that he
must be eaten as he went on the earth, saving only that this must be done
inuisibly. Though (as you say) he were thus eaten in flesh, Christ says, the
flesh profits nothing at al. And where as you call this the chief holiness
and chief worship: Christ says, his father seeks such worshippers as
will worship him in spirit and truth, and not in the flesh, shadows John.
iiii.
and ceremonies.

Again Christ says, I did not speak these things unto you from the
beginning: because I was with you. But you papists will answer. So art thou
present still, though thou be hid in a box or a little bread. Christ says
now do I go unto him that sent me, and I demand of you papists: how he
went unto his father that sent him. Not the Devil, but the scripture and the
angels of God shall answer for you. Christ (after he Act. i.
was risen from death) gathered his Apostles together, and commanded them to
tarry at Jerusalem, and to awayte for their confor^our, the holy spirit whom
he had promised to send them when he departed in flesh from the earth. And
whilse he spoke thus unto the^: he was in the sight of them all, taken up, and
a cloud covered him. And whylse they looked steadfastly up into heaven beholding
his goinge: behold. ii. men stood by the^ in white garments which said. Ye
men of Galesee, why stand you gasyng up into heaven? Christ shall come again
visiblie as he went.
This same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come as you
have seen him go into heaven. He is gone none otherwise but in the flesh: his
flesh therefore is not in the bread. When he comes again, he shall come
visibly, even as he went in the sight of them al, as the angels wytnes. He is
not therefore invisible in the bread. Now this your opinion of his being upon
the earth in the flesh, and sufferyng of him self to be hid in a little box,
and such cakes, whereof an hundrede are scarce worth one halfpeny: is to
shamfull. There is no reverence of God in his son remaining i^ your hertes.
And therefore (as the Prophet Osee says) though God show the truth of his
law never so often unto you: yet do you take it but for a straung doctrine.
Whereas they do sacrifice (says the Prophet offering the flesh and eating it:
the Lord will have no pleasure therein, but will remember their wickedness,
and punish their sins. Israel would turn again into Egypt to the flesh
pottes. They put flesh their Exodus xvi.
arm, which is meant by seekinge to Egypt. In many places of the kings also.
Yea always, both in figures and open words, the Deuteronomy. xvii.
following of the flesh and outward holiness (which is communely voied of the
spirit) is sore rebuked and grievously punished. Therefore adds the prophet.
They have forgotten him that made them, they build churches and Judah makes
many strong bulworkes. I will therefore send a fire into their cities, and it
shall consume their palaices.

Again says Ose. As for the Prophet Ose. ix.
you hold him a fool, and him that is rich in the spirit for a mad man. So
great is your wickedness. Flesh you are, flesh you seek, voied and
destitute altogether of the spirit of God, the only author of al truth and
unfeigned holiness.

Christ says, I tell you truth it is profitable to you that I go, for if I
do not go from you: the spirit of conforte can not come unto you. But if I go,
I shall send him unto you. These words were first proved true in the
Apostles, which were conforted by the spirit after their mournyng for the
bobily absence of their master. And now also does it appear true in you
papists, that the lively comfort of the spirit is ^mally felt or regarded
amongst you, whilse you think your selves to have Christ bodily among you.

Again, Christ says unto his father. John. xvii.
This is everlasting life to know the only the true God, and whom thou host
sent Jesus Christ. You say and is everlasting life and the chief mystery of
our religion, to know this cake to be a God, to know the wine to be a whole
Christ, God and man, where all faithful hertes must needs confess that it
is no god, nor ca^ be god, what so ever is made with man's hand. For both the
thing that is made (as the book of wisdom tells) is inferior to the man
that made it: and because man him self is mortal, the thing that he makes ca^
not be god immortal. But I know your answer. The priest makes it by the
word of God. I answer you again. We can neither see nor perceive any manner
of thing there, but only the bread that is made by the hand of the bakar,
and therefore made and facioned by the hands of man, who has but a borrowed
spirit, and unhappy are they, and among the dead is Sapi. xiii.
their hope: that call them Gods which are the works of men's hands. This is
the error of man's life, when men ascribe unto stocks and stones and other
vile creatures, the name of God, which ought to be given unto no creature.

Yea they are twice unhappy and accursed that do hereby make the creature
abominable: also deprive the creatoure and maker of all: of his dew honor.
But mark again that which Christ says in the same chapter John. xvij.
of John Now am I not in the world, and these are in the world, and I come
to the O father. Save them (eue^ for thy names sake) whom thou haste given unto
me, that like as we are one, so they may be one also. When I was in the world,
I did keep them in thy name.

So often it is said, that Christ is gone forth of the world. that he is not
in the world. If he were here God and man what needs these things to be so
of^ rehearsed? What needs the comfort of the spirit to be always appointed
and set forth, and never once named for their comfort, that they should have
Christ present with them so often as they lust to whisper a few words over a
piece of bread:

These things have you occasioned me to speak, by the naming of the
circu^sta^ces. For they are spoken in continual course after the supper was
done, unto the time that Judas came to betraye him. And I suppose you have no
one place of scripture, that has so many circumstances to declare it (not to
be spoken as the words seem) as this has.

As (...) Theophilactus, makes rather with us the^ against us, for he seeks
the meaning by circumstances and stycketh to the words, in their commune
senses, but we will not contend about trifles.

So^time they preach and so^time they write Winchesters, words.
to the unlearned on this wise. Christ's words be true when he said this is
my body. But as he meant the^ For so he said he was away, he was a vine, he was
a door, but he was not a natural vine, he was no such way as me^ walk in, no
such door as me^ do commonly enter into: but only a se^blan^ce of al these,
because he is our way to heaven, our door to enter into life, our vinestocke
in whom we as branches be nourished and kept in life. And so likewise, when
Christ says this is my body: he means only, that it is a rese^blaunce, a
figure, a toke^, a sign of his body. etc.

These words ca^ you reprove none other The answer.
wise, but the Devil says, and so might a young sophister confute all your
book at one word and truly say, that the Devil says it. But it is mere
sophistry (you say) for in those other places, the mattier shows that they be
spoken in parable. And why does not the mattier show the same here? I pray you,
because you do say so, or because your father of Rome and his doctors did
teach so ever sense he ga^e the primamacie and upper hand of kings and
emperors these. viii. C. years, as you name it. If the presumption of long
time be a sufficient argument against the truth: the^ call again the Pope, the
worshipping of images begone in Babylon settinge up the Image of Belus and
continued always in some corner of the world unto this day. But now you
think you have hit the nail on the head, and you weary your self long about
this mattier.

Christ spoke so^time in parables, but therefore Winchesters words.
we may not say that he spoke always in parables.

You never hard us thus reason from the The answer.
particular to the universal proposition. But we being taught by the
circumstances of the place and by the whole course of scripture, of the bodily
departing of Christ, and of the spiritual eating of his body: do likewise open
this text (this is my body) by plain textes both of the old and new
testament, where one thing is named to be the thing which it only represents
in figure and shadow, as are these in the old testament. The. vii. fat oxe^,
are. vii. years of ple^tie, and the. vii. leaneones, are. vii Genesis xli.
years of scarsitie. Also the sacrifices are called the sins of the people.
The red heyfer, is the sin. The priest eats the sin of the people. It is
the passover of the Lord. The circumsition is called the couenaunte. Exodus
xii. i. Corh. x. Marh. xi.
And such like. In the new testamente. The stone was Christ. This is Helias.
And by words spoken of the same sacrament at the same time. This cup is the
new testament, which you must needs grant to be spoken in parable and figure.

But mark the mattier without malice. We may not nor will not say, that
Christ did speak always in parables. No more may you say that Christ does
not speak here in a parable, unless you can prove it to be true, by some
other means then your own words and wrytinges, which are these.

Est signifies being, and the learned can Winchesters words.
not be deceived, good men can not be moved.

Thus bring you in false interpretations The answer.
of your own faynynge to make the mattier odious. As though any of us at any
time (out of place) did deny the name of Christ to have his own evident
signification of Christ's own person. But your malice and the Devil (whom you
name so often) blyndeth you, and couetise leads you captive.

I could answer Ciprian with an other of your doctors, but as I told you in
the beginning (and as Paul affirms) our faith may have his foundation,
only on the Romans x.
hearing of the word of God, without the which word what so ever any doctor
brings: we may not fay, aue unto it, nor receive it, for fear lest we be
part takers of their yuel works, and writings. Let the^ beware therefore,
that affirm without the word of God, that the bread is changed in nature,
and that it is made flesh, contrary to the scriptures, which teach that
Christ is gone in Act. i. John. xiiij. xv xvi. xvij.
the flesh, and shall come again visible as he went, contrary to faith, which
can seek him in no place, but where he him self assigns (that is to say)
sittinge at the right hand of his father, till he have made his enemy his
Psalm. C. Hebr. i.
footstool, yea contrary to reason and the commune judgment of the senses,
and therefore against all the knowledge that man can have in this world,
following so much their superstition and outward show of wisdom, that they
are deceived in things open by nature unto their senses.

Now whether of us are more like the John. vi.
Caparnites, we that profess (with the Apostles) that Christ has the words
of life, and do believe and teach that his doctrine is not carnal, but
spiritual, and his words spirit and life: or you that carnally and
grossly do believe that he must be eaten as he went upon the earth, flesh,
blood and bones, which the Caparnites did seek for: and the carnal
disciples did flee from him for the same. All christian hertes and spiritual
eyes, may easily judge.

The Apostles sittynge at the table, did The Apostles did not worship the
Sacrament.
not fall down and worship this bread, newly made God, as you call it,
which is an evident argument that they had it in no such estimation as you
have it. And that they made no demand or questian, (as they did at other
times) of doubts in Christ's speaking: may be a token that they were used
and exercised, with the familiar phrase of ea^ynge Christ by faith, and
therefore was it comfortable to them to be taught presently in open signs,
how they should ever after have him in remembrance, in his absence. That
they had this mattier in no admiration: is an euidente argument that they did
take it for no such strange miracle, above all miracles (as you do make it)
for the circumstau^ces, as we have largely spoken before, and for the
plainness of the words, we merueyle why you will darcke them with your
terms of reallie, carnally, and such other. Why you ^y^de gloses, saying.
This is in the form, qualities, quantities, and accidents of bread, and do
not say plainly, this bread is the body of Christ, God and man. This cup
is the self same new testament that God did swear by him self he would
perform unto Abraham.

And even like as the ^uppe is not the testament, The cup is not the new
testament.
but the sign of the testament made before unto the fathers, and now
performed in the death of Christ the unspotted lamb: so this bread which
we see is not the flesh of Christ given for the life of the world. For then
the world might have been saved, and the sins done away by the offering of
the bread long before Christ ^ad suffered. For you do most blasphemouslie
teach, that the offeringe of the same bread does take away sins,
notwythstandynge that Christ has by his own only sufferynge, fully
satisfied and taken them away. But to your words again.

I think it much better to pretermitte further Winchesters words.
occasion of that might be my praise, to expound unto you the scriptures.

Bishop Stephane. You need very little to fear this mattier. For I never
hard The answer
man praise you, nor but few of your fellows for expoundynge of the
scriptures. But for burning them I hear many men talk much of you, and say
it is no me^ueyle though you hate them, because you were brought up in the
Popes law, who in his most high holiness treads the holy word of God
under his wicked feet. In the bringing in of your greek author, where you
taunte them that love not your Popish babbling in the latin tongue, that no
man understands, sclaunderynge them that they love not the latin tongue
(wherein no doubt they labor more and are greater fartherers then you can or
will be) it might right well have been passed over with silence, if you had
loved your own honesty. For you and all the Popish Prelates in the world,
are not able to justify it, that you should thus babble before the people in
a tongue they do not understand, if we moghte be heard with indifferent
justice. But you have the world on your side, because you are of the world
and the world loves his own. And the light is comen into the world, but
man John. xv.
loves darckenesse more then the light. It must needs be true that Christ
our master says to the Prelates before your John. iii.
time. The world can not hate you, but me it hates, because I do wytuesse of
it that the worckes of it be evil. John. vii.


The answer to Doctoure Damascen, whom Wynchester rehearses in greek.
FOr the testimony of Damascen) who^ you bring in as your chief wytnes) this
I have to say. First, he is a suspected person, being at the time when the
Pomp of the Romayne bishop or Antichriste, began to exalte him self above
every thing, that was god and godly.

Secondly, he maynteyned Idolatry with such contention, that he deserved to
have his right hand stryken of, and hanged in the markette place as an open
offender, ^oeth in that crime and other, whereof he was before the Emperor
Leo accused and condemned.

Thyrdelie, you would mayuteyne his honesty by the witness of an honest
man, Ecolampadius. But we discharge you of My Lord has lost his witness.
this testimony, euen-by the testimony of the same Ecolampadius, in the
beginning of his book which he did write concerning the words of the
supper, and reproved your blindness even by your own Doctors. I am not
minded said this great Clerk Ecolampadius (who translated your Doctoure
Dasmascen) to accuse and publyshe to their shame, Thomas Aquinates, neither
Alberte, nor yet Dunsse, nor any of the new fellows: but Peter the patcher of
the se^tences: whom they call their master, who also has rubbed his error
upon other that patche up other men's wrytynges: As Damascen, and Gracian did.
Again a little after. Peradventure Damascen and other that followed him. write
in such sort, but the reader that is wise can be little moved thereby. For he
does by many arguments declare him self, neither to be sound nor
substantial. Again, Like as Paul said. When I was a child, I did speak
like a child: says he. When I had small knowledge, and had all things in
admiration, without judgment, I did write some things which now I do not
only not defend, but I wyshe them abolyshed and burned, if they be
unprofitably published in any place, and if I obtain my desire therein, I
will be glad and rejoice. By like this Ecola^padius repented the translatyng of
Damascen
book of Damascene (which he had translated) was one of them which he did not
greatly allow: for it was not publyshed whylse Ecolampadius lived: but after
his death, within these six years.

Surely, Augustine, in that he made a book of retractations, willing us to
receive the wrytynges of no man farther then they are agreeable to the
scriptures: may teach us right well that we may refuse Damascene: I will
therefore ask none of your fellows: whether you be an honest man. But I will
try boeth Damascene and all your Doctors, by the infallible testimony of the
word of God. And because you do defend him with a miracle: we put you out of
doubt: such lyinge miracles, openly maynteynynge Idolatrie', cause us to
give the less credit unto him. For Christ says, that Antichriste shall
come with wonders and lyinge signs, in such sort, that the very elect (if
it were possible) shall be deceived. Wherefore, says Christ, if they say,
lo here is Christ, lo there is Christ, believe them not. etc.

Ireneus writing against heresies, at the beginning of this iuglynge about
Math. xxiiil. Ireneus. libr. i. Cap. ix.
this Sacrament in his time witnesses, that there was one Marcus Magnus the
scholar of Valentyne the heretic, which putting mixed wine into the chalice:
did feign him self to give thanks therewyth, and caused the wine to change
color, sometime read and sometime purple, by long multipliyng of his
enchaunting words, that grace from above, might seem to drop down blood
into his chalice, by his invocation.

And therefore he did covet that they which were present should taste of that
cup, that the grace, which was called down by his enchauntment, might also
drope upon them. Again, he gave ^uppes of mixed wine unto women co^maundeinge
them to give thanks in his presens. And when they had so done, he took a much
greater chalise than the other which he had given to the woman, and poured out
of the cupe, wherein the Eucharistia and thanks geueing of the woman was made:
into the other greater cup, and reherseing his charms, he caused the grater
cup to be filled with the wine that was in the cup that was much less, and yet
did there remain some in the other. Other stra^g things this Marcus wrought,
wherbi he drew many to his madness. The prophaue histories do tell us of an The
devil works miracles.
hundred strange wonders wrought by the devil: Li^ius says that blood did
flow out of the thoumbe of the Image of Jupiter which stood in mount albino.
He says also, that it rained flesh at Rome. Julius says that the earth did
flow with rivers of blood Cur^s says that when Tire was beseged of
Alexander: the bread did sweet blood on the table. The Sucerers of pharao,
did they not work wonders in the sight of Moses and Aaron? But what neadeth
us to seek for old lies and fained miraces Exodus vii.
Our time and our abbayes have been fruitful enough of such ware. In every
monastery, thou might read an hundred such painted and set up to the
show in goodly tables, and all for maintenau^ce of these two mattiers, which
your man Damascen, does so stowtely defend. The prayeinge to Saints and the
rotten stocks and Images. But all the sort of you may full worthily hear.
Why have you forsaken me the fountain of liuelyke water and dug you broken
cisternes that can hold no water? And, because you have loved lies, an have
forgotten me and trusted in lies: I will descouer your shame.

Yet one other thing there is which canseth me not greatly to favor your
doctor Damascene. He reports the thing untruly whereof he is called to bear
witness. These he his words, where he alleges the saieing of Christ for
your purpose. Take ye and eat this is my body which is broken for the
forgiveness of sins. Like wise the cup of wine and water, after he had taken
it, he gave it unto the^ saieing, drink of this you al What dare not this
Damascene do (trow you) saying that he dare of his own brain put water into
Christ's cup, alledgeinge for Damascen puts water into Christ's cup.
his lie our master Christ Let them take him for a witness, whom it deliteth
to hear Christ belied and his holy sacraments al tered and changed.

The^ reasons this doctor of yours in this wise, Is it not possible for God
(says he) which has made althinges: to make the bread his own dodie, and
the wine together with the water his own blood: (...) your doctor will make
more creatures to be changed, then Christ named. For now Damascene will have
water made^ blood.
must water be the blood of Christ, for all that co^eth into the chalice must be
changed, and every drope must be the whole body and whole blood for the
one can not be without the other as you reason in your statute of. vi articles.
Falsehode is very frutfull, and engenders ever more new erroures. But you
look for an answer to this reasone which is clearly delated with so many
examples. What does your doctor conclude in so many his vain w^rdes:
Forsoeth that it is possible for Christ to change bread into his own body,
and wine and water into his blood Yea he labors the mattier as sore as
thought he feared that no man would believe him. And this is the thing that
you would so feign have us grant you.

Well go to, were it not that we are ashamed to speak so irreverently, lewdly
and vylely of our master Christ: we would grant you that it is possible
for him to chang him self into bread, wine, water, stone, door ^e and what you
will. And to satisfy your It is possible (...) God should change all things.
desire, we grant you no less but that all this is possible. But that Christ
is changed into these creatures or that they are changed into christ's body:
is not possible for you to prove You say, Christ's words be plain This is my
body. So are the words plain, I am a door, a vyue, I am the fountayn of
lyueing water, Christ was the stone. But Christ in his Godheade is
unchangeable, and in his manhood he continues our bishope still, and is gone
in sancta sa^ctorum, the place of most holiness where he sits on the right
hand of God, and will take unto him no^ other nature, no not the nature of
angels. Again the word of God is pure and no dross can Hebr. ii.
be found therein. All the gross blyndnesse therefore, that you do admit in
making Christ thus chaungeable into his creatures, and making one Christ that
is very God and man in heaven, and an other that is bread wine, and water in
earth: shall be found abominable, when it shall be examined by his word. You answer
again by a similitude. That like as the angel Gabriell makes answer to the
vyrgyn Marie, when she axed how Christ should be borne of her being a vyrgyn:
so dare you make answer that this is done and changed My Lords similitudes
serve not for his purpose.
by the holy ghost. Your similitud is nothing worth, nor in any poyut agreeable,
For both the angel was the messe^ger of god set down from heaven for the same
purpose: and the matter that he promised was prophesied to the world, long
before. But neither is your matter of this change, named in any place of the
scripture, nor yet are you angels when you bring not the word of God with you
except we should call you such angels as can change them selves into the
angeles of light. And to declare your similitude to be no thing fyt for your
purpose: the thing that the angel promised, was so performid that all men
might with their senses perceive it to be truli performed. It is but a li^al
matter with you to ^elpe Christ, as you have done a lyt^le before: except you
do belie the holy ghost also, and say that in his name, which you are not
taught by the spirit of God.

Due error must neades draw an other after D^e error draws an other.
it, as it appears by you. For after you have tied Christ to these creatures,
bread, wine, and water, you must have the grace of the holy ghost in like
manner tied to oil and water, and straight after the godhead to bread and wine.
Me thinks you be wours then the Pharisees. For they compted it blasphemy for
Christ (being a very man) to make him self a God. What think you they
would say, if they heard you speak thus of bread and more vile creatures?

In his prayers, your doctor Damascene calls the dead Images Sanctas et
Diuinas, Holy and godly, thought you help to cloak him with more clenly
terms, as you are full crafty in your generation. And now (says he) has he
joined his godheade to bread and wine.

Now do I perceive, that the worshipping and high estimacion of Images: is the
beginning, The worshipinge of Images is the fountain of all iuell
mids and end of all wickedness and blindness, as the wiseman teaches. For
after that Damascene has taken upon hand to defend the dead stocks to be
holy and godly: he cares not what he teaches after ward. Truly, I would
have wished more shame in your foreheade, the^ to have brought in such a
doctor for your chief foundation whose words you dare not for shame report
truly as they lie. Again where we be taught to call upon the father in the
name of his son Christ, and that we have none other name under heaven whereby
health is promised to men: your doctor will be healed by the prayers of our
lady.

There is much other made stuff in your doctor, which I do pass with
silence, because al men may judge him what he is, by that he has spoken
alredie. Yet this one thing may not be omitted. He adds more over that the
body comes not down from heaven, and yet the bread and wine be tranfourmed
into the body and blood of God.

Thus confounds he the natures, calling it the blood of God. He brings in
new and strainge schole learneinge of transubsta^ciacion. He makes. ii.
bodies of Christ One that comes not down from heaven, and an other that is in
this transformacion upon earth. This is your great clarke and principal
witness, worthy to be set forth in all languages, and his learneinge enlarged
with your annotatio^s, and all the conning and wit you have. You are much more
mete to be an interpretour of such one, tha^ to trouble your self with
commentaries upon scripture.

But ask him how it is transformed and changed: and he says, the manner is
inscrutable, March the constancy of this doctor.
and can not be serched. Yet will he not be ashamed (as thought he knew
things that could not be known) to teach how. ij. ways. First, as Christ
was borne of the virgin marie The^ as the bread by eateing and the wine by
drinkeinge, are changed in to the body and blood of him that eats and
drinks naturallye: so are these changed into the body of Christ a boue
nature. But neither of your similitudes agreth. For these two worckes before
named, are worckes of truth, and therefore do thy so appear unto the knowledge
of man, as they are done in deed. Christ was borne of Marie the virgin, very
man accordeinge* to the Prophecies that were spoken of him before, and was seen
conuersaunte with me^, the space of. xxx. years. But your miracle did never
appear one moment.

The meat is changed by a natural course This was far ^otte.
and order, digested in the stomach, and part sent into the veins, part sent
forth other wayse. But I can not perceive what like similitude you can fetch
hereof, to the things above nature. wherefore you run to your shote anchor.
This is my bodi. No man denies but this is true, You bring the word and we
bring the word. But the doubt is only in the signification and meaneynge.
You say that (est is) signifies, is changed is tra^sformed, when both the
form remains still, and you have never one scripture that makes for you: but
many that makes against you, bysides the lively feleynge of our fayeth, which
must have God in higher estimacion, then for to tie him to any dyle creature.
Yea, the whole course of the christen religion, which acknowlegeth that*
Christ is ascended up from the earth to the heavens and there sytteth on the
right hand of God the father to be our mediator and mean whom he has chosen
there to reygne till he come again to tread down his enemies under his fete.

We can therefore receive non so gross fo^tence of the change and
traunsformacion of bred and wine into the body of Christ. But according to the
whole course of scripture: we worshype our lord God, spread through all over
all and in all his creatures, Infinite, in co^prehensible, whom the heaven of
heuenes can not contain, and his son Christ, humblynge him self unto our
vile nature, but now exalted far above the Angels. And where we find any
thing spoken or written not agreeable with this doctrine of our faieth and
christian religion, if a man do say it (though he take unto him the face of an
a^gell by co^terfayte holiness) we count him Anathema, that is accursed, by
the lesson of Paul. And Galat. i.
al such scriptures as might serve for his purpose and mayntenaunce of his
error: we must confute with more open places and testimoneis of the same.

Now where as you speak unworthily of God his sacred majesty, and his son
Christ, haueynge not one like place of scripture whereby this word est is)
does make a sudden change and transformation we have boeth in the old
testament and the new, very many, where est (is) is spoken of the thing
represented. As. vii. fat kyne are. vii. years vii. good ears of corn: are.
vii. years.

This is the pasouer. Circumcision, is the covenant. And, he is Helias, The
sto^ was christ I am the door, I am the very vine. You are one bread and one
body: so many as be partakers of one bread.

We have and believe the words (this is my body) We resist not the scripture
but my Lords gloses.
as well as you. We strive only a against your gloses. We grant the
omnipotency and almighti power of God that he might have changed creatures in
all these sentences. But that he did so is our controversy and this thing
are you not able to try nor justify.

But you think it is inoughe to deny all this at one word, and say, this is
not the figure or sign of Christ's body (no fie for shame) but the very
body of our Lord glorified. For our Lord said, this is not the figure of my
body: but my body. And even so, and more plainelye, Christ said. I am the
very vine, and not the figure of the vine. But your doctoure (as Ecola^padius
gives warneinge in the begininge of his book) is nothing substa^ciall. The
text that he brings out of John: makes clear against him John. vi.
For no man can be saved unless he eat the flesh of the son of man, and
drink his blonde. Moises and the prophets were saved therefore did they eat
his flesh and drink his blood. And yet had they never Christ bodily,
naturally, and carnalli amongeste them. It is not meant therefore of the carnal
and bodily eateinge, but (as Christ teaches in the beginning of the same
sermon) he is eaten by fayeth, for so only might the old fathers eat him.
And so does Paul witness that the fathers did eat him. The fathers (says
he) did eat the same spiritual i. Corhi. x.
meat and drink the same spiritual drink. They did all drink of the same
spiritual stone. The stone was Christ. Again, where Damascene brings in
this text, he that eats me lives for me: it may prove plain, that the
^^eshelie and carnal eateinge, is not meant thereby. For the^ the wicked have
life by Christ. Straight after your doctor co^eth to the point you would have
him, to teach Idolatry boeth with outward gesturs and in ward affections.
And upon this do you discant in your annotacio^s. But to handle this mattier
worthily: would ask a whole book I will therefore bring in one only text, which
Christ brings out of Deu. against the diuil. Deuteronomy. vi. Mat. iiii.
The Lord thy God shall thou worship and him only shall thou serve And when you
can prove me yt this bread, Images, or any other creature is god: tha^ will I
promise you to fall down and worship it. But if I should do it before I know I
should commit Idolatry. Which thing was full well considered of the old
counsayles, for they did forbid kneleing upon the same days in these
mysteries. Now your man scrapeth together certain figures out of the old
teastament, to be the figures of this figu^e. And yet they serve little for
your purpose. The cole that Esai saw, the Esai. vi. Gens. xiiii. Exodus xxi.
bread and wine of Melchizedeche, the bread of proposicio^, make very little
for this purpose, but that you must wreaste some what lest you be utterly
destituted of scriptures Let al men (that dare for fear of your threatninges
read the scriptures) judge the places.

Now concerneinge your unbloody sacrifice, it is to be noted you will have him
eaten body, blood, bones, and sacrificed again for sins: and yet you say it
is no bloody, sacrifice. I think no man will be so mad as once to take your
part herin, notwithstandeinge Mala. i.
the text of Malachie the prophet, which you rehersse for your purpose, but
nothing to the purpose. From the east to the west (says he) my name is
great a monge the heathen, and every where do they bren inse^se and offer
unto my name, even a pure offeringe for great is my name among the heathen,
says the Lord of hosts. Al men may easily perceive how little this makes
for your purpose

It is hard shifte of scriptures when you bring in such places for your
purpose, as do rather make against you then with you as here after this shall be
declared to do.

That the body of Christ can not be changed The body of Christ can (...) be
cha^ng^^ ^^to our co^ruption.
into our corruption: every man knows and believes, and this is one reasone
that month us to say that this bread which is received into our mouths and
so goes into the st^^alie, and sometime is vomited up again (as we have seue
in speak folk) and sometime goes forth other ways: is nothing (the figure
set aparte) but very bread the substance nothing changed Where your doctor
has learned to ca^ it the remedy for all diseases, and upon what
consideration you term it, the armoure of defense from all ad^^yaunce, the
fire that tries out gold, the purgacion of all fylth and diseases: I ca^ not
tell. I know no such tytles it has by the scriptures, though your doctor
allege the apostle for his purpose. Notwithst^dyng make it what you will, so
you make it not God setting it up as an Idol to be worshyped: I will neither
co^^e^d nor strive against you But the lord that made both heaven and the
earth, he is the lord, besides who^ there is none other God* He is the true
God and savior and there is none but he.

He is the cole that consumes wickedness Esai. xliii. xlv. xlvi. Mala. iii.
He is the fire that purges and cleanses. He is the lord the living God. As
for the healeyng of all diseases: I doubt not but the phisicians will answer
you.

Your doctor dares not bring in the i. Corhi. xi.
sentence of the Apostle truly as it is: for fear least we should call it
bread as the Apostle does. But he says. who so ever eats the body and
blood unworthily: he eats and drynketh condemnation to him self. And this
seems quite contrary to the text of John which he cited but a little before (he
that eats me shall live) for doubtless Christ can not be eaten without
profit. He being the food of life, brings life to all them that once may
feed of his fleashe.

For this cause says Christ, if any man be thyrsty, let him cum unto me and
drink He that believes in me, the floods of living water shall flow forth of
his bealy. But he that believes not is condemned all ready.

Thus do we either eat this sacrament John. vii.
of Christ's death with fayt he, and the^ have we life abundantly: or else
nothing regardyng the body and blood whereof we should be partakers spiritually
in this sacrament we offend in vnbelyfe or lack of charity. Both the which
things Paul lays to the charge of the Corinthians, and therefore bids he
them Judge them selves lest they be condemned with the world.

Again, where your doctor says that Damascene will have this bread the
fi^^te fruits of the bread to come.
this bread is the first fruits of the bread to come: compare his last
words to the same and you shall se he speaks like a doctor. These be his
words, though you cloak the^ with your interpretacion. They are called the
examples of things to come. Not that they are not the very body and blood
of Christ in very deed: but because, that by the^ we be made now partakers of
the Godhed of Christ. (...) But then by the contemplacion of the mind, by the
only vision.

If this man's doctrine be true: we have not only the fruits in this life, but
the very fullness. For we have Christ bodilye and are also partakers of the God
head. Yet in time to come we shall have him by the vision of the mind only,
as he affirms in his last lines.

Oh how much better were it to follow the open scriptures, then blind
doctoures? For the scriptures teach, that now we do see ^t in a dark shadow,
whereas after this life in the new Jerusalem, we shall se face to face Then
shall we know as we be known* we shall eat and drink at his table. Yea no
tongue ca^ tell, no eye has sen^ or ear heard neither has it entered into the
heart of man. The glory that God has prepared for the^ that love him. Excuse
your author as well as you can from the heresy of the Marcionistes, he must
needs be in the danger thereof, so long as he reasons that Christ's Luke.
xxiiii.
body is a spirit. For a spirit has neither flesh nor bones.

Again when your doctor takes upon him to make gloses, he descanteth upon
the words of the godly enstructed Basilius, and when he calls it (...) the
exemple: your merchant says that he spoke this of the bread and wine before
the consecration. I pray you who was ever so mad to say that it did signify
any thing before it was taken to this holy use: but that it was commune
bread, as other is which we eat.

Then gives he warning like a doctor, that heretics should have no part
hereof, lest the margarites be cast unto hogs, notwithstanding that Christ
suffered Judas to be part taker thereof.

I know you are a great lawier (bishop Stephane) and have been much used in
the triynge of witnesses. I pray you what cre^ite should such a man have,
that is found fantie so many times in so small examination.

The foundation whereupon our faith is grounded.
BUt I do take our doctors and read them with like judgment as I do the
Rabines of the Hebrews. That is to say, to be me^ learned and highly endued
with knowledge of secret things, and therefore that they ca^ open deaply hid
mysteries. But yet al men of judgment may know that they have their gifts but
unto a certain measure, and as they are me^, so do they err many times, in
the mattiers of most weight and importance. Whereby is wrought the marvelous
wisdom of God, who only will be accounted always true, vprighte and just in
all his words, and that all men should appear (as they are) liars. If in any
one man should rest the fulness of al truth, we would by our weakness very
proudely swear into his words, thereupo^ establish our belief, and make him
as it were an earthly God.

Paul therefore led by the spirit of God, takes his master Gamaliell and
the great Rabines, to no counsel in the setting forth of the high mysteries,
which God had reueiled unto him. No he would not confer with flesh and
blood, that is, with any man, notwithstanding he him self was wonderfully
enstructed in the law, and became irreprehensible therein, being a pharisei,
that is to say, an interpreter, and (as your men are) a doctoure him self.
Notwythstandynge he brings nothing of Thalmud, he teaches not hynge by the
traditious of their fathers, but by Moses, by the prophets, and the open
word of God, whereupon only faith can have his foundation. Faith is of
hearing says Paul, and this is by the hearing of the word of God, and not of
man's doctrine.

Though you therefore, do call this your doctrine of the real and carnal presence
of Christ under the form of bread and wine, the foundation of our faith: yet
were they never set in our old Creed and belief, nor nu^bred among the. xii.
articles of our faith. And Paul, when he said, I do only know Jesus Christ and
him crucified, which is the very foundation of our faith, whereby we might be
saved, though we lived in wilderness, or dyed upon the seas without this
sacrament. Yea though we be murdered in your presence and by your formentes put
to death, without the receyueinge of this Sacrament. For our ^ayth stands
fully grounded upon this word. Wh^ so ever confesses Christ to be come in
the flesh, he is borne of God, and who so ever believes and is baptized, the
same is saved. Add you hereunto what new foundations you please. We feel in
our hertes (being taught by the open word) that no man can No man can lay
any other foundation then Christ.
lay any other foundation but Jesus Christ. By whose death we dye from
confidence in all creatures, and by whose rysynge from death: we do rise again
and do seek things that are above, where Christ sits at the right hand
of God.

Of contrariety and co^tradiction.
THe Devil has an other piece of Sophistry, which is in conterfaite
Winchesters words.
contradictions, wherein he uses for a preface and introduction: a most
certain truth, which is, that truth agrees with it self, and has no
part contrary to an other. Wherefore, saying the word of God is an
infallible truth, it has no contrarieties in it self. All the world must
assent hereunto. But thus the Devil proceeds to his cauillations, from
things evidently true, by little change, to things evidently false. Heaven
and earth have a kind of contradiction, Christ is in heaven where saint
Stephane did se him. Ergo he is not in the earth, in the sacrament of the
aultare. Christ ascended into heaven, Ergo he taryeth not here. He sits at
the right hand of God, Ergo he is not in the sacrament of the aultare. He is
the creatoure. Omnia per ipsum sacta sunt. All things be made by him. Ergo, he
is not a creature made of bread.

He dwells not in the temples made with man's hands, Ergo he is not in the
box upon the high aultare.

Your solution to these open scriptures and The answre.
most evident arguments: is at one word, and that is this.

They be taken for notable co^tradictions Winchesters words.
and insoluble sophisines, and in effect, in all these arguments there is no
contrariety or contradiction in the things, but only a repugnaunce, and
impossibility to man's carnal capacity.

But I beseech you (good bishop) is there The answer.
no contrariety in the things? Is not heaven and earth clean contrary? Have
you so captiuated your wits, and dulled your understanding, that you ca^ not
perceive those two things to the contrary? God is the creatoure and maker of
all, therefore can he not be a creature made of bread. He dwells not in the
temples made with man's hands, for the heaven of heavens can not contain
him: therefore is he not enclosed in a little box, and hanged up by a band. It
is to much shame, for any priest, bishop, or christian man, to think so
irreverently of the secret majesty of God, as that he might be bound unto a
place, enclosed in a cake or a little box, saying boeth heaven and earth be
full of his dreadful majesty, and we, what so ever we be, do live, be moved,
and have our being of him.

He is infinite, incomprehensible, unmeasurable, higher then the high heavens,
lower then the deape and botomles waters, he measures the wide world with his
spanne, and co^teyneth all enclosed in his fiste. With him the light dwells,
and the sun beams are at his ordering. By him is ruled light and
darkedesse, life and death, and altogether. Wherefore when thou can^t enclose
in the box the rageyng seas, when thou can catch the move in a corner and
sparre her up in a case, when thou can pen up the sun (being but a
creature) in thy pix: then will I grant the to have power over things
infinite and incomprehensible. In the mean time I must take it impossible not
only by carnal capacity: but also by spiritual judgment grounded upon the
word of God, and by the gift of reason, whereby al men considering the work
of God in the cretion, may know their creatoure to exeell all creatures
far, and that he can therefore be made by no creature, neither of any
creature, much less can he be enclosed in a box of an y^che and an half
deape, when the priest will ^mble four words in a corner: and there lie tied
till he wax foystie, unless the priest lose him. Oh abominable Idolatours,
how much does this derogate to the majesty of God? And how far contrary
is this to his godly nature.

Now, that it is contrary to the human nature of Christ to be enclosed in
bread and sparred in a little box: thus mape we more largely prove unto you.

Christ in his human body, forsakes the world, he goes unto the father.
He did keep those that were his, so long as he was in the world. And when he
departed out of the world, he desired his father to keep them. He comforted
them when he went away, saying that it was profitable for the^ that he
departed, that the spirit of comfort might come. He promised to come again
visibly and with glory as he went, and in the scriptures there is none other
coming of Christ taught us, but the coming first in humilite to take our flesh
upon him, and afterward in glory, to judge all flesh, which things are
declared, Math. xxvi. Mark. xvi. Luke, xxiiii. John. xiii. xvi. xxii. Actuum.
i. vii. Romans viii. Ephe. i. ii. Corhi. vi. Hebru. viii. ix. x. xii. i. These.
iiii. i. Petre. ii. So that by the scriptures we must needs be compelled to
deny the body of Christ and his human nature, to be now any where upon the
earth, ^or else with the Marcionistes, must we take from him, the verity of
his body: and deny that he has a body according to our nature.

This thing does Augustine handle at large in the epistle he writes to
Dardamus, Augustine to Dardanius.
unto whom I send you that stick so much to doctors. There he teaches you,
that, as he is God, Christ is in every place. But in that he is man, he is in
heaven only, which all the scriptures do testify. And it is the chiefest
point of our belief, that he is in heaven and sits at the right hand of
the father.

Now our faith which can be grounded on no manne^ saying: can seek him in
non^ other place, but where the word of Christ declares him to be, saying
Christ him self warns us that false prophets shall come and say, lo here
is Christ, lo there is Christ, and commands us, that in nowife we believe
them. But we shall then only look for him when he shall come with such shine
and brightness, as is the lighteninge from the Math. xxiiii.
east to the west thorowout the whole world. Which words, though they may be
well understand of the fall and decay of al these outward rites wherein the
Jews and hypocrites of all times have set the high worship and kingdom of
God, and also of such seducers as would promise them selves false Christ's
and saviors: yet nevertheless as the spirit of God has al things present,
which are, which have been and shall be: so are the words of the spirit
general, serving for all times, fit, apt and meet to reprove al abuses. And
here may we plainly epsy that they are spoken against al manner of bodily
presence of Christ, both in the aultares here, and there in the bread, and in
the chambers and corners where he is holde^ up and showed between the priests
fingers to be worshipped.

But if you desire yet some one place of scripture so plain that it can not be
resisted, by any gloses or sophistry, but that it shall stand plain
contrary and cantradictorie to your doctrine, read the third of the Acts.
That heaven must receive and have Jesus Christ, unto the time that all things
be restored. Act. iii.
The words of that place are very plain, for he does not only make Jesus
Christ a very man, as Moses was, whose nature was not to be in two places at
once: but he adds also these plain words. That the heaven must receive
this same Jesus Christ unto the time that al things be restored. Que^ oportet
celum accipere vsque ad tempus restitutionis omnium.

Thus do we proceed therefore. Christ has (by his departing, his sittynge at
the right hand of his father, and returning again at the time appointed) so
plainly appointed by the scriptures, one only place where we shall seek his
natural body: that, so many of us as will not strive against the manifest
truth can not double, but that his body remains there only, where he
shows him self to be. We conclude therefore, that it is contrary to
Christ's religion to seek him upon the earth enclosed in a box.

Secondly, Christ has showed where he will be until the day of judgment,
that is to say, at the right hand of God his father, till that he has made
all his enemies his footstool. Wherefore we can seek him in none other place,
with sure fayeth to find him.

Thirdly against your whole doctrine, (that the body of Christ may be
infinitely scattered thorowout the world and your words a little after
following, which are that the human body is not diuisible by time or place,
wherein you do confound the natures of Christ (...) give that unto the ma^hode,
which is only the propriety of the godheade, and so open the way unto two
heresies) we have the plain testimony of the Angel. You do seek Christ
crutified, he is risen, he is not here. Where as if his ma^hode had been
infinite as is the godhead: the^ should he have been there present. For no man
ca^ deny but there was his godhead presently. Neither ca^ you escape by this
cauillatio^, that then he is infinite, indivisible (...) without
circu^scriptio^ of time or place when you will have him, like as you do multiply
your cakes into millions and thousa^des of thousa^des at Easter, which do al
perish as it were in a moment, for that which is infinite or indivisible
cannot chaung the nature to have his bonds and finite order aypoynted him,
Wherefore we do most truly call God and his power only infinite: where man in all
his nature has his determinate measure of substance, qua^tities, qualities and
knowledge, as appears in Christ (who as he was very man) did not know the
hour and time of the day of judgment of all flesh, was enclosed in the
grave, and did walk upon the earth and appear always unto his disciples in
that sort and manner, that at no time any occasion might be taken that he
infinitely did fill all places, no not that at any time he might appear to be
in two places at once, all his miracles do so faithfully witness and report the
truth of his human nature, and natural body, which your vain opinion of
enclosing him in bread, and making him infinite, goes about to subvert.

But now when you have no scripture to prove your mattier true, that Christ as
he is man, may be in heaven and yet fill all the Aultares of the earth: you do
run to the saying of Esaie the prophet. If you believe Esaie. vii.
not, you shall not understand. The which words being spoken to Achas and
the unfaithful house of David, that was afraied at the coming of two kings of
Syria and Damascus, whom the prophet does threaten to be destroyed because
Achas will not believe: serve nothing to your purpose. The words be these.

If you do not believe: the cause is, you will Obstinacy is the cause that you
can not believe.
not be faithful. And so agrees it well with the words following, when Achas
will ask no sign. Is it but a small thing (says, Esaie) to werie men with
your infidelity, onelesse you do werie my God? And thus in the true sense we
may ryghtly turn it upon your own heads, which will weary boeth God and
man with your braynelesse Imaginations, and will not believe the open word of
God, because you are unfaithful. Then come you in with your Lordelyke sentence.

In this high mystery, where God works his special work miraculous^ie, it
is Winchesters words.
sufficient to know that it is wrought, though I can not tell how it is
wrought, nor how it agrees with other his works.

I marvel (bishop Stephane) that you wax not ashamed of your writing. You
say The answer.
that here is a wonderful miracle wrought, but you know not how it is
wroughte: nor our senses, understanding and faith, (in which three, lies
all the knowledge that man can have of things natural or above nature, as is
before proved) can perceive no manner of miracle, saying the bread and wine
remain in their kind unchanged, as Luke and Paul do witness. So that (by
your own words) you seem worthy to be one of those that affirm you know not
what, being puffed up with the fleshly Imaginations of your own minds.

Saying all the other works of God do appear as God made them, if they were
spiritual, they did appear spiritually, if they were bodily, they did so
appear, you might have added with like shameless forhead. This thing that
we bishops do say must needs be true, though it agree neither with his
works nor his word. For all men may see that you maynteyne boeth this and
all your other doings.

But in this sophistry, the devil makes man Winchesters words.
to forget gods omnipote^cie, exceeding our capacite, and causes us to measure
gods doings by our natural imbecillitie: because we ca^ not be in two places
at once distant one from an other: we judge the same repugnant in God.

For soeth here you speak untruly of us. For we al do believe in heart and
confess with The answer.
mouth: that God only is almighty, and fills all the heaven and the earth
with his presence: even as sure as he made al things in the heaven, the earth
and the seas.

This high estimation that we have conceived of god by lively faith: causes us
to take it as a thing clean contrary to the power of the almighty, to be
enclosed in a box, turned or consecrated (as you call it) into alitle cake.

But the manhood of Christ which was very man as we are (sin only
excepted) have we already proved to be in heaven, at the right hand of his
father, and therefore not in earth in the box hanged over the aultare.

But Christ's being in heaven, which s. Stephane Winchesters words.
truly confesses, was nothing contrary to saint Paul's true affirmation, that
Christ was seen to him in earth after his ascencion.

Now surely both their visions of the glory The answer.
of Christ our savior and the testimonies of the wonderful sight that they did
se: does both stablish our purpose and confute your error, but that you deal
like a sophister with this word earth speaking it after such sort, that the
simple reader should refer it unto Christ being upon the earth after the
asce^tio^, which Paul never taught, nor any of the apostles. These are the
plain words of the scripture, touching this mattier. After that he had
taught, that the highest dwells not in temples made with ma^s hand, against
the opinion of the hie priests: Stephan, replenished with the holy spirit,
loking up into heaven, did see the glory of god, and Jesus standing at the right
hand of god. And he cried with a loud voice. Lo I se the heavens open, and
the son of man sta^dyng at the right hand of God. Here it is described
wonderful plainly, that Stephane being upon earth, did see Christ in heaven,
by the wonderful work of God, thus confortynge his first martyr and witness
of the glory of his son Christ.

Paul likewise (prepared from his mothers womb, to bear the testimony of
Christ among the heathen) as he went to Damascus, was so daynely beset with a
wonderful great light from heaven. And then falling to the ground, he heard
a voice which said unto him. Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me? Then
answered he. Who art thou Lord? And the Lord said. I am the same Jesus of
Nazareth whom thou do persecute. Of this vision and such like does Paul
say. Did not I see Jesus Christ: He says also. Last of all, as unto one
borne out of course, did Christ appear unto me. Which be the words which
you do allege, as making much for your purpose. And you did bring in this
text out of course (if you be well advised* against Lamberte, as though it
should have gotten the victory, and stopped the mouths of all men. At what
time I promise you me thought your Arguments were not so strong as your
shameless Act. xxii. ix.
audacitie was out of measure which i. Corhi. iu. i. Corhi. xv.
without any cause or commandment, did in the presence of so noble a prince,
take the tale out of the mouth of your Archbishop, to whom in that Audience,
it might right well have becomed your sclender divinity, to have showed some
reverence.

But if the mind of Paul may serve you for this declaracio^: he says in an
other place, that whether he were in the body or out of the body, he could
not tell, but rapt he was into the thread heaven, and into Paradise, where he
saw such things as is not lawefull for man to speak. Which wonderful
visions were showed by God to strengthen his chosen vessel (like as the other
were unto Stephane) and are written to increase our faieth and hope which do
believe in Christ by them. I marvel much what fantasy was in your head at
that time, and how it remains still in you causeinge you to bring this vision
of Paul, for the confirmacion of Christ's natural body to be present in the
sacrament. But you are of such power, that for to stric^ your pore brethren,
whom you count worsse then doges calling them diuelles at every word: every
thing is weapon good enough.

God is the aduenger of his people and will callenge unto him self his own
glory.

It repugneth not to Christ's power to sit at the right hand of the father in
heaven, and Winchesters words.
yet to feed the infinity nu^bre of his people, with the saine his precious
body in earth. It is not repugnau^te to gods goodness, being creatoure of
all, there with, in the form of brea^e to feade us his creatures.

Surely it is no repugnaunce unto his power, thus to fead all that shall believe
in him The answer
taking the words spiritually as they are in deed spirit and life and admi^
no gross nor carnal vnderstandeing. But carnally as you do understand the^
with the fleshely minded Caparnites, that the natural body shoude be eaten,
flesh, blood and bones: a few men should devour it. But I am in doubt
whether they be men that have so cruel hertes to eat man's flesh. Nam canis
^aninam non tangit, that is (to you that understand not the The doge will not
eat doges flesh.
latin I speak it) A dog will not eat dogs flesh Tel^ the^ whether it do
not abhor nature, that man should eat man's flesh. Yet se^e you to have a cloak
for this Scithian cruelty, in that you change him into the form of bread.
In the which words if you show the spiritual understanding, that is to say.
That like as the body is fed with bread so lives the soul by this fode of
life, the offering up I say of the body of our savior Christ upon the
cross, to save us from death. Or like as we eat the bread with our mouth
bodily: so do we receive Christ into your souls by faith. These senses and
^uch like, being spiritual, do we knowledge and confess. But to eat Christ
any other way in the form of bread, we judge impossible And to eat him
bodili, carnally, reallie, and substancially as a liueing man: it is cruel,
unnatural, unprofitable, yea impossible. Winchesters words.


In the which we say not that God is become the creature of bread (as the
devil inspireth his me^bres to report blasphemouselie) but that Christ
familiarly, and of a maruailouse intier love toward us, co^secrateth him
self in those fourmes of bread and wine to be so eaten and drunken of us.

This Iudggeling have we touched before The answer.
We can not understand you bishopes when you speak of your transubstanciacion,
consecracion and your chaunginge, unless you do say, this cake, this bread,
this creature, is become the body of Christ God and man, and this thing is
changed into that. For your demonstratiue Hoc, this must demonstrate or show
something unto us. But you clock it like a spiritual father, and point us
the form of bread, with your demonstratiue as it is the chief point of
your profession, to adulterate the word of God which teaches that Christ did
take bread in his hand, blessed and said, this is my body.

A wonderful mattier, that it should now be deuelles doctrine to speak thus,
not groslye, but spiritualli. This is my body, which words we would feign
have rydde of your blind gloses, and do wish that all the world should have
them taught and believe them in spirit to be true, as they were spoken and
written. So that herby might be preached and ^h, the inestimable love that God
bare to the world, when he gave his own and only begotten son, that who so
believe i^ him should not perish, but have euerlasteinge life: and not this
strange doctrine never ^d before neither in the old nor in the new testament,
that Christ. familiarly, of ^tier love toward us) consecrateth him self in
those fourmes of bread and wine, A double er^ ^e^ (...) conse^.
whereby you do not only adulterate the words of Christ with your straung
terms and doctrine of Christ co^secrateing him self into fourmes* but you
would bring on flepe the faith and hope that we have of our advocate sittinge
at the right hand of God a continual mediator for us and bury that great
benifite and singular love of Christ our savior, offeringe him self once
for all upon the cross, settinge up a new Idol that the old fathers
Hahraham, Isaac and Jacob, never hard once named, Bring einge in a new
gospel and glade tidinges, that Paul and the Apostles never preached.
Wherefore by the mouth of Paul, we may pronouce you accursed, and by Moses
worthy to be stoned to death blasphemers.

As for the familiarity that you calenge in coniureinge him into a cake: I
fear me it will have this Answer, ^ade post me Satana.

Now, to declare how unjustly you do change the blesseing of the bread into
these found words (Christ co^secrateth him self) because I have showed it
before, I will only note that, that Christ (always when he did use the
creatures of God) did bless and The mane^ of Christ blesseinge was thanks
geueinge.
give thanks unto his father. But you do use this darcke term to deceine the
people, and would have us believe that straight after your consecracion (as you
call it, yea after your bloweinge, as we do se it) there should be such a
sudden change, and insensible: as can no where else be showed but after your
most holy finger. And in your other blesseinges, when ye do wagge your pope
holy fingers: they have, you say, like power of holiness in heaven earth and
the third place, I wot not where. It were great pity that these holy
blesseinges and consecracions the chife establishementes of your popeishe
empier, should be uttered to their worthynesse. For then your triple crowns,
proud miters, and bloody hattes would fall, your croyser sta^es and
glittereing gloves: would be despised. For when in your pontificalibus you do
give your orders of Antichriste: you c^n not be content to tell your prosilites,
that christ co^secrateth him self, but* you say thus.

We give the power to consecrate and offer to God sacrifice to pacify his
wrath. Thus do you make the doing and offering of Christ on the cross of none
effect, and set up your own consecracion. And For this is al your contencion.

God fills haven and earth and is not co^prehensible Winchesters words.
to be contained in temples made with man's hands, no man can limit gods
dwellinge place. God has power over man but man has not power over God, and
therefore Solomon's temple was no habytacion to restrain gods presence from
other places.

If this be t^we (as you dare not deny it The answer.
for shame) why did the old bishops your prodecessours stone Stephane to
death for so sayeinge? And how dare you Byshopes brenne us for sayeinge that
God dwells not upon your Alutares in your temples, neither that you can limyt
him his place of dwellinge in your little boxes till he wax mould, and the^
bren him at your Altaries end? If this be not to lymyt him a place, to challenge
power over that you call god: what shall we call power? First you have power (you
say) to call by your inchauntyng words: Christ God and man into your bread and
chalice, The^ to create him as your own books shall bear* witness against you,
After this to consecrate and sacrifice him, for the quike and the dead For
this power is given to every one of your mark, be he never so much an
horemonger drunkard or Sodomite. Accipe potestarem sacrificandi pro viuis et
mortuis. Damus ti by potestatem consecrandi, et offerendi placabiles hostias.
That is to say Take power to make sacrifice for the quyke and the dead, we give
the power to consecrate and offer pleasant sacrifices unto God. All this is
said to every one of your shauelyngs. The^ have you power to break him to eat
him, or keep him in the corporasse as you call it, or in your pyx or where you
lust, which are manifest blasphemies and gross blyndnes of the flesh
wyteout the manifest word of God to invent such fond toys of your own brain
as be manifest dexogation to the sacrate majesty of the euerlyueyng God.

And yet scripture tells us how our savior Winchesters words
christ, god and man, has taught in temples, tarried in temples made with manes
hand, and that he dwells with good men, and also in temples made with ma^s
hand for the assemble of good men, where good men trust to be releiued with
co^mun prayer, and refreshed with the most preciouse fode of his body and
blood and he is present and ^arieth in the sacrate host

This do we confess more plainly, that The answer
Christ the son of God did become man, did suffer hu^gre and cold, was
conuersaunt among men, walkeynge and teaching upon the ear the, did all
things that man does only sin excepted. But this does not prove therefore,
that you may spar Christ (either as he was God or as he was man) in a box, or
^haung him into a piece of bread in your temples, and keep him out in one host
consecrate, as you, call it but in a thousand cakes as you would have it. what
like reasone of conpariso^e is between Christ teaching in the temple very man
(as the scriptur witnesses and all the people saw and hard) and your
Imaginacio^ of Christ god and man to be presently at one time upon infinite
aulteres which no scripture^o^s names, nor eye can espy, nor reasone
approve? Yea further, where you have no place of scripture, to tech that Christ
was ever in two temples at once, or. in. ii. places at one time present in
bodelie presence co^uersa^t?

Therefore will I set Stephane the first Stepha^e the martyr against Stephane
Gardener.
martyr, against the Auctorite of Stephane Gardinar. And if men be not blinded
with this man because he is a byshope: I doubt not but the first Stepha^ shall
have the more Credit. The first Stephan (against the hypocrityshe byshopes of
the old law, bosting of Solomon's temple and the holiness there iii. Reg. vi.
only esteemed) confirmed with his death, that God does not dwell in the
temple of Solomon (though it pleased him before tym to show therein the tokens
of his favor and power most presently, unto al them that firmlye and
steadfastly called upon his ^her) but he confessed with the prophet Esai, that
the heaven is his seat and the earth is his footstool. The highest therefore
dwells not Esai. lxvi.
in any temple made with man's hand. For what house (says the prophet) ca^
you build unto me? or what place shall I rest in? has not mine hands made al
these things: says the Lord.

If this be not clear testimonye enough: mark what Paul witnesses with
Stepha^.

God which made this world and all Act. xvii.
things that are in it, seeing he is the Lord of heaven and earth: he does
not dwell in temples made with manes hand. etc. These. iii. faithful witnesses
(Esai the prophet, Stephane the first martyr and Paul the Apostle) are more
worthy to be believed, and may be followed with less danger then half a dosen
braggeynge english byshopes (I mean such as you are) which would have such a
new chaunglynge church as shall not be found again throughout the world.

Of the word institucio^, and how that the papists do make Christ to have a
body Imaginatyue or fantastical.
THat you do use here this word, the institution of Christ, against the which
word you do dispute so spit fully in your book following, I am glade you may be
found your own co^fon^der And now I trust you will give us leave to name the
institution of Christ, because you being a bishope, do use this term
institution. But let pass such triflynges.

Again, that by the alteracion of place the Winchesters Words.
body is not multiplied, but is all ways one and the same body in. x.
thousa^de places at once

This you do affirm in effect though The answer
your terms be darkened with variacion, the application and Alteracion,
because you are ashamed to speak plainly. All me^ that have any wit, reasone
or knowledge: may per ceaue your folly. And especially by that you have ^o^
other thing to prove your impossible proposition, but that the Imagination of
man may be in so many places. Oh wicked bishop wylt thou make Christ to have
^n Imaginatiue body, like unto man's Imaginacion or fantasy: how stands
this with the argument of Paul, wherein rests i. Corhi. x.
the chief hope of our resurrection? If Christ be risen (says he) so shall
we rise again. If his fleash therefore, be otherwise the^ ours shall be (as no
doubt it is if it be like the Imaginacion of man, being in every place when it
lusts) then is this argument of Paul but vain. Again if our bodies shall be
thus able to be in all places when we shall rise again then shall we not rise
like men, but like spirits, Yea like gods. Surely Paul in that he says that
we shall be like the heavenly Ada^ and bear the Image of him, like as we have
Only God is in many places at once.
borne the Image the earthely: makes Christ very man, which must be the first
fruits of them that rise again. And therefore our only hope of resurrection,
is that as he did arise, so shall we in our fleash see our God. Thy^ assersion
of yours calls again the error of Marcion, if it be not resisted. And your
doctor Damascen, can scantly excuse him self of the same heresy.

The philosophers that* said, anima est tota Winchesters words.
in toto, et tota in qualibet part, the whole in the whole, and ye whole in
eueri part: they could not se how it was, and yet nevertheless took it so to
be, and yet what a co^tradictio^ is it to say the part is the whole? And
further, do not the words of men spoken to a multitude pass wholely to every
one of the hearers ears indyfferently, that sta de within the compass of
hearing? And if the matter be intelligible to them al, do not each one hear
and understand, one as much as an other, being the speech but of one and not
diminished by the participation of the multitude?

You bring in for similitudes, these things that are so fare contrary as can
be. For The answer
what can be more v^lyke and disagreyng in their proprities: then the soul and
the body than the voice of a man: and the man him self? what a blind reasone
is this? The soul is spread through out the body: ergo the body may be scatered
into places infinitely distant. What reasone is in this? The voice and words
of man may be hard of an infinite number: Ergo Christ as he is very man may
be in all places innumerable: vnlese you will make Christ to have a
fantastical body, as the sophisters dispute whether a voice have a body or
no.

As for your excuse (because your own conscience does prick you) wherein you
say that these similitudes do nothing attain to express this your mystery:
you deser^ like thanks with Albinus that was over busy in writting the
hystories, of the which he professed him self ignorant. You say they be in
many things unlike, but you can show nothing wherein they be like, but in
your Imaginacion. If you would have proved by similitudes Mark the
examinacion of these similytudes.
that Christ's body is in many places at once: you should have showed and
declared unto us that some one body has been in two places at once, and than
we would have believed you. Or thus might your similitude have served. The
soul of man is spread thorowout his members: and so like wise is the spirit of
Christ spread, tho row out his church which consists of his spiritual members:
compareinge thus spiritual things unto spiritual, and not spiritual unto
bodilily for they differ most clearly in the things wherein you would have
them like. For the body, by the creation of God, has always his determinate
quantity, and therefore his certain place. But as the spirit for lack of
quantity occupies no place: so can it not be in any place circu^scribed or
sensibly contained, except you will follow their schools that can when they lift
have a be in a box, or conjure a spirit into a boat. But these are vanities,
and your argument is from one contrary to an other not from one like to an
other, for the body and spirit are ^ontraries, and have cotrarye propreties.

Of the quotidian miracles wherein i^ opened Escam se dedit.
FInally to make an end of your Chap^ which is spent in settinge forth of
co^une and quotidian miracles, as the alteracion and dissolueinge of stones in
the earth to norishe the corn and sede and such like, which are compted no
miracles be^cause they are so common: it makes clear against you. For if
these things be well Nature works no miracles so long as she keeps her
right course.
worthy to be had in admiracion, as they are in deed: yet for their continual
course and re course, no man compteth the^ as miracles or wonders. How much
more vanity and fo^dnesse is it to count those things for miracles, which no
man can either se, feel, or perceive: Which neither can be taught by reasone
nor by seriptures, to be miracles or wonders, but are the imaginacions of Idle
brayues, which by such fai^ed miracles would maintain their own holiness*
Histories do witness that Hildebrande, otherwise called Gregory the. vii.
commanded a fast for. iii. days, that this miracle might appear in his
kind. But the mattier was concluded without anireuelacion.

A like tale is there written in your popeish book Idlay that should be done at
hay a^ ^aye in Sussex. But remember always, dear brethren, that Antichrist
shall come with be^yed miracles and wonders with al power after the workeynge
of the devil and disceit fulness of vnryghtfulnesse

The text that you bring in (Memoriam ^irabilium suorum ^t escam se dedit)
smells of the porteous, where the psalms are so corrupted, that if david that
made them were upon the earth, he would not* acknowledge them to be his, The
lively spirit of the prophet is so far gone from them, and such aconfuse
barbarouse stainmeringe is almost in them all, In the hebrew the words ar
these (...) In english, he made a memory of his maruaylouse works. The lord
is gracious and merciful, he did give a pray to them that feared him, And he
will remember his covenant for ever. This psalm is written of the wonderful
worckes of God, which he wrought in destroieyng the Egiptians, and saueyng the
Israelytes, where in appears a perpetual memory to be made of his power,
justice and mercy. As for any fedeing of them carnally and bodily with him
self, neither the Israelites nor yet* David knew any such But only they all
drank of the spiritual^ stoue that followed the^, the ston was Chri^ i. Corhi.
x.
And the word which is traunslated in la^ esca, in english meat: does
signify a spoil or a pray, which agrees very well to the rych spoil that
God gave to the Israelyte^ at their departing out of Egypt. Thus may every man
(that has eyes) se how they wreaste all things for their purpose. And though
(...) be sometime translated esca because in the old time they did get their
meat by pray: yet do the papists falsely corrupt this text, For they read
in their por^teous Esca^ se dedit. He gave him self meat^ And you bishopes
allegyng it for your purpose, are far deceived As for the exposicion of the
scriptures (though you do accuse us there in) even as we will answer before God
at the great and dredful day, we have brought them forth plainly in the same
words and sens that they were spoken, neither by craft wreasted, nor by
ignorance adulterated as many of yours may sone be proved, and that welmost
thorowout the whole porteous and mass book, where they be wholly disfygured.
The living God ^e Judge between us in this crime, as he will I doubt not.

The vo^istes (who^ you deride) I do not maintain in their seuses concerning
the spiritual understanding of the scriptures, not being yet clearly opened
and exercised, but in the hertes and consciences, whereby they did grudge and
were offended at the open blasphemies and Idolatry that they saw maynteyned,
and therefore went about (according to the measure of their knowledge) to
reform errors. Wherefore though they did fail because the time of clear
light was not yet come, and God works We must bear with the weak.
his work by certain degrees: yet so long as they profess Christ to be come
in the flesh and agree with us in the. xii. articles of our faith, we must
acknowledge them as our brethren, not deridynge their simplicity, but
releauinge their ignorance and weakness, with our wisdom and learning, as
we our selves would desire to be handled. For if we should have been cast
away when we were ignorant: how should we have come to knowledge? Their
mattier I do not defend. But in that you would oppress us with their
ignorance: it seems rather sophistry, then any substantial argument.

Return you therefore unto our interpretation in the beginning, and the
declaration of our fayt^, which you are not able to confute: and lay not other
men's ignorance to our charge, And know that God (though he have a long
time suffered your ignorance and Idolatry: yet now does he send^ you
warnyng to repent, showing his light even unto the unlearned, and to little
babes. For now is the time at hand, when Christ* God and man shall come down
from heaven Christ's coming is at hand.
with glorious majesty, whom you hang up in a hand (if it be al true that you
say) full un reverently. Whom every whoremonger and sodomite, fears not to
handle: yea, and to brag abroad that they make him, and sacrifice him when
they lust. He shall come (I say) right shortly, to make the wicked tremble and
quake for this contempt, which shall then be confessed.

The plain openyng of this text, Do this in the remembrance of me, and other
textes of the scripture.
DO this in the remembrance of me i. Corh. xi.
does much busye your brains (O bishop) and first for that you bring in the
Devil lurkynge in so little a word as (but) you make us to suspect that he may
lurk in a bishop, especially if we can prove that you bishops ought to be the
angels of light, and some of you are now be come, both in learning and living,
the stout soldiers of Satan, breathyng forth nothing out at your mouth but
the Devil says it, when you your self teach nothing in a manner but Idolatry
and deuylyshe doct^yne. For what thing I pray you (answer if you dare for
shame) is there in the world or has been at any time, concerning any
deuylishe doctrine: but Bishops have defended Bishops have been and be the
defenders of all wyckednes.
it^ In living (when you say Christ must be preached) Bishops ar^ so
abominable, and so contrary to Christ: that either Christ and his Apostles
(which thing is horible to be imagined) or else you proud bishops, are the
deuyls dearlynges. Whosoever lusts to compare the text and open word to your
interpretations and similitudes: shall sone perceine your gloses to be of small
knoledge.

For Paul knowing that such should come after him, as would not suffer
wholesome doctrine: expouneth his own words straight ways, declaryng them to
be of the outward remembrance of Christ's death, which is done in this
Sacrament, as in all other, both of the old Testamente and of the new: and
not of the inward memory, must be continual at al times, and not in the
eating of this bread only. So often as you eat th^s bread and drink this cup
(says Paul) i. Chrin. xi.
you show forth the death of the Lord to the time that he come (as Erasmus
does translate it) and after the old translation: you shall show forth the
death. The greek word* (...) causes this ambiguitie. For it may be either the
present time of the indicatyue, or the present of the imparatiue: commaundyng
the memory to be done. And so agrees it with Luke. Do this in the
remembrance of me. So agrees it with the passover, in whose steed we have
it, for they had special commandment of like remembrance of the work of
God.

Thus agrees it with diverse other commandments, for the merueylous work
Exodus xii.
of God to be had in memory, as appears by Iosue the. iiij. and Erod. xiiii
And upon these are the verses of David known to be true. Great are the works
of the Lord and worthy to be searched forth that all delight and pleasure may
be in them. Glory and majesty are his works, and his ryghtuousnes remains
for ever. He made a memorial of his works. etc. The Hebrews do use the
imparatyue for the future tens, of whose phraces the new testament is full.

This memory of the works of God, and high estimation of his loueinge
mercies: ought to be had in perpetual remembrance, and therefore does David
brast forth into such words, by the veheme^cie of the spirit, saying. Oh al
you servants of the Lord, praise you the Lord. Optabilis laus eius. Psalm.
Cxlvii. His praise is to be wished and desired Pas. Cxrxiiii, and. Cxlv.
and therefore we desire and pray that his name may be sanctified, hallowed,
renowned, and praised. Sanctificetur nomen tuum. Ex ore infantium et lactantium
perfecisti laudem. The prophet truly instructed by the spirit of God: knows
that he has made perfect his praise by the mouth of infautes, suckelynges and
babes, and therefore byddeth he that young men and maidens, old men and
children should praise the name of the Lord, saying that this praise becomes
all his holions. It was the course of the old testament (and the Jews use the
same at this day) Psa. Cxlviii.
that the whole congregation, should (after the law and prophets read unto
them) acknowledge their sins and give thanks for their beuefi^es, or else
promise to do the things commanded, and with one heart and mouth thus
glorify God. And the same order continued amongst us till such time as you
bishops by your arrogant ignorance did shut up the kingdom of heaven
(which stands chiefly in the renowmynge, praysynge, and glorifiynge of God)
and neither would enter in your selves: no suffer them that would enter.
Math. xxiii.


Paul allows this general praysynge and preaching of Christ's benifites and
wo^ derous works, saying. So often as you come together, every one of you has a
song, has (...). Corint. xiiii
a doctrine, has a tongue, has a revelation, has an interpretation. Again
you may all prophecy one by one, that al may learn and al may have
conforte. But bishops will none of this. It is enough (say you) to have it
done once for all, it needs not to be done again. Yea you will not have it
done at all. You will have us mu^ble al our life long in a blind and unknown
language. But the sermon and preaching, and showing forth of the lords death,
must be in our living after the exe^ple of the bishops and prelates in love,
We must confirm our lives to the bishops life.
charity, and the contempt of the world. Not in making a sermon with the
tongue declaring how Christ died for us.

Oh blind guides, you ought to wish that the name of God and the special
work of his mercies, in the death of his son Christ might be most largely
renowned, praised and sanctified in the congregation, not only by the mouth of
sucklinges and babes) by the lowest, by the highest, by the smallest by the
greateste: but if it were possible, that the very stones should brast forth his
praise.

And whereas we are all to slack and negligent in re^dering thanks for this
great benifit that we have through the death of Christ: good bishops would
encourage us and steare up this heavy slackenes in us, calling upon us to be
thankeful. But contrariwise, you discourage us so much as you can possibly,
commaundinge that we shall not every man preach forth the Lords death in this
most The prelates discourage us from preaching the Lords death.
worthy sacrament, but in steed thereof, you do by your co^ma^^deme^t
establishe your Idolatrous sacrifice, wherewith we must be fully contented and
satisfied, and not so hardy as once to demand in it any one word to be
spoken to the edification of the unlearned. So that your bishop Devil,
lurketh in this word (not) more wickedly working his purpose, to put to
silence the death of Christ: the^ in the greatest (but) that ever was made.
How be it if we might opteyne of our noble Prince (as no doubt we shall, if
your Devil do not over run all together) if we might opteyne I say (the
thing that Paul commands) that nothing should be spoken in strange
language in the congregation, without an enterpretoure: that we might all with
knowledge, and not with blind mumblynge matte^s worship god and give glory to
his name: your Idol would wax so sick (Idoubte not) that you should stand
need of some expert master of physic to see his water. Doctor Buttes (if he
were on live) could do it right well. Doctoure Buttes.


Where as you deride this thing, that every man should make a sermon: I
wyshe that every man could do it, and will exhort them that can do it (ene^
for the love of God) that they do it more diligently. For I do nothing fear
that they will be over ready to the thing that is good. No, I have dwelled
fully seven years in a place where I never heard sermon. But for the
declaration of the text: understand that we do not think every man bounden
and commanded to make a sermon, but to rejoice and bless God. Which is all
one (borrowed of the Hebrew language) to acknowledge in our heart, and (if
occasion to profit the congregation or the order of the church and assemble
do permit it) to confess with the mouth, the death and benifite of Christ,
and generally to gyu^ thanke^ together in comeliness and order, that by the
multitude thus praysyng and gyuing thanks: the honor of God may be
amplified, and we the better rese^ble that heavenly Jerusalem, where they do
incessantly sing praise criynge with one voice. Sanctus, sanctus, that is
holy, holy, holy. And this is me^t by the word (...) in diverse places of
Deutronomie. The words are these. Thou shalt come to the priest that shall be
Deuteronomy. xxvi.
in those days, and say unto him. I acknowledge this day before the Lord my
god: that I am entered into the land for the which he swear to our fathers,
that he would give it unto us. Here is a like memory of God, commanded by
Moses. Whereby (as in this sacrament) is meant a reverent thanks gyuyng and
acknowledgyng, for s^ is the Hebrew word, (...) translated (...) Iudicum. i^.
Whereby we may perceive the Iud. ix.
word blessing to agree with the other greek word, (...). Thus we therefore
have by the healpe of the Hebrew tongue and the old testament, forth of the
which two, all rites and ceremonies, and the truth of all the principal places
of the new testament: have both their confirmation and declaration, and by the
circumstances of the places: proved unto you, first that in this sacrament,
there must be a general profession of our says in the death of Christ
outwardly, and the^ privately, every one must in heart acknowledge and give
thanks. And if the profit of his brethren do so require it, or the order of
the co^grega^io^ permit: they must with mouth celebrate and praise this great
benifite, to the glory of God and the conforte of the congregation.

Your first declaration that we must have Christ present in this memory by
faith: makes nothing against us. For this is it that we do believe and teach,
that unto the eyes of our faith, there is present in the sacrament, the natural
body of our savior Christ, the same body that suffered. And your similitude of
An Image ca^ not be a womannes husband.
the married woman that will make an Image of her husband for a remembrance of
him: makes much against you. For this I dare say, that all the eloquence you
have ^a^ not prove un to a right seleder witted woman: that the Image thus
made for a memorial, is her own natural housba^de, and so make her do honor
and reverence unto him at bed and at bourd, as you would have us to do to this
very Image (as you call it) of Christ, being departed in body from his church,
and leaving this most perfect Image of him self (and as you say, him self)
for a memory.

Furthermore. If you could prove unto this woman that this image were the
natural body, ^lesh, blood and bones of her husband: what need she to look for
him in any other place abse^t, who^ she has thus really present at all times.
What shall we say: Is her husband gone? Nay verily, her husband lies hid, in
and under the Image. Lo whither your blind similitudes do lead you.

But to prove his body to be in diverse places without any change of place: you
had need to ask better counsel of your sophisters, and then we shall answer
you again.

For the text folowinge. Non d^dicans corpus domini, making no difference of
the Lords body: which words be so translated in the Bible that you have
allowed by Act of parliament. For the scriptures (such is our misery) can be
no farther good and profitable for us, but as yon will allow it. That is to
say, the last year good for all men: but this year good for gentlemen only.
In the last proclamation, you condemned three translations and saved one. But
in this your book, you seem to be weary of that one, for My lord would have no
translation by his will.
you find fautes therein, and will not have at read at such times as men
meet together in the church.

But God is the Judge of your doings. You do not Judge and know that God is
as presently in his words and scriptures (which you do burn) as he is in the
Sacraments, which are made and take their strength of the same word. Oh
bishops. If this thing that you do, be for the pure ^eale of Gods word:
then take so much pains (amongst you al) as to set forth one tra^slatio^, so
true* that no man may find any faut therwyth. But you ca^ not hear on that
side. You have burned five thousand: but of your translation we find not one.
It is easy therefore to judge what your purpose has been.

But to return to the words. Non diiudi ca^s. etc. Your english text is,
making no difference of the Lords body. But your own interpretation is, not
understanding, not co^side ring. But if you will add thereunto the
signification of the greek word (not judging) I will say al is true and agrees
very well. For who so ever does eat this bread and drink this cup unworthily,
eats his own judgment, making no difference, not understanding consideringe
or judging the Lords body. Where he that does eat it worthily: does Faith
is the mouth that receives Christ's body.
by his faith, eat the very body of the Lord, so often as he eats of this
bread and drinks of this cup, and fedeth his soul by the rejoicing in the
death of the lord. For who soever seeks the spiritual fode: he regards
nothing but the body of Christ offered for his sins, though with his mouth
bodily he receive the bread, the figure of the same. If any have ^sco^strued
this text: do not charge us therewyth. But if we do take it wrong, reprove us
by scripture. No man doubts but that he is guilty of the blood of Christ,
which takes Baptism irreverently. Yet dare we not say that in the water is
really present the body and blood of Christ. He despiceth me (says Christ)
that despiceth you, speaking of his Apostles. Yet is it no good argument to say
therefore, that Christ is corporally in his Apostles. But spiritually we must
boeth behold and most tha^kefully receive our Christ in all his sacraments and
in all his messengers.

The third text. Spiritus viuificat, caro no^ prodest quicqua^. In english, the
spirit gives John. vi.
life, the flesh profits nothing: makes much against you. Yea though you
take it after your own gloss, which is, that this text is a general lesson for
the true understanding of our whole religion. But this gloss shall we touch
hereafter. This text. The spirit gives life, the flesh profits nothing:
is boeth proved true and manifestly declared, in the. xvi. chapter folowinge,
where Christ says. I tell you truth that it is profitable for you that I
depart, for if I do not go away: that confortynge spirit shall not come unto
you. But if I go: I will send him unto you, etc. Whereby it appears plainly
(against your words) that the presence of the body carnally, is not
profitable unto us now after his ascendynge into heaven, because Christ
says it is profitable that in body he should depart, but you say it is
profitable to have him here in a cake, notwythstandyng that he says, that
unless he go his way the spirit of conforte can not come. The exemple of
Peter and all the Apostles The Apostles were stronger in Christ's absence the^
in his pre^ence.
(who were stronger by the confort of the spirit, then by the presence of the
body) does declare the same thing. This thing may be made evident also, to
him that with a clear conscience, marketh the same, considering that thereof
chiefly and only we have cause to rejoice that Christ being very man upon
earth, has for our sakes ouercom^n all helly and earthly powers, and now
sits at the right hand of God our perpetual advocate. This is the
spiritual feeding and not the fleshly, which who so feels: he will never
route upon the earth for flesh any more.

Of the profit of the spirit and the departing of the flesh, read John the.
xiiij. Thou may also mark in all the scripture, how the flesh is smally
regarded. As to be mother and brother after the flesh. Matthew. xij. Mark. iii.
and Luke. viii. Again, Christ himself does attribute the true bliss and in
fallible felicity, nether carnally to bear him (...) the womb, nor yet to
give him suck of ^e breasts (which are the greatest things The true bliss
is to hear theword of God and follow it.
^at can be touching the flesh) but to hear the word of God and to do the
same. This thing because it is of the spirit only, profits and makes a
man blessed.

You do well that you couple these two textes, Caro non prodest quicquam, et
quod natum est ex carne, caro est, spoken to Nicodemus. For in very deed they
teach boeth one thing, and are a general rule of the true understanding of
our whole religion as you do say. Which is that all godly life and holiness
is borne in us (not of the flesh, neither visibly nor inuisibly) but of the
invisible power of the spirit, whereof If we wilenter into Christ's kyngdo^e
we must bec borne a new
we must be borne a new, if ever we enter into the kingdom of God, as our
savior Christ taught Nicodemus. The which words if any man should so
grossly interpret, as to expound it thus, saying, that by the power of God
invisible, a man might enter his mothers womb, and so this flesh borne
inuisibly should be profitable: every man would laugh at his foliyshnesse.
And this is eue^ much like your gloses, contrary to the which we have proved
by the scriptures, that it is profitable that the flesh do depart that the
spirit may come unto us, and that the flesh which in this humility has once
suffered (...) the cross, and done the will of the father: is no longer
profitable unto us upon the earth* but now we must be borne of the spirit*
al our conforte, al our hope must be of the spirit. For what so ever is borne
of the flesh, is flesh, and therefore carnal, and no part of our spiritual
religion and spiritual birth. You add these gloses, that inuisibly we must
have this flesh present in the fourmes of bread and wine, and so must we
eat the flesh of Christ really, but yet inuisibly you say. And shall we by
invisible flesh (but yet very flesh) bring life unto oureselues, and be
borne a new against the lessons of the spirit? If the presence of the flesh
in the bread be so profitable (which you can prove by no word of scripture,
and therefore we need not believe you except we lust.) wherefore think you,
would Christ rather hide him self in bread, then show him self openly,
saying boeth are like possible unto him: He says that this is the will of the
father that sent him, that whosoever sees the son and believes in him has
everlasting life. Now for this doubt that you do move, whether his flesh be
caro viuifica, that is flesh Christ's flesh gives life.
giving life: that it is so, is the very fou^dacion of our faith, and we both
agree in this point* But here arises the doubt, how this flesh gives life.
You say by eateinge the same reallye, and naturally in the bread without any
scripture. But we taught by the whole course of the scriptures that the spirit
only is profiteable: do understand a spiritual eateinge of this flesh, which
is taught in the. vi* of John to be by the beliefein this flesh, offered John.
vi.
for the life of the world as it is taught at length before.

And where as you say that Christ did by these words rebuke the gross and
earnal Caparnaites: it is very true an serves still against all them that
say Christ must be carnally eaten, be it in lo^pes (as you speak) or the
whole body swalowed down al together, as you defend your self. If you say
(as you do) again in this place that Caro flesh, is taken for the carnal
part of man, then do you nothing consider the circumsta^ce how Christ
laboreth in this place, to teach the people, how his own flesh is profitable
unto them. This doctrine of yours therefore, is confused to gether, makeinge the
spiritual eateing, carnal, and the very fesh and body to be the spirit. For
in your change, how can this be his very body, which you cause to go and
come, no man knows how^ ^einge he him self says unto Didimus his body
has very flesh and very bones, and is not like the spirit. You make him
like a spirit to come and go into thousand milio^s of cakes and aultares
insensibly. You make him give life also which is the chief and only property
of the spirit. And where you would cloak the first mattier sayeinge that his
body may be in so many places, and be insensible because it is adjoined to
the God head: you must learn to be ware, that in no wise you confound the
natures, as I have spoken before. And likewise, when you say that this flesh
gives life always, because it is inseparably adjoined to the spirit: you
must acknowledge the proprieties of these. ii. in sunder, grauntinge it to be
the properietie of the spirit only, to give life, according to this text
spiritus est qui viuificat: though it do (by the flesh and dodie of Christ, as
the only instrument and peculiar sacrifice wherewith the wrath of God might be
pacified) work in us that be faithful, the same life. And this same flesh of
Christ, is a stumbling stone in Zyon, to the wicked (as the prophet
wittnesseth) and is set up to the rniue and resurrection of many. It was unto
the Phariseis a blindyng, and lively to them only, that were ordained to life,
Unto the Jews which handled it, and to Judas which kyssed it, and (as you
would have it) did eat it: it was death being of it self the savior from
death. So that we may very well conclude, that the spirit only gives
lyffe, and to them only that have this spirit in their hertes, to the^ I say,
the flesh of Christ is profitable, and to them his fleash is very meat and
his blood very drink, for they only can feade spiritually of Christ God
and man. For it is the bread that comes from heaven (says John) that
gives life unto the world. And this heavenly bread of the spirit does feed
unto life everlasting, so that who so ever does once taste thereof, shall no
more be hongrye nor thyrstie after the carnal fode. And as for your opinion
concerning that the fleash (carnally eaten) should be lively and confortable:
you are not able to iustifi by any scripturs. And therefore beware how you
establishe it with your tyranny. we have learnyd this gospel, that Christ was
crucified to save sinners, and to give life unto the world.

But that he must be eaten bodylye to give life: is a new gospel. For John in
his syxte chapter, does wholly declare and set forth the spiritual eateynge
of the fleash of Christ by faith, as is before declarede, contrary to your
carnal writings.

When you say that we make the scripture like a co^fuse son of belles: I do
take all me^ to witness (yea I dare appeal your own conscience) whether of
us has the scriptures in more estimacion, You and your doctors which do
accostomably preach and writ that the scriptures are like a nose of wax, easy
to be tuurned to al purposes: or we that count no lerneing of man, nor yet any
doctrine taugh by the apearans of Angels, to be sure and stable, unless it
be confirmed by the word of God and his infallible scriptures? A gain how
lightly and irreverently you judge of the authority of the scriptures of God:
your ^larckelye cloked (...), shall testifye to the whole world, wherein you
are nothing ashamed, to recite, how that openly My Lord might have been
ashamed to make this boaste.
in the great cownsaile (like A byshope) streightwayes at your beginning (to
be sure to follow the foundation of your Romeish church) you compted the
authority of scriptures unprofitable for your purpose, because the sense
thereof (as you say) may be drawn at pleasure to both parts. You cloak the
matter with cle^lier terms (O bishop, as you do al your mattiers) but in
effect, this is al one with the nose of wax and co^fused soune of belles. Your
words be these. Prefatus sum, inutiliter me verba effusurum, si ad fra^gendam
hominum pertinaciam scripture authoritati (vt nunc sunt hominum ingenia)
inniterer, cuius se^sus pro arbitrio vtrinque distahatur. Judge (O you that do
syte and have not your consciences all ready marked) boeth of these words and
of the brennyng of the scripturs for lo here may you se the cause why the
bishope will neither meddle with them him self in his disputacions, nor suffer
them that would (so much as in him self lies) but burn them and banysh the
diligent interpretatours of them, because he and his fellows do think that
they may so easily be wrasted to the madness of man. Oh what shall we say or
think of such bishopes: It is no marvel though you have your brethern in
small reputacion and rail upon them at your pleasure, seeing the word of God
is so smally regarded with you. Yea how can you love God whom you see not when
you hate your brethern, with whom you live, conversant derydeyng, despiseing,
and brenninge all that you can have of God, in this world, his holy word and
scriptures. we take God to our Judge, that to our knowledge, we do not abuse
the scriptures, neither write we any thing, but with such minds, hertes and
conscience, as we are redi to stand before him and make answer at the great
day when he shall appear. And because we do know the scriptures inspired
above, from God him self to be profitable to teach, to improve, to amend, to
enstructe in ryghtuousenese that the man of God may be perfect and prepared
unto all good works: therefore have we it in such estimacion, that we can
count no learning good, but that is hereby confirmed and establysshed.

But let us* return to your first exposition of these words. Caro non prodest
quicqua^, John. vi.
spiritus est qui vinificat. and Quod natum est ex carne caro est. That is The
fleash profits nothing, it is the spirit that gives life, that which is
borne of the fleash is flesh This (you say) is the true rule of our whole
religion. The fleashe when it is carnallye eaten (as you will have it)
engenders naught else but fleash. Then if it be but fleash that it engenders:
then have we no profit therbi for the fleash does nothing profit. Contrary
wise, the spiritual eatinge gives life and engendrethe the spirit which
only feadeth the soul therefore we need nothing to regard the carnal eatinge,
which neither feadeth the soul nor body, for no bodily thing can enter the
soul nor no spiritual thing can feade the body.

Now, where you would myxte the fleashe and the spirit to gether by this
solusio^, that the fleash of Christ can not be without the spirit, mark what
we do answer.

If we have life by the spiritual eating of Christ once offered for us (as
thepistle to the Hebrews does witness) if we have al one Hebr. x. i. Corhi. x.
spiritual fode with the fathers, if we have lif so many of us as do thus
believe in him, by the benefit of the spirit, as the. vi. of John does tell
at larg, if the rightuous live by the faith and not by bodily eating, if that
which comes from the heart do make the man holy or propha^e, and not that
which goes into the mouth. if he that believes in Christ shall not be
condemned, but have everlasting life, if God have granted to all them that
receive Christ that they shall be the children of God (that is to say) as many
as believe in his name, as John does interpret him self, if he that drinks
of the fountayn of life by faieth, shall never be thyrsty, but be refresshed
into everlasting life, if he that hears the word of God and believes, have
everlasting life? what avails the fleashly eating, or what can you wyn
thereby.

As doctor Ciprian, calling the bread of this sacrament, Sacramentalem panem
(that is to say) bread signifiyng by sacrament farther thing than bread: it
is a mattier so evident that we need not to strive for it (...), panis, bread
in all languages, have al one propre signification of the bread made of grain.
An other signification they have by translacio^, whereby they signify al manner
of fode but your doctor must have a long gloss of your bishoplyke brain,
whereby (you are so wyttie) you can deprave every thing. For you are not content
to have glosed your doctor: but you must forbid Paul to call it any longer
bread, because that you bishopes have espied that (panis) may signify fode.
But I prei you good bishop leave your daliing and tell us what christ did take
in his hands as he sat at supper. It was not a piece of the lamb to have a
similitude of fleash, but it was bread the general substance of man's bodily
life, even like as Christ is the only bread of life and spiritual fode of the
soul. Bread (I say) it was to declare that like as bread is made of many
graynes, which all to gether do make but one body: so likewise we Note the
cause why this sacrament was instituted in bread.
(being many beleueynge in Christ) are all one body in Christ, We are one
bread and one body, says Paul, so many as be partakers of one bread. Why
then should we call it fode? Yea marie say you. For there is a great error
spread a broad about the sacraments that there remains bread after the
consecracio^. And the heretykes say that they will speak plain as Paul
does* But can you teach these heretics to speak better: speak they not well
when they speak as paul the apostle did: Yea Paul is hard and can not be
understand. Oh it is a wonderful hard thing for a plowe man to understand
what bread is. Thus would you cap^tue our wits, to take Christ and his
Apostles as blind guides. leadynge us wrong by their dark terms, but your
doctors and you bishopes do teach all so plainly, that unto you only we must
harken and le^e the other go with all their books and wrytinges pains and
burning.

But I pray you, have these heretykes no more to allege for their purpose but
Paul: Yes truly, they have the plain words of Christ for them also, or else
we would condemn them to gether with their man Paul and drive them out of
all credit by the autorite of our doctors. But Christ after he had
consecrated and blessed this bread and this wine (as you say) he calls it
still bread and the fruits of the vine. But truly Christ and Paul speak
darkely, and would not have us understand them. Harken therefore to our
doctors and you shall learn the mattier substauncially. Thus ren you about the
bush to keep us in captivity. This is babilo^^^al bondage and captivity of
conscience. From the which we beseech the allmyghtye and euerlyuyng God to
deliver his little flo^

But what shall we now do? you call them heritikes, which bring your doctors
for the^ as plainly as you have the^ for your purpose as appears by Fryth
whom you have not yet confuted, but with your laws and authority put him to
silence, and than with one word you call him an herityke, and say he defameth
the doctors. This is an ea^y way to answer. And thus might a man make answer
to your book spedilie, saying at one word, that it is crafty sophistre. As for
Ecola^padi^s a man of singular learning, virtue and sobrenesse: whom you ^o
ligtly regard and despise: You bishope Stephane and al your fellows
(co^terfayte bishopes) compared to such a notable clerk, are but shadows, and
your learning and eloquence, but co^terfaits to his. How excellent was he in
the Hebrew Greek and laten tongue: how well learned in all scienses? How deape a
serchear of the mysteries of the prophets and other scriptures How learned and
faithful tra^slatour of your own doctors? This shall his works declare and
witness with me unto the worlds end, do what you ca^ to destroy the^, that you
may triumph alone like a crade^ cock on his own ^ghil. Think you that if
Ecolampadius were a live, and heard such a foleishe sentence of ^our writing,
as here follows, that he had not rather be dispraysed the^ praised of such a
fo^de brain? your words be these without any addicion.

This is in deed convenient, that Christ in his bodi living, should be a figure
sign and memori Wiuchesters words.
of his body dead upon ye crose for us: and christ in the sacrament of the
altar to be a figure ofhys mystical body the church.

Who techeth you to speak thus fo^dely but your dotyug doctors: Is christ in
his body The answer.
living a figure sign and memory of his body dead on the cross? where learn
you this thing in the scriptures? No forsoeth. The^ need we not to believe your
lies. Had this be a likely tale for Christ to have told his disciples when he
did site at the table in his living body, and did give the^, in the figure of
his living bodi which was the^ ready to depart from them, this creature bread
which could not move because it had no life: At that time his body was not
glorified nor changed from the condition of our natural body, to be infinite
without chaung of time or place, how so ever you have changed it se^ce that
time. It was the^ a living bodi and no figure or sign of a body. Neither hade
it be possible to have persuaded the Apostels this preposition of yours to be
true* If you had said the contrary, that the dead body had been the figure,
sign or memory of the living body: some simple soul, that knows not what
a figure, sign or memori means might have been deceived by your subtlety*
But to go nere you. You know that these words figure, sign, memory must be
So much difference is between the sign and the thing sngnified: as is between
the master and servant.
referred and applied unto other things the^ their own selves, and are
therefore (in learning) called relatyues because they can not be fully known,
but only by such things as are by the^ figured, signified and brouggt into
memori. And can you show me any thing in the world either spiritual or
worldly that is boeth the figur and the thing figured the sign and the thing
signified: the memory of a thing done, and the self same thing by the
memory repeated? Yea it is a strong argument (by all the learning that ever I
heard) to reasone a relative oppositis. So that one and the self same
thyngecan by no means (in regard and respect of it self in the same
effects, as you speak afterward) be boeth the relative and correlatyue, the
figure and the thing figured, the sign and the thing signified: more then
the ale p^le or yuie bushe, can be the ale or wine thereby represented, or
circumcision the covenant and the brazen serpent Christ.

Now in the second sentence, where you say that Christ is the figure of his
mystical body: what reasone is in it: For scripture have ye none. Who ever
hard before that the head polyticke, spyrituall or bodyly: should be named
the figure of the body, whereof it is the head? Is the Kings majesty figure
of England: Is or can the husband be the figure of his wife: Oh fond and
deceiuable sophistry confoundeyng all things together. But mark the
spiritual doctrine (christen reader) and thou shall be taught that it is the
bread that is both. Christis bodi and ours in figure, and that for. ij.
purposes, without change of either of our substa^ces First, for that in Christ
it represents him to be the general fode of al souls, and right so in us,
the manifold me^bres, united and knyte unto the same our head. Thus is it
truly said of Christ, This is my body and of us, we are one bread and one
body, so many as are partakers of one bread. This same verb substa^tiue Sumus
we are) makes no chaung in our selves: Wherefore then shall we imagyne it to
have such an enchaunteynge power over Christ God and man.

In the opinion of the Arrians may be perceived somewhat if yours, for that
you are so busy with the proverb, Malum been co^ditu^ ne moueas, an old
error. As for luther (though he were the little David that killed great
Goliath) it is easily perceived by co^paring of his books with Ecola^padius
and zwin glius: how far unable he was to defend this cause. What mildenes of
spirit, and over much care of christian quietness, caused Bucere, in words
(so far as the truth could any thing yield) to agree with you: al men that read
his books with judgment may judge. Zwinglius works (who so reads the^) as
he was a man of in comparable eloquence and lerneing: are able to confound all
the rabble of the papists, and al his adversaries that speak against him.
But now come you into your ruff again with your doctors of thousand years,
yet may we prove some of the^ to have been scarcely. v. hundred years, and
other some of small Authority, and the best smally serueing for your purpose.
Amongst the^ all, the most ancient is S. Andrewe the apostle you say, whom
you allege, not out of the scripture (for we have nothing of his writeinge
there) but out of your holy lege^da auria, as I suppose, or else I pray you
whens shall this thing have his authority? of the porteous perchan^ce, which
techeth us to lock for salvation, by the merits of Thomas Beket, by setting
up a ca^dle or building a chapel in the name of. S. Margarete It appears that
you would feign have the mattier, good when you fly to your popeish portous.
Thus would you craftily deceine the people. Let Paul answer your porteouse
man, which says he does daily sacrifice Christ on the aul^re of the cross.
We learn in the Epistle of Paul to the Heb. that it is the propre and peculiar
vii. viii. ix. x.
office of Christ to offer him self, and that with his own offering he has
made his, holy for ever, by his own offering once don, and therefore was he made
priest after the order of Melchisedech, without successor. Where for, they
that go about to sacrifice Christ: do rob him of his priesthod. For Christ
only was called unto that office, for he ouelie was called as Aaron was, and
no man may take unto him that office: unless he be caled as Aaron was Not
with standinge, that we may please al and offend no man (if it be so possible)
take the words of S. Andre. spirituallie, as no doubt he was spiritual, and
would speak the^ none otherways but spiritually, and tha^ make they nothing
against us. He sacrificed, not on the aultare of stone, but upon the aultare of
the cross. And for the maintenance of this sacrifice: he him self was also
sacrificed on the cross. What did he sacrifice: The unspotted lamb. Where he
alludeth to the old figure, as is said, whose flesh and blood being
spiritually received: feadeth all the faithful people. Thus may thou answer
(gentle reader) even unto the best of the doctors vnderstandeinge them
spirituallye. And that they should be so understood, appears by the first
words that you bring out of Chrysostom we offer (says he) but for the
remembrance of his death. Again, this sacrifice is a resemblan^ce of the
other. Again alludeinge to the old figure he says. We do offer one lamb,
or else should there be many Christ's. Then shows he who is the bishop that
offers the sacrifice. Not Chrisostom nor Andrewe* but Christ. And this
which they do is the remembrance of that which is done alredie These old
writtes had much more liberty to speak such words because at that time there
were no such errors hard of as you do defend now by your popeishe prerogative.

But when you answer that Christ byde^h you pristes sacrifice him because he
says Hoc facite: I dare say you finne in wylfull blindness. And that boeth
for that you My lord sins i^ wylful blindness.
lea^e out thef^^t and principal part of the sentence which most declares
the purpose of Christ (in the remembrance of me) and also because you know
well inowghe what significacion Hoc facite must have boeth in this place and
all other. I know well that you english bishopes be not so sle^derly learned
as the Sorbouistes or doctors of Parise which in their determinations, do
bring incum faciam vitulam. Take the whole se^te^ce together therefore, and
make of it what you can. Hoc facite in mei memoriam, do this in the
remembrance of me.

Donec veniat, till he come, makes clear against you that say he is hear al
ready, let Damascene dote as long as he lusts. If you wreast this plain
text, do this in the remembrance of me until I come: what scripture can be
salfe from your gloses: Yet by your doctoures by whom you ca^ gloss forth al
things: I will not greatly contend with you, as I did proteste in the
beginning. First and principally, because our fayeth may be grounded upon no
ma^s saings, but upon the word of God only, which is able to teach To. x.
to reprove, and to enstructe a man to every good work. Secondly, because
this contencion shall never have an end, so long as you may have authority to
gloss every word of the doctors according to your own pleasure. Thirdely,
because there has been no ^ning so lewed, but it has been proved, and is at this
day allowed, by the authorite of the doctors. Fourthli, because the scripture
must be the to^chston and i^dge of all other things, words, sayings and
writeynges, and may be Judged by non other. Sixtli because we our selves shall be
Judged and examined whether we have kept that which Christ commanded us and
not that which doctors have written, Seventhly and finally because in the
word of god, lies al truth and we have an especial commandment from the
father to here Christ the authoure thereof, the spirit comeynge down from
heaven with his open testimony, This is my dearly beloved son in whom I
delight, hear him. where the doctors contrary wife as they are men, and this
scripture must needs be true Omnis homo mendax, every man Only God is true,
and al men are liars.
is a liar: so do they try. them selves as men contendeynge one with an other,
each one contrary to his fellow. Yea and the self same man retracteynge and
recanteynge that, that he had written before, that we may learn to trust in no
man nor to put flesh our arm, for fear of the great curse, but to stycke
unto the everlasting word of God as a lantern unto our fete, whereof there
shall not one Jot or title perish, though the heaven and the earth do melt
away. In this we shall find sufficient fode for our souls (if we can
patiently rest and fead therein. Wherefore (for this time) all your doctors set
aparte, and your dyuell says neglected, because your hope is so much in man,
and you are not ashamed so often to brinde in: the devil says I pray you
here the complaynt of God by his prophets, upon the Idolatours of al ages and
do not think much to herke^ what God says of you of this time, which ca^ non
other ways mayntain your pomp, but with the co^tumely of your creator, and
the plain denial of the only sacrifice of his son Christ. Think not straing
that the thing is written in the person of God, for all truth is of god. G^ie
pacient ear therefore unto our God says: as we have done toyour devil says,
al this while. Gene ear for God says it


The complaint of God against Idolatours
Hear the word of the Lord thou proud Babylon. Thou people of Sodom and
spiritual Egypt: hear the word of the Lord? For asmoche as the lord Jesus
Christ, is daily crucified, daily slain, daily set forth in mocking sacrifice:
the blood of the testament is trode^ under foot and the arc of the covenant is
driven away. He that despises the law of Moses, says the Lord, is under.
ij. or. iij. witnesses condemned: and how much more shall he be punished,
that treads under fo^e the son of god, despises his word, and does
vnhalow the blood of the testament whereby he was sanctified, and works
co^tumeliously against the spirit of grace? It is God (O you princes of Sodom)
that gives sentence in this matter. Before the high Judge shall you be
condemned (you seed of Babylon) because it has pleased God to admonish you,
first by Moses and then by the prophets, and last of al by his own son to
turn into the way of truth. But you contrary wise, do wyllingly follow the
way of wickedness. And whereas the Lord sends daiely for the fruit of his
vini^^rd* you entreat his servants at your pleasure, Some of them you do beat
some other you slay, and that more is, you do neither reverence nor forbear
his only begotten son, but rageynge like men in a furye, you have with one
whole consent taken him, slain him, and cast him out of the vyneyarde, which
was his own enheritaunce.

Hear therefore the^ wicked nacio^, and know that he whom thou have cast
away: in the corner stone where upon whatso ever buylding is stablisshed, it
grows up to be a holy temple unto the Lord, and who so ever does fall upon
this stone, he shall be shaken in pieces which thing the Jews sto^blyng upon
his The ruin of the gentiles is at hand.
humiliti, do show unto the world to have* ben truly spoken, even like as the
ru^n^ of the gentyls shall shortly declare, upon whom (...) uer this stone
shall fall, for he shall most spedily be broken to powder that the whole world
may at le^gh learn, how horible a thing it is to fall into the hands of the
living God, whose vengaunce is sore and greuouse against his enemies, Like as
his mercy is ready toward the children of mercy, the Ninevites for an example,
who at the preachinge of Jonas only, did penance in ashes and sakclothe, and
so escaped the aduengeynge hand of the almighti. But you that live now in the
later end of the world, being admonishede by a thousand oracles and
warninges of the prophets, threateninge battle, famine an pestilence: do not
change your wicked purpose, but suffer all the words of Christ his prophets
and Apostles concerning the wrath of God in the later days: to be spoken in
vayn. No man, renueth his heart, no man changes his manners. There is not one
that Noman ame^deth his manners.
does good, no not one. But the more that your wyckednese is opened by the
scripturs the more that Moses chasteneth your malice: the more earnestly that
my true messengers (says the Lord) would draw you from your errors: so much
the more fyersly you resist my spirit, boastyng forth your power wysdom, and
counsels so filled with your own ^es and subtyl inuencions: that you resist
all spiritual knowledge, and nourishe even against your conscience these gros
er rours and carnal blindness, not much unlike unto Cayn your forefather,
which not being contented with the dignity of the first birth, neither yet
restrained by the word of chastime^t: killed his brother Abel, deseruyng no
such thing at his hand. I pray you what did Pharao and the Egiptians, when
they were admonished by Moses and Aaron: but in resisteing the open will of
God, heap up his displeasure against the^? Herod also and the wicked
phariseis, always persecuteynge the Just, and ascribing the works of the
spirit to the power of Beelzebub or the devil with sinneing against
conscience, brought ven The world does always strive against the spirit
geaunce upon their heads. So does the world (says the Lord) always strive
against the spirit. And this is the only sin that condemns the world,
that I send forth the ligh of the spirit to drive away the darkness of vice
and error: and men love darkness more the^ light. It is my use (says the
Lord) always to send forth my word before I judge the world, that they
which with brazen forheades and Iro^ necks do obstinatly opprese the truth*
should have nothing to excuse their sin. Thus did I send Noe and Loath
before I destroyed the world with water and the. v. cities with fire. Thus
have I sent my prophets also to give warneynge unto Israel and Judah of my
wrath toward them And this same order do I observe continually like as Iam the
same god to dai and to morewo and for evermore. And now shortly I must go into
Judgment. Wherefore morn and houle Oh you wicked, upon the miseries which shall
chance unto you, you I say, which are the inue^ters of new Idols and the
dispisers of me your euerlasteing God. For your god (in whom your hope rests)
shall perish And when you shall strech forth your hands unto heaven, yet will I
not here you (says the Lord) because you have made you Idols with the same
hands that you lift up toward me Your Idols therefore shall be turned into
sparks of fire, and your selves into stubble, and your Idols shall be br^t.
there shall be none to quentche it, Once I will awake, and not always suffer so
great reproach as to be dispiced, where a dead Idol which has neither sense,
moueynge, life nor breath shall be received and embraced.

It is I (I say), that does give life and breath to al creatures, it is I
that lend stre^gh and all the natural powers, which you do mispe^d in making
of your Idols, utterly for getting that I am the same that made your parent
Adam unto mine own likeness, I adourned and decked him with no small gyfts
Reason and judgment I gave him, and ordained him governor over al other
creatures You have forgotten also, that immediately after this my great mercy
showed unto your said parent: He (despising the commandment of me his
creator chose rather to be subject unto the most vile creature of al foloyng
the Idol of his own heart, tha^ to cleave firmly to my word. This newfound
God therefore, does unto this day dwell under my The new found god is
^ccursed of God.
curse, and shall do for ever, and shall crepe on his breaste sucking therth in
stead of his bread. Yet have I not utterly for saken this your rebelliouse
kind at diverse and sundry times. First I called again to my mercy, the
same your forefather, who by the remorsse of his conscience, fled my sight.
Again after that man kind was increased and wickedness did grow more and
more, in so much that if I might repent me of my works, I had eue^ the^ just
occasion to have sorowed for the benifites that I had showed unto your wicked
kind, the wickedness whereof was so great that I could not other wise
express it to the worthynesse, then to say that it repented me to have made
man. Idolatry was then spread through the whole earth, and few or none would
call upon my name. For ^embroth the stout hunter raised Idols in Babylon, and
the Cha^ane^s worshipped the fire. After that Belus with his co^plices builded a
tower to withstand my vengeance, Sodom and Gomore provoked mine heavy
displeasure, with their manifold The whole world follows Idole^
enormities. To be short, all the whole world refused* me, the leueinge God,
the well of living waters, and dug them cisternes which can hold no water.
Every city inue^^ed a straung god. Saturnus, Jupiter, Juno Mars, Mercury,
and such othere monstrous Idols are newelye invented whylse I destroy the
old. But Israel, whom I had chosen to be my people, to be my holy people,
co^mau^ding him to have no manner of Image does (after so many my great
mercies showed unto Aabraham, Isaake, Jacob and the fathers: after such
wonderful deliverance from Pharao) set up a golden calfe, the Idol of their
idle brain. They ren^e to Baall Pheger. They fill the holy land (which I
gave them in heritage) full of most filthy Idols. Worthily therefore, are they
destroyed, with pistelence famine and sword.

But you that hear the name of my son Christ, and are named Christians,
whom I have by the death of the same mine only begotten son made ^e own:
you are much more blame worthy, and pour miserable wa^ wardnesse is no longer
to be sufferred. For you have these. xv. hundred years, provoked my wrath upon
you, renneing head long into al kinds of wickedness. But to pas with silence
al other things wherein you have offended my majesty: there is nothing so vile
amongst al my creatures, but that you have Man has made him gods of the ^^est
creatures
assaed to set up the same as your God, dispiceing therein, both my power, and
the rule that I gave you over al other creatures, forgettinge clearelie that I
have exalted mine elect above the Angels, and have fent mine heavenly
spirits io do service unto them. All this notwithstanding, have not you
worshipped stocks and stones, dome and dead blocks, and given my glory
(which I do not wyllingely imparte unto any other) ab^un dantly to such
monsters and I do les polluteinge your bodies with boweinge and beckeing,
crowcheing (...) kneleing, kisseing and more filthily defiled your minds and
souls with worshipeinge as gods, such insensible creatures, so that you
leave no place of dew reverence unto me (your creatur) nor to my son Christ
who suffered most bitter death to bring you out of bondage. You do often
cry, Lord, Lord. If I be your lord* where is my fear? where is the worship
mete for a Lord? wherefore do you forsake me your lord? You do often times call
me father: but I marvel whither the childeli reverence is banished, or into
what country al brotherly love is flede. Yea much more do I marvel, where
you have hyd the memory of my son Christ, of whom al fatherhod, brotherhode
and kindred (from me to you ward) takes his beginning. For he is the first
begotten of every creature of who^ al kindred in heaven and in earth has his
original. Who suffering most cruel death for your sins and most bitter
torments in his body: asks nothing again but that you will celebrate some
thankful memory of his name and not suffer his bountuouse benifite to be
forgotten by unworthy scilence. For when he departed from the earth to come
again to his heavenly mansion: what did he command to any of you but only
this: that as he had after his At his departing Christ commanded his
remembrance to be celebrated.
last supper ministered the bread and wine in mystery: so should you, so often
as you eat and drink in the remembrance of him. Certifiinge you that so often
as you should eat this bread and drink of his cup: you should show his
death till he come agane unto you. The charge that he gives you, is to do it in
the remembrance of him, promiseing you that he will not forget you where he
siteth at the right hand of me his father, where he is a continual mediator
and mean for you, never ceasynge to opteyn for you what so ever you ask of me
in his name. But lo your ingratitud, you acquit us our mede. Me you do cast
clean from you, and to a stone do you say. Thou art my father, and to a bloke
thou have begotten me. Again, to my son you are so unkind and ungentle:
that you have pute away the memory of his death, whereby you live, not only
forgetful of the labors which he susfered for your ^akes, but also if any
of my servants would renew his memory among you, he shall with much cruelty
be put to silence. And you boast of a certain vain and conterfayte gesture and
mumblynge called the mass, which you say A vain ^^u^l^uge called the mass
is more holy and more wisely set forth, then Christ my son could do it when
he was in the world. Thus do you forsake his commandment of preaching his
death to your brethern and posterity: for the maintenance of popyshe
ceremonies, the ware of Antechriste where in you babble blasphemouse collectes,
with blind mumblinges, Yet pache you your matters with my scriptures, that you
may deceive so much the more craftelie, day lyinge so with the pore people in a
tongue that they do not understand, nor know no^ ^ne word what you say,
least they should chance to dream any thing at al of the death of my son
and have him in any remembrance at all. Yea and to keep the matter more
secret, you are right well ware that when any mention is made of his body
given for the world, you speak not only in a A double c^sion
strange tongue, but also under such, scilence that a man had nead to crepe
very nere you and har^en very diligently if he should understand any thing,
though he were learned in ye tongue that you whisper in. Yea you blow forth your
words so closeli into your chalice as though you intended naught else but to
deceives people. And they sil^y souls, being al^o gether astooied through
their own ignorance and your strange gestures: cease not to run about you
like men amassed. They fall down and worship, they wonder at this new and
strange^ God in so little a piece of bread. They strive who shaldo most honor
and reverence to this weak Idol. Yea they falone in a^others neck at the
son of the little bell. They kiss their fingers they part pardon to their
^ies and other parts of their bodies. They strok their heads. What god, Yea
what mortal man could abid to be worshipped with such mad gestures? But I the
lord of host^s, for as much as I am a spirit and the creator of a^ pure
spirits, with bodily gestur am I nothing delited, but in spirit and truth will
I be worshipped. And such worshipers do I seek, as with pure minds fly up
above the heavens, and wish that mine impere and kingdom may be delated and
my name helowed and renow^^ed, celebrated and prased, in all and though al
creatures. Such worshipers, I say, do I seek, as can comprehend and perceive,
Christ sitting* at my right hand: and will seek him without the help of any
creature. These worshipar will I regard, and to their sacrifices will I have
respect. For their high bishop has an everlasting priesthod, God records
the^ that worship him in spirit
wherbi he may fully save al the^ that will com unto me by him, whom I have made
the governor of holy things and of the true ta bernacle which I my self (and
not man) have made, which must therefore be comprehended and received without
the help of any creature upon earth, neither must these worshipers seek Christ
here nor there, nor run after him in any places upon earth, where any man
shall name him to be. Much less shall these true worshipers, seek me (the
incomprehensible God) tied to any one place or creature, for heaven is mi seat
and thearth my fotestole, even as my prophet Esaie did witness unto you when
he demanded what house you would build unto me, or what place I would Esai.
lxvi. Act. xvii.
rest in, saying that my hand has made all. My servant Paul also, has
said unto you that I (the Lord God) have made the world and all that is
therein, yea the heavens also have I made how should it be the^ that I might
dwell in temples made with man's hand who is one of the creatures that I my
self have made? And eue^ as I dwell not in the temples made with man's hand: so
am I not worshipped with the works of man's hand, as once standing need of any
thing. For I the Lord give breath to al living things, and have of one
blood, made all the kind of man and have caused him to spread over the whole
face of earth, appointinge prescript times and limeting the borders of their
dwellynges, that they may seek me their God and try whether they can by
gropeing find me. Yet not withstandeinge I am not far from every one of you.
For through me you are, God is meri to every one of us
do live and are moved. So that there is no ignorance can excuse you, because
you need not ^o secke my kyngedome farther then in your selves. And to
ressemble my Godly power and worship with gold, silver, stone or any other
creatture, named and converted into the stead of me the only and almighty
your god you shall not be excused ^i any ignorance, for by my works you may
know me from my worckes and much more from your own worckes. If you therefore
can not be able resemble my godly power by any of your Imaginacions? how
much less able shall you be to shet up me (the immortal, immensurable, and
incomprehensible God, whom the heaven of heavens is not able to contain (in a
little box of gold silver or any other meatall? in bread wine, or any other
creature, setteinge up a new and strainge I dole, of the which neither you
nor your fathers have heard one word of my mouth, imagineinge a strange
worship of your own Idle brains, not withstandeinge that my son Christ
does cry against you sayeinge. In vain do you worshipe me, teacheinge the
doctrines and precepts of men. His most fayethful servants also ceased not
to threaten sharp plages unto all them that should add to or take fro,
change or alter, any one word of all that God is the father of spirits.
theye had received of their Lord, the father of spirits.

Wherefore, because your fathers have for saken me and followed strange gods,
served them and worshipped them: they have forsaken me* and my law have they
not kept. And you have done worsse the^ your fathers. For every one of you
walks after the wickedness of his own heart, striuinge always how you may
stop your ears against my words and admonicions. Loo therefore, I will fill
all the inhabitauntes of the earth and the kings, which sit in their high
thrones, the preistes and the Prophets together with drunkenness. And I will
scatter them, one brother from another, and the father from the child. I will
not spare them, nor have pity on them, but will utterly destroy them.

Harken and give ear, and beware you do not rage, for the Lord has spoken it.
Give glory unto the Lord your God, before it wax dark, and before your fete do
stumble in the dark hills, when you shall look for light, and lo, there is
nothing but the shadow of The Lord speaks to the prelates.
death, and deep darkness. Oh Popes and Princes, and glorious Prelates (high
cou^terfait names) called bishops: to you al I say, which hold the world in
darkness. If the Morian can change his skin, or the Leoparde her spots:
then can you also do well, suckyng wickedness with the milk of your mothers.
This shall be your charge, therefore and the portion prepared for you. Because you
forget me and trust unto lies, I will disclose your thoughts, and your shame
shall appear. Your lusts, your lechery, your wiked fornication shall I
disolose. Let no man The obstinate must not be prayed for.
pray for this sort of people. They sin unto death, and their plages are
incurable. If you fast I will not hear your prayers. If you offer offerynges:
I will not receive them. For when you were corrected with famine: you did not
regard it. When you were chastened whyth the pestilence and diseases: you
refused al discipline. Storms, te^pestes, and earthquakes, flo^des and
breaches of the sea, you count not to be sent by my hand. One of you
therefore, shall dygge in the bealy of an other: and you shall be consumed with
the sword of my fury. Lo I will send God has his ministers of vengeance.
fishers which shall f^she after you by the sea: and hunters which shall
hunte you in every hill, mountain and cragy rock. For mine eyes are upon your
ways, and shortly I will send my spirits which I have created for a
vengeance, the fire, the stormy hayle, famyne, death, the teeth of beasts,
serpents and the sword, which being ready in my wrathful displeasure, do
torment all things at my commandment, and especially death, blood, debate,
oppression, tyranny and the sword: are create for the wicked, and therwyth I
beat down mine enemies, be they never so proud.

I the Lord do create all these things, that my name may be terrible unto
the heathen, and my power known thorowout the earth. I demand of you (O
Bishops of my flock) I will ask you, stand up and The bishops are
commanded to stand up and answer.
give me answer of your ways. Is there any of your new found Gods that
can give you rain, or that can save them selves from the tyranny if need
require: Is there any of these Gods that can save him self and his
worshyppers forth of my hand, when I send fire and the sword upon them?

Yea tell me this rather. Has either you or your parents found any
wickedness in me, that you are departed from me and follow vanities.

Could it never (in all the time that you have found out these gross and
bodily gods) enter into your hertes to search for me the living God: but
according to your own grossness, deuiynge in your words and de spisynge in
your doing, my providence, graun tynge that I dwell in the heavens, nothing
careful of man's doings? And therefore (even like the old Israelites) you will
have gods that shall go before you, who^ you will salu^ with a long rabble of
salutatio^s, with manifold gestures and courtesies, and with vain imaginations
of man's commandments. But, oh, so far as the heaven is from the earth so far
as the east is from the west: so far are my ways from your ways, and my
thoughts from your thoughts. I the Lord which trouble the seas and their
floudes, do reign The Lord of hosts is my name. I am the self same that I
am wont to be. Terrible un to the kings of the earth. Does it nothing move
you, that I daily change so many kingdoms. I drown the proud Pharaos in
the deape sea. I subdue with worthy aduengeaunce: The Lord plageth the
tyrannouse rulers.
the cruel Adonibesech I put to flight the blasphemous Senacherib, and gave
him the death that he deserved. I pass with silence Nabuchodonosor (a terrible
example unto kings) and his son Balthaser. I pas with silence, how neither
with their bow, nor sword, but by mi mighti arm, I subdued unto the
Israelites. xxx. kings. The Cananites, Heuites, Iebusites, Amoristes, Herites
Ferisites, and Gargasites. And this people Israel, cheifely chosen, and most
dearly beloved: I did clearly forsake, when they fell from me, the living God.
I gave them first to the Babilonians, and after to the Greeks and last of all
to the Romans, to whom I gave power to spoil my people, and scatter them
throughoute all the world, as you se this day.

Now seeing that I am the same God and no changelyng: how chances it that the
posterite following, does not fear like destruction: But the children fed with
my benefits and filled therwyth: do leap from me as their fathers did before,
countyng their woul, flax oil, and grain, to be preserved by their Idols,
geuyng me thanks for nothing, and Idols be thanked for the benifites that God
gives.
yet do I minister all these things unto the^, aboundauntly, geuyng meat even
to the birds of the crows. But because this people does not know that I have
given the^ grain wine, silver, and gold, which they have offered unto Idols,
abusing my creatures, therefore will I turn, and take away my corn, and my
grain in the time they look for it: and the wine in his time appointed. I will
also deliver my creature from the bondage of corruption under the wych it
mourns, subject unto vanity. And I shall cause all joy, and solemn feasts
to sease, and I will destroy the vinepard, and the fig trees, which you have
called the gifts of your Gods, which you set up to be your helpers and
defenders Twyse mad ye are therefore, both for that you forsake me, the
fountain of living water, and also that you dygge broken cisterns that hold
no water. Hiterto have I (the lord of hosts) made complaynt against al nations
for all kinds of Idolatry. But now give ear unto my words which I shall
speak against an Idol, but weak in power and small in substance, but yet
notwithstanding, in the delusion of the people he has gotten great strength,
and through feyned miracles is merueylously maynteyned, yea and that so styfly
with sword and fire, that the blind world knows none other God. Of this
Idol it is written. O priest have not I created the and given the power to
create me? Which intolerable blasphemy being so great derogation unto my
gloriouse majesty, who only have created all things of naught) I can no
longer suffer.

But before I take open ve^geaunce: I will give warnyng unto the maynteyners
thereof, God gives ^eth ^ge^.
willing them to have recourse unto the brute beasts, the ox and the Ass,
and learn at them to know their duties, toward their Lord and master,
their creatoure and maker. What madness is it that causes these madbraynes to
compte this new made Idol, their creatoure, or that it is possible for the
creatoure to be created of mortal men and miserable wretches? No I their
creator and maker have made them but once, where they boaste and brag, that
they have made me thousand milions of times, whereby God is far in dept to his
makers.
they bring me so far in their dept, that the residue of my benifites are
not able to recompense and satisfy.

But now they begin to wax ashamed of these open words, for my servants
have of late laid them ^ore to their charge. But yet they cloak the matti^r
with new found blasphemies. Now they say. God This almo^de is well blanched.
consecrateth him self into the form of bread and wine. But yet (pretily)
when the Bishop gives his holy orders: then he gives power unto every
shauelynge, to consecrate this chaungelynge. So that the young priest coming
home to the parishoners, tells them strayghte way, that he is above
Emperors and Kings, and does far excel the Angels. For he can make that
thing which will be made of none other but of them only that be marked by the
beast for the same purpose.

This wretch (be he never so abominable in living) thinks that by the ^bling
of. iiij. words over a cake: he shall cause my son (which is the express
Image and lively resemblaunce of my substance, even equal with me in power)
to come down at his call, and to be changed God and man into a vile wafer,
which change they have with deceyueable terms named, the consecratynge of
him into the form of bread.

But away with this gross blyndenesse (O you sophisters) for all men may
perceive that you love to walk in darkness. According to your gross and
carnal imaginations therefore, and after the dullness of your capacities
which can perceive no spiritual things, because you are not borne of the
spirit: I will begin to talk with you, to see whether a rude and fleshly
talk in matteir that shall be open unto the commune senses and judgment of all
men, may cause you to harken to my voice, and perceive your own blyndenesse.

Oh how gross opinions have you conceived of me the Lord God? How leudly do
you esteem my power infinite, which do think it possible that I the living
God creatoure and maker of heaven and earth: should be changed, or would be
consecrated into bread, wine, stock, stone or any other creature. This is not
consecration or holy making: but this is contamination, polutinge and defilyng
of the name of God with intolerable blasphemies.

My sacrate majesty (to bring you out of doubt and error, O you miserable
men) can suffer no such alteration nor change, of God is not chaungeable
fourmes insensible. Wherefore, if ye require in me (the God incomprehensible)
the poetical chaunges of Jupiter: you are worse the^ mad. For I am (...)? I
am, I have been, and shall be. I am God evermore and not changed. What
comparison can be betwixt me and your feyned gods? I am that ancient in
years that does feel* none age. For a thousand years are but one day in my
syghte. For in the twynckelynge of an eye, do I behold all things, be they
present, paste, or to come.

Your Saturn whom you hang up in a cord as a wicked fellow: had need to
have Jupiter his son sought out to healpe to defend him in his old age,
when his chaungable flesh and bones (which you feyne him to have and defend
the same with sword and fire) begin once to musker and moulde, after he
passes once the age of one month. But who shall revenge the little gods which
live but the space of one minute and so perish continually. They are taken
streighte from the wafer box to the chalice, and there are they devoured. A
wonderful mattier, so sone made God, and so sone-brought to naught again.

Old Aristotle, your great master cou^pteth for a great miracle, (...) that
is in english beasts that ^yue but one day. But if he had known this
sodeyne change of so many Gods in one minute: what might he have written to
his posterity?

I appeal to your own conscience in this mattier, your conscience (I say)
that do make and mar so many Gods in so little space, you (I say) that do
seek out so strange ingines for the preservation of your Gods. The fear of
a mouse causes all this defense.
You close him in a box of harder metal then myse teeth can penetrate, you
hang him up in a cord lest the gredie myse should besiege him, you cover
him with a canopie, so that the myse can not come at him: and what means all
this, but that you know by experience, that the myse do nothing fear him,
because he is made but of bread, and has no life in him nor hardiness to
beat a mouse? Let your own conscience be Judge in this mattier.

But O wicked Idolatours. If this were God that you do this handle, he would
sometime break open his prison (wherein he is enclosed) by his power and
strength. How be it he can do nothing. Or if he can do any thing, cry upon
him as did the priests of the old Idolatours that he will do so much as put
one horn out of his shel and box wherein he is enclosed; to assray his enemies,
or else to your great confusion, he shall be less set by then a creping snaple.
Or if you dare make a proof of his power: leave him without but one night out
of his box, and you shall see the little mise will not be much afraid of him,
neither do the cattes, backs, owls, swallows, and sparowes greatly fear
him. Then tell me I pray you, why man should be so mad as to stand in fear
of the thing which is of no reputation.

Fear him not therefore (O my little flock) Ferae not the bread God.
for he can neither do good nor ^uyll. No he has neither life nor feeling. He
felt not when he was baken into a cake, neither feels he when the priest
breaks him, because there is no spirit of life in him. Be you ashamed
therefore, al you that worship him, for if by the negligence of the priests
he fall to the ground: he can not arise alone, neither if he be raised can he
stand. In vain therefore do you worship such a God as in no point can healpe
him self. How can you then desire his healpe in your adversity.

The Gods that you worship are none other thing, but as the baker that
baketh them will have them and the priest that makes them. And neither of
these two workmen is of long continuance. How ca^ their works be Gods
therefore.

These gods of yours ca^ not deliver them selves from thieves and robbers,
which have often times spoiled them of their boxes. And you have of late seen
in the suppressio^ of the Abbayes (which I did send for a punishment The
suppression of Abbayes was for Idolatry.
of Idolaters) they were then left succu^lesse, turned out of their silver
boxes, and were not able to resist. Therefore, when you see the people
worshipping round about you: say in your hertes. O Lord that have laid the
foundations of the earth and the heavens, the must we worship. And so doing
mine Angel is with you, and I will require your souls at the hand of the
oppressors.

Oh hertes barraine of al heavenly doctrine. Oh minds voied of al godliness.
How can I (the true God) be known, whilse the bread God and the cake
insensible, is in so high reputation? Yea what needs it men to lift up their
minds unto heaven, saying they have him in earth which can grant their
prayers? How can they worship in spirit and truth, seeing they worshipe the
thing that has neither spirit nor life: How ca^ you understand or
co^prehe^de my dreadful majesty, whilse ye do take this for a god, who^ a
blast of wind will klowe down from his aultare and his superaltare?

Al such gods therefore as have not made the heavens, shall perish from the
earth and from under the heaven. Mark how the breath of man (a thing of small
strength against any other creature) is able to change, alter and tra^sfourme
the bread, so sone as he has it in his mouth: and it shall be enough (to him
that has reason) to declare how sha^ful the chau^g is, from the most strong to
the most weak, from the greatest to the least, from the best and most
mighty: to the worste and most impotent.

Oh miserable and chaungeable nature of man. Oh twice miserable God, whom The
bread God is thrice miserable.
this miserable man makes. Yea thrice miserable, for he must come down into
the chalice, at the call of every whoremonger and sodomite, drunckarde and
couetouse caytyfe, and be straight ways swallowed into his filthy and
vusaciable paunch, that the first beginnynge and ending of his godhead may
he like miserable.

If the scripture do describe you any such. If Ada^, Enoch, Noah,, Abraham,
Isaac, Moses, Aaron, or Samuel: do know any such. If Esaie, Ieremias or
Daniell, have described him in their prophecies. If Math. Mark or Luke (who^
you leudly allege) had told you that there had been any such God on the earth.
If Peter, Paul, James and John (the faithful witnesses of my son Christ)
and the openers of his secrets had taught you this crusted cake might be
changed into God or his son Christ: show me one place.

But I know your craft and subtlety. Nothing is impossible to God, you
say. Because all things are possible to God: he can escape the prie^^es
iuglyng.
What then? Shall God at your commandment, be a stone, a tree, or bread? By
the same possibility make him your Ass. All mine therefore, shall answer you
in this sort, Because all things are possible: unto our God: he is able to
escape your blind iugelynge, and is of power enough, to destroy you al
together with your Idols. And what so ever he be that teaches any God that I
have not opened to my servants in the scriptures: the same I have commanded
by my servant Moses to be stoned to death. Which law I do now ratify, and
will that all such be put out from among my people.

And who so ever wilnot repent this gross error, being admonished: be it
known unto them, that they are not of my sheep. For my sheep do hear my
voice. And being once raised with my voice: they will follow no stranger, but
will with open voice cry unto the stranger and say. Oh Idol shepeherde.

All this have I spoken, because I your god am so openly contemned, and a weaks
Idol embraced. Give ear now and harken what I shall say for my son who^ I
sent to be your savior, and the only sacrifice that can take away sin in
my sight. You make him of none effect, that so you may establishe your own
glorious works and sacrifices. I was and am fully contented and satisfied with
the offering of his body once done. What need is there then of your lyeinge
sacrifice? If his only sacrifice be enough (as it is enough and more then
enough to satisfy for all) what needs you to sacrifice and offer him up again?
Will you or ca^ you kyl him again? For that which is sacrificed, must needs be
slain, and without blood can there be no remission of That which is
sacrificed must needs be slain.
sins. I know your hertes (bloody bishops) by the betrayinge of him when he
was in the earth among you, and now by the brennyng of his word, and by the
tira^nous destroyinge of his flock, which would call again the memory of his
passion, which you have extinguished with your sacrifice for the quycke and the
dead, making it a cloak for your covetousness and a buckler for the pomp and
rigorous authority, you chalendge over my little flock.

I appointed him priest according to the order of Melchisedech, without
successoure or fellow. I anointed him with the spiritual oil of my spirit,
that I might have a bishop to offer unto me sacrifice which should be pure and
without spot, which should not need many times to offer or to be offered,
but making al things perfect, by one only offeringe of him self unto me
his father, and by his blood which all other sacrifices (so often iterated and
repeted as things imperfect) did only signify. In this my dearly beloved
son, is my delight. He is the great bishop which once for all, has entered
into the place most holy. And being found like one of you in althings (sin
only excepted) he has now penetrated and passed through into the heavens,
there to be your bishop for ever, to offer him self always for you in my
syghte, by whom you may come to the throne of my grace, to have healpe by
time. If you will seek any other bishop to offer for yo^: I tell you he is
poluted, and must Christ only must be our bishop.
first offer for him self. And because of the imperfection that is in him: he
can not please me nor pacify forhim self. Yea you may also perceive that his
offering is imperfect, or else should he not need to reiterate it so often. If
you will not be deceived therefore, stick fast unto the offering ofmy son once
for all made for you. And as I have given him to the death for your sakes, so
will I deny you nothing that you ask in his name be you sure. Horse comethit
that you be called christians, that Christ my son was for your sakes
manifestly made man in the flesh, was justly declarede God by the spirit, and
showed unto the Angels, and after received into glory. This must you believe if
you will be partakers of the same glory. That he was very man as one of you
are, sin only excepted, conversant upon the earth in all humility, care and
misery at my commandment. whereby for his obedience toward me, he deserved to
be* crowned with a crown of glory, wherefore I (sendynge the holy ghost unto
you at his desire which may teach you how you are become my children by him)
did take him unto my self and raised him above all the heavens, even to sit
at my right hand for ever, Where you shall seek him if you intend to find hime
But He that will find Christ must seek him at the right hand of the father.
neither here nor there in any corner of the earth He told you that he must
depart from you. And if you look for my favor: you must not count him a
liar.

But wylt thou seek my son? Lo, he has offered one offering for sin, and
sytteth for ever at the right hand of me his father, lokynge for that which
remains. That is that his enemies be made his footstool. And thus does my
spirit witness unto you: that in this my new testament (established in his
death) your sins should be done away so that I would no more remember them.

Then if you believe them to be forgyuen how can you offer for them any more: It
is a manifest token therefore that all you which will be still sacrificeynge for
your sins: do not believe that they beforgeue^ by the death of my son
Christ.

You also which will carnally and grosely eat him and feade upon him, as
chaungeynge bread into his flesh can not worthly believe upon him. For he
departeyngefro^ They that will sede carnally upon Christ can not believe in him
the earth, did command you to eat the bread of this supper (which he
louyngly called his body) for your weak remembrance and for the declaracion
of the benefit which he then showed unto all the faithful beleuers in his
death and blood shedeynge, For the declaracion and remembrance I say of this
benefit The cause why Christ ca^ed the bread his body.
he commanded all his faithful folowers, brotherly to divide among them? the
bread and wine so often as they would, eat or drink in the remembrance of
him, whom they should not have any longer presently conversant among them.
For he was then coming unto me his father for your profit, And therefore
byddeth he you do this thing in the remembrance of him, will you then know
what it is to do the work that he commands you: or to work the meat that
ne never perishes, which meat he promised to give unto you, and I have sent
him down and appointed him for the same purpose. If you will know this work,
read in the. vi. of John where you shall learn that the work of God is to
believe in him whom he has sent. This is all that you can give me. This is all
that I require at your hands. I give you therefore the bread of life, if you
can receive it by faieth unfeignedly. That is to say trusteinge to my promise
only in the death of my son, and to none other creature. Yea my son is
this bread of life, and he that comes unto him, shall not be hongry, he that
believes in him, shall not be thirsty. And this he told you was my will and
pleasure, that who so ever does see him and beliue in him: has euerlasteynge,
life. For this is the life euerlasteynge to know me, and to know my son
whom I have sent Jesus Christ.

By this knoweledg do the Angels and blessed spirits live, rejoice and take
their The life that is in all blessed spirits is the knoweledge of christ
comfort. This is the heavenly fode. This is the Manna that comethe from
heaven. Therefore so much haste thou of euerlasteinge life: as thou haste of
the knoweledge and fealeinge of my grace and goodness, why che chiefly and
principally was openned unto the world, in the sendeinge of my son into the
world to be made flesh, lest al flesh should have perished for wickedness

This is the bread then that comethe from heaven whereof who so eats shall not
perish, but live for ever. And this bread is the flesh of my son, as it was
given for the life of the world, for so was it a very In that the flesh of
Christ was given for the life of the world it was heavenly bread other wise not.
heavenly gift and heauely bread comeinge from heaven. Other ways was it
but an erthly thing and nothing profitable. For the phariseis and all the
wicked that do not count this only thing (to know me the father and my only
son Christ given for the life of the world) to be the only salvation
thereof, but secke more help of salvation at any creature in heaven or earth,
be it man saint or Angel, be it works, sacraments or any other thing that
man can imagyne (as they can not unless they count some insufficiency and
lack in me) shall not have any part in my son Christ whom they have in so
small estimacion, how grossly so ever they imagine to eat him. No to them
that this slenderly and vilely esteem the hilpeinge and saueing that I have
given him: he is the savor of death unto death and the stumblynge stone. But
unto them that wholely and only do cleave unto him feadeinge on his body thus
offered for the life of the world, and drinckeinge of his blood given for the
remission of sins: he is the bread of life, his flesh is very meat and
his blood very drink: so that you have always in mind, that it is the
spirit that gives life and that the flesh profits nothing.

And take it for a general lesson to under stand the word of godly doctrine,
that the words which I and my son do teach you are spirit and life. And to
believe them, is to eat the meat of the soul, to work the work of God,
and therefore to have life. For the ryghtuouse lives by his belyefe* And
Abraham did beliue: wherefore it was Abraham wa^ accounted just before (...) was
certu^ sised.
compted unto him as ryghtuousenesse before circumsicion or any other out ward
sacrament was given him.

Yea this Abrahame may teach you, that without the regard of any creature,
yea contrary to the workeinge of all creatures thou must believe and be made
sure of my goodness: that thou mayeste (with* an vpryght face up towordes the
heavens) say. O Lord I have believed in the, I shall never be ashamed. For
this is the nature of faith to look straight up unto me your heavenly father,
and to receive at my hand, by the merit of my son all grace, favor and
goodness. Where if you declyne asyd and appoint your self means, aids and
helps of any creature otherwise the^ I have commanded: you must be compted
miscrea^ts mistrustinge my goodness, Here falls the Justice that you seek for
by your works and sacraments, and here arises the Justice God accep^eth none
other justice out only that which ^s by fayeth.
of fayeth, which is only acceptable in my sight For Israel in the old time
follow ynge their laws of righteousness, by their works, sacraments and
ceremoneis, could not come to righteousness, And wherefore I pray you?
Because they did not follow there upon by faieth but only by works of the
law. They stombled at the stomblinge stone as it is written. Lo I will put in
Sion a stombling stone, and a stone to fall upon: and who so believes in him,
shall not be ashamed.

Because they have believed, they have attained this righteousness which is of
faieth, of which if they will follow and not forsake: they shall never suffer
shame. This faith one lie in the seed promised (and no sign or sacrament) was
it that refreshed your first father Adain Neither was there any other sign
given unto Achas: but that a virgin should conceive a child, which (by an
holy and pure birth of the holy gofle) might take away and purify the corrupt
birth of the old Adaine, and deliver the house of Judah from the bloody
Sennacherib. Unto the which sign you must always look: for you shall have
none other sign of salvation, but the sign of Jonas the prophet.

All the Israelites drinckeinge of the same spiritual drink, and eateinge of
the same spiritual meat that you do (for it is all one fayeth that saves you
boeth, even as I am all one God and no chauncelinge) did in their lamb
unspotted, feade and take comfort of no sign or sacrament, but only of the
The Israelites fed not on a sign or sacrament
blood of our unspotted lamb which I had promised to send into the world.
For by the straight commandments and son dry charges, which my servant
Moses did give them for the choseynge and eateynge of this lamb: they did
perceive a thing far more spiritual, then could be finished in so gross a
banquet. Much more the^ the Apostles of my son being used to such spiritual
feadeinges: might perceive what my son meant in abolisheinge of the old
ceremonies of the lamb and co^maundynge a new memory to be made of his body
given for them and his blood shed for the remission of sins and for to
deliver us from the helly Pharao.

They did know that this word of the promise (which is given for you)
should be fulfilled upon the cross, and therefore ought not to be applied unto
any sacrament It is not the offering of any sign or sacrament that I regard
but the osferinge of my son God regards not the offering of signs or
sacraments.
upon the cross, which you must by your sacraments show your selves to
have in perpetual memory as the only life whereby your souls can live. Like
as they also had learned before of the Prophets, that the Messiah whom I
should send, should be stricken for the sins of the people, and then
should be exalted and send his gifts plentuouslye from above spoyleinge all
his enemies with triumph.

This did my son beat in their ears. But he never told them of any such
chaunges of bread into his flesh, and such carnal consecracions Christ never
preached tra^s substa^ciacio^.
as you do teach: wherein you will have that (without any profit) my son christ
should come down from my bosom into your bread and Chalice blown and blessed
by your inuencion: and work so great a miracle without either necessity or
profit. Have you not enough that you have everlasting life by him* has not
he humbled him self low enough that he has become manne for your sakes and
died for your sins?

What would you have more of him: would you that he should take the form of
bread for your sakes: what are you the better if he so did: Yea how much the
worse should you be: This is one thing, you should bring the verity of his
body into suspicion for that it should go and come so like a spirit, which is
no small hinderaunce to the perfection of your kind. For mine intent was, when
I made my son man, to have just occasion thereby to God intended to have just
occasion* to exaltvs when he made his son man.
advance your kind above the Angels. And now you will have him cowpled with
your wrechede creatures, worse then your selves, But he has taken the form of
the children of Abraham, And for his elect seed was he content to be come man,
disdayneing all other forms

Look no more therefore for my son Christ upon the earth in the bread, the box
or the chalice. But hear in heaven shall you seek him where he reigns at
liberty with me his father, from whom he sends down the holy ghost (the
spirit of comfort) into the hertes of mine elect, to strengthen them against
all the assaults of the serpent. I feade inwardly my sheep driven from the
pasture of my word Yea I give life everlasting to so many as by him only will
come to me his father.

Thus does he sit at my right hand, and fulfilleth al in all things,
spiritually. Not being bodylie present in every place, where you will like
charmers mu^ble four words upon dombe creatures. Here in heaven you are sure
to have him your advocate. In the bread, you have no such promise. With what
fayeth then can you seek him there. He promised you that he would send the
holy ghost after his going from you: but he never taught that he was profitable
to be changed into bread.

When he returned unto me from the earth then did he send (in fyrie tongues
visibly) the spirit of our power and wisdom, which taught the clear
understanding of the mystery that he had wrought before in the earth.

This spirit taught the hope of your calling, Ephe. i.
and that our wonderful work in you that believe how that I raised my son
Christ from death, and set him at my right hand in heavenly things. Whense
you would most vilaniousely pluck him down, turn him into bread, and swalowe
him like flesh into your These flesly sacramentaries are eaters man's flesh as
the Sithians are.
bealies, which gross blindness, and Sythia^ cruelty, my flol^l abhor. My
flock shall learn now other ^inge of the flesh of my son Christ* ^ut that
only which is by the knoweledg^ and beleueing of my mercies in my son and
therefore shall they follow no tradicions of the world nor stick to any
creatures, but say with mine old servant David I wl love the, O lord, my
strenth, the lord of Psa. xvii.
my succor, my refuge, my savior, my bu^ lar, and the horn of my salucio^.
Yea the more boldly because of my new testament. Sai^ thus. O heavenly
father, though heaven and earth do perish and all creatures turn to naught:
yet live thou (O lordof heaven and earth) and in me thou live, whose son I
am by adoption, thy spirit geueing witness of this The spirit bears
witness, that we are sons by adoption.
thing. Yea and Christ (the strength might and power of thy right hand lives,
and no man is able to drive him from the place whether thou have exalted him.
Of this am I sure, and so long as he is saulfe I am sure to be saulfe: for I am
partaker of his nature, substance and power, according to the gift of Jesus my
savior that dwells in me. Not carnally eaten: but spirituallye received by
fayeth, whereby I know that he is my head, and I one of his members. Thus may
you learn (O my little flock) when you have for sake^ al creatures: to be
assured of favor and optaine the sownde and sure taste of y^ salvation and
euerlasteynge life and (...) and feel the hope of your calleinge shall never
suffer you to come to confu^ and so rejoice as my son wilded you of no power
earthlye neither of carnal eatinge of Christ, nor (...) dynge upon serpents:
but that your names are written in the book of life in the heauenes.

Unto the other sort which may worthily boaste of their power (if it be true
that they say) because they ca^ make God, or call down God into the chalice,
for all is one matter in effect: I will an swer as I did of old by my prophet
Esaye. I abhor your Sabothes, your sacrificies and all your ceremonies. Yea
what do I care for your mass mu^bling God regards none of our inuencions.
which banisheth the memory of my son and sets a new Idol to provoke
my zelouse indignacion against you? What care I for your gletteringe miters,
seeing you banishe my word: What care I for your fasteyuge and prayeinge:
saying your hands are of full of blood? your fingers full of* wickidnes? What
care I for the swarm of your ceremonies, ye whole heap of your farthings where
upon your religion stands: sei^g your lips tell lies: Give ^are and tremble
for the wickedness of your hands, for the Lord has spoken it.

An answer to the principal points that follow after the doctors in the
bishop of winchesters book.
NOw go to you papists (who had rather er with your father the pope with his
doctors, his furred hods and forcked caps then to say truth with Christ's
despised members) will you follow the broud way that leads to perdicio^
because the multitude does enter into it? Nay rather, contend and labor to
enter the narrow and straight way which leads unto life, which is the way
of knowledge and truth wherein few do walk. I know your doctors are
gloriouse. You call them saints, and I trust they be so accepted of God. But
Christ and his Apostles, though they were not so glorious and well taken in the
world: yet was there more truth in their words and writings. Yea sure it is to
be fea The doctors are to be suspected, because they please the papestes so
well.
red* there is some privy flattery and untruth closely* cloked in the dark
sentence of their long books, where the wrytinges are so commendable in the
world, and so phausible in generally to all the heap of the papists, the
vpholders of Antechrist. For after old custom and ancient order: the
scriptures of God may not be read in the schools til such time as the master
of the sentences and the heap of your other doctoures, have stopped Jacobs
wells, the louelye fountaynes of the heavenly water with the fillthy mud of
their gloses* Yea the filthieste of that flo^ let him lie, let him dote, let
him babble wha^ helusteth: yet shall he be allowed, boeth in l^ ten and in
english, when the word of God when the new and old testament) shall be bre^^
with fire. Yea the maynteners thereof, wh^ are the only holions of God because
they maynetayne the holy word of God (shalb^ destroyed and brent together
with the boke^ of the Gospel that they maintain.

Surely your persuasion may do much to the worldely minded, when you compa^
these. ii. contraries together. The gloriouse doctors (the saints by the pope
canonised and by all worldely powers maynetayned, renowned These doctoure that
be called. S. sit highly in tht consciences of men.
and worshipped) unto the out castes of the world still barkynge at the vices
which are abominable, scrapeing the ears of men with the sharp reaseinge
truth, and thereby deserueinge (as the worldelye suppose) worthily to be
expelled, banished or burned. But unto the godly (whose desire is to be like
their master Christ in sufferinge with him in this world, that they may after
rain with him in the world to come, haueynge before their eyes all the
prophets (who suffered for the truth) and all other martyrs and witnesses
(whom the world hated and was unworthy to have still among them)
considering that the scriptures can not lie, which says, that who so ever
will live godly in Christ shall suffer persecution: all your persuasions are
but vain and of none effect. For they look only up into heaven for their
reward, where Christ their head (which suffered likewise, at the hand of the
wicked sinners, reproach, rebukes, and most bitter torments, spytefull shame
and paynful death rayneth for euermorewith me his father.

Further more, where you are about to oppress with the Maniches, Messalyans,
and other sinister opinions: you follow your father, whose nature is to accuse
the children of God. You stand up like Sathane our adversary, like the
devil our accuser.

Frythe (if you had suffered him to live Fryth is not yet confuted.
would have been able to have answered you for his book which is yet on live,
you are not able to confute.

That only faith (which Luther taught) has destroyed a great part of your
popeysh kingdom. Wycklifes Wycket did open the way to perceive your wylful
blindness. Wicklifes wicket opens the way


His necessetie sets forth the glory of God who as he alone created all
things, in heaven earth and hell without the help of any other: so by his
wisdom and power ^lone without the help of any creature: do^ he govern and
preserve all things, or^reinge every thing unto the end most wi^lye, and so
myghtily that no man can let the same.

If this our myghtie Lord and mayst^ have by his secret worckes styrred our
h^tes to bewail your blyndenesse, and to be wrath and grieved with your
tirannye, and by the same worckes, long suffered you, that he might make
manifest the vesse^les' of his God is pacient and of long suffering.
mercy (whom he has created unto glory (differing his vengeance, that you
might have inste time of repentance, suffereinge the cruel Pharaos to
oppress his chosen, and all you wicked tirantes and Lord like byshopes, to
deride and skorne not only the^ but his son Christ also: yet know for
certain, that God our father does not leave his work vnperfete and
unfinished. But leke as Satan could streach out his hand no farther upon Job,
then God permitted and appointed him: and as the rageinge princes and wicked
priests could do nothing unto Christ but that the hand of the father had
long before appointed (for the lamb was slain even fro^e the beginning of
the world) like as the princes arisinge and rageyng^gainst good and his Christ,
can do nothing, but that which his counsel has first decreed and determined:
so when they have showed all their cruelty, and laughed their fill* at the
fall of the innocent, he will finish his work. he will destroy the wicked and
laugh at their destruction. The Lord shall deride and skorn them. Then shall he
speak to them in his anger, and in his wrath shall he over whelme them. This is
the work of the Lord, and the necessity inevitable. Beware, beware I say,
that you do not suffer the aduengeing hand of God, as More and other mockers
have done, for wadeinge into this secret work of More may be an exemple to
mockars.
God, with such lewd oppression and dirision. As for us, we do (according to
the scriptures) confess this same necessity, and give God our merciful father
most hertie thanks that he has so wyselie and inyghtilye established his
works, that no man or any other creature can change any one of them, No not so
much as to make one hear white or blake

For this cause do we singe in our hertes and give thanks unto God for all his
works, For all the works of the Lord are exceeding good and convenient in
their due seasone. Man ought not to ask what is this or what is that for at
time convenient they shall be found all perfect. The works of all flesh are
before hymrand there is nothing hyd from his eien. He sees from euerlasteinge
unto euerlasteinge, and there is nothing to wonderful to him, There is no evil
done in the city but he turns it to his glory. The Romans iii.
vnrightuousenes of us does commend his justice.

Than may not man say, what is this or that? For unto the good, all things
are turned into good. And all the* ways of the Lord are plain and strayte
unto the Just: but the ungodly stumble at them.

For the good: good things are created even from the beginning, and evil
things for the ungodly. All things necessary for manues life were created
from the beginning, water, fire, Iron, salt, wine, oil, and clotheinge. All
these things are created, to To the god all things are good and to the wicked
contrary.
the faithful, to the best: but to the ungodly all these things are created
for vengeance and in their rigorousenesse have they fastened their torments*
In the time of the end they shall pour out their strength, and pacify the
wrath of him that made them. Fire death, honger, hayle, oppression, strife,
swerd and blood shedeynge, noisome beasts scorpions and serpents: are
created for the wicked. And though all flesh be troubled with such like
miseries: yet vij. fold are they poured forth upon the ungodly. And they
shall be all found ready to fulfill the commandments of their Lord upon the
earth, and when their hour and measure is appointed: they shall not over pass
his commandments

Thus may al men (considering the works of God) Judge without wauerynge, that
all his works are perfect, firm, stable* and unchangeable, and he works
every one in due seasone, and when need is. So that a man needs not to say
this is worsse the^ that, for in due seasone they are all pleasant and good.

Wherefore ge^e praise and thanks with whole heart and mouth unto his name
which works all in all things after his good pleasure.

Again, you say it is a more easy thing to live well then to live evil. Ah,
than why It is more easy to live well then ill.
will you not play the good byshope and live well accordeynge to your
calling? unless you intend to be more rewarded for the labourouse part, of
the tyrant papyste accordeynge to your own mockeynge doteynge.

But now have you yet one only thing to say for your selves and that is
this. This doctrine has continued a thousand years and has be so long
maintened by our doctors

If this be a good argument? call again into If things of ancient time be to
be received: the^ is there no vice to be refused.
England your great Idol the pope and all his pardons. Build up his
monasteries and restore his Images and Idols, which have by the pope and his
church ben so long mayntened and defended, with the tyranny of fire and
fagottes. Yea if time may be prejudicial unto the truth: by it may you
maintain the murder of Abel, the Sodomi^rie of the five cities and the
Idolatry of the Babilonians: because all these things be of such auncientie.
And because* we have nothing that has so long continued in the world,
neither that has been so generally received and maintened as sin has been:
we shall by this reasone prefer it before virtue as his ancient, But let us
discuss no longer, how long your popery has been used: but let us try by
the touchston of God his holy word how truly you popish prelates have del^
with Christ's floke, these thousand years that Satan has been louse among
you, and how diligently you have handeled, led and fed them. For no lenght of
time may make wickedness good. No no, the abhominacion of things that be
wicked: does daily increase. For the second day adds* some thing to the
wickedness of the first, And so does error (being wicked) daily grow and
increase til it come to the highest abomination: so that in co^tinuaunce it
utters it self most clearly. For as time by) the providence of God) does
first cloak, cover and hyde all things good and bad: so does the same open
Time vtterreth al things
and disclose all things even by the same providence and wisdom. And for this
cause has God appointed the dark night and confusion of things to go before,
boeth in the creacio^ and order of his creatures: that after ^at the time
appointed) when the bright light, measure and order of al things should
appear, and that his glory might the more worthelye be extolled, magnified
and renowned by the comparison of these things so far contrary.

This is it that Solomon says. He has Two against ^w^
always made. ij. against. ij, and every thing is well done in his due time.
First darkness then light, First night, then day. First sin the^ grace.
First wrath the^ mercy. First blindness, then knowledge. First erreoure,
then truth. For what worthy cause could we have had to renown and praise
the grace and mercy of God: if there had been no sin felt or wrath deserved
or feared.

And now contrary wise, what an inestimable richese of Gods goodness may we
account where we are delivered from sin shame, wrath, death, and restored unto
grace favor, joy, confort, and life. We are brought from darkness, unto
this marueilouse light from blyndnesse unto the clear sight of the treasures
of God, laid up in his son Christ

Of the word sacrament,
ABout the word sacrament,. I inte^de not long to trifle. But to take your own
words and somthinge to examine them. You do bring in an argument of your
adversaries, made by the strong places of reasoning called. Definitiorei, in
english the definition of the thing, that is (to them that understand not these
terms) grounded upon the oracion or sentence that declares what the thing
is. The definicion of a sacrament.


A sacrament therefore, is (as well by the definition that your doctors have
made, as that you your self do make) a visible sign of an invisible grace.
Upon this definition follows a double argument. First, because it is a sign:
it is not the thing signed or tokened. And this reasone is proved true, a
relative. oppositis (if you have learned so much logike) and by many fold
examples. As the ale pole, the yuie bush, being the signs of wine and ale
within the tavern house: can not be the thing signed and tokened. your. (...)
for ked myter signifiynge the. ij. laws can not be. ij. laws. Your white
rachet signifiynge chastity: can not be chastity it self. Your glitteringe
shoese: signifiynge the preciouse fete of the preachers of the gospel: are not
the fete signed and tokened. Your broad shaven A broad shaue^ crown is the
sign of folishuesse.
crown signifiyng folishnesse: is not the thing it self, I trow unless you
have changed all the things into their signs and shadows You have caused us
long, and would have us still, to gape after signs and shadows as the dog
does in Isopes fables, and so lose the thing it self which should be our
fode and confort. You tell us, that the sign token or shadow: is the thing
it self. Shall we believe you still?

Nay, your definition tells us of two things to be in this sacrament. That
is to say, Two things are to be considered in asacrament.
A visible sign, and an invisible grace. What other thing (I pray you
without contencion) can this visible sign be, but the bread which Christ
takes in hand and breaks? For other visible thing there is* none.

That is to say in plain english (that all men may know what we speak and
write) there is none other things open to the eyes of man to be seen.

This bread thus broken therefore, is the sign or token (that may be seen) of
a grace, that can not be seen. That is to say of the forgiveness of sins in
this blood of the new testament of Christ our savior.

Thus frame I therefore the secounde reasone. A thing visible and invisible can
not be boeth one, to be senne and not seen. But One thing can not be boeth
visible and invisible
this sacrament (as you have confessed in your definicion) is a thing visible
and may be seen: therefore can it not be the thing invisible, thereby
represented. All that you have spoken in this cause (byshoup Stephane) is of
your own head, without either scripture or reasone.

Of the name bread.
VVHer you say that we dally with this word bread, and would in the mean
time, your self prove that it is no bread: we dare (because Paul calls it
bread) take any christian heart (...). Corh. xxi.
to judge, who does more dally and trifell. Will you reason in like manner of
the cup, and say, that because in the same place he calls it, this cup: it
is not the cup? And a little after he calls it that cup and that bread:
shall they now continue in their own kind still?

What if he call it bread without any addicion, as he does in the same
Chapter? Jesus Math. xvii.
the same night he was betrayed: took the bread. And the Evangelists do name
it bread without any addicion. shall it yet Mark. xiiii. Luc. xxii.
be bread? You have your* excuse in readiness

It is not consecrated for so the. Well go to foxes, seek your holes. What is
it in the breakeinge? is it not then* consecrated? You can not for very shame
deny that. Hear what Paul says without addicion of this or that. Panis
que^ frangimus nonne co^municatio i. Corh. x.
corporis Christi est? The bread that we break, is it not the partakeinge of
the body of Christ? Will you now strive for the bread as you did for the
Lord? scrape it Wynchester would have us say our lord and not the Lord.
out the^, if you lust. You are to much a wra^ng lynge sophiste. Will you hear
no scriptures that you may seek some starteynge holes? we are one bread and
one body (says Paul) so many as are partakers of one bread. Again, he was
known unto them in the breakeinge of bread. They did continue in the Luc.
xxiiii. Act. ii.
doctrine of the Apostles, in feloweshipe and breakeing of bread. Daily
continuing with one accord in the temple, and brake bread from house to
house.

But lo now the wily fox, stealeeth into agreate borough where he waloweth
at will, sayeynge that it bears the name of bread, because it was so before
the chaung.

But if a man keep him from takeynge air at this change: he wylbe smothered
and killed in his hole. For this change is it that succoureth the foxes. They
are so wylye, subtyle and chaungeable: that they can change the thing that
they do but once breath upon. Prove it once to be changed: and I will never
call it bread again.

But because you can prove no change: Nothing like Exodus iiii.
your similitude of the rod of Moses (which was turned into a serpent and
strenght way returned to a rod again) is not like. For the same rod was
afterward declared (ever in the sight of Pharao and all the Egiptians) to be
the aduengeing rod of God whereby all the waters of Egypt were turned into
blood, and all the wonderful plages wroughte, which are terrible unto us,
unto this day. Worthily therefore, was this called a rod, for it was the
chastesyng rod of God, and always returned into a rod again, so often as
Moses or Aaron did take it in their hands.

Now for that you bring Jacob for your purpose, there was no change of
substance in him: for he was still Iacobbe, and his house was still called the
house of Jacob through out all the prophets, as well as Israel.

Micheas says. I am full of strength to show the house of Jacob their
wyckednes, and the house of Israel their sin. Again, ye rulers of the house
of Jacob and ye judges of the house of Israel.

You are far deceived in the Etimologie and true significacion of this word
Israel. For the name was given him not of saying the Lord, neither will the
Hebrew word Israel serve thereunto, but as is plainly declared in the text of
Genesis? it was because he had striued princely with God and with Gens. xxxii.
men, and had prevailed: therefore was it said unto him. Thy name shall be
Israel that is to say, one that has myghtilye prevailed against God and me^,
for this is the true The etimologie of this word Israel
Etimologie of the word Israel.

All your other exemples make for us, but that we will not be tediouse in
appling them to our purpose, because the time is to little for your other
mattier.

The church and elders.
NOw does the fox run to his old used paths. Stop thin ears and be
deaf. Thou must believe the church, and learn to spell ((...)) with a
little, as we men of the church teach the (The fox has small shif^e when
for fear of espiynge in plain paths, he rennethe to this hedgerowe of (e^.
est. e^. en) but we have answered to this church before and taught you it has
deceived us with false spelles and dark gloses. And we may well be contented
with this answer that Sa^ct Paul calls it bread, and it is called bread also
in other places of the scripture, how so ever the bishopes men do name it. For
there is no word truer or better then the words of scripturs are, neither any
spellinges or speakings more certain then those that be taught by the word of
God

But you ask us this question. Has not the church had and understand these
words and yet notwithstanding, taught this lesson, That the bread is by
consecracion turned into the body of Christ, Yea they have condemned Their
own testimony is inought to declare them to be woulfes.
and brent all them that would say that bread remains, Yet did they keep
Paul still, as they did John geuinge occasion to the Arians.

To this I answer, that the Romeish church had the scriptures, but the
father of this church, did tread them under his fete, Not only bodily when he
was coniuringe at his mass: but also by his power and the spirits that he
sent abroad, commaundeinge that no man should otherwise understand them, then
he and his church determined. And therefore he assigned that eueri man that
should meddle with the study of them, should first be trained in the schools
of his doctors: and so be sinered with the black coals of their helly
doctrine, that their souls should never be clear again, as for all other pore
men, not brought up in the popeishe learning of his schools and therefore
haueing their consciences like a white wall, ready to receive all truth of God
his holy word: the scripture was clearlie forboden them, like as you have
also with shame inoughe procured in this our time, that pore men shall not
read it for fear lest they dispice your shamlesse pomp and pride, and
utterly renownce all your wicked erroures,

For the understanding of it, I can not be leave that the popeishe prelates had
the true If the prelates had had the true understanding of scriptures they
would not have maintained errors.
understanding thereof, because they maytened many blind erroures clean
contrary to the scriptures, which does manifestli declare that they were
void of the spirit of truth which only opens the way to the
understanding of the heavenly mysteries.

How blindly have they taught (without the word contrary to the judgment of
reason or the perceiueynge of the senses) that this bread is changed: this
bitter contencio^ about the matter declares. Surely they have condemned and
brenned men (and that right many) for this mattier, whereby they declare
themselves to be of the cursed seed of Cain and the wicked serpent, who was the
murderer even from the beginning. Finally, they have kept the gospel and
scriptures still (we thank God and not them) for god has caused the phariseis
before the^, and our bishopes following, to keep these Iewelles for our use and
profit, and for their own confusion, that by the sam books which they kept and
where upon they boasted, they should be openly convinced and overcome.

Wherefore, in that your doctor Damascen and you would have us learn of our
elders: we answer that from the elders, al iniquity is sprongen. A senior^bus
ingressa est iniquitas From the elders have we received al wickedness.
And the Israelites are always by the threateninges of the prophets:
forbidden to follow the way of their fathers and elders We must therefore cry
with David Peccauimus cum patribus nostris, unjust egimus iniquitate^ fecim^s.
We have sinned with our fathers we have done unrighteously we have done
wickedness.

Ask your father and mine (O bishope) ask their fathers and grandfathers,
what they have believed, and they will answer (according to the time that they
were in) that they believe as the church of Rome does believe. For so my
father taught me, and so did the priests generally teach in all place
chargeinge the people (under the pain of the great curse) to believe as
their holy father of Rome believed. And farther could they not teach us their
children, neither being suffered to have the scriptures in english, neither
heareynge any thing but the lies of the Romeishe Antichriste by their popeishe
curates.

In this church you can find nothing amiss. And this blind church is it
that you There is no fault in the Romeish church.
labor so sore to defend, or else would you in some one place have given us
warneinge that we follow not this Romeishe church. But doutlesse, all your
book through, you spend all your wits, to bring us under the captivity of
this church, that you might worthily triumph as you have done makeinge
merchandise of our souls.

Would God, the king our master, head, ruler and leader, would search
forth such Romeishe traitors. For they can never take him for they only
head, so long as they have an other head upon the earth, whose honor they
labor to enhaunce even with all their might and diligence, endeavor and
studi: whose kingdom the labor to enlarge, with books, with writings, with
sermons and preachinges, with faggot^es, fire, brenninges, and all means they
can possible.

Oh bishop and Idol, dyddest thou not Wynchester preached openly against gods
word.
vilainouselie at Paul's cross (not long sens) seek and bring forth all the
Arguments of thy subtyle brain, for to stop the kingdom of Christ,
spreadeinge by his word and scriptures, from the which thou dideste affraye
men by the terrible inventions of thy diueillishe subtilties. A traitor to God
and man. But the aduengeinge hand of God thou can not escape.

Qui vos spernit, me spernit, he that despiceth Luke x.
you despiceth me, was never meant of such bishopes as drive men from the word
but of the faiethful Apostles and mesengers of Christ, which dare speak
nothing but that they have heard and learned by the spirit of God in his
holy scriptures. Which must be received, not for their own authority: but
because they are prophets and preachers of the heavenly mysteries, and the
disciples Math. x.
and scholars of Christ Not preachers against Christ (as you and such other
prelates are in your sermons) than who so receives him in the name of a
disciple or the name of a prophet: the same shall have the reward of a
prophet. And who so dispiseth him thus being the disciple of Christ, setting
forth and promoting the glory of his master: he dispiseth Christ, and not
only him but his father, the author of his message.

But you priests, you preach for lucre. Oh you prophets, you prophecy for
your own gain and for money. Yet will you be taken as those that hold upon
God, and say. Is not the Lord among us? But would God ^ure heads would
esteem the mattier as it is, and be no longer blinded with your clokes of
hypocrisy. Let them but consider the cause only as Cicero does monishe in
his oration. Cui commodo sit et bono.

It is your commodity and profit, to maynteyne popery and dombe ceremonies.
It is It is for the papists profit to keep the world in blyndnesse.
greatly your gain to keep the world in blyndnesse. For by these things
have you crept up to this lordely pomp, and ever as they decay: so decreaseth
some thing of your dignity. So it is no mer^^yle, though you being carnal
men do strive very sore for your advantage.

We pore men of the contrary part, which (of a zeal grounded upon the
knowledge of the word of God) do speak against your superstition, your pomp
and Idolatry: do not only, not gain one farthynge thereby (as I take God to
witness before whom I shall answer at the great day, I desire nothing of
yours, but your soul health) we pore caytyfes I say, do not only look for no
gain, but for tellyng of the truth, we look to lose the little goods that we
have, our wives and dear children to be spoiled, and ourelyues (with most
spiteful torments of ^ackyng and burning) to be taken from us. Vide iam cui
sit commodo.

To the governors of the people.
Wherefore seek you knowledge, ye that judge the earth? Judge a right in all
controversies betwixt a man Mich. iii.
and his neighbor. Hear O you heads of the house of Jacob, and ye leaders of
the house of Israel. Should not ye know what were lawefull and right? But ye
hate the good and love the yuell. The Lord has been sore displeased with your
forfathers, but turn you unto me says the Lord of hosts: and I shall turn
unto you. Be not you, like your forefathers unto whom the prophets cried before
time, saying. Turu^ from your yuell ways and wicked Imaginations: but they
would not hear, nor regard me, says the lord. What is now become of your
forefathers and the prophets? etc. Zach. i.


I must needs say with Iheremie* Wa^ to the prophets that prophecy their
own Iherem. xxiii.
Imaginations, mine heart breaks in my body* All my bones do tremble, I am
become like a drunken man, without rest, disquieted with wine, even for the
very fear of the Lord and his holy words: because the land is full of
aduouteres, where through it is destroyed. Yea the way that men take is
wicked, and their governance is nothing like the holy word of the Lord. For
the prophets and the priests them selves, are poluted hypocrites, and their
wickedness have I found in my house, says the Lord. Their way therefore
shall be slepperie in darkness, that they may stacker and fall therein. For I
will hrynge a plage upon them, even the year of their visitasion, says the
Lord.

If you doubt of whom you shall seek for Let them that doubt ask of God.
knowledge: remember what was spoken by God the father from heaven, of Christ
our savior when he was sent into the world. This is my dearly beloved son,
hear you him. He is the only master and opener of the wisdom of his
father. Which wisdom who so lacks: let him ask of him that gives, eue^
of God that gives unto al men indifferently and casts no man in the teeth:
and he shall have it. But let him ash in faith nothing doubting. But always
use the means that God has appointed. As for perfect understanding of the
scriptures, it must needs be granted convenient to have the knowledge of the
Hebrew, greek and latin tongue to use the diligent comparinge of the The
knowledge of the ^onges is profitable to the study of scripture.
scriptures together, and counsel of learned teachers, diverse interpretations
and writings of men of all ages. For hapely thou may perceive by one, that
thou can not understand by an other. But for the pore lay man which can not
have these later healpes and furtheraunce: let him be diligent in reading the
english text, and no fail God will grant him so much knowledge, as shall be
expedient for the ordering of his life. And therefore may he nothing doubt
but that his master Christ, which did vouchsafe to shed his blood for him:
will also grant unto him so much knoweledge as shall be thought meet for
the saving of that soul which he has so dearly boughte. And you must
always beware that you call you no master upon earth to be sworn into any
man's sayings, but have you eye unto the heavenly master only, upon whom
only rests all truth. Where men (be they doctors or bishops: if they
bring not the word of God with them) they are but liars.

To the bishops.
IT may well appear what minds you bishops have to the furtheraunce of the
knowledge of God: by that you do with out cause, find fault with the diligent
translations of good men, co^demnyng them by your counsayles, and yet will not
translate any part thereof your selves. Yea all your life and labors do teach
us plain, that you would stop our eyes and lead us capty^e in your blind
ways. Therefore if we should follow you being blind guides, false prophets
and Idol pastors: we shall be still scattered abroad in the blind ways of
ignorance, we shall be led with your lies even together with you into the
blind pit of darkness. Thus have you led our fathers before us, so many as
would take you for their scho masters, and had none other secret motion of
the spirit, to lift their hertes up into the heavens, d^nge the aid and
healpe of al other ^r^

And yet (...) can not content your selves with the kingdom that you have
usurped in the consciences of men (where none ought to reign but God) more
then these thousand years: unless you may still have the same authority in
establishinge your popetrie and Idolatry, beating evermore into our ears,
that your Idolatrous and superstitious religion, has continued these. M. D.
years. Where as we partly have declared, and might more at large declare (were
it not to tedious) that it has crept up only with your wicked papacy and
possessions of the church, and has continued only the time that Satan has
been lose and sent forth into the world to work his will, when you his stout
soldier did shit up the kingdom of God his word, and neither would enter
in your selves, nor suffer them that would enter. But now that the lamb has
unlocked the book: Satan begins to roar for fear of the fall of his
kingdom, and you bishops (his Satan begins to roar.
champions) do rage and fight against God his word, yea against every thing
that is God or godly. But we shall overcome by the blood of the lamb, and by
the word of his witness. And therefore do we ieoperde our souls unto death,
not only against the Romish Antichriste: but the Mahumetaine also who is like
to reign over us as a worthy plage for slidynge from the word of God, eue^ as
he has many years reigned over many christian nations, which boeth in life
and learning were as holy as we be now co^pted.

If this thing (I say) shall come to pass (as no man knows Gods secret
working but such only as it shall please him to endue with this knowledge) we
shall be ready, both to speak and write, as we now do, for the glory of God,
against al Idolatours so far as God shall open our hertes and give us strength.
For without his audacitie and boldness of spirit poured into us: we shall
stand in as gerate fear to perform this, as we should be to write against
your abominations, knowing your cruelty toward the^ that have hertofore
moved your patience.

What other men have written in the favor of Mahumete I can not tell. But this
do I see with mine eyes, that you bishops The bishops open the way for the
turks to enter.
do open a great door for him to enter in at: by the Idolatry that you do
maynteyne, in setting up so weak a creature to be God. For what playner way
can ye have to impunge the christian religion: then to find it to be grounded
upon so fond a foundation as this weak Idol of yours?

And on the other side, by your wicked life and tirannouse handlynge of the
pore flock of Christ: you ministre great occasion for us to thyinke, that we
shall live under the turckes, as quietly and safly as under you, both in
avoiding the Popish Idolatry, and also in escapynge of outragiouse tyranny.
Beware how your malice leads you to minister such occasions. For though we
abhor (eue^ from the bottomes of our hertes) the turrkeshe Mahumete and his
laws, and are ready to write and speak against them in the defense of our
Christ and his religion, rather wishyng to dye, then to be subject unto him:
yet this present necessity and more grievous bondage that we suffer now under
the bishops the lymes of the Romish Antichrist are so intolerable, that we
had rather prove any thing, then long to abide it.

If they overcome here, the victory will Winchesters words.
hardly be stayed from conquest in the rest.

Call back your tyranny therefore about the worshyppynge of this Idol.
Surely it The answer
is full time (as you say) for you to strive for your God, and to encourage
your companions to stick to their taklynge, for if we may once get the
victory herein, all the residue of your Popery will have a foul fall.

Note our simplicity as much as you will, and skoffe on still (with the Devil
is simple iwys) we will never be ashamed to call bread, bread, so long as we
have Luke the Evangelist and Paul the Apostle of Christ to take our part.

Come you in with your double gloses, and put forth two faces in own hoode in
every thing you go about, as long as you lust. But it is an high mattier to
understand what bread means and what the world signifies you say.

Go to, go to. And all the world (what so ever the world signifies) will
shortly deride you and think you worthy of your. ii. forcked myters, for your
doubleness.

Of this name Mass, and of the diriuation of the same.
NOw labor you to have this name Missa, or Mass, diriued of an Hebrew word,
wherein I will not greatly contend though it make not much for your purpose:
because I know the subtlety of the generation that first named it, whose
cast it is always to busy men's minds with strange names, darcke The
papists busy men's minds with strange names.
terms and subtle disputations about the same to hold men occupied in
trifles, and to keep them from the playnes of the truth. Other wise they
could have been content to have named it the breaking of the bread with Luke or
the supper of the Lord with Paul.

But for the nature of the Hebrew word: Learn what Sanctes Pagninus writes in
Thesauro lingue sancte (...) Missa sufficientia^ significat. (...) id est.
Sufficientiam voluntatis (aut spontis) manns tue.

Targhu^, Deuteronomy. xv. and. xviii. pro, (...) quod est sufficie^tia, habet (...)
Rabbi Selomoh, in co^me^taries, exponit, (...) sufficie^tia^. Rabbi Abraham hoc
pacto scribit. (...) Daghessatur samech, nam deducitur a (...) quod est sign^m.
Ihero^i^nus. Oblatione^ spontanea^ man^ tue. Vnde dicu^t no^ nulli, quod (...)
est oblatio que fit deo propter aliquod munus personale, quibus non assentior,
cum nullus ex Hebreis doctoribus ho^dicat, quos legerim. Hactenus Pagninus.

These words declare the nature of this word (...) by diriuatio^ even from
the original. Which how well it agrees with our english word mass: let the
learned judge. It ca^ not be tried hereby, that it is a sacrifice for the
quick and for the dead: but rather clean contrary, by that which Pagninus
affirms.

There is yet an other Hebrew word (...) signifiynge a tribute, which some men
say is the original: because of the contribution and payment that was
gathered for the relief of the pore in the beginning.

There is also a verb (...), which betokens to melte or to be dissolved
away, where of you may diriue Missa, if you will because the hour is at
hand, when the Mass and all man's inventions, shall melt like wax before the
brenning fire of the word of god. But what mattier makes it whereof this word
comes: saying all the world sees that your Mass is a Mass and heap of
ceremonies and fond gestures and nothing after the form that Christ our
master did institute it?

Saying therefore, you have both given it a new name, and changed the thing
it self also: men that do mislyke your doings, may without blame give it the
name that they find in scriptures, to call Christ's deed into remembrance,
which you have almost extinguished.

We therefore do co^munely call it the supper of the Lord as Paul does,
because at i. Corh. xi.
his last supper Christ did ordeine this sacrament for a memory and
remembrance. But for the word Cena, it is enough for children to daly as you
do in the schools. And the text of Paul is plain enough. It is the mattier
that we co^tende for and not the terms. This term the supper of the Lord
does signify unto us, the work that Christ did, and the thing that should
be had in memory. Your mass you say signifies (but no man ca^ tell by what
property of language) al these things.

The gloriouse presence of the body and blood of Christ, the whole
circumstau^ces used and ceremonies done, and the devout prayers that be spoken
by the priest.

Well, it is a small mattier for you that can change things and creatures, to
change words and names at your pleasure.

Polidore seems to speak in differe^tly for us both in this mattier, where he
says that in the Mass there was an offeringe and gathering Polidore de
inuentoribus ^erum.
for the poor, which favors some thing of the Hebrew word. (...)
Tributum collectum. But the pore are despised, and therefore there remains
only the song that is called the Offertorie (says he) which was song whi^se
the money was in gathering.

Finally, whether you prelates (which call your selves the church) may say with
Paul. Ego accepi a domino quod et tradidi vobis: Let al me judge that have
knowledge to perceive what is in your Mass, and what the Lord did at his
supper when he commanded us to do this in the remembrance of him, and that we
should al drink thereof. Yea that so often as we eat of this bread and drink
of this cup, we should show forth the death of the Lord unto that he come,
which is the only thing that we desire, to have the death of Christ
preached in this sacrament (for that is the only fode and life of the soul)
where you will have nothing but blind diguisinges wherewith neither the body
nor soul ca^ be fed

Of thieves that ste^e away the fode of the soul.
THey would steal away the precious fode of the body and blood of
Winchesters words.
Christ and make it a bare drinking of bread and wine.

Judge you that be of god, how we would The answer
steal away the precious fode of the body and blood of Christ, when we do
continually teach that this is the only fode of the soul, and the working of
the meat that never perishes: to believe him whom the father has sent. And
would have therefore the coming and sufferyng of Christ preached unto the
people by this sacrament that they might continually feed of his body broken
for them, for the only fode of their souls. Yea rather you are the thieves Who
be the thieves that steal away the fode of the soul.
(the whole world to witness) that rob the sheep of the fode of their souls.
You rob the pore people of the testament of their father. You rob us lay and
leude me^ of the one half of the sacrament. You take from us the testament
which only, was strike^ and established in the blood which was commanded in
the old testament to be sprinkled upon all the people, of the which we were al
commanded (in the new testament) to drink. And bisides that, in the
ministering of this sacrament, you will preach nothing of the death of Christ
unto us, though it be the sacrament thereof. No you will not speak one word of
his death and passion, nor once name unto us his body broken and his blood
shed for our sins, that it might be the fode of our souls. You cause us to
gape and gase at dead and dombe ceremonies, whereby the soul that is
spiritual, ca^ not be fed. Yea (and that is worste of al) in the steed of this
fode of Christ, you do kyl the soul, not only with famine, for lack of this
fode: but also with the most present poison of Idolatry. The utter confusion
and destruction of all that wyllyngly follow it.

And where they will pass none of their Winchesters words.
own suppers (on the greatest fasting day) without flesh: yet in this
supper of the lord they divise a diete without deinties, to have nothing
present but bread and wine.

In our own suppers, we do use no superstition of meats nor days, because
God has The answer
created al his creatures to be taken with thanks giuinge as his good
creatures, and has made man Lord over days and times, to use the^ to his
necessity, and to serve to his use, And though the Jews were nourterid for a
time, with shadows of days and meats, and like ordinances, till Christ the
body did come and set us at liberty, from al such bondage: yet because we
christians have once professed to worship god in spirit and truth: we may not
turn back from the same to follow the gross superstition that the Pope has
sowe^ thorowout his kingdom: but labor to break it, and to take it away for
the wealth of our brethren, lest peradventure they that be weak, and do still
think it an high honor unto god and great holiness to eat fish upon certain
days commanded by the Pope to be so fasted, and contrariwise, that the eating
of flesh on those days, is dishonor unto him and Learn to auoied offense in
eatinge of meats.
a crime deserving sore punishment. And thus by our strength the weak be
offended and established in their error. Eue^ as they did that did still eat
of the meat offered unto the Idols amongst the Corhinthians, though they did
know that nothing was poluted or vucleane of it self: yet they sitting at the
table of the Idols, were the occasion that the weak brothers (who fraimed
their faith after thexe^ple of the^ that had knowledge) were established in
their error, by seeing the^ sit at the meat of Idols. For it was not the manner
that any man should sit at the Idols table but such as i. Cor. x.
would be partakers of the Idolatry. In this point did Peter offe^de also,
when he disse^bled in the eating of ^eat, and paul rebuked him therefore. In our
own suppers therefore, we eat Galath. ii.
flesh or fish indifferently (as is offered unto us) and give god thanks for
his creatures. When we fast, we abstain from both. And not regarding bodily
things, for the time we do occupy our selves in spiritual meditation in
mourning for our sins and the sins of the people. And when we return to
bodily fode to comfort the body withal, then (knowinge that the thing which
enters in at the month, defiles not the body) we do without superstition and
excess, use indifferently al such meats as occasion ofsereth. And why should
not we as well do thus, as you bishops, to eat on the greatest Learn at the
bishops to fast.
fasting days you have: sweet sucket, grene ginger, marmilade, and such like
deinties for the punishinge of your Pope holy carkases? Is a piece of biefe or
bako^ more perilous for the provocation of sleshly appetite in us pore me^ of
the country that labor all the day long in ho^ger and cold: the^ these
subtilties are to your sleuthful, and idle bealies? If we do not fast the true
fast and lament for our sins so often as were convenient: the great cause is,
that we are never taught of this true fast, and very seldo^ do we hear the
word of god truly preached, which might move us to this repe^ta^ce and
mourning for our sins. So that always the fautes of the people must needs
return upon your necks (O bishops) and the blood of the sheep that perish
must berequired at your hands, because you are negligent in doing of your
duties. Now this great matter that ye do lay so ofte^to our charg. Thatin the
lords supper we divise a diete without any dainties and that we will have
nothing present but bread and wine: we have partly proved to be untruly
reported of us, who do in the Lords supper set forth the fode that feadeth
into life euerlasteynge. But the same thing, may well and justly be spoken of
you that do set up the mu^blinge of a mass (in a tongue not understand) in the
stead of the lively fedyng of the faithful in the death of Christ. which
ought all ways to be preached and showed forth in this supper of the Lord,
that the flock of Christ may continually feade on these dainties of the
heavenly manna according to the sayeinge of Christ. Not Moses, but my father
gives the true bread from heaven. For it The father geuethe the true bread
from heaven
is the bread of God that comes from heaven and gives life unto the world.
I am the same bread that am come down from heaven He that comes unto me,
shall not be hongrie and he that believes in me, shall never be ^hyrstie Lo,
what dainties we do set forth in our supper. But what daintis do the pore
people find in your mass? You say that there is raw flesh, blood and bones:
which things (compared unto ours) are no daynties. The people say that you
do eat al in a cornar, and will give no man part with you. What so ever
daynties you have, they go home hongrie, boeth in their bodies and souls. Yea
what gear is there in your mass (the gospel and epistle, and Hoc est corpus
meum, only excepted) that can fead the soul of the unlearned man Yea how does
that gospel and epistle fed their souls that understand not one word that you
speak? As for yourblasphemus collectes geueing so much to the merits of
sanctes: your secrets where in you do talk with Annas and Cayphas: your
beadroles one of benefactours, and an other of hallowes, as Peter Paul and
Crisogonus (whose memorial you name it to be, and not the memory of Christ) by
whose merits and prayers you desire to be The mass is not the memory of
Christ
defended in all points, If all this, I say, were in english and understand,
what daynteis (Yea what deuellieshnes) should hereby enter into the hearers
herte^?

This is no fode, but filth, this is no bread but poison. But you think
perchance, that we lewd people, may feed upon fond gestures upon your
fond bloweynges and blesseinges, mockeinge and, moweynge, upon your cake
holden up betwyxt your fyngers and hopped about the chalice. These be all your
spiritual works. But they neither feed souls nor yet bodies. For you are
those shep herdes that feed them selves and despise the flock. The best you
have to say, is that you do eat this supper for us, and that you drink this
cup of the new testament for us. But now have we learned of late in the
testament of our master (which you have most vilanouslye plucked forth of our
hands being no gentillmen) that it is his will and pleasure, that all we
should eat and drink of the bread and wine of this supper. Wherefore I pray
you eat our meat no longer, neither for us nor from us. For that which you do
eat, ca^ do us no more good? the^ if you did eat away That which the priest
eats does us no good.
from us our bodily diner. And if you will be partakers of our bodily labors
and goods: let us be partakers with you in this supper. And if you count us
saved and redeemed by the blood of the new testament: the^ suffer us to drink
of the cup of the same in Christ's blud If you do cast us from it, and esteem
us so lewdly as you have done herebefore: think non other but the arm where
upon you have trusted shall be broken, and the donge of your sole^nyties, shall be
scatered upon your faces. But to come to your dainties again. You do mixed the
third part of your cake with the wine, and then you say Hec sacro sancta
commixtio, this* holy mixture be health of body and soul. By the which
blasphemouse words, wherein you wysh that this same mixture that you make,
should be salvation of body and soul: we may epsy that you have here
dainties prepared for the deuilles own toth Your preparatiues to these
daynties, are like to the daynties them selves, That is to say deuillishe.

Read the Rubrica of the mass to eschew The virtue of the mass of the five
wounds.
mortality, and the mass of the five wou^des where as it is written that what
priest so ever says the office of this mass. v. times either for him self
or any other: he shall in this world have grace and health, and in the world
to come euerlasteynge life, if he continewe in good.

And in what so ever tribulacio^ a man shall be in this world, if he procure
this office to be said for him. v. times by a priest: without dout he shall be
delivered And if it be read for the soul of the dead: strayt after it is read
v. times the soul shall be delivered from pain

With such lies and blasphemies do you prepare the peoples minds to your
dayntie dyshes.

Now your cautiles and subtillities that you have about these daynties: declare
you to be more supersticiouse, then were the phariseis, and far more foleish
then the heathen: In so much that I am ashamed to write them,

Of the pure sacrifice of Malachie the prophet.
But you do establishe your mass and* sacrifice (as you suppose) very strong
lie, by the prophet Malachie, whom your doctor Damasce^ does allege for the
unbloody sacrifice. And you bring him in again here in the end of your book
though he speak clear against you.

These be his words after he has rebuked the priests of covetousness.

I have no pleasure in you says the Lord of hosts, I will allow none
offeringe of Malach. i.
your hands: For from the east to the west, my name is great among the
heathen. And every where do they bren incense and offer unto my name, even a
pure offeringe. For great is my name among the heathen (says* the Lord of
hosts) and you have poluted it in your words.

The phariseis to whom this was spoken: thought them selves and their
sacrifices so acceptable in the sight of God, that they despised al other
people (as you do now. And therefore this text serves against you boeth. Act.
x.
That enerie where, in every nation and people (as Peter was taught in the Act.
the pure offeringe in spirit and truth, shall be offere^ So that we may
truly say, that Malachie does make against you, teacheing that (a^ al
prophecies are general) as the Jews preistes were refused for their
covetousness: so shall you for yours. And as he declared that their sacrifices
and ceremonies, where upon they boasted and bragged so much, should cease: so
are yours now at the same point He declared also, that God should be honored
in spirit and truth thorowout all nations: even as we have an example of. C
xx. M. in Niniue, of diverse private persons in diverse co^treyes, as Naama^ in
Siria, the wydow of Serephtha Iethro the father inlawe of Moses, Hira of Tirus
and the queen of the south. which though they were not of the outward Israel
did nevertheless magnify the name of the lord, and offer the ca^ues of their
lyps offering: a pure offeringe of thanks geueing and offering their own
bodies a liueinge sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, and this is the
pure offeringe that the prophet Malachie did speak of ^* vii.


I will not strive with you about your doctors any more because I inte^d to
avoid the infinite conte^cions which I perceive do a rise of them.
Notwithstanding here is a just occasion offered (as there has been many times)
where Gregory Nazianzeue, calls fasteynge Gregory Nazianzene, for fasteynge
(in Christ) a bulworke and defense against te^tacio^. As though christ which
could not sin neaded any such bulworke. And yet so far as we know, he was
tempted when he was fasteynge. The same Gregory, calls fasteyngein us
apurgacion or cleanseynge. What should we co^te^de about this mattier? Like as
it pleased God to give power unto Moses to fast. xl. days twyse in the
mountain, not for the a voydeinge of tentacion: but for to set forth the
gloriouse law and will of the father, then to be published. And Elias being
sent to anoynte a King over Siria, and a King and a prophet over Israel, by
who^ boeth thief kingdo^es shouldbe clean tered and changed, did fast forty
days from all manner meat, for the declareinge of the power of God in his
works.

So did it please Christ of his own power to fast forty days that the Jews
should The cause why Christ fasted.
have none occasion to think him inferionre to those. ij. their greateste
prophets, in the publisheynge of his gospel and glad tithinges unto the
world, and his renewynge of all things: Not to the intent that we should
follow him, and thereby have purgacio^ of our sins, For beside that it is
impossible to follow him (without an especial work of the spirit) either in
that he fasted. xl. days or in that he was never hongrie: this were a plain
denial of the benefit of his passion, and the settinge up of our own work
which is imperfect. For what great mattier is it to eat meat but once eueri
day and drink. ij. or. iij many have so lived in the old time.

And what holiness is it to eat fish only? do not cormor^ntes and such as
live by the sea side live so likewise?

Christ has commanded us to follow him Learn where in to follow Christ.
in love, peace, mercy, and such like: but in this example (as a thing
imposseble) we have no such commandment, except we be drawn into wilderness by
the spirit as Christ was, or by any other work of God we be desti^^te of fode
and the comfort of creatures: then Lo the example of Christ may strength us,
and teach that not by bread only do we live but by every word that proceadeth
out of the mouth of God.

Would God that true fasteynge and prayer were taught and used, and popeish
abuse abolished, for truth and falshode can not be coupled to gether. But you
bishopes must bear the blame for all these things if it be not amended
shortly. For you have taken the charge of the flock.

An answer to diverse questions
IN the end of your book, we looked for a substanciall rehersall of your
strong arguments where with you have confirmed this mattier that you have
taken in hand But we find a rabble of confused questians nothing partaynige to
this purpose) which we must touch, or else you will say that you are not
answered. And therefore do you craftily heap these to gether in the end of
your book, that in the wrappeynge up of so many matters you may have credit of
the common people, as a professed patron of they^ used errors: and cause us
to be despised as the contemners of all these things that you do styfly
maintain. This is deuillishe sophistry and subtlety of Satan, mindeinge
nothing but contencion, debate and strife, when one stynge is stinged, to
shote forth an other. Yea it is rather the mo^strouse and poyso^ful nature of
Hidra that Hercules slew, when thou had stricken of one head, to have.
vij. or Hidra the monster the hercules slew.
more ariseinge in his place. When you ca^ not overcome by arguments in the
matter we have in hand: then stricke you up new alarm to a new field of
contencion.

Thus shall we never have don, if we now a fresh take in hand to answer you.
First you demand, which is the true fast? which is the true prayer? Then
what place the preachinge of Gods word owght to have in the church? what place
the doctri^e of men may have in the worshype of God? Again, whether the
sacrament ought to be ministered in boeth the kinds, or but in bread only?
For you will ever be inuentynge new mat tiers to occupy men's minds in
contencion, and to affraye simples souls from the scriptures. And because you
will maintain all popery (thought you perceive it is nothing) you can find
fault with nothing that the popehath invented. But when you are demanded of
any of his trifles a lone: you say My Lords answer in private communicacion.
they are nothing. And yet you will have this large heap of nothinges, to be
the mass (as you call it) and whole heap of our religion and every one
severally, to be necessary to your estate. Again by your book we have just
occasion ministered (were it not that we would gladly avoid co^te^cionto examine
this mo^strouse gear to their worthiness, and to speak of al your nothinges,
dombe signs, and lieing shadows, that your father and you have heretofore
inverted. But tha^ should we never have done, for every one of these
arguments would ask an whole book, like as the mattier of the sacrament has
done: you have so blinded the truth in the^ all with your deceivable
Hypocrisy. I desire all good hertes therefore: to mark the mattier as it is,
how you labor to stir co^te^cio^, how we in no case would enter therinto,
unless we were provoked. Right sorry that we have so great occasion. First
through your gros blindness, which being the eyes and seeing nothing, the salt
and become vnsaneourie and the doumbe dogs that can not bark: have brought
the world into the pity of blindness. And again, because you like swyne will
not only wallowe in your mire still: but also like wild boares labor to
destroy the vine^ard, to root forth all the sweet rotes of the chose^ vine,
and crashe the branches with your teth Settinge up your bristles and sharpeing
your teeth against al the^ that would drive your wicked gardiuars out Stephane
Gardinar.
of the lords viniyard. We are therefore compelled to shap you some answer,
least you glory still in your wickedness, and co^tinewe so terrible that no man
dare resist you. For fasting and prayeing therefore, read the. vi. and. vii. of
Math. where you may learn of Christ's own mouth, the true prayer and fasting
much better the^ by the bishopes bablinge, For they teach the matte^s and mass
(mu^bled in a tongue that the people do not understand) to be the prayer unto
the which the holy word of god and the preaching of his glad tidinges of ye
gospel, must give place. And for this the bishop alleges this saieing of
Gregory. The preachinge of Gods wrod must gene place to mattens.
the gospel is not good: when it occupies the time of prayer. And therefore on
Christemas day when the church has. iij. masses: he said he could not spend
so much time with his audience that day as he was wo^t to do.

And by their often mumbling of matte^s and mass, patched together by popes
and Pretates, and seldom or never preaching of the pure word of God it: may
appear that they prefer the inuencions of man before God and his gospel. But
if thou mark the. xiiii. to the * i Corch. xiiii.
Cor. thou shall perceive these to be madness.

And to understand what fast God requires, read Esai, the. lviii. Chap, and
Zachary the. vii. For the reproufe of their fish fast: mark that Christ
says. That thing which goes into the mouth, defiles not a Mat. xv
man. And Paul says. The kingdom of god consists not in meat and drink,
and that nothing is profane or vnholi of it self. Also that the mea^e
co^me^deth no man unto god for then should the monks of the charterhouse have
been more co^me^dable. And cormora^tes Romans xiiii.
in their kind, were most to be praised. But Paul says, that if we do eat,
we gain no thing thereby, and if we do not eat, we shall lose nothing at
all. This doctrine that teaches us to abstain from flesh or any other creture
that God has created to be taken with thanks geueing: is called the doctrine
of diuil les, (...). Timoth. iii.
because butter eggs, and flesh, are as well sa^^ified in the creation as
other creatures, and were created of God to be taken with thanks giving, at
the will, pleasure and commandment of man whom he made Lord over them, to use
them for his necessity.

Paul therefore commands, that no man Coloss. ii.
judge us in our meat and drink or part of the holy day, which were but
shadows: before the comeinge of Christ, who was the body. And seeing we have
him alredie and yet gape after shaowes: may not Paulle say as he did to the
Galathians. You observe days, months, times and years? I fear me lest I
have labored in vain amongeste you.

For the chasteinge forth of deueles by fasting and prayer: first marcke what
Christ How fasteynge drives forth diuilles
answers. He says that the Apostles could not because of their
incredulity, and weakness of fayeth. And afterward he addeh these two
(fasteinge and prayer) as weapons and worckes of fayeth which can not be
separated from says, neither can be found in the old bottelles of the
hypocrites.

This prayer, when it strives against the deuell: it surmounteth all worldely
things and pleasures. And the same is also the only true fast. To neglect
(for the time) al worldly things to neglect meat and drink and what so ever
bodili pleasure or desire may be imagined: that in prayer the mind may be
lifted above the heaven unto the throne of God.

But than (say you) your good Hipocrites and popeish votaries have experince
of this. But Christ shall witness against you where he teaches that these are
the works of the new man, and can not be received in the patched clokes of
hypocrisy. You have experience you say, of driueinge away Diuelles by prayer
and fasteing. But what devil it is you dare not tell, lest we should take
you with a lie. For if you do mean the devil of lechery: I have heard
Phisians say, that your fyshe Fish prouo^
fast stireth him up, and we se every where that he reigns amongeste you
for all your fasting and coniuring of holy water for the same purpose. But we
will let pass this lieinge doteage. As for the diligent preachinge of Christ's
word and his glade tidings: it should not need to contend with you if you
were christian byshopes. For Christ admonishes his Apostle Peter to feed, his
sheep and his lambs. Paul says, he is sent to preach and not to baptize.
Much less to mumble a paier of mumbling mattens, full of blasphemouse
collectes. He says again. Woe be un tome if I do not preach. He admouisheth
Timotheus (yea he obtesteth him before God and the lord Jesus Christ which shall
judge the quick and the dead wha^ he shall appear in his kingdom (to preach
the word and to be instant there (...), in lyme and out of time. Naie say our
byshopes, not in ^^atens time, nor in the fore ^one because the word (...)
must give place to our popeishe matens and mass.

Yea some of the^ can preach openly at Paul's cross, that we have little need
of the Doctrine preached at Poules cross
word either written or preached, because our hertes may teach us what is
good or badde.

A they have all agreed with one accord, that the word of God is il for pore
men under the degree of gentell men. But remember (O bishopes) that Moises has
taught us that the heart of man (with all his inuencions) is and has been
naught else but evil, even from the cradle. And therefore the same Moses by
the spirit of God gives warneinge unto all men boeth gentle men and yeome^:
to have the word of his doctrine in their hertes and there souls, and to hang
them for a sign in their hands (though you deride them that carry it at their
girdles) he commands also that it be continually before their eyes, and
written in the gates, the doors, and the posts of our houses. He commaundethe
to teach it our Children, that they may continually occupy their minds
therein. He commands farther, that when we sit in the house, when we walk in
the way, when we lie down and arise again we should be therein occupied,

Read the psalm (Blessed are the undefiled Psalm. cxviii.
in the way, which walk in the law of the Lord. Blessed are they which
search his testimonies) and there shall you perceive that the word of God
should be the delight of the life the fode of the soul, the light ^o the fo^e
stepes, the rode of the young man to break his lusts, the exercise of his
life, the comfort in aduersite, the bridle in prosperity, the medicine in
sickness, the only fode in health, the relefe in werinesse, the banisment of
vilanie, sufferinge no shame to assalt, the cause of reioyseinge in banisment
and imprisoneinge, in extreme age, the releyfeinge of werinesse, causeynge all
quietness. Yea in death the geuer of life, and in life joy euerlasteinge.

Is not this thing worthy to be preached in the time of mattens and mass? to
be preached, red, and heard inmattens, mass and euensonge time? to be learned
of men women, children, plowemen, yemen, gentillmen fre men, bound men, and
generally of al christen men? Oh bishope recant for shame.

Now to discuse what place the doctrine of My lord recant for shame.
me^ should have in the worship of God marck that God says. That which I
command the that only do thou, neither add thou any thing, nor diminishe
therfrom. Marcke again, how Mada^ and Abihu, the children Exemples of men's
inventions.
of Aaron, did offer unto the Lord strange fire that was not commanded them:
and fire came forth from the Lord and devoured them. So strange a thing it is
to set up a strange thing of our own brain. Oze for touching the Ark of God, was stryken to death, notwythstandynge he did it of a good intent. How
think you then will God receive your fond doctrines and ceremonies?

Saul the first king of the Israelites, was through a folishe intent of his
own put from his kingdom. Being comman^dded i. Reg. xv.
to destroy the Amalechites with all theirs, he saved the best and fairest,
inte^ding to do sacrifice therwyth unto the Lord. But God asked him by the
prophet, in this wise. Will the Lord have holocastes and offeringes, and not
rather obedience unto the voice of the Lord? But this place do you fals^y
allege for the obedience unto men: even in like manner as you do wraste this
text also. In ^ayne do they worship me teaching the doctrines and precepts of
men. But we dare examine the ma^tier by your own gloses.

You are content to grant that such doctrines and precepts of men, as be
taught of their own brains when they were but in the state of men only: were
but vain worship. And then talk you of Lycurgus and of Numa Pompilius, but in
the popes kingdom al doctrine was good, for he was above this state of a man
(as it should seem, because you can find no fault with his doings) yea and
all you bishops and your priests are more then me^ also (as may appear by
your book) for what so ever you say, we must believe you or else we despise
God. Thus ca^ you allege scriptures, and can prove this by a text i. These.
iiii.
of Paul. Non spernit hominem sed De^m. He does not despise man but God.
Which Leuite. xix. xxv.
text is spoken of the precept of God written in Leuiticus, which forbyddeth
the to defraude thy brother, which Paul alleges a little before, and
therefore warns the Thessalonians, not to set light of that law the author
whereof was not any man but God. But you write of authority. You may writh
scriptures as ye lust.

As for your place to the Hebrews, makes for the^ that preach the word of
God, whose Hebr. xiii.
faith we should follow, and consider the end of their conversation.

If you will be tried to be such ministers: you must prove unto us your
ministration, ii. Corh. iiii.
in much sufferaunce, in afliction, in necessity, in carfulness, in
strokes, in imprisonment, in seditio^s, in labors, watchyng, fastings, in
pureness, in knowledge, in gentleness of mind and liberality, in the holy
ghost, in love not feigned, and in the word of truth. etc.

Dare you still call your selves ministers? Then must you be the disposers of
these mysteries of God. And so long as you sit in the seat of Moses
preaching the word of God: so far will we believe you. And so far as you are the
folowers of Christ: we will follow you. But if you bring not his word, i.
Corh. xi.
we dare not say A^e unto you, nor receive you into our* houses. No we do take
you for the unclean beasts that do not divide the houffe.

Such are the shepeheardes (as Iheremie says) that are fed with the wind,
which Iherou. xxii. xxiii.
scatter the sheep, cast them forth, and do not visit the flock. The priest
and the prophet are boeth defiled, wherefore they do does follow a slipperie
way in the darcke, wherein they shall be driven forth, and fall in the same: for
I shall bring the day of their visitation upon them, says the Lord.

They are al like Sodomites in my sight, and the people like Gomorrha. With
wormewod and ga^^e therefore, will I feed the^. For all pollution is common upon
the earth (says the Lord) by the prophets of Iherusalem (men most highly
esteemed in outward holiness) But thus says the Lord of hosts. Give no ear
to the prophets that deceive you.
Give none ear to the words of these prophets that deceive you. For they
speak the vision of their own hertes, and not of the mouth of the Lord.

Thus are we plainly taught how perilouse a thing it is, to follow the
doctrines of men, be they never so highly advanced with titles of holiness.
Yea we are by the mouth of God admonished above all things to beware of them
that promise peace and quietness, folowinge but the shreudnesse of their own
hertes and folishe inventions, for it is a kind of Idolatry, not to stick
unto his word, as unto the thing only sufficient. Of such prophets
therefore, as bring their own inventions: does he say. I did not send
them, and they ran. I did not speak unto them, and they did prophecy. If
they had stand in my counsel and published my words to my people, they
should have turned them from their wicked ways, and from their wicked
inventions. I did hear how they told lies and dreams in my name by the
disceites of their heart, causynge the people to forget my name for their
dreams, (as is it come to pass this day) Therefore says the Lord of
hosts against such prophets. He that has a dream, let him tell his dream,
and he that has my word let him Ezechi. xxxiii
speak my word truly. What minglest thou chafe with the ^heate? Are not my
words like fire, says the Lord, and like the mall that breaks the stone?
Therefore to you prophets, that steal my words, every one from his brother,
dreamynge forth your lies deceyuyng my people with your lies and your miracles,
where as I did never send you, nor yet command any such thing to my people
as did not profit them. You are the heavy burden that I can no longer bear
and therefore I will cast you away.

Again Ezechiell in the spirit of God, does thus prophecy against you that
have Ezech xxxiiij
the names of shepeherdes and will not feed his flock with his word but
feed your selves by your crafty inventions and cause the sheep to go astraye
in the wild mountains of your errors.

Woe unto the shepeherdes of Israel (says the Lord) which do feed them
selves, The true de scription of our prelates.
ought not the flock to be fed of the shepeherdes? But you have eaten the
milk, you are clothed with their woll, you sley that which is fat and feed
your selves and will not feed my flock. You conforte not the weak, you heal
not the sick, you bind not up the broken, you seek not that which
perishes, but with power and rigor do you rule over them. Thus are my sheep
scattered because they have no shepeherde, and devoured with wild beasts.
They go wandering in the mountains and are scattered through the earth, and
no man does seek them. No man does seek them, I say. As truly as I do live
(says the Lord God) because my flock is thus spoiled and my sheep denoured,
whylse the shepeherdes do feed them selves and despise my flock. Lo, I my
self will require my flock at the hands of these shepeherdes, and they shall
neither feed my flock nor yet them selves any longer. For I will deliver my
flock out of their mouths says the Lord.

This is the talk that God the father has thorowout the old testament
against you that will not be content to feed his flock with his word only,
without the sour leven of man's doctrine. He calls you men fed and led with
the wind of errors, Idol shepeherdes, yea devouring wolfes that will never be
saciate.

Saying then, that boeth the scriptures and your own lives do testify of you,
that you are such rotten trees or rather poisoned stocks: what fruits of
heavenly doctrine shall we look to spring from you? Do men gather grapes of
thorns, or figs of thystles? The yuyl tree ca^bring no good fruit. Christ
therefore (in the new testament, and in his first sermon) gives us warnyng
of such Idol shepeherdes, saying. Beware of Math. vii.
these false prophets which come to you in shepes clothing, for inwardly
they are rauenyng wolfes.

And after that he had rebuked them that Math. xvi.
would seem to know al things, and yet could not see the time of their
visitation, calling them Hypocrites, wicked nation and aduoulterouse
generation that could not marcke or ponder the sign of Jonas the Prophet:
streightwaye he admonished his to take heed not of the leven of bread, but of
the seven of the doctrine of the scribes and phariseis. Neither did he at any
time rebuke so sharply, as when he did speak of these blind shepeherdes, and
their doctors showing how theido Mark. vii.
teach the traditous of me^ to put the precepts of God out of place, and that
all their doctrine makes for their corban and lucre, and that they do all
things to be seen of men. Thus do you also, following the trade of your
fathers. Math. vi. Math. xxiii.
For couetise, worldly pomp and hypocrisy: do establishe all the works and
doctrines of men that you do call so necessary.

Read the damnation that Christ him self pronounces against you in the.
xxiii. of Mathewe. Where he gives us our lesson also, that we shall keep and
observe your doctrines so long as they come forth of the seat and doctrine of
Moses. But in no wise to follow your works.

He teaches in the beginning of his preaching, that o^les our ryghtuousnes do
far Mat. v.
pass the ryghtuousnes of the scribes and phariseis (who only were accounted
the church in those days as you would be now) we can not enter the kingdom
of God.

The state of the phariseis and you (O bishops, lest you should murmour and
grudge The phariseis and bishops al one.
at my plain wrytynges) is in this case of your doctrines for the feeding of
Christ's ^locke, all one. Neither has any of you authority either to make
laws or interpret the scriptures (for boeth have one strength and must be
done by the same spirit) you have none authority, I say, over the flock,
further then you have the word of God for you. And bringing that word, you
may say: he that despises you, despises God.

As for things indifferent, you must say as Paul said upon this your own
exe^ple. If any man be co^tentiouse: the church of God knows no such
custom. So that rather then any such bitter contention as is now adays,
should continue it were better that all your in uentions were refused. For
saying that your authority is given to edify by love and charity: you may
not abuse it and destrye by bitter braulynge and cruel contention, for such
things as were not good before you named them so, nor yuyl before you did
forbid them.

Thus do I take many of your doctrines of men to be indifferent. As to stand
up at the Gospel, to pray or preach bare headed, to eat fish this day or
that day. All these things being indifferent in their kind, that
Superstition makes all things evil
is to say, nothing yuyll being voyed of superstition: are by superstition
made yuyll. For that changes good into yuyll. Yet are the best of these
doctrines but vain worship John. iiii.
of God, even in their best use. For his worship stands in spirit and truth.

But you have other doctrines and that very many, that are manifestly yuyll,
because you do therein adulterate the word of God as did the phariseis when
they added their gloses to the commandments of God. As when God said. Thou
shalt love thy neighbor: they added, hate thine enemy. God said. Thou
shalt not swear, but they added unto the precepte. Pay unto the Lord the
thing that thou swearest. Again, did not the old pharisees with their sour
leue^, Math. vi.
(which is Hypocrisy) make vnpleasante and unsavory the two special works
of the new man, Fasting and prayer. Did not Christ him self continually
rebuke them, Math. xv.
because they brake the commandments of God for their own traditions and
doctrines? where God the father had given commaunmente to honor father and
mother: they cried for their gain, their corban and offerynges.

Where God asks the whole heart and thereof only measures all our doings:
their teaching is to worship with the lips, though the heart be far from
me, says the Lord by his Prophet. In vain therefore do they worship,
teaching the Esai. xxix.
doctrines as precepts of men. The which doctrines, sith their first
beby^^ynge, the true Prophets of Christ seekynge the only honor of God:
have from time to time, labored to confute, and to restore to their worthi^es,
the precepts of God, and his holy commandments which ever more (amongst
hypocrites) have been in small reputation in comparison of their own
inventions. In so much that all these Prophets whom God sent to beat down the
blind errors of men's dreams: were hated, persecuted from City to City,
scourged, slain and crucified. So that all the blood of the just which was
and shall be shed upon the earth from Abell to the worlds end: may be heaped
upon the Hypocrites in the day of aduengeaunce, when they shall be adjudged to
the fire and torments prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

If any man do not fully perceive by this we have spoken, that the old
Phariseis and ours be not all one in their doctrines, their Hypocrisy and
cruel tiraunie: I desire him to considre the mattier depely, and to compare
substantially, the old and new things together. Concerning the holy words
of our Math. v.
master Christ, and most deep opening of the law of God his father, corrupted
by the gloses of the old Phariseis: our new Phariseis have found out a new
doctrine. They say that Christ's words are counsayles and no precepts. And
thereof have they founded and grounded opera supererogationis. Works that they
may distribute for money. For fasting Math. vi.
and praying (which are the new wynes that will break the old vessels) he
that has eyes may see that the old phariseis were not so yuyll as are the
new, who have added more to the wickedness of their predicessours. For where
Christ did rebuke the other bu^ of hypocrisy and vain glory. Ours have
added herunto, superstition of days, times, meats and drynkes, and have made
their prayers utterly nothing but a lip labor, because it is done in
appointed words and prescript number, in a tongue that the man which prays
does not understand. And therefore his lips labor, but his heart is voyed
of knowledge what he says, wherefore it can have no profit.

The honoring of the father and mother: they count chief^y to be done in their
corban, Math. xv.
offering mass pence and trentalles for them when they be dead. Much worsse
is this point then that of the old Phariseis.

To turn away the heart from the living God, that delivered out of Egypt:
They Math. xxiii.
have sought up and maintained ten thousand Idols. They bind heavy burdens of
law, doctrines and traditions, to oppress the pore people. Yet do they al
things under the pretense of holiness, even when they devour wydowes houses.
They love the first seats in feasts and counsayles, and to be saluted*
lords and masters, they shit the kingdom of heaven, they make proselites,
they teach blind doctrine, they are blind guydes, they are but painted
sepulchers, full of deadly poison of the old serpents seed. Wherefore they
d^ still slay the true preachers, that do admonish them of their wicked life,
false doctrines and vain worship: that they (being both in the miserable and
malicious blindness of the Phariseis and like cruelty of Cain their father) may
be judged guilty of all the blood of their brethren.

Beware of such false prophets (says our Math. vi.
master Christ) they come unto you in shepes clothinge, but inwardly they are
raueninge woulfes. By their fruits shall you know them. Do men gather grapes
of thorns and figs of thistles? Can such wicked woulfes bring forth
doctrines and lessons good and profitable for Christ's poor flock? Nay such
as the tree is, such must the fruit needs be.

If the black Morian may change his The morian and leopard^
skin, or the Leoparde her spots: then may you teach good doctrine (O
Popish doctors) you proud prelates, brought up in Sophistical sciences and
Ceremonies, and sworn proctours of all popish maonesse.

Your doctrine stands only in meat and drink, which is nothing of the
kingdom of God. In distributions of holy days and sa^thes, which are but
shadows. You have a conterfaite humility and superstition as it were of
Angels: but you go forth proudely in things you know not, puffed up in vain
by your carnal minds. etc. To be short, what are all your doctrines? Are
they not of this sort?

Toutche not the chalice, for it is holy. Toutch not the bread, for it is God.
Toutch Toutch not.
not the wine, for then thou will judge it to tarry still unchanged in his
kind. Handle not the corporace nor the karchiefe ther^, unless thou have
glo^es. Taste not steshe on the friday nor in the vigils of dead saints.
Taste no butter nor cheese, nor in a^ wise no eggs in lent. Which lent would
be handled if we had leisure, but God will grant us some other time more
meet for this mattier.

Fish you say is an holy meat in this your superstition. Thus hurt you the
body, and by your bodily doing, do nothing further true holiness. For God him
self is a spirit, and is worshipped in spirit, not in carnal doctrine and
precepts of toutching, tasting and handlyng.

Therefore (says Paul) if you be dead with Christ from traditions of the
world: why are ye (as yet living in the world) led with their Colo^^. ii.
doctrines that say toutch not, taste not, handle not. Which all do perish in
the vsinge of them, and are after the commandments of men, which things
have the similitude of wisdom in chosen holiness and humbleness, and in
that they spare not the body, and do the flesh no worship unto his need.

Mark how Paul calls all your doctrines (...) will holiness. Because Will
holiness
they come of your fond wills, and of no precept or commandment of God.
Such is your doctrine forbidding men to receive the sacrament in boeth the
kinds (make the best you can of it) grounded (...) will holiness. For you say
that the sacrament is not ministered in both the kinds as Christ did distribute
it: because we lay men will not have it. If we lay men have any such will
contcarie to the will of Christ (who said, Bibite ex hoc omnes, drink of
this you all. Diuidite inter vos, divide this among you) it is a fond will
holiness, and chosen holiness. But you say we do forbear it of a reverence.

If it be good to follow our will holiness and fantastical reverence in this
kind: why do we not of like reverence forbear the bread also, lest it wax
clammy and cleave to the roufe of our mouths? for in the wine we feel ^one
so vnreuerent a thing. But for spillynge the wine your doctrine is that we
may not meddle there with. But we think there is far more danger in your
great sleaues and Faunelles when you turn, toss and toye over and about the
cup: then in us that have the cup holden to our heads like babes. So that
if it be well done upon such reverence to forbear the wine: you (upon whom
much greater danger hangs) ought to have the greater reverence. Therefore
are either you vnreuere^t, or else are we not reverent, but folishe in our will
holiness, so many of us as will not drink of this cup as our master Christ
has commanded us.

This is like the reverence that the kentishmen had to the kings horse when
the The kentishe man.
king commanded him to open the gate. Iche am not worthy (quod he) to open
the gate to my master your horse, but hereby dwells master Pecham a man
worthy to do it. In like manner do they that will not come to drink of the cup
of the new testament, when Christ commands them, saying with the kentishe
man. Iche am not worthy to toutch it nor to drink there of: but our master
person or our sir John are worthy men for the purpose.

But (oh blind bishops) we are not all so fond, to be illuded still. For
many have read your books written for this purpose to maynteyne your pomp and
to keep us as your underlings: and therefore will we no longer suffer you to
say that we lewd men will not have it. But we desire and require you for the
love of God in his son Christ by whom we are made al one perfect and knigeli
priesthod to offer up our selves a lyueing sacrifice, purified by the blood of
his unspotted lamb, which makes perfect all things in this uewe testament,
which he commands us to divide and generalli wills us all to be partakers
thereof, that you do set up no doctrine of will holiness against the manifest
word of Christ the son of God who said. Drink of this you all. For if you
do, it must neades be still spoken of you that is said by the prophet Esaie.
They worship me in vain, teachinge the doctrynes and precepts of men.

Now lest any simple man should be deceived Beware of my Lords lies.
with your iuglinge words, when you say that good men might by the order of
the church communicate under boeth the kinds though they have contented the^
selves with the communion of one kind, and that it was never denied but that
all states of me^ might communicate in boeth the kinds, and that there was
^euer law made to the contrary, neither any estate of men repelled a^
unworthy to receive the one kind as well as the other, but that they have of
their selves forborne reerently: I have against you not only your canon law
and popeishe decrees, which you have so perfectly learned, but your cruel
statute of the syxt articles also, wherein you made it death to defend these
open words of our Master Christ, Drink of this you all. This is enough to
cast you in this mattier. For if it were lawful for all christian men to
communicate in boeth kinds what cruelty call you this, to make it to be
proclaimed fourth times in the year in every church, and every month in all
sessions, assizes, courts, and law days, that who so mayntayneth it to be
lawful shall be judged an herityke and as an heryteke suffer death by burning?
Is there any such charity in you as Paul had in the setting forth of his
doctrine concerning that a woman ought to be covered in the congregation? Or is
the drinkinge of this cup a more wayghtie matter, or more hurtful to them that
do it? Christ commands us to do this, and Paul does but reasone in the
other accordeynge to the law of nature. Why are you so shameless then (Oh
byshopes) to kill Christ's sheep for doeinge their masters commandment, and
mayntaynynge his will, declared in his scriptures: seeing that Paul is ready
(rather then there should be any coutencion about it) to call his doctrine
back again, teachinge most plainly that the church of god ought not to
maintain any such doctrine of any man as may styre any contencion, debate or
strife

The determinacio^ of the doctoures of the great university of Paris against
the ministracion of the sacrament in boeth the kinds.
FVrther more, to open unto the simple (as I have promised) what your popeishe
divinity does determine in this cause: in the year of our Lord God a
thousand. v. hundredth forty and. ij. the. x. day of march, all the doctoures
and bachilers of diuinitye of the university of Paris, gathered to gether into
their schole called Sorbona, have by solemn oath professed this article of
communion in one kind to be truly and worthyly mayntayned, and many such
like nolesse shameful then wicked, which are published in the new statue^ of
that faculty, with shame enough. Their fond foleish and wicked words be
these in the. vij. article.

The communion under boeth kinds is not (...) unto lay men unto salvation.

And it is rightly and justly in old time decreed by the church: that they
should communicate under one kind only, the kind of bread.

Which they prove by these worthy reasones. For the^ were it dainger lest the
blood should be spilt. But where the lutherians do demand whether the church
be wyser the^ Christ: because it provides for this inconvenience, whereof
Christ was not ware in commaundeynge the wine to be taken: I do answer, that
Christ did forse the thing, but he kept it secret to prove the wisdom of his
church.

There is also an other inconvenience, For the body of the Lord must be kept
in Cibario, to be given to the sick. But if the wine should be reserved also:
it would be made vinacre, and so for the corruption, it should be no longer
blood. Ye^ the lutherians would deride us sayeinge, does it not well appear
that there is wine still. And so this should make against the opinion of
traunsubstantion and change of substance.

Thyrdely, this is also reasonable, that the priests should have some
privilege, to suppress and hold down the pride of the people.

Fourthly, this does auayll to prove the opinion. De concomitantia, of what so
ever the Lutherians do clatter, that we should follow, observe and keep, the
ordinances of Christ which he has appointed for our infirmity.

Also there should be an other daynger if the blood should be given to drink,
for the^ the taste thereof might engender a suspicion to the lay men there
remained wine still, whereof would arise many slanders.

But if they do reason that the church has no power to dispense with the
commandments of God: I do answer, that the word By bite. Drink you, must
be taken as a counsel and no precepte.

There is yet one thing that I dare scarsely allege, which is well worthy to be
deeply pondered. For there be some that drink no wine, which may not be
deprived of those kinds. But I did defer to bring this same because the
Lutherians will deride us and Some drink no wine.
say, that there is no wine now but blood

This is the very doctrine that your popish doctors were wont to teach and
preach in all plares. But now that it has pleased the Lord to open the eyes
of his people to e^pie the leude reasones of you so blind guides, so that you
can no longer hope to work your wickedness so openly: the Devil steareth up
Stephane Subtle and his fellows, by deceyuable words, to maintain the same
matters.

First you lay all the fault in the lay men (as surely we are much to
blame, does in this and other things, because we have suffered you so long)
sayeinge that the lay me^ compelled by no law have of their own
foleishenesse (holiness you say* for borne the one kind. Secondly, you
establishe your purpose Luke. xxiiil. A^t^. ii.
full craftily, with the ministeryng of one kind to the disciples in Emaus. And
the breaking of bread mentioned in the Acts. Where unto you add this
exclusive, Alone. And yet when Joy says that faith alone does justify: you
can bark and brale at him biding him bring some open scripture where it is
written faith alone. We may justly therefore (if you will give us leave) ask you
wherit is written in scripture bread alone.

In the. xxiiij. of Luk, it is written that Christ did take the bread, blessed
and brake it and did give it to the^ and their eyes were opened.

But* whether we will understand that Christ used herein his accustomed and
old manner of thanks geuynge (as he did always when he did take bread or
such like creatures to teach his to be always thankful, as appears John.
vi. Luke, ix. Mark. vi. and. viij. Math. xiiij. and. xv.) or we will say that
he did also bless the cup and not the bread alone: you have not one word to
confute us.

If you dare then put to your gloss and exclusyue (A lone) in the second of
the Acts where it is said that they did co^tynewe in the doctrine of the
Apostles breaking bread by every house (besides that you make the Apostles
very lewd, so sone to be forgetful of their Masters example and special
commandment to divide this brotherlye cup among the^) you may likewise be
demanded (because you take somuche lybertye sometime to speak merylie)
whether you will add your exclusyue (alone) unto the words next following,
which are these* Inuicem sumebant cibum, They did take meat to gether. As
though they should eat meat alone without drink.

But surely you prelates do right well The prelate^ consideracion
know how unmeet and perilouse a thing it is to eat bread without drink:
and therefore have ye granted us pore lewede people, to have three draftes of
your chalyce to wash dow^e your clammye God when he cleaves to the roufe of
our mouths.

And though you do not bless the wine that you give us, no not so much as once
blow upon it or wagge your holy fingers over it: I yromise you I like it
never the worsse. For I know that God has blessed it as his good creature,
and I can not perceive how your blessinge should amend it. Whether you will
or not therefore, I receive it as the sacrament and holy semblaunce of the
blood of the unspotted lamb in the new testament that like as the fathers of
the old testament had the natural blood of their lamb and passover
sprinkled on all their posts and doors: so likewise we of the new testament
saying we can not have the natural blood of this lamb of the new testamente,
neither stand we need of any such carnal imaginacion, to us that are
spiritual. Yea some of the disciples of Christ would have dronken the blood
that ran forth of his side if this had been so profitable.

We of the new testament (I say) knowing that our vnspoted lamb Christ
Jesus, has delivered us out of the Egypt of sin, and the hellye Pharao: do
also knoweledge our deliverance by this cup of the new testament in his
blood offered for the sins of the whole world according to the sayeinge of
Paul in his Epistle to the Corhinihya^s.

The cup of thanks geueinge (says he) where with we give thanks: is it not
the i. Corh. x.
partakinge of the blood of Christ? This cup, sayteh Paul (on his masters
word) is the new testament in my blood. Do this so often as you drink in the
remembrance of me. For as often as you shall eat of this bread and drink of
this cup: you shall show the Lords death till he come.

What so ever he be therefore, that would stope this well of Iacobbe, and this
spiritual spring wytholdeing us from drinckeing of this cup wherein we do
spiritually receive the blood of the immaculate lamb that was slain for us,
he does not only break the commandment of Christ our master and
savior, refuseinge the cup of brotherly The cup of brotherli love
love, which ought to be divided amongeste all them that be of Christ: but he
does also stop the memory of our deliverance by Christ, hinder us from
the communion and partaking of his blood, and extinguish and blotte forth (so
far as in them lies) the remembrance of him that has by his blood bought us.

But now, because you know that al you have said, has but a feeble
foundation: you ren still to the cornor stone of your buildeinge, and say.

Unto this day we be only assertayned Winchesters words
by tradicion of the church, in the true vnderstandeynge of the Evangelists,
of our order in the consecracion of the said sacrame^te, and the circumstaunce
of the pronunciacion of Christ's words whereby the same is wrought.

Al thought this intricate sentence of The answer
yours of the order of consecracion, and the circumstaunce of the pronunciacion
might minister just matier of an whole book: yet because I have this one
marcke chieflye before mine eyes, to teach how that you neither in this nor
in any other mattier will cla^e to the in fallible certainty and truth of the
scriptures, but account your selves to be ascertayned by the only tradicions
of your doctors whom you call the church, I give warneinge to all good men
that they give no credence to this your deceivable sophistry. For by these
terms of tradicions Tradicions and church
of the church continued so long time: you may bring in popes pardons,
pilgrimages and what ye lust.

But how can any good heart believe, that you would truly minister your
tradicions secretly taken at the hands of your fathers when we se you minister
falsely the things that are taught in scripture? Ca^ you bewitch us to believe
that you will minister the tradicions that you have learned in secret, for our
profit: when we se you corrupt the openscripturs with your gloses for your
own profit Drink of this you al, are the plain words of our savior
Christ the master of al truth And shall we believe you in your unwritten
verities, when you go about to gloses this and such like places of scripture?
Nay it is an hundred times more likely that you would be falser in secret
things, tha^ in open. Where An apt similitude.
fore, as you might call him a fool that would trust such one to tell his money
in his absence as has picked his pursse and done falsely before his face: even
so might you reckon us worsse the^ mad, if we (haueinge experience of you,
saying you taken with the manner and reproved for the corrupting of ye open
scriptur before our eyes, yea and ^o taken that you ca^ not deny i^) would
beliue that which has these. M. years lien in your roten mawes in the fleshly
mire of man's inue^cions, should now be wholesome for us: seeing that your fathers
the Popes, have so ming led all their tradicions with the open blasphemies
against God and all godliness (which is the very doctrine of Antichrist)
and the phariseies that followed them have thriste all things so full of their
leven of Hypocrisy, and you their successors have strayned them to such
ungodly purpose, and maintained them with such crueltye.

The ceremoneis (whereof the popeish religion stands) the bishop calls
nothing, and yet like Farthynge, they all joined together make up the heap.
Therefore may we speak generally of your tradicious and ceremoneis which you
call farthynges, that fyl up the heap of your fond religiou, if every one of
the^ ^eperate alone be nothing (as you do plainly grant) surely it is a
goodly mass and heap that arises of In the. cxxvi. ^eafe of my lords book
and the. xvii. live,
so many nothinges.

Consider your own exemple does a shaven crown make a priest? you answer,
nay it is nothing. And you say the dwell cal^eth it a flesh mark. But I
call it the marcke A shaven crown is no thing.
of the beast, because the pope^ (no doubt) is that cruel beast and
Antichriste painted in the prophets and Apocalipses, whose marck you must
needs grant it to be that you may use his marchaundise. For God the father
commanded his priests that in no case they should be shaven round on their
Leuit. xix.
heads, neither by shaueinge deforme their bearders. And Christ his son
which came to appoynte a more spiritual priestehode: would not command any
such gross, carnal and fleshelye ceremony, but left such things to our
liberty. Now be cause you would declare your selves who^ you would follow:
you wylbe shaven round in your heads, and for to kiss women more swetelie
your beardes shall no sooner wax sharp but you will shave the^ smothe again.
You will be like the Idolatrouse priests of Isis, boeth in your shauinge and
your womanlyke wearinge of lyuen and side garments that like may favor like.
But to proceed with your popeish^ priesthod. Does a long gown make aprieste?
Nay, it is nothing. For tha^ A long gown is nothing.
the phariseies (who loved to walk in long robes, and made wide the skyrtes
of their gowns as ours do) had been priests good ^outh. Does the name make
a priest. As master person. sir John, or my Lord byshope Nay (says our
master Christ) woe unto you phariseis that will be called masters and have the
vain title of Rabby, he that exalts him self shall be brought low.

Does the anoynteinge make a priest? Nay Christ (the chief priest yea the
first and only priest of the new testament, because he only could offer
unto his father a sacrifice pleasant and acceptable, in whom all the
ceremonial priestehode ceased being now a ppoynted to an euerlasteinge
priesthode, not standeinge in Ceremonies as did the Levites, but after the
order of Melchisedech was not anointed with bodilye oil in to his pristehode.
Peter, Paul, James, John and all the other Apostles and disciples, the
ministers and disposers of the treasurs of God and his mysteries: were not
anointed The Apostles werenot a^ointed withoutward oils.
with outward oil, but with the in ward oil of the spirit. They had the
thing it self, and we have the shadows only and the outward ceremoneis,
which are nothing in very deed, seeing that they be void of the body and
things that they signify and are become lyeynge signs. Thus is your
anoynteinge in very deed nothing. Or else to speak in plain English, it is
a lyeynge sign and deceyuable shadow.

Does the power that you byshopes give to sacrifice Christ again for the
quike and the dead make a priest? Nay surely.

For you have no power tobe come new priests, and so to sacrifice Christ
again, as the Epistle to the Hebrews does teach you and we have spoken hereof
at the beginning. Wherefore this is a lie intolerable, and less the^ nothing
to ground the true priesthode upon.

If you blow upon your consecrate creature that you call priest, and say
Accipe spiritum sanctum, Does that make him a priest? You dare not say this
were nothing for then were it some what that you use in Christenynge of
children, wherein you make miracles even after the same sort. It must ^eades
be some what therefore, and surely it is somewhat.

Yea it is agreate deal to much, that you should take upon you to give that
you never had and mock the geuer thereof with your massinge gestures and
mumblinges, even as you do in your mass when you breath out the words of
Christ over the bread and wine, to the intent to work the straungeste
miracle by them that ever was wrought.

But as all your whole heap is but a multitude of nothinges: so are you your
self nothing (yea and that less is) the shodowe of no thing. And all your
creatures that you have coniured up of nothing shall shortly be dissolved again
into nothing, When Christ only and his priesthode shall be some thing, as he
him self is al in all things and continues our one oneli Bishop and hight
priest for ever who has satisfied for the sins of al, by ffering him self
(once for all) a lively sacrifice unto god his father at whose right hand be
sits as it is written Hebrews the tenth. This high priest or bishop offering
one oblacio^ for si^e sitieth at the right hand of god for ever.

Truly, the priests of the old law were many because death did take them
away. But Christ because he remains for ever, has an everlasting
priesthode. And because their priesthode was imperfect, therefore was Christ
appointed to be a priest after the order of Melchisedech, without any such
succession of other priests, to follow in his stead and therefore said the
prophet. Thou art a priest for evermore, after the order of Melchisedeche.

The law of Moses made men priests but the word of the oath which was above
the law, did ordein the son a priest, made perfect for evermore. He made
this presthode perfect and fulfilled all his sacrifices at once when he offered
him self.

Thus do we perceive it to be a lyeynge power that bishopes do challenge in
making their priests.

To take a priest therefore (as you do) for Learn to know a true priest.
a sacrifier for sin is iniuriouse unto Christ and we know none such in the
new testament, for that presthode must neades end with the law of sacrifice.
But to take a priest as Malachie does the lyppes of the priest shall keep
knoweledge, and they require the law at his mouth, for he is the angel and
minister of the Lord of hosts. Here find we a better mark then the beasts
mark or the flesh mark: that is to say, knowledge, whereby only he does
the message of his Lord and master, and instructs his sheep in the law of
God. By this mark are true priests tried and known.

Wherefore says God by his prophet Osee. Because thou have refused knowledge
Osee. iiii.
I will put the back that thou shalt be no priest before me. This knowledge
is the anointing of the spirit, without the which The anointing of the
spirit.
the bodily anoyntinge is plain derision of the spirit and hypocrisy, and
without this, the side gown and wide skyrtes, serve to nothing but to make
them to be magnified before men. Such therefore as have the anointinge of the
spirit, may you bishops anoint if you please, and appoint to be ministers
of Christ's flock, to distribute his word and sacraments.

Now may we mark by this we have heard: whether we may sty^ call your
disguised priesthode (w^^che stands in shauinges, oyntings, garments,
gestures, beckinges, blowynges, crossynges, kyssynges, and the farthynges
whereof the whole heap arises) the true priesthode, or rather judge all these
things to be nothing, and therefore your priesthode to be conterfaite, which
follows no learning or knowledge to be the messengers of the Lord, but
Idleness, whoredom and Idolatry, to be the me^bres of Satan, following holiness
in outward show only of your ceremonies, killinge and sleaing the true
priests, preachers and messengers which are the angels of God. These knowinge
the stewardship appointed unto the^: fear the woe and everlasting damnation
hanging over their heads, if they do not preach the message of their master:
But (I am right sure) you think me ouerlonge in this mattier.

Let us go farther with your farthinges therefore. What makes a bishop? An
whole heap of ceremonies (you say) which considered severally alone, are
nothing. What is a broad crowme, as broad as. x. priests crowns: does not
this make a bishop? No this is nothing. Does a miter make a bishop. No
surely. Do the glistering gloves make a bishop? No, they are nothing. What do
all the lordly possessions, and the long train following? Ah now we steare, for
these things are somewhat. They make you lords, but not bishops What makes you
bishops then? for we can see nothing in you but this gear and such like
Wherefore, you make us believe that you be like bishops as the other be
priests, That is to say, co^terfaite, patchinge together of the cloutes of
ceremonies, and things of naught (if you were waighed in the balla^ce of
equite) less the^ farthinges, yea lighter the^ nothing.

But Paul sets forth other manner of farthinges, where he describes a
bishop. The bishop (says he) must be fautles, the husband of one wife,
watchful, sobre, mild harberouse, apt to teach, no drunckarde, no fighter,
not desirouse of filthy gain, but vprighte, flyinge strife, flyinge
covetousness, that rules his own house well, which has his children in
subjection with al reverence. Lo, here be farthinges of great weight and value,
even when they be considered every one alone by him self. These are the good
farthynges therefore, that make the good bishops, and the other are the
nothinges that make the Idol bishops, things of no value. All the first
farthinges may well be wyped away and the man never the worsse: but wype
away these farthynges that Paul names, and you can have no good bishop.

Now for the substance of our religion which as you say stands in these
farthinges of your popish ceremonies: if you do mean of the popes religion,
we do grant it only and wholly to stand in ceremonies and shadows, as your
priesthode does. And if may well enough be wyped away as nothing. Your
mumbling in a tongue not understand (which you call your prayer) is nothing.
Your crossing, blessyng and wagging of fingers, is nothing. Your creeping to
the cross is nothing: yea it is an evil thing. Your halowyng and caryinge of
candles, is nothing. Your kneelyng, knockyng, and holding up of hands to
this, which we have proved to be bread, is nothing, if an Idol may be
nothing, or Idolatry nothing. Your super stitious conjuring of the good
creatures of God, to drive away diuylles and disases, which you call the
making of holy water, Holy water,
is notynge. Your casting of the same about your beds, is nothing. No, your
superstition of creatures in your chose^ fastes, is nothing. Yea all that ever
the Pope has bylt (which you bishops do maynteyne) is nothing, yea less
then nothing, the shadows of nothing, and the vain dreams of nothing. Thus
is your popish religion nothing, and worsse then nothing, and shall come to
nothing, even as your abbayes have done, which had their foundations of so
many nothinges, and by their nothing had heaped together all things, riches,
lands and tenementes.

But learn, O bishop, I pray you, that all your nothings are not regarded
before God. But this is everlasting life, to know God, and who^ he has sent
Jesus Christ, that the knowledge of god may make the christian man, like as it
makes the good priest and true bishop. And this is always somthynge (divide
it as small as yo^ can) continually ministered by our head Christ, according
to the capacity of every member. This knowledge of god brings forth love,
peace, righteousness and joy in the holy ghost, which is the substance of the
christian religion, as Paul says. The kingdom of God (says he) is not
meat and drink: but ryghtuousnesse, peace, and joy in the holy ghost.

Bishop Stephane, you talk fondly in reporting us to bid men eat all the day
long, and other things that follow. Your popish doctrine is, that men may
drink all the day long, so they eat but once in the day, how much they
eat then it forces not, nor how deinteth meat, so it be not flesh. Five
dishes of fish, for one of flesh, breaks no fast at al, mary it is to be
thought, that the multitude The perfec^ on of the bishops fast.
of dishes is the perfection of your fast as appeare^h in your service on
fish days (as you ^al them) and that eue^ in your most holy houses and
coleges. Yea the scholars in your coleges are allowed as much to their diners
on the fasting days as they have to diner and supper both on other days. But
if a man eat a piece of biefe or bakon, an hen or a capon: Oh abominable
heresy, treason and lowlardy. He is worsse then a Jew or a Turk.

Again, where you call the hearing of the Gospel preached (which ought to be
the chief cause of our assemble) the false teaching of the Devil: you declare
of what spirit you be. You never heard man disprayse prayer, unless it were
popish prayer, which is lip labor that no man takes profit by.

But lo thus are you led by your fantastical farthynges, from one tristle to
an other, from one creature to an other. You lynke together your wickedness as
it were with a chain and draw together your wretchedness as it were with a
cable, till such time as you come to the greatest abomination (as you say) by
degrees. Your phanell is nothing, your albe is nothing, your stole is nothing,
your gyrdle is nothing, your vestiment is nothing, your blowyng is nothing,
your blessyng is nothing, your crossyng and kykyssyng is nothing. But the
holdyng up of your Idol to be worshypped, is something. For, the set up any
creature to be worshypped as God, is abomination, and abominable Idolatry.

Thus by degrees come you to the high mystery of wickedness. And this causes
you that you can not be contented with the state of bishops, but you will be
Lords, yea above lords and princes, as you do both preach and write, because
you can make that which neither king nor angel can make, that is to say Christ
God and man. You are the children of this world and therefore the world can
not hate you. And therefore have you ben so crafty to creep in by little and
little and to make up the great heap of your baggage, which you call the
substance of your religion. And therefore do you now fight with fire and
faggot, for the conservation of the same, that it may conserve you in your
lordly dignities.

Thus has your worldly witted fathers even from the beginning fought with the
saints of God, whose blood cries from under the aultare and asks
vengeance, and shall be heard right spedily.

Mark (good bishops) whom* you have always murdered even from the beginning.
Which of the Prophets of the old testament, did escape chief priests and
bishops?

And sith the coming of Christ: your murders are innumerable. I will not, nor
ca^ not reckon them. Did not Christ him self dye by the conspiracy of Annas,
Cayphas and other bishops, because he rebuked the world of blyndenes? Al such
as you have murtherd sense that time: have clear testimonies of their
innocence, by some of your own scribes and writers. Had not Husse (who^ yon
Husse.
account the Arche heretic) four seals of the noble men of Morania, to
witness his innocent life and godly learning to your cursed and cruel
counsel at co^staunce. Does not Pope Pius, otherwise called Eneas Silnius,
Pogius the Florentyne, Platina Sabellicus and other your own men, report well
of him?

But to come home, boeth to your own time and country. Who does not bewail
the tyranny that you showed unto that innocent lamb Bylnaye, who (being
demanded in Bylnay.
derision by a proud papist, when he went to his death, why he wroughte no
miracles (being so holy as he was accounted) answered with mylde voice and
countenance. God only (said he) works miracles and wonders and he it is
that has wrought this one wonder in our eyes, that I being wrongfully accused,
falsely belyed, opprobriously and spytefully handled, imprisoned, buffetted, and
condemned to the fire: yet hitherto have I not once opened my mouth with one
evil word against any of you. This passes the work of nature, and is
therefore the manifest miracle of god, who will by my suffering and death, be
glorified and have his truth enhaunced.

What report have you gotten for the murdering of Hunne in the lowlars tower?
You Hunne.
had neither felony nor treason to lay to his charge: yet most vilanously did
the chauncelour of London murder that honest man for his own childs crisome.
I will say nothing of the priest that was found hanging in your porters ward.
And five hundredth mo, whereof some have by your tirannouse handlyng, for sworn
the truth and forsaken their masters.

Some for fear of your tira^ny have run out of their wits, some have
forsaken their countries, chosyng rather to ^ue like banished men: then to
suffer your cruel and babilonical bondage. I could reken many, whose life is
yet in the eyes of the world, and the cause of their death utterly unknown,
unless it were for speaking against your popish madness.

Wherefore dyed Barnes, Therome, and Garret? in the late storm of your
captain of Barnes.
Norfolk, steared for his kinswoman. They were neither declared felons nor
^aytours. Norfolk.
They did not strive with you against the god of bread. But this was their
death (so far as I could learn) because they preached man to be justified by
faith in the blood of Christ only, and by none of your popish inventions.

Ohtira^ny intolerable. You have to long blinded our governors and made them
your butchars and tormentours.

What should I speak of the last persecution, when you caused to be proclaimed
that no book of christian religion should be brought into this Realm from
beyond the sea? How many did you then murder, and would have done mo, had
not the King by his power plucked out of your claws, one whom you had with
small equity examined, and with less justice condemned? What justice did you
show in that you did so shamefully rack Anne Askue after she was condemned?
But Anne Askue.
she shewinge more constancy then has been communely seen in a woman: shall
now after the death of her body, work you shame to all your posterity?

Was Lassels with the other his fellows John Lassels
martyrs (co^fessinge the living God and his son Christ the only savior)
worthily burned with fire, and (as you did rashly determine and judge)
condemned and destroyed in body and soul?

What were they? whoremongers, Idolatours, adulterers, thieves, extorsiouers, or
ma^quellers? Upon such comes the wrath of God, and such have no part in the
kingdom of God. But you suffer to live and you show no power against them. No
you are not any thing terrible unto such: for they dwell at your noses, they
eat at your tables, and are The bishops darlinges.
your darlinges. But who that speaks any thing against your popish Idols
and brainsicke inventions (have he never so faithful an heart to God, and be he
never so trusty to his prince) yet must he be an heretic, a traitor a lowlar
and all together.

This does the world epsy at the length and talks of you. I would this
talk might make you leave your evil doings: and to learn at the least to
do some part of your duty before the wrath of God fall upon you. But I do
fear me al words are but wind with you. Only vexation and chastisement will
give you understanding. For lo, here you say full finely and like a popish
prelate that would have all thing brought to the old blyndenes and
ignorance, and to such captivity, and bondage that no man should talk of
his fayeth but under my Lords license, though Peter commanded the contrary.
You say that of faith there is so much talk and tattelinge (to use your own
terms) that true belief is gone. Surely if you call this true belief, the
Romish belief of pardones and pilgrimages, when we might have no talk of
^ure faith, but were commanded in pain of cursinge, and burninge, to beleue^
as the church of Rome believes, like as you can know none other true church,
nor none other good men, but such as follow that church: I grant your belief
is fore wasted, and I trust shall right shortly consume like stubble with the
fire of Gods word, and true works of mercy, peace, and loving kindne^
shall spring forth when men (knowing tha^ your Pope holy works are but the
madness of idle brains) shall worship the living God in spirit and truth. But
lo, you will have here the carte to go before the horse, and will have us to do
these works before we know them, saying that doing is the way to knowledge,
where contrary wise, al well doing must needs spring of knowledge, as the
only thing that makes our deeds good.

And because you bishops are so slow in preaching good works that God
requires: the people must needs be stacke in doing them. For you should be
the salt of the earth. The salt is ^^sauourie.
But saying that you be become unsavory, how ca^ you season other? You
preach your own inventions, the precepts and commandments of men, and them
must we needs know and confess, or else must we be brent. But it is a
dangerous thing to know the scriptures (and especially for pore men) and to
talk of our fayeth. This doctrine of yours spoyleth us of fayeth, and
brings us into the Idleness of works. Oh diuelishe sophistry, and the
spiritual subtlety, stryuing against all godliness.

Satan him self could not divise such a reason to hinder our faith and stop
knowledge. The Popes bishops only could do it.

But mark how this sophistry is confirmed and proved. The Bishop (for
lack of scriptures) brings forth Cato an heathen man who despised the greek
poets, because the youth of Rome waxed effeminate, and whi^se Cato.
they set their delight in them, they rather rejoiced in readinge of battayles
then fightinge them selves. But what is this to us christen men, which ought
to be ready to give answer of our faith to e^e^ie one that asks us? which
should talk of the will of God toward us, and his holy commandments when
we lie down and when we rise, when we go by the way and when we sit at the
table, compting our selves then to be most happy when we were most delited
therein, day and night as David says.

But this is strange doctrine unto you, because you are none of Paul's
bishops. For he gave his bishops in commandment to be iustant in the word in
time and out of time. No, you are an english bishop, thynkinge the word of
God to be good but at An English bishop.
those times that you will appoint, and that to a few gentlemen to whom you
durst not deny it. And to busily occupied merchants whom you do epsy not
so much to regard it as they have done, giuinge them this knot in the end of
your book, that (...) they wax wa^ ton, they shall be put to silence as well as
women, and yomen are all ready.

Oh Stephane, this is thy work, as the chiefest english captitaine that ever
Antichrist had. For thou workest thy works as his enemy, but thou art his
friend. Thou wouldeste seem an Angel, but thou art a fiende.

I beseech all good men therefore, that as they tender their souls health,
they will take heed to your sweet poison and flattering words, and also to
your dark terms which you do bring forth of other languages. For by them
chiefly have we ben deceived, and ever sith we have mistrusted your fair
words, and marked the mattier in our own mother tongue and natural language.
We have by little and little, ever more and more espied your subtilties.

Before we had the Creed in English: we ^lde not know that this presence of
the body naturally and really, that is to say, in his very nature as he was
man and a sensible thing and substance, was contrary to three of the most
manifest article of our faith.

Moreover, where you add as a couclusion, fully proved and persuaded unto al
good men, that Christ is really present in the Sacrament (...) the aultare, to
feed our weak bodies and souls, whereby to make us strong to come to him
and ly^e without end: surely I can not perceive how you can persuade this
thing to any good man, that marketh the Articles of his fayeth concerning the
ascendyng of Christ, and his sittynge at the right hand of his father and
his coming thence to judge the quick and the dead, though you have with your
dark terms deluded and blinded many good simple souls, who^ you would not
suffer to have and know their belief otherwise then in the lati^e tongue, and
so taken at your hands, that you might mixed therewith your gloses, so craftily
handled and blinded with your sophistry terms (as really to be in the
sacrament which you say before is accidents) that the thing it self and
substance may be really in accidents. And then shall it not only be a
spiritual meat to feed the soul: but also a bodily fode to feed your
bodies like fleshly Ca parnaites that will eat Christ as he was man walkyng
upon earth, to the fode of your bodies.

To make you strong (you say) to come unto him. What strength is it whereby
you Fill the bealie to come to Christ.
come to him? Bodily, or spiritual? Oh men voyed of the spirit. You will feed
the body, to have the strength of the spirit to come un to Christ. Where
learned you any like lesson in the scriptures?

This is your well doing and well speaking without knowledge. First labor
for knowledge of the word of God and leave the subtlety of your own brain,
and you shall boeth speak more wisely and work more godly I warrant you.

Christ teaches in the. vi. of John, that to come unto him is to believe in
him, saying. He that comes unto me shall not be hungry, and he that believes
in me, shall never be thirsty. And a little after, he calls this the eatinge
of the bread of life, the eatinge of him self, and his flesh, saying. I am
the living bread that came down from heaven, if any man eat of this bread,
he shall love for ever. And the bread which I shall give is my flesh, which
I shall give for the life of the world. He that eats my flesh and drinks
my blood, has everlasting life. And he that eats my flesh and drinks my
blood, abides in me and I in him. Then answers he to the blind
Caparnaites, that would eat him really and bodily, as the meat of their
bodies. My words are spirit and life, the flesh profits nothing.
Wherefore I said unto you, that no man can come unto me, except it be given
him of my father. And this power given of the father to receive Christ: is
taught in the first of John. He came into his own (says John) and his own
did not receive him. But so many as did receive him, he granted them to be
made the children of God. They (think you) that did receive him bodily, and
eat him really (to use your terms) to feed their bodies and souls, to make
them strong to come to him.

What need such me^ to make the^ strong to come to him, when they have him in
their bealies, and have eaten him already?

Leave of all gross imaginations of the flesh that profits not, and follow
the doctrine of the spirit: and John will teach you and declare playnelie who
receives Christ and comes unto him. For all must needs be one thing, to
come to Christ and to receive Christ. Read this that ^oloweth therefore,
which you mumble up at every Mass in every corner, and yet will you not
suffer the people to understand it. Quotquot autem receperunt eum, dedit eis
vt liceret filios dei fieri, videlicet hijs qui credidissent in nomen ip^ius.
Quino^ exsanguinibus, neque ex voluntate carnis, neque ex voluntate viri, sed
ex deo nati sunt. So many as receive him, he granted the^ to be made the
children of God (that is to say) so many as believe in his name. Mark home
diligently John declares him self of the receiuinge of Christ by faith And
further Which are not borne of blood, neither by the will of the flesh, nor by
the will of man, but are borne of God, as 1. Pet. i.
Peter says. Borne again, not of mortal seed, but by the word of the
lyuinge God. i. Pet. ii.


This is the milk not of the body (says Peter) but it is the meat and
milk of the soul, that knows no gile.

Thus renneth all the scripture, by metaphors and borrowed speech from bodily
meat to spiritual meat, from the bodily teeth and eatinge, to the
spiritual eatinge by the soul, which can be done by faith only. So that he
which is not borne from above of the spirit: can neither see the kingdom of
God, nor come unto Christ, let him eat the bread (wherein you say is really
the flesh) so long as you lust. For this must needs be true. That which
is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that which is borne of the spirit, is
spirit.

Even like as Moses set up the serpent in the wilderness, that so many as
would come unto it might be saved from the fiery serpents: so likewise was
the son of man exalted that all that do believe in him should not perish, but
have everlasting life.

Again. So has God loved the world, that he has given his only son, that
who so believes in him, shall not perish, but have life everlasting.

Again. He that believes in him shall not be condemned. And he that believes
not in him is condemned all ready, because he believed not in the name of the
only begotten son of God.

Thus may we see that faith (and not ea^inge of Christ really in the sacrament)
does ^aue, and bring life everlasting. And not to ^eleue in the only
begotten son of God: is ^amnation of body and soul. So is it not to ^enie
your gloses really present, and bodily ^aten. Yea mainteininge this gross
opinion: ^ou can not esteem him to be the son of the ^uinge God, nor believe
the work that his ^ather has wronght in his death.

For God the father did not send his ^ne in the form of bread or any other
creature, but only in the form of man, to the intent to exalt man thereby, to
make man of his householde, to give life unto man by his son Christ, to
raise him again with Christ and cause him to sit together with Ephe. ii.
Christ among the heavenly spirits. And to show forth in the world to come,
the passing richesse of his grace, in his godnesse toward us by Christ Jesus.

We believe in the only begotten son, which was made man to save the world*
wherefore we can not be condemned, though we do seek none other strange
belief of really present and bodisie eaten to feed the bodies, which things
are not taught in the scriptures.

You do not believe in the only begotten son made man, but made bread to
take away sins: wherefore unless you do repent, your da^natio^ is at hand,
because you believe not in the name of the only begotten son of God, which
is the only begotten son, as he is man, conceived by the holy ghost and
borne of the virgin Mary, not as he is bread blown with your stinkinge
breathes. Neither is he the only begotten son of God, as he is wine
whispered into your chalice.

How do you believe in this name (the only begotten son of God) when the
scripture teaches you that there is none other name under heaven, whereby men
should be saved, and yon do say that there is an other thing (which some
name the Mass, and some the sacrament of the aultare) that saves from sins,
and is a sacrifice boeth for the quick and the dead, and (as your man
Damascen writes) it purges all diseases and incommodities.

Furthermore. We do believe, that Jesus Christ is the Christ that is the
anointed of God to offer the sacrifice wherewyth only, the father could be
pleased, and therefore are we borne of God.

You do say, that you are the Christ's and anointed priests to offer still for
the sins of the people. Who is your father but he that would darken the
sacrifice of the only begotten son of God and sit in the temple of God,
boasting him self for God, being in deed the adversary and is lifted up
against every thing that is God or godly, the wicked man, the cursed child.

Again. God the father said, this is my dearly besoued son, in who^ I am
pleased and pacified, hear you him.

We believe this word, and will seek no further, but to this only begotten
and dearly beloved son of God. Neither to pacify the wrath of God for our
trespasses: nor yet to seek any other teacher of his will, then the son of
God, whom we are commanded to hear.

You will set up the Mass your own work to pacify the father for the
sins of the quick and the dead. You will have your own doctors to descant
new gloses, and these must the pore flock of Christ hear, believe and
confess, or else they shall be brent.

But to hear Christ, the only begotten son of god, speak in the
scriptures: is poison to al men under the degree of gentlemen, and punishable
by your laws, as in the cases of heresy.

What call you this, but to make the only begotten son of God an heretic?
Call you this the beleuynge in his name? Thus may we prove that you believe in
the Popes name, whose laws and wrytynges are reserved of certeyue men for
certeyue purposes and are as much practiced and more stoutely defended then
any thing that Christ commands.

Yea, how can we think but that you believe more in the Pope, when you defend
his Acts more styfly, then the laws of the living God?

What if it should be proclaimed, that no manner book concerning any part of
the Popes re^igion, should be brought into the Realm? and that al those
which are brought in already, should be brent, could you byshopnes bear
this thing so guietly as you did diligently labor to have all s^che books of
christen religion brent and banished?

But to make an end where we began. John says that every spirit that
contelleth Christ to be comen in the flesh: is borne of God. This do we
con^esse that deny him to be come in bread: wherefore we be borne of God. And
thus bele^ing in the (...) often son of God, we can not be condemned.

But that spirit which does not confess Christ to be comen in the flesh,
is not of. God. And this is the spirit of Antichriste of whom you have heard
that he shall come, and he is in the world already.

Now saying that we (so many of us as confess Christ to be come in the
flesh) be borne of God: why should nor we for the glory of our heavenly
father and for our salvation, be so ready to lay down our souls, in the
faithful hands of his c^todie, as the spirit of Antichriste, and the
children of this world are to speak and (...) ^or the mainteinaunce of Ido
atric, ^he kingdom of Antichrist, to their own (...) ^amnation. Worldly Pomp
and dignity, the maintenance of Idolatry and Popetrie: has caused the
bishop to write his book, and to rail against the truth. And shall not the
crown of glory (which can never decay, the glory of the only everlasting
God) steare faithful men to make answer for the truth against falsehode?
specially, saying that we have this plain testimony, spoken by the mouth of
our savior. He that confesses me before men him will I confess before my
father that is in heaven, and him that denies me before men, shall I deny
also, before my father and his holy angels.

If I be blamed, if I be imprisoned, yea if I be burned for Christ's cause and
the truth: yet am I happy, by the open testimony of Christ in Math. My name
shall be restored in the Math. v.
heavens in the book of life, to be a fayethfull witness. I shall be set at
liberty for ever with Christ the son of God, my body brent into ashes
(where it has put of mortality) shall be restored unto me much better,
immortal and incorruptible. If I lose wife and child, father and mother: I
shall receive for them an hundredth fold. And for advantage above all, for f^ll
recompense: life everlasting. Who will not be ammate and encouraged by such
large promises?

God save King Edward from all errors. God defend his tender age from all
^he subtle malice of al Hypocrites and tray^urs. The living God establishe his
heart in the way of the truth for ever and ever. So be it.

FINIS.
The Table.
A
A Rehersall of the benefactours and founders of the Mass. Fol. liij An Image
can not be a woman's husband. Fol. cxlij. A declaration of the true church.
Fol. lxv. Augustine to Dardanius. Fol. cxv A double error. Fol. cxxi. At his
departing Christ commanded his remembrance to be celebrated Fol. cxlix A
vain mu^bling called the mass. Fol. cxlix. A double causion. Fol. cl. Abraham
was just before circumcision. Fol. clxii An answer to the principal points
after the Doctors Fol. clxvi A broad shaven crown. Fol. clxxi All men must
know. etc. Fol. lxxviii Accidents must have. etc Fol. lxxiiii A right
bishop. etc. Fol. lxxv All the works of God. etc Fol. lxxix An apt similitude.
Fol. clxxxxvii. Lit. Dd A shaven crown. etc. Fol. clxxxxvii. Dd A long gown
Fol. clxxxxviii. Dd An English bishop Fol. ccvi Anne Askue Fol. cciiii
B
Believe not every spirit Fol. xii Be no more Caparnaites Fol. xxxiiii By what
fruit you may know the^. Fol. xli Bonifacius puts Christ out. etc. fol.
lxxii Bishops defend wickedness fol. cxxxix Baptism is not esteemed as it,
etc, fol. lxxxv Because all things are possible. etc. fol. clviii By the
works you shall. etc. fol. lxxvii Beware of my Lords lies fol. clxxxxii
Barnes fol. cciiii Bylnaye fol. cciii
C
Christ did not consecrate the bread. fol. xxxvii Christ can not be eaten
without fruit fol. xl Christ's coming is at hand. fol. cxxxviii Christ's
flesh gives life fol. cxiv Christ is the very vine fol. lxxxxvi Christ shall
co^ again visible. fol. lxxxxvii Christ only must be our bishop. fol. clix
Christ never preached tra^substa^. etc fol. clxiii Cato. fol. ccvi
D
Doctor Buttes fol. cxli Damascen puts water into. etc fol. cv Damasce^ will
have water made blood. fol. cv Damascen fol. cxi Dogs will not eat dogs
flesh fol. cxx Doctrine preached at Paul's cross. fo. clxxxxi
E
Ecolampadius repented fol. ciii Exemples of men's. etc fol. clxxxxii. Cc.
F
Few are found faithful fol. lxvi Fire can not prevail fol. lxix Faith
receives Christ's body fol. cxliii Fear not the bread God. fol. clvii Fryth
is not confuted. fol. clxvii From the Elders. etc fol. clxxiiii Fish provoke
lust. fol. clxxxx Fyl the bealy fol. ccvii
G
Go no farther the^ your commission. fol. xxxvi God has never forsaken his
church. fol. lxv God flryketh and heals again fol. lxvii Give ear for God
says it. fol. cxlv God regards them that worship him in spirit. fol. cl
God is nere to every one of us. fol. cli God is the father of spirits fol.
cli. God has his ministers of venge etc. fol. clii God gives warning before
ven. etc. fol. cliiij God is far in debt to his makers. sol. clvi God is not
chaungable. fol. clvi God accepts justice by faith fol. clxi^ God regards
not the osferyng of signs or sacraments. fol. clxiii God meant us good fol.
clxiiii God regards none of our inue^. etc. fol. clxv God is pacient Fol.
clxvii Gregory Nazienzene Fol. clxxxvi Gods word must give place. etc. Fol.
clxxxix Give no ear. etc Fol. clxxxxiii Lit. Cc.
H
How full of iniquity this time is Fol. xi How God gives wisdom to all that ask it in faith fol. xviii How the Papists reason, a posse. etc fol. xx
He that has eyes to see, let him see fol. xxxv He that will find Christ fol.
clx Hidra, the monster fol. clxxxviii How fasting dryueth out. etc fol. clxxxx
He that knows not God fol. lxxvii He that is once. etc fol. lxxix Holy water
fol. cci Hunne fol. cciiii Husse fol. cciii
I
I would wish my Lord this. etc fol. xxxiii In two words, lies the whole,
etc. fol. xxxix If we will enter into Christ's. etc. fol. cxlv Judas did not
eat the body. etc. fol. lxxxxiiii It is possible for God to change. etc. fol.
cv Idols shall be brent fol. cxlvii. Idols be thanked for Gods gifts fol.
cliiii In what respect the flesh of Christ was heavenly bread. fol. clxi John
Lasselles fol. cciiii. It is more easy to live well then Ill fol. clxix If
things be ancient. etc. fol. clxix If the prelates had had* etc. fol.
clxxiiii It is for the papists profit. fol. clxxvi
K
Knowledge of the senses. fol. xli
L
Learn to eat the flesh and blood. etc. fol. xxxi^i Learn to resist
sophistry fol xxxviii Learn to know the members of Christ's church. fol.
lxviii Learn wit at the mouse fol. lxxxvi. Let them that doubt. etc. fol.
clxvii Learn to auoyed offense. etc. fol. clxxxiii Learn at the bishops to
fast fol. clxxxiii Learn wherein to follow Christ fol. clxxxvii Learn to
know. etc. fol. clxxxxix. Dd
M
Mark what meat Christ. etc fol. xxxiii Mark how God provided. etc. fol.
lxvi Mark who has been the. etc fol. lxx Maxentius the tirant fol. lxxi My
Lord would have no tra^. etc. fol. cxliii Mark the fruits of my lords.
etc. fol. lxxxii Mark my Lords intent. fol. lxxx^i Mark my Lords
sophistry. fol. lxxxvi. My Lords own sword stryketh of his head. fol.
lxxxviii My Lords words end in ly. fol. lxxxxv My Lord has lost his
witness. fol. c^i My lords similitudes serve not for his purpose. fol. cvi
Mark the constancy of the Doct. fol. cvii Mark thexa^ation of these. etc.
fol. cxxvi My lord might have been asha. etc. fo. cxxxvii Man has made him
Gods. fol. cxlviii. More may be exemple. fol. clxviii My Lords answer in
private communication. fol. clxxxviii My Lord, recant for shame. fol. clxxxxi
My Lord will have. etc. fol. lxxii.
N
No maruayle though the sim. etc. fol. xxxviii No man ca^ lay any other
foundation. fol. cxiii Nature works no miracles. fol. cxxvii Note the cause
why this Sacrament was in^tituted in bread. fol. cxxxix No man amende^h. fol.
cxlvi Nothing like. fol. clxxii Norfolk. fol cciiii
O
One error draws an other. fol. cvi Of the words and meaning. fol. lxxxx Of
contrariety and contradiction. fol. cxiii Obstinacy, is cause of unbelief.
fol. cxvii Of the word institution. fol. cxxiiii Only god is in many places
at. etc. fol. cxxv Of quotidian miracles. fol. cxxvi Only God is true. fol.
cxliiii Of the word Sacrament. fol. clxx One thing to be sign and thing.
fol. clxxi. Of the name bread. fol, clxxi Of the name Mass. fol. clxxx Of the
pure sacrifice. etc. fol. clxxxvi
P
Pithagoras. fol. xli. Popish is the fittest name that can be given to the
Mass. fol. liii Po^durus de inuento* etc. fol. clxxxi Persecusion. etc. fol.
lxxii Paul allows not. etc. fol. lxxvi
S
Seek the truth at the minist. etc. fol. xvi Sophistry. fol. xl Silence
betokens consent. fol. liiii. Sophisters are the Devils messe^gers. fo. lxx
Stephane the martyr. fol. cxxiii. Satan begins to roar. fol. clxxviii
Stephane Gardinar. fol. clxxxix Some drink no wine. fol. clxxxxiiii. ^d.
Superstion. etc. fol. clxxxxvi. Lit. Cc.
T
The perfection. etc. fol. ccii The salt. fol. ccv The anoyntyng. fol. cc The
bishops. fol. ccv Take heed of carrion. fol. xv. The priest can not sacrifice.
fol. xxiii. That the priest does, must be in the remembrance of Christ. fol.
xxv. The verb est has no power to change any substance. fol. xxv The way
to life is but one fol. xxxiiii Take this profit of the Sacrament. fol. xxxv
The receyuyng of the Sacrament is the preaching of the death of Christ fol.
xxxvi Two manner of teachynges fol. xxxix The similitude that declares all. etc
fol. xl The senses be witnesses fol. xliij The folowers of Christ are. etc fol.
xlviii The church of Christ is not lunge without persecution fol. lxxi The
openyng of this text. Do this in the remembrance of me fol. cxxxviii The
prelates discourage us fol. cxli The Apostles were stronger in Christ's
absence. fol. cxliiii The true bliss. fol. cxlv Three syllogissmoses fol. lxxx
The Rabbis. fol. lxxxi The Apostles did not worship the Saerament. fol. ci
The cup is not the new testament fol. ci The Devil works miracles fol.
ciiii The worshippyng of Images fol. cvii This was far fot fol. cviii The body
of Christ can not be chaun. fol. cx The answer to Damascen fol. cii The
resolution of certain doubts. fol. xlix The foundation of our faith. fol.
cxii To the good al things are good. fol. clxviii Time utters al things.
fol. clxx Two against two fol. clxx The definition of a sacrament. fol. clxx
Two things are to be considered. fol. clxxi The etimologie of this word. etc.
fol. clxxiij The church and Elders fol. clxxiii Their own testimony fol.
clxxiii There is no faut. etc. fol. clxxv To the governors of the people. fol.
clxxvi. The knowledge of the tongues fol. clxxvii The bishops open the way.
fol. clxxix. The Papists busy men's. etc. fol. clxxx To the bishops fol.
clxxii The father gives the true bread. fol. clxxxiiij Toutch nor. etc. fol.
clxxxxviij The Mass is not the memo. etc. fol. clxxxiii That which the priest
eats. etc. fol. clxxxv The virtue of the Mass fol. clxxxv The cause why
Christ fasted* fol. clxxxvii The Sacrament. fol. lxxiii The Judglers are not.
etc. fol. lxxv This shall be our scholemaister. fol. lxxviii The Apostles were.
etc. fol. clxxxxviii. Dd. The prelates consideration. fol. clxxxxv. Dd
Traditions and church. etc. fol. clxxxxiiij. Dd The cup of brotherly love. fol.
clxxxxiiii. Dd The ceremonies. etc. fol. clxxxxvij. Dd The determinations. etc.
fol. clxxxxiii. Dd. The true description. fol. clxxxxiii. Letter. Cc The
Phariseis. etc. fol. clxxxxv. Letter. Cc The Morian and leoparde. fol.
clxxxxviii. Cc. The kentishe man. fol. clxxxxix. Letter. Cc The manner of
Christ's blessing. fol. cxxii The difference between the sign. etc. fol. cxli.
The complaint of God. fol. cxlv. The ruin of the gentiles is at. etc. fol.
cxlv. The world does always strive against the spirit. fol. cxlvi The new
found God. fol. cxlvii The folowers of Idols. fol. cxlviii The Lord speaks
to the prelates. fol. clii The obstinate must not be prayed. etc. fol. clij The
bishops must stand up and. etc. fol. cliij The Lord plageth tyranny. fol.
cliii This Almonde is well blanched. fol. clv. The fear of a mouse. fol. clvi.
The suppressio^ of Abbayes. fol. clvii. The bread God is thrice miserable. fol.
clviij That is sacrificed must be slain. fol. cli^. They that will feed
carnally. etc. fol. clx The cause why Christ called the bread his body. fol.
clx. The life that is in all the blesse^. fol. clxi. The Israelites fed not on
a sign. fol. clxiii. The fleshly sacramentaries. fol. clxiiij The spirit
bears witness. fol. clxv. The doctors are to be suspected. fol clxvi. The
doctors that are called saints. fo. clxvi What diuelishe sophistry is fol.
xii. Wynchester. fol. xxii. Wynchesters eloquence. fol. xxxiii. Wherein the
senses be deceived. fol. xlii. When reallitie was invented. fol. lxii We must
bear with the weak. fo. cxxxviij We must confirm our lives to. etc. fol.
c^l. We resist not the scripture. fol. cix Wycklyffes wycket. fol. clx^ii.
Wynchester would have us. etc. fol. clxxii. Wynchester preached openly. fol.
clxxv Who be the thieves. fol. clxxxii. Will holiness. fol. clxxxxix. Letter.
Cc.
Finis Tabule.



