A DIALOGVE concerning Witches and Witchcraftes.

In which is laid open how craftily the Devil deceives not only the Witches
but many other and so leads them awrie into many great errors.

By George Giffard Minister of Gods word in Maldon.



LONDON. Printed by John Windet for Tobie Cook and Mihil Heart, and are to be
sold in Paul's Churchyard, at the Tigers head. 1593.

AA


TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL MASTER RObert Clarke, one of her Majesty's Barons
of her Highness Court of Eschequer.
Certain years now past, right Worshipful, I published a small Treatise
concerning Witches, to lay open some of Satan's sleightes, and subtle
practices, least the ignoranter sort should be carried awry and seduced more
and more by them. The errors be far more gross, and the sins much greater,
into which by means of Witches he seduceth multitudes, then in common opinion
they be esteemed. It falls out in many places even of a sudden, as it
seems to me, and no doubt by the heavy judgment of God, that the Devils as
it were let loose, do more preuail, then ever I have heard of. For when as men
have set so light by the hearing of Gods voice to be instructed by him, they
are justly given over to be taught by the Devils, and to learn their ways.
Satan is now heard speak, and believed. He speaks by coniurors, by
sorcerers, and by witches, and his word is taken. He deuiseth a number of
things to be done, and they are put in practice and followed. The high
providence of God Almighty and sovereign rule over all, is set forth so unto
us in the Scriptures, as that without him a Sparrow can not fall upon the
ground. All the hairs of our head are numbered. The Devils would hurt and
destroy with bodily harms, both men and beasts and other creatures: but all
the Devils in Hell are so chained up and brideled by this high providence that
they can not pluck the wing from one poor little Wrenne, without special
leave given them from the ruler of the whole earth. And yet the Witches are
made believe that at their request, and to pleasure them by fulfilling their
wrath, their spirits do lame and kill both men and beasts. And then to
spread this opinion among the people, these subtle spirits bewray them, and
will have them openly confess that they have done such great things, which all
the Devils at any man's request cold never do. For if they could, they would
not stay to be entreated. God gives him power sometimes to afflict both men
and beasts with bodily harms: If he can, he will do it, as entreated and
sent by Witches, but for us to imagine either that their sending does give him
power, or that he would not do that which God has given him leave to do,
unless they should request and send him, is most absurd. There be many
diseases in the bodies of men and beasts which he sees will break forth unto
lamenes or unto death, he bears the witches in hand he does them: He works
by his other sort of Witches, whom the people call cunning men and wise women
to confirm all his matters, and by them teaches many remedies, that so he may
be sought unto and honored as God. These things taking root in the hearts of
the people, and so making them afraid of Witches, and raising up suspicions
and rumors of sundry innocent persons, many giltles are upon men's oaths
condemned to death, and much innocent blood is shed. How subtly he continues
these matters, I have to my small skill laid open in this slender Treatise. I
have done it in way of a Dialogue, to make the fitter for the capacity of the
simpler sort. I am bold to offer it unto your Worship, not unto one as needs
to betaught in these things, being zealously affected to the Gospel, and so
grounded in the faith of the high providence, that I have been delighted to
hear and see the wise and godly course used upon the seat of Justice by your
Worship, when such have been arraigned. I offer it therefore as a testimony of
a thankeful mind for favors and kindness showed toward me: and so entreat
your Worship to accept of it. If it may do good unto any of the weaker sort
in knowledge I shall be glad. If I err in any thing being showed it, I will be
ready to correct it.

Your Worships in all duties to command. George Giffard.

THE SPEAKERS. Samuel. Daniell. The wife of Samuel. M. B. Schoolemaister. The
good wife R. Sam. YOu are well met old acquaintance, I am glad to see you
look so well, how do all our good friends in your Country.


Dan. I trust they be all in good health, they were when I came from home, I am
sorry to see you look so pale, what have you been sick lately?


Sam. Truly no, I thank God I have had my health pretily well, but yet me
think my meat does me no good of late.


Dan. What is the matter man, do you take thought and care for the world* take
heed of that, for the Scripture says, worldly sorrow works death. 2. Cor.
7.10. It is a great sin rising from unbelief, and distrust in Gods
providence, when men be over pensive for the world.


Sam. In deed my mind is troubled, but not for that which you say, for I hope
in God I shall not want so long as I live.


Dan. Is it any trouble of conscience for sin? If it be, that may turn to
good.


Sam. O, no, no. I know no cause why.


Dan. Why, what is it then, if I may be so bold, I pray you tell me. I think
you take me for your friend.


Sam. In deed I have always found you my very good friend, and I am sure you
will give me the best counsel you can, truly we dwell here in a bad country,
I think even one of the worst in England.


Dan. Is it so? I think you dwell in a fine country, in a sweet wholesome
air, and fruitful grounds.


Sam. Air man? I find no fault with the air, there be naughty people*


Dan. Naughty people? where shall a man dwell, and not find them? swearers,
liars, raylers, slaunderers, drunckards, adulterers, riotous, unthrifts,
dicers, and proud high minded persons, are every where to be found in great
plenty.


Sam. Nay, I do not mean them, I care not for them. These witches, these
evil favored old witches do trouble me.


Dan. What do you take your self to be bewitched?


Sam. No, no, I trust no evil spirit can hurt me, but I hear of much harm
done by them: they lame men and kill their cattle, yea they destroy both men
and children. They say there is scarce any town or village in all this shire,
but there is one or two witches at the least in it. In good sooth, I may tell
it to you as to my friend, when I go but into my closes, I am afraid, for I
see now and then a Hare; which my conscience gives me is a witch, or some
witches spirit, she stareth so upon me. And sometime I see an ugly weasell
run through my yard, and there is a foul great catte sometimes in my Barn,
which I have no liking unto.


Dan. You never had no hurt done yet, had you by any witch?


Sam. Trust me I cannot tell, but I fear me I have, for there be two or three
in our town which I like not, but especially an old woman, I have been as
careful to please her as ever I was to please mine own mother, and to give her
ever anon one thing or other, and yet me thinks she frowns at me now and
then. And I had a hog which eat his meat with his fellows and was very
well to our thinking over night, and in the morning he was stark dead. My wife
has had five or six hens even of late dead. Some of my neighbors wish me
to burn some thing alive, as a hen or a hog. Others will me in time to
seek help at the hands of some cunning man, before I have any further harm.
I would be glad to do for the best.


Dan. Have you any cunning man hereabout, that does help?


Sam. There is one, they say, here a twenty miles of at T. B. which has help
many. And thus much I know, there was one of mine acquaintance but two miles
hence, which had great losses, he lost two or three kine; six hogs, he would
not have took fifteen shillings a hog for them, and a mare. He went to that
same man, and told him he suspected an old woman in the parish. And I think he
told me, that he showed him her in a Glass, and told him she had three or
four imps, some call them puckrels, one like a gray catte, an other like a
weasell, an other like a mouse, a vengeance take them, it is great pity the
country is not rid of them, and told him also what he should do, it is
half a year ago, and he never had any hurt since. There is also a woman at
R. H. five and twenty miles hence, that has a great name, and great resort
there is daily unto her. A neighbor of mine had his child taken lame, a girl
of ten years old, and such a pain in her back, that she could not sit
upright. He went to that woman, she told him he had some badde neighbor, the
child was forespoken, as he suspected; marry if he would go home, and bring
her some of the clothes which the child lay in all night, she would tell him
certainly. He went home, and put a table Napkin about her neck all night, and
in the morning took it with him, and she told him the girl was bewitched in
deed, and so told him what he should do, and he had remedy, the girl is as
well at this day, and a pretty quick girl. There was another of my neighbors
had his wife much troubled, and he went to her, and she told him, his wife
was haunted with a Fairy. I cannot tell what she bad him do, but the woman is
merry at this hour. I have heard, I dare* not say it is so, that she wears
about her Saint John's Gospel, or some part of it.


Dan. If you have such cunning men and women, what need you be so much afraid?


Sam. Alas man, I could teeme it to go and some counsel me to go to the man
at T. B. and some to the woman at R. H. And between them both I have lingered
the time, and fear I may be spoiled before I get remedy. Some wish me to
beat and claw the witch until I fetch blood on her, and to threaten her that
I will have her hanged, if I knew which were the best I would do it.


Dan. I perceive your danger is between two stools.


Sam. It is very true, if I had heard but of one, I should have gone ere this
time, and I am glad that I met with you. I pray you let me have your best
counsel; I trust you bear me good will.


Dan. Truly I will give you the best counsel I can, which I am sure shall do
you good, if you will follow it, for in deed I pity your case, it is most
certain you are bewitched.


Sam. Bewitched, do you think I am bewitched? I feel no harm in my body,
you make me more afraid.


Dan. Nay I do not think that the old woman has bewitched you, or that your
body is bewitched, but the devil has bewitched your mind, with blindness and
unbelief, to draw you from God, even to worship himself, by seeking help at
the hands of devils. It is a lamentable case to see how the devil has
bewitched thousands at this day to run after him: and even to offer sacrifice
unto him.


Sam. I defy the devil, worship him? fie upon him, I hate him with all my
heart. Do you think any seek help at his hands? we seek help against him. I
think he never does good he hurts, but he never helps any.


Dan. It is not in these matters to be taken as we imagine, but as the word of
God teaches. What though a man think he worshippeth not devils nor seeks not
help at their hands, as he is persuaded, nor has any such intent, is he ever
the near, when as yet it shall be found by Gods word, that he does worship
them, and seek unto them for help?


Sam. Do you think then that there be no witches? Does not God suffer wicked
people to do harm? Or do you think that the cunning men do help by the
devil? I would be glad to reason with you, but I have small knowledge in the
scripturs. We have a Schoolemaister that is a good pretty scholar, they say,
in the Latin tongue, one M. B. he is gone to my house even now, I pray you let
me entreat you to go thither, you two may reason the matter, for you are
learned.


Dan. I could be content, but it will ask some time, and I am going to such a
place upon special business.


Sam. I pray you let me entreat you: Four or five hours is not so much.


Dan. Well, I will go with you.


Sam. Wife, I have brought an old friend of mine, I pray thee bid him welcome.


The wife. He is very welcome. But truly man, I am angry with you, and half
out of patience, that you go not to seek help against yonder same old beast
I have another hen dead this night. Other men can seek remedy. Here is M. B.
tells me, that the good wife R. all the last week could not make her butter
come. She never rested until she had got her husband out to the woman at R. H.
and when he came home, they did but heat a spit red hot, and thrust into the
cream, using certain words, as she willed him, and it came as kindly as
any butter that ever she made. I met the old filth this morning, Lord, how
sourly she looked upon me, and mumbled as she went, I heard part of her
words. Ah (quod she) you have an honest man to your husband, I hear how he
does use me. In truth, husband, my stomach did so rise against her, that I
could have found in my heart to have flowen upon her, and scratched her, but
that I feared she would be too strong for me. It is a lusty old queen. I
wished that the good wife R. had been with me. I pray you, good husband, let
me entreat you to go to that same good woman, you may ride thither in half a
day.


Sam. Wife, I pray thee be content, I have entreated this mine old friend to
reason with M. B. for he tells me that we be in a very foul error.


M. B. I suppose, so far as my learning and capacity do extend, that small
reasoning may serve. The word of God does show plainly that there be
witches, and commands they should be put to death. Experience has taught
too too many, what harms they do. And if any have the gift to minister help
against them, shall we refuse it? Shall we not drink when we are a thirst?
Shall we not warm us when we are a cold? It is pity that any man should
open his mouth any way to defend them, their impiety is so great.


Dan. For my part, I go not about to defend witches. I deny not but that the
devil works by them, And that they ought to be put to death. We ought also
to seek remedy against them: but as I told my friend, the devil does bewitch
men by means of these witches, and lead them from God, even to follow himself,
to offer sacrifice unto him to worship him, to obey his will, to commit many
grievous sins, and to be drowned in manifold errors.


M. B. If you have this meaning, that witches and sorcerers ar bewitched by the
devil, that they forsake God, and follow him, that they worship and obey him,
and do sacrifice unto him, and commit many heinous sins, I agree with you,
for I tak it, they even vow themselves to the devil, or else he would not be so
ready to do them service. But if you mean, that such as seek remedy against
them, and would have them rooted out, be so seduced and misled by the devil,
as you speak, I say your speech is rash and foolish, for they that be earnest
against witches, be earnest against the devil, they defy the devil, they seek
to resist him, and to root out his instruments. Now, if you were a man that
had any learning, you should see, that contraries cannot be in the same
subject, at one instant, in the same part, and in the same respect: how then
can a man hate the devil, defy the devil and his works, and yet follow him
at one time?


Dan. I know that witches and coniurers are seduced and become the vassals of
Satan: they be his servants, and not he theirs, as you speak. But I mean
indeed that multitudes are seduced and led from God, to follow the devil, by
means of witches and coniurers: yea, I speak it of those, not which are carried
of a godly zeal, but of a blind rage and mad fury against them. If I speak
this rashly and foolishlie, as you say, and your self learned as you boast,
and I unlearned, I shall be the more easily overthrown. But I speak so
truly, and can so well justify all that I have said by the word of God, that
your learning and best skill, shall not be able to disprooue the same. Your
logic at the first does fail you. Not that contraries can be in the same
subject at the same instant, in the same part, and in the same respect. But
herein you are utterly blind and deceived, that you name contraries, and take
it that the first of them, as namely to hate the devil, to defy him and his
works, are in them, when as indeed they are in them but in imagination. For if
men say and think they defy the devil and his works, and through blindness
and infidelity, are even bewitched, and seduced to follow the devil, and to
do his will, does their speech and blind imagination make the things indeed to
be in them? What if a poor beggar woman say and think that she is a Queen:
is she therefore no beggar, begging still her bread? or is she rid of her lice?


M. B. Nay, if you judge, I have done. If men be earnest against the devil,
and defy him and all his works, are you to judge of their conscience, and to
say they defy him but in imagination, and follow him, and worship him in
deed? is not God alone the judge over men's hearts? Again, do you compare
those that are in their right mind, with such as be mad, or out of their wits?


Dan. I know that God alone is the searcher of the heart, touching the things
which lie hid in secret: But where things are open and manifest, the tree is
known by the fruits, so far as we may go. As if a man profess the faith of
Jesus Christ soundly, in all points according to the word of God, and does
frame his life thereafter in doing good works: it is very wicked for any man
to judge of him, that he is an hypocrite, and that he does all of vain glory.
And yet it may be that the Lord, who discerns the secret intents of the
heart, sees indeed that he is but an hypocrite. On the contrary part, where
a man professes in words that he does defy the devil and all his works,
and yet when it comes to the trial of Gods word, he is found to be seduced,
and wrapped in blind errors of the devil, in infidelity, and evil works,
in which he fulfilleth the will of Satan, and honors him in the place of
God: Shall we say that this is a good man because of his words and imagination,
that he defieth the devil and his works? Woe be to them that call good evil, and
evil good. Esa. 5. We may say they are in bad case, except they repent, and
turn from following Satan. But yet I say, that a faithful man may err in some
of these things through weakness of faith, and through ignorance. And
therefore, here men may not be too rash in judgment. And now whereas you find
fault, that I make comparison between such as be mad and those that be in their
right mind* it is your ignorance, which do not consider that there be two kinds
of madness, or being out of their right mind, the one for matters of this
world, the other for things spiritual and heavenly. There be which are in
their wits for this world, which touching spiritual things are as far
awrie in their imaginations, as the poor beggar, which thinks she is a
goodly queen. Does not the holy Apostle say, that because men receive not
the love of the truth, God will send them strong delusion to believe lies. 2 Thessalonians. 2. And what is that, but that Satan shall seduce, illude and bewitch
their minds, to make them believe that they worship and follow God, when they
worship and follow him?


M. B, Do you take that to be S. Paul's meaning? Does Satan bewitch men's
minds, and lead them into falsehoode and error, making them believe they
worshipp God, when they worship devils?


Dan. S. Paul speaks there indeed of the coming of the great Antichrist in
the power of the Devil. Now, those which are seduced and worship Antichrist*
think they worship God: but mark what S. John says, All the world wondered,
and followed the beast, and worshipped the dragon which gave power to the
beast: and they worshipped the beast. Reuelat. 13. And look in the 12. chapter
of the Revelation, and you shall find that the Dragon, which the Popery does
worship in stead of God, is the Devil.


M. B. Truly I like your words well, I am persuaded the devil does seduce
and bewitch men's minds: But touching these that seek help at the hands of
cunning men and women against witches, I cannot think so hardly of them. I
may be awry, I see well: I will not be obstinate, if the word of God show me
mine error* Let us even friendly confer of the matter. Be not offended with
me, and for my part, I will speak all that I know or think.


Dan. I must entreat you likewise to bear with my plain speeches. And let us
in the matters proceed from one point to another, standing only upon that,
wherein we shall be found to differ in judgment. And let Gods word be the Judge
between us.


Sam. I like this well, though I can say but little, I will sit and hear you.


Dan. What is the first question that we shall handle?


M. B. I heard you say, if I did not mistake your speech that there be witches
that work by the devil. But yet I pray you tell me, do you think there be
such? I know some are of opinion there be none.


Dan. It is so evident by the Scriptures, and in all experience, that there be
witches which work by the devil, or rather I may say, the devil works by
them, that such as go about to prove the contrary, do show themselves but
cauillers.


M. B. I am glad we agree in that point, I hope we shall in the rest. What say
you to this? that the witches have their spirits, some has one, some has
more, as two, three, four, or five, some in one likeness, and some in
another, as like cattes, weasils, toads, or mise, whom they nourish with
milk, or with a chicken, or by letting them suck now and then a drop of
blood: whom they call when they be offended with any, and send them to hurt
them in their bodies; yea, to kill them, and to kill their cattle?


Dan. Here is great deceit, and great illusion, here the devil leads the
ignorant people into foul errors, by which he draws them hedlong into
many grievous sins.


M. B. Nay then I see you are awrie, if you deny these things, and say they be
but illusions. They have been proved, and proved again, even by the manifold
confessions of the witches themselves. I am out of all doubt in these, and
could in many particulars lay open what has fallen out. I did dwell in a
village within these five years, where there was a man of good wealth, and
suddenly within ten days space, he had three kine died, his gelding worth
ten pounds fell lame, he was himself taken with a great pain in his back, and a
child of seven years old died. He sent to the woman at R. H. and she said he
was plagued by a witch, adding moreover, that there were three women witches in
that town, and one man witch: willing him to look whom he most suspected: he
suspected one old woman, and caused her to be carried before a Justice of Peace
and examined: with much a do at the last she confessed all: Which was this in
effect: that she had three spirits: one like a cat, which she called Lightfoot,
another like a Toad, which she called Lunch, the third like a Weasill, which
she called Makeshift. This Lightfoot, she said, one mother Barlie of W. sold
her above sixteen years ago, for an oven cake and told her the Cat would do
hergood service, if she would, she might send her of her errand: this Cat was
with her but a while, but the Weasill and the Toad came and offered their
service: The Cat would kill kine, the Weasil would kill horses, the Toade would
plague men in their bodies. She sent them all three (as she confessed) against
this man: She was committed to the prison, and there she died before the
Assizes. I could tell you of many such: I had no mind to dwell in that place
any longer.


Dan. You mistake me, I do not mean that the things are not, but my meaning
is, that the devil by such things both beguyle and seduce ignorant men, and
lead them into errors and grievous sins. And let us examine every parcel
of that which you set down in your speech, and you shall see no less.


M. B. That is it which I would feign see: You confess they have spirits, some
one, some more, and in such likenesses: what error be the people led into by
that?


Dan. First, consider this that there be multituds and armies of devils, as we
see in the gospel, yt many devils were entered into one man, and Christ saying,
What is thy name? answer is made, Legion, for we are many. Mark. 5. Now,
although the devils be many, yet they be all carried with such hatred against
God, with such desire to have him dishonored and blasphemed, and burn with
such bloody malice and cruelty against men, that they bend their study all
together, one helping and furthering another what they can in their work: in
so much that the Scripture does speak of them, as if they were but one
devil: for S. Peter says, Your adversary the devil goes about like a
roaring lion seeking whom he may devour. 1. Pet. 5. And in the Revelation
chapter 12. all the devils make that great red dragon: And our Savior does
show how close they join in one, when he says, If Satan be divided against
Satan, or if Satan cast forth Satan, how shall his kingdom endure Matthew. 12.
now then, whether the witch deal, as she supposes, with one spirit, or with
many, it comes all to one effect, thus far, that one deals not alone,
but with the help of others. So that he or she that has familiarity with one
devil, it is as much as if it were with an hundredth. Moreover, the devils be
spirits, they have no bodily shape or likeness but yet can make an appearance
of a shape, as appears by the inchanters before Pharao, when their rods were
turned into serpents in show. Exodus 7. And then one devil can seem to be four
or five, and four or five can seem to be one: It is therefore but the craft
of Satan, to make show of more or less.


M. B. Do you not think then, that where the more devils be, there is the
greater power of Satan?


Dan. Yes, but it can not be discerned by his appearing to the witch in show of
more or less: For one can seem ten unto her, and ten can seem one.


M. B. Well, I do not mislike all this, I pray you proceed forward.


Dan. Then further mark well how the holy Scriptures do paint out the
devils to be mighty terrible spirits, full of power, rage, and cruelty,
compared to a great fiery red dragon, Revel. 12. to a greedy or hungry lion,
that roreth after the pray, 1. Pet. 5. And called by S. Paul Principalities,
and Powers, the Rulers of the darkness of this world: now, when they take upon
them the shapes of such paltrie vermin, as Cats, Mise, Toads, and Weasils, it
is even of subtlety to cover and hide his mighty tyranny, and power which he
exercises over the hearts of the wicked. It is most necessary for us all to
know, what strong adversaries we have to encounter withal, that we may fly
unto the Lord God, and seek to be armed with his power against them.


M. B. Well, what will you infer upon this? I cannot deny but that the
scriptures do paint out the devils to be mighty terrible spirits, and so they
may be, although they appear but like Cats or weasils.


Dan. I do not say they be not mighty and terrible because they appear in
such shapes, but I affirm, that their appearing so, is to cover and hide their
mightiness and effectual working, which they exercise in the dark hearts of
men. And mark well I pray you, the power of devils is in the hearts of men, as
to harden the heart, to blind the eyes of the mind, and from the lusts and
concupiscences which are in them, to inflame them unto wrath, malice, envy, and
cruel murders: to puff them up in pride, arrogance and vain glory: to
entice them unto wantonness, and whordomes, and all uncleanness. And about
these things they work continually, and with such efficacy, that without the
power of the glorious passion and resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
we have by faith, they cannot be withstood, and they will seem to be but mean
fellows, busied about making drink that it shall not work in the fat, in
keeping cheese from running, and butter from coming, in killing hens or
hogs, or making men lame.


M. B. May they not do both the one and the other?


Dan. Yea, but this is my meaning, that while they be occupied about the
greatest things, as in stirring up Tyrants and wicked men to persecute, to
reproach and blaspheme the Gospel, which pulls them down, to set division
and wars between kingdoms and kings, hatred and discord between man and wife,
and contention between brethren: yea, to set all in a broyle and confusion:
they would seem to be busied about trifles, and about these they busy men's
minds, that they may not observe and take heed of them in those other.


M. B. I perceive your meaning, but yet I do not conceive whereunto you
chiefly tend: for do not they which look upon these harms done by witches,
confess that the devil does all those things which you mention?


Dan. The ignorant sort, which are so terrified by witches, do in words after a
sort, confess so much as you say, but when it comes to the matter, they deny
it in effect. For mark this, the devils continually compass the soul of man
about, to shoot it full of their fiery darts. Ephesians. 6. even to wound it to
death with all wicked sins. The devil goes about like a roaring lion,
seeking whom he may devour. 1. Pet. 5. And they by this craft which they use
by means of the witches, make the blind people imagine that they never come nigh
them, but when the witches are angry and do send them, and that they are
easily driven away when they do come, as by burning some quick thing, as
hen, or hog, or by beating and drawing blood upon the witch. Such people as
can thus drive him away, or by thrusting a spitte red hot into their cream,
are far from knowing the spiritual battle, in which we are to war under
the banner of Christ against the devil, much less do they know how to put on
(as S. Paul wills) the whole armor of God, to resist and overcome him.
Ephesians. 6. He may deal with their souls even as he lists, when they take him
not present but upon such sending, and where such hurt does follow in their
bodies or goods.


M. B. I do not deny, but that the devils seek chiefly for to destroy the
souls of men: But (as I tak it) you confess, that they being sent by the
witches, do also those bodily harms: and as yet I see no reason why they may
not seek remedy against such harms, and drive him away by any good means:
does the word of God forbid us to use means? If I be sick, shall I not take
physic? If I be thirsty, shall I not drink? Indeed I am of your mind,
though I did never mark so much before, that the devil deals subtillie in
this, that by dealing in such small matters, he covers himself in the
greater, as though he came not near, nor did not meddle but in such manner: But
here stands the case, I resist him in those greater, may I not also use those
helps which drive him away in the lesser? I will if I can drive him away in
all things.


Dan. Now the devils are sent by the witches, and how they do those bodily
harms, we are not yet come unto, and there lie two of the chief subtilties
of the devil in them, by which he deceives the multitude. But by occasion we
are fallen into the mention of remedy to drive them away* Because (I say) such
as thus drive him away, know not the spiritual battle, much less how to put
on the whole armor of God to overcome the devil: Order does require that we
speak first of his sending, and then of those bodily harms which he does, and
afterward of these means which are used to repel him. Let us therefore step
one step back again, if you agree to the rest which I have spoken.


M. B. With a good will: for so we shall omit no part. But I thought we had
fully agreed in this, that the witches do send their spirits, and do many
harms both unto men and beasts: because we have it confirmed by daily
experience: and unless you will deny that which is manifest, I doubt not but
we shall accord in these.


Dan. I say the witches do send their spirits.


M. B. What shall we need then to stand upon that point in which we are agreed?


Dan. Yes^ though we agree that they send them, yet we may dissent in diverse
things about this sending. As first, tell me, whether do you think that the
witch or the Devil is the servant, which of them commands, and which
obeys?


M. B. How can I tell that? It is thought he becomes her servant, and where
she is displeased, and would be revenged, she hyreth him for to do it. The
witches themselves have confessed thus much: and for my part, I think no man
can disprooue it.


Dan. They that do the will of God are the children and servants of God. And
they which fulfill the lusts of the devil, and obey him, are his children and
his servants, Ioh. 8. verse. 44. Act. 13. verse. 10. Are they not?


M. B. I grant all this?


Dan. The deuilles are the rulers of the darkness of this world. Ephesians. 6.
ver. 12.


M. B. The text is plain.


Dan. The darkness of this world, is not meant of the darkness of the night,
which is but the shadow of the earth, but it is the spiritual darkness, which
consists in the ignorance of God, in infidelity, and in sin.


M. B. I am of your mind in this also.


Dan. And do you not think then that the devil has his throne, his dominion
and kingdom in the hearts of ignorant blind infidels?


M. B. I must needs think he has, the word of God does force me thereunto:
seeing he is the Prince of darkness.


Dan. And is there any greater infidelity and darkness in any, than in
witches, coniurers, and such as have familiarity with devils?


M. B. I tak it they be the depest overwhelmed in darkness and infidelity of
all other.


Dan. Lay all these things together which you confess, and see whether it
does not follow upon the same, that the witch is the vassal of the devil, and
not he her servant; he is Lord and commands, and she is his drudge and
obeys.


M. B. Yea, although he be Lord, yet he is content to serve her turn, and the
witches confess, they call them forth and send them: and that they hire them
to hurt such in their bodies, and in their cattle, as they be displeased
withal.


Dan. I am sorry you are so far awrie, it is pity any man should be in such
error, especially a man that has learning, and should teach others knowledge.


M. B. Nay, I may return this upon you, for if you will deny this, it is but
a folly to reason any further: I will never be driven from that which I know:
There was one old mother W. of great T. which had a spirit like a a Weasill:
she was offended highly with one H. M. home she went, and called forth her
spirit, which lay in a pot of woll under her bed, she willed him to go plague
the man: he required what she would give him, and he would kill H. M. She said
she would give him a cock, which she did, and he went, and the man fell sick
with a great pain in his belly, languished and died: the witch was arraigned,
condemned, and hanged, and did confess all this.


Dan. I told you before that I do not deny these things, but you are deceived
about the doing: you mark not the cunning sleights of the devil: Tell me, is
not this the truth which S. Peter speaks, that the devil goes about like a
roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. 1. Pet. 5.


M. B. What then?


Dan. What then? can you be so simple as to imagine that the devil lies in a
pot of wool, soft and warm, and stirs not, but when he is hired and sent?
The devils conspire together in their work, they bestirre them, and never take
rest night nor day: they are never weary, they be not a cold, they care not
for lying soft: These be fooleries by which he deceives the witches, and
bewitcheth the minds of many ignorant people: And whereas you say he is hired,
it is but deceit: for, let me ask you two or three questions or more if need
be.


M. B. What be your questions?


Dan. You say the witch comes home angry, who has kindled this wrath in her
heart but the devil? Who inflameth her mind with malice, to be revenged, and
to do mischief but the devil? does not he rule in her heart? Tell me what
you think of this?


M. B. I must needs confess he stirs her up to wrath and malice.


Dan. Then he lies not at home in his pot of wool: nor he is not hired to
this: hitherto she is his drudge, and obeys him, and not he her, being led by
his suggestion. Then tell me, is not the devil like a red or fiery dragon,
Revel. 12. burning in malice against God, and with all bloody and cruel
hatred that may be against men? And is he not far readier unto all mischief,
than any man or woman?


M. B. The devil is more fierce than any man or woman; none can deny this.


Dan. If none can deny this, and he be the worker of the wrath and malice in
the heart of the witch; then what needs he to be hired? he stirs her up,
and if he would, he could turn her mind from sending him, and must he he hired?
does he care for a cock or a chicken? Is he hungry or needs he somewhat to
eat?


M. B. Nay, but it is thought he takes those things to witness against the
witch that she is his.


Dan. Let it be, there were somewhat in that which you speak, yet he has a
far deeper reach; for the truth is, he would, and does persuade the blind
people, that he medleth little, but when he is even hired and sent, and that
then his meddling is but in such matters: And hereupon all is on a broyle
against old women, which can any ways be suspected to be witches, as if they
were the very plagues of the world, and as if all would be well, and safe from
such harms, if they were rooted out, and thus they fall a rooting out without
all care* for it is thought that the witch which has her spirits, is even like
a man which has cursed dogs, which he may set upon other men's cattle, which
yet in the nature of dogs, would never stir but when they are bidden: and so
the harms do come from the man which owes those dogs. They think that the
country might be ryd of such spirits, if there were none to hoister them, or to
set them a work. They imagine that they and their cattle should then go
safe. Alas poor creatures, how they be deluded? how little do they understand
the high providence of almighty God which is over all.


M. B. Do you think then that witches ought not to be rooted out? or do you
think it were not much safety to the country from harms, if it could be rid
of them?


Dan. For the rooting out of witches, the Scripture is plain. Thou shall not
suffer a witch to live: but we are not yet come to that point. But whether they
be to be rooted out that men may be safe from harms, as the people in fury and
blindness imagine, that is next.


M. B. Men feel the smart and the harms which they do, and it is no marvel,
though they be earnest to have them rooted out, and a good riddance it were if
the whole land could be set free from them.


Sam. Truly M. B. I am of your mind, I would they were all hanged up one against
another: we should not (I hope) stand in such fear of their spirits. But I
interrupt you too.


The wife. They that would not have them hanged or burnt, I would they might
even witch them unto hell. If I had but one faggot in the world, I would carry
it a mile upon my shoulders to burn a witch.


Dan. Well good woman, spare your faggot a while, and ease your shoulders, and
let us reason the matter a little further? I pray you let me ask you this
question, does the witch or the devil the harm unto men and cattle?


M. B. Why, the devil does it at their sending* though I confess it must
needs be as you said, that the devil works al in the mind of the witch, and
moves her to send him.


Dan. The devil has a kingdom, but it is in darkness and corruption of
sin. He has no right nor power over Gods creatures, no not so much as to
kill one fly, or to take one ear of corn out of any man's barn, unless
power be given him. You know when Christ cast the devils out of the man
possessed, they ask leave for to go into the heard of swine. Then tell me,
who gives the devil this power then, when the witch sends him, to kill or
to lame man or beast? does the witch give it him? Do you think he had power to
do harm, but no mind till she moved him? Or do you take it that her sending
gives him power, which he had not?


M. B. It is a question indeed worth the asking: For doubtless, the devil
has not power until it be given him, to touch any creature, to hurt, or to
destroy the body, but only to tempt and to lead into sin: I am also sure that
the witch cannot give him power, but only God above.


Dan. Lay these two together then, that the devil only hurts, and that none
can give him power, neither man nor woman, but only God, and tell me whether
the people be not wonderfully carried awry in a rage. For, when as they should
consider, that the devil is the Lords executioner: And then finding that he
has any power given him to molest, to hurt and vex them in their bodies or
goods, to know certainly it comes from the Lord, and then gather from thence
(as the truth is) that the Lord is displeased with them for their offenses.
And so seek unto him* humbly craving pardon and deliverance from this enemy,
seeking to be armed with the mighty power of faith, to cast him forth, and to
resist him, as the Lord wills, 1. Pet. 5 Here is no such matter, no looking
so high among the people, but running deeper into error, and into sin, as if
the witches did it, and that it comes from their anger and not from their
own sins and infidelity, here is no repentance, no humbling themselves by
fasting and prayer, but running for help unto deuilles, using means which
those devils by the cunning men and women appoint, scratching and clawing,
thirsting often after guiltles blood as raging against those whomethey imagine
to be witches, which many times are not, because they imagine, that if there
were no witches, there should be no such plagues. As if they had no foul sins
nor unbelief, or that there remained not a just revenging God to punish, or as
if he had not the devils still the executioners of his wrath.


M. B. Truly your words do make me affrayd: for I am even guilty of th^se
things my self, if they be so grievous, as you set them out: and by Gods
grace I will consider better of the matter: for I have counseled many to seek
unto those cunning folks, and to use such helps as they prescribe, and you
say, it is to seek help at devils. To see that point we shall come anon: now I
would be resolved about somewhat in your last speech; as namely, do you clear
the witches, because God, and not they, gives the devil power, and do you
think that the devils should kill men and their cattle, if they were not sent
by witches? Should the harms still follow, if there were no witches?


Dan. That I say God alone, and not the witches, gives power unto the devils
to plague and torment: it is so evident as that I suppose a man shall hardly
meet with any man so gross but will confess it. But this does not clear
the witches at all; for their sin is in dealing with devils, and that they
imagine that their Spirits do those harms, requested and hired by them: when
as indeed the devil, where he has power given him to hurt, or where he
knows death or grievous diseases will follow either in man or beast, sets
the witch in a rage, and moves her to send him. Concerning your other
question, I say, we shall find by the Scriptures, that if there were no
witches at all, yet men should be plagued by the devils in their bodies and
goods. For touching the godly, the Lord does use Satan to afflict them in their
bodies and in their goods, for to try their faith and patience: as the
example of holy Job does testify in ample manner. It were vile folly and
brutish to affirm, that witches did set on the devils to kill his children,
and to plague his body* And I hold it no small folly, for any man to think
that the Lord does not now scourge his children, at the least some of them,
for their good, by the devil. There is no doubt, but the devil having power
given him to afflict, uses all the craft he can, and will seek to be sent by
the witch, and so he will make it known, because it may seem to be not from
God, but from the anger of a poor woman. And now touching the wicked, which
provoke God by their wicked sins and unbelief, may we not read in the
scriptures that an evil spirit was sent of God unto king Saul, which did
haunt and vex him? Was this spirit sent by a witch? Or the devils in the
Gospel, which entered into the heard of swine and drowned them? Did the Lord
give them power, and send them, and shall we be so sottish as to think, that
he sends not the devil now against ungodly men, to plague and to destroy
them? As I said before, here is the deep craft of Satan, that he will covet to
be sent by witches, whereas indeed God has sent him, seeing none can send
him but God. Again, we must consider that there be natural causes in the
bodies of men and beasts of grievous torments and diseases, yea even causes
of death. Now, they cannot be so secret, but the devil knows them, and
even when they are like to take effect. Then does he plie it with the witch,
sets her in a fury, she sends him, even upon this sending the man or the
beast suddenly and strangely are tormented, fall lame, or die. Then the witch
is suspected, examined, and confesses that she killed such a man, or such a
man's cattle, or made them lame. Here the people are set in a wonderful maze
and astonishment, as if witches could plague men in their wrath, by sending
their spirits, because they confess they did it, when their spirits do lie
and had no power, but the torments came by natural causes. And to drive the
people into a deeper madness in this, and to make them believe, that strange and
sudden torments and languishing diseases come by witches, he has his other
sort of witches, the cunning men and women, which tell even upon his word,
(which you know is to be trusted) that they be bewitched, that they be haunted
with fayries, and that there be thus many witches therabout, in every town some.


M. B. That is most true no doubt, which you speak, I do not for my part
know how to gainsay any one point thereof. Only I wonder at the craftiness of
the devils in these things, that where they have power granted unto them to
hurt, they will be sent by the witches, as if they did it hired by them, and
that you say where harms do follow men upon natural causes, that they can
make show as though they did them. But are you of this mind, that there should
be as many or all those harms done by deuilles, if there were no witches, as
there be now? Although I must needs confess, that the witches can give the
devil no power, nor he can take none by their sending: yet may it not be that
God gives them power oftener because of those witches dealing with them, than
if there were no witches at all?


Dan. The craftiness of devils is such, as without the light of Gods word,
the wisest men under heaven must needs be deceived thereby. We see there be
some men so deep in subtilties and can carry matters so close, that men can not
discern them: how much more the deuilles, which are exceedingly subtle, and
crafty above the subtillest men? the question which you ask is (in my
judgment) somewhat hard: But this is undoubted, that if the Lord God do give
unto the devils oftener power to hurt because of the witches, I mean because
the devils do deal by such instruments, it is in his heavy judgment against
the wickedness of the people, which despise the true and heavenly light of his
word. As S. Paul (prophesying of the coming of the great Antichrist) shows,
that because men did not receive the love of the truth, God gave the devil
power by Antichrist and his ministers, to seduce by lying signs and wonders.
Indeed, I will not say that for the witch the devil has power given him, but
for the wickedness of the people, which deserve that by witches the devil
should have power to seduce them further. Here yet we must take heed of the
common error which a multitude are carried so hedlong withal, that they can by
no means see, that God is provoked by their sins to give the devil such
instruments to work withal, but rage against the witch, even as if she could
do all.


M. B. Surely, I should be a wretch to deny, that God gives the Deuilles
power to plague and to seduce because of men's wickedness; but yet I would know
whether a godly faithful man or woman may not be bewitched? We see the
devil had power given him over Job?


Dan. This example of Job is not fit to prove that a godly man may be
bewitched, seeing the devil is not said to deal by witches against him, but
it does prove, that not only the godly, but even the most godly (as holy
Job, who had none like him upon earth) may for their trial be given into the
hands of Satan to be afflicted and tempted. And as I said, where Satan has
power granted him of God, to strike with bodily plagues any of the godly, for
the trial of their faith and patience, he will covet, if he can bring it
about, to be sent by some witch, and to have it known that he was sent. But
the faithful are to turn their eyes from the witch, and to deal with God,
for from him the matter comes. When they be tried; the Lord in his good time
will deliver them depending upon him, to their great praise and glory, even as
valiant soldiers. It is therefore, of no great force, whether Satan come from
the witch against the godly, or whether he have no witch to deal by: overcome
thou the devil, and thou ouercommest all. Indeed among the more ignorant sort
he preuayleth much, when he touches those which embrace the lively word as
sent from a witch. For many now do even quake and tremble, and their faith
does stagger. Has he power (think they) over such as be cunning in the
scriptures, then what are they the better for their profession? the witch is on
their bones as well as upon others. By this it might seem, and so they take
it, that other helps and remedies are to be sought than by the scriptures. And
so they run and seek help where they ought not.


M. B. Then I pray you, though I be already persuaded it is naught to seek to
these cunning men for help against witches, yet let us confer a little of
that. There be diverse things which have persuaded me to think marvelous well
of them, and even as of such as God has given wisdom and skill unto, even
for to do much good. For we see many receive help by them, and are delivered
from the plagues which come by devils. And first, I would know how they can be
so earnest against witches, if they deal with the devil, and so be indeed
witches themselves? how can they have any mind in charity to do good, to take
pity upon such as be in misery? Or how will Satan drive forth Satan? For they
no doubt, drive out deuilles out of some.


Dan. I would come to answer your questions touching the seeking help at the
hands of cunning men or women, but tell me first, are you resolved touching
the sending of the spirits, and touching the harms that are done? Me think you
slip too suddenly from these points?


M. B. I cannot tell whether I understand your meaning in every thing, but
sure, I have been in error greatly I must needs confess. And if you please, we
may stand somewhat longer in these questions.


Sam. Indeed it is my desire that you would speak a little playner of these
points: for I have marked well all your talk, and cannot well conceive of the
last things you dealt in. With your leave M. B. I would ask two or three
questions of my friend. Here was but seven miles hence at W. H. one M. the man
was of good wealth, and well accounted of among his neighbors. He pined away
with sickness half a year, and at last died. After he was dead, his wife
suspected ill dealing: she went to a cunning man, I know not where, and desired
to know whereof her husband died. He told her that her husband died of
witcherie: he asked her if she did not suspect any therabout. She said there
was one woman which she did not like, one mother W. her husband and she fell
out, and he fell sick within two days after, and never recovered again. He
showed her the woman as plain in a glass, as we see one another, and in the
very apparel she went in at that hour, for she ware an old red cappe with
corners, such as women were wont to wear; and in that she appeared in the
glass: He taught her how she might bring her to confess. Well, she followed
his counsel, went home, caused her to be apprehended and carried before a
Justice of peace. He examined her so wisely, that in the end she confessed she
killed the man. She was sent to prison, she was arraigned, condemned, and
executed: And upon the ladder she seemed very penetent, desiring all the world
to forgive her. She said she had a spirit in the likeness of a yellow dun catte.
This catte came unto her, as she said, as she sat by her fire, when she was
fallen out with a neighbor of hers, and wished that the vengeance of God might
light upon him and his. The catte bad her not be afraid, she would do her no
harm: She had served a dame five years in Kent, that was now dead, and if she
would, she would be her servant. And whereas, said the Cat, such a man has
misused thee, if thou will I will plague him in his cattle She sent the Cat,
she killed three hogs and one Cow. The man suspecting, burnt a pig alive, and
as she said, her cat would never go thither any more. Afterward she fell out with
that M. she sent her Cat, who told her, that she had given him that, which he
should never recover: and indeed the man died. Now do you not think the woman
spoke the truth in all this? Would the woman accuse her self falsely at her
death? Did not the Cat become her servant? Did not she send her? Did she not
plague and kill both man and beast? What should a man think of this?


Dan. You propounde a particular example, and let us examine every thing in it
touching the witch, for the woman's fact that went to the wise man, we are not
yet come to that point. You say the Cat came to her when she was in a great
rage with one of her neighbors, and did curse, wishing the vengeance of God to
fall upon him and his.


Sam. She said so indeed, I heard her with mine own ears, for I was at the
execution.


Dan. Then tell me who set her in such a deuilish rage, so to curse and banne,
as to wish that the vengeance of God might light upon him and his? did not the
Cat?


Sam. Truly I think the Devil wrought that in her.


Dan. Uerie well, then you see the Cat is the beginner of this play.


Sam. Called you it a play? It was no play to some.


Dan. Indeed the witch at last had better have wrought hard, than been at her
play. But I mean Satan did play the Iugler: For, does he not offer his
service? Does he not move her to send him to plague the man? Tell me, is she so
forward to send, as he is to be sent? Or do you not take it, that he rules in
her heart, and even wholly directs it to this matter?


Sam. I am fully persuaded he rules her heart.


Dan. Then was she his drudge, and not he her servant, he needs not to be
hired nor entreated, for if her heart were to send him any where, unto such as
he knows he cannot hurt, nor sees how to make any show that he hurts
them, he can quickly turn her from that. Well, the cat goes and kills the
man, certain hogs and a Cow: how could she tell that the Cat did it?


Sam. How could she tell? why he told her man, and she saw and heard that he
lost his cattle.


Dan. The Cat would lie, would she not? for they say such cattes are liars.


Sam. I do not trust the Cats words, but because the thing fell out so.


Dan. Because the hogs and the Cow died, are you sure the Cat did kill them,
might they not die of some natural causes as you see both men and beasts are
well, and die suddenly?


Sam. That were strange, if they should die of natural causes, and fall out so
fit at the time after he was sent?


Dan. It is not strange at all, as mark what I tell you and you shall easily
see. There be natural causes of tortures and grief, of lamenes, and of death
in the bodies of men and beasts, which lie so hid and secret, that the
learneddest Physicians can not epsy them, but the devil sees them, and can
conjecture very near the time, when they will take effect. Then does he ply
it, to bring the matter about that it may seem he did it. If he have any
witch to deal by, he stirs up some occasion to set her in a rage with that
party: and then he will be sent, and tells her he does it. If he have no
witch to deal by, yet he will set debate between the party and some other,
whom he may bring into suspicion, as his greatest desire is to have innocent
blood shed.


Sam. Here is a matter brought about indeed, how could the Cat do all this?


Dan. I told you before, that the deuilles work together, and can speedily
and most craftily compass things, which are far beyond the reach of man's
capacity. But sometime the devil has power given him to plague and does the
harm. Admit he had power given him, and did kill the cattle of this man: let
us come now to that, who think you, gave him the power for to strike and kill?
Did the witch give him the power, or the Lord God?


Sam. Nay surely, the witch cannot give him power.


Dan. Did he receive power after she sent him?


Sam. That cannot I tell.


Dan. The^ mark a little: he has power given him to plague this man in his
goods: he will do it, but he will do it craftily. The Lord gave him power over
the goods of holy Job: he works by instruments, for he stirs up the
Sabeis, and they take away his Oxen, and his Asses: he raises up also the
Chaldeis, and they carry away his Camels, Job. 1. Even so, having power to
strike, he will be sent by a witch, he could do it without her, but he gayneth
much that way, as we shall see when we come to speak of the remedies which
men seek.


Sam. I wonder then that the man never had more hurt after he had burnt his pig
alive?


Dan. O man, the Devil can abide no roast meat, nor no fire, he is affraide,
if they fall a roasting, that they will roast him. If they run at him with a
spit red hot, they gaster him so sore, that his dame shall go her self, if she
will he will come no more there. But of these things we are to speak
afterward in their place.


Sam. You make the devil wonderful subtle.


Dan. He is so subtle and full of all craft and slight, that no earthly
creature can escape from being seduced by him, without the light of Gods
heavenly word. But let us come now to the other man, whom the witch confessed
she killed by her Cat.


Sam. Yea, that me thinks is more than the other, the woman was told by the
cunning man that her husband was killed by witcherie. The witch confessed so
much at her death. The Cat told the witch, that she killed him.


Dan. Here be a company of credible persons to be believed: the cunning man
says the man was bewitched to death. Who told him that?


Sam. His spirit that makes the witch appear in the glass.


Dan. That same Spirit, what do you take him to be, an Angel, or a Devil?


Sam. Some of the cunning men say, they have Moses or Elias, or the Spirit of
some holy man.


Dan. The Devil can turn himself into the likeness of an Angel of light. For
they that do think the cunning men and women deal with any other Spirit
than Satan, have no understanding. Satan says, the man was witched to death.


Sam. Satan says so, he is not to be believed, but the witchconfesseth it was
so.


Dan. Who told the witch?


Sam. Her Cat that she sent.


Dan. What is the Cat, a devil? then remember the proverb, ask his fellow if
he be a thief. All the matter rests upon the testimony of devils, and they
not put to their oath. We will not ground upon man's testimony without an
oath, and must we believe the bare word of devils?


Sam. Do you think then that the man was not killed by witcherie?


Dan. It may be the Lord had given Satan power to plague the man in his body,
and then he under a color would be sent by a witch. But it is most like that
his body did languish and pine of natural causes, which the devil did know,
and so would be sent, and seem to do all, when as indeed he had no power to
touch him. For, although the Lord give the devil power, to strike some in
their bodies for their heinous sins, yet the most which the witches think
their spirits do kill at their request, do die of natural diseases.


Sam. Then it seems the witches are deceived, and mocked, when he makes them
believe he does kill and plague when he does not. And again in this, where
he has power given him of God, to strike man or beast, he could do it, and
would without the witch, and so uses the witch for a color to draw on worse
matters.


Dan. I am glad you take my meaning so right: for, think deeply of the
matters, and you shall see it must needs be so.


Sam. I interrupted M. B. I pray you go forward now to the rest.


Dan. Our matter which we come unto now, is the help and remedy that is
sought for against witches at the hands of cunning men. And now if it please
you to propound your questions, I will answer to them the best I can.


M. B. Nay truly, I see already all is naught, but yet I will object those
things which have carried me awrie. I take it a man is to seek remedy against
evils, and I thought it was even a gift that God gave unto those whom we call
cunning men, that they did very much good by. When a thing is lost, when a
thing is stolen, many go to them, and they help them to it. I did know where
the Communion cup was stolen: the Churchwardens rode to a wise man, he gave
them direction what night, and where they should stand, and the party that had
stolen it should come thither, and confess he had it: and certainly they had
it again. I did know one that had a child of five years old, a gyrle, it was
taken piteously: the father was in great heaviness, and knew not what to do:
some gave him counsel to go to a woman which dwelt ten miles from him, and to
carry some of the clothes which the child lay in: he did so, the woman told him
that his child was bewitched, and if he did not seek remedy in time, the
child would be lost: She bad him take some old clothes, and let the child
lie in them all night, and then take and burn them: and he should see by the
burning, for if they did burn black, that showed the child was bewitched, and
she said further that doubtless the witch would come thither: he followed her
advice, and sure as we be here, there came an old woman in, which he suspected,
even while they were burning, and made an errand: the man made no more ado,
but even laid his clowches upon her and clawed her until the blood ran down
her cheeks, and the child was well within two days after. I could tell you of
a stranger thing, but I have it but by report, but yet indeed by very credible
report. There was a butcher by his trade that had a boy to his son, his name
was John, grievous sores did break forth upon him: they laid salues, and none
would cleave for to draw or to ease them. The father making his moan to a
friend of his, he told him whether he should go to a very skillful man. he
did go, and being demanded whom he suspected, she was showed him in a glass,
an old woman that dwelt not far from him in an house alone: he told the
cunning man, that the woman had shut up her door, and was gone from home out of
the shyre, and so he could not tell how to come by her. he told him a way how
he should fetch her home. Cut off the hair (said he) of the boys head, and put
it in a cloth and burn it, and I warrant you she will come home with all the
speed she can. Burn it abroad, burn it not in a chimney, for if you do, it
will make you all affraide. The man went home and did this. The woman came home
with all speed, came to his house, came to the boy, and said, John, scratch
me, he scratched her until the blood followed, and whereas before nothing
would draw his soars, they healed of themselves. What should a man think of
such things?


Dan. You tell of some, which have received help from the hands of cunning men:
And no doubt there may infinite examples be brought. Some have lost, some have
things stolen from them, some are vexed in their bodies: They come by the
things again which were lost or stolen, they are taught to do certain
things, and are eased from their griefs. But this we must first know, they
receive their help, if it deserve the name to be called help, from the devil.
And do you think a man may lawfully seek help at the hands of the devil?


M. B. Some are persuaded that they do not seek help at the hand of devils,
when they go to the wise men: but that it is a gift which God has given them,
even to do good withal.


Dan. I do verily think that many of the people are so persuaded: but what
reason is there for it? Does God by his Spirit tell where the thing is which
is lost, or stolen? Is it an Angel from heaven, or the soul of some man that
is dead, which appears in the Crystal, or in the glass, and shows the
image of the party which has stolen, or that is a witch?


M. B. I had rather hear what you think touching these things, than show what
I have thought.


Dan. The devils did make the heathen people believe that they were gods, and
so procured that they should worship them with divine worship. Through their
craftines they had many ways to establish this: they conveyed themselves into
images, and out of them gave answers, when they were demanded, herein they used
great craft. for whereas they could not tell what should fall out, they framed
the oracle in such sort as it was doubtful, and might be taken both ways: and
so look which part it fell out on, that seemed and was taken to be the meaning
of the gods. If they did know how things would fall out indeed, as they did know
sundry things touching the kingdoms and monarchies of the world, by the
writings of the Prophets, and diverse things by conjectures, as the devil
could tell Saul he should be slain, because he saw God had cast him off, and
the hearts of the Israelits fainted, and the Philistims were full of courage,
those they would tell plainly. Also they did convey themselves into the
bodies of men and women, and utter things which seemed very divine, such (as I
am persuaded) were the Prophetisses the Sibylles among the heathen. Such was
the maid at Philippos, which is mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, which
brought great gain unto her masters by deuining, out of whom Paul cast the
devil. This maid could tell of things lost, of things stolen, and such like,
and great resort there was unto her, as men had need, or desired to see the
strangeness of the matter.


M. B. Let me interrupt you a little. The devil can not be in all places at
once: how could he then, remaining in the maid, tell what was done in places
far off? how can the devil tell where the thing lost or stolen is, which is
not only far off, but hidden? how can he show the image of the thief or
witch? Can he sit and behold all things a far off, and in secret?


Dan. We may not ascribe unto Devils that they can be in all places at once, or
sit in one place and behold all things done a far off. But they join
together in this special work, to set up their kingdom, and to draw the
people after them, to seek help at their hands, and so to worship them. Some
of them be in one place, and some in another, and from all places do stir up
the faithless people to run for help to those cunning men, and then they make
the relation, for they go thither also, they know the thief whom they moved
to the theft, and can make resemblance of his face and apparel: they can tell
where things be that are hid, having had a finger in the matter. And thus one
spirit* as it does seem* tells things spoken and done far off, but it is
otherwise, there be many that do it, which resort from all the places where
the things are done.


M. B. I am satisfied touching this point. You were showing how the devils did
deal among the heathen out of the Idols, and out of men and women.


Dan. Yea, and they have subtillie wound themselves in again among Christians.
For using witches as their instruments, they make them believe that they do
many harms sent by them, which they do not, and whereas they have power given
them by God to afflict, they will seem to do it at the wrath and displeasure
of the witch, she must send him, the matter must one way or other appear,
either he will seem even compelled by force of such as do adjure him, to
confess that such a woman or such a man sent him, or else the witch must
confess so much. Then the people devise how they may be safe against the
witch, there is running to the wisardes to learn what they should do, to
withstand the fury of the witch, that she send not to them, or if she have
sent, how they may expel her spirit, and keep her from sending him again:
this is it which the devil would have: for now he utters all his wares: he
teaches by these cunning men and women, many horrible abominations, and foul
abuses of the name of God, by which they are made believe, that they have
remedy against the devils sent by the witches, and that they are cured from
their harms.


M. B. I do not see how any man can indeed justify, or maintain, that the
spirits which appear unto them in the Crystal, or in the glass, or water,
or that any way do speak, and show matters unto them, be holy Angels, or the
souls of excellent men, as of Moses, Samuel David, and others, though I have
heard that the cunning men, take them to be such, and think they deal by them
against devils.


Dan. It is no matter what Satan's vassals are made to believe by his subtle
sleights: it is most abominable for any Christian man, ever to let it enter
into his thought, that they do any thing by the power or wisdom of the holy
Ghost, by any Angel or good spirit, or that they do any thing against the
devil, which work by the intelligence which they have from evil spirits:
therefore hold this, that they seek unto devils, which run unto those
southsayers.


M. B. I am persuaded indeed that they seek unto devils, but I would see some
reason for it out of Gods word.


Dan. Touching all spiritual matters, as to be armed with power against
devils, and to know how to avoid the dangers which they bring, we are no where
to seek, and to learn but of our most blessed Lord God. And of him we cannot
learn, but by his holy word, for in it he has opened unto us all his whole
will. And therefore, where the Lord commands the people of Israel by
Moses, Deuteronomy. 18. that they should not when they came into the land, learn to do
according to the abominations of those heathen, reckoning up sundry kinds of
such as were Satan's instruments, which he used to seduce the multitude, by
deuinations, by observing of times, by augurie, by iuglings with the help of
the devil, by using familiar Spirits, spirits of deuination, and seeking to
the dead: he sets down also the remedy, showing first, that he would cast
out those nations because they harkened unto the southsayers, and deuiners,
pronouncing that every one which does those things, is an abomination to the
Lord, willing his people that they should not harken to such, but that they
should hearken unto him: And then Moses says, A Prophet shall the Lord thy God
raise up unto thee from among you of thy brethren like unto me, him shall ye
hear.


M. B. Then you prove by that place, that we must seek only to God, and not
to such as work by means besides his words.


Dan. If you read that place, Deuteronomy. 18. and mark every thing well, you shall
see it does not only prove that they seek unto Deuilles, which run to
these cunning men and women* because the Prophets which God has raised up to
declare the Lords will, command us not to do such things: but also declares
that they be an abomination to the Lord that use them, or that seek unto
them.


M. B. I see then it is not only a sin, but a most horrible sin, to
seek unto them. Alas, many do not think that they seek unto deuilles, when
they go for help unto them for things stolen, or for help and remedy
against witches.


Dan. No doubt many refuse to hear the voice of God, to be instructed by him:
they despise his word, and therefore they be given up to hearken unto Deuilles.
Such as have sought unto any of these that work by the devil, and now come to
see their offense, ought to show repentance for the same, not as for a light
sin. It is no small abomination to go for help unto the devil: It is to
set him in Gods place, and to honor him as God. It rises of infidelity and
distrust of help from God, as we may see in the example of king Saul, who
finding no answer nor comfort from God, whom he had so wickedly disobeyed,
went to a witch. The heathen man said, Flectere si nequeo Superos,
Acherontamouebo. If I cannot entreat the gods, I will down among the devils.


M. B. Nay, doubtless there can be no defense made for such seeking help at
their hands, which deal with familiar spirits, but I muse at diverse things,
as this for one, how the cunning men, if they deal by the power of the devil,
should use such good words, and will them that come unto them to do all in
the name of Christ, teaching them to use words and sentences of the scriptures.


Dan. O sir, here lies the deep subtlety of Satan, how should the people be
seduced to follow him, if he should not use great cunning to cover matters, as
if devils were driven out, and harms cured that are done by them, even through
the name and mighty power of God. Herein also lies a more foul abomination,
and that is the abusing and horrible profaning of the most blessed name of
God, and the holy Scriptures unto witcheries, charms, and coniurations, and
unto all deuillish arts. Such an one is haunted with a fayrie, or a spirit: he
must learn a charm compounded of some strange speeches, and the names of God
intermingled, or wear some part of S. John's Gospel or such like. So against
the thief, against the devil sent by the witch, the like is practiced. What
can Satan desire more, than that holy things should be thus abused* There is
ado to get him into the glass, to get him into the Crystal, to get him into
the basen of water: there is a do to bind him, as it were by the name and
power of Christ to tell this thing or that thing. The coniurer he binds him
with the names of God, and by the virtue of Christ's passion and resurrection,
and so makes him serve his turn: And all is his own work; for he is not
constrained, nor bound, but seeks thus to have God blasphemed. O (says the
simple man) this is a good woman, she speaks of God, and of Christ, and does
all in his name: they be good words which she has taught me to use: and what
hurt can there be in using good words? Alas poor man, what case are they in
which must learn good words of the devil? It is not the speaking of good
words, or the wearing some part of the scriptures, that defends from devils,
therein lies the craft of satan, to have those holy things so foullie abused,
(...) that men may put trust in words and sentences pronounced* but the
deuilles are withstood only by the power of faith, where the holy scriptures
are written in the heart, and the soul armed with the power of them. From this
Satan draws men by his soothsayers, teaching them other helps: For the
naming of God, or the sentences of scripture binde^^ not satan (...) we read
he can utter them.


M. B. Then how can the devil bear such a pitiful mind, as to help those
that be in misery? For many have help by these cunning men. The devil is
cruel and bent wholly to do hurt, and that is it which persuades many that
things are done even by the power of God.


Dan. The devils be as pitiful as a greedy hungry lion that roareth after his
pray, and as a fierce Dragon, all burning with wrath and bloody malice: they
make show of doing good unto men, only of a most cruel and murtherous purpose,
even to draw men deeper into the pit of hell with them. For if they can help
the body a little, it is to win both body and soul unto eternal damnation.
Where satan offers his help, it is more to be feared, than where he
manifestly impugneth, and seeks apparently to hurt.


M. B. But this then is more strange, if they do not deal by the power of
God, but by the power of the devil, when they drive out devils from hurting,
how one devil should drive out another. Our savior says, that satan does
not drive out satan, for then his kingdom should be divided and could not
stand.


Dan. It is most certain that satan does not drive out satan: for our savior
has showed the reason of the contrary. One devil is ready to further the
work of another: but in no wise to expel or to hinder one another.


M. B. There is it which makes me to muse: we see the devil driven out, and
does not return again, and if it be not wrought by the power of deuilles, as
you say it cannot, then must it needs be by the power of God,


Dan. The Devil is driven out, neither by the power of the devil, nor yet by
the power of God, in these that are healed by cunning men.


M. B. I like this worst of all the speech which I heard you utter yet: For if
satan be not driven out neither by the power of satan, not by the power of God,
what other power is there to drive him out? If you can show a third power to
expel him, it is more than ever I heard of.


Dan. There needs not a third power to expel him, for he is not driven out
at all.


M. B. I told you before, if you deny that to be, which all experience does
show, then is it no reasoning. There be examples in many places, and daily it
is seen, that the devil is driven out of some possessed, that where he did
vex and torment men in their bodies, and in their cattle, they have remedy
against him.


Dan. I do not deny but that some which are possessed and tormented by Satan,
have release: but yet the devil is not cast forth by those means, but cease
willingly even to establish men in error, and in most wicked profaning of the
name of God, and worshipping of himself, and so enters deeper into them.


M. B. I beseech you let me hear how that is, that you say he cease of his
own accord. Will he let go his hold willingly and of his own accord, where
he has it upon any man? Does he not desire to do hurt?


Dan. He does not let go his hold which he has upon any man, but indeed
takes faster hold when he seems to be cast forth and does greater hurt:
for tell me whose devise is the coniuration?


M. B. I am out of doubt that coniuration is the device of the devil.


Dan. Then tell me, has the devil devised and taught a way to bind himself,
or to cast forth himself?


M. B. That I suppose he would never do.


Dan. Indeed if we will imagine that the devil is become an old fool; we may
think he would teach that which should bind and cast forth himself: but the
scripture calls him the old serpent: he devised and taught coniuration,
therefore coniuration does not cast him forth. Yet he seems to be bound by
the co^iurer, yea even by the name of God, and by the power of the passion of
Christ. The coniurer seems by the same power to drive him out of a man
possessed, whose body he does vex and torment. And he cease willingly to
torment the body, to establish coniuration, and so to draw men quite from God,
even to worship and to follow himself, and seek all helps at his hands. Even
so when men are tormented in their bodies, or plagued in their cattle by the
devil, and seek unto the cunning men and women, following the way that they
prescribe unto them, and have ease in their bodies, and no more harm among
their cattle, Satan does not give place as forced, but cease to do those
bodily harms, that he may fully win unto himself both body and soul. If
they should not seem to be expelled, how should men be drawn to seek help at
their hands which deal by him? how should witches and coniurers be drawn on
most horribly to pollute and blaspheme the glorious name of God?


M. B. Then I see they buy their help deer which have it at the hands of these
cunning men.


Dan. Yea, what can be bought more dear, than that which is with the loss of
soul and body for ever, by running from God after devils?


M. B. What should a man think then touching all other which deal not with
the devil and yet have certain ways to find out witches, and to vnwitch
that which they have done?


Dan. Although they deal not directly by the devil, I mean they have no
familiar spirits that speak unto them yet they deal by deuillish devises,
which are also an abomination to the Lord. For all those several sorts of
witches which the Lord rehearses, Deuteronomy. 18. did not deal directly with
devils. For some were obseruers of times, which had their luckie days and
their unlucky days, and so their hours. If they go to buy or to sell, they
choose their hour to set forth in. Some dealt by the intralles of ^easts, and
by the flying of birds, by meeting with an hare, or a fox, and on which hand,
and a thousand such like. Some deal with the Sieve and a pair of sheeres* using
certain words: Some use a charm for the tooth ach another for the ague, and
for stopping the bleeding at the nose, also their spell for the thief, and a
thousand such like, when butter will not come, when chief will not run, nor
Ale work in the fat: These would seem of all others to have witches in the
greatest detestation, and in the mean time work by the devil themselves, and
may be termed witches.


M. B. We do count them witches which have their spirits, we do not take them
to be witches, which do but use those things which the cunning men have
taught. For they do not mean to do any thing by the devil. Me thinks
therefore it is hard to call them witches.


Dan. Take the name of witchcraft for all that deals by the power and devices
of the devil: No doubt some are more horrible than other of the several
sorts of witches, yet the lightest of them be abominations before the Lord,
as we are taught, Deuteronomy. 18. and the ignorance does not excuse. For what though
the witch suppose it is the soul of Moses, which appears in his Crystal, is
he not therefore a witch? Your neighbor, whose butter would not come, which heat
a spit red hot and thrust into the cream, using certain words, does think
she did by the power of God fray away the devil, is she not therefore a witch,
dealing with that which the devil, and not God has taught? Is she not a witch
also in seeking help at devils? They which did burn the clothes which their
child lay in, to know by the burning black whether it were bewitched, and to
bring the witch thither, dealt altogether by the power and direction of the
devil, and so in scratching, for God has taught no such things, then are they
not witches? By whose instruction, and by whose power was the witch fetched
home at the burning of the hair of the butchers son you spoke of? Was not all
done by the power of Satan, and by his instruction? Are not they then which
practice the things the Disciples of witches, and so indeed very witches?
Those which have their charms, and their night spells, what can they be but
witches? I might reckon up her that deals with the sieve and the sheares, and
a number of such trumperies, in all which the most holy name of God is
polluted, and if any thing be done, it is done wholly by the effectual working
of Satan. God has given natural helps, and those we may use, as from his hand
against natural diseases, but things besides nature he has not appointed,
especially, they be ridiculous to drive away deuilles and diseases.


M. B. Now you speak of natural things, we see there be great secrets in
nature: the Adamant draws Iron unto it. And why may there not be some force
in these natural things then?


Dan. No doubt there be great secrets in nature, which the skillful Physicians,
and natural Philosophers do find out. As the hanging of some thing about the
neck, may have force to drive away an ague, the wearing of some thing may have
such virtue to deliver from the cramp, and such like. And from these Satan
does take occasion to bring in his trumperies, and curious devises. As because
there be secrets in nature, a ring is curiously framed according to the
signs in the firmament, this is tied to a thread, and let down into a basen
or cup of water, and will show great things. Because there be secrets in
nature, a horshoo must be heat red hot, and then put into a kettle seething
upon the fire to drive away the witches spirit. Also he that has his cattle
bewitched, burns some live thing, as hog or hen, to drive out the devil.
Can these natural things expel devils? Nay, they play the rank witches,
which burn any thing for to expel devils: for, has God taught to do any
such thing? Do they burn the thing to God, or is it as a very burnt
sacrifice to the Devil? In the time of the law burnt sacrifices were offered to
God: the devil among the heathen drew the like to himself. And now by his
slight he does after some sort procure the same at their hands, which profess
to be Christians, and thus worshipp^^^ him, he cease from hurting their
bodies, or their cattle, as gaining a greater matter.


M. B. If it be so (as I am not able to gainsay it) then be there multitudes in
all places which are guilty of sorce^ie and witchcraft. For I see many deal
in matters by the help and power of the devil, which are persuaded otherwise.
But I marvel much at diverse things touching the help which men have by
devils. Let us confer a little about them. The devil does know things past,
and things present, but God only does know what shall be done in the time to
come. If these cunning men do deal with no further power, than the power of
the devil, how can they tell so right what shall come to pass?


Dan. It is peculiar to God alone, to know what shall come to pass hereafter.
But the Lord God has revealed by his Prophets, and Apostles many things that
after should be fulfilled. Satan can give a nere conjecture when these come to
be fulfilled. He is a most subtle obseruer of things, and will guess at
many: but especially, where he has power given him to work and to bring any
matter about, he can and will tell it aforehand. Finally, God in his just
judgment gives him power to seduce the wicked.


M. B. I pray you open your meaning more fully.


Dan. Uery well: In which have you any doubt?


M. B. I take it the Devil gesseth at things which are prophesied, and is a
sharp obseruer of causes. But you said he tells what shall be, where he
works that which he foretells: give some example for this.


Dan. There needs no better example, than that which you told of the
Churchwardens that went to the cunning man, to know the thief which had
stolen their communion cup. It may be said, where the cunning man bad them
go to such a place, such a night, and at such an hour, and thither shall come
he that stole the cup, how could the devil tell, if it were a night or two
after, that he should come to that place, and at that hour? You must note
what power the devil has in the mind of a thief. He stirred him up to steal
the cup. He stirred up the Churchwardens to seek to the cunning witch. He
names the place and the time, whether, and when he would move the heart of the
thief to come: And at the time appointed he brings him thither, for he that
could move him to steal, could also by secret suggestion move him to go
thither. The devil told that the witch should come home with speed that had
bewitched the butchers son. He that had power in her heart to make her become a
witch, did know he should have power to make her with haste to come home. One
carries somewhat which a sick person has lien in to the cunning man. He can
tell, it seems, by the smell of the cloth, whether the devil has been in it
(if it smell like his devil) and so tells, the party is bewitched. Take the
clothes which the sick party has lien in, and burn them, if they burn
black, then may you see it is so, and the witch shall come in while they be a
burning. Now, if the Lord gave him power, and he has stricken and tormented
the body of the sick person* and if he have collourably stirred up a witch
to send him: Is it not an easy matter for him to make the fire burn black,
and to move the witch to come at that present? Or if he have power for to
torment, and has no witch to send him, his great desire being to have men
guilty of innocent blood, is it not as easy by the permission of God which in
his just judgment gives him power to seduce such people as will hearken unto
devils. for him to make the fire burn black, or at least to seem so to them,
and to move some froward suspected woman or other to come in, though she be
no witch? A thousand such things he works in, and as a cunning iuggler can
compass and bring them about.


M. B. Indeed an innocent person may come in at such a time: but I have heard,
I cannot tell how true it is, that therefore there is a further thing which
they observe. And that is this, the cunning man bids, set on a posnet or
some pan with nails, and sees them, and the witch shall some in while they be
in seething, and within a few days after, her face will be all bescratched
with the nails. And I have heard that some old woman coming in, her face
has indeed been as it were scratched within a few days after, for the
shingles or such like brake forth.


Dan. O the depth of Satan's illusions to make blind people become witches, and
to deal by him. He does know the corrupted humors in the body, which will
break out into the small pockes, or such like, and if he can procure one to
come in which is even ready to have them, what a show does he make, as if the
uails did it?


M. B. This were great subtlety of Satan.


Dan. Nay, we are not able to imagine the depth of his sleights, neither can we
see the secret force, wherewith he moves the minds of ignorant people, and so
brings about his enterprises. There does lie the greatest cunning of Satan.


M. B. Indeed it seems strange and incredible that the devil should so move
the minds of men, and lead them unto this thing and that thing, and in the
mean time they do not know it, but think they go against the devil. But now
I have a further doubt. I confess it is an easy thing for the devil to tell
where a thing is that is lost or stolen, but what power has he to heal that
which is sick or sore? Out of question they be innumerable which receive help
by going to the cunning men. You say he helps the body that he may destroy
the soul. He helps that men may seek unto him, and so set him, as it were,
in the place of God. Me thinks it should not be in the power of deuilles for
to help.


Dan. Indeed that is well moved, there lies a great sleight of the devil in
it. You say that innumerable do receive help by going unto cunning men. I
warrant you not so many as you are persuaded.


M. B. O very many. There be a number which do never make it known, because
it is misliked by some.


Dan. Yea, and there be many which come home again with a flea in their ear,
they receive an answer, as good as a flim flam.


M. B. It may be they come too late, the matter is over far spent, and if
they had come sooner, they could have helped them.


Dan. Yea, a number of such cosoning answers the devil makes which satisfy
ignorant people, which are reato believe all that he tells, and to dance
after his pipe. One comes to him for his child, if he know the disease be
deadly, he will say it is bewitched, but so far spent, that there is no help,
the child will hardly live two days* the father comes home and finds his
child dead, or it dies within two or three days after, here the devil
gets credit. Another is sick and grievously tormented, he sends: Satan
does see (for he sends them) that the disease is even spent, and that the
cause of it begin to fail, and so that the party in a few days will recover,
here he prescribes one paltrie or other, they use it, the man is recovered,
and so should have been without the devils medicine, but now Satan has gotten
further credit. Another is sick and languisheth, his neighbors tell him, he
may be bewitched, it is good to send, and then he shall know. He sends, the
devil does not know whether the sick man can escape and recover, or not. He
says, it is like he is bewitched: and teaches what to do, if there be any
help at all, but doubts, and so whether the man live or die, Satan saves his
credit whole and sound. And many of these answers he gives. Again, we must
note that man's imagination is of great force, either to continue a disease, or
to diminish and take away some diseases. And in this also Satan deludeth some,
for his medicine seems to do somewhat, when it is but the parties conceit.


M. B. These be sleightes indeed: but me thinks you go far in the last.
I do not see how a man's conceit can help him.


Dan. Imagination is a strong thing to hurt, all men do find, and why should
it not then be strong also to help, when the parties mind is cheared, by
believing fully that he receives ease?


M. B. But yet it is hard to show that ever any such cure has been wrought.


Dan. It is not hard to show, for that which men do, it is presumed the devil
can do the like. And I have heard of a merry companion that wrought such a
cure. There was one in London (as report goes) which was acquainted with Feats,
Now, this Feats had a black dog, whom he called Bomelius. This party
afterward had a conceit that Bomelius was a devil, and that he felt him
within him. He was in heaviness, and made his moan to one of his
acquaintance, who had a merry head, he told him, he had a friend could
remove Bomelius. He had him prepare a breakfast, and he would bring him. Then
this was the cure, he made him be stripped naked and stand by a good fire, and
though he were fat enough of himself, basted him all over with butter
against the fire, and made him wear a sleeke stone next his skin under his
belly, and the man had present remedy, and gave him afterward great thanks.


M. B. I know men have many foolish imaginations: but though one imagination
may drive out another, which is not the curing of any disease in deed, but of
an imagination: yet it does not follow, that where there is an apparent
grief, that a man's conceit can help to cure it.


Dan. Yes, the conceit does much, even where there is an apparent disease. A
man fears he is bewitched, it troubles all the powers of his mind, and that
distempereth his body, makes great alterations in it, and brings sundry
griefs. Now, when his mind is freed from such imaginations, his bodily grief
which grew from the same is eased. And a multitude of Satan's cures are but such.


M. B. Nay, there be also evils which be apparent in the body, and be cured,
which come not of any fear or imagination: how can these be cured by any
conceit? There is great reason that such griefs may be cured indeed by
quieting the mind, as did grow from the disturbance of the same.


Dan. Yea, and that falls out sometimes in griefs of the body, which does
not grow from imagination, but from some other passions. As I can give you an
example, which is written and reported by a very reverend learned Physician.
The cure was done by a lewd cosening knave in Germany. A woman had bleare
eyes that were watery. The knave lodging there, promised for certainty that he
would heal them: he did hang a little writing about her neck, charging
strictly, that it should not be taken from thence nor read, nor opened, for if
any of these were done, she could have no help at all by it. The woman had such
a confidence in thethinge, and was so merry and glad, that she left weeping
(for her often weeping and tears had spoiled her eyes) and so by little and
little, the moisture stayed, and her eyes were whole. It fell out that she lost
the writing, whereat she was in such grief and sorrow, and weeping, that her
eyes were sore again. Another found the writing, opened it, and read it. It
was written in the Germane tongue, to this effect translated into English: The
devil pluck out thine eyes, and fill their holes with his dung. Was not this,
think you, a proper salve for to cure her eyes? If this medicine had taken
effect, her eyes should not have been healed, but plucked quite out. We may not
think but that Satan has mo cousening tricks than al men in the world, for men
are but his scholars. Again, where men fail, he can work somewhat in the
affections of the parties minds. And you shall hear them say, when any charm
is used, you must believe it will help, or else it will do you no good at all.
Thus if it were well seen into, the greatest part of your innumerable cures,
come to be mere cosonages.


M. B. Well, let all this be true as you have said: Yet there be many things
wherein the deuilles do help. What say you to the boy which healed within few
days as he had scratched the witch, whereas his sores were most grievous
before, and could not be cured? What say you to that which they do, when
butter will not come, or when drink will not work in the fat? What say you to
the burning of some live thing, as hog or hen, and the harm ceassing? And
finally, what say you to the helping of them where the devil (...) does
torment their bodies*


Dan. All these are answered in few words, that where he has power to hurt
either man or beast, drink or butter he helps only by giving place, and
ceasing to hurt, which as I showed you before, he does most willingly, to
bring to pass, that men may seek to him, and become even very witches. If a
man be vexed and tormented by a devil, and men seek by fasting and prayer to
cast him forth, even instantly entreating the Lord* the^ he goes out with
much a do, and unwillingly, as overcome and expelled by the power of God. But
when he hurts, as you say he did the butchers son, and they seek to him,
and will follow his presciptions, as to draw blood of the witch, he goes out
willingly, I mean he cease from hurting the body: for he goes not out
indeed, but rather goes further in, and seateth himself deeper in the soul.
And so is it in all the rest. How gladly will he cease to hurt the hens, so
that to please him, a hen may be burnt alive? his helping is no more but a
ceasing from doing harm, if he had power given him to hurt.


Sam. This is a strange thing if it be so. There be thousands in the land
deceived. The woman at R. H. by report has some week forty come unto her,
and many of them not of the meaner sort. But I do but hinder, I pray you go
forward.


Dan. The devil can deceive thousand thousands, and even the wisest for this
world, when they will not be taught of God, but despise his doctrine, then are
they justly given over to be disciples of the devil.


M. B. If there be such deceit in all these things, and that the witches do not
kill nor hurt, but the devil craftily seems to kill and to hurt when the
diseases be natural and makes the witch believe that he has done all at her
request, Or where God has given him power, he stirs her up to send him, as
if either he could not, or would not meddle, unless he had been sent, Seeing
all lies upon Satan, it should seem, there is no reason that witches should
be put to death: but the scripture does command they should be put to death.


Dan. The holy scriptures do command that witches should be put to death:
therein you say right: but if you did take it, that the word of God commands
they shall not be suffered to live, because they kill men and beasts, or
because they send their spirits which possess men, and torment their bodies,
you are much deceived: For you shall never find, of all that have been
tormented and plagued by evil spirits, that the holy Ghost lays it upon
witches. The causes why they should be put to death are, that they have
familiarity with devils, which are the blasphemous enemies of God: and that
they seduce the people into error, to run after devils, and deuilish
practices, and that they have such wicked minds. Although they never mind to
kill or to hurt any, but to do them good, as they imagine, yet if they deal
with deuilles they ought to die for it.


M. B. Then you take it, that these cunning men and women, unto whom so many
run for help, which are thought to do very much good, and no hurt at all,
ought to be rooted out, and destroyed. Let us know what scripture there is for
it.


Dan. Yea, of all other they ought to die, because they do the greatest harm.
Other witches that have spirits are thought to do harm, because the devil at
the appointment of God does harm, (...) he bears in hand he does it at the
request of the witch: but these that seem to do good, do harm indeed, and
that many ways, as every one that light in him, may easily see. And for the
scripture^s which show that they ought to die, read first in the 22. chapter
of Exodus. ver. 18* and there it is said, Thou shall not suffer a witch to live.


M. B. That place we take to be meant of these witches which send their spirits
to do harm: the other be not called witches.


Dan. It is that witch, that is there commanded to be put to death, that is
called Mecasshephah: such were they and so called, which before Pharaoh did
withstand Moses, and made in show rods turned into serpents. So that in one
kind the Lord does include all such as work by the devil. For there be
diverse others sorts named in Deuteronomy. 18. and they be all called an abomination
to the Lord: and no abomination is to be suffered to remain among the Lords
people. Also in the same place, when he says, Let there not be found in thee
any such or such, as he there reckons them up: It is not alone to will that
none should practice such things, but also that they should be rooted out.


M. B. I must needs agree unto that which the word of God does set down. But
this is the hardest matter of al, how they shall be convicted.


Dan. Why do you take it to be the hardest matter, how a witch shall be
convicted? how is a thief or a murderer convicted but by proof? If there be
vehement suspicion, and the party upon examination confess the fact, that is a
sufficient proof. If the party do deny, and two or three of credit do
testify upon their knowledge with a solemn oath, that he is guilty of the
fact, that is also a sufficient proof. And touching this, God commanded by
Moses, that none should die, unless the matter were proved against them by two
witnesses at the least. Deutronom. 19. ver. 15.


M. B. I grant, if the party do deny, and especially, if the matter touch
life, that there ought by the word of God to be due proof by two witnesses at
the least. This may be for murderers, this may be for thieves: but for witches
I see not how. They deal so secretly with their spirits, that very seldom
they can be convinced by flat testimonies of men, as to say directly they have
heard or seen them send their spirits. And again, it is a rare thing to have
a witch confess. For it is generally thought the devil has such power over
them, that he will not suffer them to confess.


Dan. O then I perceive why you account it the hardest matter of all to convict
a witch, it both testimony and confession do fail: but what would you have
further?


M. B. I have been of this opinion, that if there were any likelihood, and
suspicion, and common fame, that it was even proof enough, and the best deed
that could he done for to hang them up, and so to rid the country of them.


Dan. Then you thought that their spirits were hanged with them, and so the
country being rid of the witches and their spirits, men's bodies and their
cattle should be safe.


M. B. I had a little more wit than to think so: but in truth it was but a
little more. For I thought if all the witches were hanged, that then their
spirits should not have any to hire them nor to send them to hurt either man
or beast, but I see mine own folly, and that only God gives the power unto
the devils to afflict and try the godly, and to vex, torment, and plague the
wicked, and that they shall do this, though all the witches in the world were
hanged. I know they need none to cherish them, or to set them a work.


Dan. But did you not fear if all suspected should be hanged, then some
guiltles persons might be put to death? As you see many that have been
executed as witches have taken it upon their death that they were innocent.


M. B. I will tell you my thought touching that point, which was this. The
witches raise tempests, and hurt corn and fruits upon the trees, the
witches bring the pestilence among men, and murraine among cattle: the witches
send their spirits and make men lame, kill their children and their cattle:
their spirits cannot be taken heed of, nor kept out with doors and walls as
thieves and murderers, but come in when they be sent, and do so many harms:
for this cause I thought it a marvelous good work to put all suspected to
death, though some of them were innocent, that so sure work might be made to
have not one left.


Dan. Did you not think it a fearful thing to shead innocent blood.


M. B. Yea, but I thought it much better that some should be put to death
wrongfully, than to leave any one witch, which might kill and destroy many.


Dan. Then I perceive that this was the reason which did persuade you, that it
was very good to put all to death that were suspected (although it might fall
out that some of them were innocent) to avoid greater inconvenience, and that
is, if some few witches should escape, which might plague and kill many. Better
a few should be put wrongfully to death, then many should be tormented and
killed, or lamed by the deuilles. But are you still of that mind?


M. B. No verily. For you have put me in mind that the wicked spirits receive
their power to plague both me^ and beasts, only from God. They seek about,
they watch when and where he will give them leave to touch, where God will
try the faith and patience of the just by him, as he did in Job, he sends
him, if he will be sent by a witch, it is but under a color, she gives him
not the power, he would touch though she were not. Where God will strike and
plague the wicked by him, he gives him leave, it is not the anger of the witch
that brings it, but their own wickedness, whereby they have provoked God to
displeasure, and so give this enemy power over them.


Dan. Then so long as these two things stand, that God by Satan will afflict
in some sort and try his children (as you allege he did Job) and that he will
use him as his executioner, to plague and torment the wicked, as he sent an
evil spirit to vex king Saul: so long the harms done by wicked spirits
shall not cease, although all the witches and coniurers in the world were
hanged up. Look then to the causes, if we will remove the effects. As if
thou fear God, and Satan afflict thee, stand fast in faith and patience, and
wait upon God for thy deliverance. If thou endure temptation, thou art
blessed, and shall be crowned. Iam. 1. ver. 12. If thy sins have provoked
God, and the enemy does touch thy body or thy goods, fall down and humble thy
self with fasting and prayer, entreat the Lord to turn away his displeasure:
look not upon the witch, lay not the cause where it is not, seek not help at
the hands of devils, be not a disciple of witches, to commit things
abominable, by polluting the name of God, and honoring Satan, nor thirst not
after the blood which is innocent, as it falls out in many.


M. B. I do assent unto all this: and surely it is a great fault to shead
innocent blood.


Dan. We may learn in the holy scriptures, that the sheading of innocent
blood is a very horrible thing in the eyes of almighty God: and a very
grievous thing it is to have a land polluted with innocent blood: and that is
one special cause why Satan deals by witches: for he labors to wrappe in
many guiltless persons upon suspicions, he suggesteth by his helping witches,
that there be many hurting witches in all towns, and villages, that so he may
set the multitude in a rage, (...) to suspect upon every likelihood that he can
devise or make show of* And thus whole Iuries must become guilty of innocent
hlood, by condemning as guilty, and that upon their solemn oath, such as be
suspected upon vain surmises and imaginations, and illusions, rising from
blindness and infidelity, and fear of Satan which is in the ignorant sort.


M. B. If you take it, that this is one craft of Satan, to bring many to be
guilty of innocent blood, and even upon their oaths, which is horrible, what
would you have the judges and Iuries to do, when any are arraigned of suspicion
to be witches?


Dan. What would I have them do? I would wish them to be most wary and
circumspect that they be not guilty of innocent blood. And that is, to
condemn none but upon sure ground, and infallible proof, because presumptions
shall not warrant or excuse them before God if guiltless blood be shead.


M. B. It falls out sometimes when a thief is arraigned, or a murderer,
that direct evidence fails, and yet such circumstances are brought, as do
even enforce the Jury in their conscience to find them guilty: It seems
that this holds chiefly about witches, because their dealing is close and
secret, and it is also thought that the devil has so great power over them,
that he will not suffer them to confess.


Dan. You bring two reasons to prove that in conuicting witches, likelihoods
and presumptions ought to be of force more than about thieves or murderers:
The first, because their dealing is secret: the other because the devil will
not let them confess. Indeed men imagining that witches do work strange
mischiefs, burn in desire to have them hanged, as hoping the^ to be free, and
then upon such persuasions as you mention, they suppose it is a very good work
to put to death all which are suspected. But touching thieves and murderers
let men take heed how they deal upon presumptions, unless they be very strong
for we see that Iuries sometimes do condemn such as be guiltless, which is
an hard thing, especially being upon their oath. And in witches above all
other, the proofs had need to be strong because there is greater sleight of
Satan to pursue the guiltles unto death, than in the other. Here is special
care and wisdom to be used. And so likewise for their confessing, Satan does
gain more by their confession, than by their denial, and therefore rather
bewrays them himself, and forces them to confession, oftener than unto
denial.


M. B. These things are beyond my reach, I cannot conceive of them. I pray you
open it so as that I may perceive your meaning, and see some ground of reason
for that which you shall affirm.


Dan. Then is it requisite to stand upon them more at large. And let us begin
with the latter.


M. B. If you go first to the latter, then show some reason or experience that
Satan bewrays the witches, and draws them to confess, and to disclose
themselves, rather than to conceal and hide their doings. I can tell you this
before hand, that the common opinion is otherwise, which seems to be grounded
both upon reason and experience.


Dan. I know the common opinion is as you say: But I do much marueill at it,
seeing reason and experience do prove the contrary as I will show. As first,
touching reason, you will grant, that the devils dealing altogether by sleight
and subtilties, do that which does most further their purposes and desires.


M. B. That is the very reason why the devil would by no means have the
witches bewrayed, as it is thought because he would lurk secretly to do
mischief.


Dan. Indeed it were a good reason to prove that (...) if Satan received his
power from the witch, or could do nothing but by her sending, or needed to be
harbored by her, or had no mind to meddle, but as it were hired to satisfy
her wrath. But seeing al these be absurd, and he uses the witch and coniurer
but under a color to bring in further evils, it must needs follow, that the
disclosing is fitter for his purpose, than the keeping secret, for if they
should be kept secret, how should he make men think that he does so many
harms at the request of the witch? how should he draw so many to run after
devils, to seek help at their hands? how should he procure so many to use
wicked and blasphemous charms and sorceries, and in so horrible manner to abuse
the blessed name of God, and his most sacred word? Or how should he draw the
people into manifold errors, and to thirst even in rage after innocent blood?
All these and a number such like he procures and furthereth, by disclosing
witches.


M. B. But how shall this reason be confirmed by experience: No doubt in show
he is loath to have his Dame (as some speak) disclosed.


Dan. You say well, that in show he is loath to have the witch bewrayed: for
indeed it is only in show, seeing he would make her and others also
believe, even when he does bewray her by one means or other, that it is sore
against his liking.


M. B. I pray you make that evident.


Dan. When one feels himself plagued any way, and does take it to be by
Satan, admit it be so: he goes to a cunning man, and he shows him in a
glass, or in a Crystal the shape of the witch. Who now bewrays her?


M. B. That is the cunning man's spirit which bewrays her, and not her spirit
which she deals withal.


Dan. You are not sure of that: for it may be the same devil that she deals
withal, that resembles her in the glass: none can do it better.


M. B. I do not think that he departs away from her.


Dan. Yea, but you must remember that she which deals with a spirit, deals
not with a devil, but with devils: for many do ioyn together. When one of
them departs and carries the matter to the cunning man, they do not all
depart. But what if it be as you said, that some other spirits do bewray, do
you think he does it against the liking of the witches spirit? Is Satan
divided against Satan? Will Satan bewray Satan to his hindrance? Remember what
our Savior has taught touching that.


M. B. Then if it be so, do you not take it a sufficient proof against a
witch, even for a Jury to find guilty upon their oath, if a cunning man by
his spirit do bewray any.


Dan. It is the most insufficient proof that can be, for although he do tell
true in bewraying many, as their own co^fessions do witness: yet he does it of
an evil purpose, he is a liar, and the father of lies, he desires chiefly to
accuse the innocent, that he may bring men to be guilty of innocent blood,
(...) make the people believe there be multitudes of witches, to set them a
work to learn charms and sorceries, and chiefly, that they may be brought to
seek unto him, as the bewrayer even in pity, of such bad people. Now, because
he craftily bewrays some, to get credit, shall men's verdict by oath, even
unto blood, be grounded upon his testimony? If a devil should come in unto a
Jury and say the party about whom you enquire is a witch, should they
believe him, or would they say let him be sworn, and witness upon his oath? If
not, why should they believe that which he has spoken to the cunning man?


M. B. Surely I am out of doubt he does all in craft unto a most bad purpose,
and that no credit ought to be given unto his testimony when it is voluntary.
But what say you to his testimony, when he is even charged and forced in the
name and power of God to tell the truth? It seems then he would conceal,
but cannot.


Dan. The coniurer which supposes that he does bind by the name and power of
God to tell him the truth, is utterly deluded. For he is not bound, but is
glad that the most glorious name of God is so horribly abused, and that he
can draw men into such a gulf of all abomination.


M. B. Nay, I do not mean the coniurer, but when such as be godly go about
to cast him forth by prayer.


Dan. This I take to be your meaning: a man or a woman is possessed with a
Devil, put case it be so indeed (to distinguish them from so many
counterfaits, as have been) and men assemble together where the possession is,
and cal^ upon God, and then charge Satan in the name of Christ to tell how he
came there, and who sent him.


M. B. I mean so indeed. And some being possessed, the devil being charged
to tell who sent him, he has confessed, that such a man did conjure him in
thither, or such a witch did send him. Shall not this be of force to convince?


Dan. When any is possessed by the fiend, men's compassion, their love and pity
are to be showed, even to help what they can in such a distress. They ought
with all instant suit to entreat the Lord to show mercy, and to expel him. The
doctrine of the holy scriptures does warrant this: but for men to talk and
question with him, I see no warrant at all by Gods word, much less to command
and adjure him to depart. He is the Lords executioner, he has sent him, we
may entreat the Lord to remove him, but what authority have we to command him
to depart, where God has sent him?


M. B. Men have no authority, I grant, but they command and adjure him in the
name and power of the Lord, for to depart.


Dan. That I take ought not to be, for mark this comparison: the Prince is
displeased with a subject for some disloyalty: An Officer is sent from the
Prince to attach and imprison him: shall he or any other charge this Officer in
the Princes name to let him alone, and not to meddle? Is not their way only to
pacify the Prince, and so the Prince will command the Officer to cease? Even
so, where God sends Satan his executioner, the only way is to entreat the Lord
to be pacified, for then shall the tormentor no longer remain.


M. B. How does this which you speak agree with that which we read in the
Acts of the Apostles, how S. Paul commanded the devil to come out of a
Maid at Philippos?


Dan. The holy Apostles and others in the Primitive Church, had an
extraordinary power given them to cast forth devils, and to heal diseases,
and they did execute the same power by the direction and instinct of the holy
Ghost. We may not draw a pattern from that.


M. B. We see that devils are sometimes expelled.


Dan. They are when the Lord is entreated, otherwise they but seem to be bound
by adiuration and expelled. But how can it be proved, that the father of lies
may be bound, and forced through charge and adiuration in the name and power of
God to tell the truth? And what warrant have we to learn any truth from his
mouth? As to say we command thee in the name of God, that thou tell us who sent
thee. Who sent thee? who sent thee? Mother Joan, Mother Joan, says he. Also we
command thee to tell us, who sent thee. L. B. coniured me in hither (says he)
Shall we think he does this even compelled? Or shall we ground upon it for
certainty, that he tells no lie?


M. B. The devil in a party possessed has said, such a man coniured me in
hither. The coniurer has been put to death for it, and has confessed so much.
The devil in an other has said, such a woman sent me; it has likewise been
confessed by the woman.


Dan. All this makes for that which I affirm. The Lord gives him power to
possess a man. He under a color will be sent by a coniurer, or by a witch:
and the one thinks the devil enters at her entreaty: the other supposes he
does even bind him thereto, whereas he rules both their minds, and sets
them a work. Then does he willingly bewray them, even for many subtle
purposes: but chiefly, that he may establish coniurations, witchcrafts and
charms, that he may be sought unto, that he may set the people a work in
their calamities to be troubled about witches and coniurers, as though they
could plague, and never look to God, and that bewraying some witches and
coniurers, he may win credit, and be believed, even when he accuses
falsely, that he may bring innocent blood upon the land. Let all men take heed
how upon their oath they give a verdict, especially touching life, upon his
word howsoever he seem to be forced thereunto: all is most deep craft and
subtilty in him.


Sam. I pray you give me leave to speak a little. You say the devil willingly
bewrays witches and coniurers and that for many subtle purposes. I have
heard of diverse things done of late which seem quite contrary, and that he
takes it grievously when they do confess and bewray matters.


Dan. He will seem to take it in evil part, but let us hear the matters, and
you shall see plainly that he iuggleth, and makes show of that which is
contrary to his practice.


Sam. Well, I have heard very credibly, that a woman of late, suspected another
woman to be a witch, and that she had hurt her some way. She procured a
gentleman to send for the party suspected, and charging her in his presence,
she left her to the Gentleman, who taking her aside, and walking alone with
her, began to admonish and persuade her to renounce the devil and to forsake
such wicked ways: While he was thus persuading, and she denying stiffely that
she was any such woman, suddenly there appeared some distance from them, a
Weasill or Lobsterre looking even upon them. Look (said the Gentleman) yonder
same is thy spirit. Ah master (said she) that is a vermin, there be many of
them every where. Well, as they went toward it, it was vanished out of sight:
by and by it appeared again, and looked upon them. Surely (said the
Gentleman) it is thy spirit: but she still denied, and with that her mouth was
drawn awrie. Then he pressed her further, and she confessed all. She
confessed she had hurt and killed by sending her spirit. The Gentleman being
no Justice, let her go home, and did mind to open the matter unto some
Justice: When she was come home, another witch meets her, and says, Ah thou
beast, what have thou done? thou have bewrayed us all. What remedy now (said
she?) What remedy said the other? send thy spirit and touch him: she sent her
spirit, and of a sudden the Gentleman had as it were a flash of fire about him.
He lifted up his heart to God, and felt no hurt. The spirit returns, and
told he could not hurt him because he had faith: what then, said the other
witch, has he nothing that thou may touch? he has a child said the other.
Send thy spirit, said she, and touch the child: she sent her spirit, the
child was in great pain and died. The witches were hanged and confessed.


Dan. What is the chief thing which you allege this for?


Sam. To show how unwilling the devil was that the witch should confess and
bewray things. No doubt it should seem, that when the Gentleman was talking
with her, he appeared to call her away, for fear least she should confess:
and when she would not come away, he drew her mouth awry: and when she had
confessed, the devil complained unto the other witch, and made her chide her.


Dan. The thing is as clear as may be, that he willingly bewrayed them: and
will you imagine the contrary? Why did he appear in a likeness, but even to
enforce her for to confess, both by abashing, and giving the Gentleman evident
notice, especially, when he drew her mouth awrie? And why did he set on the
other witch to move her that had confessed to send her spirit, but that he
would have the matter more open, and bring them both to light.


Sam. What should move him to bewray the witches? what could he gain by it?


Dan. Nay, what almost does he not gain by it? Now all the country ringes of
the matter. As if the witches set on their spirits to lame and to kill: and
that they do not meddle, but sent by them. He did know what power he had from
God to afflict any: he will deal by witches: he makes others afraid of them,
that so they may accuse them. He finds means to have all disclosed. He
moves the witches to send him against the gentleman: he knows what he can
do: he returns and says there is faith: As though God did not give him
power sometimes to afflict the faithful? Or as if he could touch all that have
no faith? If he could, the greatest part of the world should be destroyed by
him. For they be very few in the world in comparison which have the true faith.
Then must he be sent to the child that has no faith: does not the faith of
the parents hold Gods protection over their infants as over themselves? Here
is Satan's craft: either he did know by things breeding in the body of the
child that it would at such time fall sick and die: and he would be taken to
be the killer of the child, to bear in hand that he has such power and will
do when he is requested. Or else he had power given him of God, and would bring
it about this way. If he did strike the child, do you imagine he does it at
her pleasure? Or do you think he would never have thought of any such thing,
but moved by her? Do not all the armies of devils go about continually,
seeking whom they may devour? Do they not wait where God will give them power
to strike? Shall we still be so simple as to think that women need to hire or
to entreat them to do harm? Look unto God, for those wicked spirits play all
parts in the play, and delude both the witches and others.


Sam. I will tell you another thing which was done of late. A woman being
suspected to be a witch, and to have done some hurt among cattle, was
examined, and confessed indeed, that she had a spirit which did abide in a
hollow tree, where there was an hole, out of which he spoke unto her. And ever
when she was offended with any, she went to that tree, and sent him to kill
their cattle. She was persuaded to confess her fault openly, and to promise
that she would utterly forsak such ungodly ways: after she had made this open
confession, the spirit came unto her being alone. Ah, said he, thou have
confessed and bewrayed all, I could teeme it to rend thee in pieces: with that
she was affrayde, and wound away, and got her into company. Within some few
weeks after, she fell out greatly into anger against one man. Toward the tree
she goes, and before she came at it, Ah, said the spirit, wherefore come
thou? who has angered thee? Such a man, said the witch. And what would thou
have me do said the spirit? He has (says she) two horses going yonder,
touch them or one of them. Well, I think even that night one of the horses
died, and the other was little better. Indeed they recovered that one again
which was not dead, but in very evil case. Here me thinks it is plain: he
was angry that she had bewrayed all. And yet when she came to the tree he let
go all displeasure and went readily.


Dan. Do you think all is plain here. Indeed here is that plain dealing
which devils do use. First, do you think Satan lodges in an hollow tree? Is
he become so lazy, and idle? has he left off to be as a roaring lion, seeking
whom he may devour? has he put off the bloody and cruel nature of the fiery
Dragon, so that he minds no harm, but when an angry woman shall entreat him
to go kill a Cow or a horse? Is he become so doting with age, that men shall
epsy his craft: yea, be found craftier than he is? Alas may there not be deep
subtlety in these things?


Sam. Do you think there is nothing but subtlety in these things?


Dan. Do I think there is nothing but subtlety? Tell me what you think. What
other end can there be but subtlety?


Sam. He may have this purpose (as I think the devils study nothing else) to do
harm.


Dan. I do not deny that: for all his craft tends unto harm. But what
harm mean you?


Sam. You see here he killed men's cattle.


Dan. It may be he did: but how know you that?


Sam. You see he went at her request and killed one horse, and almost killed
the other.


Dan. I would be loath to adventure my hand upon that: For who told you, that he
killed the one, and almost killed the other?


Sam. The witch her self has confessed the whole matter.


Dan. UUho told the witch so?


Sam. Her spirit told her that he did it at her request.


Dan. He is a credible person, and kind he was unto her as it seems.


Sam. Nay, but we see all things fell out according as she confessed.


Dan. How do you mean?


Sam. UUhy, she confessed her fault, the spirit was angry with her, afterward
she fell out with that man, and upon th^^ his horse died, she confessed she
sent the spirit, how could all things fall out so fit?


Dan. The spirit when she came toward the tree, asked her, wherefore come
thou? who has angered thee?


Sam. He did so.


Dan. And do you imagine that the devil did lie there and knew nothing until
she came and told him?


Sam. UUhy needed he ask to her if he did know?


Dan. Because he is subtle: for he wrought in her heart, and kindled her
wrath, and procured the falling out between her and that man: he did know
either that the horses at that time had somewhat in them which would bring
death, or else that the Lord had given him power for to strike them: he moved
and wrought in her heart to have her come again to the tree: he seemed to be
angry that she had confessed before, but was not, but sought to have things
known. If he had not known that the horse should die, either by some natural
cause, which would then break forth, or by some power given to him, he would
not at this time have moved her heart to go to the tree. And if her wrath had
without his suggestion carried her so far, he could quickly have turned her:
for great is the efficacy of Satan's working in the hearts of such.


Sam. But I marked one thing which you said before, (...) that it might be that
God gives sometimes power to the Devil, even at the sending of the witch.


Dan. I say that God in justice gives power unto Satan to delude, because men
refuse to love his truth: but that makes not that the devil obtains any
power to hurt because the witch sends, but the fault is in men, the sins of
the people give power to the devil: for God is offended, and sends (as S.
Paul says) strong delusion. But have you any mo examples to prove that the
Devil is not willing to have witches bewrayed*


Sam. I have heard of many such like, but you say all is but craft, and that he
would have men think he does all harms that are done.


Dan. The Devil would have men believe that he does all, if he could bring it
about: And therefore, it is for his advantage if he do hurt, to have it not
kept secret, but openly to be made known.


M. B. what say you then unto this, a witch is apprehended upon vehement
suspicion, and carried before a Justice: he handles the matter in such sort
that she confesses, as I heard of one not long since: her confession was to
this effect: She had two spirits, one like a Weasill, the other like a Mouse.
These, she said, did many things for her. Now, she accused a woman about ten
or twelve miles off, whom (it may be) she did not know, and yet could name,
and not only that, but said, the woman had, as it were, a little big in her
mouth, where the spirit did suck blood.


Dan. It is a most easy thing for the devil to tell witches, that such a man
or such a woman is a witch, and has this or that secret mark upon them. And
within these few years he has by witches and cunning men, accused such as
were very religious and godly. Men must beware that they proceed not upon his
testimony: he is not to be meddled withal, nor any meddling which he uses, is
to be taken in good part, seeing he does all in deep subtilties.


M. B. I do take it, that the testimony of the devil ought not of it self to
have any force with a Jury, unless it can be proved by some other firm
proofs. But what say you unto this, a witch is condemned, and tells at the
gallows not only what she has done, but also of whom she first had her
spirit. She does this in repentance, and even ready to depart out of the
world. It is to be presumed that she will not in this case lie, nor accuse
falsely: Let it be some woman in another town, whom she says, brought her the
spirit. This woman is also suspected by some of her neighbors, apprehended
and brought to judgment, and stiflie denies that she is any witch, or that
she ever delivered any spirit unto the other which accused her. Now here is
the question, Is not the testimony of the woman upon her death, a sufficient
warrant for a Jury to find this woman guilty? here they have now the
testimony not of the Devil to proceed by, but of a woman, and though not upon
her oath, yet upon her death, which is no less.


Dan. This testimony may seem to be sufficient even to warrant a Jury to
find guilty, though it touch life: but if we look well into it, we shall see
it is not.


M. B. It may be you take it to be infirm, because it is the testimony but of
one.


Dan. Nay, not only in respect that it is the testimony but of one, but that it
is the testimony of such a one.


M. B. I put the case of such an one as does show repentance, who though she
has been bad, yet now may be believed.


Dan. I do not mean in that respect, as to say she was a witch, and therefore
not to be credited: but if she repent never so much, yet her testimony in this
is weak, because she may be utterly deceived, and think she tells the truth,
when it was nothing so, but she utterly deluded.


M. B. Do you mean, that (...) may make the other woman think, that such a
woman delivered her the spirit, and never no such matter?


Dan. Yea, that is my meaning.


M. B. It is far beyond my reach to see how that can be.


Dan. You must consider that the devil does many ways delude witches, and make
them believe things which are nothing so. In Germany and other countries, the
deuilles have so deluded the witches, as to make them believe that they raise
tempests of lightenings and thunders. For the devils do know when these things
be coming, tempests of winds, and thunders, and feign would he make the blind
world believe that those great works of God, be not Gods but his: And that is
the cause why he coueteth to appear in them. These devils make the witches
believe, that at their request they kill both men and beasts, and many ways
afflict, when as many of the things fall out naturally, which they would seem
to do, and the rest in which they have power given to work, they stir up
the witch but under a color for to send them. These devils make the witches
in some places believe, that they are turned into the likeness of wolves, that
they rend and tear sheep, that they meet together and banquet, that sometimes
they fly or ride in the air, which things indeed are nothing so, but they
strongly delude the fantasies of the witches: Even so the devil can delude a
poor woman with the likeness of another woman delivering a mouse or a catte
unto her, by appearing in such a likeness. Or he can set a strong fantasy in
the mind that is oppressed with melancholy, that such or such a matter was,
which indeed was never so. Men must be wise in these causes, or else may they
soon be circumuented by the crafts of Satan and drawn into great sin.


M. B. If it be thus, then how should a Jury condemn by their verdict any
witch? For she has not killed, nor the devil at her request, but makes her
believe he did it at her request.


Dan. A witch by the word of God ought to die the death not because she kills
men, for that she cannot (unless it be those witches which kill by poison,
which either they receive from the devil, or he teaches them to make) but
because she deals with devils. And so if a Jury do find proof that she
has dealt with devils, they may and ought to find them guilty of witchcraft.


M. B. If they find them guilty to have dealt with devils, and cannot say they
have murdered men, the law does not put them to death.


Dan. It were to be wished, that the law were more perfect in that respect, even
to cut off all such abominations. These cunning men and women which deal with
spirits and charms seeming to do good, and draw the people into manifold
impieties, with all other which have familiarity with devils, or use
coniurations, ought to be rooted out, that others might see and fear.


M. B. You will not have the testimony of Devils to be of any credit with a
Jury, what say you then unto men, there be some which die, and take it upon
their death, that they are bewitched, and will say precisely such or such have
done it. For that is in the other point touching likelihoods.


Dan. They are bewitched indeed, for the devil does delude their minds: for
you shall find them able to render no reason but only this, in their
conscience the party is naught and they are out of doubt it is so.


M. B. That may be as you say in some, but I have known a woman my self
which many have counted to be a witch, and many things have fallen out where
she has taken displeasure. Do you not think that is a firm proof? She
denies, but the things which fall out, do manifest her to be naught.


Dan. You must show the things, and thereby it will appear.


M. B. She fell out, or else at the least seemed to be displeased with one, and
he had an hog died suddenly. An other thought she was displeased with him,
and his horse fell sick. A third could not sit upon his stool at work. And
within nine or ten years space diverse others. One saw the devil bigger than a
cat with great eyes. An other was haunted with a spirit. An other brewing, the
drink would not work in the fat. An other saw a thing in her house as big
as a lamb, playing in the window: Another in her grievous torment saw the
woman stand by her all the night, whom she suspected to bewitch her, and diverse
such like, which were too long to reckon up. If she were not a witch, how
should all these fall out so fit?


Dan. I have showed already, that where Satan has a witch to deal by, he
brings it about, that in all such things as he has power given him of God,
he will seem to do nothing but requested and sent by the witch. In those
things which fall out in sicknesses, lamenes and death, upon natural causes,
he works in such sort, as that he makes the witch believe she does them.
And this he coueteth to have break forth by her confession. Now, where he
has no witch to deal by, he gains exceedingly, if he can work in the
minds of any a strong suspicion of any man or woman. For if it be once begun,
he pursues it with all his power and cunning. If one be visited with
grievous torment of sickness, and be so ignorant, and void of the faith in Gods
providence, that he imagine the devil does it at the sending by a witch, the
devil will delude him, and make him believe that the witch stands by him.
The man or woman suspected cannot come there: Who then works that illusion
but Satan? Another is affrayde of the devil to be sent unto him, by that
party whom he suspecteth to be a witch: and thus through want of faith in
God, gives the devil the more power over him, either to hurt, or to appear
unto him. For Satan haunteth all men continually, seeking all occasions, and
needs not to be sent by man or woman. They be exceeding blind which will
reason thus, an evil spirit came and appeared unto me, after I had angered such
a woman, therefore she sent him. Satan if he have power to do harm, or know
where somewhat will follow, is he not cunning to make the party which shall
receive the harm, to fall out with some that he may suspect, and so the harm
may seem to come from that party? Again, in fear, in the dark men take some
little cat or dog to be an ugly devil. As not long since a rugged water
Spaniell having a chain, came to a man's door that had a saut Bytch, and some
espied him in the dark, and said it was a thing as big as a colt, and had eyes
as great as saucers. Hereupon some came to charge him, and did charge him in
the name of the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, to tell what he was. The
dog at the last told them, for he spoke in his language, and said, bowgh, and
thereby they did know what he was. If he do know where harms do follow upon
natural causes in men or beasts, he labors either to make them offended,
and to fall out with the party that is suspected, or at the least to persuade
the^ of such displeasure conceived, that the harms may seem to come from the
same. If he do torment indeed having power to possess the body, he will not
stick to lie, and to say such a woman sent him.


M. B. And does it not fall out sometimes, that as he says such a woman sent
him, so the woman upon examination confesses so much.


Dan. Yea, but I speak where he has no witch to deal by, but pursues the
innocent with suspicion upon suspicion, that men may be guilty of innocent
blood. He tells the truth sometimes, to the end he may be credited when he
does lie. For let no man be so simple as to think, that he will ever tell
truth but for some wicked purpose.


M. B. Yet this of all the rest seems most strange unto me, how so many
things should fall out, as it seems, after the displeasure of a suspected
person, and some of them such as apparently are done by Satan, as in drink not
working, or in cream, when butter will not come, and yet the party suspected
is not a witch.


Dan. Oh sir the sleights of Satan in compassing such matters be marvelous. I
know it is taken (as they say) to be dead sure that the party is a witch, if
sundry such shows of matters do concur. But how easy a thing is it for
crafty devils to compass such matters?


M. B. Then you do not think that common fame is sufficient to warrant the
conscience of the Iuror, to condemn any.


Dan. Experience does teach how heady much people are in judging men or women
to be witches upon every surmise. And the power imagined to be in witches,
which breeds a fear in many, causes them to be credulous. Many go so
far, that if they can entice children to accuse their parents, they think it
a good work.


M. B. You say the testimony of the devil is not to be taken, although it be
manifest that he does many times tell the truth, because when he speaks the
truth, he does it of a bad purpose. And you hold it the testimony of the
devil, not only which he speaks when any charge him, but also which the
cunning men and women give, in as much as they can say nothing but upon his
word. Moreover, unless I mistake you, the testimony of a witch in many things at
her death, is not as you say any other than the testimony of the devil,
because the devil has deceived her, and made her believe things which were
nothing so. Besides all this, you will have likelihoods and suspicions to be of
no weight, nor common fame and opinion to move the conscience of a Jury,
because Satan is exceeding subtle in all these. Then how shall a Jury find a
witch? What proofs will you have?


Dan. Men are upon their oath to deal, and it does touch life, if they do
find any guilty of witchcraft. This is a most weighty matter: whereupon it
follows, that there must be either due proof by sufficient witnesses, or else
the confession of the witch. For if the testimony be such as may be false, as
all that comes from devils is to be suspected: or if it be but upon rumors,
and likelihoods, in which there may be exceeding sleights of Satan, as for the
most part there be: how can that Jury answer before God, which upon their
oath are not sure, but that so proceeding they may condemn the innocent, as
often it comes to pass.


M. B. You mistake one point, for the finding of a witch guilty by a Jury does
not in all causes touch blood.


Dan. I am not deceived, for where the Jury having but likelihoods does find a
man or a woman guilty but for killing a beast, it casts them into prison,
sets them upon the pillorie, and not only diffameth them for ever, but also
if suspicion follow again and arraignment, it is death: you see then how near
a way they have made unto blood. But if it touch not blood, but the party
escape with the imprisonment and pillory, and never again fall into suspicion,
how grievous an infamy is it, to have been condemned by Jury to be a witch? I
speak it where it is only upon suspicion, or suchtestimonie as is only from
Satan, and the party may be clear.


M. B. It falls out sometimes that upon suspicion and common fame they hitte
right, and the party which would not confess any witchery upon examination,
and arraignment, being condemned does confess it.


Dan. Let it be granted that the Jury upon Satan's testimony, or suspicions and
common fame, sometimes hitteth right, which yet I fear is very seldom, that
is no warrant before God for men that are sworn, for are they sworn to indict
upon likelihoods, or upon knowledge in that which upon sound testimony or
confession they shall find? If the party be a witch which is suspected, and
yet no proof, the Jury does more rightly in acquitting, than in condemning,
for what warrant have they upon their oath to go by guess, or to find that
which they know not?


M. B. I do take it men offend grievously, if upon insufficient proof they
condemn the innocent, and especially, because they are solemnly sworn: but if
they hit right, though it be only by conjectures and likelihoods, I cannot see
how they should therein offend: they condemn not the innocent, they do the
party no wrong.


Dan. I do not say they are to be charged with any innocent blood, or wrong to
the party: but I ask what warrant they have before God upon oath to touch
blood by suspitons. Admit one be arraigned upon felony, the likelihoods ar
great that he is guilty of the same, but yet it may be he is clear. What is
a Jury now to do? Are they to venture upon the life of a man by their oath
by suspicions? Let it be he is one that God knows to be guilty, but no man
can disclose the same, and therefore they clear him, do they commit any
offense? Are they bound to find that which they cannot know? What innocent
person then may not be condemned?


Sam. I pray you give me leave a little. I do not well conceive this matter
about finding out and condemning of witches. It is somewhat strange unto me
which you speak I have my self sundry times been of the Jury when witches
have been arraigned, we have found them guilty upon common fame, upon
likelihoods, and upon such testimony as you disalow. They have indeed taken it
upon their deaths that they were innocent, but that never made me to doubt but
that they were witches: for it is said, the devil has such power over them,
that he will not suffer them to confess.


Dan. What should move you to think that the devil will not have them to
confess? you see some do confess when they be examined, and when they be
executed: The devil has power over the most desperate thieves and murderers?


Sam. Yea but he cares not so much though the thieves and the murderers do
confess, it makes not so much against him, as when witches bewray all.


Dan. What, do you take it he is loath to be diffamed or hardly thought off?
Otherwise what should it make against him when witches confess? It is some
step to repentance when thieves and murderers acknowledge their sins, and if
he can hinder them, or hold them desperate from confessing he will. It is
apparent that he coueteth to have witches to confess* it makes so much for
him* He would have men judge that there be an hundred fo^^e more witches than
there be. He discloseth by his cunning men and women, and otherwise. He
coueteth greatly to have it thought that he does all, in tempests, in strange
plagues and diseases which light upon man or beast. And for this cause he
makes the witch believe and confess more than all, that is, that at her
request he did that which he never did nor could do: unless we will deny the
soueraintie, and providence of God over all.


Sam. If Satan gain so much by disclosing them, what should be the reason that
men are generally persuaded that he coueteth to have the things kept secret,
and so will not let the witch confess.


Dan. It arises from false persuasions, and from a false fear that witches
do so many harms, and that at their sending and request the spirits work
all. If Satan be so kind and serviceable to the witch: how is it that he does
not fetch her some money? For he knows where it is lost, or where it lies in
men's houses. He tells the witch he can make a man lame. He says he can kill
an horse. Yea at sometime he will say he can and will (if she will have it so)
kill a man. As if it were in his power to do many great things, and will not
but requested. Let us see if all the devils can fetch one penny out of a man's
house, whose horse or cow they say they have killed. The coniurer, says he,
can conjure him into a man, or out of a man: let him conjure him but into a
man's chest if he can, to fetch somewhat from thence. If the devils can not do
these things, then be assured that either they make but a show of killing and
laming, as they do in the most of such harms, or else where they do hurt, it
is upon special leave from God, and not from the witches pleasure. And to what
purpose then should all such iugglings and shows serve, if they should be kept
close and not confessed.


Sam. Yet for my better satisfaction give me leave without offense to lay open
some particulars which I have seen. I was of a Jury not many years past, when
there was an old woman arrained for a witch. There came in eight or ten which
gave evidence against her. I do not remember every particular: but the chief
for some things were of small value. One woman came in and testified upon her
oath that her husband upon his death bed, took it upon his death, that he was
bewitched, for he pined a long time. And he said further, he was sure that
woman had bewitched him. He took her to be naught, and thought she was angry
with him, because she would have borrowed five shillinges of him, and he denied
to lend it her. The woman took her oath also, that she thought in her
conscience that the old woman was a witch, and that she killed her husband.
There came in a man that halted, he told a shrewde tale. I once, said he, had
both my legs sound. This old woman and I fell out and did chide. She said she
would be even with me. Within three days after I had such a pain in my knee
that I could not stand. And ever since I go haulting of it, and now and then
feel some pain. There came in an other, a little fellow that was very
earnest, me thinks I see him yet. He took his oath directly that she was a
witch: I did once anger her said he, but I did repent me: for I looked
somewhat would follow. And the next night, I saw the vgliest sight that ever I
saw: I awaked suddenly out of my sleep, and there was me thought a great
face, as big as they use to set up in the sign of the Saracens-head, looked
full in my face. I was scarce mine own man two days after. An other came in,
a woman and her child dyed with grievous pain, and she took her oath, that in
her conscience she killed her child. Then followed a man, and he said he could
not tell, but he thought she was once angry with him because she came to beg
a few pot-hearbes, and he denied her: and presently after he heard a thing as
he thought to whisper in his ear, thou shall be bewitched. The next day he had
such a pain in his back, that he could not sit upright: he said he sent to a
cunning woman, she told he was bewitched, and by a woman that came for
pot-hearbes. But she said he should recover of it, and so he said he did within
some ten days. Then came in two or three grave honest men, which testified
that she was by common fame accounted a witch. We found her guilty, for what
could we do less, she was condemned and executed: and upon the ladder she
made her prayer, and took it upon her death she was innocent and free from
all such dealings. Do you think we did not well?


Dan. Nay what think you? Are you sure she was a witch? May it not be she was
innocent, and you upon your oaths shed innocent blood?


Sam. If she were innocent what could we do less? we went according to the
evidence of such as were sworn, they swore that they in their conscience took
her to be a witch, and that she did those things.


Dan. If other take their oath that in their conscience they think so, is that
sufficient to warrant men upon mine oath to say it is so?


Sam. Nay, but you see what matters they brought, which persuaded them to
think so.


Dan. Might not both you and they be deceived in your thinking, or may you upon
matters which may induce you to think so, present upon your oath that you
know it is so?


Sam. If witnesses come in and swear falsely, the Jury proceeding according,
their testimony is clear from blame, for they go but by testimony of men
sworn.


Dan. If witnesses do swear directly that in their knowledge a matter was so
or so, and swear falsely, the Jury is clear which proceeds according to
their evidence: unless the Jury do perceive that their oath can not be true.
But what is that to make the testimony sufficient where men do but think,
and can show no necessary reason to ground their thought upon? As let us see
in all these which one could prove that she must needs be a witch. One says
her husband took it upon his death that she killed him, because he would not
lend her five shillings: does this prove she bewitched him? Can the devil
kill a man at his pleasure, to gratify the witch? Is it not rather to be
judged he dyed of some pining sickness growing from an evil constitution of
body, which the devil did know, and would set him at some variance with one
old woman or other, that so it might breed suspicion of witchcraft.


Sam. You see there were some things which could not be done but by the devil.


Dan. In deed the great face which the man thought he saw, was the illusion of
the devil. But is this a good proof, the devil appears to a man after he
has displeased a woman, therefore she sent him? Does not Satan haunt all men
continually, and would if he could get leave from God, terrify them with such
illusions* When men are affraide, and have strong imaginations? What reason did
the woman show which took it upon her conscience that the old woman killed
her child, to prove that it was so? If she thought so in her conscience, and
ten thousand more with her upon bare imagination, was that a warrant for you
to swear solemnly that it was so? As for the testimony of the cunning woman
that he was bewitched which had the pain in his back, upon the denial of
pot-hearbes, it was the testimony but of the devil, as I showed before. And
what is common fame grounded upon imaginations?


Sam. Then you think we did amiss do you?


Dan. I would not upon mine oath do such a thing for to gain a kingdom.


Sam. It may be she was a witch, although she took it upon her death that she
was not.


Dan. It is rather to be thought she was not a witch: for what should make her
deny it upon her death? The devil had accused her to be a witch, for direct
testimony against her but his.


Sam. You say it was the devil that told by the cunning woman that she was a
witch.


Dan. And do you think it was any other but Satan?


Sam. I did not at that time think it was the devil: but now I see it could
be none other.


Dan. Then be wiser hereafter, and sorry for that which you have done.


Sam. In deed I have cause to be grieved if she were not a witch.


Dan. If she were a witch your warrant was small: but she being no witch, you
have taken away both her life, and covered her with infamy.


Sam. I was of an other Jury since, and there was a woman indicted for a
witch, but not for killing any man or child. There came in five or six against
her: the first was an old woman, and she said she had displeased her, as she
thought, and within two or three nights after as she sat by her fire, there
was a thing like a toad, or like some little crabbe fish which did creep upon
the earth, she took a beasome and swept it away, and suddenly her body was
griped. An other fell out with her as she said, and her hens began to die up,
until she burnt one hen alive. A third man came in, and he said she was once
angry with him, he had a dun cow which was tied up in a house, for it was in
winter, he feared that some evil would follow, and for his life he could not
come in where she was, but he must needs take up her tail and kiss under it.
Two or three other came in and said she was by common fame accounted a Witch.
We found her guilty, and she was condemned to prison, and to the pillorie, but
stood stiff in it that she was no witch.


Dan. And are you sure she was one?


Sam. I think verily she was one, although there be many of her neighbors
which think she is none: for how could those things follow so upon her
anger? It seems they were all done by the devil.


Dan. He is cunning that can tell that: let it be that it was the devil which
appeared to the old woman like a toad, or like a crabbe fish, and that he did
gripe her body: does it follow therefore of necessity that the other woman
sent him? He can not turn him self into any likeness unless God give him
leave, as he does in justice permit that so he may delude ignorant persons* No
witch can give him power to appear unto any in a visible shape. He had this
granted him from God, and Satan by and by will set anger, and then appear,
that it might seem it grew from that.


Sam. We see he appears unto witches, and coniurers.


Dan. Yea but we may not think he can at his pleasure take a likeness for to
appear in. That he does appear unto witches and coniurers, it is granted in
Gods wrath to the end he may strongly delude such wicked people as will not
hear and obey the voice of the Lord God. For the devils are chained up by Gods
most mighty power and providence, and in all things so far as he lets
forth their chain, so far they proceed, one inch further they can not
proceed. Where men love darkness more then light, he has leave given him to
do many things. Some he terrifieth with vgley shapes, some he intiseth with
fair shows, others he plays withal in liknes of a Weasell, or Mouse, or
some such small vermin.


Sam. I thought Satan could appear in what likeness he would, and to whom he
would, if the witch sent him.


Dan. Therein you were much deceived: for the sending by the witch can give him
no power, and if he had power, he would no doubt in all places appear unto
many as far and in such sort, as should best serve his turn. Therefore if he
appear unto any man, let him think God has given him leave to go thus far
with me, and let him call for faith to resist him, and for true wisdom that
he may not be deceived nor deluded by him.


Sam. But does he not appear sometimes when the witches send him?


Dan. Where he finds it is granted unto him for to appear, he moves
witches to send him if he have any to deal by: but if there be none, yet will
he appear, and deal so far as he has power given him.


Sam. But what say you to the woman's hens?


Dan. What should one say to them when they be dead.


Sam. I mean do you not think they were bewitched?


Dan. Christ says, a Sparrow can not fall without the will of your heavenly
Father: and is not a hen as good as a Sparrow?


Sam. Nay I am fully persuaded by that which you have said, that the devil can
not touch any thing to kill or to hurt it, but upon special leave from God.
They can give him no power, she thinks she sets him on, and it is he that
sets her on work. Let these things be no more called into question: but was
it not evident that the devil killed those hens? because after the burning
of one hen, the woman had no mo that dyed. If Satan did it not, how could
they cease dying for that? You said that he where he has power to hurt in
such bodily harms, is willing to cease, that such wickedness may be
practiced. And then if this hurt were done by the devil, is it not to be
thought that the woman was a witch, seeing it followed after she was angry?
Let it be that Satan having power to do that he did, would be sent by the witch
for a color, and to make it evident did set anger between her and that other
woman, to make men think that he would not deal, but entreated by her being
angry. And so we could do no less but find her a witch.


Dan. These be weak foundations to set such a weighty building upon. For
first it is not certain that the devil killed those hens. Might be they had
some infection which he did know would kill them, and he craftily brings the
matter about, makes two women fall out (which is the easiest matter of an
hundredth) even upon the dying of the hens, that so it might seem they were
bewitched. But you say then, how could it be that upon the burning of an hen,
there dyed no more, if the devil did not kill them? Nay how can you tell but
that there should no more have died, although the live hen had not been
burned? What if he saw there should no more die, and thereupon moved the
heart of that woman to use that witchcraft in burning a hen, that it might
seem that was a present remedy to drive away devils? Or put case he had the
power to kill the woman's hens, either he is a weak killer, or else he goes
to his work but lazely. He could kill a great heard of swine quickly when
Christ gave him leave: could he not if the woman had five thousand hens, have
killed them all at once? Why did the fool then but nibble killing now one and
then one, and so was scared away before he had killed all? If he had power
before the hen was burnt for to kill why did he not then when they went about
to burn an hen kill the rest? It may be he did not know what they went about,
he was laid soft in his pot of wool: and coming to kill an other hen, he
was met withal, he smelt the coastmeat, and was scared.


Sam. Then you think he did not kill those hens.


Dan. What certainetie had you that he did kill them? You found it upon your
oath that he killed them, and that such a woman sent him and set him a work,
and yet it is an hundredth to one he never had power for to touch them.


Sam. But what can you say to the other? The man which could not choose but
kiss under his cowes tail?


Dan. I say he was far in love with his cow. Let such men learn to know God,
and to expel fantasies out of their minds that the devil may not have such
power over the^, for he works in the fantasies of man's mind, and the more
strongly where they fear him, as it appears this man did. Satan did work in
this man's mind many foolish imaginations, and to make him believe he was
bewitched he makes him fall out with one that may be suspected. And thus you
Jury men take your oath and condemn many innocent persons, because you
believe the devil, and imagine that witches do that which they can not do.


M. B. I have heard of many that have been condemned for witches which have
taken it upon their death that they were innocent. And sundry of the^ have had
far weaker proofs brought against them then these that have bin mentioned.


Dan. Yea that is it which I say, men do so little consider the high
soueraignety and providence of God over all things: they ascribe so much to the
power of the devil and and to the anger of witches, and are in such fear of
them, that the least show that can be made by the sleights of Satan deceives
them. The only way for men that will eschew the suares and subtilties of the
devil and all harms by him, is this, even to hear the voice of God, to be
taught of him by his lively word which is full of pure light to discover and
expel the dark mistes of Satan in which he leads men out of the way. and to
be armed with faith to resist him, as the holy Apostle S. Peter wills, so
such as do forsake this way are seduced into gross errors and into many
abominable sins, which carry men to destruction. I must now bid you
farewell.


M. B. I could be content to hear more in these matters, I see how fondly I
have erred. But seeing you must be gone, I hope we shall meet here again at
some other time, God keep you.


Sam. I am bound to give you great thanks. And I pray you when occasion
serves, that you come this way, let us see you at my house.


M. B. I thought there had not been such subtle practices of the devil, nor
so great sins as he leads me^ into.


Sam. It is strange to see how many thousands are carried awry and deceived, yea
many that are very wise men.


M. B. The devil is too crafty for the wisest, unless they have the light of
Gods word.


The wife of Sam. Husband yonder comes the good wife R.


Sam. I would she had come sooner.


The good wife R. Ho, who is within, by your leave.


The wife of Sam. I would you had come a little sooner, here was one even now
that said you are a witch.


The good wife R. Was there one said I am a witch? you do but jest.


The wife of Sam. Nay I promise you he was in good earnest.


The good wife R. I a Witch? I defy him that says it, though he be a Lord. I
would all the witches in the land were hanged, and their spirits by them.


M. B. Would not you be glad if their spirits were hanged up with them to have
a gown furred with some of their skins.


The good wife R. Out upon them, there were furre.


Sam. Wife why did thou say that he said the good wife R. is a witch? he
did not say so.


The wife of Sam. Husband I did mark his words well enough, he said she is a
witch.


Sam. He does not know her, and how could he say she is a witch?


The wife of Sam. What though he did not know her? did he not say she played
the witch that hette the spitte red hot, and thrust it into her cream, when
the butter would not come?


Sam. Indeed wife, thou say true, he said that was a thing taught by the
devil, as also the burning of an hen or of an hog alive, and all such like
devises.


The good wife R. Is that witchcraft? Some scripture man has told you so. Did
the devil teach it? Nay the good woman at R. H. taught it my husband: she
does more good in one year than all these scripture men will do so long as
they live.


M. B. Who do you think taught it the cunning woman at R.H.


The good wife R. It is a gift which God has given her, I think the holy
spirit of God does teach her.


M. B. You do not think then that the devil does teach her?


The good wife R. How should I think that the Devil does teach her? Did you
ever hear that the devil did teach any good thing?


M. B. Do you know that was a good thing?


The good wife R. Was it not a good thing to drive the evil spirit out of my
cream?


M. B. Do you think the devil was afraid of your spit?


The good wife R. I know he was driven away, and we have been rid of him ever
since.


M. B. Can a spit hurt him?


The good wife R. It does hurt him, or it hurts the witch: One of them I am
sure: for he comes no more. Either she ca^ get him come no more, because it
hurts him: or else she will let him come no more, because it hurts her.


M. B. It is certain that spirits cannot be hurt but with spiritual weapons:
therefore your spit cannot fraie nor hurt the devil. And how can it hurt the
witch, you did not think she was in your cream, did you?


The good wife R. Some think she is there, and therefore, when they thrust in
the spitte they say, If thou be here have at thine eye.


M. B. If she were in your cream, your butter was not very cleanly.


The good wife R. You are merrily disposed M. B. I know you are of my mind,
though you put these questions to me. For I am sure none has counseled more
to go to the cunning folk than you.


M. B. I was of your mind, but I am not now, for I see how foolish I was. I
am sorry that ever I offended so grievously as to counsel any for to seek
unto devils.


The good wife R. Why, M. B. who has schooled you to day? I am sure you were
of another mind no longer agone than yesterday.


The wife of Sam. Truly goodwife R. I think my husband is turned also: here
has been one reasoning with them three or four hours.


The good wife R. Is your husband turned to? I would you might loose all your
hens one after an other, and then I would she would set her spirit upon your
duckes and your geese, and leave you not one alive. Will you come to defend
witches?


M. B. We do not defend witches.


The good wife R. Yes, yes, there be too many that take their part, I would
they might witch some of the^ even into hell, to teach others to defend them.
And you M.B. I would your nagge might hault a little one of these days: see
whether you would not be glad to seek help.


M. B. I would seek help, I would carry him to the smith to search if he were
not pricked or graueld.


The good wife R. Tush you laugh, If you were plagued as some are, you would not
make so light account of it.


M. B. You think the devil can kill men's cattle, and lame both man and beast
at his pleasure: you think if the witch entreat him and send him he will go,
and if she will not have him go, he will not meddle. And you think when he
does come, you can drive him away with an hot spitte, or with burning a live
hen or a pigge.


The good wife R. Never tell me I think so, for you your self have thought
so: and let them say what they can all the Scripture men in the world shall
never persuade me otherwise.


M. B. I do wonder, not so much at your ignorance as at this, that I was even
of the same mind that you are and could not see mine own folly.


The good wife R. Folly? how wise you are become of a sudden? I know that
their spirits lie lurking, for they foster them: and when any body has angered
them, then they call them forth and send them. And look what they bid them do,
or hire them to do, that shall be done: as when she is angry, the spirit will
ask her what shall I do? such a man has misused me says she, go kill his
Cow, by and by he goes and does it. Go kill such a woman's hens, down go they.
And some of them are not content to do these lesser harms, but they will say,
go make such a man lame, kill him, or kill his child. Then are they ready and
will do any thing: And I think they be happy that can learn to drive them
away.


M. B. If I should reason with you out of the word of God, you should see that
all this is false which you say. The devil can not kill nor hurt any thing no
not so much as a poor hen. If he had power who can escape him? Would he
tarry to be sent or entreated by a woman? he is a stirrer up unto all harms
and mischiefs.


The good wife R. What tell you me of Gods word? does not Gods word say there
be witches, and do not you think God does suffer bad people? Are you a
turnecote? Fare you well, I will talk no longer with you.


M. B. She is wilful in deed. I will leave you also.


Sam. I thank you for your good company.


FINIS.

