A brief and plain Narration of proceedings at an Assemsemblie in Glasco, 8.
Iun. 1610. anent the innovation of the Kirk-governement.

With a narration of some strange Episcopal accidents lately happened in
Scotland, worthy consideration: which the wise of heart will understand.

Psalm 2.6. I have for my King opon Zion.

Proverb 21.30. There is no counsel against the Lord.

Luke 19.37. Those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over
them, bring hither, and slay them before me.

Anno 1610.

To the reverend Brethren in Scotland.
Notwithstanding I can not (as I often desired) see with my bodily eyes, by
what means and degrees the state of Christ his Church (there) is become so
straungelie defaced, that so I might with more feeling pray, and with more
judgment help, as I could: yet have I never ceased with Nehemiah, carefully to
hearke^ after, and diligently to inquire concerning Jerusalem. So that (of
late) by sundry intelligences, I understand, that the Glory of the Lord, (can
Nehemiah possibly hold in his tears?) is departed from that part of Israel
touching outward administration of Christ his Kingdom by his own
Office-bearers. Oh, that our sins have provoked God thus to moove our David
against us! We hoped that our gracious King (according to his promise made
openly in Edingburgh that day before he went toward England) would rather
have remooved those Relics of Antichrist, which ever have troubled the peace
of Christ his church in England, whereunto the God of peace did carry him in a
wonderful peace, that he should prove a Prince of peace in building and
beautifying the house of God. O thou highest, and most gracious Governor of
kings, who did turue our Kings heart in Anno Dom. 1592. torestore
Discipline, notwithstanding he had in anno 1584. set up Papal Bishops: give
him now grace religiously to remember, That he has by subscription sworn to
defend Discipline then in Scotland, all the days of his life, and That he
consented to a constitution of the general Assembly in Holi-rud house. And
anno 1602. where by it was ordained (to prevent aspiring to the state of Papal
Bishops in England) that those who were called by his Majesty unto that
Parleament, and were formerlie entitled Lord Bishops, should from
thence-forward, have no longer that title, and be called Commissiners for the
Kirk to vote in Parleament. Long have we (in these parts) expected from some
of you (in whom the holy fire is not yet extinguished) a continuance of the
faithful report anent th'assemblie at Aberdene But supposing that either
fear, or want of means has restreigned your zealous spirits, I have out of
the said intelligences compiled this Narration with all faithfulness, though
perhaps, there may be some small mistaking of the order of time. For most of
mine intelligences (which I follow) show that the Archbishop of Glasco
preached first. But one reported the Bishop of Orkney to be the first
preacher. It is thought meet by more then my self to publish it, in hope,
That, through the merciful working of our good Lord and God, it may occasion
our wise and Christian King (according to that heavenly light, wherewith God
has endued him) to revive and redress such shameful proceedings. 2. The
Nobles, Barons, and Burroughes, to consider, that if such proceedings hold on,
many (besides the English Nation) will (too readily) say: Are the Nobles,
Barons, and Borroughes of Scotland (as well as the Bishopps and some Ministers
there) corrupted by the treasure of England, to yield unto the ouerthrowinge
of their Law, by directions from England, which proceed from the instigations
of the Archbishop of Ca^torbuie? 3. The perjured hyrelings, and apostate
betrayers of Christ his kingdom, to repent, if they have so much grace, or to
be ashamed, if they be not past all grace, the wages of unrighteousness choking
the spirit of God in them. And 4. Such faithful Ministers of Christ Jesus, as
fight the good fight of faith, to justify Wisdom, by learned and modest
writings, to resist the approches of Antichsist, by patient suffering, though
unto blood: and incessantly to pray to God of truth (who has said to his
Christ, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy
footestoole) to take his own cause into his own hands, and to make our Noble
King (all seducementes notwithstanding) a worthy instrument of his glory
herein. AMEN.

A brief and plain narration of proceedings at an Assembly in Glasco, 8.
June 1610. anent the innovation of the Kirk-governement.
THE general Assembly at Linlithgowe 26. Iuli, 1608. appointed 10. approving
the present kirk government, and 10. affecting the Hierarchy of Lord
Bishops, to confer about middesses, to determine questions controverted
among Ministers, but referred the determination it self to the next general
Assembly then and there agreed upon touching time and place, and that with
consent of Dumbar the Kings Commissioner, according to the Statute. These 20.
met at Falklande. The Bishops would have made a question, whether the
government of the Kirk by Synodes and Presbiteries, or by the Bishopps, were
more agreeable to the word of God. The other side would not yield to make a
question of that point, because the present Kirk government by Synodes and
Presbiteries was without controversy established by Parleament and former
Assemblies, and further confirmed by the Oaths of his Majesty, the Nobles and
Ministers. And therefore without the compass of their commission from the
general Assemblies The Bishops being defeated of their purpose (which was
suspending the execution of Discipline, if question had been made thereof, as
may appear by the sequel) the conference was so adiorned, that it never held
again, neither the general Assembly, though by such lawful consent
appointed for some weeks before the last day appointed, it was forbidden by
proclamation. And why? If it had convened in dew order, then every
Presbiterie should have freely chosen 2. or 3. of the same to be Commissioners
for the general Assembly, and (in all likelihood) would have given them such
directions to be observed upon pain of Nullitie on their proceeding, and of
deposition and excommunication, if they proceeded otherwise, as all the
Presbiteries did in one form at the said former assembly, viz. that they
should not give their consent to any alteration of the Kirk government, etc.
All this being against the Kings purpose, it pleased his Majesty to send
Dumbar (a man after his own heart) with a multitude of Letters, some to
several Presbyteries, and some to particular persons, such as could readily
say, Placer. The Bishopps (forsooth) accompanied every Bishop in his own
Diocese: the Kings letters, with theirs to the Presbiterie, as if the Kings
Letters were not sufficient without theirs. The parport of both letters was
peremptorily to charge the Presbiteries, to send to the Assembly to be at
Glasco 8. Iunij. that very man whom the King named, and in no sort to give
them direction, that they might be free to vote as the King and they them
selves would.

Before the Assembly (or rather Dissemblie) convened, Dumbar and the Bishops
had three days serious conference to plott all matters: when those tractable
men were come, Dumbar honorably entertained them with Balaams wages (perhaps
sub nomine viatici) as he had formerlie intertayned the like Assembly at
Linlithgowe Anno 1606. at what time (vijs and modis) he set up a constant
Moderator, to make way for a Lord Bishop to be advanced in fulness of time,
which was even now. For as Daniel, understanding by books, that the time of
captivity was expired, fasted and prayed that Gods people might return to
their own land, so the Apostolical (I should say) Apostaticall Prelates,
knowing by certain intelligence, that the time of casting off Christ his yoke
was come, fasted and prayed (I say not by Daniels spirit) thus Lordly, or (as
the King calls them) Papal Bishops, might Dominere over the Lords
inheritance. The first that preached was the Archbishop of Glasco, his text
was, Ier. 51.9. We would have cured Babel, etc. This he applied only to Rome.
But why did not the Archb. apply it thus: So we would have repaired Babel,
that is the Hierarchy of Papal Bishopps, which is a principal tower of that
great City which rules over Kings? Belike Dumbar and the Bishops had
appointed that part to be played by other. For the second Preacher was the
Bishop of Oarkeny, whose text was, Romans 14.19. Let us follow those things
which concern peace: He showed that peace is kept by keeping Truth. But whereas
Truth touching the authority of Bishops over Presbiteries, was contraverted,
He taught that Prelaticall truth thus: What greater reason can be the^ the
practice of the Apostles and the consent of the primitive Church, with
authority of old and new Fathers, as Bez^, Iunius, Calvin, etc. Again, it is
of it self either indifferent, or commmaunded, or contrary to the word: it
can not be indifferent none (he thinks) can show it to be contrary to the
word. Therefore it must be commanded in the word. Lastly, it has the
command of our mighty King, who for knowledge of Theology, exceeds far
all the Doctors of Divinity. Therefore what ingratitude shall it be to us to
refuse so necessary a law, a burden to us Bishops, but to the Kirk of God the
only perfection of her liberty in this life. This done, the people were
dismissed a while. In which space the dissemblie chooses the Archb. of Glasco
Moderator, and a privy conference (which Englishmen call a Comittie) upon
which were Dumbar, the Bishops, many Statesmen, and some deemed opposites to
Bishops, as M. Hall, M. Copar, etc. The Archbishop produced the K. Letters,
wherein he professed care to maintain discipline, whereof his Ma. ever thought
Bishops to be the ground and pillar, And therefore has convocated the
Dissemblie to establish them in their full power, having long waited and looked
that the Presbiteries should have done it of themselves. Behold here Prelaticall
Theology. Behold the Prelates fast, In the midst of the pretended humbling
their souls in a solemn manne: before the King of Kings, an earthly Kings
letter must be read, elections must be made, they must fall to their business,
before they have ended their fasting and prayer for direction and a blessing,
But confused proceedings are fit for a work of confusion intended. Well at
last they go to the third Sermon made by Doct. Hodge sone (one of Dumbar his
English Chaplains) his text was, Act. 2.1. his doctrine of cooks and kitching
stuff. And yet he had one argument of note for the superiority of L.
Bishops, viz. Christ taught some of his Apostles at the head, some in his
bosom, and some at his feet, Ergo, potlid. The next day being Satterdy, the
dissemblie convened about 8. hours, but sat looking one on another, till
about elleven; The cause was opposition in the privy conference between
May. John Hall, etc. and the Bishops about their negative voice in
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. The Bishopsoath to the contrary being urged,
Dumbar produced a Lettre from the King to the Bishopps, commanding them either
to accept their whole office, or to quite their places: So were the Bishopps
freed from their oath, the matter thereupon presently carried with plurality
of voices, and then they went to the Assembly, wherein nothing was done that
forenoone, only the Archbishop being Moderator, excused the long staying of
the privy conference, and M. Primros would have protested against the
proceedings of that Dissemblie, but was interrupted by the Moderator, because
it was high dinner time, and referred to the privy conference, after that
Glasco (the Dissemblie then risen) had drawn him to discover his purpose. In
the afternoon the privy conference met, and make up their conclusions, viz.
1. The Assembly at Abirdeen was unlawful. 2. All power of convening, and
discharging general Assemblies, pertayneth only to the King. 3. Ordination,
admission, deprivation, and suspention. 4. Visitation of Churches, and 5.
Excommunication and absolution be proper to the Bishopps: if they be slack,
the general Assembly shall try and report to his Ma. that he may censure
them according to their merit. 6. Synodes are to meet yearly in October, and
April, and the Bishopp is to be Moderator. 7. The Presbiterian Moderator, is
to be the Bishop him self, or shall be chosen with his consent. 8. Ministers
admitted, shall give the oath of obedience to the King and his Ordinary. 9.
Whosoever shall preach, write, or speak against these conclusions, shall be
deprived. The Moderator propounded these to the Dissemblie, not severallie to
be discussed, but altogether jointly as one, requiring every one to answer,
yea, or no: having made way to the first, with this reason: The brethren
banished, have promised to confess a fault to his Majesty, if they shall be
condemned by a general Assembly, and so to return ^o their own
Congregation. O reason Archiepiscopall! But what if the banished brethren
protest against this dissemblie, and plead that they be unjustly condemned,
because they be not heard what they can say for them selves.

The Moderator likewise desired the dissemblie, that a letter might be penned
to request his Ma. for a yearly Assembly, orat the least to appointe certain
times, as he should think expedient. Behold a Machevillian trick, by a
pretended Synod to weaken the authority of Parliament in a Statute made in
anno 1592. whereby it is ordained, that there should be a general Assembly at
least once every year, and to give the King only all authority to call
general Assemblies at his pleasure, hat statute notwithstanding. Moreover,
before their votes was particularly demanded, an ordinary was made that none
should speak but speared at. When votes were demanded, the affirmatives carried
all before them, but some negatives charged the conclusions to be contrary to
Gods word: Some pleaded their oath to maintain Discipline so many years
established, and some answered, they had no commission from their Presbiteries.
Furthermore, these conclusions get the more ready passage, because a fear was
conceived that Dumbar had the Kings guarde present to commit such as should
earnestly withstand the Kings purpose. For his Lo. professed that he would
have no man there that should give countenance of mislike. Lastly, to make all
sure, there were in this dissemblie besides the 13. Bish. Nobles 13. and
Gentlemen 40. which were not chosen by Synodes or Presbyteries to carry the
matter with plurality of votes, if in aunters, many Ministers should stand for
their presbiteries, al other devises notwithstanding. When this transcendent
authority of papal Bish. was thus obtained, Dumbar produced an instrument
from the King, utterly to discharge all the Presbiteries. If question had been
made in the conference at Faulkland before mentioned of the then present
kirk-government, would not Dumbar have played the pranke even then to suspend
the excom. thereof? When the discharge of Presbiteries was red, there was an
outcry in the Assembly: Dumbar took that occasion to promise upon his honor,
to persuade the King, if he could, to recall that discharge: Provided they
would subscribe the conclusions whereunto they had consented. By this cunning he
got the hands as well as the votes of many sworn Balamits. The next day being
Sabbath, the Kings Chaplains D. Hampton and D. Merdon, preached one in the
forenone, t'hother in the afternoon. D. Hamptons text was, Psalm. 122.1. I
rejoiced. etc. In his doctrine he taxed sacrilegious persons, who robbed God
of his tenthes, reproved the form of Discipline by Synodes and Presbiteries,
and proved the superiorities of Bishops thus: To one maintaining paritie,
another said, begin paritie in your own house, Ergo the staff stands in the
church conner. M. Moret. text was, 2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing is the testimony
of a good conscience. A principal part of his doctrine was, a maintenance of
superiority of Bishops, with these reasons: 1. There was superiority amongst
Priests in the old Testament. 2. Though the high Priest was a type of Christ,
yet there were Captains over the Priests and Levites. 3. Paul left Titus at
Creta to ordain Elders, and it is not said. I leave thee an Eva^gelist. 4.
Act. 20.28. and Revel. 2.1. conferred together. 5. Bees and Cranes have their
governors, yea Angels have Gabriel, and Devils have Beelzebub their princes,
Ergo, the Pope is no oecumenicall Bishop. On Mu^day the Moderator praising God
for the happy success in the first cause of that dissemblie propounded. 2.
More, viz. Taking order with papists, and provisio^ for Ministers, touching the
which Dumbar and 4. Bishops should meet, make up a roll of excommunicants and
vnpla^ted churches, and send it to the King. So the dissemblie was dismissed,
now new appointed, and Psalm. 133. chanted. As Dumber, Bish. Noble men, and
others returned by Stirling, M. Patrik Symson made such a sermon as grieved
them at the heart, but nothing was said unto him. At their coming to Eding. M.
Walter Bakanquell made a mighty sermon against the whole proceeding of the
dissemblie, for which he was called before the Counsel. But dismissed with
admonition, and M. Patrike Galloway in his first sermon after his return to
Edingborough from Perth. (where he had been all the time of the Assembly)
inveyed (though wisely yet sensibly) against the dissemblie, and threatened
judgments, because of the same.

To the Reader.
BEfore I had altogether finished the imprinting of this Narratio^, I received
from a faithful Brother (whose being is where be may have present and certain
intelligence) a letter: Wherein he credibly reports these ensuing works of
God. Which, because they be right worthy to be noted, I thought good to
publish in the same words, as they came to my hands. Admonishing our Papal
Bishops of the new erection, to consider these judgments of God: and
withal to remember the death of the late titular Bishop Master James
Nicholson, who was then troubled in conscience for accepting that title: So
that he would not be called Bishopp in his will, and by his Will rejected
whatsoever was due to him out of his Bishopric. The Lord give us
understanding in all things.

The Arbishop of S. Androis, reposing in his bed in time of the afternoones
sermon, the Sabbath after his Diocesan Synod in S. Androis, was wakened and
all the Kirk and Town with him, with a cry of blood and murder. For his
sisters son (master of his household) wit^ a throw of his dagger killed his
Cook, while as he was busy in dressing of the Lord Bishops Supper, the
dagger light just under the lest pappe of the Cook, who fell down dead
immediately.

Item, the said Bishopp, at the Town of Hadington in Lawdien, where he keepit
an other Diocesan Synod: after he had been in doctrine much upon the
contradiction of Core, out of the Epistle of Jude, coming forth of the Kirk
door, in the porch thereof, the earth under him, burst, and rent, and he sunk
down: So that, if he had not been pulled out quickly by his Colateralles, he
had gone the way of Core, and his companions.

FINIS.

