A Sermon on the Parable of the Sower, taken out of the 13. of Matthew. Preached
at London by M. G. Gifford, and published at the request of sundry godly and
well disposed persons.

Imprinted at London for Tobie Cook, dwelling at the Tigres head in Paul's
Churchyard. 1582.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL M. John Hutton Esquier, George Gifford wishes health
and increase of worship.
IT is more then half a year (right worshipful) since I handled this parable
of the Sower, in a Sermon at London, Being instantly urged by a friend which
heard me, to put it in writing, although I was very vnw^^^ng, for sundry
considerations, yet I made some promise if lesure should serve. Afterward when I
would very gladly have been released at her hands whom I promised, I could by no
means obtain it. I have therefore at the last so nigh as I could, set down in
writing, that which I then uttered in speking, I know that I have omitted some
things in the particular applications, and exhortations which I made: and also
I have added so^ewhat which either then came not to mind, or else time did not
serve to handle. I am bold to present and dedicate this my poor travel unto
your worship, moved thereto with diverse respects as thinking my self in duty
bound, not only with this common and general bond that ye are one which long
time have professed the glorious gospel of Jesus Christ: but with diverse more
special, which are so well known unto you, that it were needless for me to
recite them: only thus much, seeing I was born and brought up under you, my
parents receiving benefits daily from you, I think I ought, when as I am not
able to make any recompense, at least to show some token of a grateful mind.
But especially I am moved hereunto, with consideration of the greatest
blessing which all my kindred have enjoyed by you now so long, in providing and
procuring their spiritual instruction. I pray you accept of my good will, and
account of me as one which prays to the Lord for you, that he will multiply
and increase his good gifts still in you, to the glory of his holy name, the
benefit of his Church, and your endless comfort in Jesus Christ. Amen.

Yours for ever to command in the Lord, George Gifford.

A Sermon upon the Parable of the Sower.
Math. 13. 1 IN that day Jesus went out of the house and sat by the Sea side.

2 And there was gathered unto him a multitude, so that he entered into a
ship, and sat down, and the whole multitude stood on the shore.

3 And he spoke many things unto the^ by* Parables, faieng: Behold a Sower went
forth to fowe.

4 And as he sowed, some seeds fell by the way side: and the fowls came and
eat them up.

5 Other fell upon stony ground, where they had not much earth, and by and by
they sprang up, because they had not depth of earth.

6 And when the Sun rose they were parched, and because they had no root they
withered.

7 Other fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked it.

8 Other fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit, one seed an hundredth
fold, another sixty, another thirty.

9 He that has ears to hear, let him hear.


ALthough the Jews, at such time as our savior Christ came into ye world, had
the word of God among the^: and had also the temple and Sinagogues where they
heard ye same read and expounded: yet their state was very miserable, for
Christ says, they were as sheep without a shepherd: because their teachers, ye
Scribes and Pharesies, being choked with covetousness, and puffed up with vain
glory, were become stark naught, corrupt in manners, and corrupting the word
with their fond gloses: their teaching also was so cold, and with so little
power even in yt which they taught truly, yt the people had no great list to
hear the^. But when John Baptist the forerunner of Christ, was raised up to
publish the beginning of the Gospel, and to prepare ye way for the Lord: he
like a sounding and shrill Trumpet, with the power of his word shook their
hearts, and rowsed their drowsines, so yt from his time ye kingdom of heaven
suffered violence. When Christ Jesus himself uttered his voice in preaching,
and his divine power in working wonders, there appeared such a wonderful majesty
in his person, as did amaze the hearers: whereupon his fame was noised far and
near, so yt they came running out of all quarters of ye land by heaps, for to
see and hear him, they seemed to forget themselves and their state, in leaving
al worldly affairs, as ye husbandme^ their plough, ye Artificers their crafts
and sciences, following him into ye wilderness with their wives and their
children laggering at their heels, so great was their zeal. So that, as
before almost all did perish in yt miserable state they were in: now it seemed
yt the greatest part, or at lest an innumerable multitude did with such care
embrace ye heavenly doctrine* as yt they should be most happy, and come to
eternal life: but this was otherwise, for our savior Christ shows here, yt
of this great heap and rableme^t of people, which were so zealous and traveled
so far to hear him, there were three parts which did not profit by his doctrine
but continued still damned and forlorn creatures, only one part of four, are
true scholars. And because we be rank hipocrits, prone and ready to deceive
our selves, Christ Jesus lays open the matter so plainly, and in so familiar
a kind of teaching, yt unless we wilfully blind our selves we cannot but see
how the case stands in every of us, each man in himself: for he takes a
similitude from a sower of corn, which going and casting his seed abroad, it
lights upon sundry kinds of ground: some falls by ye way side, where the
path is trampled and beaten smooth and hard, by men's feet, and is made like a
pauement, and there it lies above ye ground altogether uncovered, the Fowls
come by and by and pick it up.

Some falls into stony ground or rocky, or as S. Luke says upon a rock:
where there is a little thin crust of earth in ye top, and some moisture in
which the seed is a little covered: and because ye earth which does cover it is
but shallowe, it springs up quickly and brauncheth, and is fresh and green,
and being so good, seems to be forward corn, and such as would yield to the
husbandman a plentiful harvest: but because the root can not spread it self
deep enough to suck juice out of the ground, for the nourishment of the
blade, when the parching heat of the Sun lights upon it, then it is dried
up, and scorched, and dies, and never brings forth fruit. Some other does
fall among thorns: there is deapth of earth for the seed to grow, so that it
springs up, and not only a blade, but also a stalk, and comes so far as
to have the ear: but the thorns grow up with it, ouershadowe and choke it,
insomuch that the Corn in the ear, can not have the benefit of ye Sun to
make it ripe: therefore the fruit that it seems to bring forth comes to
naught. Some other seeds fall into good ground, and grow up, and bring forth
seasonable fruit, one karnell an hundredth, another sixty, another thirty.
This is the Parable: Now for the meaning of it, we are not to seek far,
neither to go by conjectures, for Christ himself does expound and interpret
every part of it a little after in this Chapter: I need not but to lay open his
Exposition. The seed is the word of God: the sower of it is the Preacher and
publysher of the same: for as the Sower does fill his hand and so casts it
abroad upon the ground, not setting it seed by seed, or choosing a place for
every seed, but where it lights: even so the Preacher does cast forth the
word among ye people: and look how the ground is into which it falls, so
does it prosper: for your hearts are the ground upon which it is cast: you that
are the hearers and among whom the seed is sown, have every one a heart which
is one of these four sorts of ground, upon which the seed falls: and
because the seed has been and is still daily sown among ye, I think this
parcel of Scripture is very fit and agreeable: even as a touchstone for every
one to try himself withal, whether he have rightly embraced the Gospel, and
to his salvation: for what a sottishness were this, when we have so just and
plain a rule, not to measure our selves with it. But going on, on, nothing
consider whether we be not one of those three evil sorts of ground, which
receive the seed, but bring forth no fruit, thinking we be well if we
profess the Gospel or hear it, after any sort. Let us go forward: those
which receive the seed by the way side, are they which hear the word and do
not understand it, then comes the evil one, or as Saint Luke says, the
Devil, and takes it away from their heart. In these first kind of hearers,
we have to observe, how that their hearts being hard and smooth like a path
that is trampled and beaten with men's feet ye word has no entrance, but lies
above uncovered: for like as when a man casts an handful of corn upon a very
hard and smooth path, it is all one as if it were cast upon a pauement: so also
through ye custom and deceitfulnes of sinning, ye devil has made ye hearts of
these unmeet to receive the heavenly seed of the word: and look how ye see
Crows and other fowls follow the heels of the Sower, to pick up and devour
such karnells as do lie uncovered: in like manner do the devils come like
greedy fowls into the assemblies, where ye word of God is preached, to take it
away from ye hearts of the people, that it may not grow there. This
peradventure will seem strange to some, that Satan should have any
entrance into the Church among Gods people, especially when they be about the
best and most holy exercises of hearing the word and of prayer. How strange
soever it may seem, and how many soever have been, or be of that fond and
doltish opinion, to think that the Devil has nothing to do with them, or
comes not near them, when they be about these holy things: we are to
believe Christ who tells us the contrary: and we are wisely to consider, that
when we are nightest that which should do our souls good, then is this enemy
readiest at hand, and does most busely bestirre him. If this were not uttered
by our Savior Christ himself, we might wonder, and for mine own part I
would not cease wondering to see many hearers which carry away almost nothing
which is to any purpose: let a man tell a long story in a worldly matter, they
have wit enough to recite it in order again, and to keep it in remembrance a
long time after: but let the Preacher speak never so plain, although they sit
and look him in the face, yet if ye enquire of them so soon as they be out at
the Church doors, ye shall easily perceive that (as the common saying is) it
went in at the one ear, and out at the other. They will say peradventure,
after this manner, It was a good Sermon, I would we could follow it: he said
very well: he is a perfect ready man in the Pulpet. But ask, what doctrine did
he handle? Then are they at a pause, and set at a dead lift. They will make
this answer: we are not able to carry away so much as other can,
nevertheless we hope that we be as good toward God, as they that carry away
most. They will also confess that the word of God is good, and that we should
be ruled by it. Let us therefore dearly beloved, (if we desire not to be of
the number of these) mark well the subtle sleights, and policy of the
Devil, how he handeleth and conueyeth the matter with this kind of people.
There is no doubt of this, but that if he can he will draw away the mind
from coming to the Sermon, one pelting let or other must come in the way: if
there be no worldly business to be done: then a pair of cards or tables or
some honest recreation, it should be now no good civility to part company
when friends are met together: this is the surest way if it may be obtained:
but what if he fail herein? They come to the place where the seede-shall be
sown, sit down, and mind to hear: then the next way is to come with them,
and to attend at their elboe, seeking how to deprive them of ye word. Now his
best way is to bring them asleep because they were then as good be absent: or
into a slumber, that they may hear only a sound and a confused humming,
without any perseverance of the things uttered: or else when they hear any
perfect sentence, or a few sentences, they know not why they be uttered,
because they hard not that which went before. Such as are not so drousie
headed, being wakeful, he seeks still to convey some thoughts into their
minds, whereabouts they may be occupied, and their understanding drawn away:
the mind of a man being light and inconstant, if he can put in but one motion,
it oftentimes draws with it so many lynkes as make up a whole chain, in ye
mean time the Preacher goes on, and he understands not what was said, and
so when his mind retourneth, he can have no sound knowledge of the things
uttered, but a confused opinion: into these by thoughts, men are oftentimes
brought, even by occasion of some word or sentence which they heard uttered,
and are carried so far, that they cannot of long time recover their mind to
bring it again to the matter. Seeing this great danger, we ought when we come
to hear Gods word taught, to make account that we go about a very hard work,
yt we go to encounter with Satan hand to hand, who seeks then most busily to
steal away our heart: yt he may make ye word fruitles in us, and cause us to
sin grievously against God. There is no one man which makes conscience of
hearing ye word rightly, which setting these things together, ye reverence we
owe unto it, ye stedines of our mind, which should be upon it, and the care to
keep it, but will easily grant that it is as hard and painful a travel to do
this, as for the man that works in the sorest bodily labor. Here is
therefore a lesson for every man to apply to himself when he is going to hear
the word, to think, I am now going about a great work, I shall be too weak
if the Lord God do not mightelye assist me: for I am not to sit down there at
ease, but to wrestle and struggle with the Devil, and with all the corruptions
of mine own flesh, and hardness of my heart: that my mind may be kept
steadfast upon the word, that I may receive it with all reverence and fear, as
the word of the great and glorious God: not to judge of it at mine own
pleasure, but to crave wisdom from the Lord: not to hear it and to let it
go, but to keep it as a most precious Jewel locked up in my heart, that I may
guide my self thereby. And we shall be a great deal the rather moved to this
diligence, if we consider what a companion we carry about with us, and what a
guest we lodge withal, when we he such as hear the word, and do not keep
it. For Christ tells us that it is the devil which does this: which as a
greedy Foul deuoureth the seed which was sown in our heart: if any make
none account to have him possessing their mind, and hardening their hearts
against the word: then let them continue in their sloth to hear with drousie
minds, to hear and not to understand: to regard the holy word, but as the word
of a man: to make little account to keep it. But if he think it a most
miserable thing to have so filthy a beast, and so foul a spirit to lodge in
his breast: if he think it to be a most vile slavery, to be vanquished and
overcome of so horrible an enemy, to be lead captive and kept thrall under such
a tyrant: then let him think also how miserable a thing it is to be such a
kind of ground as does receive the seed by the way side: for undoubtedly
howsoever men seem to defy the devil, and curse him as though he should not
come nigh them, yet seeing it is no mortal man but the Lord Jesus Christ
himself, who tells us here yt the devil is not only nigh, but in these
kind of hearers, even hardening their hearts, and blinding their eyes, we
ought most constantly to believe it. He that shall deeply weigh ye estate of
our church at this day, will soon be brought to confess, that there be many of
this first sort of hearers, they shall perceive it right well by this, that
they are not able in any wise to judge or put difference between sound and
sincere preaching, and vain prattling: they know not when ye Preacher does
minister unto the^ wholesome food, and when there is nothing but chafe and
wind: ye shall hear them highly commend some Sermon, as a matter worthy to be
written in letters of gold, when as indeed it deserves not so much as to be
noted with a coal. I speak not of those sily wretches, which were never as yet
acquainted with preaching, for it is no great marvel, though they be not able
to discern chalk from cheese: or being blind for to judge of colors, but to
such as long time have been hearers, and yet never ye wiser, because they are
not able to judge when sound and necessary conclusions are drawn out of ye
word: but is al one with them, whether ye reason that is made be good or bad,
strong or weak: yea further ye shall perceive yt even a little show of a
reason although never so doltish, being against true godliness, does more
prevail with them, then a multitude of infallible proofs, although they be
never so sure: and that which is so gross and absurd that a child may laugh
at, seems to them a very strong pillar to lean unto. There needs no more
when a man preaches unto them, but a glorious show of learning, a sweet
ringing voice, and matters so strange and straungely handeled, that they may be
brought into a wonderment of yt they know not. And Satan has many chapplaines
fit for this turn, to serve ye vain humor of such people, and to set forth
themselves after a pompous sort: more seeking their own vain glory, then the
glory of the Gospel, in the conversion of the people. The second kind of
ground are they which receive the seed upon ye hard rock, where there is some
entrance, and the word has a shallow root in them, for as it were the top of
their heart is soft after a sort, and there it is covered a little, and it
grows up quickly, and springs fresh, they seem to be stout and excellent
professors, they brag of great zeal: a man would take them to be sincere, and
so they take themselves: but when the Sun arises, that is, the fiery trial or
parching heat of persecution, they stumble and fall away, and because the word
had no deep root in them, it withers and brings forth no fruit: these
also are not profited by the word of grace, but are still cast awayes and damned
creatures: in this kind of ground, or in these hearers, if we note well, we
shall see that which is strange and wonderful: when Christ says and
testifies of them, that they receive the word with joy: these he not
blasphemers or persecutors of the word: they be not contemners which regard
not at all to hear it: they come not under a show or pretense as to a thing
which otherwise they have no care nor feeling of, or which they delight not for
to hear, but how? They receive it with joy, and take such pleasure therein,
that returning they can say, surely this was a very notable piece of work and
well handeled, I am glad that I heard it, it does me even as much good as my
meat, I would go a mile to hear ye like again. Is not this then marvelous
and fearful, that a man may go thus far, and yet be a castaway, and a
forlorn wretch? It is not a thing to be wondered at when the holy scriptures
give sentence against those traitorous villains which set themselves against
God, and tread down his laws: but when God utters this sharp sentence against
this zealous kind of men, if it cause us not to wonder, yet it may make us to
tremble, when we see y^ a man may proceed thus far in religion and yet be
damned. When we understand yt a man may be zealous, and ready to hear
preaching, understands, carries away, lets it grow in his heart, has some
joy in it, and yet never the better, abiding still under the curse. But there
be some which will object against me and say, this is no good manner of
teaching, for ye use of true teaching is to build up and edify ye faith: but
this seems to take away the certeintie of faith from al, so that no man can
tell whether he shall be saved: For by what means can a man make a better
trial and proof of his faith then this, that he gives ear to Gods word,
understands it, carries it away, and ioyeth in it? If such a man may be
damned, who may not despair? I auni^were with S. Paul. 1. Cor. 10. 12. He
that thinks he stands, let him take heed he do not fall. If y^ admonition
were necessary to the Corinthes, it is necessary for us al One of the
principal ends and uses of preaching, is to give men warning yt they do not
deceive themselves with every kind of faith or joy in the word: but to look
for good and sound trial in themselves: which is not the way to bring men to
despair, but to bring them to true godliness: to cause them to shake of
security and looseness in the service of God: to beware least their hearts
be hard still within: it causes men to try themselves least they should be
deceived by a vain shadow of a dead and fruitless faith: for Christ says, yt
these believe (for so it is expressed by S. Luke the 8. 13.) and joy in the
word, and yet are damned. Then let us come to the particular applieng of this
point: to see how we are to deal with our selves. When ye receive ye word
take heed yt ye give it depth of earth enough, look that your heart be not
soft and pliable enough a little above, and a hard rock of stone within, but
see yt it be dug and softened to the bottom, yt the word may take root
deep enough. Alas, what a miserable thing is it, when Christ has given us
warning here so plainly, for a man to be a zealous Gospeller, not only
willing to hear, but has an earnest desire, and trauelfeth to hear, takes
pleasure and delight when he hears, yet nevertheless, because he takes no
heed thereto, his heart within is so stony, yt he hears but to his further
increse of damnation. Many think it goes well with the^, when as they receive
this testimony from men: he is a sound Protestant, he favors and delights
in ye truth, these indeed be great tokens of y^ fear of god, but yet we are
not to rest in the^: our chief dealing is between God and our heart: and that
in this thing whether our heart be not hard and rockie. Those are a thousand
times happy, which feel melting hearts and soft affections, so that Gods word
does pearse into them, and causes them to tremble at the majesty and power of
the same: their tender heart does sigh and mourn for their iniquity. As on ye
contrary part, they which make no conscience of sin, but are hardened in
their affections, although they seem to be in good case, yet are they cursed
and miserable. Let every man therefore that goes from the Sermon, carry this
with him: I hear by Christ's own words yt there is a stony ground where the
seed falls: where it grows but not deep enough, it springs up but does
not bring forth fruit, this is a woeful case, if I should be in ye number of
these, for then all my labor is lost, which I bestow in frequenting Sermons,
yea, it were much better yt I had never heard: I feel that I joy in it, I
would not for any thing but I had heard it: but Christ says that the
reprobate, some of them do hear the word with joy, so that if I look not
narrowly to mine own heart, I may for all this be damned: therefore I must not
satisfy my self with this, but see that I cover the word deep enough, that
my heart be softened in such sort, that I feel the root goes deep, yea, so
deep, that it can never be rooted out: And therefore let him continually cry
unto God and say: O Lord make soft my hard and stony heart: let it be a
melting heart, that thy holy word may grow in it for ever. I would to GOD,
this doctrine of our Savior Christ, might make every of us to tremble and
shake (as indeed if it were well weighed, it is so fearful, that it might
cause the hair of our heads to stand up) for then would we not so loosely and
securely walk in the hardness of our hearts: there would not be so many
backsliders in time of persecution: there would not be so many brave boasters
and praters of Religion, who are ready to pull in their horns, and to kide
their heads, so soon as there is any fear of danger, or lykelyhoode of
persecution: neither would men bear themselves in hand that they ^e jolly
Professors, when they have but a little tasted of the word, and are no more but
empty barrels, which give a great sound. Here then we be set a work with
great toil, to have this same hard stonye ground made soft, and fit to
receive this heavenly seed. And he which is not careful in this point, to
take pains, ye shall see him wax so hard, that even as a continual rain
dropping upon a Rock of stone makes it never the softer, so nothing can make
his heart to relent. This may teach us then to cease maruelling, when we see so
many which willingly give themselves to be taught, and have still little
remorre of sin. The Lord for his mercy sake make us wise and sharp sighted
to judge of our selves: not to be lead on forward in a carnal profession,
but to give credit to our heavenly teacher, who has here opened his holy
mouth to instruct us so plainlye, and before hand to warn us of the great
danger: that we may stir up our selves, and de quickened in our dull spirits,
with all humble submission, and boowing down our necks, to receive the
doctrine of our Lord, and to open our hearts in such sort that he may dig
in them, and thrust in his spade to the bottom. For otherwise, it cannot go
well with us. If this were practiced among us, we should not have so many old
rustie Protestants: which if a man talk with them from morning to night, they
are able to continue speech in reciting stories and places of Scripture, and
will utter matter against the doctrine of the Pope: but let a man urge them
with the doctrine of regeneration, and stand upon the necessity of sincere
repentance, showing them that they must be truly humbled under the burden of
their sins, that they must mortify and subdue their carnal lusts: this is
to hard a crust for their old teeth. This matter does mar all: this does
rob them of their glory: and therefore they cannot willynglye abide* to
hear of it. Let us come now to the third kind of ground, which receives the
seed among the thorns: here is depth enough of earth: so yt as the second sort
of hearers seemed to go far beyond the first, so these seem to go far
beyond them, and to come nigher to eternal life, for here the word does grow
and has root so deep, that it springs forth so far, that Christ says
it grows up, and the thorns grow up with it, the stalk does shoot forth
the ear, and lacks but riping. For this may be proved by Saint Luke, who
says that they be not (Telesphorountes) that is, such as bear ripe and timely
fruit: for these professors do many good works, and seem to bring forth the
fruits of the Gospel: and that in such wise that men cannot always discern
them, but think their deeds to be notable: but Christ Jesus does show that
their works before God, (who only cannot be deceived) are as Corn which
lacks riping, which being ouershadowed with bushes, withers in the ear
and comes to naught: this is a dangerous case if we look not to it: That a
man may hear the Gospel preached, carry it away, be moved thereby to do
many good works: and yet be damned. He is a thousand fold mad therefore,
which does not look to himself in this point: to try what soundness there
is in the fruits of his faith, and how sincerely he does embrace Gods word. As
before I said, that some would object and say, this will destroy the faith, so
am I sure that here it will be said much more: because this seems to take
away the surest trial of faith: if a man may not by and by say, I have good
works, therefore I have the true and lively faith: I answer, that whosoever
has any good work in him, the same has the true faith, which has brought
forth that good work, because it is impossible without faith to do any good
thing, or to have any good motion or intent: but withal I say, that it is one
thing to seem good before men, and another thing for to be good indeed before
God. In outward appearaunce, there is little difference between the good
deeds of them which fear God sincerely, and the untimely fruit of worldlyngs:
but God whose eye does not look upon the outward show, but the inward
affection, sees which proceeds of faith, and which does proceed of vain
glory, or some other sinister respect, and puts as great difference
between them, as he did between the sacrifices of Cayn and Abel. We must take
heed then, yt the fruits of our faith be ripe and timely, otherwise they be
good but in show. We must come then to see first what these thorns are: in S.
Matthew they are called, the cares of this world and the deceitfulnes of riches:
in Saint Luke: the cares of riches, and pleasures of this life. And in very
deed, these thorns do grow together. For were it not for the pleasures of
this life, there would be no cares of riches: he which does seek greedelye for
wealth, it is either because he would be able to have wherewithal to fill the
lusts of y^ flesh, and to pamper his body delicately: or else to set forth
himself in pride, and to clyme ambitiously to honor. For so long as a man
does take pleasure in any of these, so long he is covetous and raketh together
so much, that as the common saying is, he raketh up the Devil and all. What
must we do then? Our hearts are as a ground that is rank, and brings
forth many weeds: we are set a work as God speaks by his Prophet Jeremy.
chap. 4. 4. Plow up your falow, and sow not among ye thorns: we must put all
diligence and care yt our hearts may be rid of such noisome weeds as will choke
ye word of God, and make that it shall not bring forth fruit in us. So long as
we suffer any of these in us, either to love dainty and delycate feeding of
our flesh, and to fill our selves with ye lusts thereof, or to be gallant in ye
eyes of men, and hautely to lift up our selves in our vainglorious minds, and
for ye maintenance of these delights bend our care to ye world: so long shall
we be unprofitable scholars in ye school of Christ. Alas poor men which would
feign come to God, and yet are glewd to ye world, they offer one hand to
Christ, and the other to ye devil: they can talk of ye spirit, and yet are led
by ye flesh: ye gospel is in their mouth, and covetousness lodges in their
hearts: their works glister and are green before men, and are withered before
God: they seem to be faithful and are faithles, to be heirs of glory, and
yet are the children of co^fusio^. There are great ple^tie of these herers, and
specialy in such places, where there is wealth and honors: how many fall away
cheked with the world? And yet we are not afraid of our selves to take heed
that we stand fast. A great mercy of God it is that we have not only the
doctrine laid before us, but also fearful examples: so that we may buy our
wit with other men's cost. For when we see the world with delights and
pleasures, with conetousnesse and ambition, to carry away those which profess
the Gospel, is not our own matter in hand, are not we made of the same
metal they are, does not the world assault us as it does them? Yes, and we
shall be overcome also, if the Lord have not mercy upon us. The hardness of
this work, ought not to discorage or make us slack, but hearing what Christ
says, whom we ought to believe, the more hard, the more we are to stir up
our selves, unless we make small reckoning of the salvation of our souls. He
yt shall yield and give over the digging up of these thorns, because he
perceives they grow deep in his heart, and spring as fast as he can cut them:
is not worthy to enter into life: be which will not continually till and weed
this ground, may well have the Gospel in some sort for to grow in him, but
not to save him. Deerly beloved we must be surely persuaded of this, that as
there be many godly men, so have they atteined it with great labor and toil,
yea, they are still set a work and cannot come to an end, because these
thorns cannot be utterly ro^ted out.

Those are greatly ouerseene which think it to be an easy thing to profess
Christ unto salvation: and make no further account but to be Gospellers, at
ease: if they can vanquish in disputation, to think they have won the field:
no, no, they have a heart which is hard to overcome: they have thorns which
will not easily be destroyed: here lies ye victory and getting of the spurs:
this man shall be crowned because he has willingly given up himself to the
power of Gods grace to purge his heart, and to make room for the holy word,
that it may grow there alone, and not be ouershadowed and choked. Now let us
mark well that which is said here, both of the stony and also of the
thornie ground, how far they proceed in professing Christ, and embracing his
Gospel: and we shall plainly see, how greatly those carnal Gospellers which
will not have faith to be tried by the fruits, are deceived: Faith, faith, (say
they) is that which does justify, it is true indeed, but not a fruitless
faith: whosoever believes shall be saved: it is even so, but not after every
kind of belief: for then why should not these two sorts of herers be saved,
it is marvelous when the Scripture is so evident, and our savior Christ
speaks so plainly, that this gross and doltish error should possess the
minds of so many. But indeed it is a sweet doctrine, when a man may let loose
the raines to all the lusts of the slesh, at the least thus far, not to vere
and torment himself in subduing them, and yet by faith to be saved. When
heaven and hell meet together, and God and the devil be reconciled, then shall
these fleshly Epicures, and vain proud men come to their happiness. When
Christ shall deny that which he has here uttered, then shall these be true
believers.

Let men therefore take heed that they be not deceived, nor made slack in
looking to the fruits of their faith and mortification of vain fleshly lusts,
through ye profane prattling of such worldly belly Gods: believe not them, but
believe Jesus Christ, who tells you that it is not enough to hear the word,
and to receive it with joy, and to let it grow in us, unless it bring forth
reasonable and timelye fruit in us.

Again, let us mark how strong and invincible an Argument may be gathered out
of this text against all contemners and despisers of the word, such as care not
for hearing: these three sorts of hearers, are before the^, and nearer to
christianity then they, and yet come short: therefore it must needs follow,
that such ignorant Atheists, as neither know, nor desire to know any thing
above this world, are very far from God, although they would seem with their
mouth and lips to draw near unto him. For if this matter were well observed,
men would not regard nor have those men in estimation to be good and honest,
who are very dogs or swine, not regarding ye precious pearl of the Gospel, but
ready to bark and bite at those which bring it. Let a man inquire thus, not of a
few, but of ye greatest part of men, how say ye to such a man, what think ye
of him? he is (say they) a very good man, a good natured man, a gentle person
trusty to his friend, sure of his word, and does keep as good an house as
any man of his calling in all this shire. But how is he affected unto Gods
word: is he zealous in religion? Nay surely, I did never hear yt he did deal
y^ way, he is a very quiet man, no medler at al. O notable honest man, as
devout in ye laws of God as the horse which he rides upon, as careful to have
gods glory advanced, as the swine in the ^^ie, a great deal behind these
unprofitable hearers, which are ^^^^^ ways: and yet forsooth being very bruit
beasts before God (in ye state they be in, yet unless ye Lord call them to be
zealous of his glory) they must be reputed for the best men. Our fields are
full of such Cattle as these, and if the Lord do not put too his helping hand;
our case is very miserable. If any of those which were so zealous to hear,
that they would to their hinderaunce in worldly matters leave off their
business, and follow preaching, as these which flocked to hear Christ, were
yet nevertheless relected, because they did not so sincerely as they should:
what shall we say of those which will not step out at their doors, even when they
have nothing to do, unless it be to sit at cards or tables. If such a man may
be damned, as is moved with some delight, when he hears the word preached:
What shall we judge of those wooden blocks and sottish men, who feel no more
joy in it then a post, when it is uttered unto them? If there be some go to
destruction, which conform themselves and have a show of fruit by the word:
where shall those wretches appear, whom the holy word of God cannot move one
whit, to reform their disordered and beastly behauiours. I need not stand to
mueigh out of this place against those helhounds, which dare open their mouths
to reproach and slander the setting forth of the Gospel. The Lord diminish the
number of them.

The last kind of ground, are the good hearers, which do not only receive the
seed, but also bring forth the fruits there of. Although not every one a like
or in the same measure, for some bring forth an hundredth fold, some sixty
fold, some thirty fold, according to the measure of Gods graces in them.

Although here be great ods in bringing forth the fruits, yet they be all
accepted and accounted for good ground, true Christians, and sincere
professors of godliness: now as we be taught here that it is required of all
to be doers, as S. James says, and not hearers only cha. 1. ver. 22. so are we
also taught, not to despise or rashly to condemn those, which do not bring
forth so great a measure of fruit as others do: True it is, as Christ says,
herein is my father glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit. John. 15. 8.
But it is also as true which he says in the second verse of the same chapter,
Every branch that brings forth fruit, he purges, that it may bring forth
more fruit. Then to bring forth most, is most of all to be desired, that God
may have the greatest glory: to bring forth the least is not to be contemned,
because the Lord in time does purge the^, and make them more fruitful. I need
not to stand here for to handle many things, or to make large exposition, the
matter is exceeding plain, there is no more but this, that all our care in
hearing and professing the Gospel, be to receive it into good ground, and to
bring forth the fruits thereof. What should I stand to rip up the shameful
abuse in the contrary, to utter how many evil fruits there be in many which
are Gospellers. This should be but as it were to light a candle in the clear
Sun shine, for all men do see them. I do not speak this, as though it should
not be good to cry out against them: but because the former things which I
have now uttered, do fully disclose them. And therefore I will here end,
desiring the Lord to write these things in our hearts, which we have heard with
our outward ears, and to make us good ground, to receive the heavenly seed,
and to bring forth fruits of the same, that glorifieng him in this world, we
may be glorified of him in the world to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

FINIS.

