A Cathechisme containing the sum of Christian Religion, giving a most
excellent light to all those that seek to enter the pathway to salvation:
Newly set forth by G. G. Preacher of Gods word at Malden in Essex.

Psalm. 19.8. The Statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoice the heart: the
commandment of the Lord is pure and gives light unto the eyes. Imprinted at
London at the three Cranes in the Vintree by Thomas Dawson. 1583.

decorative compartment of Thomas Dawson, featuring his initials (not in
McKerrow) T D



To the Reader.
I Know right well, that many men of good judgment in the truth are of this
mind, that they would have but one, or as few catechismes as might be: and in
as brief and few words, as with any light the necessary points of doctrine
may be comprised. Wherefore I cannot escape some blame, not only for setting
forth this of mine after so many: but also for being so large. I should be of
the same mind, were it not that our Church does consist of diverse sorts of
men: and that I have learned by experience, that the multitude of Catechismes
does not hinder, but bring furtherance unto the better sort. If all were as
the Prophet says, as Infantes new weaned from the breast, yt in teaching
there must be line unto line, precept unto precept, a little here, a little
there: then I confess, that some one brief form were best. If to rest in the
words or sentences, when a man can repeat them, were so sure a way, as to
search into the matter it self, which is better, and with more judgment
attained unto by many, then by one: I should also think it best. Finally, if
all needful points were handled in any one, then might it seem a vain
travel, and lost labor. This therefore being my purpose to write of some
things which are not handled in the rest, I hold my self satisfied, If not to
profit all, yet to be a furtheraunce unto some. I crave no more but this of
him, whom it cannot further: that he will give it gentle passage to such as it
is sent.

George Gyffard.

A short Catechism, containing the Sum of Christian Religion.
Question. ARe there any greater matters for men to be busied about, then the
affairs and state of this life?

A. There be far greater things to be looked unto, then these which be
present. For the things which are seen, be temporal, but those which are
not seen, be eternal. 2. Cor. 4.18
.

Q. Ought not the care and diligence then for things eternal, to be doubled
and multiplied so far above the care for things temporal, as the things
themselves do exceed each other?

A. I hold him a very sotte which will deny that point. For common reason
does teach that diligence and care is to be measured in proportion, to be
aunsweareable unto the waightinesse of the affairs.

Q. Declare this more plainly: and in particulers.

A. Look how much the endless damnation of hell is more miserable then
poverty, or sickness, or dangers of life: so much more wary and slye ought
men to be for falling into that, then into these Mat. 10.28.
: On the other side, the glory of the world to come, and the treasures of
heaven, are as far to be preferred in the care and desire of the mind, as
they excel the riches of the earth Mat. 6.33. John. 6.27.
.

Q. Our travel and industry does help us unto such things as we need
here: but heaven, and heavenly things are far above our reach: we must
commit them to God.

A. So say the earth worms, whose eyes are daubed up with clay, that they
cannot see. But the truth is that our travel for worldly things is in vain,
unless God bless it Psalm. 127.1
: And likewise, although it be in Gods hand alone to lead us in the way to
heaven, yet we are earnestly called upon to seek it Mat. 7.13. Luke. 13.24.
.

Q. Where are we to seek?

A. In the holy Scriptures: they are given by inspiration from God to teach
us, and to be the light to guide us in the way Psalm. 119.106. 2. Tim. 3.16.
. They are able to save our souls Iam. 1.21.
: for in the^ God has so perfectly revealed his will that there is no want 2.
Tim. 3.17.
. He does instruct us how to believe, how to repent and obey him, and how to
call upon him.

Q. Have we the sum of these drawn into few words?

A. We have the brief sum of these.

Q. Where have we the sum of the doctrine of faith?

A. In the articles of our belief. For there are gathered together the
principal points of the Gospel.

Q. Into how many parts do ye divide the articles?

A. We may divide them into four parts: first of God the father, the second,
of God ye son, the third of God the holy Ghost: the last, concerning the
Church, and the benefits bestowed thereon.

Q. Ye do acknowledge God the father, God the son, and God the holy Ghost.
Are there more then one God?

A. Holy scripture does teach, that there is but one God 1. Cor. 8.6. Deuteronomy.
4.32.39
.

Q. Wherefore do ye then acknowledge three?

A. I do ackowledge three persons in the Godhead: and every person to be God,
and yet but one God.

Q. Does the word teach that Christ is God?

A. It does in sundry places most plainlye affirm that Jesus Christ is God
John. 1.1. and 20.28. Romans 9.5. 1. Tim. 3.16.
.

Q. How can ye prove that the holy Ghost is GOD: seeing the Scriptures do not
so manifestlye name him God?

A. Although the Scriptures do not so manifestly speak as to say, the holy
ghost is God: yet by collection it may be proved that they call him God. Act.
5.3.4.
Moreover, the holy Scriptures do ascribe unto him those things which belong
unto none but God. He searches the deep things of God 1. Cor. 2.^0.
. He does distribute all heavenly gifts where it pleases him 1. Cor. 12.11.
. He did send forth the Apostles, and appoint them their work Act. 13.2.
: the sin committed against him, shall never be pardoned mat. 12.31.
.

Q. There is but one God, and every one of these is that one God. Do ye
affirm the^, that the Father is the son, or the son the holy Ghost?

A. I do not affirm that the father is ye son, or the son the holy Ghost,
for that is a damnable error, which the holy scriptures do condemn, by
teaching the distinction of persons.

Q. Are the three persons distinguished the one from the other by the word of
God?

A. The Scripture does so distinguishe them, that it calls the^ three. There
be three which bear record in heaven, the father, the word, and the holy
Ghost Ioh. 5.7.
we are baptized in the name of the father, the son, and the holy Ghost Mat.
28.
: It is said of Christ, the word was with God, and the word was God Ioh. 1.1.
, and when he was in the shape of God, he thought it no robbery to be equal
with God Phil. 2.6.
. The holy Ghost does proceed from the father and the son Ioh. 15.26
.

Q. Proceed unto the words of the articles: which is the first part?

A. I believe in God the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth.

Q. In what sense is here mention of the almightye power of GOD: and that he
is the maker of Heaven and earth?

A. This is expressed to show that our faith is in the true God. For the Gods
that made not heaven and earth, shall perish from under heaven Ier, 10.1^
, and this God is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ Ephe. 1.3.
.

Q. The builder must have stuff or else he can set up no frame. Of what stuff
did God make heaven and earth?

A. He made them of nothing Heb. 11.3.
For he only was without beginning and of himself: and herein God does most
wonderfully excel al creatures, which are not able to make so much as an hair
of nothing.

Q. When God had created al other creatures, then it is said that he made
man. Whereof made he him?

A. He made the body of man of clay, or as Moses says, Of the dust of the
earth, Genesis 2.7
Of the soul it is said, God breathed in his face the breath of life Gene.
2.7.
.

Q. It is said that God made man in his own likeness Genesis 1.26.
. What means that?

A. It is not meant that there was any resemblance of proportion or shape: for
so nether the body nor soul of man was the image or likeness of God. But in
gifts and qualities of the body and mind, he did resemble God, and therein
he did far excel all the creatures here below, in dignity and
happiness, for none of them were like God.

Q. What are those qualities and gifts in which he did resemble God?

A. A pure and clear understanding in the knowledge of God Col. 3.100.
, true holiness, and rightteousnesse Ephe. 4.24
: for the law of God was written in his heart, as in a pure book, and he did
perfectly both understand it and keep it.

Q. How is it to be proved that he had the law which we now have?

A. It is manifest by the knowledge of the law which is naturally in the
hearts of all his children, which we call the law of nature: for the Gentiles
which showed (as the Apostle calls it) the work of the law written in their
hearts Romans 2. e
: had never the law written, but that which was in them, was from Adam.

Q. Ye do affirm the^ that God created all things good. Show how men became
sinners?

A. It could not be otherwise, for how could evil come from him which is
goodness it self: or darkness out of ye most pure light: again how should God
be an enemy unto evil, to hate and punish it, if he had brought it forth. But
our first parents sinned and fell from God, and by that means we are al become
sinners.

Q. By what means did they fall from the dignity of their creation?

A. The Devil in the Serpent did seduce the woman, persuading her that their
estate should be bettered by eating of the fruit forbidden: she entised the
man and so they sinned Genesis 3.
.

Q. Were the Devils which brought sin into the world, created by God?

A. God created them, yet he created the^ not devils but holy Angels.

Q. When were they created, and how fell they?

A. For the time of their creation it is not to be doubted, but they were
created when the other creatures were: because it is said that in six days
GOD made heaven and earth, the Sea, and all that in them is Exodus 20.
. For the manner of their fall, we are to be curious no further then the
Scriptures do teach. It is said that God spared not the Angels that sinned,
but cast them down into (...): it is also said they kept not their first
habitations. 2. Pet. 2.4. Jude uer. 6.


Q. What moved the Devils to seek the destruction of man?

A. Malice and hatred both against God and man. For seeing they were cast down
into misery from a blessed estate, and no hope of recovery left, they did
burn in fury against God, and sought to deface his glory. Also they did
envy the happy estate of man, and sought his decay.

Q. How long was it after the creation that this fall was?

A. It is not expressed in the scriptures, how long it was after the creation.
But it is to be thought that they stood a very few days: because there be
great reasons for that, and none to the contrary.

Q. Show some one reason to prove it?

A. The ignorance of the woman in the state of the beasts; that she did not
perceive the Serpents tongue to have a further skill then his own: does show
a small time of conversation. Also there was no generation between the man and
the woman before the fall.

Q. When ye confess that GOD made heaven and earth, do ye therein also mean
that he does govern both in heaven and earth.

A. That is most certain, for he that made all, does govern all. He did not
only show his power in making all things: but also he does exercise the same
in governing and preserving the^ Heb. 1.
. And this is the providence of God, which leaves no place unto fortune or
chance, no not in the smallest things: as the hairs of a man's head, or
falling of a sparow upon the ground Mat. 10.
.

Q. If ye take it, that this providence of God should extend it self, so far as
unto all motions and actions whatsoever: then what say ye to all the evil and
wicked deeds which are wrought by the devils and by wicked men: is there any
further providence of God then a sufferaunce?

A. There is more then sufferance, for our God is in heaven, and does
whatsoever he will Psalm. 115.
: there is nothing done against his will: and his power providence and will go
together.

Q. This seems to charge God to be the author of evil, which is a most
horrible blasphemy: For no evil can come from the Almighty.

A. It may seem so to those, which be of weak understanding, but in truth
the matter is not so. For although the providence, power and will of God, are
joined in those actions which are most sinful, yet God is clear from al
blame: The actions of themselves, as they come from God, are good: the sin
which is in them, is to be laid upon the instruments which God does use, as
the devils and wicked men.

Q This then is the sum of your answer, that in the self same actions God
works, the devil and the wicked work, whom he uses as his instruments: and
that the action as it is Gods, is holy, and good, as it is theirs, it is sinful
and wicked. Show this by some examples out of the scripturs?

A. The scriptures are plentiful in this point: but a few examples may suffice
in this behalf. Joseph was sold into Egypt by a wicked hatred of his
brethren Genesis 37.28
, and yet the holy Ghost says God sent him thither Psa. 105.17
: and he says to his brethren, you meant evil against me, but God meant it
for good Gene. 50.
God in a righteous judgment, to punish David for his murder and adultery,
threatened to raise up the sword in David's house, and also, that he would take
David's wives, and give the^ to his neighbors: He adds, thou did this
secretly, but I will do it openly, in the sight of Israel, and in the sight of
the sun 2. Sam. 12 9.10.11.12.
. All this was good, as God did it, but most abominable in Absolon and
Achitophell, which were the instruments. God appointed his son Jesus Christ to
be crucified, a most glorious work of God: The heigh priests, with Pilate did
nothing but that which was the determinate counsel of God Act. 4.28.
, and yet they did commit a most horrible sin: and are justly damned for it.

Q. All the doubt is not yet taken away, for when we affirm that the will of
God is executed by those wicked instruments in such actions as he has in his
law, (which is his express will) flatly forbidden, it may seem that he should
have a double will, one secret, and another revealed, which is a thing far
disagreeing from the nature of God.

A. That it seems there should be two wills in God because of this, it is to
be ascribed to the weakness and imperfection of our understanding, for look
how a daselled and disturbed eye sight, does suppose, there be two candles
when there is but one: even so fares our mind when it looks upon the will
of God.

Q. Ye conclude then, that not only the motions of things without life, or
without understanding, are guided by God as storms, tempests, and sicknesses,
wars, and famines, but also the actions of the devil and all the wicked, are
measured and directed by his providence, to proceed so far as he does
appoint.

A. Or else it were wide with us: for how evil were our case, if the Devils
could go any further then God lets out the chain in which he has tied
them: or the wicked could put in practice any more, then he does let loose the
bridle with which he does restrain them.

Q. The common opinion is, that the devil does raise up great winds with
tempests and thunders.

A. It is the common opinion, but is contrary unto the faith, which we must
have in Gods providence and government, and the Devil does deal craftily in
the matter. For to the end that he would make men believe that he does bear
a great stroke, when the Lord does send any strange and wonderful tempest,
he does conueye himself into it, and come with it, that so they may think it
is his.

Q. Proceed unto the second part of our belief, and first what is the sum
of it in general?

A. The sum of it in general is, how our Lord Jesus Christ has redeemed us
from destruction, and brought us home again to God.

Q. We cannot perceive how great and wonderful this grace of redemption is,
until we know the greeuousnes of our fall and decay.

A. By the fall and disobedience of our first parents, we were al utterly cast
away. For we have not only lost the glory and happiness of our first
creation: but also we are become by nature the children of wrath Ephe. 2.3
, which is no less then to be the very children of hell and destruction. Q.
Was the decay so great, that there was no help at al left in us?

A. It was an utter downfall, and a perfect breach: For although there remained
some little sparks of light, as it were some little pieces of a sumptuous buylding
pulled down, should be found in ye dust: yet the same are no further
available, then to make men void of al excuse Romans 10.1
. Q. Then ye affirm that it is not in the power of man to recover him self
out of this misery?

A. I do not only affirm that, but also that man is not able so much as to
help to recover himself: nor once to move toward it.

Q. That seems much, seeing ye confess, that in the decayed estate of man,
there remain some sparks of light, and of excellent gifts.

A. I confess so much: but yet those do not avail so far as to give him any
help to recover, or any motion: but he does so choke and pervert this light, yt
it thrusts him further from God, because it lifts him up in pride: and this
is the cause why the scripture does set forth the inwardes of man, which seem
most gay, to be so corrupt, that it does not afford him a good thought Genesis
6.5.
. When all the thoughts of his heart are only evil from his youth, how could
he have any motion to help himself? Q. This point is hard to perswad some men
in: and therefore needs a more manifest declaration and proof.

A. To set forth the depth of our misery, ye scripture does not only affirm,
that we are dead in our sins, but also shut up and enclosed under the
dominion of the prince of darkness Ephe. 2.12 Romans 11.32. Gal. 3.22.
. We are then far from any motion of life, not only because we are dead, and
dead men can not stir, but also yt we are holde^ under by ye power of the
devil. For this cause ye holy scripture says, no man can enter into ye
kingdom of God, except he be borne again John. 3.3.
. Likewise it affirms a new creation 1. Cor. 5.1^
, and that we must be raised from the dead Col. 3.1.
. None of these speeches could be used, if there had been any thing at al to
help, left in man.

Q. How may this be said of the soul which never dies?

A. In respect of the true life, which is called the life of God Ephesians. 4.18.
, the soul is dead, being separated from God. The soul by nature has still a
kind of life in it: as the devils and damned, shall live for ever, but their
life is no more but a continual death, a man has no life in him until he be
partaker of the spirit of life.

Q. You seem to make the work of God in bringing men to salvation, to be
even as a Carpenter works upon a block.

A. Not so, for men differ from blocks because they have reason, will and
affections, which God frames, for they be all against God, until he frame
them: so they feel the work of God, and are moved to put to their consent and
endeavor.

Q. Now ye have set forth the fall and decay, show the recovery?

A. The recovery is only by our Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. All were cast away in Adam, shall all be saved by Christ?

A. All that believe in him shall be saved, Ioh. 3.15.
, those which do not believe in him are already condemned, because they
believe not ye testimony which God gives of his son John 3.18.
.

Q. What do the names signify in our tongue?

A. Jesus is a Savior, and Christ is anointed. For he alone does save us
from our sins, and he is our anointed king, Prophet and Priest.

Q. Is every one which confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, of
god?

A. Every one which does rightly confess him, is of God. And S. John says,
that every spirit which confesses, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is
of God 1. John. 4.2
.

Q. Then it does seem, that every man which does believe, that Jesus is
Christ, is of God, and shall be saved.

A. This needs exposition: where S. John says, that every spirit which
confesses, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, it is the doctrine, which
he calls the spirit, and not the men: for that doctrine which does set forth
Christ is of god, although ye man which utters it should be a reprobate. And
where he speaks of the men, and says, that every one which believes, that
Jesus is the Christ, is borne of God 1. John. 5.1.
: He speaks of a far other thing, then a bare opinion.

Q. Do ye then confess, that the doctrine of the Papists is of God, for
they confess Jesus Christ?

A. So far as the doctrine of the Papists, or any other do confess Jesus
Christ, so far it is of God. But the matter does not consist in the bare
titles or names: for if a man deny any thing, either in the person or
office of Christ, he denies Christ. For it is but a vain thing to confess
in words, and to deny the effect and truth of the matter. And therefore
besides others, the Papists also, as most wicked and rank Heretics do
deny Christ.

Q Sehw how both others and they deny Christ?

A. Some, as concerning his person have denied him to be GOD, and some have
denied him to be manne. The Papists confessing the truth in these, have yet
committed sacrilege, and spoiled him in his office. For he being our great
Prophet which has perfectly revealed the will of his Father Heb. 1.1
: yet they take authority over his word, and say it depends upon the^. They
chaleng power to disanull what they will, and to make laws, which they say,
are of as high authority as his. He is our Lord and king, which has power to
save and destroy: they ascribe the same to the Pope. He is our Priest, which
offered him self a Sacrifice to God, to cleanse our sins, and is our only
Mediator to make intercession for us. They spoil him of all this, when they
ascribe the purginge of sins to the blood of Martyrs, and to other things.
Also when we are bid to come boldly unto the throne of grace, because he is
there our high Priest, they pray to Saints and Angels, and so deny him to be
a merciful high Priest.

Q. Then you confess Jesus Christ our Lord the only son of God, to be the
whole and perfect savior. Is it then of necessity, that we confess him to
be both God and man?

A. If he were not God, he could not have been able to save us: If he were
not man, we could not come nigh him, to lay hold of life. For eternal life
by the Godhead is in the Manhood of Christ: and from the manhood of Christ it
is conueighed into us.

Q. Why is it mentioned, that he was conceived by the holy ghost?

A. This is to show, that he was brought forth a pure man without sin. For
although the Virgin Marye was a sinner, yet he took flesh of her, without al
spotte or infection of sin: Not being begotten of her by the natural
generation: but conceived by the holy Ghost, who from the very moment of her
conception, did sanctify his humane nature.

Q. Was it requisite that he should be without sin?

A. How could the most glorious godhead be cupled with sinful flesh, to
make one person? How could a sinner be accepted to make the atonement, and
to be the sacrifice to purge sin? Fynallye, how could he be the sanctifier
of others: Heb. 2, 11. and 10.9.10.
unless he had been most pure and holy? For all the whole lump of
manne-kynde beeinge wholye infected and defiled with sin, he took one
portion thereof, and did perfectlye sanctify it, and out of it does conueye
and spread perfect holiness, upon his whole Church.

Q. Did Christ then take our flesh?

A. He took our flesh, or else we are never the near. The holy Ghost
says, he took not the Aungelles, but he took the seed of Abraham Heb.
2.16
. He was made of the seed of David, according to the flesh.

Q. What say ye then unto those, which hold, that Christ did but pass
through the Virgin Marye, and not take flesh of her, but brought his flesh from
heaven?

A. Those are mad beasts, which do root up the whole faith, and take away
all our comfort, and deny the flat testimonies of Scriptures, which
affirm, that he was made of a Woman Gala. 4.4.
, and that he was the seed of the Woman Gene. 3.15.
: and therefore he was called the Son of man. Mat. 17.22. and 20.18.


Q. How do ye answer unto those Scriptures, by which they would prove
this error? which are these and such like: no man ascends into heaven, but
he which came down from heaven, even the Son of man, which is in heaven
John. 3.13
. Also saint Paul says, the first man is of the earth, earthly, the second
man, is of the Lord from heaven, heavenly 1. Co. 15.4^
.

A. These places must so be taken, that they deny not that which is most
flatly and manifestly expressed in the Scriptures, before noted: but we must
acknowledge such a sense in them, as agrees with the other.

It is not the purpose therefore and meaning of the holy Ghost, to teach that
Christ brought his manhood from heaven, when he says the second man from
heaven, or the Son of man came down from heaven: but beccause Christ God
and Man is but one, he ascribes that to the Manhood, which did belong to
the Godhead. Which appears most plainelye in this, that although in the
Manhood he was at that time only in earth: yet he said the son of Man,
which is in heaven, because in his godhead he was there.

Q. Had Christ both the body and soul of man together with his divine
nature? or was only the body cupled to the Godhead?

A. He was a perfect man, both with soul and body: he suffered in both,
beeinge to redeem our souls and bodies. And for this cause he said, My soul
is heavy unto death Mat. 26.38
.

Q. Was the Godhead of Christ turned into man, or the manhood into God?

A. No, in no wise: for the Godhead did retain still the properties of the
divine nature: and the Manhood did keep still the humane qualities. And yet
they are so joined together, that even as the body and soul do make but one
man, so God and man do make but one Christ. And for this it is said, the word
was made flesh John. 1.14
.

Q. Then ye believe that the manhood did retain this nature still, to be
passible, or to feel the bytternesse of pain and grief. And likewise, that
the glorious Godhead remained still impassible, and not subject to any
suffering.

A. I do most constantly believe so: and they be detestable Heretics which
believe otherwise.

Q. Wherefore is it expressed, that he was borne of the Virgin Marye?

A. This is to show, that he is the true Messiah, which was promised of old:
which should come of the seed of David, of whose lynage Mary was Luke. 2.4
: and also should be borne of a Virgin: as ye Prophet says, behold a virgin
shall conceive, and shall bring forth a son Esai. 7.14.
.

Q. What follows next?

A. He suffered under Pontius Pilat: was crucified, dead and buried, descended
into hell.

Q. What is the sum of all this?

A. Here are contained all his suffringes, how far he did abase him self to
deliver us.

Q. What was the extremity and deapth of these sufferings?

A. It was even the whole burden which was to be laid upon us for our
sins. For in all this he set him self in our place.

Q. The holy Scriptures do teach, that the punishment for sin, besides all the miseries of this life, is everlasting torment in hell. Then if Christ
took our place, and bare that which we should have borne, he suffered the
pains of hell.

A. The holy scriptures do teach, that we should al be arraygned before the
high throne of God, and receive the sentence of condemnation, proceeding upon
us from the just judge. He submitted himself and was arraigned before the
judge Pilate: and although the Judge himself did pronounce him innocent, yet
he did pronounce upon him ye sentence of condemnation unto death. This
sentence of Pilat was ratified by God, in as much as nothing was done, but by
his determinate council Act. 2.23.
, and the execution followed from him, as if it had been from his own seat.
Also where the scriptures do teach, that Gods anger and curse, and the bitter
pains and torments of hell were due for our sins: they do also teach that
he took all these upon him. For under this condition he did offer himself
unto his father hanging upon the cross: yt with whatsoever the justice of his
father could charge us, he should charge him, and to strike him as deeply
with his wrath, as we were to be stricken.

Q. This is a great point of our faith, and therefore ye must confirm it by
manifest proof of the word?

A. The word of God does plentifully declare this matter: for it does affirm
that he bare our sins in his body upon the tree Pet. 1.2.2.
, to deliver us from the curse, he himself was made the curse Ga. 3.13.
. He was made sin for us, which knew no sin 2. Co. 5.21
.

Q. Is it a sufficient proof that he descended into hell, or did endure there
the torments of condemnation, when it is said he bare our sins, he was
made the curse, and that he was made sin?

A. It is a most sufficient and perfect proof thereof. For what is it to bear
sin but to bear the torment of it? What is it to be made sin, but to have
the giltinesse thereof put upon him, not to defile him, but to torment him?
What is it to be made the curse, but to have the bitter anguish of Gods wrath
in his soul and body: which is the fire that shall never be quenched.

Q. Is there any outward appearance given in the sufferinges of Christ,
whereby it is evident that he suffered condemnation?

A. There is most clear and evident appearance of this thing. First, in his
agony before he was apprehended, where there appears a most wonderful
horror, by the manner of his prayer, by his strong crying and tears, and by
his sweat which was as drops of blood. Who can be so simple as to think
that this could be in the son of God, for fear of the bodily death Luke.
22.44
, then when he did hang upon the cross, and cried out with a loud voice, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me Mat. 27.46.
. Shall we not see, that there was an unspeakable torment which caused him,
which had al fullness and perfection of faith, to cry out as a man condemned
and forsaken?

Q. Then ye affirm that our Lord Jesus Christ, did endure and suffer pains
and torments, which we are not able to conceive, nor to utter: seeing all the
sins of Gods elect were laid upon him and stricken in him: how could a man be
able to endure such a thing?

A. If he had been no more but a man, he could never have endured it,
although he had had the strength of all the angels in heaven. For how can a
creature stand under the burden of the wrath of the Almighty? But he was
also God, and so by that power he was sustained, and made able to hold out
until he had made full satisfaction, and so overcame it.

Q. You believe and confess that thus Christ is said to have descended into
hell, because he was in this state and condition: but ye do not believe that
his soul went down unto the place of the damned either to preach, or to fetch
out souls from thence?

A. I believe so far as the holy scriptures do teach: I renounce that fable
of heretics and Papists, which affirm that after his death he went to fetch
out souls, or to preach there: Because it is contrary to the doctrine of the
scriptures.

Q. What Scriptures do ye allege?

A. Moses and Elias did appear unto Christ in glory Mat. 17.3.4
before he suffered his passion, shall we suppose they were fetched out of
hell, and that they returned thither? Christ teaches that Lazarus died and
was carried by the Angels, not into hell, but into Abraham's bosom: where he was
in joy and comfort. Luke 16.22.23,
.

Q. They say this does confirm the matter, for Abraham's bosom was a border of
hell, which appears by the speech that passed between the rich glutton and
Abraham?

A. This Divinity of the Papists is as sound as can be found among the Poets.
How blind are they to make abraham's bosom and hell to be so nigh, as though
there were but an hedge between the^, when as it is expressed, that there was
so great distance, that those which would pass from the one to the other
could not: and to gather it by the conference of speech, is very gross, when
it is manifest that our Savior Christ does therein, but as it were borowe his
speeches from outward things in the world, to set forth unto us things
spiritual, not that the souls did speak one to another. For then it may as
well be gathered, that souls have eyes, tongues and fingers.

Q. If the speeches of Christ be but in parables, then ye can bring no
certain proof out of this place, that the souls of the godly before Christ
were in joy.

A. If all his speeches were in Parables we might say so. But that there is
hell and torments in it, where the rich man was, is no parable. Abraham the
father of the faithful, and the place of joy, and the souls carried thither
by the angels, are no Parables.

Q. But it seems by S. Peter that his soul went down into hell and preached
unto the souls there 1. Pe. 3.19.
?

A. They do wrest and abuse that place of Peter, when they would prove by it
that the soul of Christ went down into hell and preached there to the
souls, because he says, he suffered in ye flesh, but was quickened in the
spirit, in which he went and preached unto the spirits in prison. For this
spirit in which he went and preached; was not his soul but the Godhead,
which did quicken him, or raise him from the dead. For the words are, that he
went and preached in that spirit which did quicken him. It was not the soul
of Christ that did quicken and raise him to life. Further it is said, that he
went to the spirits which are in prison, which were disobedient in the time
of Noah. If he had gone down into hell, to what purpose should those few of
the damned be mentioned, which did live in the days of Noah, and not rather
all the whole multitude, and especially the godly? It is manifest therefore
that Christ in his eternal Godhead, did preach in Noah, unto spirits that are
now in prison, which were men living upon the earth, when they were preached
unto.

Q. How prove ye that the Apostle does call them spirits, because they were so
then, when he wrote, and not when they were preached unto?

A. It is plainly proved by the like speech of the same Apostle, when he
says, the Gospel was preached unto the dead 1. Pet. 4.6.
. It is most manifest that he calls them the dead, not because they were dead
when they were preached unto, but when he wrote. For can this be fulfilled in
dead men, when he says, it was, that they might be condemned according to men
in the flesh, but might live according to God in the spirit, are the dead
called to repentance?

Q. Is satisfaction of Christ, a full and perfect discharge for all sin, and
is it the only way to discharge us from it?

A. It is ye full and perfect discharge of all the sins which God will
pardon, and there is no other thing which is able to make satisfaction and to
discharge sin: and therefore the Papists deface the glory of Christ's death,
when they set up any thing with it, to be of that strength to take away, or to
have any part of this glory, when he is called the lamb of God, which takes
away the sins of the world John. 1.29
. They have so many things to take away sin, that by such time as all are
served, there remains little unto Christ.

Q. Do ye then account the papists heretics in this part of the articles of
our belieefe?

A. They are in this matter most detestable heretics.

Q. Shall all have pardon and remission of sins, which do acknowledge
Christ curcified?

A. All those shall have pardon and remission of sins which believe a right
in Christ crucified.

Q. What mean ye by believing aright in Christ crucified?

A. It is not enough to believe that by the offering of himself upon the
cross, he has satisfied the justice of God, and appeased his anger: unless
a man do so believe, that he be also crucified with him: for to believe in
Christ crucified, is to be crucified with him.

Q. Declare your meaning in this point?

A. Saint Paul says, that our old man is crucified with him, that ye body of
sin might be destroyed: that hence forth we should not serve sin, for he
that is dead is freed from sin Romans 6.6.7.8.
. Also Saint Peter does infer upon this, that Christ has suffered fro us in
the flesh: we should arm our selves with the same mind, that he which has
suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin 1. Pet. 4.1.2.
: The thing is this, Christ upon the cross did slay sin and abolishe it:
not his own, for he had none, but the sin of those which are coupled unto
him by faith.

Q. What reason is there to be showed, that the power of the death of Christ,
which was long sithence, should be in us?

A. The power of his death in slaying sin does continue: and all those which
are in him, must needs feel the same spread upon them. There is nothing in the
world besides this, which is able to slay sin, or to rid us of it.

Q. What follows next?

A. The third day he rose again from the dead.

Q. What do ye gather of this?

A. This is so principal an article of our faith, that the Apostle says, the
preaching of the Gospel were in vain, and our faith were in vain, without it
1. Cor. 15.14.
.

Q. Show the cause of this?

A. If he had not risen again, it must needs have followed that he had been
overcome. But in that he rose, he declared himself to be a most mighty
conqueror, and to have spoiled and led captive all the mighty enemies. And
this victory is most glorious, being accomplished by a man in our flesh. For
as the Devil did bring us all into thraldom and captivity by ouercommyng a
man: so also a man entered even into the very castle and privy chambers of
death, that by death he might destroy him which had the power of death, that
is, the Devil Heb. 2.14.
, and set us at liberty again.

Q. How does this appear, that such a conquest is made for us, seeing we be
still subject unto death?

A. That is no hiderance at all, because the dominion of death and the Devil
are abolished: the bitterness and terror of it are taken away, in as much as
our death is but a passage unto life: and we be assured by the resurrection
of Christ, that we shall rise again 1. Cor. 15.16.


Q. Is there any further thing to be considered in this article?

A. Yea that there is, for as the Scripture does teach that we are crucified
with Christ, so also we must while we live here, be raised up with him.
And for this cause it is said that they be blessed which have their part in
the first resurrection, for the second death shall not hurt them Reave. 20.6.
.

Q. Express your mind more fully and plainly.

A. As the death of Christ does mortify and kill sin in us, so also we are
quickened by the power of his resurrection unto holiness and newness of life.
Therefore the Apostle says, If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things
which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. Set your
affections upon things which are above, Col. 3.1.2.
and not upon things which are upon earth.

Q. What is then the true faith in the resurrection of Christ?

A. To be partaker of the power of his resurrection, and to be raised with
him. Therefore the blessed Apostle did still covet to know him, and the power
of his resurrection Phil. 3.10
.

Q. Do ye conclude upon this, that such do not believe the resurrection of
Christ, as are not endued with true holiness?

A. It is without all controversy, that those be flat infidels, which feel
not the power of the resurrection of Christ. All is in vain which they hold
of Christ: for if they were partakers of his death, to be grafted with him in
the similitude of his death, they should also be grafted to the similitude of
his resurrection Romans 6.5.
.

Q. What say ye to that which follows?

A. I do believe that this Christ, in his body is ascended into heaven.

Q. What benefit and comfort is there in this article?

A. Very great, if we consider it well. For he being our great high Priest,
is entered into the most holy place, even unto the throne of glory, there to
present us, and to deal for us: for so long as he is there, and does make
intercession for us, it cannot but go well with us: Because we may now come
boldly thither, and present our selves and our prayers: and we are accepted,
because god is well pleased with him Heb. 4.16.
.

Q. Is there no more but this, in his ascension into heaven?

A. Yes, he is there exalted, and set at the right hand of God. For as he is
there our Priest, so also he is our Lord and king, having the highest rule and
power committed into his hands.

Q. How do you gather that?

A. Because it is said, that he sits at the right hand of God Ephe. 1.20.
, which is as much in effect as to say, as that God does by him govern and
administer all things both in heaven and earth.

Q. Is this thing set forth plainly in the word?

A. It is expressed most plainly. For he said, all power is given unto me in
heaven and earth Mat. 28.18
. The Apostle says, that he is exalted far above principalities and powers,
and above every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in the
world to come Ephe. 1.21.
: Also he says, that God exalted him, and gave him a name which is above al
names, that in the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven,
things in earth, and things under the earth Phi. 2.10.
.

Q. What say ye further as concerning his glory?

A. His authority and glory is such: that he shall come at the last day to
judge the whole world, both the quick and the dead.

Q. What is the sense of the words?

A. He shall come down from heaven, where he sits at the right hand of
God, with so great power and glory, that at his commandment, the dead shall be
raised up. The devils and all the rebels shall be forced by his might to come
before him, and to receive their doom: he shall have power in his hand to
cast them into hell, and to execute judgment: and on the other side, to bring
those which obey him unto eternal glory Mat. 25.34.41. Heb. 5.9.
.

Q. Proceed unto the third part of our belief.

A. I believe in the holy ghost.

Q. It has bin proved that the holy ghost is the same God with the father and
the son, so that he can, if we respect the Godhead be no more a spirit,
nor no more holy, then the father and the son. Tell me therefore in what
respect he is thus called, and distinguished from them?

A. He is distinguished from the father and the son by these names not in
respect, of that which he is in himself: but in respect of his operation and
work, which he works in men, whom he does enspire and santifie.

Q. This must be opened more fully, being so great an article of our faith?

A. The father has given his son for ye redemption of the world: the son
has humbled himself in obedience unto death, and so has performed the same:
but the holy ghost does make us partakers of it, or else we are never the near.

Q. What is then the work of the holy ghost?

A. He opens the heart, and gives faith in the gospel. He does couple us
unto Christ, and make us members of his body: he does wash us with the blood
of Christ, he does regenerate us, by mortifiyng in us, all carnal affections,
by making us feel the power of the death of Christ: he does give us all
heavenly virtues and good desires, by the power of the resurrection of Christ:
he does seal up the faith of the promises in our hearts, and testify unto
our spirits ye we are the children of god: he does teach us all truth. Finally,
it is he which does teach us to pray and to call upon God Romans 8.16.26.
.

Q. Do none believe in the holy Ghost but those that have this?

A. The truth is, that none believe in the holy Ghost, neither are they
partakers of Christ, unless they be endued with the holy Ghost. For
whosoever has not the spirit of Christ is none of his Romans 8.9.
.

Q. Do those then which are abominable sinners, declare themselves to be
infidels?

A. What can be more manifest? For how can that man commit sin, and have it
reign in him, which is led by the holy Ghost.

Q. Are ye then of their mind, which affirm, that after they have once
received the spirit, they sin no more? For as they say, he is a perfect
spirit, and because he is most holy he cannot dwell in sinful flesh?

A. I am far from the mind of such abominable heretics, although I
confess, that the power of the holy ghost is such in all those whom he does
sanctify, that he does mortify and kill sin in them, so far that albeit
it trouble and vex them, yet it does not reign over them, neither do they
willingly obey it. They fall into this deuillish error, because they do not
put difference beetweene the essence of the spirit, and his gifts and graces.
For it is most true, that if the essence and substance of the holy Ghost
should be in men, they must needs be perfect, for every such man should be
a God: but we receive the working, and graces of the spirit, not in full
perfection, but in such measure, as that we may still increase.

Q. Can ye show by the scriptures that those which were endued with the
spyrit, were also burdened with infirmities and sins?

A. I could show that at large, by many examples, but one testimony of the
Apostle is sufficient, where he says to the godly, that the flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, so that ye cannot do
the things which ye would Gala. 5.17.
.

Q. What follows next?

A. The fourth part of the Articles of our faith, yet remains: the holy
Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, etc.

Q. What is it, which ye call the Church?

A. The whole company of those, who^ God has chosen unto life everlasting.

Q. Wherefore do ye call it the holy Church?

A. Because every member of it is holy, being sanctified by the holy Ghost:
for whosoever has not the spirit of Christ, is none of Christ's Romans 8.9.
.

Q. Do ye affirm, that such men, as be ungodly and wicked be not of the
Church?

A. Whosoever they be which hold, that although men live an unholy and an
unclean life, yet they be Christians, and of the Church, they deny this
article in this point, that we believe the Church is holy. For if a covetous
man, a drunkard, and an adulterer, or one that lives in any such vice, shall
affirm, that he is of the church, the^ he must say, yt he believes ye unholy
church.

Q. In what respect do ye call the Church Catholic?

A. In that it is universal, for Catholic is that which goes through out
the hole.

Q. Has it respect unto time or place?

A. It respects both, for the Church has been always in the woorlde from
the beginning, and shall be to end: and in all places of the world, while it
pleases God, to call any.

Q. Then that is not the Catholic Church, which is but in some countries, and
at some time?

A. It is but a company of Heretics and Schismatikes, how many soever they be,
or how long soever they continue. For those which be of the Catholic Church,
are such as are coupled unto that Mother Church, which has been from the
beeginning.

Q. What say ye to the Church of Rome, which does challenge this title, to be
called the Catholic Church?

A. They do falsely usurp the name: both because their faith is new, and
such as Moses, and the Prophets never did know: For they cannot show, that
the holy Patriarchs, Abraham and the rest did believe as they do. They
teach doctrine quite contrary to Christ and his Apostles: and also, because
many nations of the world, where the Gospel has bin taught, have never
acknowledged their Pope, nor obeyed their doctrine. Therefore it does follow,
that seeing they be thus departed from the true Church, they be but a swarm of
waspes, and a rout of Heretics.

Q. By what reasons can ye show that we be of the true Catholyque Church?
For they call us Heretics?

A. We hold that doctrine and faith, which is most ancient and old, taught
by Moses and the Prophets, and also by the Apostles: we believe it in every
point, and none other: and therefore being joined with them in the unity of
faith, we be also of the same body that they be: and therefore of the Catholic
Church.

Q. Ye say that the Church is Catholic, because it has been at all times
in the woorlde, although at some time in small number, as in the days of Noah:
then it follows, that those be not of the Catholic Church, of whom it may
be said, that there was a time, when their Church was not in the world.

A. That is out of controversy, that there has never been so much as one
day, in the which the true Church has not been in the world, although at many
times, in very small number.

Q. The Papists do demand, where our Church was an hundred years a-gone,
and so for the space of five or six hundred years before.

A. At such time as the Man of sin was exalted, and did sit in the Temple
of God 2. The. 2.3.
, and all kinredes, and people, and tongues did wonder and worship the beast
Reave. 13.8
, then the woman persecuted by the Dragon, which is the Church, was driven into
the wilderness, and was secret, but yet not altogether destroyed: For the
remnaunt of her seed, which had the testimony of Jesus, were persecuted
Revel. 12.
. This therefore I answer, that our Church, which is the true Catholic
Church, did lie, as it were buried and hid in the Papacy, even as a few
wheat Corns in a great heap of Chafe: Yet some of them did ever appear, and
were persecuted by the Beast, and the Dragon.

Q. What proof have ye of the word to confirm all this?

A. Even those places which I have already recited. Antichriste should sit in
the Temple of GOD, and there bear such rule, that he should boast himself to
be God, by taking that power and authority, which does belong only to God:
yet it remains still the temple of God, which could not be, unless the
Church were there still.

Q. Yea, but you must show that the Catholic Church, should at any time be
without a visible government.

A. The place cited does most playnelye prove it: for the woman driven into
the desarte, and yet her seed remaininge, does show that the outward face
of the Church was gone, while the glorious trim whore was got into her
place. And yet she could not be destroyed: for the remnaunt of her seed
could never be rooted out.

Q. How do ye understand the next words? the Communion of Saints?

A. This clause is added as a declaration of the other: in this wise: I believe
there is an holy Catholic Church, which is the Communion of Saints.

Q. In what sense is the Church called a Communion?

A. As there is one head Jesus Christ, so are all the faithful knit together by
one spirit, and made one body in him. This is the cause, that there is such a
Communion and fellowshippe among them, one with an other, as there is between
the members of the natural body.

Q. What is the effect of this Communion or fellowship?

A. The entire love and sincere affection which they bear one toward an
other, even as the members of the same body. And out of this also does spring
the making common of all good things, which they have, and the care to defend
each other. For look what good thing any member of the body has, it does
willingly employ it to the benefit of all the rest: and the love is such, that
every member does cheerfully apply it self to relieve the rest, and no one of
them does hurt or seeeke to destroy an other. Even so is it in this Communion
of Saints, which are all the members of one body Cor. 12.12 14.
.

Q. Do ye mean, that no one does possess any thing by himself, but the
possession in commune, when ye say they make all good things common among
them?

A. That were absurd, the possession is private, the use of the good things,
which they inioye, is made commone, while every one does know he possesses
them not for his own private commodity alone, but for the benefit of all
other. This thing is cleerelye to be discerned in the members of the body:
For the eye alone does possess the sight, and yet it does see for the whole
body.

Q. Do ye take it to be an infallible proof, that a man is endued with the
spirit of God, and is a true member of the Church, when he does love the
godly?

A. It is a perfect proof. Hereby we know that we be translated out of
darkness into light, if we love the brethren 1. Ioh. 3.14
. It is also a perfect argument, that a man is not of that fellowshippe and
body, when he does hate and stomach them so, that he cannot brook them. For
if he were of them, he should love them, although he but hear of them.

Q. Are all the true Children of the Church Saints, while they be in this
life: or is the Church called the Communion of saints, because they shall be
Saints in the life to come?

A. All that shall be saved, are sanctified in this life. For except a man be
regenerate, or borne again, he shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven
John. 3.3.
. For this cause ye scriptures both in the old and new Testament do call the
children of God Saints, even while they be here in earth Psalm. 16.3 Pilip. 1.1.
. And every one which makes account to be of that number, must behave himself
as a Saint: and do the things which become Saints Ephe. 5.3.
.

Q. What say ye then unto those, which hold stiffly, that none are Saints,
while they live?

A. They do deny an article of our faith, and that very grossly.

Q. But they do it of humility, because they dare not presume to take the^
selves to be Saints.

A. If it be humility to deny the faith, they may then be commended. But let
them not, because themselves be unholy, deny the graces of God in others. This
is no humility, when they mock at the faith: and when in disdain they reproach
men on this wise: you be holy men, you be Saints. They say they be christians:
why? because they can say their Creed: and yet they flatly deny that, which
they profess.

Q. While men live here among men, must they not fashion them selves like unto
other men?

A. We must consider our high calling, and walk worthy of it Ephe. 4.1.2
. We must have no felloweshippe with the unfruitful works of darkness
Ephe. 5.11.
, having fellowshippe with GOD, and with his Son Jesus Christ 1. Ioh. 1.3.
, and being called to be saints Romans 1.7.
, we must keep our selves unspotted of the world Iam. 1.27.
. We are commanded to separate our selves, and to come out from among the
wicked 2. Co. 6.17
: because there can be no fellowship between light and darkness.

Q. Wherefore is there joined unto this article, the forgiveness of sins?

A. Because there is no pardon, but unto those which be of the Church. For as
there is no condemnation to those, which are in Christ Romans 8.1.
: because they be so in him, that they be members of his body, and called
Christ 1. Cor. 12.12.
. God cannot be angry with Christ, nor condemn him, and therefore he cannot
condemn them. So contrariwise there is nothing but condemnation to all that be
not in him, because there is no pardon or forgiveness of sins but in him.

Q. Can there be no salvation, but in the forgiveness of sins?

A. Our blessedness is only in the covering of our sins, and pardon of our
iniquities Psalm. 32.1.
. Without this there is nothing but misery: because God does so abhor
sin.

For there is no foul Toad so loathsome unto us: nor the most stinking caryon
is not so abhorred of us, as the sinner is loathsome and abominable unto God:
there can no unclean thing stand before him, but he must needs remove it
away with detestatio^ and curse.

Q. Do ye deny the satisfaction for sins?

Q. Those which hold, that men must make satisfaction for their sins, do
deny this Article of our faith: For these two things be quite contrary, to
make satisfaction, and to have pardon. If a man should say unto his debtor, ye
owe me such a sum of money, I will forgive it, but ye shall work so many days,
and earne it out, this were ridiculous. The Papists therefore, which affirm
that they beeleeue the forgiveness of sins: and yet teach that Christ has
taken away Original sin, and for actual sin, men must make
satisfaction: are not only ridiculous, but also rank Heretics, because they
deny so great an article of the faith, concerning which the Scripture says,
the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin 1. John. 1.7
.

Q. What is required in us to obtain pardon?

A. True repentance, which consists in the mortification of sin, and
puttinge on true holiness. For the penitent sinner, who only shall be saved,
has a wounded and bleeding heart for his sins, and does hate the filthiness
of them: and the graces of the spirit, to replenish him with virtues, are as a
most precious oil, to refreshe his weary soul.

Q. Does not a man believe the forgiveness of sins aright, unless he
know his sins be forgiven?

A. To beeleeue that there is pardon for sin, is little: but for a man to
have assurance that his sins are forgiven, that is the thing.

Q. Ye speak of a matter which seems to be far beyond a man's reach,
for to hope that his sins are forgiven he may: but to know it for
certainetie, that seems impossible.

Q. A man which has true and unfeigned repentance; does know for certeintie
yt he has it, and then he must needs know also for certeintie that he is
forgiven, unless he will doubt of the truth of God. A man which has not
repentance, or but an haulting repentance, has but a doubting opinion that
he is forgiven, which is not agreeinge to the nature of faith. It is no
marvel though they waver, and be uncertain, whether sins be forgiven them,
which have no repentance: For they may be sure they are not. He therefore which
would be glad to be pardoned, let him believe the forgiveness of sins.

Q. How shall a man know, when he has true repentance?

A. He cannot but know when he has it, by the woorking of Gods spirit in
renewing his heart. For if he feel his heart changed, and the lusts of sin
killed in him, so that he does hate evil, and shun it: and love and
delyght in that which is good, then he has repentance.

Q. There is no man so renewed, but that he does abide in some sins: and
therefore may seem not to have repented.

A. I confess repentance is not in full perfection in any, nor yet so
great, but that they may go a great way further: Nevertheless it is
unfeigned repentance, when a man has a full and settled purpose of heart,
to strive and labor, to come out of his sins, and when the remnantes of
sins, which in time past he thought merueylous sweet, do now stink as a
dead caryon, that should lie and rotte in him.

For the godly mind is as much anoyed with the stink of the dead carcass
of sin, which is slain in a man: as the body is with the stink of dead
caryon, when it comes where it is, and for this cause it does vex him, when
he sees it in other.

Q. What follows?

A. The resurrection of the body: and life everlasting.

Q. Do ye believe that al men shall rise again at the last day?

A. I do believe that al, both small and great, good and bad, shall rise
again, and come before the Judge Reave. 20.1^
.

Q. The bodies of such as dyed many hundredth years agone are consumed to
nothing, that we can see. Some have been eaten and devoured by fowls, and some
by fishes, and their flesh carried, who can tell whether: is it possible that
these should rise again?

A. There is nothing impossible with GOD: It is as easy for him to raise the
dead bodies out of the duste, as it was to create all of nothing. And
howsoever the substance of men's bodies be dispersed, and mingled together
we know not where, yet they remain in his knowledge, and in his hand, to
disceuer them, and to give every one his own?

Q. Do ye then believe that every one shall stand up with the same bones and
flesh, which he lived in here, or shall God give new bodies?

A. It shall be the very same flesh and the same boanes: otherwise how
should we be said to rise again: Yea what wonder should the Resurrection
be? With what justice should GOD make new bodies, which had never sinned,
and cast them into hell? It is the very same flesh which has sinned here,
that shall be cast into hell. And the same flesh which has in this life
glorified God, and suffered for the Gospel, shall be raised up, and be glorified
for ever.

Q. Saint Paul writing of the resurrection, does make great difference
beetweene the bodies of men here, and those which shall rise again. But
especially in this, that he says, it is sown a natural body, but it
shall rise a spiritual body 1. Cor. 15.4.


A. The difference which Saint Paul makes is in the qualities, and not in
the substance. And when he says, it shall rise a spiritual body, he
does not mean but that it shall be flesh and bones: For else how should
be call it a body? But it shall live not by the power of the soul, with
outward helps: as meat, sleep, and such like: but by the spirit, as it were
a spiritual life.

Q. Then the resurrection of the body unto life eternal, is the end of our
faith?

A. It is even the drift and end of all our faith, and the eyes of the
faithful mind are fixed upon this, even as upon the finishing and shutting up
of all.

Q. What is the meaning of the scripture, where it says, we be justified by
faith, and not by the works of the law? Is it not contrary unto this, when
we say that we are justified by Christ? And does it not overthrow good
works?

A. The Scripture says, we be justified by Christ Act. 13.21 39.
. and it says, we be justified only by faith Romans 3.28.
, and no contrariety at al. For our sins being reckoned to Christ, and laid
upon him, he only was able to bear them, in him we have our discharge: also
his innocence and holiness, or perfect obedience, being given unto us, we
are found righteous in full perfection. So the matter is only in Christ. Now
because we be coupled unto Christ by faith, it is said, that faith does
justify, not as the matter, but as the instrument, and hand which lays
hold of Christ.

Q. Ye have not yet answered unto every part of the question. What say ye
further?

A. I say that to be justified by faith, and to be justified by works are so
flat contrary, that the one does ouerturne the other. For the one does fix
righteousness in our selves, and the other goes out of our selves, and does
fetch it from Christ 1. Cor. 1.30
: but yet this does not overthrow good works: for those which are in Christ
be new creatures 2. Cor. 5 17.
: created unto good works Ephe. 2.10
. They be regenerate by the holy Ghost John. 3
: and led by him Romans 8.14
. And therefore he being so holy, they cannot but be holy, in hating sin
and loving goodness.

Q. Are all good works then excluded from iustifiyng: both those which go
before faith, and those which follow?

A. All are excluded. For before a man be in Christ, and made alive by his
spirit, although he seem to have good things in him: yet God which has the
just waightes, does not afoorde him so much as a good thought Genesis 6.5
. After he is in Christ, regenerate in the highest degree that any come unto
in this life, because the remnants of sin abide in him Romans 7
: And all his best works be mingled and spotted with some sin Esaias. 64.6
: he can not be justified by them: But must needs confess that none which
lives, can be justified in his sight Psalm. 143.1 Romans 3.20
.

Q. How can the good graces of the holy Ghost be mingled with any sin or be
imperfect? Seeing he is most perfect.

A. In themselves they be not, but we do mingle them. For look how sweet
wine put into a fustie barrel, does taste of the vessel, when it is drawn
forth: even so fares it with us, for ye graces which are put into us: we
cause them to savor of the flesh.

Q. Do ye hold then that a man cannot be saved without good works? and yet,
they do not justify and save him?

A. I do hold that most constantly: For a man cannot be saved, unless he
be in Christ: and it is impossible for that man which is in Christ to be
unfruitful in good works. The Spirit of Christ does mortify and kill his
carnal lusts. So that he does not walk in the flesh, to fulfill the
lusts, and to commit the deeds of ye flesh Romans 8.1
. Also the same spirit does quicken him, and fill him with heavenly virtues:
and so lead him unto all good works. If a man therefore be void of the
fruits of the spirit, and commit the deeds of the flesh, it is certain,
that man is the child of death, and has no part in Christ, because he is not
led by the spirit of Christ Romans 8.13.
.

Q. Ye affirm a necessity of good works, although they do not nor cannot
save us, being spotted: for if a man will stand to claim life at Gods hand
for his own desartes: the Lord needs not to lay to his charge, his
adulteries, theftes, murders and such like: but he may find sin enough in
his prayers and alms deeds, and other his best works, to cast him into hell.
Does not this imperfection, as it overthrows all merit, so also overthrow
all reward?

A. It does not overthrow reward, for God has promised and bound himself,
of his free grace, to cover the imperfection of the good works of his
servants, and to reward with eternal glory that which is good in them Heb.
6.10.
.

Q. Let us see then to what use good works are?

A. God is glorified by the good works of his servants Phil. 1.9.10 11.
: The Gospel is adorned by them Titus. 2.10.
They be profitable unto men Tit. 3.8.
: Men receive commodity by good deeds done unto them, both for this bodily
life: and also they which are ignorant of the truth, are drawn to love the
gospel, when they see the pure and holy conversation of those which profess
it 1. Pe. 3.1.
. By the fruits of the spirit man does also know that he is called and
chosen of God 1. Ioh. 4.1 Gal. 5.22.23
. Finally, there is no good work which a man does, but it shall be crowned with
eternal glory.

Q. Which is the rule of good works, which we are to walk after, to show
our repentance, and fruits of faith, in true obedience?

A. The ten precepts of the law are a full and perfect rule: for in them is
commanded every good work, which God does require of man to be performed,
either toward his majesty, or toward men: and there is no evil but it is
by the same condemned.

Q. How do ye prove that there is such full perfection in the law, when as
it is expressed in so few words?

A. Although the Lord has compact it of few words, yet the same do contain
all righteousness. Which is manifest both by the sum of the law, which is,
thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy mind, with
all thy strength, and thy neighbor as thy self Mat. 22.37.^9.
, For there can be no sin where this is: And also because the law does
promise life unto those which perform it, which cannot be without perfection:
for no imperfect thing, or that has sin in it, can enter into life.

Q. Does the law contain in it such perfection of righteousness, that if a man
could fulfill it, he should be as righteous as God?

A. It is an abominable heresy to think so: for the holiness of God is
infinite: which cannot be in any creature. The righteousness of the law which
is the full perfection of that which God requires of man, is but a little
stream derived from the maine fountain. the blessed Angels in heaven are
perfect in that holiness, which is required of the^: but if they be compared
with God, it shall be found which the scripture says, he has put folly in his
angels Job. 4.18
. The angels are not able to comprehend nor behold the unsearchable holiness
and majesty of our great God: and therefore they be brought in of the Prophet
covering their faces Esaias. 6.2
.

Q. Have we any thing to do with the law, being under the Gospel?

A. I hold him accursed which does separate the law and the Gospel, or that
says we have nothing to do with the law: or that the law is not to be
opened and preached.

Q. S. Paul seems not only to separate them, but also to make them quite
contrary the one to the other, and wholly to set us free from the law.

A. Whatsoever Saint Paul seems to do, this is most certain, that if he be
rightly understood, it does agree with this that he says, Do we make the law
of none effect, therefore through faith God forbid, nay we establish the law
Romans 3.31.
.

Q. Wherein is that contrariety the^ between the law, and the Gospel, that
they cannot stand together?

A. There is no contrariety at all in themselves, for they come both from ye
self same God which is unchangeable Mal. 3.6 Iam. 1.17
The righteousness which they offer, if we consider it in it self is the
same. For the righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ, is the perfect obedience
unto the law which was in him. But now the contrariety is when it comes
unto us, in this wise: to fix righteousness in our selves, by our own deeds
in the law, (for the righteousness of the law says, do this, and thou shall
live) and to fetch righteousness out of an other by faith, being destitute of
it in our selves, for the Gospel says, Believe and thou shall be saved Romans
10.9. Ioh. 3.15.16.
. These then be the contraries, to be righteous and just in our selves, by our
own deeds: and to be made righteous by the merits of Christ, which we
obtain by faith, ye see these are so contrary, they cannot stand together.

Q. If there be no contrariety at all between the law and the Gospel, how
does the Scripture teach that the old Testamente is abolished, of which the
law of the commandments, is a part?

A. We must wisely understand the mind of the holy ghost, when he does
teach that the old Testament cease. For many by mistaking it do fall into
very wicked errors. The old Testament in substance of matter is all one with
the new: for the fathers in the time of the law had Christ, and the
Sacraments of Christ 1. Cor. 10.1.
. And we see that the doctrine of the old Testament is alleged for to
confirm the new. Those therefore are foolish which say, that is in the old
Testament, but show it in the new: for if they will overthrow the one, they
overthrow the other. But herein is the matter wherein the old testament is
abolished, for the form and manner of dispensation, they had the promises of
the Gospel Heb. 11.
: We have them performed: they had figures and ceremonies which did shadow out
Christ, we have him manifested in the flesh, and those shadows cease Col.
2.16.17. Heb. 10.1.
.

Q. But the Apostle speaks not of ceremonies when he says, We are not under
yt law, but under grace Romans 6.14.
: And that the law is not given to a righteous man. For he speaks of the ten
commandments, which are the moral law 1. Tim. 1.9
.

A. It is very true that the Apostle speaks of the moral law, when he
says, We are not under the law. And that the law is not given to a
righteous man. But this is not to be taken simply, but for some respects. For
we are bound still to this which the law requires, that we love the Lord
our God, with all our heart: and our neighbor as our self: and therefore we
may not commit idolatry, abuse Gods name, nor murder, or such like.

Q. Which then are those respects which are to be had?

A. In the one place where he says, The law is not given for a just man, the
sense is this: that it is not given against him which consents with it. In
the other place, we are not under the law, but under grace: is to be
restrained unto this, that we are not under ye law as it is the strength of sin
1. Cor 15.56.
. And so the Apostle coupleth them together: sin shall not have dominion over
ye, for ye are not under the law but under grace.

Q. How is that to be understood?

A. Saint Paul compares the law to the husband, our corrupt nature to the
wife, the affections of sins which are brought forth between them unto the
children Romans 7.
.

Q. Do ye not charge and accuse the law, and blame it, when ye make it to be
the strength of sin, and to bring forth sin.

A. The Apostle shows that there is no blam at al to be laid upon the law:
for the law (says he) is holy, and the commandment is good: but our corrupt
nature takes occasion by the law to bring forth evil Romans 7.8
. For ye law showing and manifesting sin, and giving no power to rid us from
it, is called ye dead letter which kills 2. Cor. 3.6.
: and the heat of sin being kindled by it, to become more sinful, it is
called the strength of sin. But when a man is under grace: that is to say,
regenerate and led by the spirit, then does he consent unto the law, and his
nature does not take occasion any longer by the law to bring forth sin.

Q. If we be not freed from the law, but in such sort, then do those wickedly
which would not have the law opened?

A. Doubtless they do it of a very wicked mind: even because they love to walk
at liberty, and to fufill the lusts of the flesh, which the law sharply
rebukes. Their doctrine is liberty to the flesh, when as they only speak of
redemption in Christ: let sin abound, so they hold that.

Q. Ye say we cannot be justified by the law, because we are of a corrupt
nature, and cannot fulfill it: to what purpose then should it be preached,
seeing it does but curse and condemn us?

A. There is great cause why the law should be severely and sharply preached
even to that end, that men may see them selves to be accursed and condemned
in themselves and so be forced and driven to seek help else where: for look
how a man cares not for the Physician so long as he fears no dangerous
disease: even so no man feels the sweetness of Christ and his Gospel,
until he feel himself, by the knowledge of the law to be utterly lost and
condemned. This is the cause why Christ said, The hole need not the
Physician, but the sick: I came not to call the righteous but sinners to
repentance Mat. 9.13.14. Mark. 2.17. Luke 5.31.32.
. Likewise he calls none unto him, but such as travel and be heavy laden
Mat. 11.28.
. Those which understand not the law, think themselves jolly fellows and in
good health, and care little to know the Gospel.

Q. This use of the law is chieflye before a man be in Christ, but to what
purpose is it when we know and believe the gospel?

A. When a man does know and believe the gospel, then is he called by
repentance unto true holiness, and godliness of life: even so far that he
ought to strive hard for perfection, and to endeavor himself to come as nigh it
as he can Phil. 3.13.13.
. And therefore now he is deeply to search into the law, which does contain
the perfect doctrine of obedience.

Q. Ye have showed the use of the law unto those whom God does convert, but
is it for any purpose to the reprobate?

A. It is to this purpose in them, that it makes them void of all excuse: for
whereas they cannot perform any part of it, they are hardened, and sin does
more abound in them Romans 1.20. and 5.20. and 7.9.
.

Q. Ye confess that those whom God leaves unto themselves, have no power at
all, to perform any part of the law. The law being spiritual, and they
carnal, altogether sold under sin Romans 7.14.
. How ca^ they the^ be justly condemned unto eternal fire? Shall they be cast
away for breaking those laws, which they were not able to keep? If the prince
should command a subject under pain of death to do a thing impossible, as to
remove a mountain: and then put him to execution for not doing the same: who
would not say this were extreme tyranny? it is as possible for a man to
remove a mountain, as to keep the law. And yet God does damn him both body
and soul for breaking it.

A. The answer unto this is easy, God does justly require at man's hand, the
perfect obedience unto his law, because in his first creation, he made him
perfect, and gave him power to fulfill it. We must not consider what we have
now, but what was given us in our first parents.

Q. Our first parents in who^ we were created, and with whose flesh we are
clothed: did loose all, we cannot do with it. We be unclean before we are
borne, and are cast into a necessity of sinning: and so it may seem still
great rigor to condemn where there is a necessity of tra^sgression?

A. The necessity does not excuse, because man cast himself into the bands
thereof. And because men do willingly and with a glad consent commit sin,
before they be regenerate: if it did grieve him, if he did hate uncleanness,
and struggle against it, there were some pity to be had. But when he does joy
and take delight in it: and greedily swallow it up, eue^ as a sweet poison,
what co^passio^ is to be showed?

Q. Let us proceed unto the words of the law, how do ye divide it?

A. The whole law of ye ten precepts was delivered unto Moses, written in two
tables of stone Exodus 31.18
: the one table in 4. commandments containing al duties which are required
toward god himself: And the other in 6. commandments, all things toward me^.

Q. Do ye affirm that God never required any duty of man save that which he
requires in the ten commandments?

A. God has never required more of any man, then to walk in those duties
which are contained in these commandments.

Q. How say ye then unto those precepts, which were given unto certain persons,
as to Abraham to slay his son Genesis 22.2.3
: To the Israelites to rob the Aegyptia^s Exodus 3.22
: to the young man which came unto Christ to sell away all that he had, and to
give to the poor Mat. 19.2^ 21.22
.

A. There was no more commanded unto any of these, but that which the law did
bind them to show their obedience in.

Q. The law is given generally unto all men: and therefore, if the law did
bind Abraham, it binds others: if the law did bind the young man to sell
all, and to give to the poor, it binds all others.

A. This is contained in the law, that a man shall love the Lord with all his
heart, and all his strength, and therefore the law does bind him to do
whatsoever God does command him, whether it be a general precept, or a
particular precept only to him, as these former were. If God should give the
same commandment to any which he gave to Abraham, to the Israelites, or that
Christ gave to the rich man, he is bound by the law to obey God therein.
Because the Lord is to lay what particular commandment he will upon any man.

Q. Then the law may seem to co^tein things contrary in it: Because God does
forbid to kill or to steal?

A. There is no show of things contrary in ye law, if we consider how generally
we are bound by ye same to obey God: and what sovereign authority god has to
command. For thereby we shall see, yt although the things commanded be such
as be not in the law: yet our obedience unto god in ye law, binds us to
perform ye same. God has forbidden to kill or to steal, and therefore when he
commanded Abraham, to kill his son, and yt Israelites to rob ye Egyptia^s:
these things were not in ye law: but yet ye obedience unto them, was in the
law. A man is most straightly bound by the precepts of the Law, to hear
the doctrine of the Gospel preached, and to give credit unto it: but yet it
does not follow, that the Gospel and faith are therefore contained in the law.

Q. Proceed unto the words of the law: which is the first Commandment.

A. I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out
of the house of bondage. Thou shall have none other Gods before my face.

Q. Wherefore are these words put in, that he brought them out of the land of
Egypt?

A. In delivering them out of Aegipt, with so mighty a hand, with signs and
wonders, and a stretched out arm, he declared himself to be the only true
God, in heaven and earth Deuteronomy. 4.39.
, and also to be the God of Abraham, Isaake and Jacob. For this cause they are
forbidden, to have any other Gods.

Q. Do those then perform al obedience required in this precept, which do
verelye think in their heart, that there is but one only God, which made all?

A. There is a far deeper matter required then so: for he does not say, thou
shall think there is none other: but thou shall have none other.

Q. How can men think there is but one, and yet have other?

A. When they give away that to other things, which does only beelonge unto
GOD. As namelye, when a man gives his heart to any thing, he makes it his
GOD. The heart is to be given unto God, and therefore he complains: that the
people did draw near him with their mouth, and honor him with their lyppes,
but their heart was far from him Esai. 29.13.
, and that he was near in their mouth, but far from their raines Iere. 12.2.
.

Q. Declare then by particulars, how men break this Commandment, and
depart from the true God.

A. When they give away the inward affections of the mind. As for example, the
man which sets his care to seek riches, more then he seeks God: and
does rest and stay upon them, as the maintayners of his life: makes money
his God, because his heart goes after it. He which delights and ioyeth with
greater pleasure in worldly and fleshly lusts, then he does in the holy
doctrine of God: and like an outlaw follows his own appetites, to fill
himself with them: little caring for the other, where GOD is to be sought:
makes his belly, and the very Devil his GOD: for where his love is set,
there is his God.

Q. It seems hard, that any should be thought, to worship and honor the
Devil for God.

A. It will not seem hard, if we consider the doctrine of Gods word, which as
it terms Covetousness, Idolatry Ephe. 5.5 Col. 3.5.
: because the covetous worldly man sets money in that place of his heart,
where he should set God: and so makes it an Idol or a false GOD, and says
that some make their belly their GOD. So also it terms the Devil the GOD of
the world 2. Cor. 4.^
.

Q. How can he be GOD unto those, which in their heart defy him?

A. They are foolishlye blinded: for so long as they love that which he
loves, and show obedience unto his will, and perform his lusts: although
they suppose and say, that GOD is their father: yet Christ says, ye are of
your father the devil John. 8.44
. He that commits sin, is of the devil 1. Ioh. 3.8
.

Q. Are there any other ways, by which men break this law?

A. Some pray to Saints, and Aungelles, and so give that unto them, which
belongs unto God: some fear men more then GOD: when they will rather sin
against God, then offend men. They say they cannot bear the displeasure of
men: whether God be pleased or displeased they weigh not, and so men are
lifted up, and god is set at naught: contrary to that which Christ
commands: Fear not those which kill the body, and have no power to kill the
soul: but fear him which is able to destroy both body and soul in hell Mat.
10.28
.

Some seek help of Witches and Coniurours, when their bodies, their Children,
and cattle are hurt: which is to seek at the devil.

Q. What must a man do, when he repents in this Commandment, or how shall
he know which way to walk in obedience unto it?

A. He must set his study and delight in the word of God: there to seek God,
and to give him his heart Pro. 2.10.
, by drawing it from the love of earthly things, and by cuttinge down pride.
For a man shall know how much he loves and delights in God, by his zeal
and love to the word of God. For that which a man loves best, that does he
most seek after, and his mind thinks most upon it. And therefore it is
most certain, that those dull men, which have no zeal nor love unto the
word, have given their heart away, and do worship the world, and the prince
thereof.

Q. What say ye to the second Commandment?

A. In the second Commandment we are forbidden the sin of Idolatry, which
is both the making of Images, and the worshipping of them.

Q. He forbids to make any Image or similitude of things in heaven or
earth, or in the sea. Is it therefore against this Commandment to make the
picture of a man, or of a flower, or such like?

A. It is not unlawful to make the picture of a man, to resemble a man: nor of
any other creature, which we see. But to make the picture of any thing in
heaven, as of the Sun, Moon or Stars, or of any thing in earth, as of man
or beast, or of any thing in the sea, as of fishes: and to say it is like God,
or that it is the picture of GOD, this is abominable, and forbidden in this
Precept.

Q. It is thought of many, that the making is not forbidden, unless it be
with an intent to worship.

A. Those which think so, are unskillful in a very plain matter: for the
words are thus, Thou shall not make.

Q. If the words should so be taken, then it seems no picture may be made:
which is an absurdity.

A. That does not follow: for this Commandment is of the first Table, and
pertains only to divine woorshippe. It does not meddle with pictures which
are for common use. But the pictures, which are brought into Gods woorshippe:
and therefore the Papists which picture God the father like an old man, are
abominable Heretics, and foul Idolaters. There can no likeness be made of God
Esal. 40.18.
. The image is the doctrine of vanity and lies.

Q. Can not a man bow before them or worship the^, but he renounceth god?

A. That is out of all question, that he that does worship Idolles, although
he persuade him self, that he does worship God in them, yet he does worship
Diuelles, and therefore renounceth the true God.

Q. He that worshippeth the Image for God, or any false God, as the Gods of the
heathen, he worshippeth Devils. But the Papists excuse themselves, that their
intent is to worship the only true GOD, and therefore theirs is not the
worship of Devils. They worship not the Image it self: and therefore they
commit no Idolatry.

A. Whatsoever they pretend, it is but vain: they that break the
commandment, and worship him after the will of ye devil, their intent does not
excuse them, but yt they worship the devil in steed of God: for him they
worship, which is the author of the worship, and whom they obey Romans 6.16.
. Moreover, when they say, they do not take the Idol for God, nor worship it,
they lie. For do they not take it to be more holy then other creatures? If it
be gold, do they take it to be as other gold? or if it be wood, is it as
other wood? If not, is it not a divine holiness, which they ascribe unto them?
And so they make it God in effect.

Q. Are those to be counted Idolaters, which do but with their body, with cappe
or knee, or such like, give reverence to Idolles: not meaning any such thing
in their heart, but do keep their heart to God?

A. Many blind them selves that way, supposing that in time of persecution,
for to save their life or goods: or for occupying merchandise in Idolatrous
countries for their gain, they may dissemble their conscience, persuading
them selves, that because they do not religiouslye reverence that woorshippe,
they are to be excused. But they understand not the saying of Christ, He
that denies me before men Math. 10.
. They do not understand, that both their bodies and souls are the Lords,
and that nether of them must be given to the devil.

Q. It is not a giuinge themselves unto the Devil, but in show, because they
mean not any such thing?

A. The Corinthes meant nothing less, then to give honor to the Idolles, when
they went into the Idol temple, and did sit at table there with Idolaters, and
eat of meat which had bin sacrificed to Idols: And yet S. Paul threatens them
as Idolaters, willing them to fly Idolatry: saying, that they could not be
partakers of the table of the Lord and the table of Devils, ye cannot drink
of the Cup of ye Lord and the Cup of Devils 1. Cor. 8.9. and 10.
.

Q. Is there any Idolatry, besides that which is committed in the making and
worshipping of Images?

A. Men do commit Idolatry, when they think and imagine of GOD after their
own fantasies. For although they confess a God, yet is it not the true God,
but a God of their own framing: and therefore it is written, That the fool
(which is the ungodly) has said in his heart, there is no God. Psalm. 14.1.
For he gives not credit unto the promises, neither does he believe the
threatninges: and thereby makes God neither true nor just: which is to deny
God. In many other things he conceiueth wrong of God, and denies him, and so
al his thoughts and meditations of God are but upon an Idol.

Q. Is there any other sin condemned in this Commandment beside the sin of
Idolatry.

A. This rule is to be observed in the Commandments, that where God
forbids any one sin, he forbids all that are of that kind: he
forbids all that are accessaries unto that sin: all things whereby it is
bred and nourished: so yt he condemns both root and branche.

Q. What sins are of the same kind that Idolatry is?

A. All sorts of counterfeite and false worship.

Q. What call ye counterfeite and false worship?

A. All the inventions and devises of men in the service of GOD. For the true
worship is prescribed by God him self in his word: and it is perfectly set
down, that no piece of it is left unto the device of man. For that were a
great dishonor to God, if he should set down his service so imperfectly,
that men must finishe it, and so in effect be wiser then he.

Q. When men devise any thing to be done toward God of a good intent, of
devotion, of love, or such like, must it not needs please God?

A: Ye may term it a good intent, devotion, and love: because it is so in
man's imagination, but in very truth it is nothing so: For GOD does abhor
it, both because it is so injurious to him, and also because it is so contrary
unto him: for all that is in manne is corrupt: therefore GOD says, they
woorshippe me in vain, teachinge for doctrines the Precepts of men Esai.
29.13.
.

Q. Are there any examples in the scripture to make it plain?

A. There be examples in the scripture of men, which have done things of
good intent, of love and zeal, and yet the things very abominable before
God, because the affections of men are corrupt. Who could have a better
meaning or greater love then Peter had unto Christ, when he took him a side
and said, spare thy self Master, etc? And yet Christ answered, go beehinde
me Satan, thou art a stumbling block unto me: thou sauourest not the things
of God, but the things of men Math. 16.
. Also the people had, as they thought, a good intent, and aloue to Christ,
when they would have taken him, and made him a king John. 6.
, therefore ye may see that all superstitions, and Ceremonies of men's framing
are utterly condemned.

Q. What is then commanded to be done by this Commandment?

A. We are commanded to keep our selves pure and chaste unto GOD in his
woorshippe: which is to cleave to every point of that, which he has in his
word prescribed: and to keep our selves clean both in body and soul, from
ye Idolatrous and superstitious inventions of men.

Q. So that a man do not superstitiously abuse the things, which Idolaters
have devised: it seems that the things of them selves being indifferent, a
man may communicate with them?

A. That is not so, for the free use of the things is taken away, because God
will not have his servants to be like unto the servants of the Devil, nor
to be partakers with them, otherwise why should not ye meat offered unto Idols
be indifferent to be eaten?

Q. Then the things which have bin abused, are utterly to be abolished?

A. We are to put difference: for there are things which were ordained by God
for necessary use: all the abuse in the world cannot abolish these: but they
are to be reformed. There are other things, which god never appointed, but were
invented by men: and these can never be washed so clean, but there will be some
spot in them. And therefore the true reformation, is ye utter abolishing of
the^?

Q. What is meant by the words which follow in this commandment?

A. The first part of the words which follow, when he says, I thy Lord thy
God am a Ielous God, and visit, etc. do contain a very sharp threatening
against Idolaters. For he does affirm, that as he is a strong God, so also he
is jealous, and will not bear the spiritual whoredom in those that commit it,
but will punish the^, and their seed after the^.

Q. Is not this contrary unto that which God says by the Prophet Ezechiel,
that the son shall not bear the fathers offense Ezech. 18.
.

A. It is not contrary, for there ye Prophet is sent to reprove those, which
did use this properbe, The fathers did eat sower grapes, and the childrens
teeth are set on edge. Which was as much as to say, our fathers committed the
sin, and we their children do bear the punishment and smart for it. Thus
they did clear them selves, and blame their fathers: but god does show, yt he
does not punish the children of wicked fathers, unless ye children themselves
be also wicked. Now in this God does as much as if he should threaten yt he will
leave the children of Idolaters in the sins of their fathers, and deprive
them of his graces, that so they may be damned. For God does severely visit ye
sins of ye fathers upon the children, when he does reject the children, as the
cursed seed of cursed parents.

Q. What is the other part of the words?

A. A sweet promise which God makes unto those which love them, yt he will
bless their seed after the^ unto a thousand generations. Q. Has God tied him
self in this unto every particular?

A. Not so, for God has bestowed his graces upon some children of very wicked
parents 1. Sam. 19.
. And some of the children of right godly fathers have been graceless 2. Sam.
16.
.

Q. What say you to the third commandment? Thou shall not take the name of the
Lord thy God in vain etc.

A. The sum of the Commandment is, that we should by no means abuse or
profane the name of God: but as it is most glorious so to give al due honor
and reverence unto it. Q. What do ye understand by the name of God? only the
words which we speak, when we call him God or Lord?

A. We may not restrain it into so narow a compass: for the name of God is
in all things, which set forth his majesty, and the renoume of his excellency.
As for example, the glory, the greatness, the power, the wisdom, and the
goodness of the divine majesty, which shine in the heavens, in the earth, and
in the sea: Also in his word he has showed him self more perfectly. Likewise
his noble acts which he has wrought in the government of the world, and of his
Church, do publish his name: for he says he would get him a name in all the
earth, when he dealt against Pharao Exodus 14.4
. Also when David in the Psalms and other do call upon men to magnify the name
of god: or do set forth his name, they declare his works and his judgments
Psalm. 102. Psalm. 106.
.

Q. Then express some particulars, by which men do abuse the holy name of
God. A. Men take his name in vain, when they behold the heavens and the earth,
without admiration and woondermente of the God of glory, which has framed
them. Also when they hear of his great iudgmenets, and worthy acts, and their
heart not stricken with reverence and fear. Likewise when they hear his word,
think of it, or talk of it irreverently, to make a light matter or a ieste of
it: or to myngle it with light Iestes: as in stage plays, or such like.
Moreover, when men call on God in prayer, and do it not as it should be: as to
pray they know not what: to ask according to their lusts and fantasies: to
speak with their mouth, and their hearts wander in by-thoughts, or when they
profess Gods word, and live not thereafter: for they cause the name of God to
be blasphemed, whereas they should by their profession purchase honor unto
it.

Q. Are these all the ways, by which men take the name of God in vain?

A. There are many ways, whereby men take the name of God in vain: A man
cannot recite them al, though he should study long. Men do fowly profane this
excellent name: when they are perjured: when they swear rashly: when they
curse: when they use the words of the scriptures, and the name of God in
charms and coniurations.

Q. What do you call rash swearing?

A. When men sweat without cause: no matter of weight to move them: or no
necessity to enforce them.

Q. Men suppose that they do not offend, when they do not swear falsely: and
because they will not take the name of God to abuse it, they swear by small
things, as by cock and pie, by the mouse foot: and many other such like,
do these offend?

A. Our Savior Christ does confute both these things, for whereas the Scribes
and Pharisees had taught thus, Thou shall not forswear thy self, he says,
Swear not at all. And whereas they thought by taking the creatures to let the
name of God go free, he proves, that he that swears by any creature does
swear by the Lord: The heavens are his throne, the earth is his footestoole:
Jerusalem is the City of the great king. Thou shall not swear by thy head,
for thou can not make one hair white or black Mat. 5.33.34.35.36.
.

Q. What is then the reason whereby he proves that those which swear by
creatures take the name of God in vain?

A. Because the name of God is upon all his creatures, even the smallest, for
there is a glorious power and wisdom in the least thing which we see: and such
as far passes the capacity of all the creatures in heaven and earth: for
they cannot all make so much as an hair of nothing.

Q. What do ye think then when men swear by their faith and other such
like oaths?

A. I affirm that they do grievously sin by taking the name of God in
vain. Christ says, He ye swears by heaven, swears by the throne of God,
and by him that sits thereon Mat. 23.22
. Then must it needs be, yt he which swears by his faith, swears by ye
word of God upon which it is grounded, by the holy ghost wc is ye worker
thereof, by god ye father and by Christ, upon who^ it lays hold.

Q. Some swear by the Devil, some by the mass, by the roode and such like,
do these offend against this commandment?

A. They do offend grievously against this precept, in as much as they give
away the glory of Gods name unto those things which are abominable? It is a
part of the due honor which we owe unto god, to swear rightly by his name: and
therefore God complains as injured, when he says they swear by those that
are no Gods Ier. 5.7.
.

Q. What mean the words which follow, for the Lord will not hold him
guiltless which takes his name in vain?

A. These words are a very vehement threatening, by which the Lord would
terrify men, that they be not bold to abuse his name.

Q. What needs this, when there is a general curse pronounced?

A. There is great need of this, as experience teaches, because me^ set
exceeding light by the name of God: and count it either no sin, or at the
least a very small sin: and this you may see in the words of many, who
abusing Gods name by rash swearing, or otherwise, tell them of it, and they
answer, I pray God we do no worse, and then we care not.

Q. What is the cause that men think so light of the breach of this law, when
God makes it so weighty?

A. The very cause is this, that men's hearts are stuffed full of profane
ignorance of Gods glory: for if they did see the most precious glory of Gods
name, they could not so tread it under their feet as a thing of naught.

Q. Let us proceed to the fourth commandment, which is the sanctifiyng of the
Sabbath. Wherefore does he say, remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day?

A. By this speech, when God says, Remember, he does put us in mind of our
dullness: for it is as much as to say, ye are so addicted to your own work,
and your minds so set upon worldly things, that ye forget all holy exercises,
and pass them over.

Q. Is this commandment in every respect with us, as it was before the coming
of Christ?

A. It is not. For one part of this commandment was ceremonial and ceased
with other ceremonies: another part of it was moral, and that was from the
beginning, and must be to the end.

Q. What is it in the Sabbath which was ceremonial?

A. They were commanded that day to rest from all bodily work: which was a
sign of sanctification: for thereby was meant, that they should cease from
sin, and sinful affections, which are called their own words and
works, and give up themselves to be led by the holy ghost, to work the
works of God.

Q. Is the substance of this abolished?

A. No in no wise, for we have it accomplished in Christ, by whom we do
enter into the rest of God, Heb. 10.19 Ephe. 2.18
ceasing from our own works as God did from his, this is the continual
Sabbath, which we must keep all the days of our life unto God.

Q. It seems then by this doctrine of the Sabbath that there is nothing in
man, which is not contrary unto God, and also abominable in his sight.

A. That is most manifest. For if there were any goodness left either in our
will or in our affections, we should not be willed to cease from it. But
this continual Sabbath is for to cease from all our own works, which is to
deny our selves.

Q. If the ceremony be abolished and the Sabbath continual, then it seems
that the seventh day is no more to be regarded then another day?

A. In respect of any such signification of holiness, it is to be regarded no
more then another day. But yet it differs from other days in respect of the
other use of the Sabbath, which was from the beginning, and which must continue
to the end. For from the beginning God blessed the seventh day, and did
separate it from other days.

Q What is then that other use of the seventh day which we must be mindful of?

A Men are to set their wordly business apart that day, and to give them selves
unto holy exercises, as the hearing of the word preached in the public
assembly: to pray with the congregation to communicate in the ministration of
the Sacraments: to meditate upon the word, for the increase of faith,
knowledge and godliness.

Q. Are not men for to hear the word of God preached in the week days? For
some reason thus, six days shall thou labor: and therefore unlawful to go
to a Sermon on these days?

A. These are very ignorant and profane, which reason after that sort. For
does God say they shall labor every hour of those six days. Can they not
find one spare hour in the week to play a game at the cards or bowls, or to
hunt and to sit and talk merrily together? can men spare some time for these,
and not to seek God, and yet not be of those wicked, which the Apostle says
are lovers of pleasure, more then lovers of of God 2. Tim. 3.4.
? These also are not the best obseruers of the Sabbath day, which are so
careless to seek God in the week days. He is blessed which does meditate
in the law of the Lord day and night Psalm. 1.1.2.
.

Q. Tell me then how men offend God in breaking this commandemente of the
Sabbath?

A. Men do break this holy law many ways, and go under the displeasure of
God, as committing a grievous sin. But first in general they offend, which
do so neglect the time, that they do not profit in knowledge, faith, and
godliness by the day: Also those which occupy themselves in any thing, which
does hinder them from profiting by holy exercises. In particular, those which
are idle, those which go to visit their friends in feasting, yt occupy their
trade of worldly business: that send abroad their servants to gather up their
dets or such like. Much more those which run to plays, bearbaytings,
Maygames, or ye spend ye time in drinking, carding, dicing, or other such
vanities.

Q. Ye say those break this co^ma^deme^t which do not profit in faith,
knowledge and godliness, by the day: How shall those do which have not the
means, but are under an unlearned, or an insufficient minister of the word?

A. They are not excused, because they have not the means at home, for they
ought to travel and seek where they may be edified: for if their Cattle did
want water at home, they would drive them to water at another Town, and them
selves would travel two or three miles for meat that day, rather then be
without. Also men are without excuse, because they like better to spend ye day
in their lusts the^ for to have the holy exercises of the word. For
doubtless if they did earnestly desire it and long for it, God would send them
faithful shepherds which should feed them unto life eternal.

Q. These four commandments are the first table of the law: the rest which
follow are the second table. Is there any thing to be observed in this order
which God uses?

A. Yea no doubt: for look how the Lord excels men, so also the duties
which do immediately belong unto him are more excellent, then those which
belong unto me^. And this is to be observed against those gross men (if they
be worthy the names of men) which regard no more then outward deeds
toward men: if he be an Idolater, or superstitious, or an heretic, or a
blasphemer of the Gospel, or a swearer, or a mispender of the Sabbath: if he
will keep tuche in bargain and be true of his word: or if he keep a good
house, or give alms or such like: they will say he is a good man: and if he
go not to heaven, they know not who shall. But we must learn that none are
good men, but those which regard to walk in all duties, both in the first
table of the Law and also in the second.

Q. When God rebuked the Israelits by the Prophets, he finds fault with
them for want of duty in man toward man: and commends mercy and pity,
justice and judgment Mich. 6.8
: as though they were the special things required.

A. That is very true, that God by his Prophets sundry times does so urge the
duties of man toward man, as though they were the sum of all: But this was
not to prefer the second table of the law before the first: but to detect
hypocrites which vau^ted much of zeal toward God, for he proves that they
had no love of God, seeinge they dealt so wickedly one against another.

Q. Let us then proceed unto the first commandment of the second table:
Honor thy father and mother.

A. This commandment is great, as it may appear, not only because it is set
in the top, or comes in the forefront of precepts toward men: but also
by the grievous penalty which was set upon it: that the disobedient child
unto father and mother should die the death: he that did curse father or
mother, he that did strike father or mother, should also die the death Exo.
21.17. Leuit. 20.9.
. And moreover, as S. Paul gathers, it is the first commandment with
promise Ephe. 6.2.
: For the promise of the blessing which God annexed unto it, does show how
precious a thing it is before God, that children should honor their parents.

Q. How is it said that this commandment is the first with promise, when as
there is a promise annexed also unto the second commandment?

A. This is the first commandment, which has a special or particular promise
by it self: For that which is added to the second commandment is general to
all. For he says, I will show mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and
keep my commandments.

Q. What do ye take to be meant by the honor which children are commanded
here to yield unto their parents?

A. All the duties they owe, are comprised in this one word honor: how they
are to obey them, to love, reverence, and cherish the^, especially when they
grow to be poor, or weak, or aged. For this was a common saying of parents,
that their children should be the staff of their age,

Q. Is there only the duty of children to be considered in this commandment?

A. Here is also the duty of parents toward their children contained: and
not only that, but also the duty of all inferiors, as the wife to the
husband, the subjects to their prince, the servants to their masters, the
people to their teachers, the young to the aged: And contrariwise of all those
superiors toward their inferiors.

Q. What reason have ye to show this, Seeing here is set down expressly no
more but that which children owe to their parents?

A. There is great reason and manifest: first for Parents, when God wills
children to honor them: they are also bound to do those things for which
they are to be honored. Also for all Superiors they are fitly represented by
the titles of fathers and mothers in respect of the affections which should be
in them unto their inferiors.

Q. Then let us briefly consider the several duties which are required in
each of these: and first show wherein parents are bound unto their children.

A. The father and mother are bound as concerning this bodylie life to make
honest provision for the sustenaunce of their children. And therefore the
vnchriftie Dycers and drunkardes, which wast away their goods, whose children
may well be counted fatherless, and their wives widows, do very unnaturally
sin, and break this commandment of God.

Q. Is there no further thing required at their hands then this?

A. Yes they are to care not only for the body in this life, but also most
especially for both soul and body in the life to come, and therefore they are
enjoined to bring up their children in the nurture and instruction of the Lord
Ephe. 6.4
, whereby we may see not only how these are deceived, which when they have
brought up their children, and provided well for them in the world, will say
they have done their part, although they have not taught them to know god: But
also what a great account they have to make before God for the souls of their
children. By which also we may judge how cruel those are, even more then
savage beasts, who not only by negligence in not teaching their children the
fear of God: But also by corrupt example do lead them into evil, and so
murder their souls: for the child insteede of a godly instruction does
hear his father, swear, lie, sclaunder and rail: does see him deal
deceitfully and unjustly, and to walk in every evil way.

Q. Then you do not account those fathers to have discharged their whole
duty, which do teach their children to say the ten commandments, the
Lords prayer, and the articles of the faith: and say they have done what they
can.

A. It is most sure they have to render account unto God for a far greater
matter then the teaching them to speak these things: for they are to see that
they understand them: they are to instruct them in all points of true religion:
they are to show them the steps of godliness, they are to exhort them with
all diligence, yea and to charge them to fear God: and to walk in his ways.

Q. All men are not able to do this you speak of?

A. The more shame for them, that they will be fathers, before they can do that
which is the duty of fathers, and the more heavy judgment tarryeth for
them, for casting away and spilling the souls of their children.

Q. What is required at the hands of the wife to her husband?

A. It is the duty of the wife to be in subjection to show all obedience, and
reverence, and love, unto her head: and that with a meek and quiet spirit
Ephe. 5.22 23. 1. Pet 3.1.2.3.4.
.

Q. What is the part of the husband unto his wife?

A. The husband ought to love and cherish his wife Ephe. 5.25.
: And because she is the weaker, and subject to infirmities, he is to put away
all bitterness, and tyrannical roughness: and to guide her with wisdom and
discretion: to cover her infirmities, and to heal them: and for such
knowledge as she wants he is to instruct her.

Q. How if the husband be an ungodly and a froward man and not meet to be
an head to govern, being rather like a mad bedlim then a discrete guide?

A. The wife is to do her duty notwithstanding, for why did she make such a
choice, when she should have been most careful to marry in the Lord? And
she is to be the more heedefull: that by her godly and chaste conversation
joined with meekness, her husband may be won from his naughty life.
Likewise, the man which is coupled with an evil wife, is to use all godly
means, and discretion to draw her to the Lord.

Q. What owe the servants unto their masters?

A. The servants ought to love, reverence, and obey their masters, to do their
work faithfully, both in sight and out of sight C. 3.3.22.23.
: To see nothing go to wrack, nor to spoil any thing, nor to pilferre: But
to show all faithfulness and diligence.

Q. What must the masters do unto their servants?

A. They are bound in duty before God, not only to deal kindly and
lovingly, and to do them no wrong, neither by defrauding nor oppressing them
Ephe. 6.9.
: but also to instruct and teach them the true knoweledge of God.

Q. What proof can you show that masters are bound to teach their servants?

A. There can be no reason showed against it: for when it is plain by the
scriptures that every man is bound in conscience to admonish and instruct his
neighbor, when he goes astray Heb. 3.13.
: Who can doubt but that a man is much more bound to do it to those that are
under his charge, and of his own family.

Q. What do you think of those men which do not this?

A. Howesoeuer they take themselves, it is manifest that they have not so much
as the show of Christianity, nor of any godly mind: For can those be good
which suffer their family (which should be a little Church) to be so full
of wickedness, as roysting, swearing, railing, lying, quarrelling, and all
other filthiness, that is even a little hell: and never go about to examine
and instruct them in any goodness. So that they have their woork well done in the
week day, they care not where they become upon the Sabbath day: They never
examine them how they profit by the word.

Q. What is the duty of subjects to their Prince?

A. The Subject is to love, honor and obey the Prince 1. Pet. 2.17
, and because he is defended both in his life and possessions by the Prince,
he is to be ready with his body and goods to defend his Prince: and with a
ready and cheerful mind to pay tribute, and such like Ma. 17.24.25 Romans 13.6.
.

Q. What is required of Princes and governors?

A. It is their duty for to seek the benefit of their subjects, to cherish
and maintain the good, and to punish evil doers. And this must be by such
laws for temporal matters, as be equal, and for spiritual matters, as do
maintain sound religion.

Q. The subject is to obey the Prince and the child his father: Is this
obedience to be showed in all things?

A. They are to obey them in the Lord, and not further: for if they command
that that God forbids, we must obey God rather Act. 5.29. and 4.19.
. If the Prince should set up false religion, the people must not receive it.
If the Father would match his Son with a wicked woman, or his Daughter with
an evil man, void of true religion, they are to refuse, because they are
commanded to marry only in the Lord Deu. 7.2.3.4 1. Cor. 7.39.
.

Q. What are the people bound to show unto their Pastors?

A. They are bound to esteem them, as the Messengers of the Lord of hosts
Mal. 2.7.
, and disposers of Gods graces 1. Cor. 4.1
, they ought to submit themselves unto them, to be taught and guyded, and to
obey them in the doctrince which they teach: And to follow their steps
He. 13.7.17
. They must also provide things necessary for their sustentation 1, Tim. 5.17
.

Q. And what must they do to their flocks?

A. They are most straightly bound to watch over the flock, and to feed them
Ioh. 21.15 16.17. 1. Pet. 5.2.
, to open unto them all the counsels of God, and to do it faithfully 1. Act.
20.27. and. Pet. 5.2.
: They must also be patterns and examples in all goodly conversation 1. Pet. 5.3.
. For if they fail in either of these, they be not true Shepheardes, but
Woolues and Hyrelinges.

Q. What must be the behavior of youth to the aged?

A. They must honor and reverence the gray head Leui. 19.32


Q. What must they show unto the younger sort?

A. As they be above them in years, so must they excel in knowledge, wisdom,
sobriety, and staydnesse Tit. 2.2.
, so that their very countenance must be as a bridle unto the lusts of
youth, that they may be ashamed to be wanton and light in their presence.
And there is no greater shame, then to see old persons foolish, ignorant,
vain, given to boyishe tricks, and lightness: which spoyleth them of all
reverence, and causes them to be condemned.

Q. The promise seems to have little force in it: for if we consider the
miseries and dangers of this life, we will easilye confess it to be far
better to be out of the world.

A. Long life in it self is not such a blessinge: for to the ungodly it is
a grievous curse, because it had been far better for him to have dyed in
his cradle: But yet it is a great blessing, when GOD gives it as a token and
pledge of his favor, and when a man is so guided in it, that it is to the
increase and heaping up of his everlasting glory.

Q. The next commandment forbids to commit murder.

A. This precepte is of great weight, for the sheddinge of man's blood is a
thing which God much abhors, as it may appear by the penalty, yt the
murderer should without al pity be put to death Number. 35.16
.

Q. Is there no other murder here forbidden then, when a man does kill with a
weapon, or is the cause by any means to take away life?

A. Yes, this Commandment is expressed in one word, but yet it extends it
self very largely, which will more euidentlye appear, if we consider certain
rules which are generallye to be observed in the law.

Q. Which are those?

A. First, that the law of God is not as the laws of Princes, that a man can
say, thought is free: but it binds as well the inward parts of the mind, as
the outward parts of the body: Also where God forbids any thing, he
commands the contrary. Likewise that which we noted in the second
Commandment, that where god forbids any one sin he forbddeth all other,
that are of that kind, he forbids all things that are accessaries unto it,
al things that do nourishe and breed it, and so condemns both the root and
branch.

Q. Show then how men commit murder?

A. Our Savior Christ in the 5. Cha. of Math. does affirm, that anger,
taunting, and reproachful speeches are murder. Mat. 5.21.22.
. S. John says, that he which hates his brother, is a murderer, and no
murderer has eternal life, abiding in him 1. Ioh. 3.15.
. Then cruelty, unmercifulness, oppression, fighting and quarrelling must
needs be murder.

Q. Then it appears, if these and sundry other such like be murder, because
murder is bred and cherished by them, that many men be murderers, which do
not take them selves to be so.

A. This Commandment does sit higher unto men then they suppose: For by
nature we be all murderers: And if there were no change by regeneration, nor
no outward penalty to restrain, it would break out, and men in their
anger, furye, and hatred, would slay one another without pity: Now GOD does
judge of these, as they lie in the heart.

Q. Do not these kinds of murders cast men out of the kingdom of God?

A. No Murderer shall have everlasting life: No man's prayer can be
heard, so long as he has a murderers mind.

For the Lord says, when ye stretch forth your hands, I will turn away
mine eyes, for your hands are full of blood Esai. 1.15
. The Apostle wills to lift up pure hands without wrath 1. Tim. 2.8
. If a man be fierce in anger and furye, cruel in malice and hatred,
boisterous in revenge, and full of reuiling and reproach: This man before GOD
is a rank murderer, with a cruel heart, and bloudye hands: and his prayer is
as acceptable unto God, as if he should offer a Dog in sacrifice.

Q. What are we then to look unto, in our repentance in this Commandment?

A. We must seek to have all bloody and cruel affections killed in us: as
anger, hatred, desire of revenge, pride, contempt, and such like: and we must
put on, and deck our minds with gentleness, lowelynesse, meekness,
kindness, and long suffering, for these things are here commanded.

Q. Proceed unto the next Commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery.

A. For the breach of this law GOD did appoint death Deuteronomy. 22.22
, to declare in what great detestation he has adulterers. It is set also
before theft, being worse then it: As Solomon does make comparison, and
proves, that the adulterer is more abominable then the Thief Pro. 6.
. And the cause why men make so small accounte of this sin, is, that the
adulterer, and the adulteress, have not their brains dashed out.

Q. There was such punishment appointed in the law, but many suppose that this
rygour is taken away now under the Gospel, which is the time of grace.

A. Those are greatly deceived: for look how a man is more to be blamed,
which goes out of the way in the clear Sun at midde day, then he which
goes by night with a Candle: even so are men more to be punyshed for such
foul sins in the clear light of the Gospel, then in the time of the law.

Q. Some think it great pity they should be dealt withal, because they may
repent, and beecome honest: Also Christ wills to let the tares grow with
the Wheat, least in plucking up the tares, the pluck up the Weate also Mat.
13.29.30.
.

A. Some indeed make such reasons, but without all reason: for so they may
say of Thieves and Murderers, It is pyttie, they may repent. Also when they
alleadg that the Tares must be let alone, that is not meant of open offenders,
but of close Hypocrites, which are like good men: for it is Darnell, which
Christ speaks of, which is so like wheat, that it can hardlye be discerned,
until it shoot forth the ear.

Q. They do alleadg also that Christ did not condemn the woman to death, which
was taken in adultery, and brought before him Ioh. 8.3.10 12.
.

A. They do allege it very unskillfully, not considering, that Christ came
not to take upon him civil power, as a judge to put to death: but to preach
the Gospel, and to call men to repentance: and therefore when one prayed him
to command his brother to divide the land, he answered: Man, who made me a
Judge, or a deuider Lu. 12.13.14
?

Q. Come then unto the words of the Commandment: Do ye think there is
here any thing condemned, but the outward act of fornication, adultery,
incest, or such abominations?

A. Our Savior Christ says, that he which looks upon a woman, and lusts
after her, has committed adultery in his heart. Also this must needs be
confessed, that all things, which do nourish and breed unclean lusts are
condemned here: as so^ges of ribaldry, filthy and light communication, enticing
apparel, gluttony, drunkenness, unclean, and unchaste looks, daunsing and
such like.

Q. The Scripture does mention, that dancing was used and allowed.

A. The scripture does not show, that ever any holy man or woman did use this
wanton kind of daunsing of men and women together, whereby their inward lusts
are stirred up and increased. There was an other kind of daunsing, wc was
allowed.

Q. What is here then commanded to the servants of God?

A. All chastity and pureness, both of body and mind, sobernes in meat,
drink and apparel, with such like: Men must also take heed to their eyes,
least they come to have eyes full of adultery, by viewinge the beauty of
women.

Q. It follows in the Commandments: Thou shall not steal: How far does
this extend?

A. It extends thus far: first that a man shall not wrong his neighbor in
his goods, by taking ought from him, or hurting him in the things he
possesses. Then on the contrary part, he is commanded to be careful for the
wealth and prosperity of his neighbor.

Q. Show then the particulars, in which men offend in the first part.

A. Men do not only commit these, when they lay violence hands upon the
goods of others: but also by extortion, usury, briberie, and all kind of
Cosinage and deceites in buying and selling: by destroying their corn, and
hurting their cattle. Likewise when they inwardly so covet the goods of their
neighbor, yt they seek to win it from him by cards, dice, or bowls.

Q. Do ye judge that theft for men to increase their goods by gaming?

A. There is theft first in the heart, both of him that wins, and of him
that loses: for each does desire to gain by the hurt of ye other. Then there
is theft in both outwardly committed, in him that wins, because he seeks
riches by a mean which GOD has not sanctified, because a man by it does never
benefit him self, without the hurt of others. The leeser commits
abominable theft, because by this means he robs his wife and his children,
or the poor: or does not employ his riches to good uses, for which God has
given them.

Q. Is a man bound in conscience, when he sells any thing unto his
neighbor, to disclose the faults of it: and so to take no more for it, then
it is worth?

A. That is without all doubt: for ye general rule is, that whatsoever ye
would that men should do unto you, even so do you unto them Mat. 7.12
. There is no man that would be hurt and hindered by the deceit of an other:
Therefore when he deceives and hurts the wealth of his neighbor, he does
commit theft.

Q. Then it appears, that there be a number of men, which are arrant
thieves, and yet disdain to have the title.

A. It is even so: for they which find their neighbors goods when it is lost,
and conceal it: They which defraud, and which seek by sleighes of law to
defeat true owners: also those which do mibble, and pilfer the value of a penny
at a time: have al of the^ such theeuish hearts, that if it were not, that they
feared the gallows more then God, they would break out into al violent theft.

Q. Are al these thefts to be repented of, and rooted our of the heart, before
a man can enter into the kingdom of god? and is a man to restore the theft?

A. No thief shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, although he should be but
a thief in heart. Moreover, he which does repent in deed, if he be able to
restore, he will, least he should be like a cutte-purse, which should crave
pardon of the Judge, and keep fast the purse which he had cut in his hand.

Q. What is the other part, which we are on the contrary commanded?

A. We ought so to love our neighbor, that we be careful of his prosperity,
and ready to cherish and save his goods, if we should see any thing of his in
danger to he lost: as his ox or his Ass, although he be our enemy we ought
to drive it home, when we see it go astray Deu. 22.1.
: Also we are bound if our neighbor be poor, and we rich, to minister unto
his necessity 1. Ioh. 3.17.
.

Q. The ninth Commandment says, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
neighbor: what punishment was appointed for the lying witness?

A. It was ordained by God, that if the false testimony were foundout, that
then he which did wrong evidence should bear the same punishment, that he
would have brought upon his neighbor: if he bare false witness in a crime
of death, the^ he him self died for it: if it were to be whipped, or beaten
with rods, then was he beaten Deu. 19.17.18.19.
.

Q. What are the sins against this commandment?

A. First the giving false testimonye against any before the Judges, or such
as were to decide matters: Then the raising and spreading of false tales, lies
and sclaunders: Also the ready mind and open ears to receive evil reports
against other men.

Q. It cannot be denied, but that such as do raise up and spread false tales,
to defame others, do commit a wicked sin: because they spoil a man of
his good name, which is a precious thing: But what reason is there, that such
should be blamed, as have not bin the deuisers of the sclaunder, but have only
heard and reported it upon the words of others?

A. There is great reason why they should be blamed: for if they had any
love in them, how could it delight them to hear evil report of others, with
such a desire to have it true: for the carnal minded men, which hate the
light, are right glad when they hear any evil of those, which profes
godliness: which does holden sclaunderers to tell the^ such lies, as have no
color of truth. But a godly mind is grieved to hear of evil in a other, and
if it be true, yet he will not blase it abroad to defame him.

Q. Is it then an offense, and a breach of this commandment, for a man which
does know an evil vice in an other, and does tell it abroad?

A. The end why a man does a thing is much: for if he do it of a grudge to ye
man, he does sin: but there may be profit in doing it, both to further Gods
glory, and also to benefit men: for if there be a man which is of good
estimation for truth and honesty, which is an enemy to the truth: a good
manne ought in such a case to disclose his faults, and to disgrace him, least
his credit hinder the truth, and keep others from it. This rule did Christ
observe against the Scribes and Pharisees, in laying open what Hypocrites they
were, and so spoiling them of their good name and estimation Mat. 23.2
.

Q. There remains, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, Thou shall not
covet thy neighbors wife, nor his man servant, nor his maid servant, nor his
ox, nor his Ass, or any thing that is thy neighbors. Is all this but one
commandment?

A. It is al but one Commandment, albeit there be diverse branches, yet they
set forth but one sin.

Q. Does this Commandment contain in it any thing several, or is it only
a repetition of the former. For he that does inwardlye wish to have his
neighbors goods is a thief: and here he says, Thou shalt not covet thy
neighbors house: He which lusts after a woman, is an adulterer. And here he
says, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife: It may seem therefore to be
but a bare repetition of the former.

A. That were a great absurdity, for then they could not be called ten
Commandments, because there should be but nine, if this last were a
repetition.

Q. Show then the difference beetweene this precept and the other.

A. True it is, that ye unclean lusts of the heart be adultery, the
desires and intentes of the mind to get other men's goods are theft: and so
in the other Commandementes, because God is a spyrituall Lawe-giuer, his law
binds the spirit and the soul, as well as the body: But yet there is a
difference beetweene the last Precept, and the other: for this is more inward,
and touches more deeply, and sits nigher then they.

Q. This seems hard, for how can any thing be more inward then that which
restrains and binds the inward desires and intentes of the soul. Declare
this thing therefore more plainly?

A. The other commandments do reach to all the inward motions of the
heart, which go with deliberation and consent: But this reaches unto those
motions before they come unto any consent, yea it reaches unto the root, or
fountain it self of all evil thoughts: and so it goes deeper then unto the
thoughts. What testimonies of the Scripture are there to declare this thing?

A. The Apostle Paul sets forth how close a sin it is, when he says,
I could not tell that concupiscence were sin, but that the law has said,
Thou shall not lust Romans 7.7.
. Also S. James does make it to be the mother or the womb, which does
conceive and breed evil thoughts Iam. 1.14.
.

Q. Those which take it then that covetousness is forbidden in this precept
because he says, Thou shall not covet: and those which take it that Saint
Paul and Saint James in the places cited, do speak of the gross lust, are
deceived.

A. They are greatly deceived, which comes to pass through the barre^nesse
of our language, which lacks words to express these things: for the word
which we translate in the commandment, Thou shall not covet: in the tongues
which the Scripture was first written in, is nothing near ye word which does
signify covetousness. Also that which is translated lust, in S. Paul, and
James, does not in those places, (being the word which is used in this
commandment) signify the gross lust of the heart, which goes with liking
and consent: for natural understanding does take that to be evil. But S. Paul
did not know that this was sin.

Q. What is it then which is here forbidden, to speak more fully?

A. Here is the natural infection of original sin forbidden: out of which
all other sins do spring in us. And therefore in this commandment children
are found guilty. For the Apostle proves them to be sinners, because they
die Romans 5.14.
. Now it is certain that the child new borne, or before it is borne cannot
sin in word, deed, nor thought: But this concupiscence is in his nature, which
conceiueth and hatcheth diverse sins, which we see the buddes of, so soon as
they have any discretion.

Q. What have we the^ to note in this commandment, that it reaches unto both
the tables of the law, or that it contains the whole concupiscence?

A. I do not think so, for although it be not mentioned in the first table of
the law, yet when Christ gives ye su^me of it thus, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, with all thy mind, with all thy thought, it
forbids and leaves no place to any inward infectio^. Also the Lord in this
last precept does me^tio^ nothing but toward ye neighbor.

Q. What do you gather for our repentance in this commandment?

A. As this co^ma^deme^t notes unto us, ye root and fountain of sin, and from
whence it is bred in us, so must it lead us to begin our repentance at ye same:
for so long as co^cupisce^ce is not killed in us, although we be reformed in
our outward doings, yet we are never the near: for our hearts being unclean
still we loose all our labor.

Q. This being so secret a poiso^ in our nature, how shall we know when it is
killed

A. A man shall easily know that it is killed, by the changing of his
thoughts, for look how fruitful his mind is still in vain, and corrupt
motions, and look how far he delights still in them, so far there
remains life still in this womb of sin, which conceaueth them.

Q. We may perceive by the opening of the law, that when we are regenerate,
yet we come far short of doing any thing perfectly, according to the straight
rule: and therefore it may seem that it is to small purpose that we do?

A. It is most true that every one of the regenerate so long as they live
here, may say with the blessed Apostle: The law is spiritual, and I am
carnal, sold under sin Romans 7.
Also there is no good work which we do, but there is some leaven of
infection mingled with it: but yet it is unto great purpose that we endeavor
to show forth good works, because God is highly pleased when we strain with
all our might to attain as nigh perfection as may be Heb. 6.1. Phil. 3.
.

Q. Do ye allow then of their sayings, which speak thus, we are weak and
frail, we cannot but sin in every matter, we do well as nigh as God does
give us grace, more we cannot do.

A. These sayings are true in them selves to be allowed: but yet the great
abuse of them which is common, is in no wise to be liked. For when an evil
disposed person to excuse himself and to cover his sin does answer thus,
we are all sinners, we cannot but sin: It is a foul abuse. Also when an
ignorant and slouthful person unto all goodness shall say, I do well as near
as God will give me grace: It is naughtily spoken, for God is ready to give
and bestow his graces in plentiful measure, if they would seek and use all
the holy means and exercises that he has appointed.

Q Let us come now unto the Sacraments of the new Testament: and first how
many be there?

A. There be only two 1. Cor. 1.
: that is, Baptism and the holy Supper of the Lord.

Q. To what end and purpose are they ordained?

A. They serve to confirm and strengthen faith, and to further repentance.

Q. Faith comes by hearing Romans 10.17.
: and so repentance is wrought.

A. Yea but God uses two sorts of teaching, to draw us nigher unto himself.
The one by the opening of the word, which does display and offer unto us, all
the treasures which are in the son of God: The other by the Sacraments, in
which he does offer and set before us the same things, in a kind of teaching
applied unto our dull nature. For whereas we being lumpishe and heavy, our
faith and mind does not so readily mount up into heaven, GOD does most
louinglye reach forth his hand, and so set us ladders to creep up by.

Q. How should these earthly creatures have such power in them, as to
carry men's minds up into heaven?

A. The things of them selves have no such power: but the institution of God,
who has appointed them, to represent and set before us Spiritual and
Heavenly things, and also the truth of GOD which does assure us, as well of
that which is signified, as of the sign: have great force and power in them.

Q. Then ye are not of their mind which ascribe the power to the outward
work: neither yet of theirs, which count them base and needelesse?

A. We must beware that we give not that to creatures which is proper only to
God. For such as by grace unto the sign (as though the work wrought did the
deed) do like blind Asses rob God: Again, those proud men, which are
swollen so fat that their eyes are closed up from seeing themselves: supposing
their faith to be so strong and their minds so heavenly, that they need not
the use of the Sacraments: are much to be misliked. Even as those which take
upon them to know better what is fit for them, then God does.

Q. What may the Sacraments be likened unto, that we may more fully see the
use of them?

A. The Apostle calls circumcision the seal of the righteousness of faith
Romans 4.11.
: and it is without controversy that other Sacraments are so also: look then
what use there is of a seal in temporal things, the like use is there of the
Sacraments, in spiritual things.

Q. Declare then more fully that point?

A. When a man has a promise of any good thing: he thinks it better when
he has it in writing, but surest of all when it is sealed. Even so God to
make us more sure, has not only given his word written, but also has set to
his seal.

Q. If men were constant and true of their word, there should need no seal
to be set thereto to confirm it. Does it not therefore accuse the word, that
the seal must be put to it, for to make it sure?

A. There is no doubt but that the inconstancy of man's word was the cause
why the seal was added. But the thing is far otherwise beteweene God and us:
for it is not for any respect of the word it self that seals should be
added thereto. (For the word of it self is infallible.) But it is the wonderful
kindness of God which does yield so much unto our unbelief: that rather
then we should have any doubt of the truth of his unchangeable word, he
would set to his seal also to confirm the same.

Q. May it be gathered by this, that the Sacraments are to no purpose without
the word?

A. It is out of doubt a most foul abuse and profanation of the Sacraments,
to minister them unto those which are not first instructed in the word. For
were it not a very foolish and ridiculous matter, for to put seals, and annexe
them unto a parchment without writing. What use has ye seal, so long as there
is a blancke?

Q. There is the same reason in both the Sacraments: and yet Baptism is given
unto those which are without knowledge?

A. It is ministered unto infants when they cannot know any thing at all: But
yet they are bound to know so soon as they come to years of discretion, For
such as continue in blind ignorance, having been baptized in their infancy, do
carry about a seal set unto nothing. For this cause the Apostles are willed
to teach, and the^ to Baptize Mat. 28.19.
.

Q. How many parts do ye consider in a Sacrament?

A. There be two in general to be considered: that is to say, the outward
and visible sign: and the invisible grace which is signified.

Q. What is that invisible grace, which is represented in both the Sacraments?

A. That which we obtain in Christ: for in both the Sacraments our Lord
Jesus Christ is set before us, with the riches of his grace: even painted out,
unto our outward senses.

Q. Proceed unto the holy baptism: and first show the doctrine which it does
seal.

A. The doctrine is this, yt whereas we were borne unclean, even a lump of
sin, and therefore strangers from god, and children of his wrath: He does
incorporate us into ye body of his son, and wash us from all uncleanness and
filthiness, and receive us into his own family, to be heirs of eternal life.

Q. How is this figured unto us?

A. By the water. For by it is set before us, how we are baptized into Christ,
eue^ into his death, burial, and resurrection. Also ye washing with ye water,
which purges away the uncleanness of the flesh: does show how the holy ghost
does inwardly wash away our sins in the blood of Christ.

Q. Is Baptism only the seal in gods behalf: by which he does assure us of
this new birth and regeneration in his son?

A. It is the seal set to in the covenant between both parties as well in our
behalf, as in the Lords. For as God does thereby bind himself unto us to be
our God, by setting to his seal: So also does it bind us as the seal of our
vow, which we have there solemnly made, to be his people, by renouncing the
Devil, and his works.

Q. What say ye then of those which are not mindful of this: but walk in all
the lusts of the Devil?

A. They have unfaithfully and traitorously broken so great a promise made unto
god. And so are become guilty of such a sin as shall turn to their greater
damnation. For it had been better for them never to have vowed Deuteronomy. 23.21.22.
Eccle. 5.3.4.
. For how grievous a sin is it so to dally and dissemble with God?

Q. Let us come unto the other Sacrament. Show also that doctrine which it does
seal?

A. The doctrine is plentifully set down by our Savior in the sixth of Iohne
when he says, I am the bread of life which came down from heaven, He that
eats this bread shall live for ever. My flesh is meat in deed, my blood is
drink in deed: he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal
life. He that eats not my flesh has not life Ioh. 6.51.54 ^5.
.

Q. Do ye then take this to be the doctrine of Christ, that his very natural
flesh, and blood, and the very substance of it must be received: and that
none shall live, but those which eat and drink the same?

A. We can have no benefit by Christ, until we be partakers of Christ
himself: And that in such sort, that we do become flesh of his flesh, and
bones of his bones, as the Apostle speaks Ephe. 5.30.
: and therefore such as shall be saved, do eat his very natural flesh, and
drink his very natural blood.

Q. Is not God only the fountain of life? And then how can it be ascribed
unto the flesh of Christ to give life?

A. It is most certain and without gainsaying, that God only is the fountain
of life. And yet it is rightly ascribed unto the flesh of Christ to have in
it life, and to give it, unto all that do eat thereof. Because his flesh is
joined unseparably unto the Godhead, and from thence has life also in it self.
Which thing he plainly shows, when he says: As ye living sent me, so I
live by ye father, and he that eats my flesh, shall live by me Ioh. 6.57.
.

Q. Seeing we must eat the very flesh of Christ, and drink his blood, or else
we can have no life. Do ye believe that the bread is turned into the flesh
of Christ, and the wine into his blood?

A. That is a most abominable error: For our Lord is only in heaven, and
thither must our faith ascend and lay hold on him, to eat spiritually that
flesh of his which was crucified, and to drink that blood of his which was
shed. This being so great a mystery, and we so dull to conceive, the Lord to
help us, has chosen bread and wine as a seal and pledge that he does give
us the same. For the bread broken does signify the crucified body of Christ,
and the wine powered forth, his blood that was shed. Now because the Lord does
feed us in deed with the flesh and blood of his son: and not give us bare
signs, the bread is called his body and the wine his blood. For the true
receiver does as verily and undoubtedly receive the flesh and blood of
Christ with the mouth of his soul, as he does receive the bread and wine
with the mouth of the body.

Q. There be reasons which seem to prove that there is not after consecration
the substance of bread and wine, but only the accidents (as they call the^)
which are the proportion, the color, and taste, with such like.

A. It is very truly spoken, that the reasons used for this matter do seem to
prove: but do not prove, as being alleged, they shall easily be answered.

Q. Christ brake the bread, and said this is my body.

A. If it were not called his body, because it was a Sacrament of the same, wit
because it was his very flesh in deed: then had Christ been crucified
before he was betrayed, for he delivered the bread before: Or we may say that
the bread was crucified. For it is the crucified flesh of Christ, which we
receive by faith: and the same which the Lord gave unto them in the night he
was betrayed, the same is also now delivered unto us.

Moreover, if the bread be changed because he says, This is my body: then
was the rock also changed, for the Apostle says, They did all drink of the
spiritual rock that followed them, and the rock was Christ 1. Cor. 10.4.
. This blasphemy should also follow, that the unclean reprobate should
eat the flesh of Christ. But Christ says, That whosoever eats his flesh,
shall live for ever.

Q. They say that is to be taken of those which eat his flesh and drink his
blood worthily: for all such shall live for ever. But say they, some do eat
his flesh and drink his blood unworthily, or else how should the unworthy
receiver be guilty of the body and blood of Christ. If it be bread and wine
still, then should he be guilty but of bread and wine: and not of the body
and blood of Christ, which he does not touch nor come nigh.

A. In so saying they show themselves to be impudent and blind in the
scriptures. For how holds the reason of Christ, by which he proves that
manna was not the true bread of life, because their fathers had eaten of it,
and yet were dead Ioh. 6.59.
: If the reprobate may eat the flesh of Christ. Also where they say if it
be bread still, a man should not be guilty of ye body of Christ, but of
bread, yt is absurd: for it is not common bread: but a Sacrament of Christ's
body: and God does offer the flesh of his son unto those which receive it.
Also it is a seal and pledge of the holy mysteries. If a man contemptuously
break and deface the Princes seal, shall he not be guilty of treason
against the person of the Prince? Shall it be said that he has defaced but
a piece of wax? Because in substance it is still but wax.

Q. Make that reason of our Savior Christ more plain: Because it does fully
and flatlye overthrow the cavil of the Papists of eating the natural flesh
of Christ unworthily. For they like blasphemous wretches, to defend their
transubstantiation, do affirm, that the wicked do eat the very flesh of
Christ. And so they join Christ and Belial, Heaven and Hell, GOD and the
Devil together: and this they must do, or else deny the bread and the wine
to be the very flesh, and the blood of Christ. For the very Reprobate do
receive the Sacrament.

A. The reason of our Savior is most evident, to show that the reprobate do
not eat his flesh: Because he proves ye manna was not the true bread of life,
seeing the me^ which did eat it were dead. He speaks of the spiritual
death, for he does not promise to set those free from the bodily death, which
eat his flesh. If the wicked and damned might eat the true bread of life,
and yet die in their sins, it might be then objected, that Christ's words
were of no force to prove the Manna not to be the very bread of life.

For a man may answer, and say, that it might be the true bread of life,
but they did eat it unworthily, and so it profited not them.

Q. What charge does the holy Ghost inioyne those, which come unto this
Sacrament?

A. He wills that a man try himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and
drink of that Cup 1. Co. 11.2
.

Q. What cause is there showed, why they should do so?

A. The cause is rendered, that he which eats and drinks unworthily, eats
and drinks to him self damnation. And thereof also there is a reason given,
namely, yt he is guyltie of the body and blood of the Lord.

Q. Are not men damned, unless they eat unworthily?

A. A man is subject unto damnation, although he never do profane these holy
mysteries: but the Apostle does speak of greater and sorer damnation, which
those do draw upon them selves, which are defilers of the Sacraments.

They deserve hell, which commit adultery, and other such sins: but those
shall be cast into deeper horror, which commit a sin so foul above many
sins. For whereas the body of our Lord, and his blood are the most precious
of all other things: so must GOD needs be most hyghlye displeased, and his
wrath in greater measure kyndeled against all those, which receive
unworthily, and pollute the same.

Q. Wherein is a man to examine and try himself, that he may come worthily?

A. Seeing we are to come even unto the most holy flesh, and precious blood
of Christ it self: we are to discern the Lords body: that is, we ought to
come with reverence and fear, not with unclean and filthy hearts. For the
unclean are no meet guestes to come to that table.

Q. Show then how each man is to deal with him self.

A. He is to look into him self, whether he have the true and lively faith
in Christ, which is known by true repentance, which it brings forth. For
if a man do not bring Christ in him, he shall not there receive him.

Q. Is the faith of Christ in none, but such as dwell in Christ, and Christ in
them?

A. We are by faith made members of Christ, even flesh of his flesh, and
bones of his bones Ephesians. 5.30.
. And for the same cause the Church is called Christ 1. Co. 12.12
: it is also Christ crucified, whose flesh we eat, and which dwells in us.
And therefore those which are in Christ are new creatures: their carnal
lusts and sinful affections are mortified, by the virtue and power of the
crucified flesh of Christ. And also they are raised by him unto true
holiness.

Q. Do ye then deny the true faith in Christ unto those in whom sin lives
and bears sway?

A. They spoil the passion of our Lord, of al power and glory, which say they
believe in him, and eat his flesh, and yet are abominable sinners. For what
do they leave unto him, if he do not by his flesh crucified slay sin where
he comes.

Q. Do not men remain sinners still, when they have eaten the flesh of
Christ, and drunk his blood?

A. The Scripture says, that he which commits sin, has not seen him,
nor known him 1. John. 3.6
: but yet it is one thing to commit sin, and to live unto sin, and an other
to have the remnaunts of sin abiding in us, which those that be in Christ
have Romans 7.
.

Q. How shall a man know then, seeing sin remains still in him, whether it be
alive or dead?

A. He may easily know that by his hear. For if sin stincke, and be
loathsome unto him: and he is displeased, and mislyketh, and condemns him
self for it: And if it were possible, he would vomit it up, as a thing that
does annoy the stomach of his soul: He does abhor it wheresoever it does
appear, eitheir in him self, or in others: Then is the body of sin as a
rotten caryon in him, which has from christ crucified received a deadly
wound. But if he take joy and delight still in sin, and think it sweet
and pleasant: then is sin alive in him still, and he is dead, because Christ
does not live in him.

Q. There is no man living, but takes delight in some sin or other.

A. I grant that the most godly are sometime deceived, and take pleasure in
doing or speaking that, which they consider not to be sin: which they are
greatly grieved for, when they perceive they did offend. Also in the heat of
tentation, the corruption of flesh does sometime prevail, and take some
delight in one sin or other, which he knows to be sin. But yet afterward
it brings more grief of heart, then it had pleasure in it. And so there
is great difference, between the faithful and the infidel, in the manner of
sinning.

Q. What say ye then to the common saying, we be all sinners, and shall be to
our lives end: we must repent so nigh as God will give us grace. But yet we
cannot leave those things, which we have bin accustomed unto? are these
worthy receivers?

A. These are not worthy receivers, howsoever they flatter themselves, because
they never fealt the power of godliness, nor know not true repentance. They
are greatly bewitched with those general speeches, which in some sort be true.
They do not perceive what work God works in his children, to draw them out
of the filthiness of the world, that they be not spotted with it.

Q. What is the practice then of the godly in which they excel those other?

A. The godly man at all times, but especially when he prepares him self to
come to the holy table of the lord, does go through all the Commandments of
the law, to search and spy out what sin there is in him against any of them.
But most of all he does make narow search for those sins, with have a deep
and secret root in our nature: as pride, vain glory, and covetousness. And
when he finds himself faulty, then he cries unto God, to have his spirit, to
mortify the flesh. He is humbled at the sight of his corrupt nature, he does
even vow to God solemnly, with a full and settled purpose of heart, not for a day or
two, but al his life long, to travel in all holy exercise of prayer, hearing and
meditating in the word, and careful practicing the same: and so to weight
patiently and attend, when God will succor him. Q. This diligence is required
at our hands. But that it may be the better known, show the negligence of the
other. A. The other sort of men do not rightly consider the worthiness, and
dignity of the flesh and blood of Christ: but come rashly and irreverently, in
the filthy rags of their sins. They do not purpose in their heart to turn
from wickedness, but to live as they have done, even in those things, which they
know to be ungodly. And as for other foul sins which swarm in them, yt they
understand not to be sins, they are so far from the desire to find them
out, by the true knowledge of the law: that they covet and labor to defend
them to be no sins. And therefore they are wonderful glad, when they ca^ get any
color of matter, to prove that to be lawful, which their flesh lusts after,
and finds sweetness in. And for this cause they do not call upon God to have
power to ouerco^e their sins. Q. They confess when they hear of that which
is evil, that they should leave it, and they say, God grant we may leave it.

A. They cannot but confess, that men ought to forsake wickedness: they have
also a desire that they could so do: but in this they fail, that they never
labor about it. They have the wit to say, that if a man be fallen into a
ditch, he may cry long enough Lord help me, if he do not strive to come
out, and take hold of such things as he may clamber up by. And yet they are not
so wise as to consider the means, by which GOD does reach forth his mighty
arm unto them, to draw them out of the puddle and mire of sin. For God does
reach down his arm, to draw men up to heaven, and to save them by the
preaching of the Gospel 1. Cor. 1.21
: which is the power of God to salvation unto every one which does believe Romans
1.16. 1. Cor. 1.18.
. But who believe this preaching, or to whom is the arm of GOD revealed Esai.
53.1
? They do not seek to lay hold of it: But contrariwise, they cast them
selves headlonge into the snares of temptation, by joining in fellowship with
the workers of iniquity.

Q. Is that so great a hinderaunce unto true repentance, when men accompany
them selves with such as live and walk in sinful ways? There be some,
which say, I thank God, I have such a strong faith in Christ, that I can
keep company with the worst, and yet they cannot hurt me: I hope to do them
good.

A. Such men are even as wise, and have as good a faith, as that man which
should skippe down from the top of a house, and say, I trust so in God,
that I fear not any danger, of breaking my legs or my neck: Or that shall
cry out, and say, Lord keep me from drowning, and skip into the sea. For when
a man has heard the word, and does call upon God to save him, he must avoid
all occasions of evil: and therefore God does command al his servants to come
out from among the wicked, and to seperat them selves. He pronounces those
blessed, which shun their counsel, and their way.

Q. Do ye esteem those to be worthy receivers then, which strive and labor
to return home unto God, and use al good means which he has appointed,
although they be still but weak and full of infirmities?

A. They are worthy receivers, and the Sacraments are ordained for such: For if
men's faith and repentance were perfect, then should not stand in need of such
help: But because they seek to come unto God, and are not able to ascend, he
comes down unto them, to lift them up.

Q. Then ye take those men to be in good case, which carefully and thankfully
embrace the means, which GOD has ordained to draw them unto eternal life.

A. Those are in most happy case: for although they seem to travel in vain,
yet it is far otherwise: for GOD is faithful, and cannot cast away those which
seek him. If they crave of God to be taught the truth, and to abide in it,
they cannot miscary: but the proud mind which does swell, shall obtain no
favor nor grace.

Q. Let us proceed now to speak of prayer, which is a special mean which
God has ordained, to help our selves withal, and first show what those
things are, which we obtain through true and hearty prayer?

A. We are by prayer to seek in general for all things, which set forth
Gods honor, and advance his truth here below in earth. We are also to seek
for all things which we stand in need of, either for body or soul, for this
life, or for the life to come.

Q. Have we the sum of all these in one prayer?

A. Our Savior Christ has in very few words comprised the sum of all
these: in that prayer which he taught his Apostles, which we call the Lords
prayer. For the whole prayer does consist of six petitions, whereof the three
first concern God him self, and the other three, our own estate.

Q. Shall not al those be saved, which call upon the name of the Lord? and pray
the same prayer?

A. It is out of controversy, that every one which does call upon the name of
the Lord shall be saved: for so God says by the Prophet Joel. 1.32
: But yet this is to be added, that they he such as call upon him in truth
Psa. 145.18
: for otherwise their prayers are turned into sint and they do in most
fearful manner procure the vengance of God against their own fowls, which do
not pray rightly. For prayer being a thing most excellent and precious, ye
abuse thereof must needs be a most fearful sin. God says, yt when they stretch
forth their hands, he will turn away his face Esai. 1.15
. He calls such prayers ye sacrifice of fools Eccle. 40.
: He says yt ye sacrifice of yt wicked is abominable unto him. Prou. 15.


Q. What are the things which are required in prayer, to make it to be in
truth, and right before God?

A. There be diverse things required, which go together in true prayer: which
if they be wanting, al is marred. And therefore our Savior does use a few
words, to put us in mind of the same, when he teaches us to say, Our
Father, which art in heaven. For in these words we are taught, to make our
prayers only to GOD, reconciled unto us in Christ, and become our father.

Also when we come, as children to their father, which does love and pity
them, we must ask in assurance and boldness of faith. For he which does
not ask in faith, but wauereth and doubts, shall receive nothing Iam. 1.6.7.
. Our hearts must also be lifted up into the heavens, with great reverence of
the glorious majesty of our God, unto whom we speak.

Q. Show how men break these rules in prayer, and fail in them?

A. Those which call upon Angels, and the souls of men departed, thinking to
find more pity and mercy at their hands, then at the hands of God: bewray a
wicked conscience, and deny the throne of grace, unto which we are willed to
come boldly, to obtain mercy and grace Heb. 4.1^
. Those which do not ground their prayers upon the promises of ye word: nor
cannot persuade their hearts, yt God is indeed their most loving father: and
therefore to be out of doubt, that he hears them, and sure they shall obtain
all that he has promised them: do but speak with their mouth, and not think
it in their heart, when they call GOD father. For can they take him to be
their Father, and not to love them? Can he love them, and not give them all
good things, which they beg of him.

Q. How shall a man come unto this assurance, to know that God hears him,
and will save him, because he does continually beg it of God?

A. No man can come unto this assurance of him self. For it is the spirit of
adoption, which does persuade men to call God their Father, and that does
witness unto their spirit, that they be the children of God Romans 8.1^
: and therefore the guilty conscience of the wicked man, does cause him, that
he cannot pray, being without the spirit of god: which only teaches men to
pray, and makes intercession for them with sighs and groans, which cannot be
expressed Romans 8.26.
. What is the ungodly man therefore the better, if he lie at the point of
death, and the guiltiness of sins cause him to tremble, so that he cry out
with bitter tears: if for want of the holy spirit of adoption to regenerate
him, he doubt whether God hear him?

Q. It is not in the power of man, to obtain such a treasure.

A. That is most sure, but those which beg of GOD to have his spirit, shall
have him Luke 11.13
: and those which labor to obtain the faith to call upon GOD, shall find it
Mat. 7.7.
.

Q. Which way shall they labor, and what means shall they use?

A. They must seek for the true understanding of the will of GOD: and meditate
upon the faythfulnesse and truth that is in him, to perform his promises,
and cleanse their hearts and their hands from evil, for the holy Ghost
does affirm, that he which turns away his ear from hearing of the law,
his prayer shall be abominable Pro. 28.
. Also he wills a man to take heed unto his foot, when he comes into
the house of God, and to be ready to hear, rather then to offer the sacrifice
of fools Eccle. 4.
.

Q. What way do men bewraye the want of reverence in prayer?

A. When they pray but for custom and fashion. When they do but babble with
their mouth, their thoughts wandringe, their hearts not lyfted up into heaven:
and when they pray so coldelye, that they do not sighe, and groan in the
spirit: even with those sighs and groans which are unspeakable, with which
the holy spirit does make intercession for us, as the Apostle says To. 8.2.
.

Q. What is to be done in this thing?

A. Men are thoroughly and advisedly to consider, into how great and glorious a
presence they come: and what high majesty there is in the God of heaven, unto
whom they speak: and before whom they present them selves.

They are also to remember how vile and unclean they be of them selves: that
so they may come with humbleness of mind and fear. Further they are also to
look into them selves, to see how beggarly and miserable they are, and so to
deal earnestlye and vehementlye, even as those, which are utterly undone and
lost, unless they be heard, and obtain their suite.

Q. Come now unto the peticions. What do ye observe in the order, by which
they are placed?

Q. The order of the prayer is agreeable unto the order of the law: Where the
duties unto God being the chiefest, are set in the first place. For we crave
those things first and principally, which concern Gods honor: because that
ought to be dearer unto us, and more precious then our own souls: Because GOD
is worthy all glory and honor, we are to care most for his name, and to
delight more when it is hallowed and sanctified, then in life it self. And so
above all things to show our desire, and wish, that this most woorthye and
most precious honor of his may be advanced.

Q. Whereby shall we know, when men have this tender love unto the name of God?

A. The grief, which a man does conceive when he sees Gods name troaden down,
is a manifest declaration of his good will unto it. For when the holy Prophet
says, That rivers of tears did flow out at his eyes, because men kept not ye
law of God Psalm. 119.136.
: He declares a wonderful love of Gods honor, by the greatness of the
sorrow which he conceived, to see it defaced.

Q. Who are those then which abuse this prayer, meaning or desiring no such
thing as they speak?

A. All those which are proud and seek glory unto themselves: Being so
jealous over their own honor, that to magnify and lift up them selves, they
will tread down the name of God. All those which profess the Gospel, and
stain it with their wicked life. And likewise such as delight to raise up, and
spread sclaunders against the profession of godliness. For all these say and
babble with their mouth, Hallowed be thy name, but their heart never cares
for any such matter.

Q. Open the meaning of the second petition, which is in these words, Thy
kingdom come.

A. It is manifest by the plain words of this petition, that although God
alone is the king of all nations, if we respect his absolute power: yet
because men are fallen from him, there is an other kingdom, which is contrary
unto his even the kingdom of ye Devil, which is the prince of darkness Ephe.
6.12.
. under whom, as under a most fierce tyrant, all men are by nature. The sum
therefore of this petition is, that we desire ye Lord to destroy the power and
kingdom of the Devil in us, to set us free from his tyranny, and that we may
obey him in holiness and righteousness as our sovereign and gracious Lord
Luke 1.
.

Q. Ye confess then, that there is no power to deliver our selves from the
subjection and tyranny of the Devil?

A. There is no power able to set us free from this captivity, but only the
power of God, and therefore we sue unto him to do it, the Devil has his
throne and scepter in the heart of man, where he sits with great power.
And therefore our Lord does compare him to a strong man armed, which keeps
his palace, which cannot be driven out until a stronger then he come upon him,
and overcome him Mat. 12.28.29.
.

Q. Wherein does the kingdom of the Devil consist?

A. It consists in darkness and in sin. For he is the prince of
darkness, and his power is only in sin: and those things which follow sin.
It is of necessity that wheresoever sin does bear sway, there he does
reign. For he can not be separated from sin, being the author thereof 1.
John. 2.
.

Q. Wherein does the kingdom of God consist?

A. In righteousness, and peace, and joy of the holy ghost Romans 14.17.
. For when we are set free from the bondage of our sins to obey God in
righteousness, then is the throne of God set up in our hearts, and he does
reign in us as our king, and we are his subjects.

Q. By what way and means does God destroy the kingdom of the Devil, and set
up his own kingdom in us.

A. The Gospel is called the kingdom of God Mark. 1.14.
: it is called ye scepter of his power Psalm. 110.2.
: it is called the arm of God Esaias 53.1
. Because by it he does overthrow and destroy the power of darkness. By it
he does set up his throne in the hearts of men. And by it he does draw men
unto heaven, as with a most mighty arm.

Q. Let us see then who they be which pray this prayer in truth: and who they
be that babble they know not what?

A. Those do pray this prayer aright which mourn and lament to see the
dominion and power of the Devil to be so great. And therefore they desire
vehemently to be delivered themselves, and also that God would multiply the
number of his children, by spreading the light of his glorious gospel. And
finally, they long for that day when he shall put down all rule, and all
authority and power: and when he shall put all his enemies under his feet 1.
Cor. 15.25.
. Contrariwise, those do but babble they know not what, which say, Thy
kingdom come, and yet seek to keep it away as much as they can: by
defending and upholding wickedness, and hindering the Gospel. For we may see
how doting mad men are, which glory in this prayer, and say it is the best
prayer (as no doubt it is) but they do wish quite contrary unto that which
they speak.

Q. The third petition follows. Thy will be done in earth as it is in
heaven. What say ye of this?

A. The will of God is so holy, so right, and pure, that all our love ought to
be upon it. And our vehement desire ought to be that it might be perfectly
performed by men in earth, eue^ as it is by the holy angels in heaven.

Q. How can we pray this prayer with faith, seeing we have no promise, that
it shall be so?

A. Although we have no promise * that it shall be so: yet the will of the
Devil ought to be so abominable unto us, that we should wish it were
utterly destroyed: the will of God is so excellent, that our hearty desire
ought to be to see it wholly accomplished. This desire and love of ours is not
in vain, although we come short of that we wish. For God does accept our
good will. Those are wicked fools which speak the words, and desire no such
thing in their heart. Which appears by the love they bear unto vanity,
and sinful ways.

Q. What follows next?

A. The second part of the prayer, wherein we beg for our selves: all things
which we stand in need of both for this life, and the life to come.

Q What means the first petition of this second part in which we crave our
daily bread?

A. As God is the author and nourisher of our life, so our life, so our
Savior does teach us to crave of him all things whereby it is maintained.
For this petition does plainly teach, that we must depend upon God for this
mortal life. And that it is not only lawful but also our duty, to ask of him
al such things, as shall maintain the same. It is not bread (by which is meant
all sustena^ce) whereby man lives only Mat. 4.
. But it is the ordinance of God which has given that power unto food to
nourishe us. And therefore he says it is by every word which proceeds out of
the mouth of God, we travail in vain unless god bless our labors Psalm. 127.
. We possess all in vain unless he give us the use thereof. For no man's life
does stand in ye abundance of things which he does possess as Christ says
Luke 12.15
.

Q. Wherefore is the prayer framed in this wise? this day, our daily bread?

A. This manner of composing the words of the petition, is to cut of, and
bridle all inordinate care, and immoderate desire of riches. For although we
be willed to ask riches of God: Yet we may not ask to spend them upon our
lusts Iam 4.3
. Neither may we make provision for the flesh to fulfill the desires there of
To. 13.14
. But we must be content with moderation, depending wholly upon God.

Q. Is it then unlawful to crave of God to give us great riches? or to travel
with an earnest desire to get store of wealth?

A. It is manifest by this petition how unlawful it is. The blessed Apostle
also says, that those which desire to be rich, fall into temptation, and a
snare, and into many foolish and noisome lusts which drown men in destruction
and perdition 1. Tim. 6.9.
.

Q. Men are not (as you have said) to desire great wealth, that they may
bestow it upon their lusts. But many hunt after riches that they may be able
to do good.

A. This is a vain excuse of blind men, which know not their own weakness. For
they never came to the sight of that, which the excellent servant of God
speaks: give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with my stint of food:
Least if I be full, I should lie, and say who is the Lord? Or least I be
poor, and steal, and abuse the name of my god. Pro. 30.7.
He makes his prayer agreeable unto yt which Christ does teach us in this
petition. He confesses the weakness of man's nature, which can neither bear
extreme poverty, nor yet great abundance of wealth.

Q. The covetous man then does not use this petition?

A. The greedy mind of worldlings, which cannot be satisfied, is far from the
desire of that which they speak: for the moderation which they in heart
desire, is the infinite abundance of riches. And therefore they do but dally
and mock with God.

Q. What are the words of the next petition?

A. Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

Q. Does this prayer belong unto all the godly?

A. There is no man so holy but that he shines 1. Kin. 8.46
: yea the best are so weak, that the holy Prophet says, Who can tell how
often he offends Psalm. 19.
? And for this cause we are to crave pardon continually. Because also our
blessedness does consist in the covering of our sins Psalm. 32.
: We are to beg earnestly of God, to give us free pardon.

Q. What means the other clause of the sentence? As we forgive them that
trespass against us?

A. This is put into our mouth when we beg mercy at the hands of God: to
bring us in remembrance, that we are to show mercy unto men. We must be
merciful as our heavenly father is merciful Luke. 6.36.
: or else how are we his children?

Q. Is there then no mercy to be obtained at the hands of God, for those which
show no mercy unto men?

A. Our Lord does teach, that except we forgive from the heart the offenses of
our brethren, we cannot be forgiven of god Mat. 18.35.
: and in saying this prayer, we crave to be no otherwise pardoned, then as we
pardon. For it is reason that with what measure we meat, with the same
should be measured unto us again Mat. 7.2.
. If we be so cruel yt we cannot forgive the offenses which men commit
against us, which can be no more but as the debt of an hundred pence: with what
face can we require of God to be forgiven ye offenses which we have
committed against him, which are as the debt of ten thousand talents Mat. 18.3^
. Look how ofen therefore a man does utter this petition, with a mind
desirous of revenge: so often does he call unto the Lord to take vengeance
upon him, for his sins.

Q. Do ye take it that we are bound to forgive both the godly and the wicked?
or are we only to show this mercy unto the good?

A. We are to love our enemies, to pray for them which hate and persecute us,
to bless those which curse us Mat. 5.44
.

Q. Are we bound then to join in familiarity with the wicked? To like them,
or to think well of them?

A. We must in our hearts wish and desire that GOD would convert and turn
them from their sins, and give them everlasting glory. But so long as they
be wicked, we must not like well of them, unless we will mislike the Lord
God. We must take heed that it be not spoken against us, when the Prophet
says, Woe be to them, which call evil good, and good evil, sweet sour,
and sour sweet, light darkness, and darkness light Esaias. 5.
. We are commanded to separate our selves from the ungodly 2. Cor. 6.
. Therefore they pervert the doctrine of this petition which allege it, to
make an hotch potch of all. Ye must forgive say they, and therefore ye must
join in familiarity with them.

Q. We are willed to forgive, how can a man when he has wrong, seek
remedy by the law, but he fails in this?

A. When a man is iniuried in his possessions, in his body or in his name, he
may relieve and succor himself, and defend his right by law: but yet he may
not do it with a revenging mind, and desire to hurt. The power is ordained of
God, and the magistrate does bear the sword to punish the evil doers, and to
maintain the good Romans 13
. When god has ordained so excellent a remedy, we should greatly sin, if
we should not take the benefit of it.

Q. Do not those break the rule of this prayer, which do not only seek the
defense of them selves from injuries, but also to bring the offenders, being
wicked men unto punishment: can a man forgive and yet do that?

A. The mind with which a man does a thing is all. If a man be foully
slandered, and being one which is to set out and maintain the Gospel: although
he should not delight in the punishment of any, nor in respect of himself is
to seek it, Yet if the slander which cannot be taken away otherwise, be to the
defacing or hindering of the truth, to the dishonouring of God, and the hurt of
men's souls, he is to seek it: because these things of all other are the
most precious.

Moreover the correction by the Magistrate, is a singular means which GOD
uses, to bring men to better order of life, and in that respect a man may
covet to have them punished, with a charitable mind. If a man be iniuried, and
seek the punishment of the most wicked, of an hatred and revenging mind, he
does declare himself not to be of God.

Q. Who are they then, which offend in this petition?

A. Al those which fetle not the burden of their sins, nor do not repent
heartily for them. All those which are lead with hatred and desire of revenge.
And such as do not pray for the conversion of their enemies.

Q. Come to the last petition: Lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from
evil. What say ye of this?

A. As in the former petition we desire pardon of our sins: so in this we
entreat the Lord to defend and keep us from the hands of the temptor:
least we fall again into them, or into greater. For what are we the better, if
we should be released, and then fall from God into all abominable sins,
which we should do, if the Lord should let Satan have his full desire, to
sift us.

Q. Then it appears we are in great danger?

A. We pass continually through wonderful danger: and if the mighty power of
God did not keep us, we should be swallowed up. For the devil goes about as
a roaring Lion, seeking who^ he may devour 1. Pet. 5.
: and multitudes he does overcome, and lead into sin, and so careith them to
the pit of hell.

Q. Our strength then is not able to match with him?

A. We have no power at all to resist him. And so we confess in this prayer,
when we entreat the Lord to deliver us from him. for the same cause also we are
willed to be strong in the Lord, and in the might of his power, and to put on
all the armor of God: and to watch in prayer continually Ephe. 6.
.

Q. Do ye say, Lead us not into temptation, or suffer us not to be lead into
temptation?

A. God does not only give leave unto the devil to tempt, and does take away
his graces from the wicked, and leave them in the snares of the devil: but
also when men have despised his gifts, and set light by the help which he
offreth in his Gospel: he does blind their eyes, and harden their hearts Esaias.
6.
, and give them up into a reprobate mind Romans 1.
: that the devil may lead them into most foul sins: And for this God is said
to lead into temptation. We make suite therefore unto the lord, that he will
keep us from sinning against him in such sort, that he should be so
displeased, as to give us up into the hands of Satan. For that is a dreadful
vengeance of GOD: which men do provoke, when they begin to sin against their
own conscience.

Q. How are we then to use this petition aright?

A. Considering how weak we are, and how strong the enemy is, we must take
heed, that we drive not the Lord from us by any filthy sin of pride or such
like. We must also shun and avoid all occasions of the temptation: for if a
man shall desire the Lord to keep him, that the devil may not tempt him unto
adultery, then must he also take heed to his eyes, as Job did Job. 30.
. When he does give scope unto his eyes to wander, he is worthily given over
of God. And Satan does tempt him so far, that he comes to be of the wicked,
which have eyes full of adultery, which cannot cease to sin, as the holy
Ghost says 2. Pet. 2.14.
.

Q. What means this, that is added? For thine is the kingdom, the power and
glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

A. This is the conclusion of the prayer, wherein there is first a reason
rendered, wherefore we should obtain, not only to be delivered from the
power of the devil, but also receive all good things from God: even because he
is king over all, and the might and power is his. Then also it does show, that
God is to have all the praise and glory of our salvation. For they have not a
right mind, which are not as ready to give honor and glory unto GOD, for the
good things they obtain: as to call for that they need.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree by Thomas Dawson. 1583.


