A TREATISE concerning the Trinity of Persons in Unity of the Deity.

Written to Thomas Mannering an Anabaptist, who denied that Jesus is very God
of very God: but man only, yet endued with the infinite power of God. ()

Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling on Adling hill near
Carter-lane. 160^.

TO MY VERY Loving and dear friend Master Thomas White, a Citizen of Bristow.
WHile I was at Norwich, in the year 1597. I writ this Treatise upon such
occasion as appears therein, and delivered it unto that Heretic, that by
himself, if God would, he might consider and be persuaded Since which time I
have kept it by me: and though some of my private friends desired copies; yet
allowing that wisdom of Solon, who would make no law against Patricide, least
the mention of the fact might give occasion to commit it: and withal
considering that it is too s^mple and poor for the public view; I have
hitherto refused to make it common. Yet now perceiving a present necessity,
because that s ^me of late have wandered in this labyrinth: and withal
remembering, that of any weakling shall hereafter entertain this opinion, he
may, before he be wholly possessed therewith, find the absurdity of it and be
reformed* that many a nouice in Christianity, who therefore doubts of the
trueness of his Religion, because he finds no familiar reason to persuade,
but only the rack of authorities to (...) him to acknowledge it; may perhaps
be hereby satisfied and find comfort: and that they who are already strong, may
by this overplus, triumph in the goodness of God, who requires them to believe
no more, then they may by that understanding, which he has given them, be
persuaded of: I have for their sakes, who may reap benefit thereby, set at
naught all other Censurers, not guilty unto my self of any offense which I can
commit in making it public. Such as it is, accept (good master White) as a
parcel of that assertion, which may hereafter follow, of every article of our
Christian faith; if God shall vouchsafe me understanding, leisure, and
maintenance thereto. I therefore offer it unto you, both because I know you are
diligent in reading books of good argument; and because I have none other
means, whereby to show my self thankful for your manifold kindnesses and
your love. At London, this 20. of April. 1601.

Your loving and assured friend, A. G.

THE TREATISE.
THough many things discouraged me to write unto you of this Argument in such
sort as I intend; considering that neither your daily reading of the Scripture,
neither the persuasion of learned Divines can move you to accord unto the
truth; though by manifest testimony of Scripture they convince your heresy:
and most of all, that God has left you to believe that lying spirit of
Antichrist, who denies that Jesus is that Christ: Yet nevertheless, having
some hope that God of his goodness will at last pull you as a brand out of the
fire, and quench you with the dew of his grace, that you may grow in the
knowledge of his Son; I will as briefly as I can, lay down some few reasons of
that faith, which every one that will be saved must hold. Whereby if I persuade
you nothing, yet shall I obtain thus much; that you, who neither believed his
word, nor yet opened your eyes to see the light of reasonable understanding,
shall at last confess, that his word and judgments are holy and true. But
before I come to the point, let me first persuade you, that although the
knowledge of the holy Trinity be one of the most high mysteries which can be
known or believed, and that it is the only work of ye holy Ghost to work this
faith and knowledge in the heart of man, yet nevertheless, God has not left us
destitute of means, whereby to come to this faith and knowledge; but has also
with his word, given us a reasonable soul and understanding, whereby to grow
in the knowledge of himself and his will. For when Adam was created, he had
given unto him all perfect knowledge meet for him. Now God, who created the
world for no other purpose, the^ the manifestation of his own glory, might not
leave that creature without understanding of the Godhead, who being by nature
and creation the most excellent in this world, was made for that purpose
especially above al other, to set forth his praise and to call on him. Now how
could he do this, if he knew him not? But (I think that) seeing it is said,
that man was created in the Image of God, you will not deny yt man before his
fall, had much more perfect understanding of ye Godhead, the^ it is possible for
him to have, till he come to know even as he is known, but that by him (you
may say) this knowledge was lost: not lost, but corrupted only, even as man's
will. For then it should follow that we were inferior to bruit beasts, who
have in the^ a sensible knowledge meet for that end whereto they were
created. Furthermore, it is not possible that man's sin should frustrate the
end which God intended in his creation, but it is manifest, that man was
created to know and honor the creator. Again, seeing in Christ al things
consist, he being ordained of the Father before all worlds, in whom the world
should be both created and restored; it is plain that this light of our
understanding both proceeds from him, and is restored in him, as it is said,
Ioh. 1. He is that light which lightneth every man that comes into the world,
not only his chosen with knowledge of his saving truth, but even generally
every man with reasonable understanding, whereby we may know whatsoever is to
be known of God: and how? even by the works of God, as it is plainly
concluded, Romans 1. 19, 20. Therefore are they not to be heard, who hold any
thing without the compass of Faith, which is without the compass of
Knowledge. For Faith ought so to be grounded on Knowledge, as Hope is grounded
upon Faith. So that as Faith, Heb. 11. 1. is said to be (...), an euiction or
proof of things hoped for, though they be not seen* so may I say that
Knowledge is the proof of things which are believed. For Faith is nothing else
but the Conclusion of a particular Syllogism, drawn from the conclusion of an
universal, which the knowledge of God had concluded, as it is manifest, Iam.
2. 19. and Heb. 11. 3. By conference of which two places it appears, that
this knowledge, of which I speak, this Historical Faith, as to believe that
there is one God which made all things of naught, is only such a knowledge, as
the devils and wicked men have: but to believe, and have confidence in this
God, is that particular conclusion, and that faith which causes us to have
hope in his promises. Therefore said Christ, Have faith in God: that is, strive
to know God, that knowing, you may have faith, and believe in him. And we see
that in these things, where a bare faith without knowledge might seem to be
most required, because as a man would think, there were no reason to be given
of them, namely, concerning the maintenance of this life, and the resurrection
to the life to come; both Christ and his Apostles use no other reasons, but
such as every reasonable man may easily be persuaded by, though authorities of
Scripture were not wanting to both purposes, as it is manifest, Mat. 6. and 1.
Cor 15. yea Paul at Athens, or wheresoever he persuaded the worship of the true
God among the Gentiles, he persuaded not by authority of Scripture, which
amongst the^ had been very weak; but by such arguments as they knew to be
sufficient eue^ in themselves. If these things were not so; how the^ could the
Gentiles which knew not the Scriptures, he without excuse for their ignorance
of God? Therefore I conclude, that there is nothing which is believed, but it
may also be known. Now knowledge (we know) is engendered by such principles as
have truth in the^, the which is evident of it self. So that by plain and
reasonable understanding, a man may know whatsoever he believes. You will say,
To what purpose then serve the Scriptures? I answer: That God, infinite in
goodness, has together with this understanding and light of Nature, given us
withal his word, as a greater light whereby our lesser lights might become
more shining: That he has given unto us not only an inward word, to wit, our
natural understanding; but also an outward word, as a most illustrious
Comme^tary, both of declaration and amplification of that text; whereby we may
the better understand, whatsoever we ought to understand without it. But how
the^ comes it to pass, that all men have not Faith? And how is Faith said to
be the gift of God? The first is answered, Romans 1 21. and Ephe. 4. 18 For
hardness of their heart, who when they knew God, did not glorify him as they
ought: therefore their imaginations* became vain, and their foolish heart was
full of darkness. And for this cause is Faith also said to be the gift of God.
First, in respect of that knowledge whence it does proceed, which knowledge
is his gift. Secondly, because it is the only work of God, to make that
knowledge to become fruitful, by laying it so unto man's heart, that the
hardness thereof may be removed, that when we know God to be good and just,
we also believe and worship him as we ought. Thirdly and most especially,
because that God oftentimes pardoning the ignorance which men have of himself
and the creature, does so illumine the heart with (...) holy Spirit, that it is
suddenly (...) without any previant knowledge, to faith and obedience. The
truth whereof nevertheless does not any whit impugn that which I say, That God
has given unto every man so much understanding as to know what he ought to
believe, and to be satisfied for the reasons of his Faith, if he could open
his eyes to see in the midst of what wondrous light he were placed. This
point is manifest both by many Scripture-authorities, and by many reasons which
I omit. But taking this as either granted, or sufficiently proved, that God
has given us light of understanding, whereby to yield a reason of the Hope
that is in us; a reason I say even of every article of our Faith: let us with
holy reverence come unto the thing in question, and see what reason we have
for our defense. I will therefore a while forbear to use the authority of
holy Scripture; not that I esteem the weight or evidence of any reason
comparable thereto: but only perceiving by that talk I had with you, that you
had read the Scripture, as one of those whom Peter notes, 2. Epist. 3. 16. Not
intending to wrangle about your wrested interpretations; I will first propone
the evidence of reasonable proof: and afterward bring in the assent of holy
Scripture, that you may perceive in what wondrous clear light you strive to be
blind. And because I know not what your opinion is concerning God, (for he
that denies the Godhead of Christ, may as well deny the Godhead absolutely:)
that being one step toward the question, I will proceed orderly, and give
you also a reason of our faith, concerning that matter: taking this only as
granted, which is rife in every man's knowledge, that both the terms of
Contradiction, cannot be affirmed of the same Subject: that is, that one and
the same thing cannot be both affirmed and denied, of the same Subject, at one
time, and in the same respect.

But first, by the Name of God, know that I mean an Eternal Being, infinite
in goodness, in power, in wisdom, in glory, in virtue, and only worthy of
endless love and honor. My reason is thus. If there be not a Being which had
no beginning, then of necessity, that which was first existent or begun,
must be a beginning unto it self, by causing of it self to be, when it was
not. But this is impossible, that any thing should be a cause, and not be:
for so should it both be and not be; therefore there is an eternal Being,
which is the beginning, middle and end of all things, and himself without
beginning, and this eternal Being we call God. My reason is plain to be
understood; and remember what I have said, that I may go on.

Whatsoever is without beginning, is also without ending; because it has no
Superior which might bring it to nothing: therefore God is eternal. Again,
whatsoever comes to nothing, is corrupted by his contrary; but nothing can be
opposite to God, therefore he is Eternal. Or else I might thus reason.

Being and Not Being are such contraries, as one of them cannot spring out of
another: for every thing, for the preseruations sake of it self, does repress
and corrupt the contrary. Seeing then that there is Being, which could not
possibly raise it self out of Not Being, it follows that Being had a primacy
or prioritie before Not Being: and therefore of necessity must be eternal;
for otherwise there was a time, wherein it might be said, that Being is Not
Being, and so Not Being should have been first, and contradictories might have
stood together: but both these are impossible, therefore there is an eternal
Being; and this eternal Being, we call God. Furthermore we know, that the
greatest excellency or perfection of every thing, is in the proximitie or
approach thereof unto the first cause. But every thing is more excellent in the
Being thereof, then in the Not Being: therefore Being was before Not Being;
and for that cause Eternal. Now Eternity is an Infinite Continuance:
therefore whatsoever is Eternal, must of necessity be Infinite: and this
Infinite Being, we call God. Moreover, whatsoever has Infinite continuance,
has Infinite Power to continue infinitely; and this omnipotent or endless
Power we call God.

I might reason likewise of his Goodness, of his Wisdom, Truth, Glory, etc.
but one shall serve in stead of the rest, and I will take his Wisdom for my
example, and prove unto you, that likewise to be Infinite, and that not only
in existence, but in action also. And first that he is wise; God is most
worthy to be such as he is: but if he were not wise, he were not worthy to be
God: ergo he is wise. Now mark how these depend one on another. In God is
Wisdom, which by reason of his Infinity, is also infinite: and by his
Eternity, is also eternal: so that there is no time, wherein it may be said,
that this infinite Wisdom is not infinitely exercised, for then were it not
eternally infinite. Therefore his wisdom is infinite, not in existence only,
but also in action.

Again, the wisdom of God is such, as has no defect or imbecillitie
therein. But if it were not Infinite both in action and in existence, a man
might find defect therein, and imagine a more Infinite wisdom then that is,
but this is impossible. So might I conclude of all the other Dignities of God,
but I haste to the purpose, and I think that you will not unwillingly grant
what I have said, but understand the rest. All the Dignities of God being
actuated or brought into working, require of necessity an Infinite Object,
whereon they work, because they themselves are Infinite: but nothing can be
Infinite, but God alone, therefore it follows that these Dignities are
objected or exercised in God alone. And this is that Eternal Son, begotten
before the worlds, in whom the Father rests: or as the Prophet speaks, His
beloved, in whom his soul delights; which cannot be applied to any
creature, without which, God is happy in him self: therefore says the
Apostle, that in him dwells the Godhead bodily. How is that? not in his manly
body eternally; for his humane body took beginning of the flesh of the Virgin,
when the fulness of time came, but yet bodily, that is, as essentially, or
substantially, as the body of a man is substantial to the man. For every
Dignity of God being infinite in action (as was proved) must of necessity
produce such as it self is. As for example; the Wisdom of God or his Infinite
Understanding, must have an Infinite intelligible or vnderstandable object,
which is produced thereby, by an infinite understanding. So that ye must know
of necessity, and mark three Terms, as I will a while call them: the Term
from whence: the Term whereto, or wherein: and the middle Term between them.
I will for your capacity, which I know not to be much exercised in these
matters, make a comparison meet for your understanding.

When the mind or understanding of a man conceiueth any vnderstandable object,
then is (you know) first the understanding in the mind it self, secondly the
object understood, and thirdly, the discourse or understanding, whereby that
object is apprehended.

Now give me leave to tell you, what differences you must make, between the
understanding of God, and the understanding of man in this comparison.

First, the mind of man being finite, the understanding is not able to view
all that which can be understood thereby at one time, or with one action of
understanding, but must conceive of one thing after another: whereas the
understanding and wisdom of God is such, as at one sight sees himself, and
every thing else, past, present, and to come; and this not once only, but even
continually, because it is eternally infinite.

Secondly, the intendement of man works nothing in the thing conceived, to
make it either to be, if it be a mere conceit, or to be other then it is, if
it be existent: but the understanding of God, is by reason of his power so
active, as that it causes that wherein it is exercised, both to be, and that
according to his manner of apprehension or understanding of it: which
understanding is by his Infinity so infinite, and by his Eternity so
continual, as that of necessity there must be a subsistence or a person,
wherein it must be exercised, which must also be Infinite and Eternal. And
this is that glorious Son of God, who is thus begotten or produced eternally,
both before the world was, even as he is now, and shall not cease to be
produced after the world shall cease eternally.

Thus you see two of the terms spoken of: from whence, and wherein: now you
must know the middle term between them. The term whence, is the Wisdom
intelligent, God the Father. The term wherein, is the Wisdom intelligible,
God the Son. The middle term is, ipsum intelligere, which in my Comparison I
called, The discomse it self, which also in this must needs be Infinite. For
an Infinite intelligible, cannot be conceived of an Infinite intelligent, but
by an Infinite intelligere; and this is that Holy Ghost, which as you may
easily understand, must of necessity proceed from both the Father and the
Son, and be also infinite and eternal, and therefore God. Now because they
are all Infinite, and of Infinite, essentially there can be but one: therefore
are these three in Essence or Being, one, but in Subsistence or clear
distinction of Persons, three.

Understand my comparison which I made: I will yet clear the matter further
for your conceyuing.

If you take in a myrrour, the light of the Sun, and reflect it directly
thereon again, in the Sun it is one, in the glass another, and yet the
reflection of the beams, is also a third, but for all this, there is but one
nature and word of light, which comprehends al three: so is it in this
Tri-Vnitie of which I speak. My leisure serves me not to dilate these things,
but I hope you are able to understand what I say, therefore I will proceed. It
is said, that Powers are known by their actions, and actions are limited by
their objects. I know the meaning of it, and it is not unfit in this place.
But to my reason: The Power of God is infinite, and by his infinite wisdom
he knows it to be infinite: but God could not know that his Power were
infinite, unless he were able thereby to bring forth an infinite action; and
every infinite action must of necessity be exercised in an infinite subject.
(For whatsoever is received, is received according to the capacity of the
receiver:) therefore there is an infinite subject, wherein the power of God is
exercised: that is the Son of whom I speak. And here again behold the
Tri-Vnitie; an infinite power the Father; an infinite action the Holy Ghost; an
infinite subject the glorious Son; all three one infinite Being. Return to
your comparison.

As the understanding of man could no way know his own power, but by his
actions, neither can there be any actions of understanding, where there is
nothing to be understood, no more is it possible to be in the Deity. Now
understand that, as I have reasoned from the Wisdom and Power of God: so
might I reason from all his other Dignities: so that for one reason which I
have brought. I might have brought you fifty. But I show you the way, if you
be guided by the Spirit of Truth, how you may strengthen your self in the way
of Truth: therefore I will go on, and show you yet more plainly by more
familiar reasons.

An Infinite power is not more weak then a finite: but every finite creature
which we can cast our eyes unto, does by nature produce his like, as much as in
it is; as a man begets a man; trees bring forth seed, whereof their like in
nature may spring, and in likewise every other thing. Therefore the Infinite
Power of God begets his like also, which is the Son, the image of the
invisible God, the first begotten of every creature, Col. 1. 15. But none can
be like unto God in his Being, who is not very God: therefore Christ the only
begotten of the Father is also very God.

Marvel not, that I make this argument from the creature to the Creator; for in
this very point of the Power and Godhead, the Holy ghost himself teaches me
to reason of the invisible things of God* by the things visible, Romans 1. 20.
And hereby also learn to help your ignorance, and put away your wonder, how
God should be one, and yet three. See you not how the understanding? the
Sun-light also, is one in nature, and yet three in evident and clear
distinction? though in so base and imperfect order, as that which is above all
perfection, is possible to be above it.

And further, see you not in every thing a body, a spirit and a life, which
is the knot between them?

Or rather, see you not how the very bodily composition is both one, and three?
one body which is united of three bodies? that is, earth, water, and air, or
oil, which yet again in the root of their nature are but one. For oil is but
a due mixture of water and earth, meanly fixed, and meanly volatile; and earth
is but fixed water; so that water which is but one, is the root of the three:
as it is manifest, Genesis 1. and 2. Pet. 3. 5. They which understand the rules
of Pyronomy, know what I say; and if you understand me well, you would confess,
that not only this instance which I have brought, of earth, water and air;
but even the whole frame of Nature did proclaim the Trinity in the Unity.
You would, I say, confess, that whatsoever may be known of God, is manifested
in the creature. If I should here tell you, how the Heaven, the Earth, and the
Deep, Genesis 1. might be understood mystically, and the Analogy between the
Creator and the creature therein: and then tell you, what Let the earth bring
forth living soul, might mean, and compare it with that place, That which was
made in him was life; and then particularly for man, The Lord God also made the
man of the dust of the earth, and tell you, that it was so necessary, because
that Christ is Terra ^^^enti^^: and enforce an argument to prove the
Tri-Vnitie, by that treble repetition of the man made in the image of God;
comparing it with that place, 1. Cor. 11. 3. and 7. If I should then tell you,
that it was necessary that the Son of God must become flesh, as well that
the infinite Justice of God might be actuated in him, which could not be
actuated in him being only GOD: as for many other reasons, both from the
Justice, and Mercy, and Wisdom of GOD, though to a well sighted
understanding I might seem to have laid a precious foundation of Philosophy
divine and natural: yet to you I might rather seem perhaps to have proponed
Cabalisticall dreams, then any sound argument to the thing in question.

Yet this will I tell you, and hold it for good Divinity: that the main
drift and scope of the whole Scripture, is to show the Creation of all things
in Christ, through him and for him: and the restoring of the whole creature in
man by him: That in all things he might have the preeminence, Col. 1. Neither
does this any whit derogate from the honor of the Father.

For first, It has pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell:
and besides, it is an honor above all honors unto the Father, to be the
Father of so glorious a Son.

Therefore is this world and all the things therein, created to the Image of
Christ, to express his glory, even as he is the expressed Image and glory of
the Father. And here is the worlds Eternity, which had in Christ an eternal
Being; according to that his Name, Esaias. 9. 6. The Father of Eternity.

Here are those separate Ideas, about which Plato and Aristotle could never
agree, and which neither both of them, nor many of their followers did
perfectly understand: not that they might not by the frame of nature, and the
wisdom which GOD had given to man, be understood.

For is not this world as a book wherein we may read and understand by the
created trueths, what is the Truth which is increated? but all true knowledge
is the gift of GOD.

Therefore wrest not that place, Coloss. 2. 8. against the Christian search
after the knowledge of Nature, whereby above all other humane knowledges a man
is brought to know GOD, and to honor him as he ought: but rather be sorry, that
your knowledge of Nature is no more. For that will I tell you, to teach you to
know your self, that there is nothing in the creature, which may be known,
(and all may be known that is in the creature) but man ought to know it, and
to glorify the Creator thereby. And this great labor has GOD given to men,
that knowing how short they are of that they ought to be, they might be
humbled thereby, Psalm. 1. 11. Eccles. 1. 13. And why ought this to seem
strange? does not God require that perfection at man's hand wherein he did
create him? and was he not created with perfect discourse to know the creature,
that he might therein behold the Creator, and so glorify his wondrous Power
and goodness? But this question would draw me from the question in hand: and
therefore I will briefly add one reason more: and because my leisure is little,
I will be as short as I can: but I pray you lend me your ear; for it is hard
in English, an inartificiall language, to express my mind: but because you
told me, you could a little Latin, I will be bold here and there, to use a
word: my reason is thus. The whole and perfect nature of a Principle or
Beginning is in God, who is alone the beginner of all things. Now a Principle
is of three sorts, whereof every one is so clearly distinct from another, as
that one cannot possibly be that other: therefore in the Unity of the Deity
there is also such clear distinction into a Trinity, as that one distinct
cannot possibly be that other, from which he is distinguished, yet in the
Unity of essence they are all one. The differences of a Beginning stand thus;
It is either Principium principians, non principiatum; that is, a beginning,
which is a Beginner unto another; yet has not his beginning from another, lest
there should be a process into Infinity a part ante: this is God the Father,
to whom it is peculiar to beget the Son, yet is himself neither made* nor
created, nor begotten of any other.

Secondly, there is Principium principiatum principians; to wit, a Beginning
which has his beginning of another, and is also a beginning to another, lest
there should be any defect or imbecillitie in the Beginning: and this is the
Everlasting Son, very God of very God, begotten of the substance of his
Father alone before the^ worlds, neither made nor created.

Thirdly, there is Principium principiatum non principians; that is, a
Beginning, which is also begun, but is not a beginner unto another: lest there
should be a process into Infinity a part post: and this is the Holy Ghost,
who proceeds from the very substance and Being of the Father and the Son,
and is with them one GOD coeternall and coequall. But you will say, Is not the
Holy Ghost a Beginner unto any other? how is he then the Author of our
consolation? and how is he said to lead us into all truth, etc? Understand
what I mean: He is not a Beginner unto any other of the same Infinite Essence
or Being with himself. For the beginnings which I spoke of before, are in ye
Essence of God alone now our spiritual consolation, whereof the Holy Ghost is
said to be the Beginner, is but an or effluence from that Being, which he
himself is; as the light of the Sun does illuminate every bright body
exposed to his light, and yet imparteth not his being thereto. You will again
object, that Eternity has no beginning nor ending: how then can Christ be
both eternal and begun? and how again can he be equal to the Father, whereas
he being begotten of the Father, the Father has a prioritie before him? I
answer, that this beginning is none other, then that production or begetting,
which I before declared, to have been heretofore none other, then it is now and
shall be eternally: as the Sun has brought forth light since his creation,
and shall still bring forth light till the worlds dissolution. For this action
of GOD, whereby he begets his Son, is not a transeant action, to cause a
passion in the subject, and a repassion in the agent, for in such the subject
of necessity should have been existent before the action; but this action is
immanent, and therefore of necessity of the same nature with the agent; which
agent because it is eternal, therefore the production is also eternal, and
consequently the product, and so of necessity very GOD. But you must ever
remember what difference I made between the action of God, infinite in power,
and therefore able to actuate the object; and the immanent actions of our
mind. Now for the Prioritie or Posterioritie, you may object. I grant there
is Prioritie among the persons of the Godhead; but of what kind? not of Being;
for their Essence is one, and therein is none before or after another, neither
is any one of the Trinity more or less God then another: not of time; for
they are all one Eternity: not of dignity, for they are all one Infinity:
and the Son himself being very God, thinks it no robbery to be equal
with God.

But yet there is Prioritie, and that of order only; for the Father is in
order before the Son, because the Son is begotten of the Father: and the
Son likewise is before the Holy Ghost, because the Holy Ghost is the mutual
love between the Father and the Son: and so proceeding from them both.

I will make a comparison unmeet for the matter of which I speak; for to whom
shall we assimulate the Highest? but yet meet to help your understanding.
When a man does dream and imagine things which are not, there is, you know,
the fantasy, the phantasme or thing imagined or dreamed, and the phansying or
working of the fantasy about that object. Now these three are all of one
nature, and are one after another only in order, and not in time.

For the particular fantasy of such an object, is before the object, and
makes it to have an intentionall being; then the object being, the discourse of
the fantasy follows in order, which nevertheless was in time as soon as
it, observing ever the cautions that are to be observed.

Thus have I very briefly shown not many reasons, but rather how that many
reasons may be showen for this Christian assertion: yet have I showen enough
to persuade any reasonable man, to yield meekely unto the truth of that
doctrine, which is so evident both in the book of GOD, and in every faithful
and true Christian man's confession, and according to that discourse which is
evident to every man's understanding. Now give me leave to speak a little to
those arguments which have thrown the most learned of the Jews headlong to
the feet of Christ, to make the^ acknowledge that the Messiab must be both God
and man. I will not herein do any thing contrary to that, which in the
beginning I protested, that is, not to compel you by authority of Scripture,
but to entreat you by reasonable persuasion, to incline your ear to the
truth. But because I may not without injury to the cause, leave altogether
out such manifest proof, and without injury also to your self, who might
think that I went about to sophisticate a true seeming untruth, which would
not abide the touch: I will only intend my finger to some very few, of many
thousands of axioms of the Scripture for this purpose, and leave you to make
the conclusion by your self, hoping that the Jews example may provoke you to
follow them, so far forth as they have followed the truth. Exodus 13. 21, it
is said, The Lord went before the^, etc. Chap. 14. 19. The Angel of God, which
went before them, removed: where Christ the Angel of the Covenant, is called
The Lord Jehovah. Again, Exodus 15. 3. The Lord is a man of war, his name is
Jehovah: therefore Christ is God and man: who by his conflict upon the cross,
triumphed over Death and Hell, as it is written in the Gospel, the book of
the wars of the Lord. Again, Esaias. 9. 6. Unto us a child is borne, there is
his Manhood: and unto us a Son is given, and they shall call his name, The
mighty God. And Esaias 35. verse. 4. Your God will come and save you. Ierem. 23.
5. etc. I will raise up unto David a righteous branch and a King shall reign*
and this is the Name whereby they shall call him, The Lord our righteousness.
And Ierem. 33. verse. 16. Judah shall be saved, and be that shall save her, is
the Lord our righteousness. Where the name used, is that great Name (...)
Jehovah, which is never given to any creature. Zach. 9. 9. proves him God and
man. What shall I cite unto you that of the second Pslam? Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee: which place with many more, is brought in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, to this purpose, which is your question.

These authorities the Thalmadists, who stick only to the killing letter and
apparent sense of the law, hold sufficient to put this matter out of doubt.

Now, if leaving this outward sense of the Scripture, we should desire to know
what is the quickening spirit thereof, and should ransacke the treasuries of the
Cabalists, remembering that place of our Savior, Matthew. 5. 18. One iod, or
tittle of the Law shall not pass, till all be fulfilled; and should examine
the question by the letters and pricks of the Scripture, we should more easily
find an entrance, then an end thereto. Yet for a taste take only ye first 3.
words of the Law, (...) breshith, bara, elohim: which may not unfitly be thus
turned: In the beginning, they the mighty God created. And of that again, take
the first (...) bresbith, and see what it may signify by that part of the
Cabala which they call Notariacon, (...) b. the first letter of ben, signifies
the Son: (...) r. the first of ruach, signifies the Holy Ghost: (...)n a. the
beginning of av. is ye Father: (...) s. the first of Sabbath imports rest: ^^
the beginning of the ineffable name of God (...) and not there only, but even
of it self it imports the Deity. For we consider of things not obuious to our
senses and understanding, as if they were not: and therefore this least of all
the letters, nearest unto nothing, does signify GOD. (...). th. the first of
Ta. or Thom. is construed a Closet or a Depth. Which construction if you put
together, according to the rules of that excellent Grammar of Divinity, with
reference to that which follows, may import thus much. The Word, the Spirit,
and the Father, resting eternally in the Closet, or inconceivable abyss, or
as Paul calls it, the inaccessible light of the infinite Deity, manifested
their almighty power in creating the heaven and the earth. Neither is it
without a great mystery that the Son is here put in the first place: for In
the beginning was the word: because the chief honor both of the Creation, and
restoration of the world is given unto Christ, as the Apostle does comment
upon this text, Coloss. 1. And in another place, In him is all the treasure
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God. As Psalm. 104. verse. 24. In wisdom
have thou made them all. For in Christ were al things together one infinite
wisdom, till in the Creation he made them several, according to their
distinct Ideas. Therefore says the Apostle, He sustayneth every thing by his
powerful word: that is, the Son: and elsewhere, In him (Christ) we live and
move (after the Creation) and have our Being (before the Creation.) And for
this cause does John begin the law of mercy and grace, in the very same words
wherewith Moses began the law of Justice and condemnation: In the beginning.
For we know nothing of God, neither of justice, nor of mercy, etc. but only
by Christ; as he says, No man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom
the Son will reueile him. And in another place, No man comes to the Father,
but by me. Now, the Holy Ghost is put in the second place, because he is the
mutual love of the Father and the Son, and as I may say, the instrument of
their actions, both in manent, and transeunt.

Go forward now, if you will, to the next word, (...) bara; you see, it affords
the same argument for the Tri-Vnitie, by the three letters before explained,
and the number which is the singular.

Think not this a fancy, neither reproach the divine Cabala, as the ignorant
Sophisters use to do, not knowing how above all other knowledges, it does
advance a man's meditation on high.

And to the present purpose, they which know any thing in the holy language,
know that this sentence can no way agree in Grammatical construction, unless
the singular verb (...) bara, be thus made plural, that it may have
concordance with the plural (...) Elohim.

You will ask, why these letters, (...). b. r. a. (...). a. are twice put,
seeing in this preciseness, no such superfluity should have needed.

I tell you, that it is not done, but to intimate unto us a most high mystery.

For in the first place it imports that Eternal and Infinite Being of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, which they had before the worlds in
their endless glory and felicity, in that silence of the Deity, in that
super-supreme Entity which is unto the Godhead, perfect above perfection,
without any respect unto the creature, it imports that Infinity, that
Eternity, that Power, that Wisdom, which is above all things, and gives unto
it self, to be such as it is: that Nothing, as the divine Areopagite seems to
speak, which is before and above al things, that may be spoken or thought,
without any respect of any emanation, or effluence whatsoever. And therefore
follows that letter of rest (...) that of unity, (...). and that of
perfection. (...). Now in the second place, it signifies the Deity, as
exercised in the creature: and therefore follows that Epithyte Elohim, which
shows that emanation of Power or Strength; and is sometimes given unto the
creatures, Angels, and men. It were an endless thing, to speak that of these
mysteries, which may be spoken, neither can I; For the Law of the Lord is
perfect, and man is full of weakness. I have said so much as I think meet
concerning the Tri-Vnitie.

Now a word to that point, that Christ is GOD: which although it appear
sufficiently in the Tri-Vnity before proved, by this anagogicall doctrine: yet
to that second person in particular, is that which follows. Esaias 7. 14, it is
said of Christ, that his name should be called Immanuel; but in the history
of the Gospel, in Matthew and Luke, both before his Conception, and at his
Circumcision, he is called Jesus. It is therefore meet that you know, how
Jesus is Immanuel or God with us. The writing of the Name of JESUS is thus
(...) Ihsuh, though according to the rules of the pronunciation of that tongue,
Jesus, and according to the ancient abbreuiation following the Hebrew
orthography IHTS. In which Name you see, are all the letters of the greatest
ineffable Name of God, (...) Jehovah; with ye interposition of that letter of
rest (...) s. for then was God reconciled to the world; then was everlasting
righteousness brought in, when the Word became flesh.

This is that glorious Name, of which God spoke by the Prophet, Behold, I will
make my Name new in the earth. For you see how of (...) is made, (...) that is,
JESUS.

This is that Name, which is meet for the Son of GOD alone, and cannot be
given to any creature, because it is a Name of the DEITY, as it is Hebr. 1. It
is that Name, which is above all names: in which the Angels and the righteous
souls triumph; at which the powers of Hell are aghast and tremble; to which the
whole creature yields meek obedience.

This is that Name, of which our Lord spoke, Father, I have manifested thy Name
unto men, the Father (...) the Son (...).

For so long as the mystery of the Incarnation of God was hid, so long that
Name remained vnsoundable: but when the Word became flesh, and dwelt amongst
men, so that the mystery was reueiled; then the Name, which was before not to
be pronounced, was lawfully pronounceable. That as the Word of life was to be
seen with eyes, and handled with hands; so that glorious Name might also be
beaten between our lips and teeth; and this by the interposition of that
letter of rest. The Jews knowing this reason of this great mystery, and moved
with the reverence thereof, durst never pronounce that Name (...) but in stead
thereof, Adonai or Elohim.

Let it not trouble you, that Judah the son of Jacob was called by such a
name, as had these four letters therein, with the addition of (...) d, thus
(...) Iehudah: but rather wonder and learn, how by these sacraments the
children of GOD before the Incarnation, exercised their faith, saluted the
promises afar off, and saw that our Lord should enter into our earthly
tabernacle, by the door of Iudahs flesh; for so much the letter (...) Daleth
imports. To which mystery the heavenly Poet alluding, triumphed with that
double joy, Psalm. 24. Lift up your heads ye gates, and be ye lift up ye
everlasting doors, etc. foreseeing the descension of GOD the Son, by the
gate of our flesh, and the ascension of our flesh by Christ, into the heavenly
places: both which he celebrated by that repetition. Compare with this place,
Genesis 39. 35. and 49. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. and Reuelat. 5. 5. and other places as
you shall read, and understand them: and with all consider, how the ancient
Fathers have prided themselves with the several letters of this Name, to keep
in remembrance by their own names, a thing never to be forgotten, The
Incarnation of our Lord. As Abram assumed h. (...) and was called Abraham.
Oshea took i. and was called Joshua, as you know. Neither again let it
trouble you, that some do write this name thus (...). ISV, because (say they)
the letter (...) s. turned upward (...) is as much as the double he (...)
omitted. I know no reason for this, but many authorities against it, as you may
know by that which is and shall be said, though I let pass a very great
number. Now consider the name in every letter, and see what clouds of
witnesses there are, that Christ is God and man: and learn by the Name it
self, how Christ is the Character or ingraued Image of the person or
subsistence of the Father, Hebrews 1. 13.

(...) i. Is the Crown or Diadem of the ineffable Name of GOD, and signifies
the Godhead.

(...). u. Pretends the Tree of life: for it is a thing much noted among the
learned of the Hebrew tongue, that this letter is never put radically in any
natural Hebrew word, either in the beginning or end thereof, but is as the
Tree of life, in the midst of the Paradise of God.

The double letter h. (...). signifies, that Christ, concerning his Deity, is
essentially united to the Humanity; and concerning his Humanity, united also
essentially to the Deity; and that by the Holy Ghost. For (...). h. is a
spirit or breath: therefore is Christ in himself, or in respect of his Deity,
the superior Wisdom of the Father, and the Son of GOD, not made, but
begotten. Prou. 8. 22. In the creature, or with respect of his Humanity, the
inferior wisdom of GOD; not begotten, but made, and created, Ecclus. 24. 11.
12.

Now the letter (...). s. has many things therein to be considered.

For you may not think, that it was taken by chance into this Name; but for
the Notory, and for the Geometry.

For the Notory, I have observed that the Theologians, both of the old and new
Testament, have celebrated thereby; first, the rest or dwelling of the Godhead
in him, as Esaias. 42. verse. 1. and ^o. 1. verse. 33. Then the rest, or ^ie all
being of the world in Christ before the creation: and the restoring of the
world by his suffering: wherein the justice of God rested, or came to a period,
as Esaias. 53. 11. He shall see the travel of his soul, and be satisfied.
Lastly, that great Iubile or Sabbath of Sabbaths in the world to come, when all
the creature shall rest from corruption. Secondly, they learned thereby, the
everlasting Anointing of Christ to be our King, our Priest and our Prophet.
For (...) is the head of (...) which is to anoint. Hitherto belongs that of the
45. Psalm. Thou art anointed with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. And
in particular; I have found David (or my beloved) servant, with my holy oil
have I anointed him: that for his Kingdom. Dan. 9. 24, speaks of his
Priesthood: To finish the wickedness, to seal up the sins, etc. and to
ancint the most Holy. Esaias. 61. of his Prophecy; Therefore has the Lord
anointed me, he has sent me to preach, etc. For this cause was there no
Anointing in the old Testament, but typical, as a shadow of the good things
that were to come; so that when He came, all these anoyntings ceased; both of
the Leuiticall Priesthood, for Thou art a Priest for ever. Heb. 7: and of the
Kingdom; for He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever: Luke 1. 33.
And for his Prophecy he says, Whatsoever I have heard of my Father, I have
made known unto you. The whole scope of the new Testament is to this effect.

Now the Geometry has also many mysteries: first, it is one semicircle with
three branches; the mystery of the Trinity in the Unity: all whose dignities
of Virtue and Power, etc. are coequall in all, and in every person, entirely,
and indiuisibly; and therefore in our Lord also: according to that saying of
the Angel, The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most High
shall euershadow thee; therefore also that holy thing which shall be borne of
thee, shall be called the SON of GOD.

Shall I tell you what Lectures the Divines have made upon the text of this
letter: Z^ch. 11. 13, did read herein that goodly price, at which the wicked
Jews did value him. For ^. i. in the Hebrew Arithmeticke is ten; so the
three tennes in the triple Crown of this letter, are the thirty pieces of
silver, which the traitor took to betray that precious blood, which was too
dear a ransom for the whole world.

And one in another place said; They have sold the Just for silver.

Consider the letter and every part thereof. (...) This inferior semicircle
is the creature, the earthly Paradise, in the midst of which is the Tree of
life. And that thus the letter vau^ is one part, and signifies in that tongue,
a nail, if you will, that nail, that pierced his tender hands and his
beauteous feet, to which if you add the iod reuersed,

you may well perceive the figure of the whole Cross, that Tree of life, which
bare that heavenly fruit; that spiritual food, whereof Adam and his faithful
children, which overcome, may cate and live for ever. Revel. 2. 7.

Thus you may see, how the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us. You may see
that riddle of the Angel to Esdras, 2. Book, chap. 5. verse. 37. expounded: The
image of that Word, from which, and whereto, the books of both the Testaments
do found.

You may see what confidence we may have in that promise of Christ, who in the
days of his flesh said, Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my name, he
will give is you, Ioh. 16. 23 But after his Ascension, the miracles that are to
be done in that Name, are more stupe^dious, Mark. 16. 17. And again, He that
believes in me, greater works then these shall he do, for I go to the Father.
Behold the mystery of it, cause it to ascend, and describe that circle, whose
center is every where, whose circumference is no where. (...). Now are the
superior and inferior conduit-pipes soudered together, (as the Hebrews speak)
now the higher influences, the Spirit and Graces of God are not given by
measure: and the refluences so great, as that Whosoever believes, out of his
belly shall arise fountain: of living water, springing up unto eternal life.
O glorious Name! O sacred Mystery! by which you may well perceive, that there
is greater Unity between the Deity and the Humanity, then by any words of
Contiguitie, or Continuitie, may be expressed. You may well perceive, how
according to that place of the 89. Psalm, He the first borne; or as John
says, Chap. 1. The only begotten of the Father, is made higher then the Kings
of the earth. Here is our righteousness, our sanctification, and redemption
complete: here is our adoption and reward: our consolation, our life, and
religion: our reverence, and our fear: yet our joy and boldness: all in all:
The presence of God. I may not say what experience has taught me, by this
magnificent and admirable Name; neither am I able to give due honor thereunto.
My thoughts are swallowed up, when I consider the other great mysteries which
this one letter does import: the mystery of the triple world; the mystery of
mercy and of Justice; of Election, and Reprobation; of that great Iubile, or
Sabbath of Sabbaths, when that which is above, shall again descend, to restore
the creature from corruption and change, into that nimietie or excess of
Goodness, wherein it was created. But these things are therefore here to be
omitted, because the discourse thereof were long, and because they are rather
consequents, then premises to the question. To tell you at once, and to make an
end of this argument: The whole Nation of the learned Jews confess, that the
Messiha should be called by this great Name: (...). To which purpose, there
are, besides these which have been brought, many places of Scripture, which in
the Hebrew verity are most direct, though by our translations they might seem
somewhat harsh. They hold, I say, that He must be both God and Man: and in a
word, there is nothing which we Christians do affirm concerning our Lord,
but the evidence of Scripture does compel them to confess it. Only they
differ in this, from us; whether This Jesus be that Christ that should come
into the world; though this also be a thing not questionable, as you may
learn of Daniel 9. verse. 24. 25. 26. and 2. Esd. 7. verse. 28. 29.

Although the common error and expectation of the Jews, was of a terrestrial
Monarchy; yet the best learned of them agree, that the Kingdom of Christ is
not of this world. For they remember that place in the Testament of Jacob: The
Scepter shall not depart from Judah, till Shiloh come. By which it follows, that
when Messiha shall come, there should be no more show of an earthly kingdom.
That of Zach. 9. 9. is as direct, Jerusalem, behold, thy king comes unto thee
poor. They remember also that in the 21. Psalm, I am a worm and no man, a
shame of men and the contempt of the people. And that also of Esaias. 53. He
has neither form nor beauty: when we see him, there shall be no form that
we should desire him. He is despised and rejected of men, etc. Read the whole
Chapter and the Psalm, compare them with the histories of his Passion, and
behold Him on the Cross, in the horror of his anguish, and extreme perplexity.

But you will say, what is this Iudaisme in the letters of his Name, for
argument to prove that he is God? Is it more then if we should write the name
of Christ with the last letter thereof capital, Chris T; because it may
represent the cross? or else the two last letters so enterlaced, that they may
have reference to the serpent in the wilderness, because that was also a figure
of CHRI 'S' superimposed on 'T'? Though I had here to answer for the Cabala of
every of the 72 languages of the Confusion, yet I say only thus: If after all
this that I have said, you will still be contentious, I have no such custom,
but I am well content, that either thus, or by any other means, a Christian man
should hold that in perpetual memory, which is his Joy, his Victory, his
Crown, his Happiness in this world, and in the world to come.

Were it to any purpose to make you know, what the ancient Philosophers, who
knew not the Scriptures, have thought of this matter? all speaking this one
thing, which the light that GOD has given to mankind, did make them know,
although they concealed their intendiment by diverse names. Yet Hermes called
him plainly the Son of GOD. Zoroaster, the Understanding of his Father.
Pythagoras, Wisdom; as Paul and Solomon, every where, and particularly,
Proverb. 8. and in the book of that title.

Parmenides named him The Sphere of Understanding. Orpheus termed him Pallas,
to the same effect as the other, if you know the fable: and yet he speaks
more plainly to the Trinity, in his Hymns of the Night, of the Heaven, and
of the Air. Platoes separate Ideas mean nothing else: and in fumme, as many
of the Philosophers, as were worth any thing, were not ignorant of this thing.
But I fear, these authorities are with you of little worth: yet have I brought
them, that you may see how we are furnished with all kind of proofs, and how
you do contemn all manner of testimony.

If this which I have said, persuade you to look better to the foundation of
your faith, it is sufficient: if it persuade you nothing, then have I done
contrary to the Commandment, which forbids to cast pearls before swine.
But yet I hope, that God will not suffer you to be led any longer by that
Spirit of Antichrist, against which S. John does so often warn us. For I do
you to wit, that this your heresy is no new thing, but even as ancient as
the Apostles time. For, the reason of John's writing of his Gospel, was, to
prove the Godhead of Christ, against the Heretics that denied it in his own
time. And truly, I marvel that you, who have received this Heresy from the
rotten bones of Arrius, should not provide for your safety as he did. He
denied the authority of S. John's writings to be authentical. And why? because
this earth-bred Giant, which would pull Christ, out of the throne of his Deity,
should with his lightening be suddenly burnt. Believe you the Scripture? Is
John's authority sufficient? then the case is plain. We are in him that is
true, in his Son Jesus Christ, who is very God, and eternal life. 1. Ioh. 5.
20. Can you now confer this Scripture with that place, I have said ye are Gods,
and not be ashamed? I and the Father are one. The Jews understood, that he
herein professed himself to be very GOD: and are you his enemy more then
they? Read Ioh. 10. verse. 30. and 33. and 34. and you may understand the
meaning of both places. The devils acknowledged him to be GOD of Infinite
power: I know thee who thou art, even that Holy one of God: And will not you
confess as much as the devils? But this is more then I thought to say, only
you may see hereby, that we speak no other thing then Christ himself, even in
his enemies understanding, said. Now if you could see a little the folly of
your own opinion; that were enough to cause you to put on a better mind. I will
touch it as lightning does touch the ground: for if you be willing to be
reformed, there is no doubt, but you may propound it to the learned Divines,
and be fully satisfied. You say Christ is only man, but yet endued with the
infinite Power of GOD. Here first you do injury to the Highest, to make the
Power of God to be accidental unto him: whereas he is purus actus, absolute
perfection, and without shadow of change: his Being is most simple and pure,
not capable of accidents. Then his Being is such, as no addition can be made
thereto, to make it more the^ it is: therefore it is necessary, that he be ever
actually whatsoever he may be. Besides, His Being is infinitely distant from
Not Being; therefore his Power is inseparable. Again, if there come any thing to
God as an accident, it must come unto him from himself, or else from another:
not from another, for he is impassible, or such as cannot suffer violence: not
from himself; for all such accidents do proceed a potentia, that is, from the
imbecility, or imperfection of the subject: but his Being is most simple, and
infinitely perfect. Again, all accidents do rise from ye matter, form or
composition of ye subject. In him is neither matter, form, nor composition.
Now all things we see in this world, do consist, ex actu and potentia, of
Perfection from God, and imperfection from themselves: for of themselves they
are non entia, absolutely nothing. Yea, even the very Angels, and the soul it
self, are partakers of this compositio^: (for nothing is purus actus, but God
alone) therefore are they subject to accidents; yet they which come nearest to
perfection, are most free from accidents; as that which is mere perfection,
has no accidents at al. Know then, that all the dignities of God are in him
essentially one God. For the Goodness of God, his Power, his Wisdom, his
glory, etc. being all infinite, do of necessity concur in the nature of
Infinity. Whence it follows, that whatsoever is in him, is essentially
himself: therefore the power of God is not accidental, or such as may be
imparted to a man. The learned Hebrews according to this do hold, that Eusoph
or Infinity, is not to be numbered among the other attributes of God: because
it is that abstract Unity, wherinto they all essentially concur, and from
which they al essentially proceed. And hence by the way take another strong
argument to the former question: for if GOD be essentially a Father, then the
term correlatiue a Son, must be in the Godhead also, and that essentially.
But now again see another folly in your supposition. The work of our
redemption is a work of infinite goodness, mercy, power, wisdom and glory;
therefore it follows, that Christ the worker, had infinite mercy, power,
wisdom, etc.

Now I demand; had Christ this infinite goodness and power, so given to him
of God, that the Father himself had in the mean time none? This you dare not
say, for that were to say, that GOD did cease to be GOD; which cannot stand
with his Eternity.

Now if GOD the Father had, notwithstanding this absolute infinite Power of
Christ, of which he spoke, All power is given unto me, both in heaven and in
earth: then it follows that either there were two infinities of Power; or
else that these two which had this infinite Power, were all one Infinite. The
first is against the nature of Infinity: or that is absolutely infinite, which
so comprehends all things, as that it leaves nothing without it self, and
yet is not comprehended of any other. Besides, if you would say, that the
Father and the Son had each of them several indivisible infinite Powers; it
must follow, that neither of their Powers were absolutely infinite: because
each of them had not the infinite Power of the other: And besides, that both
these infinite Powers must be conjoined with infinite weakness, because they
must be mutually subjected to the infinite Power one of the other. but both
these things are impossible. So you see, that two Infinities can by no means
stand together: therefore it follows, that these two, to wit, the Father and
the Son, are in Being one, and that of infinite Power; and this is that which
I strive for: which, as you see, I have concluded by your own assertion.

The time would fail me, to lay before your eyes the manifold untruths,
which would ensue of your position which sauoureth neither of wit, judgment,
nor learning: And therefore I see, how they which have once departed from the
truth, must of necessity run into infinite absurdities. Therefore look
back, and be ashamed of such newfangled toys, as you do daily imagine, which
in truth do argue the great inconstancy and vanity of your mind, and
withal, such palpable blindness of understanding, as the darkness of Egypt.
For tell me without selfe-liking, what sound judgment does this argue, to be
driven about with every wind of doctrine? a Protestant, a Brownist, an
Anabaptist, an Antichrist. What bringing up? what gift of learning and
knowledge have you, that you should presume to oppose your sentence, against
the faith and doctrine of all the Christian Churches in the world? Blush, and
learn with meekness the truth of that Word, which is able to save your
soul. You may see by your own miserable experience, what it is to forsake the
Unity of Faith, and the Communion of the Saints, who embrace the truth of
Gods word, and have manifest tokens that they are the true Church, to wit, The
word of God truly taught, and the Sacraments duly administered. What if there
want perfection? The Church militant must ever confess; I am lovely, yet
black* For it is impossible that any Church should be without imperfection, so
long as the world stands: but at the end it shall be presented without
spotte or wrinkle. Therefore remember from whence you are fallen, and repent,
and do the works of righteousness, lest Christ, who^ you so despite, come
against you shortly. The work of Christianity is not in foolish questions,
and disputing about needless subtilties, but in doing the works of truth and
righteousness. Pray and endeavor your self thereto. And till such time as GOD
for his Christ's sake, vouchsafe to have mercy on you, the enemy of his SON,
and give you grace to repent of this great wickedness, I am neither your
friend, nor yet your foe.

Alecsander Gil.
FINIS.

