Gods Handy-vvorke in WONDERS.

Miraculously shown upon two Women, lately delivered of two Monsters: with a
most strange and terrible Earthquake, by which, Fields and other grounds, were
quite removed to other places:

The prodigious births, being at a place called Perre-farme, within a quarter
of a mile of Feuersham in Kent, the 25. of July last, being S. James his day.
1615.

two monstrous figures

London, Printed for I. W. 1615.

TO THE READER.
GEntle Reader, here is a lively description of the mercifulness of our God,
wherein thou may behold his Fatherly affection, showed unto us Christians, in
that he forewarneth us to fly from the wrath to come, as it appears by this
picture here before thine eyes; the matter declares unto thee, the most
horrible and strangest birth of a child, that ever was heard or seen to be
borne of any Christian woman in our days: which wonderful strange news, God
the Almighty does send, to declare unto us his wrath, and heavy displeasure to
be at hand, except we speedily repent, and be heartily sorry for our former
wicked life. But let our hope be fully reposed in the comfortable, and most
sweet promises of the holy Ghost, who pronounces by the mouth of his servants
the Prophets and Apostles, these words to our comfort, At what time soever a
sinner repents from the bottom of his heart, I will put all his wickedness
out of my remembrance, says the Lord.

Let not these fearful and terrible examples terrify or fear thee, gentle
Reader; for all these things, as it is written Math. 24. must needs come to
pass, but the end is not yet: For Nation shall rise against Nation, and Realm
against Realm, and there shall be Famines, Pestilences, Thunders, and
Earthquakes in all places, before the terrible day of the Lord do come, in
which day all things, as it is written, 1. These. 5. That he shall come as a
Thief in the night: yet of his mere mercy does he use these terrible sights
as a messenger, and fore-teller of his wrath to come: For as Saint Paul says,
When they shall say, Peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon
them, as sorrow upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape in any
wise. Therefore let us not sleep in security, as others do, but let us watch
and be sober, for the day of the Lord is at hand, lest suddenly his wrath will
come, and in the time of vengeance, he shall destroy us: From the which, God
the Father, for his Son Christ's sake, deliver us. AMEN.

GODS WONDERS in Women.
IF God had from the beginning of the world made all creatures beautiful, and
in their perfect shape, his glory had not bin so great: but as white sets off
black, so these contrary colors in the creation of man, sometimes fair,
sometimes deformed, express the skill, power, and omnipotency of the great
Master, in whose hand it lies to make a Beggar, or a King, a beautiful body,
or a monstrous, and to fashion thee or me as ugly, as that wretched shape
(whatsoever it be) at which with wonder and loathing thou so often castest an
eye, happily of scorn.

Neither are prodigious Birthes (for that is the womb, which now is in labor)
simple or mere mistakings in God as if like a bungler in some common trade, he
were not his Crafts-master: no, he receives no less honor from the shape of
a Monster, than from the rarest piece of beauty, that ever was out of earth;
no, we are all but one piece of clay, and as the Potter pleases, so are the
vessels made, some to base uses, and others to noble: neither is the vessel to
repine and ask the workman: Why did thou make me to no better purpose?

Monstrous births are Moales in nature, they are Wens sticking on her cheek to
disgrace her: they are to man and woman mockeries of their pride: for why
should either of them with Dives boast of their purple and rich clothing, when
an arm from heaven can strike them, in a moment, into the leprosy of Lazarus?
That face and forehead which thou paintest for allurement, and so adorn'st it
with jewels, to show the glory of thy riches, is molded out of the same flesh
and blood, of which a beggar is framed, and which gives fashion to a
stigmatick, and misshapen creature.

To check therefore our vicious condition, who are proud of that which must
rot, and consume with worms bred out of our own corruption: and to punish the
sins of some particular parents, God from time to time strikes the womb of
the mother, and doubleth his curse, not only in making her to bring forth with
pain and dolor, but to be delivered with fearful and horrid shapes, to
astonish the beholders, and affright the sinful breeders.

What man (unless the hammers of hell continually beat upon his heart to
harden it) being a father to a son or daughter so blasted in the nativity, but
would at sight of such a horror fall down and die with sorrow: or curse
himself that ever his sins were so black and monstrous, as to move the
Almighty in his wrath to make his body, to be the begetter of an ugly Monster?
Say such a child should live to call him father, how unpleasing were the
sound? The very name of, This is my son, should presently strike him cold to
the heart, with, This is my shame; or rather, This is my sin: For be assured,
that albeit women with child, may by blows, or other misfortunes miscarry in
their delivery, and bring Infants into the world maimed in limbs, or deformed
in countenance, and this cannot choose but be an unspeakable grief to the
afflicted father and mother; yet when Gods own fingers shall crush the loins
in the womb, and set his marks of fearful divine vengeance, on the breast of
an unborn Babe, to turn it into a Monster, it is without all question, a
revenge and punishment for some extraordinary sins in the Parents. God never
gives a sound payment but it is for a sure fault: when an Infant is borne
dumb, deaf, or in a limb misshapen, he does but shake the Rod; but when the
birth is prodigious and beyond Nature, the stripes are deep, for then he is
angered indeed, and at every such blow he draws blood. Former ages hereof
have had plentiful demonstrations: and these latter days of ours are too
pregnant in the like examples.

But omitting either of these, I beseech you (Christian Readers) to cast your
astonished eyes upon this late-begotten Object of horror and misery, lately
sent into the World, in Kent, in a place not far from Feuersham. For at a Farm
called Perre, standing a quarter of a mile from the Town before named, a poor
wayfaring woman being great with Child, but not near her time, seeing the
night approaching, stepped into an old Barn, there to take up her lodging. Where
it pleased God (for the punishment of hers and her husbands sins) before her
expected hour, to strike her with pains, so that there she fell in labor:
And after many terrible throws of terror and agonies, more then women commonly
suffer in such extremities, she was after many tortures, and torments of Soul
and body, delivered of two Children: Twins they were, not of gladness, but of
shame and sorrow; not of Motherly embracements, but of affrights and wonder. A
brother and sister they were, and yet I know not whether I may so term them:
but if I could give these names unto them, yet never were Brother and Sister so
unlike to one another, or to those that did beget them. For the one was a woman
perfectly framed in all her limbs, saving that the body was pyned away, and by
that means, meagre and lean. But the second unfortunate burden that came
along with her, was neither a Brother nor a Sister, but Both; for it was an
Hermaphrodite, it was neither man nor woman, but such as you might call both
man and woman: yet inclining rather to the form of woman than man, hansomely
composed from the Nauill downwards, but a Monster upwards, and below the
knees: for one leg was greater than the other; and either foot had no more
then four toes. Head it had none, nor neck, but in the breast stuck out a
bunched piece of deformed flesh, which like a flap, being to be lifted up, it
carried underneath, the fashion of a mouth with a tongue, and choppes, yet
were they neither. Above this deformed mouth, grew forth a tuft of hair, the
breadth of a teston, and more, and a full inch in breadth: out of the right side,
came a thing like an arm, altogether formlesse and without bones, or the true
shape of a hand, having two fingers only, toward either side one. It had no
pappes, but prints and marks like them in their places. The length of this
disproportioned creature was 13 inches, and in compass 15 inches and a half.
This was more fat and fleshly than the former.

The Father of these unfortunate pair of Twins, named himself Henry
Haydnot: the Mothers name was Marth^t, And being examined of their dwelling,
they reported it had been in Chelmesford in Essex. These prodigious Births
were sent into the world on the 25. of July now last (being Saint James his
day) and were buried at Preston a Town near Feuersham: to behold whom, so
long as their bodies rested above earth, thousands of people came from all
places, the misery of the sad mother, being relieved by much money, which out
of Christian compassion, many bestowed upon her. GOD grant that these and such
like other fearful demonstrations of Gods anger for our sins, may call us
home to his fold, from whence worse than monsters and wild beasts we wander, to
the everlasting slaughter of our Souls; from which the Lord of heaven deliver
us. Amen.

Another strange wonder at Arnheim, a town in Gelderland the 23. of January.
1615.
THis ugly and fearful Monster was borne the xxiii. of January, in the year
of our Savior Jesus Christ, a Thousand Six Hundred and Fifteen, an ensample
to us of the great wrath of GOD, because of our manifold and great sins,
which now a days in every place does bear sway, as Cursing, Swearing,
Blaspheming of GOD, Whoredom, Drunkenness, and the like, the which is truly
to be lamented. And every man may let this fearful Monster or token of God,
be unto him a looking glass, whereby to amend his life, and repent: for this
birth was very wonderful, and seen of many credible persons that do witness
hereunto, and has been openly declared, and published throughout the whole
Town of Arnheim, and chanced as hereafter follows.

A Citizens wife in the said Town, a comely woman (whose name for certain
causes I let pass) being great with Child, and looked every day, her Husband
(being one that had almost spent al his goods amongst whores and thieves) did
not leave the fame, but without any regard of his Wife, or her time so near,
followed his naughty accustomed use. For he was rather amongst other naughty
company, then in his house, or by his wife, which did not a little grieve his
wife, who often rebuked him, both with good and bad words: all would not
help, it made him to be more earnest against her, and to use her so much the
worse, the which grieved her very sore. She being now great with Child, (as
aforesaid,) upon a time her husband accompanied himself again with his
companions and whores, yea in an open house, he both druncke, daunced and
leapt, both night and day, and thus used all manner of filthy concupiscence
with them.

This came to his wives ear, whereupon she having intelligence thereof, was in
a great chafe, ran thither in a fury, told him his own, and rebuked him for
it, and said: he should some thing regard her great belly, and tarry at home,
and leave the company of those wicked women, for she had but small goodness
at his hands, and has scarce to eat or drink at home. Her Husband little
regarding her words, was in a raging anger, and would have beat his wife: the
company which were in the said house, would not suffer him, and said, he should
bethink himself better, be more wiser, and not deal in such sort with his
Wife, seeing she was great with Child, and looked every day to be brought a
bed. Her husband in his great anger, and unadvisedly made answer: she may
bear the Devil of hell. His wife on the other side being sore vexed, answered
thereto, I would I might bear a Devil, so should I once be rid of this woe
and misery, wherewithal thou do so vex me, for thou will by no means leave
thy whore-hunting, but be always in their company, both drunken and half
mad, the which I woeful woman must both hear and see.

Thus in her anger she returned home again, and shortly after the time came:
as soon as the neighbors and Midwife were come, she began for very great
pains to cry out fearfully, and not long after was brought a bed of this
wou^derfull Monster, with so fearful proportioned limbs: the which as soon
as the woman was delivered thereof, it ran underneath the bed. The
proportion of his body and lims was as hereafter follows, and was seen of
many persons, both men and women, which witness the same openly.

First, this Child being a Monster, was over his whole body very rough with
hair, and all black, except his belly which was like a Swanne.

Secondly, the two feet upon the which it did stand, were like to a Peacocks
feet.

Thirdly, his eyes were to behold, fearful, for they shined like fire, and
were very great.

Fourthly, he had a mouth like unto a Storcke or Crane, altogether black and
very fearful to behold.

Fifthly, it had a tail like unto an Ore.

Sixthly, it had two horns upon his head, which hung over him.

Seventhly, it had in stead of hands and fingers, claws like unto a foul.

In sum it was not found in any point like to a Christian body: but was very
fearful and horrible to behold.

After that it had now (with great trembling and fear) been seen of many men
in the town, and every man astonide thereat, in the end they smothered it
betwixt two beds and so killed it.

My brother in Christ, and Reader hereof, let not this which is here declared,
seem a fable unto thee, for this and the like wonders, many have been heard of
here and there, as Monsters by Sea, signs in the Air, both of men and
cattle.

By this we do perceive and mark, that the Lords coming is at hand, and that
shortly hereupon will follow the judgment day, whereas we must not only give
account of our sins, but also of all vain works, words, and deeds. For now
a days the common sort of people are wholly bent to wicked company, whereas is
cursing, swearing, eating, drinking, breaking of Wedlock, and whoredom, like
as was with this aforesaid man of Arneheim: good people amend your sinful
lives, and call to God for grace.

Also this may be a looking glass unto every wedded woman, whereby to refrain
casting out of such unadvised words, like as did this aforesaid wife, her time
of delivery being so near, but rather to have patience, by pacifying her
wrath, and commit all matters to almighty GOD, that he may amend all that,
which in her husband is amiss, also to pray for him, that it will please God so
to turn his heart, that he may acknowledge his sins, and so amend his
sinful life. The almighty GOD, wonderful in his creations, grant us all his
grace, that we may amend our wicked lives, confess his power, and have
everlasting life in Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A TRVE DISCOVRSE OF THINGS happened by an Earthquake, the 1. of March 1615.
according to the ancient supputation, in the places adjoining to the lake of
Geneua, otherwise called Lacus Lemanus: and especially in the villages of hie
Corberye, and Iuorne, which are perished.
SYthence that GOD speaks unto us by all his works, our duty is, not to
pass over lightly that which he causes us to hear: but rather to consider it
so well and attentively, that the whole be referred to that end, unto the which
it appertains. He has spoken unto us long time sithence, by his holy word,
published and preached in these latter days so faithfully, that we may say,
that those which have lived before us, do follow us in this, very far off.
But alas! the more he speaks, the less we hear, and the hearts which ought
to relent, do ware the more hard; yea in stead of yielding willingly unto his
obedience, there is such a rebellion in the most part of men, that a great
number of them make themselves utterly unapt to learn.

Nevertheless, for all this he cease not to set before us, that which is to
the furtherance of our salvation, as well by his promises (whose effects are
felt and perceived in the hearts of those, which love him and fear him) as by
his threatenings, by the which his will is, to terrify the hypocrites
contemners of his Majesty, the more to increase their condemnation. Indeed,
if being admonished, threatened and corrected, they shall persevere in their
wickedness, without doubt. God will continue his justice, and display his true
and severe judgment in this world, to the continuance of it everlastingly in
the world to come. It is most certain, that on what side soever a man turns
himself, he may perceive the signs of the wrath of God, ingraued in all his
creatures, whose age and weariness in the service of men, in their corruption,
requires nothing more then to be delivered from the oppression which they
feel, through the wickedness of such as abuse them, in dishonouring God, and
following their wicked will.

The heavens are witness, the air, the water, and the earth cries nothing
else. The plagues and infectiue diseases, which have almost unpeopled the whole
world, bear witness hereof. The foreign and civil wars which have
destroyed, and do yet destroy the earth, do declare it. The dearthes and
famines which have brought, and do bring to ruin many realms, do show the
like. Nevertheless they laugh, and mock, no less then in the days of Noe,
whereas they should rather prepare the Arc to save themselves, when as the
flood of the lake and eternal judgment shall light upon all creatures: for it
seems to be even already at hand. This Arc is unfeigned repentance, which
having the true fear of God for the foundation, causes men to be grieved and
sorrowful for their wickedness past, with careful and most earnest study of
well doing, for the time to come. To this repentance God does call us, by
sundry and diverse ways, especially by the signs aforetolde by our Savior
Jesus Christ, in the 24. Chap. of Saint Matthew, which signs in these later
days, he daily sets before us as forerunners of his glorious coming.

Now our meaning is not, to speak of things happened far hence, or long
sithence, neither of impressions or sights seen in the air within these few
Months, such as are burning flames, the Sun doubled, yea tripled, or yet of
thundering or lightning in the midst of winter: but only of the Earthquake
happened the first of March, 1615. according to the ancient Almanac in the
countries of Lyonois, Masconois, Daulphin, Sauoy, Piedmont, Valles, Swysse, and
Burgonny. Nor yet to discourse of the causes and effects thereof, as the
natural Philosophers, according to their profession, are wont to do: but to
warn every one, that seeing the earth shakes, we may take occasion every one
of us generally, and particularly, to be affraide and quake in our hearts,
considering the multitude of sins, which ouerwhelme us in this cursed time
and extreme old age of the world: And also that it is not here beneath that we
must look for our assurance, seeing that there is nothing firm or stable but
above in heaven. For as Histories witness unto us, there have seldom been
such signs, but that there have followed shortly after most great and cruel
calamities, common and general to all estates. And not to speak of things
befalne elsewhere, we will briefly touch such things as are chansed in these
quarters near to the lake Lemanus, leaving unto others, to do the like of
that which happened to every one in his Country.

The 1. of March 1615. half an hour before 12. of the day, the sky being
most clear and fair, the Sun shining, all suddenly came the Earthquake,
which lasted not above 10. or 11. minutes by the clock, for that one time. It
was especially perceived by the clicketing of the windows, and cracking of the
houses, shaking of trees, and stone walls, with a great noise and hollow sound
in the air.

In many places there fell down chimnies, the walls rased and riuen, as
amongst the rest at a town called Bonne in Fussigny, at Thonon, Euyan, S.
Mauris in Chablage, Laufanne, Morges, and many other places.

At Geneua fell down three or four chimnies, and a stone wall of an old
building, without any other extraordinary thing chauncing: such is the singular
providence of God. Although one has most falsely published (at which he may
tremble and blush for shame, to have lied so manifestly in feigning) which he
has written of the blackness of the Lake, which he says to have been the
Satturday before: Item, of the walls and houses du bour de four, and of the
continuance of the Earthquake for the space of two hours long, which was often
renewed with whirle-windes. But to return to our matter, not far from thence
there have been other accidents, no less lamentable then memorable.

For upon Monday being the second of March, the said Earthquake renewing his
force in the places of the higher side of the Lake, and being redoubled the
Tuesday following, bath at morning and at night, with wind and snow, chanced
that which follows, in a place subject to the Souereignity of Berne, distant
from the said side of the Lake two hours journey, from a Town called Aille,
about four gunne shottes: and this happened the Wednesday following, being the
fourth of March, betwixt nine and ten of the clock in the morning. A great
quantity of earth rolling (even as it were a huge stream of raging water,
falling from the top of a most high Rock) from the tops of the Mountains,
glaunced a far off, and as some say about one league, the which was not so
much by the natural motion, (which is from a high place unto a low) as being
driven by winds and exhalations mingled amongst it.

This earth was so driven, that in one instant it covered the places near the
valley, upon the which it fell, and in carrying before it all the earth that it
met, the same was clean taken away, the which was more easily brought to
pass, by reason that it was moved by the Earthquakes and stirring winds,
as well as the first earth which driued it: so that it chanced in this, as
commonly we see upon the lake or tempestuous Sea, whereas one wave is violently
driven by an other. The descent and valley did not only adioyne themselves
unto it, but that which is most strange, the little hills upon low places, and
the valleys were shaked likewise. Here is furthermore to be noted, that the
place where this removing was, is right against a Cliffe caused by many hills
and hye places, that are commonly whereas the rocks of the hills meet and
touch together. Over against, in the issue of this Clyffe, was the higher side
of Corbery, a little village or hamlet, containing about 8. houses, 25. barnes,
and 3. water-milles. The earth fell from above upon the said village so
violently, that in a moment all was covered, one house excepted, whereas a
thing most worthy to be marked, chanced. The master of the said house, being
astonished and amazed, through the exceeding great noise, which he heard, said to
his wife, he did verily believe the end of the world to be come, and that it
was necessary to pray to GOD to have mercy on them. Whereupon without delay
kneeling down in their house, they perceived such fruit and profit of their
prayers, that the earth which rolled as is aforesaid, passed over their house
in a manner as a huge wave, without any harm to the house, or any within it,
saving that, the Master having his hat pierced, was hurt in the head. As
concerning the other houses and barnes, they were all thrown down, and almost
covered with earth. There chances also in the said place, another thing not to
be omitted, that is to say, a child of a quarters age was found safe and alive
in the cradle (as he is yet, thanks be to GOD) having his mother found dead by
him. The manner of it was this, the mother upon the noise of the house falling,
seeking to save her Child, clasped the cradle in her arms, wherewith all the
house fell, and she most pitifully bruised, was found dead, the Child being
alive and safe, as is aforesaid. The like befell to a maid child of a year
old, which was found whole and alive among the ruins of a house. As touching
the water-milles, they were all broken, and in one of them happened another
strange thing: for being very low situated, the axeltree with the wheel, were
found whole together in the top of a hill, which was higher then the said Mill
500. paces or steps. The number of men which perished in this Village 29. of
Barnes 25. water-milles 2. of yearly revenues or Farms within the town,
called in latin, Praedia Vrbana 7. of Vines 23. acres: of tons of Wine 82.
of Neat, Bullocks and Calves 81. of horses, mares and colts 16. of sheep 73.

The lower the earth descended, the more this mishappe increased: for falling
upon the next village, called Iuorn, which was lower, and at the foot of the
hill, whereupon the said Corbery stood, there perished of men 93. or a 100.
persons, (some affirm more) of houses 62. barnes 101. fulling milles 3. of
Vines 39. Acres: of Tuns of Wine 236. of Neat 166. of calves 112. Horses and
Mares 43. Sheep 108. also great abundance of Corn, all kind of fodder for
Cattle, with great quantity of household stuff: to be brief, this Village
was well furnished with all kind of things, and was esteemed one of the best in
all these quarters.

The situation of it was upon a descent not steep, but slope and stretched out
from the East to the West. The ground was so fertile, that they received every
year 3. crops, as Wheat, Millet, and Turnops. Furthermore, amongst them were
neither poor, nor beggar, but every one even to the very least, lived on their
goods and labor, being a people very thriuing and painful, void of all
evil practices, as usury, contentions and suites, as all their neighbors do
witness of them.

It is said also, that the aforesaid falling of the earth, was so sudden, that
no pellet out of any gunne could be more swift, then all this said removing was
past. Other report, that a far off they beheld about 20. persons, the most
being women, and children, which coming down a hill to save themselves, were
overtaken, and overwhelmed with the said falling of the earth.

The most that perished were women and Children, by reason that most of the men
were at labor in the fields. In this great affliction, GOD has used such
mercy, that of every household, some were saved, either men or Children.
Moreover, besides the most fearful and terrible confusion, which the falling
of the earth caused, being mingled with great stones that mounted in the air,
there was seen infinite sparkles of fire, with a great and dark cloud, from
the which did proceed a most strong smell of Brimstone.

At the length the earth stayed it self, joining together 2. houses, which are
at this present time standing whole, laden on one side with earth, to the half
height of the walls, without any other hurt: besides these, there remains
yet 7. or 8. houses, with as many barnes and other country houses.

The length of this descent is from the top of the mountain, unto the 2.
said houses. The breadth is of 12. Arpantes, the depth is in some places less
then in some other: toward the side it is about two men's depth. It is a
marvelous thing, that in all this descent so extended, whereas the houses
were, it is so plain, that it seems as a portion of earth been newly tilled
and harrowed, without any appearance of the ruin of the said houses, no more
then if there never had been any: and that which is more, few or no stones are
to be seen. From the place where the removing took his beginning, unto the 2.
houses, where it rested, it is all as but one ruin, where there is but one
house to be seen.

In Aille the middle roof tiles of the Church fell down, without that any
other moved. Not far from this place fell a rock down from a hill, the
which was stayed in a cliffe of the said hill, without any hurt. Many chimneis
fell down, many walls were riuen, by reason of the reiteration of the
earthquake, upon sundry days. Hard by a place called Morteru, the Lake has
exceeded his ordinary breadth twenty paces, having carried away a portion of a
Vineyard, the which they say was swallowed up by opening of the earth.

Some say, that at a Town called Ville Neufue and in other places, adjoining
unto the same, the Earthquake was so violent, that whole tons of wine were
raised upon their end. At Veuey many chimneis were cast down, many houses
loosened, and amongst the vines de l'Auau, certain walls were overthrown.
The Magistrates of Bearne, in whose sovereignty these said things happened,
have appointed men, or officers to look and provide for those men, that yet
living have lost their friends and substance.

Now let every man judge of these things, as the fear of God shall direct him.
It is well known what the Philosophers do affirm to be the causes of such
Earthquakes; but if one do weigh the diversity of their opinions, it will be
found that we must seek hyer for the causes hereof, then in the stars, fire,
waters, vapors, exhalations and winds included in the bowels of the earth, to
the which they cleave full fast: And that we may come unto the cause touched
by the Prophet, In the 114. Psalm, where he says: Before the face of the
Almighty the earth leaped, as the scarred Rams in the fields, and the hills
like trembling Lambs.

Furthermore, to judge of those whom God has so visited, we must remember,
that it does only appertain unto God, to whom the judgment must be left,
without concluding, that those of Iuorne were greater sinners then we,
according to that which our Savior Jesus Christ teaches us, in the thirteenth
Chapter of Saint Luke, speaking of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had
mingled with the sacrifices, and of those upon whom. the Tower of Sylo fell:
but we must persuade our selves that except we do repent, we shall likewise
perish. God is not unjust, but contrariwise his works are as a bottomless
pit, unsearchable to men, into the which we ought never to enter, but to stay
our selves in worshipping with reverence his incomprehensible wisdom. Surely,
if we do not condemn all those, which were drowned by the waters of the
flood; neither all those which were destroyed by the fire falling upon Sodom,
and other places adjoining unto it (for there were many children innocent in
the transgression of the aged): far less ought we to have an evil
suspicion of those, which were not so given to sin as other men.

Laodicea, Colossi, and Hieropolis were overwhelmed by an Earthquake. In Asia
first fourteen Cities, and sithence twelve. In Thracia 11. and in Africa one
hundred have been destroyed by Earthquakes heretofore. Nicodemia, Antiochia,
Alexandria, Constantinople, and other places infinite have been hazarded by
Earthquakes. And who shall say, that so many condemned places as were then in
the world, should rather have escaped; then the places aforenamed? Certainly,
if God should have respect unto the sins of men, one village should not have
felt his wrathful hand: but all the world, especially the great Cities,
whereas the great and wicked sinners be, and the most fearful sins
committed. But it pleased God, to beat the Dog before the Lion, to punish
the least sinners before the greatest, to cut down the natural Olyue, before
the wild, and the green wood before the sear.

Let us then wonder at the great patience of God, that bears so much with
this world, and let us so account of his justice, that it be hereafter to have
recourse to his mercy, the which I pray him, that he will vouchsafe to show
us, through Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord and Mediator.

S. Augustine. Mieux vault le tremblement des humbles,
que l'asseurance des Orgueilleux.
Better is the trembling of the lowly,
then the assurance of the proud.

FINIS.

