WIT IN A Constable.

A Comedy written 1639.

The Author HENRY GLAPTHORNE.

And now Printed as it was lately Acted at the Cockpit in Drury lane, by their
Majesty's Servants, with good allowance.

LONDON: Printed by Io. Oaks, for F. C. and are to be sold at his shops in
Kings-street at the sign of the Goat, and in Westminster Hall. 1640.

To the Right Honorable his singular good Lord THOMAS LORD WENTWORTH.
My LORD!
SO many are the noble attributes inherent to your Heroicke Nature, that it is
difficult to distinguish whither they be diverse, or one entire virtue, but
impossible to define which ought to be accounted the Superlative in so perfect
a Harmony: to ascribe to one more then to another, were to derogate from the
justice of either. I cannot therefore proclaim 'twas any particular, but your
general Goodness which has imboldn'd me to intrude this Poem on the Patronage
of your Name, as honorable in virtue as in Greatness: nor shall I tender any
excuse for the presumption, since I am assured your Lordship cannot conceive an
anger from the true devotion of

Your humblest honourer, Hen: Glapthorne.

The PROLOGUE.
YOu need not fear me Gentlemen, although
I come thus armed; it is but to let you know
I am in office; in my own defense,
And to secure me from the violence,
Which might from you (who now my Judges sit)
Be off'red to this Trophee of my wit:
And cause I know that you will obey
Authority, I do charge you, like the Play:
Think who I am, how often I may catch
You at ill hours in Tavernes, or in the Watch;
In Fraies sometimes; nay sometimes (not to trench
Too much upon you) with a pretty wench.
All this is possible, and Gentlemen,
Consider how my rage will use you then,
If you should now, as sure it is worth your fear,
Be in the censure of my wit severe,
Vexed IN me implacable; and though the Tribe
Of Constables do us't, I Will take no bribe
To let you pass: These sturdy knaves will take
Not the least mercy on you for my sake:
Nor will the Justice free you: (to your smart)
You Will find, he and his Clarke will take my part.
I can but gently warn you to prevent
A danger, nay a certain punishment,
Should you dislike: for if the Play do fall
Under your votes, I Will apprehend you all.
EPILOGUE.
ARe you resolved yet Gentlemen? I am
In earnest haste of Towne-affaires, and came
To know your minds: how is that? there is one I spy
That will dislike, to the Counter instantly
With him; intreat^ Sir, shall not prevail,
Nor shall you think to come out upon bail.
For in this case (believe it) I Would not spare
(Though the sword were borne before him) my Lord Major;
Nor should the Court of Aldermen reprieve
For such a f^ct, my good friend Master Shreive.
If so severe to them then, who by vow,
Are my own brethren? what will become of you?
I have considered; and will now commit
To your free votes the Cen^ures of my wit.
For though their dullness (whom I Have threatened) may
Dislike (you'ave wit) and will allow the play.
The Persons in the Play.
Through good, a young Gentleman, suitor to Clare. Valentine his friend, a suitor
to Grace. Knowell their friend. Sir Timothy Shallowit, a Country Knight. Sir
Geffery Hold-fast, a Knight of Epping. Jeremy Hold-fast, his Son. Alderman
Covet. Busy, a Linen Draper, the Constable. Tristram, servant to Jeremy
Hold-fast. Formal, servant to Alderman Covet. A Parson. Four watchmen. Clare,
niece to Alderman Covet. Grace, his Daughter. Maudlin, servant to Clare. Nel,
daughters to Busy. Fiddlers boy, Drawer, Attendants.
The Scene London.

Wit in a Constable.
Actus primus, Scena prima.
Enter Holdfast, Tristram. Holdfast. DID you ere we departed from the College
Orelooke my library?

Trist. Yes sir, I spent two days in sorting Poets from Historians,
As many nights in placing the divines
On their own chayres, I mean their shelves, and then
In separating Philosophers from those people
That kill men with a license: your Physicians
Cost me a whole days labor, and I find sir,
Although you tell me learning is immortal,
The paper and the parchment, it is contayn'd in,
Savors of much mortality.

Hold. I hope my books are all in health.


Trict. In the same case the Mothes have left them, who have eaten more
Authenticke learning then would richly furnish
A hundred country pedants; yet the worms
Are not one letter wiser.

Hold. I have been idle
Since I came up from Cambridge, go to my stationer
And bid him send me Swarez Metaphysickes,
Tolet de anima is new forth,
So are Granadus commentaries on
Primui^ se^undae Thomae Aquinatis,
Get me the Lyricke Poets. And --

Trist. I admire
How he retains these Au^hors names, of which
He understands no syllable, 'twere better
I bought the Authenticke Legend of Sir Bevis,
Some six new Ballads and the famous Poems
Writ by the learned waterman.

Hold. John Tailor, get me his nonsense.


Trist. You mean all his works sir.


Hold. And a hundred of Bookers new Almanacks.


Trist. And the devil to boot,
Your fathers books in which he keeps th accounts
Of all his coin will scarce yield crowns to afford
Your fancy volums: why you have already
Enough to furnish a new Vatican,
A hundred country pedants can read dictats
To their young pupills out of Setons logic,
Or Golius Ethics, and make them arrive,
Proficients learned enough in one bare twelmonth
To instruct the parish they were borne in: you
Out of an itch to this same foolish learning
Bestow more money yearly upon books:
Then would for convert sisters build an almes-ho^se.

Hold. You will displease my patience Tristram.


Trist. I speak truth: if you should want, your learning scarce would make you
Capable of being town Cleark, or at best,
To be a famous Tyrant unto boys,
And wear out birch upon them: or perchance
you may arrive to be the City Poet,
And f^nd the little moisture of your brain
To grace a Lord Majors festival with shows,
Alluding to his trade, or to the company
Of which he is free, these are the best preferments
That can attend your learning.

Hold. I say Tristram, the spirit of my learning stirs me up
To give thee due correction.

Trist. Would you study? as does young Thorowgood your noble Cosen,
Not books, but men which are true living volums:
You would like him, be held rich in the esteem
Of all the illustrious wits that deck the city
When the extent of your admirers is
Confinde to fresh men: and such youths as only
Know how to frame a syllogism in Darij,
And make the ignorant believe by Logic
The Moons made of a Holland Cheese: and the man in it.
A swagbellied Dutch Burger Intras Thorowgood.

Thoro. Cosen Holdfast, a good day attend
Thy learned piamater: prithee tell me
How do the Cabalists and ancient Rabbis
And thou agree? will they be sociable,
And drink their mornings draught of Helicon
With thee: have they instructed you to prove yet
That the world runs on wheels? or that the sea
May be drunk off by a shole of Whales? such things
You know there are in nature.

Hold. O far stranger.


Thoro. Peace you booke-worme,
Fit only to devour more paper then
A thousand grand tobacco men or a legion
Of boys in pellets to their elderne gunnes.
Do think to live this life still? you're not now
Amongst your eues at Cambridge, but in London,
Come up to see your mistress beauteous Clare,
The glory of the city: go and court her,
As does become a gentleman of carriage,
Without your Tropes and figures Inkehorne terms,
Fit only for a Mountebanke or Pedant,
Or all your Physickes Metaphysickes and Meteors,
(Tomes larger far and more repleate with lies,
Then Surius, Gallo-Belgcus, or the welsh
Bard Geffrey Monmouth) sh^l be straightway made
Pitiful Martyrs.

Hold. Why cosen I had thought.


Thoro. Thy self an errant idiot, that is the fittest
Thought for thy brain more dull then a fat Burgers,
Or reverend country justices, whose wit
Lies in his spruce clearkes standish, thou were begot
Surely in the wane oth' Moon, when natures tools
Were at lame Vulcans forge a sharpening, thou art so lumpish.

Trist. He has already spoyld
His eyes with prying on Geneva prints,
And small dutch Characters: his watching makes him
Look like a grandchild of old Errapaters,
Some lean Astronomer, who to get ten shillings,
For that is a large price for an Almanacke,
Has wasted himself to the bigness of his Iaccobs staff,
Which is so limber, 't cannot stand to take height of Venus rising.

Thoro. He says truth: besides your study has attained already,
Learning enough to inform your mind the knowledge
Of arts fit for a gentleman, were not better
For you my sprightfull senior to advance
Your bever with a hatband of the last
Edition in the Court, among the noblest
Youths of our nation, then to walk like Faustus,
Or some high German conjurer, in a cap
Fit for a Coster-monger, to wear your purle
Or cut work, band then this small ^^ip of linning
That Is proper only for T^om Thum: or some of queen Mabs gentlemen-ushers.

Trist. This Cassocke were a pretty garment for a fortuneteller.


Thoro And this cloak of tinder comely for a ballad-seller,
Life sir, you are borne here to an ample fortune,
Your father absent knows not how you have altered
Your disposition: I must reclayme it,
Thou shall with me and court the beauteous Clare
Reserved for thee, a purpose in the mean time,
Our chief companions, shall be wits more pure,
Then your quick sophisters, or ^lie logicians,
We Will talk of the bright beauties of the age,
Girls whose each look deserves to be a theme
For all the nimble poets, two days practice
In our brave arts will teach thee to forget
Philosophy as fruitless and abjure
All other Ethics, but what is usd among us, as most erroneous*

Hold. Well You shall persuade me, I Will be an errant ass, or any thing
For thy sake coz, but shall we have such wenches
As are at Cambridge, hansome as peg Larkin.

Thoro. O far before her, cosen thou shall read
Are^ius Politics; and Ov^ds Art,
Shall be new read, thee and we will refine
Thy Academicke wit with bowls of wine.

Hold. Tristram shall toth' College and sell my books immediately.


Thoro. Speak like the son of Phoebus and my cosen.


Trist. My studious master.


Thoro. Sell thy Dictionary.


Hold. I Will not keep a prayer book.


Thoro. They are out of fashion.


Hold. Nor a Calender, to look the age oth' Moon in, Trist. be sure
You burn G^eens groats worth of wit; I scorn to keep
The name of wit about me.

Trist. It Is confessed sir, but for the numerous Rhemes of paper, which
Are pil'd up in your study, give them me,
I have a brother in law in the towne's a cook,
I Will give them him to put under his bake meats.

Hold. Take them: I will not leave a pen within my lodging,
I will forget to write, or set my hand to any thing.

Thoro. Unless 't be to a bond.


Hold. I Will go put this blessed design in execution,
Cosen anon i will meet you at your chamber.

Thoro. What in that reverend shape? the gentlemen
That I converse with, will believe thee some Itinerant
Scholar, have thee whipped by the statute.

Hold. I would be loath, now I am past a fresh man to be had into the buttries.


Thoro. Still them terms? study to forget them, I Will send my
Man to you with a new suite of mine I never wore yet,
Be sure to put it on right, you mere Scholars
Know no degree of garment above Serge,
Or Satanisco: tie your band-strings neatly
And do not eat the buttons off, put not
Your Cuffs both on one hand; twill tax your judgment
Of new inventing fashions when accoustred,
Come to my chamber, and I Will furnish you
With language fit to accost your mistress.

Hold. Rare, I Have got more learning from him in half an hour,
Then in a whole life's practice out of books.
Follow me Tristram, farewell dear cosen. Ex. Hold. Trist.

Thoro. How I could laugh now, were my spleen large enough: a
Hundred such lame stupid Idiots were enough, if married,
To precise Burgers daughters to replenish
The city with a race of fools, and root
The stock of knaves quite out of it, he loves books:
Not that he has a scruple more of learning
Then will suffice him to say grace, but like
Some piteous cowards, who are often thought valiant
For keeping store of weapons in their chambers,
He loves to be esteemed a doctor by
His volumnes: but I shall fit his schollership: whose these?
Alderman Covets, Formal, byth' proportion: Ent. Formal and Clare.
That rib of man's flesh should be Clare, do hear
My honest Cadis garters: who for care
And close attendance on thy charge deserves
To be grand porter to the great Turks Seraglia: how hight that vayl'd damsel?

Form. She has been at Brit^ins burse a buying pins and needle
To work a nightcap for my master sir.

Thor. Pox upon him, is not her name Clare, niece to Alderman Covets


For. Her father was a country Squire of large revenew and her mother.


Thoro. I shall be forced to hear him blaze her pedigree,
I Would beat him, but that clubs and paring shovells oth' city
Would be so busy about my ears: they would spoil
My hearing two months after Gentle Lady
Pardon my error if I do mistake, are not you mistress Clare?

Clar. Formal at last, would have resolved you, and I held my
Peace of purpose, cause I knew his slow discovery would vex
Your nimble patience

Tho. You are a Gypsy, but does thy unkles hu^our hold of wedding
His daughter to sir Timothy.

Clar. Yes, or to young monsieur Holdfast whom he says is
Learned enough to make Cheap Side a College,
And all the City a new Academy, but have you
Thorowgood performed what I advised you to?

Thoro. Yes, my girl: good Formal use thy motion to convay
Thy ears a little farther off, there is money
To buy thee a new pair of garters: Clare
Thou shall no more behold me in the garb
And noble ornament I used to wear, my fashion shall be altered.

Clar. To the schoolars,
Young Holdfasts likeness.

Thoro. O by all means girl* thou shall behold this comely hat transformed
To frugall brim, and steeple crown, this band
Of fair extent changed to a modern cut,
Narrower then a precisians: all this gay
And gaudy silk I will convert to Serge
Of limber length: like some spruce student (newly
Exalted for saying grace well, to be fellow
Oth' College he had studied) I will
Salute thy reverent Uncles spectacles,
And without fear of his gold chain, i will woe thee
In metaphores and tropes Scholastic till
The doting Senator with a liberal hand give
Thee his dainty darling to become my spouse inseparable.

Clar. This suites well with my directions.


Thoro. True girl true, farewell Clare,
I kiss thy white hand: Sir resume your charge,
I Have done my errand: let not your old Sir Amiar*
Know of this conference, if you do, that twist
Of spinners thread, on which your life depends Exe. Clare. and Formal.
Shall be shorn off like a horse mane. Farewell.

Form. Man's life indeed is but a thread, good day sir. Ent. Valentine and Sir
Timothy.


Thor. Attend your charge friend, Valentine, Sir Timothy.
You Are well incountred, may I inquire the affair
Which happily has brought you up toth' City?

Thoro. May I know it? is it not to purchase a Monopoly
For Salt and Herrings? for state business,
Unless it be to see the great new ship,
Or Lincolns Inn fields built: I Am sure you none here.

Tim. Very right sir.


Thor. But for thee: my noble man of merit, thou art welcome,
Weel be as kind to one another boy,
And witty as brisque poets in their wine,
Weel court the black browd beauties of the time,
And have by them the height of our desires: with ease accomplished

V^l. Noble Thorowgood,
Did I not own you by the name of friend,
Already these indearments would engage me to beg that title.

Tim. Very right, and me too.
I know you for the most Egregious'knight
In all the country.

Thor. You sir, you have reason,


Tim. Very right* I am indeed esteemed so.


Thor. One that live on Onions and Corne-sallets.


Tim. Right again,
Sure he can conjure, I had one to my breakefast.

Thor. Nay no Herald
Can better blase your pedigree. I Have heard
Your father my most worthy knight, was one
That died a knave to leave you so.

Tim. Passing right still.


Tho^. And pray right witty, and right honored sir,
What may your business seem to be in the city.
Are you come up to learn new fashions?

Tim. Exceeding right again.


Thor. To change this ancient garment to a new one
Of a more spruce edition.

Val. Yes, but before,
For I am privy unto all is intentions,
He means to see and court his mistress.

Thor. Who Is that? my doughty Impe of spur and sword,
Some fair Dulcina de Tob^so.

Val. No, it is Grace, daughter to Alderman Covet.


Thor. I do commend thee my dear Don, and will
Be thy assistant, go and see thy horse dressed,
And then approach my chamber.

Tim. Very right, I kiss your fingers end. Ex. Timothy.


Thor. Do you, Valentine, know
The Lady he intends to Court.

Val. Only by report,
Which speaks her most accomplished.

Thor. Oh she will make
An excellent Ass of him: she has a wit
More sharp and piercing than a Waspes sting, she speaks
All fire; each word is able to burn up
A thousand such poor Mushromes: had her mother
Not been held honest, I should have believed
She Would bin some Courtiers By-blow, or that some
Quick Poet got her.

Val. How Is her feature?


Thor. Rare, past expression, singular, her eyes
The very spears of love, her cheeks his throne,
Her lips his paradise, and then her mind
Js far more excellent than her shape.

Val. You give her a brave Character; is it possible
To have a sight of her?

Tho. Yes, by my means, scarce otherwise will thou have her*
Speak but a syllable, 't shall be performed
As sure as if Don Hymen, in his robes
Had ratified the contract.

Val. You are merry sir.


Thor. When did thou know me otherwise: yet now
In sober sadness friend, could thou affect
A woman, as there is few of them worth loving,
Thou can not make a nobler choice: I Will bring thee
On to the skirmish, but if thou retreat,
Beat back by the hot Artillery of her wit,
Which will play fast upon thee: may thou live
To be enamored on some stale Hay, or Matron
Of fourscore, that may congeale thee to a frost
Sooner than forty winters: or be wed
To an insatiat Chambermaid.

Val. Defend me
From thy last curse; fear not my valor.

Thor. This fool shall serve both her and us for sport:
Lets to our task; and if our project hit,
I Will swear all fortune is comprised in wit. Exeunt.

Explicit Actus primus.
Actus secundus. Scena prima.
Covet, Clara, Maudlin. Cov. YOu will provoke me.


Clar. No matter:
Although you be my uncle, and so nature
Binds me to observe you, i will not be obliged
To what the phlegmatic humor of your age
Strives to enforce upon me: I was borne
Free, an inheritresse to an ample fortune,
Of which you do pervert the use, and trust me,
I Will be no longer tame and suffer it.

Cov. Suffer what? you're used
Too well: if you complain of this, I shall
Study to be more harsh.

Clar. Do; you shall not, as you had wont,
Think to attire me in black Grogram,
Daubed over with Satin lace, as if I were
Daughter, and heir apparent to a Tailor,
Who from the holiday Gowns of six neat fish-wives
Had stole the remnants made the thrifty garment.
Nor shall you sir (as it is a frequent custom,
Cause you're a worthy Alderman of a Ward.)
Feed me with Custard, and perpetual White-broth,
Sent from the Lord Majors, or the Shriefes feast,
And here preserved ten days, (as twere in pickle)
Till a new dinner from the common hall
Supply the large defect.

Cov. You Will leave this language?


Clar. Leave to use me so then:
You Have made my self, your daughter, and my woman,
Sup with a penyworth of Lettice, under
Pretense 'twould make us sleep well: your full morsells
(Had not the virtue of Clay wall, and Oatmeale
Preserved my maid) ere this she would bin shrunk up
Toth' bigness of a Squirrill.

Maud. Any Dwarf
might without stretching his small fingers, have
Spand me about the waste.

Clar. Nor shall you,
(As sure it is your intention) marry me
To the quondam foreman of your shop, (exalted
To be your Cash-keeper) a limber fellow,
Fit only for dear Nan, his schoole-fellow,
A Grocers daughter, borne in Bread-street, with
Whom he has used to go to Pimblico,
And spend ten groats in Cakes and Christian Ale,
And by the way has courted her with fragments,
Stolen from the learned Legends of Knights Errants,
Or from the glory of her fathers trade,
The Knight of the Burning Pestle.

Cov. Sure the Devil
Has entered her in the likeness of an Eele,
Her tongue's so slippery: Minion --

Clar. I Will not be frighted
As are your Prentises, with Little ease,
Or showing them the Beadle. In plain terms,
I do not mean to incorporate with a Salter,
Or any of those thriving trades, to have
My shoes lickt over each saturday night
Byth' under prentise; they shine so brightly
With soot and kitching-stuffe, that I next morning
May spare my glass, and dress my head by their
Greasy reflection: yet let me tell you,
I must be married instantly a virgin:
Of my full age, setting aside all niceness
May justly claim a husband.

Cov. Have but patience, i will wed thee to a Knight.


Clare. What is he, one oth' Post sir, or some such
As was in the old famous Ballad mentioned:
He that has forty pounds per annum, by
Which Charter I should be undutifull,
And take the wall of my aged Grandame: No,
I Will have a Courtly gentleman, whose wit
Shall equal his estate, and that so large,
As't shall afford me a sufficient joyncture.

Cov. This Knight shall do it, or if you like not him,
What say you to Sir Geffery Holdfast's son,
The famous Scholar?

Clare. If he be a Parson;
And I his wife, I sure shall make my friends
Lucky to horseflesh: No, I will have one
That shall maintain my Coach, and four fair horses:
Not such thin jades, nor such a crazy Chariot,
As i have seen used by Citizens to convey
Their wives with leisure to their Country houses,
(For fear the late Plum-pudding they had eaten
Fried to their Breakfast, should with too much jogging
Broyle on their queasie stomachs) One that shall
Maintain me a Sedan, and two strong varlets,
That so I may not need the Common men Mules,
With their wood-Litters, with nineteen at end of them,
The usual shelters, which the Gallants carry
Their wenches to their Chambers in: In brief,
If you can find me any where a husband
That I can like, I will allow your choice;
If not, i will take my own; so good day to you.
Pray meditate upon it. Ex. Clare, Maud:

Cov. This is the maddest wench: would I were rid of her,
She vexes me more than her Portion's worth;
But if she stoop not to my Country Knight,
Sir Timothy Shallow-wit, or to young Holdfast,
(Whom I had rather marry to my daughter)
She shall ha grasing.

Enter Formal. For. Sir, there are a brace of gentlemen without,
Desire admittance to you.

Cov. Let them enter.


For. I shall denote your pleasure. Ex. For.


Cov. Some young heirs,
To borrow money upon Morgages.

Enter Holdfast, Brave, Tristram. Hol. I shall observe my Cosens rule, nere
fear me.


Cov. Save you sir.


Hol. You do not think me damned sir, you bestow
That salutation on me.

Cov. Good sir no.
Whom would you speak with here?

Hol. Sir, my discourse
Points at one Alderman Covet.

Cov. I am the party.


Hol. Good Mr. Covet, I covet your acquaintance:
I understand you have a daughter is
Of most unknown perfections.

Cov. She is as heaven ma^e her.


Hold. She goes naked then,
The Tailer has no hand in her; may I see her?

Cov. I must desire your name first.


Hold. My name is Holdfast.


Cov. Son to sir Geff. Holdfast.


Hold. His proper son and heir, and I am come
To see your Daughter and your Niece.

Cov. Came you from Cambridge lately.


Hold. I come from Cambridge:
What do you see in these my looks, should make you
Judge me such a Coxecombe.

Cov. Your father writ me word, his son that should
Come up to see my Daughter and my Niece,
Was a rare scholar, wholly given to's books.

Hold. My father was an arrant ass for's labor,
I never read book in all my life, except
The Counter scuffle, or the merry Gossips,
Raynard the Fox, Tom Thumb, or Gargantua,
And those i have quite forgotten: I a scholar!
He lies in's throat that told you so.

Trist. On my Conscience
You may believe him: he scarce ere saw book,
Unless the Chronicle in an iron Chain,
In's fathers Hall: for learning sir, except
What Is in a Horse, a Hawke, or hownd, he knows not
How to expound your meaning.

Cov. I mar'le sir Geff. knowing my aversion
From any of these courses, should bring up
His son to all of them: nay, write me word,
Knowing my love to learning, he had him
A scholar purposely: pray sir resolve me,
Are you sir Gefferies son?

Hold. I am a Bastard else.


Cov. Sir Gefferies son of Eppinge?


Hold. Yes, of Eppinge,
One that will venture five hundred pounds upon his horse,
Soon as the proudest he that lives in London,
I Will play my Crop-eare against my Lord Majors Steed,
And all his furniture: I do intend
To scour Hide Park this summer.

Trist. did give him
His Oats this morning? Shall I see your daughter.
Did he drink's water hastily? Your Niece
I Would be acquainted with.

Cov. Sir, you must pardon me, you're not the man
I took you for.

Hold. You did not take me for an Ass I hope.


Cov. O by no means, but they cannot be seen
Conveniently this morning: another time,
At your best leisure, I shall not deny you.
Please you walk in, and taste our Beer?

Hold. I know it is but oth' sixes; and I hate
Liquor of that complexion: pray commend me
To both my sweet-hearts. Tristram come lets back,
And, as my Cosen says, drink lusty sack.

Exeunt Holdfast and Tristram. Cov. There Is some deceit in this, perhaps some
gallant,
Knowing my purpose with Sir Geffery Holdfast,
Has taken his name upon him: i will dispatch
A messenger straight to him: whom have we here?

Enter Thoroug* and Formal. Form. Sir, that is the Alderman my Master.


Thor: Is this the venerable Man, to whom
This goodly Mansion is impropriate:
I should negotiate with his reverence
About authentic business.

Cov: This rather
Should be sir Geff. son, his words and habit
Speak him most learned. I Am the person, pray
Let me be bold to crave your name.

Thor. My appellation or pronomen, as
(It is termed by the Latins) is hight Jeremy,
But my Cognomen, as the English gather,
Is called Holdfast.

Cov. This is he certainly; are you, I pray
Sir Gefferies son of Eppinge?

Thor. The Nominalls, the Thomists, all the sects
Of old and modern Schoolmen, do oblige me,
To pay to that Sir Geffery fillial duty.

Cov. I Am glad to hear it, the other was some varlet,
I shall find out and punish: Sir, you are welcome;
I guess your business; it is about a match,
Or with my Niece, or Daughter: which you like,
Shall be at your dispose: if not, your business.

Thor. My business is of procreation, or as
The Civil Lawyers learnedly do paraphrase,
Is of concomitance, Cohabitation,
Or what you please to term it.

Cov. How am I blessed, that this rare scholar shall
Be matched into my family? Within there;
Niece, Daughter, both come hither.

Thor. One at once sir,
Twill satisfy; the Canon does prohibit
Us Polygamy.

Enter Clara, Gray. Cov. Sir, this is my only daughter, this my niece,
Pray know them better.

Thor. Fair types, nay Orbs of beauty, J salute you,
Each in his proper altitude.

Graie. Heyday, this is some Fortune Tellers.


Clare. It Is Thorowgood, you must not seem to know him.


Cov. Daughter and Niece, this is a gentleman,
My care has picked out, as a most fit husband
For one of you; which he can soonest fancy,
Hear him but speak, and he will put you down
Ten Universities, and Jnnes of Court,
Jn twenty sillables. Good Mr. Holdfast
Speak learnedly to th'wenches; though J say it,
They have both good capacities.

Thor. Most rubicund, stelliferous splendant Ladies,
The ocular faculties, by which the beams
Of love are darted into every soul,
Or humane essence, have into my breast
Conveyed this Ladies luster: and J can
Admire no other object; therefore beauty
Your pardon, if J only do address
In terms Scholasticke, and in Metaphors
My phrase to her.

Graie. J shall not
Envy my Cosens happiness.

Thor. You Are full of Candor;
Jf you will love me Lady* i will approach your ears,
Not in a garb Domesticke, or terms vulgar,
But hourly change my language, court you now,
In the Chaldean, or Arabicke tongues,
Expound the Talmud to you, and the Rabbines,
Then read the Dialect of the Alanits,
Or Ezion Gebor, which the people use
Five leagues beyond the Sunrising, in stead
Of pages to attend you, I will bring
Sects of Philosophers and queint Logicians,
Weel Procreat by learned art, and I
Will generate new broods of Scholars on you,
Which shall defend opinions far more various
Then all the Sectaries of Amsterdam
Have ever vented.

Covet. Learned, learned young man,
How happy am I in thee?

Thor. Do but love,
I Will call the Muses from the sacred hill
To Enucleat your beauty: I my self
(After in loftier numbers I have sung
Your famed Encomiums) will convert to poet,
And for your sake I Will write the city annals,
In famous meter which shall far surpass
Sir Guy of Warwickes history: or John Stows upon
The custard with the four and twenty Nooks
At my Lord Majors feast.

Cov. How am I ravished!


Thor. Whose brave show hereafter
Shall be no more set forth with stalking pageants,
Nor children ride for angels nor loud actors
Pronounce bold speeches, I will teach his Henehboyes
Sergeants and trumpeters to act and save
The city all that charges: Nay I Will make a new
Found engine; which without fire shall keep his
Whitebroath warm til his return from Westminster
Nor shall the Aldermens daughters, who have
Dreamt at least six nights before of gilded
Marchpane, forfeit their serious longing: I Will have
Horses with their Saint Georges on them, that shall gallop
Into their handkerchers.

Clar. You promise wonders.


Covet. Hold your tongue, he is able
To perform more by's learning.

Thor. The cross
And standerd in Cheapeside I will convert
To Hercules pillars: and the little conduit
That weeps in lamentation for the Church,
Removed that did lean on, it shall be still
Like the great tun at Heidleberge sild with wine,
And always running, that the prentises
Shall not on Sundays need to frequent Tauerns,
And forfeit their indentures.

Covet. Still more miraculous.


Thor. The great conduit
Shall be a magezin of sack, and Smithfield
A Romish Cirque or Grecian Hippodrom,
My Lord Majors gennet shall not die without
An Elegy, nor any citizen break,
But have a doleful ditty writ upon him.

Val. Save you gentlemen.


Covet. Noble sir Timothy, and your friend both
Welcome, this is my neice, and that my daughter, pray
Be pleased to know them, Sir honor me to walk,
I Would have some private conference with you,
The house sir Timothy is at your command.

Grace. Cosen what would these gentlemen?


Clare. Truth I know not,
I Will venture my discretion to his nose there,
And that appears a rich one, they are two
Country Idiots whom thy father would
Put upon us for husbands.

Grace. Very likely,
Pray gentlemen your business.

Tim. Speak for me Valentine.


Val. Ladies wee'r come to see you, fame does give
You the attribute of fair and witty.

Clare. Yet our wits you see sir will not serve to keep
Fools from our company.

Tim. Very right in faith.


Val. That tartness
Becomes you prettily, and might serve to fright
Young linnen-drapers or some millaner
That does with gloves and bracelets stolen from's
Master court you, a haberdasher would have shak'd
His blocke-head (as if he had been trying a Dutch
Felt out) and with a shrug departed, but we are
Gentlemen Ladies, and no city foremen
That never dare be ventrous on a beauty,
Unless when wenches take them up at plays
To entice them at the next licentious Tavern
To spend a supper on them, we are creatures
Deserve you at your best and noblest value,
And so expect you will use us.

Tim. Very right, this is
A country gentleman my neighbor I,
A trusty and coragious country knight.

Clare. I do believe you sir, your face does tell me,
You Are one that feed on bacon and bagpudding,
Your nose by its complexion does betray
Your frequent drinking country Ale with lant in it,
Have you no hobnayls in your boots, driven in
To save the precious leather from the stones
That pave the streets of London.

Grace. Is not sir your
Cloak new turned, the aged three pil'd velvet
Was not your grandams peticote this jerkin
Made by your grandsire at his first translation
From Clown to Gentleman, and since reserved
An heir long to the family, and this sword
The parish weapon?

Tim. Very right again.


Clare. Now for you sir.
Who of two fools do yet appear the wisest,
Can your ingenious noddle think that we
Bred in the various pleasures of the city,
Would for your sake turn beasts and grase in the country,
We cannot milk, make wholesome cheese, nor butter,
And sell it at next market and lay up
Out of the precious Income as much coin
In thread bare groates, mill-sixpences, and pence,
As will suffice to find the house in Candles
And Soap a twelve month after.

Grace. Nor can we
Spin our own smockes out of the flax which grows
Behind your Dovehouse, no. nor card the wool
Must make us peticoates things (to say truth)
Not worth the taking up.

Val. They Have Magic in their tounges
They have so daunted me, I think I shall
Turn fool and get me* 'hem without reply.

Clare. All the company,
We can enjoy there is each day to walk
To the next farmers wife, whose whole discourse
Is what price Barley bears, or how her husband
Sold his last yoke of Oxen: other meetings
We cannot have, except it be at Churchales,
When the sweet bag-pipe does draw forth the
Damsells to frisquo about the May poles, o^ at
Weddings, where the best cheer is, wholesome
Stewd broth made of legs of porke and (...)*

Grace. Yes, at Christnings, where the good
Wives, stead of burnt Wine and Comfets,
Drink healths to the memory of all christian souls
In Ale, scarce three hours old: eat cakes more tough
Then glue or farthing gingerbread: then talk
Of the last Blasing Star, or some new monster:
Then drink, and cry heaven bless us from the Spaniard,
While the learned Vicars wife expounds the Ballad
Of'twas a Ladies daughter in Paris properly,
And so breaks up the wise assembly.

Val. And you
That are the precious paragons of the City,
Who scorn these harmless sports: can have your meetings
At Islington, and Green Goose fair, and si^
A zealous glass of Wine till the parched floor
Be moistened with your virgin dew, then prattle
How that you dream^ last night that John the Mercer,
Or Tom the Drapers man at London-stone
Was in your bed, and what sweet work he made there.

Tim. Very right, and kis'd you oftener
Then ere the good man did his Cow, and hugged you
As the Devil hugged the Witch, that is right now*

Val. When you are married
(For that you will be, or else run away
With Costermongers, Mountebankes, or Tailors)
Your husbands are more subject to you then
Their bondmen are, whom by profuse expense
You break beyond redemption from the Indies* the
Straights, or Barbary, see them lodged in Ludgate,
And then turn pricking semsters, till that trade
Failing, you take your selves (as to the last refuge)
To the old occupation; till the Marshall
Carry you to Bridewell, of which you are free,
Even by your fathers charters that have been
Sometimes the masters of it, there I Will leave you,
So farewell wildcats.

Tim. Very right as I am a gentleman.


Grace. I like his (...) Clar^, (...)
Or none shall be my husband. Enter Thorowgood.

Thor. help me to laugh good wenches, I have tal^'d
Thy Uncle Clare into so free an humor,
That he is resolved straight to take forth the license,
And marry us in the morning.

Clare. What od fellow's this?
Know you him Cosen Grace.

Thor. Prithee good wit noe more, we have overcome
All foreign enemies, and it is unfit
To war among our selves.

Grace. This is the pedant
My father brought to mock us, good thine stuff,
Get thee home to thy parish,
And instruct
Thy people wholesome Doctrine, for us,
We have no zeal to learn.

Thor. Life they will persuade me out of my self,
Clare, Grace, know you not me, not Thorowgood.

Amb. Thorowgood, pray put your tricks on some body,
More easy to be wrought on, Thorowgood, Ha, ha, ha. Exe.

Thor. What should these wenches mean, the ^ive and sheares
Cannot resolve this mystery; they know me
Better then I can know my self: 'twas she
Advised me to this habit to deceive
Her uncles prying eyes, and why then
Should they abuse me thus? the rest were made
But fools in Quarto, but I find my self
An ass in Folio: I Will away, and if
I quit them not with an abuse as fine,
I Will say there is no quickening spirit in wine. Exit.

Explicit Actus Secundus.
Actus Tertius, Scena prima.
Enter Thorowgood, Valentine Knowell. Know. ARE they so witty say thou?


Val. You Would best try
The acuteness of their intellects.

Thor. You may endeavor
With the large talent of your masculine wit
To exceed their female sharpness you shall find,
Though you firm and stiff in your defense,
These city lasses able to take down
Your most courageous fury: pray endeavour't.

Know. That gentleman, were to usurp your presence,
I find no inclination, yet I thank you,
To rest a fool upon record as you do.

Val. How Is that, my impe of understanding?


Know. By being so egregiously abused
By two poor City infants, things that never
Have heard wit named, unless 'twas when their father
Has called his Formal foreman witty varlet,
For cheating hansomely, had they been some
Illustrious dames, the glory of Cheape-side,
Stars of the City, that are daily haunted
By this great Lord that courtly kiss their gossips,
It had been possible their conversation
Might have instild into them so much language
And wit sufficient to withstand the assaults
Of some young Innes acourtman.

Thor. Yes, who never
Had mooted in the hall or seen the revels
Kept in the house at Christmas.

Know. Some such gamster might have
Come often with credit, though he would ventured
His whole estate of wit on them and lost it,
But you the rookes oth' age to be ored one
At your own game by city girls.

Val. Thou art an ass,
A very coxcomb, there are girls in the City
Able to oredoe at their own game a hundred
Such feeble fellows as thy self, but Thorowgood,
Leaving this infidel to his mis-beliefe,
Are you resolved that I shall undertake
The new design we plotted?

Thor. With what speed
Can be convenient, sir Timothy
Shall be our instrument.

Know. If there be wit in it,
Honor me to assist you.

Thor. A revenge
Upon these peevish wenches, one of them
Loves me entirely, nay has vowed me a marriage,
And did advise me to assume this shape,
To cheat her uncle.

Val. And for the other,
By many a shroud cast of her eye upon me,
I do suspect for all her queint dissembling,
She Is taken with my good parts. Enter Maudline.

Thor. Thy face I must confess,
Is full of choice allurements, see there maid,
How fares it with your witty mistress,
My gallant type of beauty, is the stomach,
Come down, I Am sure you are furnished
With some excuse or lamentable epistle,
To reconcile me to them.

Maud. Sir I am
As ignorant of the interpretation of your words,
As of your person.

Thor. She not know me neither?


Maud. But if there be one Valentine among you,
A well accomplished gentleman.

Val. That Is I, that's I.


Maud. Then sir,
I would require your privacy some minutes.

Val. Weel be as private as thou will, my girl,
Your patience gentlewoman.

Know. I wonder Thorowgood what business
She can have with him.

Thor. Heel declare it.
See they are parting.

Val. Tell them I Will advise ont.


Maud. You will be speedy. Exit Maudline.


Val. Yes, ^es, nere doubt my haste, say I me their servant.


Thor. The business Valentine.


Val. Do not thou know it,
Even by instinct?

Know. We cannot prophecy.


Val. Thou art a fool then,
Does not the harmony of my good parts
Speak me the conqueror of all beauties Thorowgood.
The wenches are on fire for me.

Tho. Their bloods
Are always (...) in the Dogdayes: but good Valentine
Be serious, did their maid bring news of love
From either of them?

Val. From both, from both, now were for the statute,
That Bigamy my tender conscience
Would not much be oppressed to have two wives,
But one of them thy Pinnace, thou shall man her:
But J delay too long, I must go meet them;
I long to be a kissing, pray heaven their breath
Smell not of Marmalade, 'twill turn my stomach.

Tho. You Will practice our design I hope.


Val. Methodically: farewell boys. Ex. Val.


Tho. Pray be you Sir Timothy, know his entrance:
It Is such another mad-cap my Scene is.

Enter Holdfast. Hold. Nay, come forward Land lord Spoild else. Trist. Bus.
It Is my Cosen^ lodgings, pray be bold in it,
As is my Chamber. Cosen this is a Constable.

Tho. He comes not with a warrant.


Hold. No, I Will warrant you, I
Brought him Sir to see you; he is a wit,
A very wit, or as the modernes term it,
A spark, a mere spark, such a one as I am*
Since I left off those idle toys called books,
He Will take Tobacco too, and with a grace
Spit in the rubbed chamber, though his testy wife,
Cry fie upon him: he is a very spark,
and worthy your acquaintance.

Tris. Come forward sir, you stand as if you would cosen'd
One of them with bad linen; pray advance,
My Master is your Leader.

Bus. Save you gentlemen.


Tho. You Are very welcome Sir, my Cosen speaks you
A Citizen of rank.

Know. That you bear office
Of honor in your parish.

Tho. That you are witty,
Or as he says a spark.

Know. Nay, a good fellow.


Bus. It Is granted gentlemen,
This is my Character, I am by trade
A Linen Draper.

Tho. Would trust me
For forty else of Holland?

Bus. Ha, how is that sir?
I have more wit I thank you: cause you seem
A Gentleman of quality, I care not
To venture as much Cambricke as shall make
Your Crush a gorget, but ^o farther, sir,
There is no wit in it: how is that Mr. Holdfast?

Hold. You are a spark still Landlord.


Know. I Will swear in this he is witty.


Bus. It Is my humor,
My wit has half and one me long ere this;
But for my wit I Would be^^ie an Alderman,
And twirld a pondrou^ chain upon the bench,
With as much grace as can the formalst of them:
I should have fined for Sheriff, but all Guild Hall
Hearing I was a wit, cried out upon him,
Twill breed an alteration in the Senate,
To have a wit amongst them. How Is that sir?

Know. And so you mist preferment*


Tho. And continue
In The state of wisdom still; an humble Constable?

Hold. Yes, and an honest one, i^e say that for him,
He never stopped wench in's watch.

Bus. How Is that? I scorn it,
I Have stopped a hundred in my time: how is that sir?
You relish wit I see.

Know. It Is so acute,
No pallat but most taste it; shall's to the Tavern?
You Are for a cup I hope?

Bus. For now sir,
It is my frequent use, when I have set
My watch, to view the Tavern, drink a quart,
And then back to my business, and there wit in it.

Tho. It Is granted sir: Come gentlemen, an ^oure
Is ou^ extent of time: good Mr. Constable
It shall be yours. Cosen J have some business
Concerns your knowledge, as we pass along
J shall inform you. Exeunt.

Enter Valentine, Grace, Clare, Maudlin. Val. You see I me come
Upon your summons.

Clar. Sure you mistake,
There Is none here is so fond of you to court
Your cheap and vulgar presence.

Val. Here Is a Letter
Speaks other language, you might cloth your discourse
In the same phrase, or I shall laugh your folly
Into a milder temper, and then leave you.

Clar. You Are very confident.


Val. No, you're too coy,
I me now in the humor to be tempted to
Love any of you: take me while the fit
Is on me, for i am sure twill not endure
Longer than does a wealthy widows grief
For a loa^h'd husband. Speak, ha you a mind to me?
Speak quickly, or for ever more hereafter
Be sure to hold your peace, and that is a task
Far worse then death to any of your sex.

Clar. Her blushes does betray her, were to me,
He should find other usage. Sir my Cosen,
I know not how transported by her love,
Above her reason, has enthrald her heart
To your dispose. I hope sir you are so much
A Gentleman, you will make civil use
Of her affection; twill be worth your care sir.
Besides the rich endearements of her youth,
She Is Mistress of a fortune that may challeng^
A noble retribution for her love.
We Will not disturb your conference. Ex. Clar. Maud.

Grace. Cosen, cosen, you will not leave me thus?
I pray let me go sir.

Val. Thus far into my arms girl, that is the place
Thou oughtst to rest in: you expect I warrant
That I should court you now, and with an army
Of oaths, stuffed with as many sinicall falsehoods,
Protest I love you: by this light I know not,
It Is folly to dissemble, whether or no
I can affect thee; yet thou seemst to wear
That pretty harmless innocence in thy looks,
It wins my credulous thoughts to believe
Thou may be virtuous.

Grace. Sir, I hope my own
Too forward zeal, in tendering you my love,
Will not in your good thoughts beget an ill
Opinion of my modesty.

Val. Never fear^t:
That freeness more engages my just faith
To embrace thy affection. I have seen some Ladies,
Coy as a Voteresse below their suitors,
Yet with a tough-backt groom, have known them sin
With most libidinous appetite in private;
But J'me as fearelesse girl, that ought amiss
Can stain thy soul, as thou were confident
In settling thy most constant choice upon
A stranger; yet I must desire the reason
Why you did love me: for my own good parts,
Certain they are not so attractive as to conquer
A beauty at first sight*

Grace. Since I have
Disclosed my affection to you, (although love
Often times admits no reason) i will endeavor
To satisfy your question: the first cause
Moov'd me to love you, was my father.

Val. Hang thy father
In's own gold chain: but such another word,
And never hope to have me; do thou think
I Will be beholding to an eight in the hundred,
To such an empty caske as is thy father,
(Who soon did get his wealth by the old proverb*
Of fools have fortune) for a wife; but that
I have some mercy in me to believe
Thou may be virtuous; I would not match
With any of my squeamish Ants of London,
For all the wealth in the Chamber.

Grace. Sir, you asked,
A question of me, and will not permit
Me give a civil answer; as I said,
My father --

Val. Father again, farewell, my ears do blister
At the harsh sound: would thou had been a Bastard,
So thou had no title to his blood:
Another father, like a whirlewind, blows me
Hence from thy sight for ever.

Gra. Pray hear me.
Intends to match me to Sir Timothy
Shallow-wit, a creature only fit for scorn;
Which to prevent, and taken with the fullness
Of your true worth, I rather choose to cast
My reputation on your noble pity,
Than stand the desperate hazard of my ruin.

Val. She loves me by this light, this is no trick.
Now to my Thorowgoods project: thou art a good wench,
A harmless wench, and I believe a sound one,
And I will have thee; give me thy hand: yet stay,
Ere I do cast my self away upon thee,
You here shall promise Mistress, to become
A most obedient wife, and not according
To the ancient trick inherent to the City,
Rail till you be my Master.

Grace. Never fear me.


Val. Nor shall you, when you're at my house in the Country
Be niggardly, or spoil a dinner for
Want of the the other ounce of Sugar, nor
Repine to see me merry with my friends,
Or curse my brothers, when they so journe with me*
Nor starve my servants when I am from home.
I must be dr^^k^ sometimes ^oo, then you must not
Whine and cry out, were I ^ maid again,
I Would never marry any that does take
This wicked Herb Tobacco. Those injunctions,
And some few hundreds mo^^ of the same nature,
Sealed and delivered to me by your promise,
I may be won to wed thee, nay to bed thee,
And get a race of such Heroicke children,
As shall entice posterity to conceive
Some good came from Cheapside. Your lip shall seal this.

Grace. You see your strength^ upon me.


Val. It Is my good girl:
Thy father, armed with the trained bands o'th City,
Shall never pull thee from me* to confirm thee
How much I love, i will disclose a plot
I had to gain thy affection.

Grace. It Is some good one,
Pray let me hear it.

Val. You see my youth and feature will admit
A woman's Character; if I were clothed
But in the habit, should I not appear
A bouncing Mary Ambr^^^*

Grace. Some such creature* but to your project.


Val. I have prepared me
A handsome female-shape, my man without
Has them under his (...); and I persuaded
Sir Timothy, in hope that would court thee
I his behalf, to have presented me
Here for his Niece; you mark me.

Grace. Very well; but now
This the design is useless.

Val. By no means;
It must be pu^ in action; come go in,
And help to dress me: Sir Timothy expects
To meet me in that shape here: and besides
In that disguise, secure I can at any time
Steal out with you, and marry you.

Gra. Your reason
Shall govern my obedience.

Val. Come let us in then.


Enter Timothy, Covet, Formal. Tim. It Is very right that sir, but yet methinkes
A wholesome song, sung to a fine new tune,
Should not be much amiss: my boy here has one,
And I Would be very loath, although I cannot
Sing, as they say, my self, that she should hear
What those, I can keep, can do; is not this right now?

Cov. Your pleasure shall prevail, though to say truth,
Son Shallow-wit, for son I still shall call you,
I never liked a Song, unless the Ballad
Oth' famous London Prentice, or the building
Of Britains Burse: for Music, less the Virginalls,
I never cared for any. Does but cloy
The ears, but never fills the purse son.

Tim. Very right indeed; it is too light
For such a purpose.

Form. With your leave sir,
Music is most delightful, and young Mistress
Grace, and her Cosen surely will receive it
With thankful Equipage.

Tim. Honest Formal,
Thou Art in the right still; come exalt thy voice
My little Impe of gut and hair: My Mistress
Shall know there is something in me.
How do you Sings.
Like it?

Form. It Is very odoriferous.


Cov. I shall begin
To love it better then I have done; it is a good boy,
A very pretty boy, and i will reward thee.
There Is a threepence for thee.

Tim. Very right.
Father you are too bountiful.

Cov. He shall take it,
Indeed he shall; it is manners to receive
Money from your betters boy: but here is my Niece.

Enter Clare. Tim. Very right, I had almost forgotten, pray where is mine?


Cov. Why, have you a Niece Sir Timothy?


Tim. Yes, yes, I Have two or three, but one I sent
Hither, to view my Mistress in a Coach
An hour ago at least.
Sure she is come.

Cov. Clare did you see the gentlewoman?


Clar. None such came hither yet Sir.


Tim. That Is not right though,
A pox upon her for her pains.

Enter Maudlin. Maud. Mrs. your Cosen does desire some conference with you.


Cov. Maudlin,
Did there a Gentlewoman arrive here lately,
To see my daughter?

Maud. There is one within,
In busy conference with her.

Tim. Very right that, he is pleading for me now.
Fair Damsel that is my Niece; pray tell her* here is
A Knight, a simple Uncle of hers, or so, desires her
Company. But here she comes, my Mistress with her; Niece
It Is well done, i will give thee the the other thousand to increase
Thy portion for it: Mistress, and how, and how do y^^ like my
Niece, a plain Country girl, or so.

Cov. A very handsome woman, I could love her,
Did I but know her portion. Mistress welcome.
What Is in that house is yours?

Grace. Sir Timothy,
You have much graced me by the sweet acquaintance
Of this good gentlewoman. Pray Cosen know her;
She Is worthy your endearment.

Clare. I shall be proud
To do you service.

Val. I most fortunate
To be esteemed your creature.

Tim. Very right
She Is a poor niece of mine, yet she can speak you
May perceive or see.

Enter Thorowgood, Holdfast, Tristram, Knowell. Cla. Life Thorowgood with young
Holdfast, pray heaven my folly
Has not undone me.

Thor. You Will please to pardon
Our rude intention sir, we have some business.

Cov. Please you declare't.


Thor. This gentleman and my self,
Come to inform you that this spark my Cosen,
Is son and heir to sir Geffrey Holdfast,
And since I hear you have disposed your daughter
To that good knight, I in his fathers name,
Desire your niece should be his wife.

Cla. Pray Sir speak
In your own cause he needs no advocate.

Cov. I Have been abused,
In this Sir Geffreys son the scholar?

Thor. The very same sir.


Hold. I am the spark sir.


Know. Valentine, in the name pulls off his periwig.
Of madness: man why in this shape?

Thor. Valentine, Ha, ha, ha.


Tim. Very right, my niece is Valentine.


Thor. And how is it bully, have not found these girls
Of a hot appetite, how often ha?

Val. Has my Land-lady
Provided me a cullis, life my back
Does needs a swathband.

Cov. What means this gentleman?

Thor. Nothing sir,
But to inform you what strange things your neice,
And daughter and, nay never blush he has
Performed it better then your uncles foreman.
I know he has.

Covet. Timothy this abu^e must not be thus put up,
Did not you say I was your Neice.

Tim. Very right, but it was Valentine.


Know. He has been here all night (...)


Grace. Cosen we are basely betrayed.


Cla. Take courage.


Thor. Do you think sir, my Cosen shall mix with such
Stale ware that keep their gamsters in their chambers.

Know. Or this knight have Valentines reversions?


Tim. Very right, I scorn it.


Thor. Keep them. they I serve to set up some twice
Broken Merchant, or undone Linnen-draper, come away
Valentine, thou have made a brave discovery. Farewell,
My witty virgins, you are pay^ now. Exeunt.

Cov. I Will be revenged for this, and if it cost me
Half my estate Formal send post, for sir Geffrey,
The whole town shall know of this abuse*
I Will make you fast enough.

Explicit Actus terpius.
Actus Quartus, Scena prima.
Grace, Clare, Busy, Luce. Busy. THey are both sparks, that is certain, ^^ere
I take them in my watch, I Will make them stoop
Under my staff of office, Mistress Clare,
Though I Am a Citizen, and by my charter,
Am not allowed much wit, as being free
Oath Linnen-drapers, and a man in office,
Yet if my counsel, if you please to follow it,
Do not revenge you on these saucy mad caps,
May taking up of Holland at dear rates,
Be quite abjured by courtiers: and I canvas'd
Out of authority, how is that now?

Clare. Master Busy,
You seem of sage discretion: and to say
Truth, I conceive you have the stock of wit
Belonging to the city in your custody,
You are the chamber of London, where that treasure
Is hoarded up, and I do hope you can
Be true and secret.

Busy. How Is that Lady?
I were unworthy else to thrive by linen,
Could I not keep smock secrets for your uncle,
Your father mistress Grace, I care not for him,
Although he be right worshipful and an Alderman,
As I may say to you he has no (...)
Wit then the rest oth' bench: what lies in's thumbe-ring,
Yet I do love you dearly for the kindness
Shown to my girl here, and because you have
Some flashes in your brains: and since you have
Opend the case to me, ere we proceed
To sentence, tell me seriously do not you two
Love Valentine, and Freewit?

Grace. For my own part,
And I dare say as much too for my cosen,
Their memories are as distant from our hearts,
As civil honesty from theirs.

Clare. And though
I well could like that Freewit for a husband,
Yet in mere spite because he shall not have me,
I Will wed the next man's offered me.

Busy. How Is that?
I would my wife were dead; two comely lasses,
Such as sometimes I light on in my watch,
would make fit wives for such rude sparks, and t'shal
Go hard but I will for your sakes sweet beauties,
Number a brace of such sound ^u^tell to them,
If you will give way to it.

Cla. And crown thee for
The king of witty Constables use our names,
Or any thing to draw them forward, that
We may in triumph laugh at their disgrace,
And weel procure a pattent, to continue
Thy office to thee, during life: and after
To hire some ingenious poet that shall keep
Thy fame alive in a brave Epitaph
Engraved on thy marble.

Enter Covet, Sir Geffrey Holdfast, Sir Timothy, young Holdfast. Geff What
varlet should that be trow?


Cov. Truth I know not,
Nor can conjecture, yet I (...)
Him to be truly yours, because attird
In The habit and the phrase of a right Scholar,
And for your son, pardon me master Holdfast,
I took you for some lewd audacious varlet,
That had usurpt that title.

Hold. I imagine
It was some bastard of my fathers, gotten
In youth upon his Tailors wife or Landresse,
He has good store of them, but master Alderman
You now conceive I me son and heir apparent
Unto the Holdfasts, whosoever got me,
That Is not much matter.

Bus. How Is that, anon before I set my watch,
I Will visit you again: meanetime, pray give my
Daughter Luce leave to come home, her sister
Poor wretched, is troubled with a pain in the
Bottom oth' body, pricks even to her very heart,
And I would have Luce go toth' Pothecaries,
And get some Besar stone, they say 'twill cure her.
Farewell good Ladies, you will be sure to come Luce. Ex. Busy.

Geff. Are these the maidens, I promise you master
Alderman the'r virgins of good feature, and I shall
Be well apaid if my son match to either,
Which like thou best boy?

Hold. Both of them good father,
Be not so troublesome, but let me take
A view of them: Sir Timothy which do you
Like best of these two Ladies?

Tim. Which do you
Like best good Mr. Holdfast.

Hold. Yours shall be
The choice noble Sir Timothy.

Tim. Yours indeed,
Magnanimous Mr. Holdfast.

Hold. On my gentility yours.


Tim. Yours on my knighthood.


Cov. Good sir Timothy,
No striving, they are free for you* and for
The stain those idle gallants put upon them,
It Was on my credit gentlemen to keep
All other suitors off, in hope by that means
To obtain them for themselves.

Tim. It Is very likely
That Valentine's a wagge.

Cov. Daughter and neice,
This hopeful gentleman, and this good knight are
By my care provided for your husbands, pray use
Them as befits their worth, and take it
As a fatherly admonition; either resolve
To marry these or none.

Cla. It Is a hard choice sir,
Yet rather then our maiden-heads shall starve,
Weel feed on this course fare, young wenches uncle,
Are like young hungry Hawks: they will stoop at
Jack-daws, when they can meet with no better prey,
Draw nearer thou doughty knight, and thou good
Squire oth' damsells, Uncle these youths are bashful in the
Presence of you two their grave Elders: your grim beards,
And azure notes able are to fright
Their precise love to silence.

Tim. She Is in the right,
I Am scuh a fearful fool I cannot speak,
If any body look on me.

Geff. Let Us withdraw,
Now plye thy business boy.

Clare. So now the game Exe. Sir Geffery and Covet.
Will begin presently: I pray you tell me
Which of you is the valiant Rosicleer,
Dares break his Lance on me.

Tim. Marry that would I
If I durst be so bold, mine is a stiff one,
And will prick sorely.

Clare. A fools babble is it not?
But come in brief toth' purpose: is it you
Sir knight of the ill favored face,
That would have me for your Dulcina?

Tim. Very right,
You know my mind as well it seems as if
You Are in my belly.

Grace. So then you are sped:
This gentleman's my comely spouse that must be,
Twere fitting Cosen Clare ert be a bargain,
They know on what conditions they do cast
Themselves away upon us.

Hold. It Was discreetly
Thought on, I would do nothing rashly.

Clare. Mark then
You men that will transform your selves to
Monsters, wretches that will become so miserable,
You Will hang your selves: and think it a fair rid dance,
Mark what you will come to, if you be so mad,
So desperate mad to wed us, you must first,
Resolve like patient gulls to have your no^es
Twingd if ours'chance to itch: your ears like asses
When they grow lasie cropped, least they oreheare
Our chamber secrets, for our recreation,
And least with too much ease we should grow resty,
Weel beat you daily: while you like tame Spanells,
Shall fawn and lick our shooe-strings.

Grace. Nor expect,
To get a good word from us in a twelve month,
Hourly revilings and perpetual noyses
Shall be as favors taken that we would
Vouchsafe to spend in such regardlesse trifles,
We Will be as proud as ere our mothers were,
When she was Lady Majoresse, and you humble,
As her trim hench-boyes: whatsoever servants
You kept before, although they were your grandsires,
You shall turn off and limmit your attendants,
As it is the city fashion to a woman
Butler, that shall not dare without our license,
To let you have a penny pot of sack
To give a frugall entertainment, to
Your visiting friends.

Clare. If you have a brother,
Kinseman, or friend, that does in pity grieve at
The tyranny you live in, him it shall be felony
To converse with, we in tissue and plush will
Brave it while you walk in fustian, weel
When we please have our fair coach and horses
To carry us up to London to ask counsel of
Our mothers and our gossips how to abuse you.
You shall be still obedient, we commanding,
And if a Lord or courtly gentleman,
Whom we style servant, out of love sometimes
Gives us a visit, you shall not repine:
If we forsake your bed to go to his.

Gra. And if you chance, as fools will often be
Peeping to spy us coup^ing, with respective silence,
You shall depart, not daring to bedew
Your eyes with tears for grief that you are cuckolds,
Nor to exalt your honors above your neighbors,
But big with joy triumph that you have wives
That are in so much credit, as to have
Persons of quality, take the pains to get your
Heirs to your large revenewes.

Tim. Very right,
It Is not the fashion now adays for knights
To get their own sons, it is sufficient for us
If we can leave them lands, no matter who
Was their true fathers.

Cla. Say sir Timothy
If upon these conditions you can like
The match is perfect: but faith take my counsel,
Make not your selves mere raskalls: the reproach
To boys and scholars, subjects fit for ballads,
Not worthy M Ps name to them, good Sir Timothy
Have pity on your self, and marry rather
In your own tribe, some damsel that can churne,
Make Cheese and Apple pies with Currants in them,
And Mr. Holdfast twere far better for you to
Match with some grave doctors impe at Cambridge
Or else as it was your use when you are a student,
Lie with your bed maker.

Tim. Very right,
Yet I do know all this is but in jest,
To make us love you better.

Hold. True sir Timothy;
Speak as it were to let us understand
By an Irony as we the learned call it,
How well they mean to use us: therefore in
My judgment it were requisite with all speed,
While there in this good humor
To strike the match up.

Tim. Very right, we are
No Jackdawes to be fright with these Scar-crowes,
Mistress your hand, and if you will have me so,
If not so likewise: but you will repent it,
You Will scarcely meet two that will offer fairer
Then we have done.

Cla. But do you mean performance,
Truly of these conditions.

Hold. As sincerely
As ere we mean to eat.

Tim. Or drink good Ale
At mother Huffs a mornings.

Grace. You Will confess this
Before the Priest and witnesses.

Hold. Before
The Congregation, or at a Commencement
Before the University.

Clar. That you will be
Honest contented Cuckolds, bear your heads
As peaceably, and with as much obedience,
As the tam'st beast in the City.

Tim. On my Knighthood.


Hold. On my gentility.


Clar. Why then strike hands on it;
Since you will needs undo your selves, 'twere folly
To endeavor to redeem you: but this night
We will be married, and in private,
Not yours nor our friends being acquainted with it.
We Will meet you any where, procure the license,
And we will be ready; so farewell: to night,
Or not at all lets hear from you.

Exeunt Clara, Grace. Hold. And feel us too ere morning, 'tshal go hard else.
Sir Timothy, was not this wisely carried:
To let them have their sayings? but we will not
Be such stark fools to do what we have promised;
When they are ours once, we may rule them easily
At our own pleasures.

Tim. Very right; and use them
At our own pleasures: But see here is your Mr.
And Mr. Constable your Landlord.

Enter Grimes, Busy. Hold. Landlord, welcome
On my Gentility, to my house that must be.
Thou thoughtst, because I did wear Lokram shirts
I Would no wit: but hark thee, I have got
The wench of Gold: Sir Timothy, and I
Have struck the stroke old boy: to night's the night,
Thou shall know more of it ere twelve of Cl^^^e,
And then believe me: Grimes go you to the office;
There Is money, fetch a License.

Tim. There Is more money,
Bring me a License too; sure as we wooed
We Will wed together,

Busy. How Is this? Gentlemen
I shall have gloves I hope.

Hold. And favors too,
Thy daughter Nell shall have my Bride gatters,
And thy foreman my points: But hones^ Landlord,
I know the art excellent at a device,
This matter must be private, not my father,
Nor Mr. Alderman must be acquainted,
Till all is finished: Could thy wit but help us
To plot this finely: Clare and Grace will meet us,
At any place where we will appoint.

Bus. How Is that?
I Will set you presently in the way; my house
Shall be your randevous: soon after ten.
The hour of meeting: there I Will have prepared
For the two Ladies a Sedan: that shall
Carry them thence unseene through the watch
At Ludgate, where I exercise my office,
Into white-Friers, there shall a little Levite
Meet you, and give you to the lawful bed.
With much celerity: give me your money, and i will take out the license.
How Is that now?

Tim. Very right.


Bus. Mean time my daughter Lu^e shall give them notice
How all is contrived, they will be willing,
When they shall know the managing's committed
To my discretion; but about your business;
It will grow late oth' sudden.

Hold. Come Sir Timothy. Ex. Hold. Tim. Grimes.


Bus. So, so, as I would have it: if I do not
Do something to exalt the fame of Constables,
May I be hanged upon my staff of Office.
Ha! Valentine and Freewit with my daughter?
They must not see me. Exit.

Enter Valentine, Free-wit, Luce. Luce. It Is certain Mr. Freewit they are
contracted,
And this night to be married: I am sorry
You should be thus supplanted, by two such
Dull witless idiots: but they are so bent on it,
That when I speak in your behalfes, my Mistress Ent. Clar. Grace.
Stopped my mouth with a blow oth' lips: see here
They are themselves; if you do any good,
It must be now or never. Ex. Luce.

Clar. Grace. Ha, ha, ha.


Free. What do the Monkyes laugh at?


Clar. To behold
Two such trim gallants as your selves, like Asses,
Shaking your empty Noddles ore the Oats
You feign would eat, but must not lick your lips at.
You thought to have won us by your wit, where lies it?
In your gay clothes; perhaps so, if you can
Out-sweare the faithful Tailor, that is unpaid yet.
Or cheat your Sempstresse. Troth make safe retreat
Into the Suburbs, there you may find cast wenches,
Who will in pity have you: and for dowry,
Bring you an ampler stock of hot diseases,
Than you are already furnished with. We Orphans
Oth' City have more charity to our selves,
Than to wed^Surgeons boxes.

Grace. When our portions
Shall be consumed in Pothecaries Bills,
Or giving Doctors fees; or at best use,
Serve but to purchase Sack; or be as tribute
Paid toth' three Kings; or piously bestowed
Upon Jerusalem.

Free. No, you would best reserve them,
Till th^se you wed be begged for fools; and then
They will be seas'd to better use. You think now
You have broake our gulls with anger that you have
Resolved on other husbands: who would have you?
But two such idiots, fit to be the styles
To the vast pride and lust lurkes in your blood,
Derivative from the City: for our selves,
Why should you have a thought we could descend
So much from gentries honor, to mix with you?
It Is true, you appear handsome, but you paint
Worse then a Bawd, or waiting woman, in love
With the spruce Chaplain.

Val. For your hair let us see
Your eyebrows badge: oh it is not your own;
Be modest and confess it: it is a Peruke,
I saw it at the French-mans in the Strand,
The other day: and though you hold your head up,
It is supposed it grows too near your shoulders,
And you wear iron bodies, to keep down
And rectify the crooked paths that are
In this same hill your body.

Free. Nay, besides
You Are infinitely lascivious, it is reported
You Have killed the reverend Alderman at least,
Ten Prentises, besides four journy-men.
With too much labor: That you will be drunk
Our selves can testify: and with these imperfections
This inexhausted Magazin of vices,
Could you imagine we would have you? no.
Heaven give you joy, with your well-chosen spouses:
May they be patient Cuckolds, that is all the harm
We Will wish them: the more fools, more fit for husbands
To such hot wild cats.

Clare. Well Mr. Free-wit,
I thought how ever we, in mirth, or madness,
Could have transgrest civility, that you
Would not have made such a severe construction
Of our intentions: how i have loved you, heavens
Can bear me righteous witness; but man's faith weeps.
Is ^ickle as his shadow, never seen,
But when the Sun shines.

Grace. And that you, whom I
Even at the first view loved, and fixed my heart on:
Should not alone contemn me, but with these
Abuses wound my fame, torments my soul
Beyond the strength of patience, heaven forgive you.

Free. They are our own, dear Valentine: our own as surely,
As if the officious Priest had put the Ring
Upon their pretty fingers; why you need not
Take words with such unkindnesse Clare yourselves
Being the occasion.

Clar. Such discourtesies
From friends; nay, such beloved friends as you were,
Wounds deeply Mr. Freewit.

Free. Prithee Clara
No more remonstrances of this unkindnesse,
Dry thy fair eyes, or I shall else grow childish,
And weep for company: poor heart i am sorry
Thou Art thus distempered; prithee sweet forgive me;
We will be friends, and instantly steal hence,
And end all difference in a happy marriage.

Clar. Ha, ha, ha: hold the man's head, heel swowne
I fear oth' sudden: marry you; go boast
How you have abused us, and do not forget
This part oth' story, twill much grace the action,
That you were foold again into belief
That we could love you: ha, ha, ha. Ex. Clare, Grace.

V^l. We have made our selves fine fools, a pox upon them:
I knew their tears could not be serious:
They only fell from their left eye, as wealthy
Young widows weep for their old husbands, Freewit
They Are lost, past all recovery.

Free. Who can help it;
There are more wives in the Kingdom; yet I Am vexed
That two such gulls should carry them: lets go seek
Sir Timothy and my Cozen Holdfast out,
And geld them, then proclaim them to be Eunuchs.
That course may spoil their marriage. Enter Busy.

Bus. I have o're-heard them all, and it ^onduces.
Much to my purpose: now, or never Busy
Show thy self a true spark, that Constables
Hereafter may be thought to have some wit*
More than is in their staff. Good day to you gallants,
I have some business with you.

Val. Your name is Busy?


Bus. The same body,
Your friend, although a Constable* there were two Ladies
Went lately from you.

Free. What of that?


Bus. They told me, as I am of their council, that they loved you.
And though some words of course had past between you,
As often does among friends: you know the Proverb put lately
In a Ballad, where I learnd it, that amantiumirae amoris redinteg^atio est:
yet that was but in jest, and in all haste,
Wished me to assure you, that if you would speedily
Take out the Licenses this very night, twixt nine and ten, at my
House they would meet you, and join with you in Matrimony.

Free. Is this truth?


Bus. How Is that? upon the faith sir of a man in office,
You may believe me: for a P^iest, leave that
To my care gentlemen, i will have one ready
Privately in White-Friers, the house anon
I will inform you, and what way to take
To miss pursuit, if any should endeavor
Your apprehension.

Val. How may we deserve this kindness from you?


Bus. When it is done, then thank me; mean time make haste, and get the
licenses. Ex. Free. Val.
I will pursue the rest, and if I fit not some body,
Ent. Luce. Let me be held as other of my fellows are, Asses in office.
Luce thou art come as aptly as I could wish: be sure at nine of
Clock to be at home, and if you can bring with you two of the gentlewomens
gowns, question not why?
But on my blessing do it; if this hit,
Time shall report some Constables have wit. Ex.

Explicit Actus Quartus.
Actus Quintus, Scena prima.
The Watch. 1 Watch. IT is a cold night neighbor,
And it is likely we shall have frost,
That will make Sea-coales dear: heaven help poor people.
Is no news stirring neighbor?

Men. 2 Wat. Yes, to day
I heard such news, heaven bless us, as would make
A man's heart quake in's belly; strange, and true,
It came up in a Carret Boat from Sandwich
Last tide; an Oister wife, a good old Woman,
Heard it at Billingsgate, and told my wife on it,

3 Watch. What is it? pray lets hear it.


Men. 2 Wat. Marry, that twixt Deal
And Dover, one fishing for Flounders, drew
A Spaniards body up, slain in the late sea fight,
And searching him for money, found in the sets
Of his great Ruste the -- I shall think on it presently,
It Is a hard word -- the Inquisition.

1 Wat. O monstrous, what is that?
I have not heard of such a Beast before.

Men. 3 Wat. You Have heard nothing then:
It is a Monster very like the Man-drake
Was shown at Temple Bar.

2 Wat. You have heard nothing neither:
The Monster's no such Monster: neighbor Mandivell
You are a zealous brother, a Translator,
It Is such a Monster as will swallow thee,
And all the Brethren at Amsterdam,
And in new England at a morsel: verilies,
Your yeas, and nayes will not appease its stomach,
Twill sup them up as easily as a Tailor
Would do six hot loaves in a morning fasting,
And yet dine after.

Enter Busy and Parson. Bus. There is the License sir for Mr. Holdfast,
And wise Sir Timothy; you have instructions
How things ought to be carried: when I have
Disposed my Watch, I will be there my self;
Mean time good Sir be careful.

Pars. Doubt me not,
Good Mr. Constable; it is not the first time
I have espoused couples of as much worship,
Behind the Brickhills: when it is done, it is done,
And surely consummate.

Ex. Parson. Bus. Well said neighbors,
You Are chatting wisely over your Bills and Lanthorns,
As becomes Watchmen of discretion: pray you
Let Us have no wit amongst you; no discourse
Of The Commonwealth; I need not neighbors give you
Your charge to night: only for fashion sake.
Draw near and be attentive.

3 Men. I have edified
More by your charge I promise you, than by
Many a mornings exercise.

Bus. First, then,
You shall be sure to keep the peace; that is,
If any quarrel, be in the streets, sit still, and keep
Your rusty Bills from bloodshed; and as't began
So let it end: only your zeales may wish
The Devil part them.

1 Wat. Forward Mr. Constable.


Bus. Next, if a thief chance to pass through your watch,
Let him depart in peace; for should you stay him,
To purchase his redemption he will impart
Some of his stolen goods, and you're apt to take them,
Which makes you accessory to his theft,
And so fit food for T^^urne.

Men. Good advise,
I promise you, if we have grace to follow it.

Bus. Next if a drunkard of a man disguisd,
Desire to pass the gate, by all means open't,
You Will run your selves intoth' praemunire,
For your authority stretches but to men,
And they are beasts by statute.

1 Wat. Such as we are,
Horned beasts he means.

Bus. How Is that; you carry lanthornes,
Thou have wit, and I Will reward't, there is four tokens
To buy the cheese: next for the female creatures,
Which the severer officers in the suburbs
Term girls, or wenches, let them pass without
Examining where they been: or taking from them
A single token: less good souls, they get
Their money hard, with labors of their bodies,
And to exact on those were even extortion
Beyond a brokers.

Men. Yet they do it
Without the City, I have heard a brewer,
Being one year in office, got as much from those
Good souls as bought him a new mash-fat,
And mended all his coolers.

Bus. How Is that? we are bidden
Not to take ill examples, for your selves you have
Free leave for the good oth' common wealth to
Sleep after eleven: mean time you may play at
Tray trip, or cockall for black puddings,
So now your charge is finished.

Enter Sir Timothy, Grimes, Holdfast, with a Sedan. 1 Wat. Stand, who goes
there?


Men. Come before Mr. Constable.


Hold. It Is I Landlord,
There Is sixteenpence to buy thy watch some (...).
Prithee tie up their tongues.

Tim. And there is four (...)
To purchase tosts to it.

Bus. How Is that, pray stay (...),
You Are sober men and fit (...):
Whither goes all this carriage? (...),
These are the cunningst wodden bawnly houses,
Were ere invented, and these blew coat men (...),
The most authenticke pimps: set down and open
Your chair of sin you (...)

Hold. Why good Landlord,
You will spoil all, do you not know your tenent,
Not Jeremy Holdfast?

Bus. How Is that? not my father
Upon a watch, I Will lay my life they have stolen
Some city orph^^e, they are so loath to have
Their load discovered.

Hold. There Is ten shillings* Landlord
To buy thee sack: although it be thy office,
And thou art sworn to it, for a friend it is lawful
To break an oath: I will forswear my self
A hundred times to do thee good.

Exeunt Holdfast, Timothy, Grimes, ^^d Seda^^ Bus. Iam
Appeased, march on: look you remember my
Instructions: so this money was well gotten,
And 'tshall as merrily be spent, you need no
More, club your half pence sparks to purchase Ale,
You Have an exchequer: ha^ another chariot, Int.
This same should be some Lady from a labor,
Her waiters smell of groaning cheese: goodnight
Gentlemen, pay the Porter, what is it twelve pence*
Share it amongst you.

Men. Mr. Constable
It Is very late, a fire and a brown tossed now,
With some of mother Trundles Ale, I promise you
Would comfort much the inwards.

Bus. How Is that hang it,
It is heretical: Sack's the Orthodoxall
Liquor: and now I think ont, you two, and Mendwell
Shall with me to the Saint John's head: there is
A cup of pure Canary, and we have it,
Twill break your heads, your own bills,
And wear your Lanthornes in your noses bullies:
My masters, you that stay behind observe
My charge with strictness, and if any business
Be of importance, call me.

Exit cum C^^^ri^. 1 Wat. Now my masters,
Shall I expound a motion to you, shall we
Share, and share like this money?

4 Wat. With all our hearts* Omnes*


1 Wat. Lets see what comes it to a piece* there is eleven groats,
And we are five of us, that is -- that is, let me see seven pence a piece.
No, no, I lie, it is eight pence, and six pence over.

4 Wat. Right, right, this it is to be booke-learn'd,
He Is a good Arimetician: but stay neighbors,
Here comes more company: come before the Constable.

Enter Covet, Sir Geffery, Formal with a Link. Cov. This is the government
the city keeps,
How do you liked Sir Geffery?

Geff. Very well,
I do not think all Christendom affoords
The like for formal discipline.

1 Wat. Leave your pratin^,
And come before the Constable, though he be not
Here himself, there is those that can examine you?

Cov. You do well masters to keep diligent watch,
There Is many varlets at these hours commit
Disorders in the City: Where Is the constable?

1 Wat. Good master Alderman, I cry your worship mercy,
Because your worship wanted your worshipful horse.
We did not know you: Mr. Constable
And please your worship is but at next door
Drinking a pint of sack

Cov. How at a Tavern?


1 Wat. At the Saint John's head*
And please your worship, where if your worship please,
You may have excellent s^cke, and please your worship.

Cov. This is the fowlst enormity I ever
Heard on in the city, that a Constable,
Who ought to see good orders kep^, should be
At these unlawful hours, breeding disorder*
And in an open Tavern. Good Sir Geffery
Bear me but company, I Will make the knave
A fair example to all men in office, how they
Come nere a bush: watchmen look well
To the charge committed to you: for your Constable,
I Will make him kiss the counter, light on Formal.

Exit Covet, cum caeteris. 1 Wat. A shrewd man this, if ere he live to be
Lord Majors, ha mercy upon us; neighbors surely
It Is very late, and I was up till twelve
Last night a mending my wives bodies, shall we
Each to his bulk and take a nod?

Omnes. Agreed, agreed. Ex^. Watch.


Busy, M^ndwell, watchmen (...) in a Tavern. Bus. Set down your trusty Bills
my sparks, and let us
Watch ore a cup of Sack, here it is will make you
Each one an Alderman: a bigger glass boy,
I do not love these thimbles, they are fit
For none but precise Tailors, that do sip,
In zeal, and swear cuds nigs over their wine,
To cheat their customers: so this is something.
A score or two of these my sparks, will set
Our brains a floate, and then weel talk as wisely,
As all the common Counsel, how is that now?

Men. Mr. Constable
You Are in the right I promise you: I feel
My self already growing from a watchman
Into a head-borow.

Bus. How Is that? thou shall be
A Constable within this half hour Mendwell,
Carry thy staff with the red Cross and Dagger
In as much state, as the best gold smith,
That ere bore office in Cheap Side; here is to thee,
Hang care and Cosenage; let mercers use it
In the dark shops: I am a Linen Draper,
Love wit and Sack, and am resolved to thrive by it,
When they shall break like bottles: Here lets ^^nvas
This quart, and then will bumbaste off another,
And drink a health to Holland, and the mad boys
That traile the puissant Pike there: how is that; do you peep?

Enter Fiddlers Boy. Boy. Please you hear a good song Gentlemen?


Bus. These squeakers, do claim more
Privilege in a Tavern,
Then a man in office; into every room
They thrust their frisled heads; and I Would bin at it
With some distressed Damsel, that I had taken
Late in my watch, thus I Would bin served: i will have
An Edict made against them at Guild Hall,
Next sitting certainly.

Boy. A very new song and please your worships gentlemen.


Bus. There you lie boy;
I doubt it is some lamentable stuff,
Oth' Swine-fac'd ge^^lewoman, and that you will grunt out
Worse than a parish Boar when he makes love
Unto the Vicars sow; her story's stale boy,
'T has been already in two plays.

Boy. An't please your worships,
My song is of a Constable.

Bus. How Is that? a Constable,
It Is not my self; I hope i am not exalted
Into a ballad: Dare you sirrah abuse
Officers in your Madrigalls; you deserve,
And so does he that made (...), to be whipped for it.

Boy. Pray hear it sir: it is no such matter on my credit.


Bus. How Is that? Well, on thy credit I will hear it.
Callin your company; welcome my Master^:
Ent. Musicians. Here: wet your (...) first, then thund^^ forth
Some lofty Sonnets in the praise of Constables;
And never fear the whipping-post hereafter.

Constables 2 Song.
SIng and rejoice, the day is gone.
And the wholesome night appears.
In which the Constable on Throne
Of trusty bench, does with his Pe^res
The comely watch; men (...) of health,
Sleep for the good oth' Commonwealth.
It Is his office to do so,
Being bound to keep the peace.
And in quiet sleep all know
Mortal jarre^, and lewd brawles cease:
A Constable may then for's health,
Sleep for the good oth' Commonwealth.
Unless with Nobler thoughts inspired,
To the Tavern here sort,
Where with Sack his Senses fired,
He reigns as fairy King in Court;
Drinking many a lusty health,
Then sleeps for the good oth' Commonwealth.
With a comely girl, whom late
He had taken in his watch,
Often he steals out of the gate
Her at the old sport to watch,
Though it may impair his health,
He sleeps with her for the good oth' Commonwealth.
Who then can Constables deny
To be persons brave and witty,
Since they only are the eye,
The Glory, the delight ^th' City,
That with staff, and (...) light
Are like black Pluto Princes of the night.
(...). An excellent Ditty I promise you.


Busy. Well done boy.
There Is twelve pence for you Knaves, and tell the Poet
That made it, if heel come to me, i will give him
A quart of Sack to whet his Muse. Ent. Drawer.

Draw. Sir, below there is one enquires for you, and I suppose him
To be at least an Alderman.

Bus. And if he be
The Major and his horse, let them come up.
Flinch Squeakers into another room: Good Mr. Alderman
It Is strange you are abroad so late, will it please you Ent. Cov. Sir Geff.
Formal.
To taste a cup a Sack, twill warm your stomach
After your walking.

Cov. No Sirrah, i will not be
Partaker of your riot: this the watch
You keep good Mr. Constable? in troth
The City's much beholding to your care,
And they shall understand it, in a Tavern
A fit place for an Officer: but i will send you
To one fitter for you to the Counter.
Lay hands I charge you, bear him hence,
I Will have you all laid fast else.

Bus. How Is that? I hope you will let us
Drink off our sack first: twere far better sir,
In my poor judgment, that you sat down in peace,
As does befit your gravity, and drink
A friendly cup or two: then for the first
Offense to send your neighbor to the Counter:
Pray sir be not so fierce; a glass, or two
Will mollify your hard heart.

Cov. Will you not stir knaves?
Where is the Master of the house? i will make
This Busy an example.

Bus. Pray do not sir:
Perhaps you are bashful sir, and will not dr^nke,
Cause you want coyn^ to pay: i will lend you some;
Or if you scorn to borrow, you may dip
Your chain; a good pawn never shames the master.
Pray sit down sir; we just now had Music,
I Will call them in again.

Cov. Within, the master of the house, i will have
These knaves indicted for this bold contempt,
And whipped about the City.

Bus. You may see sir,
My Watchmen know their duty, they will obey
None but the Constable, and i will experience,
If they will know me for one: My masters, take
This Alderman and his company I charge you,
And carry them straight to the Counter, i will secure you
Against all the harm that follows.

Seize on the Alderman and Sir Geffery. Men. Come, come, come along sir.


Cov. Dare you do this sirrah?


Bus. Yes, and answer't too sir.
You Have met a Constable that has the wit,
To know the power of's office: neighbor Mendwel,
Because they will take him for a Rat in the Counter,
And I Would be loath to have his reverend b^^rd
Be twitch'd off for his Garnish, to my house
Convey him, and that comely Knight, and bid
My maid show them a Chamber; i will deal kindlier
With you, then you would have done with me: there watch them
Till I come home: how is that now?

Cov. Sirrah, sirrah, i will make you smoke for this.


Mend. Come, we lose time sir.


Bus. Let him have
A good fire pray you. So, all works as't had bin
Molded before in wax: boy there is your reckoning.
Now to my sparks, Ive done that will be talked on in the City,
And registered, a Constable was witty.

Freewit, Thorowgood, Valentine, Luce, Clare. Clar. You think you have us sure
now. This same Busy
Is a mere cheating Rascal.

Thor. Come, your rage
Is useless now: he has done better for you,
Than I by the circumstance perceive you had
Intended for your selves: what would you have done
With two such March-pane husbands? I believe,
For all you set a good face on the matter,
It Was your own plot.

Clar. Ours? then may we dye Virgins,
And these same trusty youths, now called our husbands,
Be suddenly transformed to Eunuchs; we
Had thought young Holdfast, and Sir Timothy
Had bin the Squires had ushered us, and them
We had resolved to couple with.

Free. Sweet Clare
No more of this; for all your queint dissembling.
I know you love us, better than to part
For a slight quarrel; now we are man and wife,
And we will love you, if you will be obedient,
And get such Boys upon you, as shall people
Cheap side with wit five generations after us.

Val. Fear not thy fathers frowns: sweet Grace I have
An Aldermans heir a joyncture.

Enter Busy. Bus. Bless you my hearts of gold, and give you joy.
Frown not good Mistress Clare, I knew your mind
And so fulfild it.

Free. Constable, i will have
Thy Annalls writ, in a far larger volume,
Than Speed or Hollingshed.

Clar. Well Mr. Busy,
You Have served us sweetly.

Bus. How Is that? I hope your husbands
Anon will serve you sweetlier: faith I thought
There was no wit in it, that you two should cast
Your selves away on two such gulls, your portions.
Deserved more noble husband^: therefore finely
After you were gone down, to take your Chariot,
Instead of them, when in the mean while my daughters
Held in discou^se, I sent these, now your husbands*
To exercise their office: Now you are married.
I shall have Gloves I hope?

Clar. Yes, and such favors
As thou shall wear in triumph: but what have you
Done with our other sweet-hearts?

Bus. How Is that? matched them
To two will hold them play: Come will you ^ravaile
Your father Mistress Grace is at my house,
Thither you shall, and if he will be angry,
Let him be pleased agen^ Advance my sparks*
I Will be your valiant (...) Exeunt.

Sir Geffery, Covet, Formal, Watchmen. Geff. Storm not so Mr. Alderman, the
man
Has done no more beleev't, than what his office
Will bear him out in.

Cov. I Will spend a thousand
Pound, but I Will be revenged: a saucy rascal
In my own Ward to serve me thus?

Enter Timothy, Holdfast, Grimes, Luce, Nell. Hold. Nay, come forward Ladies,
Although your father sweetheart, be in our search,
Be not abashed, come forward, though you kept
Your tongues in peace, ere since our going forth,
And nere spoke word, unless before the Parson
When we committed Matrimony, yet now
Pull of^ your Maskes and Vailes, and show your faces,
Be not ashamed of them.

Cov. Who Is here? Sir Timothy and your son, I Will lay
My life on it they have struck a marriage up
Without our knowledge.

Geff. Very likely Jeremy.


Hold. No more words sir, it is done, I and sir Timothy
we hit the white: Good father Covet be not
^ungry mood now I have wed your daughter,
And he your Niece, we will use them kindly: pray you
Bid give us joy; your daughter is so fearful,
She dares not ask you blessing.

Cov. This qualifies all anger, I forgive them.


Luce. Forgive us sir? you do not hear us ask it,
Not need we your remission.

Cov. Ha! who are these! Sir Geffery we are cheated
Abhominably, cheated by this Constable,
This rascal Busy, these are his daughters.

Luce. Nor are we ashamed
To own him for our father, that has provided
Us two such wealthy husbands.

Hold. Nell, I did not think you would have served me thus
Unkindly, gentle Nell.

Nel. Unkindly sir, in what? to make you master
Of all I have. I Will use you kindly trust me;
When you come drunk a nights home, in the morning
I Will make you amber Caudles.

Hold. Say thou so;
Give me thy hand: Father pray be not angry,
My Wife's my wife, and so I will maintain her
Against all the world. Sir Timothy, your spouse
Is not to be contemned, she is a good girl.
And therefore pray regard her.

Tim. Very like; for your sake
I will do much: Although I find my self
Made a stark Ass. Come hither Luce

Enter Clare, Grace, Thorougood, Freewit, Valentine, Busy. Grace. Your pardon
Sir, and blessing.


Clar. We have done sir
What cannot be undone, now if you will
Be foolish now, and vex your selves, you may
Be laughed at for your labor; they are our husbands,
And we no cause now to repent our choice,
Nor you Sir to repine at.

Free. Our duties
And after carriage, shall deserve your love,
Nor our fortunes Sir so m^ane, but may
Merit their portions

Cov. Well* you shall not
Report me cruel; you have my consent,
And blessing with it; neighbor Busy, I Will
Be friend^ with you, and at my entreaty
Sir Geffery shall be reconciled.

Bus. How Is that?
Give me thy (...) good brother Knight, my daughters
Shall not come without portions; they shall have
Each one a Bolt of Holland* that is enough.
Son Knight give me thine too; and son Holdfast
We Will be as merry boys, and drink old Sack
In plenteous glasses, till we all grow witty,
A^ humorous Poets* to your beds, the're ready,
Your wedding dinner shall be mine, we will dance.
And have the Song oth' Constable; March fair,
And get each one a chopping boy by Morning;
I and my Watchmen here will drink your healths,
Though we do lose our own by it.

Free. Mr. Busy,
Wee're all beholding to you, and it is fit,
We should confess this Constable had wit.

FINIS.

