A FRVITful sermon, preached at Occham, in the County of Rutland, the second
of November. 1583. By Thomas Gybson.

PROVERB. 29. 8. Where there is no Vision, the people decay. GOD IS MY
DEFENDER GOD IS MY HELPER

printer's device: swan standing on a wreath

AT LONDON; Printed by Robert Walde-graue, dwelling without Temple-Barre. 1584.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Lord, FRAVNCES, Earl of BEDFORD, and one of her
Majesty's most honorable privy Council, Knight of the Noble order of the
Garter: With the right honorable, Sir WALTER MILDMAY knight, Chancellor of
the Queens Majesty's Court of Exchequer, and one of her highness most
honorable privy Counsel: Grace, Mercy, and peace be multiplied from God our
heavenly father, and from our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
THE blessed and holy Evangelist Saint Luke, (Right Honorable) penning and
publishing the Heavenly story and blessed Gospel of Jesus Christ, does also
dedicate the same to one Theophilus, a Noble and famous man, of singular credit
and authority. The reason and cause that moved him thereto, is because in
those times, the pureness of the Gospel was hindered, and persecuted, whereby
many erroures began to be spread and allowed: and therefore in great Wisdom
it pleased the holy Ghost, not only to write a faithful, sure, and perfect
storye: but also to offer and present the custodye and defense of the same, to
one of Religion and power. The very same cause partly, has moved me at
this time, to be so bold as to offer and Dedicate this poor and simple
testimony of my travail to your Honors. For although I do confess, we
live under a Gracious Prince (whom the Lord long continue to his glory, to
the shame and confusion of his enemies, and to the daily profit of his Church)
although (I say) we live in so peaceable, happy, and gracious a time, under the
flourishing state of the Gospel: yet truly the dearest Children of God, and
the sincerity of religion, is subject to bitter persecution. These words at
the first may seem very grievous, hard and heinous, and yet they are most
certain and true. The holy Apostle S. Paul, writing to the Galatians. 4 29.
speaks on this manner: As he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him
that was borne after the spirit: even so is it now: he speaks of Ismaell and
Isaac, and yet we do not read in the scripture of any persecution between
them, neither did Ismael persecute his brother Isaac, with hand or swoorde,
but that which is worse, proudly and arrogantly, he raised himself against
him, mocking him, and as it were, treading under feet the promise of God. And
this dealing by the Apostle is called a persecution, and in deed there is not
any persecution more grievous to the Children of God then this. Now who does
not daily see, that the best Christians, and the pureness of religion are
greatly persecuted, by Papists, Atheistes, and Hipocrites, as Isaac was by his
Brother Ismaell. And of all matters of religion, I think there is scarce any
in these days more generally hated of such kind of men, then that, which is
most altogether, and almost only hand led in this simple Sermon. For these and
such like men, many of them can be content with a common ordinarye
profession, to hear Mattins and Euensong, and sometimes a Sermon, by such men
as they like off, but that there should be any continual course of the pure
preaching of the word of God, they can in no wise allow or like of. This I
say, is hated, rejected and persecuted so far as may be, of the greater
sort, and therefore not without cause have I attempted to dedicate this my
labor, to your honors as special patrons, and defendors of the Lords cause, and
tried Friends and favorers of God and his truth. But yet this attempt may seem
very rash and needles: For who am I, that I should take upon me to set
forth and to publish any thing? The unworthiest I confess of many hundreths,
and the vnablest of many thousands, and yet seeing many things more simple,
less needful and profitable, are not only suffered, but allowed to come
abroad: I am not altogether discouraged: neither has any man just cause to
accuse me in this my simple enterprise. I know these be days of knowledge and
learning, there be great stoore of famous and learned divines in our land
(whom I beseech the Lord to bless, that they may assist their weak brethren,
in the defense of this, and such good causes,) and yet the two mites of the
poor widow cast into the tresury, amongst the great gifts of the wealthy,
are not to be refused. I know your Honors be daily hearers of famous and
learned men, both in your houses and abroad: you are acquainted with the
sermons of profound and deep divines, and such as are mighty in the
scriptures: notwithstanding having in my self sufficient trial and experience
of your honors most courteous, humble, and favorable dealing toward me, and
also of some liking of my simple and poor trauelles in preaching heretofore: I
am not ashamed or afraid after such trial and proof, to offer this so small
and simple a thing unto your honors. The great necessitye of the matter I
deal withal, the care of Gods glory, the zeal of his house, the benefit that
his church may have by it, has especially moved me that it should be
published and come abroad. Let not therefore hypocrites be too rash in
judging, the Lord the searcher of the hearts and reins, knows my purpose
and affection, in preaching and publishing this matter. The cause that has
moved me to present it to your Honors, rather then to other, is the long proof
and acquaintance of your honorable courtesies, and friendly goodwill toward
me, which for my part, I am never able to requite, for the which I think my
self as long as breath is in me, most bound and indebted to your Honors. And
here I offer this poor fruit of my travail* as some testimony of goodwill
and thankfulness. And whereas we are wont commonly to offer and present to our
dearest friends, some gifts, as tokens of good will, or else of special
duty: Amongst many great and prescious presents, which are no doubt given and
presented to your honors, I also offer this simple mite, and yet I hope more
pleasant and acceptable to the receivers, then thousands of gold or silver, or
any earthly thing whatsoever. And in deed, can there be any matter more sweet
and pleasant, to the chief Patrons and defenders of the Godly preachers, and
the word of God, then to hear of the necessity, profit, and excellencye of
preaching: which things are set forth plainly and largely in this little
sermon. For howsoever many men hate and abhor this matter, and can in no
case digest it: yet your honors zeal, c^^rage, liking, good will and
countenance, to this and other good causes, is commonly known and spread abroad.
A further reason why I publishe this Sermon, is because there is some matter in
it, for the which I have been in the country where I dwell, openly slaundered
and evil spoken off, and therefore to clear my self from such false reports,
to satisfy my friends which are ready to answer in my cause: to let the
enemies know, I have spoken nothing whereof I am ashamed, but dare put it to
the witnessing and testimony of the Christian reader* and also to resolve
morefully, the weaker sort, in such things as at the first seem strange and
absurd: For these and such like causes, I say, I am content and willing, that
this my travel come to light: although the whole or most part of this Sermon
is unsavory and unpleasant to the greater sort, and specially to the ignorant
people, to the hipocrite, to the idol or dumb minister: yet this is that, which
chiefly misliketh and greeueth them: because, both in the place where I
preached this Sermon, and also else where, I said and affirmed, that the
minister which preaches not, and has not those gifts which the lord
requires in his Ministers, that such a one is no Minister, approved of GOD,
neither has any right and authority from the Lord, to minister his
Sacraments. Which matter, how strange and absurd soever it seem to
ignoraunte and carnal men: yet I hope it is here sufficiently confirmed by
authority and examples of the holy Scripture. I could allege further, the
allowaunce and judgment of most famous and pure Divines, and such as are
generally received and allowed of all true Christians. Master JOHN CALVIN,
about the latter end of his Catechism, which is allowed by her Majesty's
authority, says in plain words, that the ministration of the Sacraments
belongs to them, who have the charge to preach openly in the Church. For
the preaching of Gods word, and the ministration of the Sacraments, be things
jointly belonging to one kind of office: these be his very words which are as
plain as may be. M. Rodolphus Gualter in his 118. Homely upon Mark, speaking
of the institution of the Lords supper, and of the right order in ministering
that sacrament, amongst other things says on this manner. Peccant qui coenaem
absque verbi predicatione peragunt, adeoque illam huic praeferunt, quasi vel ad
dei cultum, uel ad salutem plus conferat, quam verbum, cum tamen huius maiorem,
quam sacramentorum rationem habuerunt Christus and Apostoli. They sin against
the institution of Christ, which do minister the Supper without preaching of
the word, and so prefer the Sacrament before preaching: as though that
auayled more to salvation and service of God, then the word preached: whereas
notwithstanding, both Christ and the Apostles esteemed more the preaching of
the Word, then the Sacrament. These are his words. I might allege many
other testimonies for this cause, not only from the most worthy, Godly, and
learned divines, both old and new of other nations: but also from famous
Martyrs and Bishops in this our land, in their sermons and writings,
published and privileged by authority. I hope then there is no cause, why this
doctrine should not receive a favorable intertainment and allowaunce, as of your
honors, so of all faithful christians, having such warrant from so pure and
learned men, and from the testimony of the holy word. What soever I spoke in
delivering and uttering this sermon, I have here set it down (so near as I
could remember) both in form and matter. To conclude, I most heartely desire
in the Lord, the christian reader, and especially your honors, to accept this
my poor travel. I am bold to ioyn you both in one, not only because the Lord
has joined you together in the bond of friendship, and in a care of my good
estate: but also, that which is greatest of all, in a zeal of Gods glory and
furtherance of his religion. Now the very God of peace sanctify you through
out: and I pray God that your whole spirits and souls, and bodies, may be
kept blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Your Honors in the Lord; THOMAS GYBSON.

Hearken with fear and reverence to the word of the Lord, written by the
holy Apostle Saint Paul, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians.
Chap. 9. verse 16. Woe be unto me, if I preach not the Gospel.
OUR Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in the 17. Chapter of the blessed
Evangelist Luke, amongst many other excellent things, utters and propounds
this parable. Who is it of you, that having a servant Luke 17. 7. 8. 9
plowing or feeding Cattle, would say unto him by and by when he were come
from the field, Go and sit down at table, etc. And afterward in the tenth
verse applies it on this manner. So likewise ye, when ye have done all those
things which are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants: we have
done that which was our duty to do. The holy Apostle and servant of Christ
in this place, avouches and confesses in him self, the saying of his Master
to be most true. For although amongst many good works, there is not a more
excellent or better work, then the preaching of the word of God (which was done
most purely, effectually, and diligently by the Apostle) yet he is so far
from accounting it meritorious, that he says, a necessity is laid upon him,
that duty binds him to do it. In the former verses from the beginning of
this Chapter: S. Paul shows, and that with diligence and large copy of
words, that being amongst the Corinthians, he was content to give place to
his own right, to forbear that which he might lawfully do, to take no
maintenance at all from them, least be should give occasion of cauilling to
the false Apostles: as though he under the presence of the calling of an
Apostle, should seem to seek his own gain and lurre. Amongst other things
he has said, and that in the former verse: It were better for me to dye, then
that any man should make my rejoicing in vain. The which words may seem to
proceed and flow from an ambitious and vain glorious spirit. And therefore it
might be said? What now Paul? What needs all this? Thou art wont to glory
in Christ alone, and do thou now glory in thine own doings? To such a
question or objection the Apostle aunsweareth, qualifiyng his former speech, as
if he should sa^: although it be an excellent work to preach the Gospel, and
that freely yet take not my words so, as though I repose any merit of
salvation in this work, for I am called to it, and bound to it, by duty and
commandment from my master Christ. And if I do it not, I provoke and
procure the anger of God, and the sentence of his curse and condemnation on me.

Woe be to me if I preach not the Gospel: Of these words, being but a part of
the verse, I have taken upon me to speak at this time. From whence I mean by
Gods grace to speak o* these three points. First I will gather some
description of preaching, that you may know what it is. Secondly, I mean to
prove the necessity of preaching, and that every minister is bound to preach.

Thirdly, I will show what they ought to preach. The first point, as in many
other places, so here it is named, but not fully set down what it is, but in
other places we may easily gather what it is. The second is here named and
proved. For Saint Paul being a minister, and saying: Woe be unto me if I
preach not the Gospel, does plainly affirm as much. The third is here set
down most plainly, the matter that we must preach of, namely the Gospel.

As touching the first, let us see how the Scripture speaks of it, as it is
particularly and specially applied to ye public office of the minister,
otherwise I know this word preaching, to have a further and more general
signification: But I speak of it, as Christ and the Apostles do, applying it
to the ministers. Saint Paul 1. Cor 14. 3.
says, He that prophecieth, speaks unto men to edifiyng, to exhortation, and
to comfort. The same Apostle charging Timothy and in him every minister, to
preach the word, adds immediately, Improoue, rebuke, exhort, with all 2.
Tim. 4. 2.
long suffering and doctrine. The blessed Apostle Peter, as he received of his
1. Pet. 5. 2.
master a charge to feed his flock, so he exhorts al other to do the same.

The holy Evangelist Luke says, Luke 4. 16.
that Christ taught or preached in Nazareth. He first read, then shut the
book, afterward he expounded that scripture which he read: and so applied it
to the hearers. By the^e and such like places, we may gather, that preaching
properly as we speak of it, is an exposition and application of the
scriptures, by the lively voice of the minister, to the edifiyng of the people:
whereby it may easily appear that reading is not preaching, nor yet sufficient
in a minister approved of God. Saint Paul will have him apt to teach. 1. Tim. 3.
2.


The Prophet Malachy affirms, that the Priests lips must preserve Mala. 2. 7.
knowledge. Christ after reading shut the book and expounded, and yet some are
not ashamed to count simple reading sufficient: saying, it will serve the
turn, and there may be as much good done by it, as by preaching. As for
reading, we speak not against it, we disalow it not, but account it a holy,
lawful, necessary, and profitable mean, whereby great good and benefit is
wrought to the Church of God: but yet, it does not follow that it is
sufficient in a minister, that it will serve simply of it self in the public
congregation. The Lord has set d^^n an other order, and requires greater
things at the hands of his special servants. But this matter shall appear
more plain in ye words following: For my purpose in this part is, only to
show you by some circumstances and descriptions what preaching is, and that
reading is not preaching, or at least that kind of preaching which the Lord
requires in his ministers, as may appear by comparing them together, and by
using some apt similitudes for the explanation of this matter. The smell or
sight of meat does good to the hungry man, but it will not feed him, except
he taste of it: So by reading, men may have some smell of religion, but they
shall never thoroughly taste of it, without preaching, and therefore it is
called a feeding, as we heard before, and Preachers are counted Pastors and
feeders. Again, meat that is raw and fat, may be called good, but it is
not to be eaten before it be made ready and dressed: so are the Scriptures
read, good holy and pure, but not sufficient food, for the people, without
preaching. Again, bare reading is as though one should cast a whole loaf,
before 1. Tim. 2. 15.
them which want strength to cut it, Preaching is a cutting and dividing of the
bread of life, that every one may have his several portion. Again bare reading
without preaching, is even as the husbandman should cast whole strikes and
bushels of Corn, on his land together on heaps, not scattering of it:
preaching is a spreading M^th. 13.
and a sowing of the seed. Again bare reading is, as though the Fisher should
shuffle his nets on heaps, not opening them: Preaching is a wise opening,
laying and handling of the Net.

Bare reading is as one should offer good treasures, and yet such as were hid,
shut up and fast locked, and could not be come by: Preaching is an opening of
the treasures, to the joy of Gods children. Reading is like to fire covered
with ashes, which does smally profit them that stand by it: Preaching is an
opening and discovering of the fire. Let us consider one example amongst many,
for the further explaning of this matter. The Chamberlain that noble treasurer
of Aethiopia, going to Jerusalem, to Act. 8. 27.
worship God as he went, read the Scriptures: if reading would have served
his turn, Philip needed not to have come to him, but he understood not before
he had a guide: he was not converted, neither had he faith sufficient to
salvation, before he heard the preaching of the word, which indeed is that
especial, effectual, blessed and excellent ordinarye mean of faith, as it
appears more plainly and fully in the next part of our text.

Which being rightly waighed, confirms the great necessitye of preaching,
and proves that every minister ought to preach. Woe be to me if I preach not
the Gospel. And why so? because I am called to it, because I am a minister,
because the Lord requires it of me. Although Saint Paul and the other
Apostles had privileges and prerogatives, which we have not: although we have
not fullye so large a Commission, as he and they had: although they did many
things, which we neither may, nor can do: yet as touching the office of
preaching, it appertains as well to us, as to them. And for the further
proof of this matter I will rehearse some arguments, which before I have used
in this place, adding diverse others to them.

1 It is the commandment of Christ and the holy Apostles, therefore necessary.
Christ said to his Apostles, Go preach the Gospel. The which commandment,
Mar. 16. 15.
in this behalf belongs to all the ministers of God. Saint Paul straightly
charge the ministers of Ephesus. Take heed unto your Act. 20, 20.
selves, and to all the flock, whereof the holy Ghost has made you overseers,
to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. And
most weightily of all, he requires it in the place already alleged, he
leaves it not as a thing indifferent, that may be done, or undone, but
speaks with a wonderful and mighty protestation, he joins the Scripture
and preaching together. For having before in the former Chapter, set forth
the great profit of the scriptures, straight way he necessarilye adds this
2. Tim. 4. 1.
forecible exhortation. I charge thee therefore before God, and before the Lord
Jesus Christ, which shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and
in his kingdom: preach the word, be instant, in season and out of season,
improoue, rebuke, exhort.

2 It is an argument and token of the love the minister owes unto Christ and
to the people, as it appears John. 21. 15. where Jesus Christ says to Peter
after his resurrection. Simon son of Iona, love thou me more John. 21. 15.
16. 17.
then these? He said unto him, yea Lord, thou know that I love thee: he
said to him, feed my Lambs. He said unto him the second time. Simon the son
of Iona, love thou me? He said unto him, yea Lord, thou know that I love
thee: he said unto him, feed my sheep. Christ said to him the third time.
Simon the son of Iona, love thou me? Peter was sorry because he said to him
the third time, love thou me, and said unto him, Lord thou know all
things: thou know that I love thee. Jesus said unto him: feed my sheep.
Whereby it is evident, that those which feed not, love not Christ: Seeing then
that feeding or preaching, is so plain a token of the love that the minister
owes to Christ: it is most necessarily required, if any do preach and yet not
upon this love, they have their condemnation,

3 The church of God is begun and grounded, by the preaching of the word:
and therefore necessary. Paul says, Faith comes by the word Romans 10. 17
preached.

Again, he counts his preaching amongst the Corinthians, a planting 1. Co.
3. 6.
of them in faith and religion. S. Peter says: We are borne a new, not of
mortal seed, but of immortal, by the word of God, 1. Pet. 1. 23.
who lives and endures for ever. And presently adds. This is the word
which is preached among you.

4 By preaching, ye Church of God is not only begun, but also amplified, 1
Cor. 3. 1. Heb. 5. 12. and 6. 1.
builded and enlarged. It will not only make us Babes in Christ, but strong
and spiritual men. It has not only milk for the weak, but strong meat for
them, that are at age. By it we are brought not only to the beginning of
Christ, and first rudimentes of Christian religion, but also we are led
forward unto perfection. The holy Apostle affyrmeth this, when as he says,
that Jesus gave some to be Apostles, and Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
Ephe. 4. 11. 12. 13.
some Pastors and Teachers, for the gathering of Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ unto a persect man,
and unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ.

5 The Church of God begun and brought to that perfection which can be in
earth, is also stayed, strengthened, vpholden and preserved, by the preaching
of the word, against sin and error. And therefore for these causes also, the
preaching of the word is most necessary, yea and that daily and continually,
because some are weak, and have need of daily strengthening, some fall into
errors, and some into grievous sins, from the which they are to be drawn
out by the effectual preaching of the word. This does the holy Apostle
confirm, whereas he says, that The whole Scripture is profitable to teach, to
2. Tim. 3. 16.
improoue, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God
may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works.

6 Again, to the pure preaching of the word, the Lord has promised a
blessing, the minister shall be blessed, the people also blessed thorough it:
They that be wise says Daniell, shall Dan. 12. 3.
shine as the brightness of the firmament: And they that turn many unto
righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. The wise and
faithful Steward, Mat. 24. 25.
that gives meat to the household in due season, when his master comes he
shall be blessed, and made partaker of exceeding joy and glory. Take heed
(says ye Apostle) 1. Tim. 4. 16.
to thy self, and to learning: continue therein, for in doing this, thou
shall both save thy self, and them that hear thee. God Jonas. 3. 4.
so blessed the preaching of his Servant Jonas, that through it the Ninevites
believed God, humbled them selves, and forsook their former wicked ways. At
one preaching of Peter, Act. 2. 41.
there were won to the Lord about three thousand souls. Thus does the Lord
bless his own order, the minister by pure and faithful preaching,
discharges his own soul, obtayneth peace in conscience, and so is blessed in
this life, but shall be far more blessed in the life to come, when he has
finished his course, he shall receive an incorruptible crown of glory. The
people also by this means are many ways blessed, they receive knowledge,
faith, and Act. 26. 18.
salvation: their eyes are opened, they are turned from darkness to light,
and from the power of Satan unto God. Al these great and notable blessings,
do ensue the preaching of the word* and therefore required most necessarily in
every minister.

7 On the other side, without this, both the minister and the people are
accursed, the blood of the people shall be required at his hands, because he
has not as a faithful watchman, Eze. 3. 17
forewarned them of danger, and yet they shall dye in their own sins.

The Lord complayneth by his Prophet Hosea, saying, My people Hosea. 4. 6.
are destroyed for lack of knowledge, because thou have refused knowledge, I
will also refuse thee, that thou shall be no priest to me. To this agrees our
Savior Mat. 5. 13.
Christ. If the salt have lost his saltness, it is good for nothing, but to be
cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men. And if these ministers which
sometimes have had salt in them, zeal, and knowledge to season the people, and
by negligence and carelessness, decay and loose it: If these I say be worthy
to be cast out, how miserable and curssed are they which never had, nor yet
have any Salt in them. It must needs be fulfilled of them which our Savior
speaks in an other place: They be blind leaders of the blind, and if the
blind lead the blind, Mat. 15. 14.
both shall fall into the ditch, that is, both the ignorant Minister, and the
ignorant people shall perish. And in an other place it is said, Cast that
unprofitable Servant into Mat. 25. 30
utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. And here it is
said, Woe be to me if I preach not the Gospel.

Seeing then, that every way there hangs so many grievous cursses, both upon
the minister and people, where the word is not preached, it is most requisite
and necessary, that every minister look to this, even as he will escape the
fearful and heavy curse of God.

8 Moreover the chief end and Romans 15. 4. 1. Cor. 14.
use, why the Scriptures were written, does require preaching. They are left
for our comfort, instruction, and edifiyng. But we are most comforted,
instructed, and edified, if they be opened and applied unto us, and therefore
most necessary that they be so used.

9 Also the corruption and dullness of our nature, requires the same. We are
dull, ignorant, and careless: we please our selves in our own sins, the
Devil goes about continually to devour us, and therefore we have need to
have continual preaching of the word. The natural man perceives not the 1.
Cor. 2. 14.
things that are of Gods spirit. David, after he had sinned, continued in 2.
Sam. 12.
his sin, until the Prophet reproved him for it, yea, and would not take
it to him self, although Nathan spoke a very plain parable, till it was
particularly applied to him. Seeing then there is in our nature such
corruption, such blindness, such slothfulness, and also forgetfulness: what
can be more necessary for the curing of these so great diseases, then the
continual and daily preaching of the word?

Besides all this, it has been an usual order in the Church of God under the
law, by Christ and the Apostles, not only to read, but also to expound and
apply the Scriptures, and therefore the same order is to be Nehe. 8. 8.
observed of us. It is said of the Levites that they red in the book of the
law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the
reading. Christ as we have heard already, continuallye preached and commanded
the same to his Apostles, who as they obeyed in themselves their masters
commandment, so they required it as a continual and usual rule to be
observed for ever, of all the ministers of God in his Church.

And most specially the Apostle in those Epistles which he wrote unto Timothy
and Titus, very largely and effectually urges this matter. I refer you also
unto the 14. chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians: 1. Cor. 14.
wherein so highly he commends the gift of Prophesiyng, interpretation or
preaching, that he prefers it before all other gifts, and accounts it so
necessary, that he would have it continually observed in the Church of God.

Again, Christ commands us, and we daily pray for the enlarging of his
Kingdom, whereas he has taught us to say, Thy kingdom come: Now, the
singular and excellent means to establishe the kingdom of Jesus Christ, is, by
the pure and effectual preaching of the word, and therefore he says in an
other place, Pray to the Math. 9. 38.
Lord of the Harvest, to send forth laborers into the harvest. And how can
they pray with any safe conscience, for the enlarging and establishing of the
kingdom of Christ, which by their ignorance and carelesnes, do altogether
hinder it? Furthermore, all and every one of the names, which are given by the
holy Ghost to the ministers, in ye word of God, do necessarily require at their
hands preaching. They are called the light of the world, the salt Math. 5.
13. Ezech. 34. 2. 1. Cor. 4. 1.
of the earth: They are called Pastors and sheepheards: they are called
husbandmen, Guides, Stewards and Messengers, besides many other excellent
titles given to them. Now, how can they be called lights, which have no light
in them, which either are in ignorance and darkness themselves, or else hide
their candle under a Bushel? How can they be called the salt of the earth,
which cannot or will not season the unsavory and sinful people, with the
heavenly and wholesome doctrine of eternal life: How can they be called Pastors
and teachers, which do not feed, or have no food at al to give to the flock?
How can they be called the Lords Husbandmen, which have no skill at all in
tilling his ground, and sowing his seed? how can they be called Guides unto
other, which either know not the way themselves, or else will not vouchsafe to
open and declare it to other? How can they be called stewardes, which have no
care of the household, which either can not or will not feed them? And how can
they be called the Lords messengers, which are not able to do their message,
or have no care at all to do it. If the minister be a light to the people, of
necessity he must needs go and shine before them in knowledge and doctrine.
If he be the Salt, he must needs season. If he be a Pastor or Sheepehearde,
he must needs feed. If he be a husbandman, he must needs have a care of the
lords husbandry. If he be a guide, he must needs show the way. If he be a
Steward, he must provide for the household. If he be a messenger, he must be
willing and able to do his message: nay, I say more, it stands for the Lords
glory and credit to have such Pastors, and such husband men, such Stewardes
and messengers, as have wisdom and knowledge. The poor people of the
country will not hire him to be a Sheephearde to their sheep, whom they know
to be ignorant and careless: and shall the Lord choose such to govern and
guide his stock? The Gentleman and the Yeoman, will not hire any to be
overseers of their husbandry, except they know them to have sufficient
discretion and experience: and will he think ye be content with simple, foolish,
and rechlesse overseers of his so dear and precious a husba^dry? The noble man
for his honors sake, will seek to have such a one to be the Steward of his
house as is trusty, wise, and of sufficiency to guide and govern a whole
household: and shall the Lord be less careful of his honor? shall he be
content with unwise and unfaithful stewardes? The Prince will have a special
care to send such to be his messengers and Ambassadors, as be most wise and
faithful, and are able discreetely and cunningly to do their message: and
shall the Lords messengers be without knowledge? What can be more to the
discredit and dishonor of his holy name? This argument I amplify the more,
because it is very plain and effectual. Mark I beseech you well: al these
and other names given to us in the holy scripture, do require of every
minister of god, that he preach the word. As we have a care to answer to our
names, and a care of the glory and credit of our God: even so let us be
careful in doing this so necessary a duty. What shall I say more, the end and
purpose of our calling and ministry requires at our hands preaching. The
Lord has ordained Pastors and teachers, for the gathering together of his
saints, and to the edification of the body of christ: seeing the^ we are
called to this end, seeing we are ordained to this purpose, there is no
remedy, we that are the ministers of God, must needs of necessity preach his
word. For a further proof and conclusion of this matter, I call you to record,
I appeal to your own consciences, which are now won to ye lord, which have
some measure of knowledge, which are called out of darkness to light, from
ignorance to knowledge: ye yt sometime have been content with reading
ministers, and quarter sermons, but now hunger and thirst for the word
preached: I call you I say, as witnesses in this cause, what comfort you feel,
what profit, what power in the effectual preaching of the word? how careless
how profane, how ignorant, how lewd you were before, notwithstanding the
daily and the ordinary readings which diligently you had? what has wrought in
you y^ measure of faith, y^ heavenly knowledge which you now have? What is it,
that has wrought in you such a sorrow of your former life, such a grief and
hatred of sin and superstition, both in your selves and others, such an
earnest zeal of the word, such a conscience and a care to reform your selves
and your housholdes: What (I say) has wrought these things in you? how came
you by the^? What is it that has so altered your minds, deeds and
affections: Let your conscience be witness to me in this matter. I am sure you
will approve yt which I have spoken, and acknowledge the profit, the power and
necessity of the word preached.

All and every one of these arguments do prove and confirm, as I think, that
every minister necessarily ought to preach, and otherwise, yt he is no minister
approved of God. Al and every one of these, or most of them do quite overthrow
and condemn, all dumb, idle and careless ministers whatsoever. One day they
shall know, what account he makes of the souls of his people: for seeing the
word of the Lord, in so many places, requires in a minister preaching, yea,
diligent* and careful preaching: in what a miserable and damnable state do
these men stand. The Apostle says, Woe be to me if I 1. Cor. 9. 16.
preach not the Gospel* Well, it may be, whatsoever I have yet spoken will be
granted, it is necessary that every minister preach: but what shall all those
be condemned which have not such full measure of knowledge as other have, which
be not accounted and allowed for public preachers? God forbid: I know there
is difference in gifts, there was so amongst the Apostles, but they all
sufficiently preached. Amongst us and such others as use this place, and such
like places, there is difference, every one of us have not the like measure:
but for my part I speak as I think, our measure is small enough, yet the Lord
be thanked for that we have, and give us grace to use it to his glory, and the
benefit of his church. In my self, I profess and grant very small and weak
measure, insufficiency, and lack of gifts, and the Lord the searcher of the
hearts knows, that the consideration of this has and does make me to fear
and tremble oftentimes, to sigh and lament, y^ so great a charge, and so
weighty a burden is laid upon me, so simple and weak a wretch.

To you that have any measure of those gifts which the Lord requires in his
ministers: to you (I say) quench not the spirit, use the means to increase
your measure, if you be painful, careful, watchful, and faithful in your
Ministry, with a holy and pure affection, the Lord will bless Math. 25. 29.
you. To him that has shall be given, we cannot at the first come to
perfection. Acts. 18. 26.
Appollos a learned Doctor, fervent in the spirit, and mighty in the
Scriptures, yet was he ignorant in some things, and received instructions from
Aquila and Priscilla. Some have more then others, some have ten talentes, some
five, and some but one, yet always remember, and let it never slip out of your
minds, that the slothful and unprofitable servant shall be cast into utter
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Against such I
speak, which in deed never had any one Talent, or any gifts of Ministers, or
having any, do either abuse them, or at least do not put them soorth to any
profitable use. Consider a little the state of our ministry. There be some
amongst us sacrificing and Massing Priests, full of manifest superstition and
hypocrisy, and in truth enemies to Christ's religion. Others there be
altogether ignorant, unlearned, very Idols, they can do what? Even just
nothing. Others there be, which may have some ground of learning, but in deed
they utter very little, neither is y^ people bettered by them. Some are idle,
some careless, some altogether lewd and profane: some join living to living,
and take more upon them, then they can discharge, although it may be they
speak in one place, yet are they dumb in an other. All these and such like
are worthy of blame, to be openly spoken against, because they openly
commit offense. All these stand daily in a miserable and damnable state
without repentance. But my chief drift at this time in this part of my Text,
is, to prove as you have heard, that every Minister approved of God must
preach, that is, he must feed the people, he must cut the word 1. Tim. 4. 1.
^
of God, he must improoue, rebuke, exhort: he must not simply or barelye read,
or hear the people say some Catachisme, but he is to be able in some
sufficient measure, to open and interpret the holy scripture, and apply them,
and I hope that this is already proved: only I exhort you to account the
Lord wisest, to rest in his holy decrees, and allow his own order as best.
Let us not take upon us to appointe him what he should do. Seeing he has set
down preaching, as the most excellent, and ordinary means to salvation: let
us not say, yt reading will serve the turn: Seeing that he requires that his
Ministers be apt to teach, let us not count them his ministers which never
taught, nor ever had any aptness in them. If he may be counted a lawful
Minister and teacher that only reads the ordinary Service, and sometime
hears a few Children to say a Catechism without book, as it is set down
before him, then may the Cleark also of the Town be counted a minister, and
teacher: then may every husbandma^, Seruingman, nay, every boy or child that
can do as much, be so counted. Let not some say for defense of ignorant
ministers, that if they do that, which they can do, it will serve the turn: for
in the building of an house, as there be some Master builders which bring
timber and Stone, so other there be, which bring mortar and fillings, and
serve to necessary use, but let us remember yt every Mynister in his charge,
is, or ought to be a builder, yea a master builder, and if the chief builder
bring nothing but fillinges, how shall y^ Lords building in y^ place go
forward? The Apostle in y^ place which has been already twice alleged, says,
That the Lord has ordained the Minister for the gathering together of his
Saints, and for the edification of the Ephesians. 4. 12. 1.
body of Christ, till we all meet together in the unity of faith and knowledge
of the Son of GOD, unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the
fullness of Christ. Oh these be no small things: these are no trifles, this is
no vile, simple, and drudgery work, no small measure, but very great,
weightye, high, and most excellent. The holy ghost in another place says:
Leaving the doctrine of the beginning of Christ, let us be led forward Heb. 6.
1.
unto perfection, not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead
works, and of faith toward God, of the doctrine of baptism and laying on of
hands, and of the resurrection from the dead, and of eternal judgment. Mark
I beseech you these words: There be many people, yea and Ministers also, that
are ignorant of the first rudiments of Christ, that of repentance, of
Baptism, of the resurrection, of eternal judgment, are able to say nothing
to any purpose: but yet let it be so, that some can do this: they can teach as
they say in some measure: they can Catechize, and lay the grounds of Religion,
yet this will not serve the turn, there must be building after the foundation,
there must be a leading to perfection. The Lord in building the material
Tabernacle, did choose men of singular wisdom, and understanding: and will he
be content, with every drudge and bungler in the building and erecting of his
spiritual Tabernacle? But herein chiefly, have some gathered offense and
grief, because I have said in this place before, and also other where, that
such Ministers have no right to administer the Sacraments.

This seems a strange and hard doctrine: yea, some are not ashamed to count
it erroneous and heretical. If I would stand upon the authority of men, I
could allege for the confirmation of the very words which I have spoken, the
judgment of those, which, by common consent of all true Christians are received
and allowed, as the best, most learned, and most pure divines, that ever were
since the time of the Apostles, but this I hope shall not need. For, if of
necessity every minister ought to preach: or if all the former arguments
will serve to prove this: then also that other doctrine, how strange and
absurd soever some count it: must, I say, needs, necessarily and consequently
follow, that none ought of right, to deal with the Lords sacraments, but his
Ministers. Christ requires of him that baptiseth, that he teach: saying, Go
teach Math. 28. 19.
and Baptize: No Teacher, no Baptiser: that which God has joined together, let
no man put asunder. Saint Paul speaking of the Lords Supper: As often, says
he, as you shall eat this 1. Cor. 11. 26
bread, and drink this Cup, ye show the Lords death till he come. If the
people, at the receiving of the Sacrament, ought to have an effectual and
thankful remembrance, of the death of Christ: it must needs follow, that
the Minister is bound, sufficiently to instruct them in the same. If any will
say that this is done by the dumb minister in reading the words of the
institution: he preaches: he shows and publishes Jesus Christ crucified: so
may I say, that he or any other does the same, and that more effectually, if
they do but say their belief openly before the congregation, but we speak of
a singular, of an effectual, of an excellent and lively showing of his death,
which is by preaching. The Apostle speaking to the Galatians says, I hat Jesus
Christ was Gala. 3. 1.
described in their sight, and among them crucified. His meaning is, that
Christ was so lively preched to them, as his lively Image was set before their
eyes, or else had bin crucified amongst them. This is the power of preching,
this is the duetye of the minister, plainly and effectuallye to discribe and
set soorth the merit of Christ his passion, so that it may be seen as it were
before the eyes.

The first Minister of Baptism, John the Baptist, was a preacher, he Math 3.
joined Preaching and Baptism together, and in him no doubt, the Lord would
leave to his Church an example and pattern, and a form of the right
ministration of the Sacraments. Christ, although there were sundry causes why
he would not Baptize, yet he ministered the Supper to his Mark. 1. 38.
Apostles, but Christ was a preacher, yea, he preached then of his death before
Math. 26. 20.
the first ministration and institution of that sacrament, leaving us an
example to do the like.

The Apostles ministered the Sacraments, Acts. 2. 38. Act. 8. 12. 38. Act. 10.
34. Acts. 20. 7.
but they all preached: yea, the Evangelist Luke in the storye of the Acts,
sets Preaching always before the ministration of the Sacraments. John the
Baptist, Christ, the Apostles and Primative Church, are the best examples that
I know, and best worthy to be followed.

Consider further I beseech you, the great inconveniences which follow in
these places where the word is not preached, the people are still in ignorance
and blindness, and kept still in their old and Popish errors, received from
their forefathers, they know not the use of the sacraments, or to what end
they serve, they hold still their Papisticall transubstantiation: some say,
they receive their maker: other say, they never heard what a Sacrament meant:
some say they do it in a good intent, and yet they know not their own
intent: other say they hope that they receive it as others do: few make any
conscience with knowledge, fear and reverence to prepare them selves. The
greatest cause of this, is lack of preaching, and in deed how can their great
ignorance be taken away? how can their old superstitious errors be
effectually confuted, but by the continual and pure preaching of the word? And
is it not then most fit and convenient, when the sacrament is to be ministered?
but we are so far from having any usual preaching before the Sacrament, that
there be many thousands, which never heard any preaching at all of the
Sacraments in all their life: they have lived these 25. years in a Christian
land under the Gospel, and yet they have profited no further: and if they
should live still double and triple the same years, they should be never a
whitte the better, except they had better ministers, Woe be to me if I preach
not the Gospel. Learn one thing further before I go to the next part of my
Text: if there depend a woe over the minister if he preach not: the same woe is
also against the people if they hear not, and obey not the word preached: Woe
Chorazin: woe Math. 11. 21.
Bethsaida, woe Capernaum, woe to these Countries, Cities, Towns and people,
which neglect and contemn the word preached, it shall be easier for the land
of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, then for such a people. The
same God, the same word which requires preaching of the minister, requires
also hearing and obedience of the people. He that is of God, hears Gods
word, and therefore Ihon. 8.
do ye not hear it, because ye are not of God. My sheep (says Christ)
Ioh. 10. 27.
hear my voice. And to the true minister it is said, He that hears you
hears Luke 10. 16.
me, and he that despises you, despises me, and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me. And again, Verily, verily, Ioh 13. 20.
I say unto you, if I send any, he that receives him receives me. Wherefore
we He. 2. 1. 2. 3. 4.
ought diligently to give heed to the things which we have heard, least at any
time we should let them slip. For if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast,
and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward:
how shall we escape, if we neglect so great satuation, which at the first began
to be preached by the Lord, and afterward was confirmed unto us by them that
heard him, God bearing witness thereto, both with signs and wonders, and with
diverse miracles, and gifts of the holy ghost, according to his own will? Woe
then unto all Papists, Infidels, Atheistes, Hipocrites, ignorant and carnal
men, for none of these in truth do make account of the Gospel.

And now let us come to the third The third part.
part of our Text, wherein is set down what every minister ought to preach,
namely, the Gospel. They are not bound to deliver the counsels of men, the
traditions of the fathers, the statutes of earthly Princes, or the authority
of mortal men: but as they are the servants of Jesus Christ, Prince of all
Princes, so are they Ierem 1.
bound only to preach his Gospel. The true Prophets never spoke of Ezech. 3.
them selves to the people, but as they received warning from the Lord. They
had no authority to speak their own words, nor the words of any mortal man.
The Apostles might not teach their own doctrine, but only y^ which they had
received from their Math 28. 10.
master, who enioyneth them to teach all things whatsoever he had commanded
them: Go (says he) and preach Mark. 16. 15. 1. Cor. 11. 23. 1. Cor. 15. 3.
the Gospel. The holy Apostle writing to the Corinthia^s, avouches that he
received of the Lord that, which he delivered to the^. Whereby we may see al
these teachers confuted, which stand upon the authority of men, which add or
diminish any thing from the Scriptures, which join their own fantasies and
the traditions of men, with the holy, pure and perfect word of God. Woe be to
those sons of vanities, for in deed they preach not the Gospel, they preach
not Christ, but themselves: they deface and weaken the authority of the holy
scriptures. The law of God is a perfect law converting Psalm. 19.
souls. The scripture is able to make the man of God absolute, and perfect to
all 2. Tim. 3.
good works. The Lord says by his Iere. 23. 28.
Prophet: He that has a dream, let him tell a dream, and he that has my
word, let him speak my word faithfully: And what is the chafe to the
wheat, says the Lord? Is not my word even like a fire, says the Lord, and
like a hammer that breaks the stone? Our Savior in the Gospel* speaks
against such teachers: saying, In vain they worship Math. 12. 3.
me, teaching the doctrine and precepts of men. Let us remember that which is
spoken in the last Chapter of the Revelation. I protest unto every man Reave.
22. 18.
that hears the prophecy of this book, if any man add unto these things,
GOD shall add unto him the plagues, that are written in this book. And if any
man shall diminishe of the words of this prophecy, God shall take away his
part out of the book of life, and out of the holy City, and from these
things which are written in this book. Woe be to them which preach and yet
preach not the Gospel. But that we may know the better how the Gospel should
be preached, let us consider a little what it is, and what it contains. The
Evangelists call it the Gospel of the kingdom. Saint Paul accompteth it
that, which was promised before by the Prophets in the holy scriptures,
concerning Jesus Christ our Lord: And in the same Chapter Romans 10. 16.
he says, It is the power of GOD unto salvation to every one that believes.
And in an other place he calls it the word and ministry of reconciliation.
2. Cor. 5. 18.


Saint John calls it the testimony Reave. 1. 2.
of Jesus Christ. From these and such like places may be easily gathered a
full difinition of the Gospel, which I leave to your Godly consideration: only
this I add, that under the voice of the Gospel, is comprehended the whole
Historye of Jesus Christ in the flesh, and also the fruit and use of the same
history. As touching the first, namely the history of Christ, it is sommarily
comprehended under his passion and resurrection: the use and end of al is,
that we should have repentance and remission of sins in his name. And this does
Christ himself witness, when as he said to his Apostles after his
resurrection: Thus it is written, and thus it behooued Luke 24. 46.
Christ to suffer, and to rise again from the dead the third day, and that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name, among all
Nations. To this agrees the holy Apostle S. Peter, when as he says with
other the Apostles, to the counsel and chief Priests. The God of our Fathers
has Act. 5. ^. 8.
raised up Jesus, whom ye slew, and hanged on a tree: Him has God lift up with
his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance unto Israel,
and forgiveness of sins. By this we may see how the Gospel must be preached,
the people must be taught what Christ has don for them. The whole story of
his Incarnation, Conception, Birth, sufferinges, Resurrection and Ascension:
these things I say must be oftentimes and effectually preached to the people,
as they are set down by the holy Evangelists and Apostles: but yet this is
not enough to show what Christ has done, to rehearse the story of his
Incarnation, but also the minister must be careful to preach the use, the end
and fruit of the same story: which is, that the people may repent, be turned
unfeignedly unto God, and so by faith made partakers of remission of sins
through Jesus Christ. Repentance is a true turning to God, a changing of the
outward and inward man, a dying to sin, a living to righteousness, and
amendme^t of ye whole life: with this doctrine we must begin, this we must first
of all and chiefly urge: this is that doctrine chiefly and most of all
preached by the holy prophets: This is the common Ierem. 4. 1 Ezec. 18. 1.
Hose. 14. 1.
and usual voice, O Israel return to the Lord. John the Paptist the
Messenger, and also Jesus Christ his Master, they cry both of them: Repent
Math. 32. Math. 4. 17. Romans 3. 2.
for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. The Apostles also every where exhort
men to repentance, to amendment of life, to mortification and regeneration.
This is an usual doctrine in all their Epistles. Now, they can never truly
repent which know not the greatness of their sins and the punishmente due to
them. And how shall they know this, except their sins be reproved and
laid open by preaching the law of God? Romans 7. 7.
for by the law comes the knowledge of sin: so that the Doctrine of the
law must not be separated from the preaching of the Gospel: for it is a
Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. This then is necessarily required of every
Minister, freelye and boldlye to reprove sin in all states and degrees
whatsoever. This is it that the Lord says to his prophet. Cry Isai. 58. 1.
aloude, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show my people their
transgressions, and to the house of Jacob their sins. Our Savior Christ
accounts it as an office and duty of the holy John. 16. ^.
Ghost, to reprove the world of sin. And in deed there is no doctrine more
necessary for this age, wherein we live, although few can away with it, but cry
out against such as preach it. And as in other places, so in this place
heretofore, I have had proof in this matter. For upon just occasion noting the
certainty of Gods judgments and condemnation of the wicked, I find then,
that the impenitent and such as continue in their sins could not be saved,
God could not forgive them. Hereupon some have said and do say still of me,
that I preached, that God could not forgive sins. I said, and I say again,
the Lord is as true in his justice, as in his mercy. Christ says: Except ye
Luke 13. 3.
amend, ye shall all perish: And again, He that believes not is damned.
Saint Paul says, No whoremonger, nor Ephesians. 5. 5.
adulterer, no unrighteous or unclean person shall inherit the kingdom of
heaven. This is as much as I said, and in effect all that I said, Woe be to me
if I preach not the Gospel.

Now Repentance is a part of the Gospel, and that we may repent, it is
needeful to know our sins, and as the sins of al men must be reproved, and
the judgments of GOD threatened against them, so especially the sins of
public persons, as Magistrates and Ministers: And if this in no case will
be borne, but he that does it, is straight way blamed, alas, what shall we
do? If we speak against the people, they are grieved, they say we deal hardly
with them, but look not to our selves or to the higher powers. If we deal
against Gentlemen and great men, we are hated, evil spoken of and abused: If
we speak against the ignorant and careless Ministers, they are also
offended, and say we lack discretion, charity and modestye. Thus dangerous a
thing it is to preach the Gospel, yea even amongst them that glory in the
Gospel, so that as our state stands, it may be said clean contrary to the
saying of the Apostle in this place: Woe to them that preach the Gospel: and
happy are they which preach not the Gospel, and they are counted wisest which
either hold their peace, or else meddle not with this part of the Gospel.
But the faithful Minister, how soever he seem to be discouraged by such
wicked and unthankful dealinges of the world, yet he is to comfort him self
in the Lord, and to fear God more then men. It is far better to discharge
our duties faithfullye with a good Conscience, although we procure displeasure
of men, then by leaving our duty undone, or by doing the Lords work
negligently and vnfaithfullie, to procure the displeasure and heavy curse of
God.

The holy Apostle has spoken it, We be to me if I preach not the Gospel:
And to answer them somewhat which blame us for dealing so hardly and openly
against the sins of the ministers: Is it not a part of discretion to reprove
their sins which do mest hurt, and are the causes of many other sins? this
is that discretion which was used by the holy prophets every where. They cry out
aganst the negligence of the Priests, against their ignorance, carelessness,
and lewd conversation. Amongst many and infinite places, I refer you to that
one place in the Prophet Malachie, who deals so hardly and particularly with
the priests, as though al sin had been in them. No doubt there were many
sins amongst the people, and yet in all his prophecy, he seems to deal
specially almost only against the Priests, being in deed the causes and the
authors of the sins of the people: yea, and these were such Priests, as were
ordained of God, as were the successors of Aaron, and the tipes of Jesus
Christ, and yet are so sharply and publicly reproved by the Prophet. This
discretion was used by Christ himself. How often times together does he
pronounce woe against ye Scribes and Pharisees, calling them Hipocrites, Math.
23. 13.
fools, blind guides, Serpents, and generation of Vipers: yea, how
oftentimes does he most sharplye and openly rebuke his own Apostles. Perceive
ye not yet (says he) neither understand? have you your hearts Marc. 8. 17.
yet hardened? have you eyes and see not, have ye ears and hear not, and do
ye not remember? Are not these my brethren very hard words, and such words as
are used in the Scriptures against the very reprobate, and yet the Lord Jesus
uses the^ against his own apostles? In an other place he reprooueth them for
their unbelief and Marc. 16. 14.
hardness of heart. How sharply does the Apostle deal in all his Epistles
against false Apostles? nay, did he not Gala. 2. ^^.
reprove openly to his face, Peter the Apostle, and his fellow minister,
because he went not the right way to ye truth of the Gospel? So that it is not
only lawful, but also necessary, that the sins of all estates, and specially
of the greatest, and of the ministers be sharply and openly reproved. The holy
apostle says, Them that sin openly rebuke openly, that the rest also may
fear. But are not the sins of our ministers open? Is not their ignorance
apparent? Is not their idleness and carelessness known? Does not the common
sort of people see it: And are not some of them feign to seek for instruction
in other places? Do not many complain of the lives of the ministers? Do they
not say commonly of them, they speak well and do enil? they be as conetous
as other, they have never enough, do not the people see this and a great deal
more? Are not these open offenders? Does not duty, discretion and charity
bind the Preacher, if he will faithfully preach the gospel, to reprove them
severally which give cause of such offenses? The Apostie uses this modesty
against himself, Woe be to me if I preach not the Gospel: which woe
signifies no light, small or easy matter, but ye grievous curse of god in
this life, and that fearful condemnation in the life to come. Can they be too
sharply reproved, or can any speeches be too hard for them, which are
ignorant and careless in so great a light of the Gospel, after so long
profession? which should be guides to others, which have so many excellent
means, so great helps of knowledge, offered to them by the Lord, in these
days which we live in? Can they be too much or too often spoken against, which
are ignorant, and will be ignorant, which mislike those that reprove them,
which hate all that are not like them selves, which seek to deface the
painful minister, yea, and stand in defense of their own wickedness? Is not
this to bind sin together with Cart-ropes? Sin not twice, says the wise
man, for one sin shall not be unpunished, and therefore take heed in time and
amend, or else you perish* say what you will, think what you will, the Lord is
my witness, I speak the truth. I know I might be better thought of to pass
over such matters, but Woe be to me if I preach not the Gospel. But it may be
yet that some will say, although this be true that you have spoken, yet all
truth is not to be spoken at all times, in all places, and to all persons. The
minister must cut the word of God aright: Like a wise Steward, he must give
meat in due season. To these men I answer, that no necessary truth is to be
hidden from the Church of God. And to speak more fully and directly to the
purpose, as touching this matter of the necessity of preaching, of the
miserable estate of them that be without it, and of such ministers as preach
not: This matter I say in my conscience, with wisdom and discretion may be
spoken privately or openly, wheresoever, when soever, and before whomsoever:
there is no place, but it has need of this doctrine, no time but it requires
it, no persons that it is not meet for. It is most fit and convenient, most
profitable and necessary for all estates and degrees of men, high and low, rich
and poor, strong and weak, learned and unlearned, Princes, Nobles, Bishops,
Preachers, dumb Ministers and people, all have need of this Doctrine. They
which have knowledge, have need of it, that they may know what they have
been* that they may see what they are, and be thankful to God. The
ignorant sort have need of this doctrine, that they may feel their
misotable estate, and so seek for help and remedy. Princes, Nobles and
gentlemen, have need of this doctrine, and it is fit and necessary to be
preached before them, that knowing the necessity and worthiness of preaching,
they may be more careful and liberal to maintain it, and with better
conscience bestow their liuinges. The learned Bishops have need of this
doc^rine, it is chiefly to be urged before them, and they are continually to
remember it, least they lay hands rashly on any man, and so be partakers of
other men's sins. The wise and godly Preachers have need of this doctrine,
that they may be comforted and stirred up* to greater zeal and travail:
ignorant ministers have need of this doctrine, that they may see the damnable
state they stand in: and so either amend if it will be, or else give themselves
to some other calling, more fit and profitable for them. Let this doctrine be
stayed: let men be persuaded, as they are of themselves, that they are in good
state without the word preached, that bare reading will serve the turn, the
people wax careless, and make no account of preaching. For they think they
are well enough, and best of all without it, the people of God shall lack
their strengthening, their growing in faith and knowledge: Princes and Gentlemen
will make no account (as they do but little already) how, or on whom they
bestow their liuinges. The preachers shall be nothing set by, the Idol
ministers encourage the famous universities decayed and overthrown: and in a
word, the concealing, hindering, and withstanding this doctrine, is the next way
to cast down all religion and learning: to bring Princes, Nobles, rich and
poor, Ministers and people, to hypocrisy and Atheisine. The Lord therefore
open the mouths of his faithful Ministers, to the daily urging of this so
necessary a doctrine, that the prince may be strengthened, the Nobles stirred
up, all good ministers encouraged, the poor people instructed, ignorance and
idolatry defaced, Religion and knowledge of God, may flow through the whole
land, that at the length, all ignorant and careless ministers may be
ashamed, and every congregation may have a faithful, several, and a resident
Pastor. Thus we have seen at large, that whosoever will preach the Gospel
faithfully and profitably, he must first of all, and chiefly, urge the doctrine
of repentance, which men can never have, before they know their sins by the
law of God, and therefore the sins of all men must be thoroughly and sharply
reproved, and chiefly the sins of them which do most hurt, and give greatest
occasion of offense: as the sin of the Magistrate and the minister.

Now indeed to repentance, there must be joined also the doctrine of remission
of sins through Christ. But this belongs only to them that repent, that
are humbled and cast down, that feel in their conscience the torment of sin
and condemnation, to such belongs remission of sins, to such it is to be
offered and preached, but it does not appertain to ignorant and senseless
men, to Hypocrites, Infidels, Atheists, Iusticiaries, profane and carnal men:
these have nothing to do with the doctrine of remission of sins.

And because this age is altogether secure and careless, full of iniquity, of
ignorance, disobedience, unthankfulness, and contempt of the word: it is
unworthy of the doctrine of mercy, and remission of sins, so much the more
worthy, as the benfites of God in so great measure, and so long a time have
been received without any profit at all, so that in many there is nothing
still, but ignorance and idolatry, in others less zeal and religion, less
Godliness of life then was in them many years ago: and are these men worthy
of mercy? Is remission of sins to be preached and offered to them, nay the
former doctrine of repentance, of the law of reproouing sin, of denouncing
the judgments of God against al states and degrees. This part of the Gospel,
I say, is most fit and needful for such an age. And woe be to us, if we
preach not the Gospel.

Consider also, I beseech you here before we go to an end, the excellency and
worthiness of the preaching of the gospel. It is small accounted of in the
world, it is thought a vile and a simple office, it is contemned and despised
of y^ most part: But if these me^ knew the sweet and excellent things conta^^ed
and offered in the Gospel, which is ye matter of preaching, they would also
know the worthiness of this so high a calling, and that the excellency thereof
may more clearelye appear, let us ad some surther proof of this matter. And
first remember, yt this calling of the ministry and preaching of the word, is
no devise of any mortal man, but the ordinance of ye living God. It was he
that ordained Moses and the Prophets. The Prophesy came not in the old time by
the will of 2. Pet. 1.
man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy ghost. The Lord
Jesus himself, called, appointed, and Mark. 3. 13.
sent forth into the world his Apostles to preach the Gospel: It is the holy
Ghost, which ordayneth saythfull Act. 20.
overseers to feed the Church of God. It is Christ also at this day, which
appoints Pastors and teachers, Ephe. 4. 11.
for the gathering together of his saints. It must needs be a worthy and an
honorable calling, which has so worthy authors, even God him self, his son
Christ Jesus, and the holy ghost: yea, and not only so, but as worthy have
exercised* and practiced this calling. The first preacher that ever was in the
world was God him self, he preached to Adam in paradise that comfortable
Gospel, the seed of the woman shall destroy the serpents Genes. 3.
head. After that he stirred up Noe, and Lot, Moses and the prophets, men of
singular credit and authority. Nay what shall I speak of David and Solomon, of
the which, the one was a most victorious prince, and the other most wealthy,
and yet they have gotten more glory and credit, by their doctrines and
instructions, then by all their riches and triumphs. These are gone and they
are gone, but their good counsel, their Proverbs, their Psalms, and
Preachings, remain and abide for ever for their everlasting memory, to the
glory of God, and daily profit of his church. The first minister and Preacher
of the new Testament, was John the Baptist, of whom Christ our Savior says,
there was not a greater Mark. 2.
Prophet amongst women's children. Nay Christ himself was also a preacher of the
Gospel, and witnesses that he came into the world even to that purpose.
After him, the Apostles also were sent into the world, even to this end. Seeing
then that God himself, and his son Christ Jesus, have vouchsafed to preach
the word: seeing so famous men as the Prophets and Apostles were ordained to
this purpose, it must needs follow that the office of preaching is most
famous, worthy and excellent. The worthiness also of our calling most
evidently appears in the worthiness and price of the things committed unto
us, which is the people of God, the Church of christ, his dear spouse, the
very price of his blood: If so great things be committed to us: If the Lord
put us in trust with so dear and precious things, our calling must needs be
worthy and notable. Remember the notable effect and fruit of this calling, the
winning of souls, the conversion and salvation of the faithful.

It pleased GOD by the foolishness of 1. Cor. 1.
preaching to save them that bleeue. And further, the worthy matter of
preaching, is both here and other where set down, namely the gospel, ye word
of reconciliation, the word of grace, the good news and glad tidinges of
salvation, ye testimony of Jesus christ, repentance and remission of sins. O
that al men would consider this, that the glory of Gods ministerys might
appear. If princes, noble me^, and Patrons, would remember this, they would
have more care and conscience in bestowing their livings, and in defending the
good minister. Pharaoh, king of Egypt, in the time of Genesis 47. 22.
famine, had such a care to provide for his idolatrous priests, that he would
not suffer them to sell their land, but gave the^ a sufficient ordinary to live
upon. This example of an idolater in providing for idolatrous priests shall
condemn many christian gentlemen. which have a great deal less care for true
and christian ministers, which are so far from adding any thing of their own
to their maintenance, that rather daily by deceit or violence, they take that
from the Minister, which long ago was given by others. Let the Papist, the
Atheist and hipocrite remember and consider the worthy calling of the minister,
that laying aside all contempt, skoffing, disdain and railing, they might in
heart, reverence and honor the Lords ordinance: and let al people remember
this, that they may chierfully yield honor, obedience, reverence and
maintenance to the faithful minister, remember that his calling is of the
Lord, that he has to deal with your souls, that his purpose is to win you to
the lord, that he preaches no less a thing then the holy gospel of Jesus
Christ. Now these things rightly considered, is he not worthy to be obeyed and
maintained? How beautiful are the feet Romans 10.
of them, that bring the glad tidinges of peace: And read al which is gone
before in the chapter, y^ you may know that he which preaches the Gospel, by
right and equity ought to live of the Gospel. Let al good ministers remember
this for their comfort, and instruction, that howsoever ye world think of
them, they have a worthy and high calling, and let them not faint, but make
their ministry fully known, and end their course with joy: and let al
ignorant and careless ministers, especially remember this doctrine, that so
they may either amend, or else come to shame and confusion. If the Lord be the
author of the ministry, the souls of the people are committed to us: If the
effect of our calling be to save the souls of the people: if we have to deal
with the gospel of Christ: if so famous and notable men have always been in
this calling, what a man ought the minister to be? what care? what conscience?
what knowledge? what zeal and holy conversation is required at his hands? you
may see and witness with me, I speak nothing to the defaring and discredit of
the minister of God, but rather to his great credit and glory: his calling is
most worthy and honorable, he is worthy of double honor, he is to be obeyed
and sufficiently maintained, he is the steward of the lords house, and the
messenger of the lord of hosts. But as the faithful minister is to have his
credit and commendation: so the ignorant and careless sort, as we have
sufficiently already proved, are to be cast down and defaced, because by
their ignorance, idleness and lewd conversation, they greatly dishonor the
Lord, and deface his glory. I conclude and end with the holy Apostle: I
beseech you brethren, that you know them which labor among you, and are over
you in the Lord, and admonish you, that you have them in singular love for
their works sake. By the which place, we see that such as labor not, admonish
not, and work not (such I say) are not worthy of any love or honor, but
rather to be thrust out and banished, as unprofitable members out of the church
of God. The which the Lord of the harvest, grant for his tender mercies, in
Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

