THE STEWARDS LAST ACCOUNT.

DELIVERED IN FIVE Sermons upon the sixteenth Chapter of the Gospel by Saint
Luke, the first and second Verses.

BY Robert Bagnall, Minister of the Word of God, at Hutton in Somersetshire.

MATH. 25.13. Watch therefore: for ye know neither the day, nor the hour,
when the Son of Man will come

MATH. 12.36. For I say unto you, that of every idle word that men shall
speak, they shall give account thereof at the Day of Judgment.

LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe, for John Clarke: and are to be sold at his
shop under Saint Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in God, ARTHVR, by Gods providence, Lord Bishop
of Bath and Wells, ROBERT BAGNALL wishes all health and true comfort in this
world, and eternal happiness in the World to come.
AS to the building of the material Temple (Right Reverend Father in God, and
my very Honorable good Lord) many co adiutors and fellow laborers were
admitted, some more excellent then others, yet none were repelled, nor
rejected, although they were of the meaner sort, as Mortar carriers: because
they were necessary. Even so reason wills, and necessity requires, that
they which are lawfully called to the office of the Ministry, although they
are not Architects, yet if they may do good in the Church of God, should be
suffered to help a little to build up the Spiritual Temple of the Lord: For
many hands make light work. The consideration hereof has emboldened me, being
as it were, the least of the Apostles, and also requested of many who saw my
notes, and heard me preach them, to attempt this work; wherein if I may add
but one mite to the treasury of the Church, to help a little to build the
Lords spiritual House, I shall think my labor well bestowed. Howsoever, I
would not with that small Talent which I have concredited unto me, be like to
that evil servant, which made no good use of his, but hid it in the ground,
and therefore was shamefully reproved.

The subject, or matter, which I have taken upon me to entreat of, is, of our
last account at the general Assize in the last Day. A matter most fitting and
beseeming my gray hairs going to the grave, and requisite for all sorts of
people living in this careless age, and very available to shake them out of
the cradle of security, wherein they lie lulled and rocked, and to stir them
up to vigilance and watchfulness. This work, I confess, is a withered fruit
of my old age, but if it may obtain your Honors favor so far, as to
cherish and protect it under the shadow of your wings, it growing to maturitie,
in process of time may obtain some favor in the world, especially among the
Children of God, whom it may somewhat benefit. I therefore beseech your good
Honor and reverend Paternitie, being a most godly and vigilant Watchman over
us all, to patronize this my Doctrine of warchfulnesse, and to take in good
part my endeavors therein: hoping that it may make many waking, and looking for
the Lords second coming to their salvation. So craving your Honorable favor
herein, I humbly take my leave: Resting (as duty binds me) your Honors
poor Minister under God, in all Christian duty to be ordered and commanded:

ROBERT BAGNALL.

TO THE GODLY READER, GRACE, MERCY, and Peace from God the Father, etc.
AS in the contriuing, managing, and bringing to good effect worldly businesses
that tend to the maintenance of the body in this present life, we account
opportunity of time, and fit occasions, the greatest furtherers; and loss of
time, the greatest hinderers: and therefore in every thing, we take the
fittest time; as in planting, sowing, gathering in the fruits of the earth, and
all other affairs: So nothing does more help in the course of Piety, and
further our journey to eternal life, then to be vigilant and careful, to take
all times and occasions to serve God, and to let no time pass away
unprofitable. For time hastes away, and tarrieth for no man, and foolishly
spent, cannot be recalled: And therefore the Heathens painted out Time with
wings at her hands, and also at her feet, with a lock of hair before, but
bald behind. This velocitie of time, and irrecuperablenesse of her being
carelessely and idly let slip, Bernard laid down to his Scholars, when he
said: Bern. ad Scho.
Volat tempus irreuocabile, volat tempus irremeabile, nec aduertit insipiens
quid amittat, etc. that is, Time flies away, that cannot be recalled; Time
flies away, that cannot come again, and foolish man does not consider what he
loses: and yet (alas) he loses all the good use of time, and all the benefit
that he might make of the same, when it offers it self. Basil.
And therefore Basil well said: Nemo vsum temporis habere queat, nisi quis cum
se offert, arripiat: that is, no man can receive any profit of Time, but he
that speedily lays hold on it, when it offers it self. Let the
parabolicall example of the ten Virgins teach and admonish us herein, and make
us take Bildad the Shuhites counsel: Early to seek the Lord, and seek him
while he may be found, and speedily to go about the Lords business, Exodus 25.
as the Cherubims did, and therefore were pourtraied with wings before the
place where the Israelites prayed. O good Christian Reader, consider, I beseech
thee, what a foolish thing it is for thee, to let time pass away securely, to
let thy reckonings run so long without any examination of thy life, and
doings, and without calling thy ways to account, that thou should be grown
obdurate, past sense and feeling, yea, and so forgetful of thy dealings, that
thou can not bring in a true reckoning.

Consider this in time, and call thine own ways to remembrance, sleep no
longer in security; but be sober and watch, that thou may not be called to
account when thou think not thereof, and be found false therein, and so he
proved and convicted a false Steward. Security will bring thee to extremities,
and to all these distresses, as it did the people in Noah his time, in Lots
time, and many other people in all ages, and so it will do many at the last
audit. Therefore let me beseech thee; yea, and persuade thee by the tender
mercies of God, to suffer me to pull thee back by the sleeue from running
into the pit of perdition, have thy books of account in a readiness, be a
vigilant and watchful Steward, that at the last Day it may be said unto thee,
O well done, thou good and faithful Servant, thou have been faithful over few
things, I will make thee Ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord. I have (good Christian Reader) bestowed my small skill and labor in this
Treatise, to make thee a good Steward and accountant at the last audit and
General Assize. I pray thee read the same, not with a preiudicate opinion,
but with a yielding resolution to the truth, as thou shall find it, and
persuade thy self that this is written (howsoever it may cross thy humors in
taking thy fleshly pleasures) yet for thy learning, and to do thee good, and
to set thee in the way to Heaven, in the which way God speed thee with
faithfulness and constancy to the end, and then thou shall be sure of thy
wished desire, a crown of incorruptible glory: Which God of his infinite
goodness and mercy grant me, and thee, and the whole Church quickly. Amen.

THE STEVVARDS LAST ACCOUNT. The first Sermon.
LVK. 16.1, 2. 1. There was a certain rich man, which had a Steward, and he
was accused unto him that he wasted his goods.

2. And he called him, and said unto him, How is it that I bear this of thee?
Give an accounts of thy stewardship: for thou may be no longer Steward.


THese two verses, and the other following unto the ninth verse, according to
the plain literal and verbal sense and meaning, contain a parable spoken by
our Savior Christ unto his Disciples, concerning a certain rich man which had
a Steward, that dealt falsely with him, injuriously scraped and raked together
great store of worldly riches, and all that he could get from his Master by
hook and by crook, by any means, were they never so ungodly, unjust, and
wrongful, that he ill employed, and wastfully spent in pleasures and sinful
courses of life. Of which fraudulent dealing and wasting his goods, as soon as
his Master had intelligence; he called him, and reprehended him, saying: How
comes it to pass that I hear this of thee? And presently calls him to
account, and puts him out of his Office. Which thing when the Steward
perceived, he knowing he could not frame himself to painful labors, as to
dig and delue, because in former times he had lived idly, and pleasantly, but
yet in reputation; and therefore he was ashamed to beg; for that (as he was
persuaded) would much abase him, and make him contemptible: then he resolves
himself of a third way, which was, privily to call his Masters debtors
together, and to abate the debts which they owed him; and to one that owed his
Master an hundred measures of Oil, he parts at half, and abates fifty. And
another that owed his Master an hundred measures of Wheat, he bids take his
writing and write fourscore, cutting large thongs of another man's leather,
thinking by these means to procure friends, that afterward when he was put out
of his Office, might receive him into their houses and maintain him, thus
carefully providing for the time to come. And the Lord not allowing falsehood
and wrongful dealing, (for he loves righteousness) but to show that worldly
men are more careful to obtain earthly things and provide for this world,
then the children of God are desirous of heavenly treasures that enrich them in
the world to come, (for the children of this world are wiser in their
generation then the children of light) is said to commend the unjust Steward
for dealing so wisely, and so carefully providing for this world, wishing a
far greater care to the children of light to provide for the world to come.
Which thing we may see to be true, by the fit application of the parable, made
by our Savior in the ninth verse, saying thus: And I say unto you, Make you
friends with the riches of iniquity, that when ye shall want, they may
receive you into everlasting habitations.

To be yet somewhat more plain: The true sense, scope and purpose of the holy
Ghost, as it were by way of comparison and resolving upon the best, is this;
The Steward of a certain rich man is careful what shall become of himself,
when he is put from his Office: much more therefore Christians who are
Stewards unto God in sundry gifts, should be careful what shall befall them
when they shall depart out of this life, and make their accounts unto God for
the same. But as the worldly Steward purchases him friends with the Mammon of
unrighteousness, that may receive and maintain him when he is removed from his
Office: So should Christian folk with their goods, gifts, and talents
concredited unto them, make the poor so beholding unto them, that they by
their prayers made to God for them, Verse 9.
may receive them into everlasting habitations, as in the ninth verse. This
briefly is the sum of this present Gospel. Howbeit, to the intent that it may
minister more plentiful instruction to all Gods people, I will by the
assistance of Gods holy spirit entreat of these two points. First, the persons
mentioned in the parable, which are three: First, the rich man; in these words:
There was a certain rich man. Secondly, the Steward, in these words; which had
a Steward. Thirdly, the accusers of the Steward, in these words: and he was
accused, etc.

The second point: What the rich man did to his Steward, when he found him
false and unjust? in the second verse, in these words: And he called him, and
said unto him, How is it that I hear this of thee? Give accounts of thy
Stewardship: for thou may be no longer Steward.

In the first part, I will show unto you who the rich man is? who is the
Steward? and who are the accusers? when I come to handle that point.

In the second part, to wit, what the Lord did to his Steward when he proved
him untrue, is declared in four points.

First, he called him, in these words: And he called him.

Secondly, he reprehended him, saying: How is it that I hear this of thee?

Thirdly, he calls him to account, saying: Come render account of thy
Stewardship, etc.

Fourthly, he puts him out of his Office: For thou may be no longer
Steward. Of these in order, and first of the rich man.

The rich man is God, who is chief Emperor, Lord, King, true owner and
possessor of all good things temporal and spiritual, earthly and heavenly.
For of earthly things David, Psalm 24. Psalm. 24.1.
truly speaks, saying: The earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the
world and they that dwell therein. Again, Psalm. 50.10, 11, 12, verses, he
says, All the beasts of the forest are mine, and the beasts on a thousand
mountains. I know all the fowls of the mountains; and the wild beasts of
the field are mine. If I be hungry, I will not tell thee: for the world is
mine, and all that therein is. This is most plainly proved in the 115. Psalm.
verse, 16. where the Psalmist says: The Heavens are the Lords, and the earth,
which he has given to the sons of men. He is rich also in spiritual and
heavenly things, and so every way rich, as Bernard 57. Sermon notes: Deus
vndique dives, dives misericordia, magnifious in iustitia, munificus in gratia:
that is to say, God is rich every way, rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. Ephesians. 3.16.
Iam. 2.5. 1. Pet. 5.10.
magnificent in justice, liberal in Grace. He is rich in mercy, rich in
glory, rich in wisdom, rich in grace: for he is called the God of all grace.
All which graces and gifts he gives us in his Son Christ Jesus, the most
plentiful fountain of all goodness, in whom, and by whom, all these and many
other good gifts ineffable are conferred unto us, Chap. 1.16.
as John well proves, saying: Of his fulness have all we received, and grace
for grace: as if he should say, grace upon grace, or graces heaped one upon
another.

The consideration of this doctrine should make us in faith and full assurance
to pray to this rich God, and to none other: for unto whom should we pray? and
of whom should we crave for all good things, but of him which has all to
give, and from whom every good giving and perfect gift comes? Iam. 1.17. Genesis
17.1.
who is able to help in all extremities: for he is omnipotent; is present
with us, and near us, as he is unto all that call upon him faithfully. And
lastly, he is willing to help and save, for he would have all to be saved,
and to come to the knowledge of his truth. 1. Tim. 2.4.
And therefore our Savior Christ calls all unto him, promising unto all that
come unto him in repentance and faith, refreshing, Math. 11.28. Math. 28.
He commands his Gospel to be freely preached unto all, and he bids all to
his great Supper, Luke 14. O let us in repentance and faith come unto him, and
pray unto him continually: for he is the rich man here meant able to grant our
requests.

Again, if all the good things we have come from our rich God, it should make
us most thankfully to acknowledge him to be the giver, and to return all laud
and praise to him, from whom the benefit comes, for as all the waters come
from the Sea, and return thither again: so all the benefits which we receive,
come from God, Iam. 1.17.
and by our thanksgiving should return to him again. O let us be
thankful, and say with David from our hearts, and speak to our own souls
as he did: Praise the Lord, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
O my soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy name. Praise the Lord,
O my soul, and forget not all his benefits: which forgiueth all thy sin, and
heals all thine infirmities: which saves thy life from destruction, and
crowns thee with mercy and loving kindness: which satisfies thy mouth with
good things, making thee young and lusty as an Eagle. Let us praise God our
selves, and exhort others to do the like, for it is good and godly so to do:
And therefore the Prophet said: 147.
O praise the Lord: for it is a good thing to sing praises unto our God; yea, a
joyful and pleasant thing it is to be thankful. Thus much concerning the
person meant by the rich man, to wit, God. Now of his Steward.

The judgment of ancient Writers concerning this Steward (who he should be,
and what should be his name?) have been diverse, every man having a several
opinion, and speaking as he thought, quothomines, tot capita, tot sententiae:
Look how many men, so many heads, so many opinions: which thing is to be
deplored, that so many learned men, and famous in other matters, should in this
point be so much deceived, Romans 15.7.
as to restrict this parcel of Scripture written for all our learning, to one
particular Man, People, or Nation, it being also parabolically spoken. Whereas
it deeply concerns us all, and is to be applied particularly to every
several man of us. Some have thought that Saint Paul was this Steward. Act.
9.4.
For he was a bad one, until he was called of Jesus Christ: and of this
judgment was Theophilus, Bishop of Antiochia. Some affirmed that the Jews
were this Steward, and the Gentiles these Debtors. Of this opinion was
Tertullian, lib. de fuga, cap. 13. Gaudentius writing to Germinius, supposes
that this Steward was the Devil, mis-implying all his gifts, his wit and power
to tempt men to their destruction. Many others have diversely and strangely set
down their opinions, which I think more fit to omit, then to fill my paper
with frivolous matters. Let us harken to them who come nearer to the scope of
the place. In this number I place Ambrose in his Commentaries, Aug. in quaest.
Euang.
Augustine in his Evangelical questions: Theophilact, and others, who affirm
that this Steward is all mankind, and further say, that the word, OIKONOMOS, a
Steward, does signify not only Villicum, a Bailey of Husbandry; but one to whom
all manner of goods and possessions in a Farm, are concredited and committed
to t^^^, to wit, a general Steward, best expressed by the word (dispensator)
which signifies an Officer laying out money for an household under another man.
And therefore these read the words following, (Render account of thy
Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward.) Thus: Read rationem
dispensationis tuae: non enim poteris amplius dispensare. So then this Steward
is all mankind. For every man has received of God, the proper owner of all,
one good gift or another in trust, which he ought to dispose and employ, not as
he lists, but as God the proper owner of al would have him, and must yield an
account to him, even as the earthly Steward does to his earthly Master. For
this cause every man must needs be a Steward, and a disposer of some good gift
of God. Kings then are Stewards to the highest of all, and acknowledge their
aduancements to come from the Lord; and therefore in their styles of Dignity,
use these words (by the grace of God.) Ministers are Stewards of the Lords
House, which is the Church, and ought to break the Bread of Life to their
Flocks, to preach the Word in season, and out of season, and must render an
account. 2. Tim. 4.7.
All Magistrates are Stewards of the common house, which is the weal public,
and ought to consider that they are set over the people, for the punishment of
evil doers, 1. Pet. 2.14.
and for the praise of them that do well. Masters are Stewards of their own
Household, and ought not only to dispose all things in order, but especially to
make this resolution, that they and their households will serve the Lord. Iosu.
24.15.
All men are Stewards of their own bodies, and of the privy closet of their
own conscience, as Pontan has. There is none so mighty that is greater, or so
mean and base, that is less then a Steward to the King of Kings, to the
Highest of all; and what goods or goodness he uses, he has received them all
of the Father of Lights. Iam. 1.17. 1. Cor. 4.7.
For what have thou, that thou have not received? He it is that delivers to
his Servants his Talents to some more and to some less. Which doctrine
confuteth the Pelagians, Math. 2.5.
and all such as ascribe all that they have to their own industry. Whereas all
that is good, comes from God, as being infinitely rich in goodness and mercy
toward all, Romans 10.12.
and yet has never the less himself: for his riches and treasures are
inexhaustable. All we therefore are Baylifes, Stewards, and Disposers under
God, and should Minister the gifts which we receive spiritual or temporal, 2.
Pet. 4.10.
as good Stewards and disposers of the manifold graces of God. And then a man
proves himself to be a faithful Disposer; 1. Cor. 4.2.
which whosoever does, is blessed of God, a most happy man, and if he does not
discharge his office of Stewardship and service well, of all men most unhappy.
The Lord says, Who is a faithful, Luke 12.42, 43, 44, 45, 46.
and wise, whom the Master shall make Ruler over his household, to give them
their portion of meat in due season? Blessed is that Servant whom his Master
when he comes, shall find so doing. Of a truth, I say unto you, that he
will make him Ruler over all that he has. But if that Servant say in his
heart, My Master does defer his coming, and shall begin to smite his Servants,
and Maidens, and to eat and drink, and to be drunk, the Master of that
Servant will come in a day when he thinks not, and at an hour when he is not
ware of, and will cut him off, and give him his portion with the unbelievers.

Every Christian man and woman, be they never so high, or never so low; never
so rich, or so poor; have a threefold Farm committed unto them, the fruits of
which they ought to dispose wisely, and faithfully: and therefore good Stewards
are called faithful and wise, of our Savior before, Luke 12 42. It behooves
us therefore to take heed what we do, that we may make a good reckoning of our
Stewardship, be found true, and not false in governing these Farme-places,
Manors, and Mannor-houses, which are these three, as the Learned have set them
down. Ludolphus de Saxonia, Iodocus Rad.
Prima villa est mundus iste; secunda proprium Corpus, tertia anima. The first
Farme-House is the world: the second, a man's own body: the third, his soul.

Now in being a Steward in the first Farm, the world: man must take heed that
he become not so great a friend unto it, and be not so much in love with it,
that he become an enemy unto God, an untrue and false Steward unto his Master:
for he that will be a friend of this world, Iam 8. Mat. 6.27.
is made an enemy to God. For no man can serve two Masters. He may not look to
flow in the treaasures and pleasures of the world, and reign with Christ.
Augustine said, August.
Nemo potest gaudere cum mundo, and regnare cum Christo: that is, no man can
rejoice with the world, and reign with Christ. And again, he says:
Difficile, imo impossible est, vt praesentibus and futuris quis fruatur bonis,
vt hic ventrem, illic mentem impleat, vt a delicijs, ad delicias transeat, vt
in vtroque faeculo primus sit, vt in terra, and in coelo, appareat gloriosus:
that is, it is an hard thing, yea, impossible, that any man should enjoy the
goods of this present world, and also of the world to come: that here he
should fill his belly, and there his soul: that he should be chief in both
worlds; that he should be glorious in the earth, and in heaven. And this made
John so earnestly to dissuade us from the one, the world, 1. Ioh. 2.15, 16, 17.
and so lovingly persuade and exhort unto the love of the other, the world to
come. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world: If any man
love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the
world, (as the lust of the Flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life)
is not of the Father, but of the world: and the world passes away, and the
lust thereof: but he that fulfilleth the will of God, abides for ever.

The riches, treasures, and stock of this Farm, are all goods Temporal,
which being concredited to us of this rich person, God, the true owner of them,
we must take heed that we play not the bad Stewards with them: and that is done
four ways. First, in getting them wrongfully. Secondly, in setting our hearts
on them idolatrously. Thirdly, in keeping them to our selves basely. Fourthly,
in spending them unlawfully, and sinfully. Of these four in order,

First, we placed of our great and good Lord and Master, Stewards in this
Farm, the world, may not gain goods through other men's hurts, building our
houses, as the moth, in other men's cloth, and feeding our selves fat by
hurting, biting, and spoiling others, as the moth is fatted by spoiling the
cloth where she lives. Such men are very like to the filthy worm in a sheep,
which is made fat by eating and consuming the poor seely sheep, and like Lice
and Fleas, which fat themselves by sucking men's blood. Iam. 2.6.
Such bad Stewards are the wicked covetous bad rich men, who are made full by
devouring the poor, and oppressing them by tyranny. Good Christians are
compared to Trees, which do bring forth good fruit in due season, Psalm. 1.3.
and help every way: For a good Tree will bring forth fruit to quench hunger
and thirst, and it will put off the injury and violence of the stormy weather;
but a bad tree, a Bryer, when the poor Sheep fly unto it for succor,
scrapeth and scratcheth all the wool from their backs, and pilleth them bare.
Such trees are the merciless Stewards, the Tyrants of the world: which, when
the poor fly unto them for succor, they tie them, and wrap them in Bonds,
like as the Bryer does the sheep, and then unmercifully spoil them. 1. King.
21.
The rich Steward Ahab could not rest, unless he had poor Naboth his
Vineyard, and he and his cursed wife Iezabel cared not how wrongfully and
cruelly they came by it. Greg. decret. l. 5. tit. 19.
Gregory reports, that such cruel and bad Stewards were denied Christianorum
Sepulturam: Christian man's burial. And Glanuill Glanuil. l. 7.16.
writing of the Laws and Customs of England, says, that by the most ancient
Laws of England, the goods of an injurious and defamed oppressor, dying
without restitution, were escheated to the King, and all his Lands to the Lord
of the Town. And what becomes of himself? His flesh is given to the worms, a
right Cadauer. Look to the sillables of that word, and let ca, stand for caro,
da, for datur, and ver for vermibus. It shows That man's flesh is given to
worms: and his soul to the Devils, to be tormented world without end. And
therefore the ancient Father says, Si haberes sapientiam Salomonis, si
pulchritudinem Absalonis, si fortitudinem Samsonis, Aug. super Mat. 25.
si longaeuitatem Enoch, si diuitias Croesi, si foelicitatem Octauiani, quid
prosunt haec cum tandem caro datur vermibus, and anima daemonibus, cum diuete
sinc fine crucianda? That is to say, If thou had the wisdom of Solomon,
the beauty of Absalom, the strength of Samson, the long life of Enoch, the
riches of Croesus, the felicity of Octauian, what do these profit thee, when
at the last, thy flesh is given to the worms, and thy soul to the Devils,
with the rich man to be tormented world without end? For what will it avail a
man to win all the world, and to lose his own soul? or what ransom shall a
man give for his soul?

2. Men placed Stewards in this world, and having the stock of the same at
their disposition, play the bad Stewards, in setting their hearts upon them
idolatrously. From this vice and heinous sin, David dehorteth, when he said,
Psalm. 62.10. 1. Tim. 6.
If riches increase, set not your heart thereon. And Paul commands them that be
rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, neither put their trust in
uncertain riches, but in the living God. In which place, he yields a great
reason to move men not to trust to riches, adding a fit Epithet to riches,
calling them uncertain. For they ebb, they flow, they come, they go, they
are never certain. Therefore the Wise man gave good counsel, when as he
said: Trust not in uncertain riches. Valerius said well to this purpose,
Diuitiae istae in quibus summam foelicitatem consistere putant, sunt caducae,
momentancae, crepundijs simillimae, affluunt subito, subito dilabuntur, nullo
in loco, nullo in homine, nullo tempore sunt certae, sed incertissimo flatu
fortunae huc illuc actae, quos in sublime sustulerunt subito casu deijciunt.
That is to say, Those riches wherein men place their chief felicity, are
caduke, momentany, most like to gugawes, they come suddenly, and suddenly slide
away: they are certain in no place, in no man, at no time, but tossed hither
and thither by fortunes instabilitie, whom they have exalted highly, they throw
down suddenly. This was one of the Philosophers reasons, why riches should not
be felicity: quia fluunt, and refluunt, that is, they come speedily to a man,
and hastily run away, like the tide of the Sea. So long as Troy flourished,
it was said of King Priamus (quo no^ foelicior alter) never was any more happy:
but when it was destroyed, so uncertain was his state, and so vain his former
trust in riches (infoelix Priamus) so that this saying (Priami calamitates)
became a common proverb spoken of all distressed persons. What a foolish thing
it is for men to trust in riches, may appear by the example of that rich
Steward, who considering his great in-comes and friuts that were to come in,
reasoned with himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have no room where
I may lay up my fruits? And he said, This will I do, I will pull down my
Barnes, and build greater, and therein will I gather in all my fruits, and my
goods: and I will say to my soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many
years, live at ease, eat, drink, and take thy pastime. But God said unto
him: O fool, this night will they fetch away thy Soul from thee, then whose
shall those things be which thou have provided? So is he that gathers riches
to himself, and is not rich toward God, which trusts to uncertain riches,
and considers not how deadly they sting in the end. For as the Be carries
Honey in his mouth, and a sharp sting in his tail; even so the covetous and
cruel man trusting to his riches, has pleasure in his life, but pain at his
death: Like to the example of the rich Glutton, whose pleasant life you may see
whiles he lived, and his doleful sorrows after death: from the 19. Verse to
the end of this Chapter.

Thirdly, men play the bad Stewards in this Farm, this world, by keeping their
goods to themselves basely, and miserably, of which goods, the Lord is the true
owner, and not themselves, but Stewards and Disposers of them; and therefore, O
man, thou should dispose them, and do with them, as he would have thee; for
so ought every one to do that is a Steward and Bayliffe under another.
Therefore be rich in good works, glad to distribute. For this is the true use
of riches in good men that use them well, to whom they are Gods blessings, and
the ornaments of virtue. But to the wicked that employ them not to help others,
but rather do hurt, they are sentina malorum, Arist.
a sink of evils. Keep not that to thy self basely, which God the true owner
bids thee layout cheerfully to help others. For if thou do, thou art false
to God in thy dealing. If a rich man that has a Bayliffe, a servant under him,
should say unto him, Here is twenty shillings, pay this to such and such
persons, and it is as good as if thou payedst it unto me. If this servant
should keep this twenty shillings unto himself, and not lay it out as his
Master bids him, nor restore it, you will say with me, that this were a bad
servant, a false Steward. God of his gracious goodness bestows all that thou
have upon thee, and bids thee give unto the poor, feed the hungry, cloth the
naked, Math. 25.
visit the sick, and employ it to other good uses, and then thou give it to
him. If thou should not do this, thou art a false Steward, thou do not
repay that which thou have received. Thou a rich man carriest as it were the
poor man's stock; and therefore let them have part with thee. Stips pauperum,
thesaurus diuitum: Tiberius Constant.
the rich treasure is the poor man's stock, as said the good Emperor. God
will have no Beggar in Israel. Nature suffers nothing empty, and the Rain
when it falls down, and runs, fills every chinker and hole as it
runs, and leaves still some moisture behind it, to do good, where need
is. So do you, ye rich Stewards of the weal public: Lay out some goods for
the maintenance of the Gospel, some for thy poor neighbors: that is done to
Christ, that is a treasure in Heaven surely kept for thee, Reu. 18.
and has a final blessing, Math. 25. for the works of the godly follow them,
to defend them, and rejoice them in the world to come. But if thou art a false
Steward, gettest thy goods by pilling, polling, grinding the faces of the
poor, and selling them for hose and shoes, and keep them basely to thy
self, and think at thy death to leave them to thy wife and children: thou
shall undoubtedly leave behind thee for all thine, not a blessing, but a
plague, and a curse, and so utterly undo all thy posterity.

De male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres. Exodus 20.
God does visit the sins of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and
fourth generation of them that hate him. And the Lord commanded the cruel
servant himself, his wife and children, and all that he had to be sold, Math.
18. inflicting the punishment not only upon himself, but also upon his wife
and children. Therefore let men be not unjust and cruel, but true and
merciful: for as the holy father has: August.
Sola misericordia est comes defunctorum. Only mercy accompanies the dead:
That a man shall carry away with him, and God in his mercy will reward mercy.

Fourthly, men play the bad Stewards, when they receive the Lords goods, and
lay them, not out according to his will: but spend them unlawfully, wilfully,
and wastfully: for which they are culpable and accusable, as this bad Steward
was. The idolatrous person lays out his riches upon superstitious works, as
Ahab, and Iezabel. The quarrelsome man lays out his goods upon unnecessary
suites of law, hindering himself and his neighbors, as the Corinthians did.
The unclean person in chambering and wantonness, as Sardanapalus and Absalon,
living altogether in carnalitie. The Epicure and belly God, in faring
deliciously every day, as the rich Glutton. Gam^ters, in gaming, as Octauius
Augustus. To conclude, every one which lays out his goods in idle superfluous
and ungodly courses of life, plays the parts of an unthrifty and unfaithful
servant, as the prodigal son. And if a Preacher, Magistrate, or other
Officer rebuke any of these for their unfaithful dealing, and prodigal
swaggering: they will say, What have they to do with us? we wast and spend but
our own money and goods: building upon a base ground: for no man is Lord and
proper owner of his wealth, but only a Steward for a time to the high Lord of
all. And as a great man's Bayliffe and Steward on earth, ought to lay out the
goods of his Master as he commands, and must render an account how he does
it: even so must every man being made a Steward in this farm the world, employ
the talents and gifts which he receives, as the Lord of Lords, the high Master
of all commands, and shall render an account, as hereafter follows.

The second Farm or Mannor-house, wherein man, a Steward under this rich man
God, is to be employed, and which he ought carefully to look unto, is his own
body; the goods whereof, as health, power, and strength, are to be employed to
the honor of God, to supply our own necessary occasions, 1. Cor. 6.
and to help our neighbor in all godly and honest affairs. This Farm ought
to be well and cleanly kept, that it may be a fit dwelling Place and Temple of
the holy Ghost: for if we will adorn our houses, deck them, sweep them, and
every way (as much as in us lies) make them hansome and commodious for a great
earthly person: much more should we have a care to preserve from pollution,
and keep clean our own bodies; because they are the houses of the holy
Ghost; and further, to give our members instruments of righteousness unto God,
Romans 6.13.
and to offer up our bodies a quick sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God,
Romans 12.1. This Farm a good Steward should carefully look unto, lest death
should enter through the ports and gates thereof to the soul, and work the
destruction thereof: which ports and gates I will set open unto you, making as
much haste, as the Porter does, when his Master waits for him at the gate.
The ports and gates of the body are these five: Hearing, Seeing, Talking,
Tasting and Touching: Which gates should be heedfully watched, that nothing go
in or out, but that which pleases the Lord: for as a great earthly man has a
Porter to keep his gates, that no lewd, filthy nor contagious person should
enter in to pollute his house, or infect his people, and so procure danger or
death unto the^, or otherwise disorder himself: Even so every Christian man
should look to the gates and doors of his body, lest sin enter in by them,
and death follow to the subversion of body and soul.

The first port and gate of the body is the care, the proper organ and
instrument of hearing, it is the mouth of the soul which gives it nourishment,
and sends down food into it, and which makes it lively and fructify in all
the rest of man's members. Man's ears should be open to hear good things,
Revel. 2. Math. 13.
as the Word, as our Savior would have us, and the Prophet Esaias, verse 3.
exhorts us so to do, showing the utility thereof, saying: Incline your
cares and draw near: Hear and your soul shall live. This word is the sincere
milk, whereby our souls are nourished, and receive their spiritual growths:
it is a lantern to carry light, 1. Pet. 2.2.
and to direct: it is a medicine to heal, a guide to conduct, a bit to
restrain, a sword to defend, water to wash, fire to inflame, salt to season,
wine to rejoice, rain to refresh, a treasure to enrich, a key to unlock
heaven gates unto us, and by the merits of Christ Jesus to let us into an
inheritance immortal, and undefiled, and that fades not away. Now, beloved,
seeing that man's ears are the instruments, and vessels to receive this Word,
let us study to keep them clean, and open to receive the Word: 1. Cor. 15.
Moenan:
but shut this gate against al blasphemous speeches, slanderous and filthy
talking: for evil words corrupt good manners.

The second port of the body is the eye, which must not let in bad sights, it
must not couetously look on his neighbors goods, lands or livings, 1. King.
21.
as Ahab did on poor Naboths vineyard, nor wantonly look on his neighbors
wife, as David did upon the wife of Vrie. 2. Sam. 11.
This caused Jesus the son of Sirach in his ninth chapter, verse eight, to
say, Turn away thy eyes from a beautiful woman, and look not upon others
beauty; for many have perished by the beauty of women: for through it love is
kindled as a fire. What harms enter in by this gate, it may appear by the
example of Putiphar his Lady and wife, Genesis 39.
who steadily beholding the beauty of Joseph, after many days, at the last
said, Come, lie with me. Let us therefore take heed of wanton looking, sinful
lusting, and ungodly committing of sin and wickedness.

The third port and gate which lets in sin and death to the soul, is
talking out of the mouth, executed by the tongue: This should not be filthy,
nor foolish, Ephesians. 5.4. Col. 3 8. Ephesians. 4.29.
but good to edify withal, that it may minister grace to the hearers. The
tongue is the best member that a man has, (if it be in tune, in good order;)
but the worst member, if it is out of order. And therefore Anacharsis being
demanded what was the best member of a man? and what the worst? The people
looking for a double answer, unto a double question: He spoke in one word and
said, The tongue for the former reasons. Therefore the Poet said: Est vitae,
pariter ac ianua lingua necis. The tongue is the gate of life and also of
death. Therewith bless we God, Iam. 3.9.
even the Father, and therewith curse we men, which are made after the
similitude of God. But let us look to the true use of the tongue, and have it
still in our hearts and minds, which is first to glorify God, and then to
exhort our neighbor to goodness. This made David to pray thus: O Lord, open
thou my lips, Heb. 3.
and my mouth shall show forth thy praise: and it made the Author to the
Hebrews to give this good counsel: Exhort one another daily, while it is
called the day.

Lactantius writing of the tongue of man, sets down these things to be
considered, the Final cause, the Material cause, the Formal, the
circumstances, and the manner how it is, wet and moistened.

1. The Final cause: which although it is last in execution, yet is first in
intention: and that is (as the Philosopher has) to express the conceptions of
the mind. But the Scriptures tell us, Heb. 13.15. and 3.13.
that the tongue was given to glorify God, and to instruct one another.

2. The matter of the tongue: it is made of flesh and not of bones, that thou
should not be stubborn and stiff in thy speech, but gentle and courteous,
1. Pet. 3.8.

3. The form of the tongue: it is more long then broad: open above, and shut
below. This shows that it ought to be stretched out, and to reach on high to
sound out the praises of God, but it ought not to be delighted to talk of
things below.

4. The circumstances: Labia et dentes, the lips, and the teeth. The lips
must speak to the glory of God, and the edification of our neighbor, and the
words (as he says) must be examined dentibus examinationis, with strict
examination, and due consideration, before we speak.

5. The tongue is wet from the head: so our speech ought to be of Christ our
head: it is wet also with our own spittle: so our talk should be of our own
filthiness, of our own sins, that we may be ashamed of them, repent and
amend, that we may be forgiven.

The fourth gate of this Farm (the body) which lets in sin into it, and
hurts the soul also, is our tasting, our eating and drinking, which should be
moderate to suffice nature, and not to make the flesh proud and rebellious
against the spirit, which a little will do as the Philosopher thought. The
Apostle would have us to walk honestly, as in the day, not in eating and
drinking, meaning excess of eating and drinking, like to the sons of Eli,
Job, Baltazar, and the rich glutton: 1. Pet. 4.3.
and thus the Apostle Saint Peter understands it. And our Savior gives us a
good caveat to beware of this excess in eating and drinking. Take heed to your
selves, Luke 21.34.
lest at any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness.
Excessive banqueting with costly meat and drink, makes a man procline and
prone to lust: Hierom. Venture mer^ aestuans, spumat in libidinem. Let us
therefore follow both the counsel and example of Paul. His counsel is, Col.
3.5.
that we should mortify our flesh, our earthly members. His example is laid
down, 1. Cor. 9. where he says, I tame my body, or I beat down my body, that
is, I bring it into servitude.

The last gate of this Farm, whereof we are made Stewards, and which lets
in sin and death to the body and soul, is Touching; the object whereof must
be no unclean thing, as the Apostle does teach, 2. Cor. 6.17. 2. Cor. 6.17.
In which place the Apostle brings in an exhortation taken out of Esaias 52.11.
where the Prophet says: Depart ye, depart ye, go out from them, and touch no
unclean thing, etc. Which exhortation the Apostle brings in there to
persuade the Corinthians, and all Christians, 1. Cor. 6.19.
that for as much as they were the Temples of the holy Ghost, they should leave
the Temples of Idols, the prophanations of the Babylonians, and their filthy
coinquinations: for that which the Prophet speaks of the peoples going out of
Babylon into the Land of the Jews, Esaias 52.11.
the same he transferreth from the type, to the thing signified, to wit, that
all they which have given their names to God, should forsake the wicked
prophanations of the Gentiles, their heinous sins, Ephesians. 5.11.
their filthy kind of life, Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness: yea, and they should be so farstrangers from an unclean life, that
they should not so much as touch any unclean thing, lest they should be
defiled: for he that touches pitch, shall be defiled. Esaias 52.11. 1. Cor.
6.17. Act. 2.40.
Which places may well be understood of both ill company-keeping, and of
unclean living: from both of these we are forbidden. But to speak a little of
the former: We see by daily experience, that one mangie horse will infect
another: and therefore when we see in a close or stable such a one, we will
say, We will not put our horses there, lest they should be infected: In like
manner we our selves will refrain the company of such as have any contagious
and and dangerous diseases, as the Leprosy, or the plague; and we will desire
the societies of such as are sound and healthy: And why do we not refrain the
companies of the wicked, whose vile and lewd examples in speeches and living
soon deprave us, and confirm us in naughtiness? And again, Why do we not
delight in the company of the godly, knowing that of them we may learn
goodness? for with the holy thou shall be holy, and with the froward thou
shall learn frowardness. Let us therefore detest, abhor, and flee from
naughtiness, and wicked men's companies, as from the sting of a Serpent, and
poison of a Basiliske, (unless it be in hope to convert them) and let us touch
no unclean thing, but practice holiness of life and conversation. 1. These.
4.3, 4, 5.
For this is the will of God, even our sanctification, and that we should
abstain from fornication, that every one of us should know how to possess his
vessel in holiness and honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence, even as
the Gentiles which know not God: and God has called us not to uncleanness,
but unto holiness. 7. verse.


O dear Christians, Christ has made us Priests unto God, Revel. 1.6.
and St. Peter Ep. 2.5. says, That we are an holy Priesthood, to offer up
spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ and Paul beseeches us
to give up our bodies a living sacrifice, Revel. 12.1.
holy, and acceptable unto God. O let us do so, let us do so; let us sleep
no longer in sin, rocked and lulled in the cradle of security. And thus much
concerning the second Farm place, and the ports and gates of the same, which a
careful Steward should circumspectly and warily look unto.

The third farm, is the soul of man, which although it is created pure of
God, as the Angels are, yet being in the body, a foul and filthy prison, and
yet part of man, (for man does consist of a body and a soul) is polluted by
this participation with the body, is tainted now with original sin, and
performs not many times good parts and offices. Now to speak somewhat more
plainly to this purpose: Whereas there are two parts of man's soul, the
Understanding, and the Will: The office of the intellect is, to discern among
objects what is good to be allowed, or meet to de disalolwed: It is the office
of the Will to choose and follow that good which the intellect shall appoint,
and to despise and refuse that which the understanding shall disallow. If the
former, (the intellect) fails in discretion and judgment: then the Will
fails also in choosing and following: for the intellect is as it were the
souls guide and governor, the Will ever expects judgment from the
intellect, and is still at his beck. Now whereas man fails many times in
judgment and understanding; and the Will not only couets, but chooses that
which is evil; it comes to pass that the soul is polluted, and in man's
members performs wicked actions. And therefore man must crave the conduction
of Gods holy Spirit, to be led by him, and the Word of God, which must be a
lantern to his feet, and a light to his paths, and then he shall go well.
This soul of man should not be polluted with impure and unclean thoughts, and
bad choyces, and all the virtues and powers of it ought to be directed
principally to the knowledge, love, and honor of God.

The soul of man performs diverse offices in man, and according to her
several performances takes diverse names, as Isiodorus writes: Anima dum
viuificat corpus, Secundo etimolog.
anima est: dum vult, animus est: dum scit, men's: dum recolit, memoria: dum
rectum iudicat, ratio est: dum spirat, spiritus est: dum aliquid sentit, sensus
est. This is a point fit for the learned, and therefore I leave the Englishing
of it to them that can understand it. And so much of the third and last
Farme-house, which Man, a Steward under God, must look unto, and have an
especial care of: for it is immortal.

By this which I have spoken, it may appear what a great burden and charge
lies upon every man's conscience, to look unto his ways and paths, his
consultations, studies, and all his labors, and works. For Almighty God, who
by his Word and great power made all things, in his infinite wisdom created
nothing vain and idle. The glorious Angels are ministering spirits, Seruentes
unto God, his Messengers to do his will, and sent for the good of the Church, to
bring glad tidings, to comfort and help: which the word AGGELOS teaches Which
thing the Author to the Hebrews has well observed, Chap. 1.14.
saying, that they are sent from God to Minister for their sakes, which shall
be heirs of salvation. And therefore Gregory says, Angeli ad ministerium pro
nostra salute semper mittuntur: that is, the Angels are always sent to serve
for our salvation. The coruscant and glorious Sun does go and accomplish his
courses (as God has appointed) by motions and operations. Adam the first and
principallest man, as soon as he was created, was placed in the Garden of
Eden, to dress, trim, and keep it, in a decent and good order, Genesis 2.15. And
yet this being before the fall, and before any weeds and trumperies that there
might grow, there was no need to labor; yet God appointing him to this work,
hereby does show how much he abhorred idleness. Adam then was, as it were, the
Lords labourer as well as his own, even before the fall, in the time of his
integrity. But after the fall, labor was a punishment laid upon Adam, and all
his posterity. In the sweat of thy brows, or face, thou shall get thy living.
Now labor is pain: and therefore when we speak of a laborious man, we say,
such a one takes great pain, whether it be in Mechanical crafts and
occupations, or altogether in contemplation. All men are Stewards, and must
labor, the Word of God exempteth none, and God has no respect of persons. Our
Savior Mat. 20. will suffer none at any time to be idle, but sends them to
labor in his Vineyard.

Ministers are the Lords Stewards, and must labor, Math. 9.37. 2. Cor. 6.1.
and therefore are called Laborers: they are called workmen, and workers
together, and should show themselves to be cunning workmen, rightly dividing
the Word of God.

They are the Lords Servants, and receive Talents: 2. Tim. 2.15.
and therefore should make good use of them.

His Shepherds: Ezec. 34.
therefore must feed and ouersee his flocks.

His Cryers: therefore must cry alowd and spare not: Esaias 58.1.
Tell the people their transgressions, and the House of Jacob their sins:
they may not be dumb.

His Builders: therefore should go on in their work.

Fishers: therefore ought to let slip their Nets, to take and win souls, but
cast their Angle to take money, as Peter did.

Ambassadors of the Lord: 2. Cor. 5.20.
Therefore they ought to have tongues, and sufficiency to do the Lords message.

Feeders: therefore ought to have meat, and to distribute it.

Sowers: therefore ought to scatter the Seed of the Word into men's hearts.

His Leaders: therefore they should conduct their flocks in the way of the
Lord.

His especial Fighters against Sin, the World, the Flesh, the Devil,
Heretics, and all the enemies of Gods Truth, as Paul was, 2. Tim. 4.7.

By these, and many other like Appellations and Names we see, and may learn,
that God vouchsafes the help of Ministers, to execute his will, and uses
them as means to save his Sheep from perishing; yea, they are the instruments
to convert the people. The Lord saved the Arc, but by Noah: He converted the
Ninevites, but by Jonas; instructed the Eunuch, but by Philip: persuaded
Cornelius, but by Peter: called Paul, but by Ananias. Paul must plant, Apollo
water, and God gives the increase. Albeit Christ is the light, yet Ministers
bear witness of the light: though he be the fountain of living water, yet
Ministers are the conduits to convey them to the people: though he be the
Physician, yet Ministers are the Apothecaries, to make the confection: though
he be the cause efficient, yet Ministers are the instrument, even helpers:
though he be King, yet Ministers are his Ambassadors; yea, which is more, if
more can be, Paul tells Timothy, that if he take heed to himself, and
unto doctrine, and continue therein, he shall save both himself, and them that
hear him: and so Timothy should not only be an Helper, but a Sauer in sort.
Ministers then must be good Stewards, careful, and painful. Cura curarum
regimen animarum: The government of souls, is the care of all cares.

Notwithstanding this office of the Ministry truly administered, brings
honor: yea, it is worthy double honor. For the Elders that rule well, are
worthy double honor, specially they that labor in the Word and Doctrine. Many
love to rule, but they rule not well, neither labor in the Word and Doctrine:
and therefore are not worthy double honor: for there is none due, but to the
painful, Steward; the laboring Minister, as Father Latimer well said in his
fourth Sermon before King Edward the 6.

Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen of great valor and worth are Stewards, and
ought to employ some hours in the service of God, to please him; as
Iehosophat, Asa, Josias, and Ezechias did. They ought also to do good to the
Commonwealth, not neglecting a reasonable and necessary care of their own
followers, and Families. Ancient Chronicles testify, that Alphred King of
England, and Founder of the University of Oxon, divided the day and night into
three parts: eight hours he spent in the service of God, eight hours upon his
Country, and eight hours upon his body, and the maintenance of his Family,
letting no time to pass away unprofitably, always remembering, that whilst he
had time, he should do good. Ernestus Luneburgensis spent himself in doing
good; and therefore was represented by a golden Candlestick, bearing a Torch
in it, wherein were engraven these Letters in gold, showing his good and
charitable mind, and deeds of charity, proceeding from him. A. S. m. i. c. A
stood for Alijs, S. for seruiens, m. for me, i. for ipsum, and c. for consumo.
Set all together, the sentence will be, Alijs seruiens, meipsum consumo: I
consume my self, by serving other men's turns. It is a common speech among
worldly men, when they are exhorted to help the poor being in distress, to
say, We will do what we can for our neighbor, not hurting our selves; but we
will look to our selves first. O beloved, these men are lovers of themselves,
more then lovers of God, or of their neighbors. The old commandment given of
God, was, and is: Ioh. 13.34. and 15.12.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: and who does so now? And yet our
Savior in the New Testament presses us more nearely, teaching us to love one
another, as he loved us: now Christ loved us better then himself: for if he
had not, he would have harkened to Peter, dissuading him from his sufferings
for us, and persuading him to pity and favor, himself: but he would not
follow his wicked counsel, but knowing it not to be of God, said to him,
Chrysostom.
Get thee behind, Satan, for thou art an offense unto me, etc. Christians take
their names of Christ, and should be of Christ's mind, and reckon every one an
enemy unto them, that disswadeth them from doing good to their neighbor, when
they may, although it be to their own loss, hurt, and hazard not only of
goods, but also of life. There is a great hatred between the Dragon, and the
Pelican: the Dragon, when he knows that the Pelican has young Birds,
watches her when she goes from her nest, and then comes and poisoneth the
young ones. The Pelican returning, and finding her younglings dead, bewaileth
the loss of their lives, sending our most doleful and lamentable cries and
squeakings, and at the last, forgetting al care of her self, and burning with
a fervent love toward them, she pecketh her own breast, lets out her own
blood, which streaming out on them, reuiueth them. In like manner, there was a
great hostility between the great Red Dragon, the old Serpent, (I mean Satan)
and all mankind. He in Adam poisoned and killed us all with sin. Romans 5.12.
Math 26.28.
Our Savior Christ pitying our miserable case, and willing to help us, shed
his own blood for us, and made us alive again. Ioh. 11.25.
Such a love should be in us, when we see our Christian brethren in extremity,
1. Ioh. 3.16.
and can help. We ought to lay down our lives for them, much more we should
impart our goods, and bestow any labor and pain to do them good. I write
these things to you (you Honorable, Worshipful, and rich men of the world) to
move you (if it please God that I may,) to be liberal, and rich in good
works, 1. Tim. 6.18.
and to lay up treasures in heaven for your selves, by showing works of mercy.
Which thing most of you are able to do, and may do without danger of life. O
then be willing to make performance, and God will here on earth increase your
basket and your store, as he did the Loaves and Fishes in the Disciples hands,
Math. 14.
distributing them, and he will lengthen that which you have, as he did the
Meal and the Oil of the poor Widow of Sarephath: 1. King. 17.
you shall receive mercy at the Lords hands in earth, and in Heaven at the last
Day, an everlasting blessing. Math. 25.
Therefore flatter not your selves, because of your high Places of Honor and
Worship. For God priuiledgeth not you more then the poor, to be idle Stewards.
There must be no ciphers in Gods. Arithmetike, no mutes in his Grammar, no
blankes in his Calendar, no Drones in his Bee-hiue, no loyterers in his
Marketplace, and Vineyard, no idle Stewards in his Farms. And so, my good
Lords, and you Worshipful Gentlemen, with all respective duties, I humbly take
my leave of you.

Lawiers are Stewards, and diligently and faithfully should examine their
Clients causes, deal plainly and justly with them; and not for gain sake
tell them a lie, and confirm them in errors, and make them pay for all,
sowing the seeds of Sedition, which come up every Term, when as lovely
compositions and agreements at home might better serve: and whereas their
Clients are poor already, they in the end make them poorer. Lib. 5. de guber.
Siluianus says, Hac lege tueri pauperes videntur, vt spolient, hac lege
defendunt miseros, vt miseriores faciant, defendendo: that is to say, With this
Law they seem to defend the poor, that they may spoil them. With this same
Law they defend poor wretches, to make them more miserable by their defending.
And yet for all this, who better rewarded then the Lawyer? A Preacher that
speaks the truth from God, and uses the means to win men's souls to God,
has many times for his pains, reproaches: but Lawiers sometimes for pleading
unjust causes, have large fees: and when their Client is overthrown, his cause
lost, and his money spent, they blame the Client, and say, He told me the best,
but not the worst, we lacked good information But now what becomes of this
poor man overthrown? He perhaps has maintained the suite with borrowed money,
and is become indebted unto many, and new suites by his Creditors come upon
him, Baylifes (who live and rejoice at poor men's falls) swarm about him like
Caterpillars, and the Flies of Egypt, they take him, and prey upon him. Thus
the unmerciful feed upon him when he is down, as Wolves, Dogs, Kites,
Crows, and such like do upon a Sheep that lies in a Ditch, and is not able
to rise. But this dangerous and hurtful sore is commonly bred and maintained
by the inferior sort of Lawiers, who wringing out matter from poor silly men,
bring it up out of the country, to the better sort of Lawyers, and work them
to undertake businesses, concealing the truth many times from them, which these
good Lawyers, whereof (God be thanked) we have great store, learned and godly,
skillful in our Laws, would never undertake, if the truth at the first were
delivered unto them. O God, give them knowledge of the truth and righteous
causes, and make them maintainers and followers of the same. Amen.

Husbandmen, Artificers, Tradesmen, and all other workmen of occupation, and
laborers whatsoever are Stewards, and ought trustily, and not deceitfully;
diligently, and not idly labor and take pain early and late, lest poverty
come upon them, as one that trauelleth, and necessity like an armed man, Prou.
6.11. Prou. 6.
He that will not work in Harvest, shall want at Christmas. The very Bees and
Emmets, by the instinct of nature, labor diligently in Summer, 1. Tim. 5.8.
to provide for Winter. So should poor laborers do to provide for them, and
theirs, that they may not prove worse then Infidels. A slothful hand, says
Solomon, makes poor; Prou. 10.4.
but the hand of the diligent, makes rich. He that gathers in Summer, is a
wise son; but he that sleeps in Harvest, is the son of confusion. Let
every man therefore in his place show himself a good Steward, that he may eat
the labors of his hands: Psalm. 128.
which is a blessed thing, and then he may eat with a good conscience.
Solomon gave good counsel, Prou. 5.15.
when he said, Drink the waters of thine own cisterne, and of the Rivers out
of the mids of thine own Well. Get thee goods with thine own honest labors,
and then eat with thanksgiving; but if thou art idle, 2. These. 3.11, 12.
and labourest not: the Apostle thinks thee unworthy to eat. The Heathens
did hold, that no good thing could be had without labor and pains taking; and
therefore spoke of virtue and knowledge, thus: Virtutem posuere dij sudore
parandam.
Non iacet in molli venerandae scientia lecto
Ipsa, sed assiduo parta labor venit.
Man must depend upon God; yet use the means, and he will give a blessing. Our
Savior Christ Jesus could have given fish unto Peter, without casting out his
net, but he would not; to teach him and the Church, that is to say, all the
faithful, by his example, Luke 5.
to labor and to use the means.

Math. 13.
as when men are asleep, careless and idle: for then he hatcheth and
breeds many vices in us: for like as in a standing water worms are engendered
and bred, and not in a sweet and swift current: So likewise in an idle, (and
not in a laboring body) many idle and evil thoughts are bred, and fostered.
In which lamentable estate, as long as man lies in, he is in the Devils
service, he is the Devils labourer, as Bernard writes upon the Canticles,
saying: Qui in labor hominum honesto non sunt, in labor profecto daemonum
erunt: that is in effect, as if he should say: Men that are loyterers, are the
Devils laborers: Romans 6.
and what is the wages and pay of the Devil? Death and destruction, the wages
of all sin. The Crab-fish (as Pliny says) when he sees the Oyster lie
gaping against the Sunne-beames, privily steals upon him, and puts a
pibble into the mouth of the Oyster, and so gets out the fish, and leaves
nothing behind him but the shell, good for nothing: So likewise when we lie
idle, rocked and lulled in the cradle of security, the Devil steals into
us, gets away our hearts, and destroys our souls, and leaves nothing but
a body subject to sin, which he also will have at the last.

2. A man that labors, shall thereby the better be able with a good
conscience to provide for himself and his family, without making false
reckonings to deceive his Master, as this false steward did.

3. A painful man shall the better be able to relieve and help others, and
this is a Christian man's duty: for as Plato de legibus has, Non solum nobis
sumus nati, sed partem patria, partem parents, partem amici vendicant, that is
to say, We are borne only for our selves, but our Country claims part for
her own, our parents part, and our friends part. We must do good to all, but
chiefly to the household of faith: We must do good to all, I say: yea, even
to our enemies that hate us, following the example of our heavenly Father, who
lets his Sun to shine, and the rain to fall upon the good man's ground and
the bad. And this must a man do with his true gotten goods: for the gift that
is given, being truly gotten, makes the alms more pleasing to God.

4. This shows the true end wherefore God makes men rich Stewards, and
delivers them his goods: not that they should lay them up, and do no good
with them, nor put their trust in them, nor keep them basely, nor spend them
wastfully and sinfully; but that they should gladly distribute them, according
to the good pleasure of the chief Owner, God; to the benefiting of the Church,
Gods faithful people: for as a sheep bears a fleece of wool, not for
himself, but for the necessity and benefit of men: Even so the gifts of God
which he gives, either spiritual, or temporal, we are not to keep only for
our selves, but to supply the necessities and wants of others: for so the
Apostle teaches us, 1. Pet. 4.10.
saying, As every man has received the gift, let him minister the same one to
another, at good disposers of the manifold graces of God. We as feeling
members one of another, ought to relieve and support one another: for as the
Stagges when they swim over a great river to feed in some meddow, swim all
on a row, and lay their heads one over another back, carrying the weight of
one another horns, and when the first is weary, another takes his room, and
so do it by course: Even so must we do, bear one another burden, helping
and doing good one to another, til we have passed the troublesome waves of this
world, and are come to the haven of eternal salvation. Then shall we approve
our selves good Stewards, good servants to our high Master the Lord God
Almighty, we shall be found faithful in our places, and shall have the fruit
thereof, an eternal blessing, as our Savior does teach, saying, Mat. 24.45,
46.
Who is a faithful Steward and wise, whom the Master shall make ruler over his
household, to give them their portion of meat in season? Luke 12.42, 43, 44.
Blessed is that servant whom his Master when he comes shall find so doing:
Of a truth! say unto you, that he will make him ruler over all that he has,
that is, he will make him an heir of eternal life: He shall inherit the
Kingdom prepared from the beginning of the world. Math. 25.34.
He shall walk with the Lord in white garments, that is, he shall be
glorified, Reu. 3.
and have life everlasting, and the glorious company of Christ: He shall be in
Abraham's bosom, as Lazarus was, Luke 16.
and eat of the tree of Life in the midst of the heavenly Paradise of God:
Reu. 2.7.
He shall have the Crown of glory: He shall be a pillar in the Temple of
God, that is, he shall be firm and stable in glory, as a pillar irremoueable,
etc. Eye has not seen, Reu. 3.12.
neither ear heard; neither ever did enter into the heart of man, what good
things the Lord has prepared for them that love him, and serve him in
holiness and righteousness all the days of their life. Illud verum et summum
gaudium est, says Bernard in a Sermon, that is the true and greatest joy: and
therefore as it were ravished with a great love thereof, cried out, O beata
regio Paradist! o beata regio deliciarum! O blessed region of Paradise! O
blessed region of delights! And therefore he exhorts us to be out of love
with this world whiles we be here, and to hasten thither, saying thus,
Festinemus ad locum tutiorem, ad agrum vberiorem, ad pastum saniorem, vt
habitemus sine metu, abundemus sine defectu, epulemur sine fastidio, that is to
say: Let us hasten to a more safe place, to a more fertile ground, to a more
sound feeding, where we may inhabit without fear, abound without defect,
banquet without disdain. Here is the haven, the blessed port of rest, and the
liberal portion of the good and faithful Steward. But the slothful,
wastfull, cruel and unfaithful Steward shall be cut off, or cut into pieces,
and have his portion with hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth, Math. 24.51. Wherefore seeing that we all rather desire to be reputed,
(yea, and be indeed) good Stewards then bad, to enjoy a good place and portion,
rather then a bad: let us depart out of the Kingdom of sin and Satan, and
come to the Kingdom of light, let us show and approve our selves good
Stewards, keeping our Farm places, the world, the body, and the soul well,
and let us not get our goods in the first manor house, the world, wrongfully,
nor put our trust in them idolatrously, nor keep them to our selves basely,
nor spend them wastfully and ungodly, but lay them out for the maintenance of
the Gospel, and help of the poor indigent members of Christ Jesus liberally.

Again, let us look to our second Farm place, and manor house, (our body)
that it be clean, and fit for the chief Lord and Master of all, and his Son
Jesus Christ, and the holy Ghost to come into. Let us diligently watch the
ports and gates of the same, our Hearing, Seeing, Talking, Tasting, and
Touching, that nothing go in, nor come out, that may defile the body. Lastly,
let us have an especial care of our principal part, the soul, the last
manor house. Let repentance sweep it clean from impure thoughts, and wicked
cogitations, let a good conscience be his bedding, let faith be ever looking to
Christ Jesus, and cleansing, and let the graces and virtues of the holy Ghost
be the ornaments of his lodging. And in all things, and in all our places and
charges, let us prove our selves good, wise, and faithful Stewards, that it
may be said unto us, and to every one of us, It is well done, good servant,
thou have been faithful in little, I will make thee Ruler over much: enter in
into thy Masters joy. This approbation and allowance of our Stewardship, and
unspeakable reward, give and grant us (O heavenly Father) not for our
worthiness (for we have no merits) but for thy mercies and graces in Jesus
Christ. Amen.

The end of the first Sermon.
THE SECOND SERMON. And the same was accused.
AS all men are Stewards under God, and what good Talents and gifts so ever
they have, they receive from him the fountain of all graces: Even so they
ought to occupy and employ the same, according to the good pleasure of him the
Collator and Donator, as it is plain in the Parable of the Talents, Math 25.
And as S. Peter teaches, 1. Epist. 4. saying, As every one has received the
gift, even so minister the same, as good Stewards of the manifold graces of
God: Whosoever does this, is commended and rewarded of his high Lord and
Master, with these words of grace to his comfort: O well done, thou good and
faithful Servant, thou have been faithful over few things, I will make thee
Ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, Mat. 25.21. But if
a servant have much co^credited unto him, if it be but of an earthly Master,
and employ it ill, spend it wastfully, eating and drinking with the Drunkards,
participating with the Adulterers, and entreating his fellow-seruants hardly,
and yet thinks that his evil carriage and outragiousnesse shall not be
known, but that he shall escape with impunitie: O how this man deceives
himself: For the fellow-seruants will relate the treacheries, bad vsages, and
cruelties of their fellows to their Lord. As those servants did which saw
their fellow-seruant so cruelly handled, Math. 18. And here the bad Steward is
accused to his Lord. Now if we see by daily experiences, that bad Stewards to
earthly Masters escape not always free with their false dealings, and other
evil behauiours, but one or other will espy them, and disclose them, and give
their Master intelligence, and then he reckons and accounts with them, and
displaceth them: then we may much more assure our selves, that no cloud of
darkness, no mask nor veil can be cast before the Lords eyes: Psalm. 79.9.
For he that planted the ear, shall be not hear? Or he that made the eye,
shall he not see? God knows, notes, sees, ouerseeth al things; yea, the
very secrets of the heart: and yet if he were not so quick of capacity, of
hearing, and seeing: Yet there are many tell-tales, and pick-thankes in the
Family, which relate all our misdemeanors, and accuse us unto him, as in my
Text; the false Steward is said to be accused. And here begins a lamentable
discourse, and a Tragical Relation of the miserable estate of a bad Steward,
laid down in my Text, in these points: First, He is defamed, or accused, in
these words: and the same was accused. Secondly, called: (and he called him.)
Thirdly, reprehended, in these words, (How comes it to pass that I hear
this of thee?) Fourthly, he yields an account: Come render an account of thy
Stewardsh. Fifthly, he is put out of his Office, in these words: For thou may
be no longer Steward. Of these in order: and first of his accusation. Wherein
we are to note, first, his Accusers: Secondly, the capital and heinous crimes
whereof he is accused.

The Accusers or complainants are these: 1. Satan. 2. Angels. 3. Saints. 4. His
own Conscience. 5. Sins. 6. Creatures of God.


The heinous crimes whereof the evil Steward is accused of, are these five: 1.
Unfaithfulness. 2. Cruelty. 3. Slothfulness. 4. Ill company-keeping. 5.
Wastfulnesse.


First, the evil, unfaithful, and ungracious Steward is accused of the
Devil. For which cause he is called, Reu. 12.
The accuser of the Brethren, which accuses them before God day and night. He
accuses our works, words, and thoughts, as Gregory notes, saying thus: Lib.
2. moral.
Diabolus prima opera nostra, deinde verba, and tandem cogitationes accusat. He
defameth man, accuses him of wickednesses, reports them before God, calls
for vengeance and speedy death, lest the thread of man's life should be drawn
out along, and he should repent and obtain eternal life. Job 1.
If Satan was so impudent, that he blushed not to defame and accuse before God
holy Job, a man to whom there was none comparable in his time on the earth, a
perfect and just man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil: What is it that
he will not allege against a sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, a
seed of the wicked, corrupt children, in whom, from the sole of the foot, unto
the head, there is nothing sound in them, but they draw wickedness with cords
of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart-rope?

Secondly, an unjust Steward is defamed and accused of Angels, Job 20.27.
Reuelant coeli iniquitatem improbi. Esaias 1.
The Heavens reveal the iniquity of a wicked man. Per coelos, Angelos, qui in
coelis sunt, accipe, says the ancient Father: In Math. 18. The fellow-seruant
told to the Lord the cruelty of his servant. Now the Angels are our
fellow-seruants, as we may probably gather out of John, Reu. 22. where he fell
down to worship the Angel, who said unto him, See thou do it not: for I am
thy fellow-seruant, and the fellow-seruant of thy Brethren the Prophets, which
keep the sayings of this Book: Worship thou God. Lo, the Angel said to
John, that he was his fellow-seruant, and not only his, but of his Brethren
the Prophets, which kept the sayings of Gods Book. The Angels then tell God
our faults as here. Our prayers, holiness, and righteousness, as in Tobie 12.
Let us therefore that live in the presence of God, and his Angels, carry our
selves godly, and honestly, knowing that most pure eyes do look upon us.

Thirdly, a bad Steward is blamed and accused of Saints both triumphant which
are in Heaven, and militant which live on earth. Of Saints triumphant, whose
blood was shed on earth by cruel Tyrants and persecutors, for the Word of God,
and testimony which they had. For these being in the blessed port of Heaven
cry out against them that imbrued their hands in their blood, Reu. 6.
saying, How long tarriest thou, O Lord, which art holy, and true, to judge and
avenge our blood on them that dwell on earth! And that an ungracious Steward is
accused before God of Saints, that are living in this mortal life, it is also
most manifest. Jeremy blamed and accused the Jews unto God, yea, and craved
reuengement against them in these words: O Lord of hosts, thou righteous judge,
Ier. 11.
thou that tryest the reins, and the hearts, let me be avenged of them. For
unto thee have I committed my cause. When Antiochus oppressed the Church of God
with great tyranny, David accused him unto God in these words; Psalm. 74.10, 18.
Remember this, O Lord, how the enemy has rebuked, and the foolish people has
blasphemed thy Name. Jeremy in like manner accused and blamed his persecutors
unto GOD, and craved him to revenge him, saying, Ier. 15.15.
O Lord, thou know, remember me, and visit me, and revenge me of my
persecuters. If the poor is oppressed of the rich, and make his moan unto the
Lord, accusing him and crying for reuengement: The Lord respecting the deep
sighing of the poor, will awake as one out of sleep, and as a Giant refreshed
with Wine, Psalm. 12.
and will smite their enemies in the hinder parts, and put them to a perpetual
shame. True it is, and memorable, which Siracides has, chapter 35. where he
says; God has no respect of persons against the poor, but does hear the
prayer of him that is wronged, he will not neglect the prayer of the
fatherless, nor the widow, if she complain. Do not the widows tears go
down her cheeks? and they cry out to God on high in Heaven, against him that
has caused the same? Now, beloved brethren, and sisters, if we should wrong
an innocent and harmless man in a righteous cause upon earth, we would be
unwilling,; yea, we would tremble and quake to have a complaint (we knowing our
selves guilty) to be made unto a mighty Judge or Potentate that can punish us
severely. How much more then should it grieve us, and astonish us, and cause us
to make recompense, and satisfaction to the parties whom we have wronged, when
we know that the complaints and cries of them that are injured, do sound in
the ears of the Lord, that an accusation is made against us, that an account
must be given to the high Judge, and justice without partiality ministered?

Fourthly, Romans 2.
the bad Steward is accused of his own thoughts, and testified against of his
own conscience: and this is as forcible to convict a man, as a thousand
witnesses: and hereupon grew the proverb, Socrates.
Conscientia mill testes. When a man's Conscience is wronged, he lives as
merry, as a Bird in a pitfall. Lib. de moribus.
For Conscientia laesa est nunqua^ secura, as Seneca writes. Chrysostom
writing upon the 50. Psalm, says, Conscientia peccati, formidinis matter: that
is to say, The Conscience or knowledge of sin, is the mother of fear. If a man
fear any creature, Man, Beast, or Worm, he may avoid them; but he can never
flee from his Conscience: she is a bird which he always carries in his
bosom, pleasant as the Nightingale, if she be not violated; but being
wronged, she is like a Waspe, or Snake under a man's clothes, or rather like
the Bots in a Horse belly, which never suffers him to be quiet, but are still
eating, and gnawing. Sat. 12.
And therefore Inuenal said, that this is the greatest punishment, (and we must
needs all yield unto it.) Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem. This
grief of Conscience is an inward tormenting of the soul, Upon 1. Cor. 11.
void of Faith, Hope, and Charity, which Melancthon calls Erinnys
Conscientiae, that is to say, an hellish Hagge, or infernal Fury of the
Conscience. A wronged Conscience is never quiet, never at rest, but makes her
possessour to flee hither and thither, and seek to depart from her, Tom. 8.
fol. 286.
but he cannot. Augustine in his enarration of Psalm 45. says, that he which
has a violated conscience, will flee, ab agro, ad cinitatem, a publico, ad
domum, a domo, in cubiculum: that is, he will flee out of field, into the City,
out of the City, into his house, out of his house, into his Chamber: and what
there? Ecce hostem inuenit, quo fugiturus est, nempe seipsum: and there he
finds the enemy that he would flee from, to wit, himself. These torments are
the most grievous torments. Aristides.
And therefore Lucan truly (although mournefully) said of an afflicted
conscience: Heu quantum misero poenae men's conscia donat!

Alas what punishment the filly wretch endures by reason of his guilty
conscience! Esaias 57.21. Act. 24.16.
Such a one has no peace. Let us therefore with Paul endeavor, yea, exercise
our selves to have always a clear conscience toward God, and toward men.
Let us take the counsel that Paul gave to Timothy, 1. Tim. 1.
Fight, that is, earnestly strive, that we may have Faith and a good
conscience. For quaenam summae boni? Men's quae sibi conscia recti. Prou. 15.15.
A good Conscience is a continual feast, the cheer, joy in the Holy Ghost,
and the Music such a peace with God, our neighbors, and our selves, as
passes all understanding, Romans 14.17.

Fifthly, the very sins which a man commits, are said in the Book of God
to accuse, reprove, and condemn him. Jeremy in his second Chapter said unto
the Jews, Thine own wickedness shall reprove thee, and thy turning away
shall condemn thee. For as the works of the godly do follow them, ad
defendendum, and exhilarandum, Reu. 14.13.
to defend and cheer them: so the works of the wicked do follow them, ad
accusandum and contristandum, to accuse, and make them sad. Among the sins
that cry unto God against man, and most grievously accuse him, there are four
detestable sins, as some will, but I reduce them to two. The first crying
sin.


First is the shedding of innocent blood, the greatest wrong that can be
wrought to humane nature, even worse then the taking away of a man's goods; for
they may be restored, but mortal life never. Besides this, as much as in the
murderer lies, he takes away from the party killed, all time to dispose and
set things in order, and also to repent, that the man may obtain remission of
his sins. This is not a dormient and silent, but a crying sin. This sin
was in Cain that bloody butcher, killing his godly and innocent brother Abel;
unto whom God said, Behold, the voice of thy Brothers blood cries unto me out
of the ground. Genesis 4.10.


Secondly, The second crying sin.
the oppression of the poor lifting up their voices unto God their revenger,
who hears and helps them. As in the 12. Psalm, ver 5. At the crying of the
poor, I will up, says the LORD. Siracides 30. God has no respect of persons
against the poor, but does hear the prayer of him that is wronged, he will
not neglect the prayer of the fatherless, nor the widow, if she complain.
Do not the widows tears go down her cheeks? but they cry out to God on
high into Heaven, against him that has caused the same. And such a sin as
this was that sin of Pharaoh his exaction, Exodus 5.
imposition, and cruel oppression of the Israelites. And very aptly to this
purpose, may be applied the crying of hirelings defrauded of their hire by the
rich, whereof James speaks, Chap. 5.7.
saying, Behold, the hire of Laborers which have reaped your fields (which is
of you kept back by fraud) cries, and the cries of them which have reaped, are
entered into the ears of the Lord of Hosts. And of this sort, was the cry
against Sodom and Gomorrha, whereof God speaks, Genesis 18.21. O beloved, beware
of these heinous sins, and assure your selves, that neither these, nor other
the least sins that we commit, shall go unpunished, without unfeigned
repentance, and quick apprehension of the merits of Christ Jesus by a true and
lively faith. And so much of the two crying sins.

Sixthly, the creatures abused not only the sensible creature, groaning and
traveling in pain, till it be delivered from the bondage of corruption and
vanity, Romans 8.
which against it will, it suffers under the wicked; but even the very
senseless creature. Habuc. 2.11. Iam. 5.2.
The stone crying out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber answering
it. The moth of the garment, and the rust of the cankred gold, witnessing
against the covetous worldlings; yea, the dead letter of the Bible cries and
accuses, as Christ shows in the Gospel. Ioh. 5.45.
Do not think (says he) that I will accuse you to my Father: there is one
that accuses you, even Moses in whom ye trust: that is, The law or writings
of Moses shall accuse you, for playing the bad Stewards. To conclude, the
heavens shall declare his wickedness, and the earch shall take part against
him, as Zophar said, Job 20.27. Let us therefore not deceive our selves,
thinking that our abuses in our Stewardship will not be known to the Lord: for
although he knows all things already, yet the Scriptures speaking after the
manner of men, tell us that many criminations, and accusations one after
another will come out against us, and be brought before the Lord, stirring him
to reuengement: And yet alas, how careless man is in this point. He without
any care or fear of God, abuses his creatures; even sensible and living
things, that are subject to vanity, and the touching and abuses of him. Man,
when he hurts any living creature, will laugh and rejoice at such times as
he is willing to exhilarate himself withal, when the creature it self (being
subject to vanity, the touching and abuses of the wicked) does groan for
sorrow; and man at his pleasure will kill the same. But yet he considers
not, that for these his abuses, and other his wickednesses, (if he repent not)
he shall himself die eternally. O sinful impiety, merciless cruelty, and
careless security! from the which God deliver us. So much concerning the
accusers of the bad Steward.

The capital and deadly faults, and heinous crimes, whereof the evil Steward
is, and shall be accused, are these 5. 1. Infidelity. 2. Cruelty. 3.
Slothfulness. 4. Ill company-keeping. 5. Wastfulnesse.


First, unfaithfulness and falsehood: for whereas faithfulness is required in
the Lords disposers, and they should so carry themselves in their offices, that
they may be called faithful and wise: Math. 24.
and should so employ and minister the gifts of God, as becomes good Stewards
of the manifold graces of God: To be brief, should get their goods truly, and
bestow them in godly affairs, 1. Pet. 4.
and matters bountifully: may not he worthily be accused of infidelity and
falsehood, which makes waste of his Masters goods when he is in office and
service: and when he knows that he shall out, will not study amendment, nor
crave mercy, nor favor, nor forgiveness of his faults, but will persevere in his
naughtiness, and study further to deceive at the last, as this false Steward
did; which being accused, and knowing that he should go out of his Office, to
make up the full measure of deceit, he compares and complorreth with his
Masters debtors and abateth their sums, to this end, that they might maintain
him when he was put out of his Office? Valor. Max. l. 9.
Occultum and insidiosu^ malum, est haec perfidia, this treachery is a secret
and deceitful evil. Such fellows show themselves to be no true members of
the Church: Psalm. 15.2.
for every one that is such, walks uprightly, and does the thing that is
right, and speaks the truth from his heart. Such a wicked Steward comes by
riches, but not righteously, in the midst of his life must be leave them
behind him, Ier. 17.11. Luke 12.
and at the last be found a very fool: Such a one was the rich man. Nothing
crosses the Lords love more then this: for the righteous Lord loves
righteousness, his countenance does behold the just, Psalm. 11.7.

Secondly, the evil and naughty Steward is accused of cruelty, Math. 24.49.
because he beats his fellow-seruants, that is, deals rigorously, Mat. 18.
cruelly, and injuriously with them, as the other servant did to his fellow
that ought him an hundred pence, and was not able to pay him; and therefore
fell down and be sought him, saying: Refrain thine anger toward me, and I will
pay thee all: but the creditor would show no mercy upon him, but having caught
him by the throat, ready to thrattle him, cast him into prison. O cruel
pranke, rather agreeable to the nature of a beast (who will huntch his fellow
that is under him) the^ the humane qualities that should be in a man, who
should succor and relieve the poor that are next him: and not to be currish
unto them like churlish Nabal, 1. Sam. 25. 1. King. 21.
nor cruel like Ahab, not suffering them to have any thing near them, nor any
way to prosper; but (the more is the pity) as the high trees drop upon the
low, and hinder their growth: and as the mountain Radish being planted near
the Vine, causes it to starve, and wither away: So the great wicked ones of
this world, being too near the poor godly, make them to decay, and fall away
to nothing: for where the hedge is lowest, the beasts will break over, and it
is usually seen that the great fish will eat up the small. In the holy Book
of God we find that Eliah was fed by Ravens, 1. King. 17. Dan 6.
Daniel not hurt among hungry Lions, and man endued with reason: and who should
be led by Gods holy Spirit and his word (a ass for pity) is many times
neither charitable, nor merciful to the poor, but most cruel and
unmerciful. So true is that saying of Cyprian lamenting this case: Sermon. de
erat. dominic.
O detestandam humanae malitiae crudelitatem! aues pascunt, ferae parcunt,
homines saeuiunt: that is to say, O detestable cruelty, proceeding from the
malice of man! birds do feed men, wild beasts spare men, but men do rage one
upon another. But what becomes of the wicked, cruel, and ungodly Steward? They
consume suddenly, perish, and come to a fearful end, although for a time they
bear never so fair a show in this world: for as fire made of thorns burns
fiercely for a time, and keeps a great noise and crackling, but yet is
speedily burnt out and consumed: So the attempts of the wicked are for a time
violent, and dangerous, but God in his good time does with speed extinguish and
quench them. This David does prove by his own experience, who speaking of his
cruel adversaries, Psalm. 118.12. Psalm. 68.2.
says; They came about me like Bees, and are extinct, even as the fire among
the Thorns: For in the Name of the Lord I will destroy them. And therefore as
the smoke vanishes, and comes to nothing: so the wicked and ungodly perish
at the presence of God. So that they hurt themselves most, and therefore are
little better then mad men. For as mad men and frantic, are wont to rent and
tear themselves: So wicked and ungodly men inflict upon themselves most deadly
and incurable wounds: yea, they are most wilful murderers of their own souls
and bodies, and when they hurt a poor man a little, they most wrong
themselves. And so the rich Glutton in this Chapter, by his unmercifulness and
cruelty toward poor Lazarus, did hurt himself more then he did the poor
man: For the poor man went presently to Heaven, and he to Hell. The cruelty of
Pharaoh toward the Israelites, Exodus 14.
hurt himself and the Egyptians more then the Israelites, as their fearful
end most plainly showed, when the Waters overwhelmed them in the Red Sea, so
suddenly ouertaking and covering them, that no signs of true repentance could
appear. The grief and torments of Cain his conscience, Genesis 4.
his fear and trembling, perfecting his miseries, with death of the body here,
even an end unnatural, and everlasting torments afterward, must needs be
worse, then the only untimely death of the body to Abel, Genesis 3.19. Heb. 9.27.
death being ever certain, a misery incident to all flesh. Adonibezec was a
most vile and cruel Tyrant to many: For he cut off the great Toes and Thumbes
of seventy Kings, Judge. 1.
and made them to gather bread under his Table: but at the last the judgments
of God laid on him were such, that he was taken, and his own were cut off,
and his own conscience made him acknowledge his own worthiness of that
punishment, and to say: Verse 7.
Seventy Kings having the Thumbs of their hands, and of their feet cut off,
gathered bread under my Table: as I have done, so GOD has rewarded me. So
they brought him to Jerusalem, and there he dyed.

O beloved Christians, seeing that cruelty is a thing so hurtful to your
selves, and others; let me beseech you that are men of valor, might, and
power, even great and mighty Stewards, to lay aside the same, and all wrath,
the cause of the same, Lib. de morib.
as Seneca counsels, saying: Euitabis crudelitatem, and ministram
crudelitatis iram: that is to say, Avoid cruelty, and anger a servant of
cruelty. And again, Reijce crudelitatem, and matrem crudelitatis iram: that
is, Reject cruelty, and anger the mother of cruelty. Cassiodorus thinks that
Ambition, Pride, and desire of Riches make most men to be cruel unto the
poor; and he would have great men of the world not to be rigorous unto the
poor. His reasons are two: First, because poor men have misery and sorrow
enough of themselves already. Secondly, rich men reap, by hurting poor men,
neither glory nor abundance of riches.

Thirdly, the evil Steward is accused of slothfulness, and long continuance
in the same, which made him unwilling and unable now to labor: for he plainly
said, Verse 3.
I cannot dig. Mat. 25.
Such an idle servant was he that had a talent delivered unto him, and never
made any good use of it, but hid it in the ground. Of this vice, all idle
persons that have good gifts, and use them not, are guilty, and so are all
they that have store of worldly riches, and employ them not to the maintenance
of the truth, the advancement of Gods glory, the good of the Church, Gods
faithful people, and their own competent maintenance, and their families.
Beloved Christians, high and low, rich and poor, young and old, all, one with
another, and every one by himself, give your selves to honest and godly
exercises: for hereof comes fruit and goodness. Aurelius says, Nullus
fructus otij, imo magis dispendium: There comes no fruit of idleness, but
rather loss. His example is: Otiosus Esau amisit primatus benedictionem, quia
maluit cibu^ accipere quam quaerere, that is, Idle Esau lost his primary
blessing, because he had rather receive meat, then get it by labor. The Devil
has never so fit time to sow the seeds of wickedness and mischief, as when
men are idle, as appears by the Parable, Matthew. 13. where it is showed, that
whiles men slept, that is, were idle, the Devil came and sowed tares among the
wheat. The counsel therefore of Saint Hierom touching this matter, is very
good: Ad Demet.
Aliquid operis facito, vt te Diabolus inueniat occupatum. Non enim facile
capitur a Diabolo, qui bono vacat exercitio: that is, Do some good work, that
the Devil may find thee busied: for he is not easily taken of the Devil,
which is employed in good exercise. The Bees teach us to labor: for no
creature is more painful then they: and if any become drones, and will not
labor for honey and maintenance, they will draw him out of the hiue, that he
may perish. Beloved, it seems that these small irrational creatures have a
greater care to punish this vice, then many Magistrates, Officers, masters, and
parents. For innumerable loyterers are suffered to swagger, spend, and waste,
they care not how much almost in every town, yea one such will spend more then
two or three men of good government, and yet these idle drones are suffered in
many places without controlment of any, to live even how they list, hatching
and breeding by their idleness and secure life, many inconveniences, and
grievous sins. For as by the pumpe of a ship, water does oftentimes secretly
get in and increases, so that through the negligence of the Mariner the ship
is drowned: so by slothfulness and a secure life, wicked thoughts and
concupiscences are multiplied in our hearts, till at length our souls are in
great danger.

Fourthly, the evil Steward is accused of ill company-keeping, for he eats
and drinks with the drunken, Mat. 24.49. If a man were honest before, yet the
society and fellowship of such as are wicked, will hazard his reputation and
conversation, and change his manners from good to evil. For as the Camelion is
sometimes black, and sometimes green, sometimes pale, and sometimes blue,
(for he ever takes his color of what thing is set before him:) So men of all
degrees are wont very much to imitate the nature, disposition, and manners of
those, whose company they frequent, and whose counsel they follow, and whose
familiarity they use: for with the holy thou shall be holy, and with the
froward thou shall learn frowardness. Keep company therefore with the godly,
and refrain the sinful delectations of the wicked. Act. 2.
Save your selves from this froward generation. Come out from among them: Esa.
52.11.
depart ye, depart ye, go out from them, and touch no unclean thing, for if
ye do, ye will be infected, For if one shabed and scabbed sheep will infect a
whole flock, then what will daily feeding and folding with many do? Take the
good counsel of Solomon: Prou. 4.14, 15, 16, 17.
Enter not into the way of the wicked, and walk not in the way of evil men:
Avoid it, and go not by it: turn from it, and pass by. For they cannot
sleep, except they have done evil, and their sleep departs, except they
cause some to fall. For they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine
of violence. Go not therefore the broad way with the wicked which leads to
destruction: Fashion not your selves like to the world, the wicked ones of the
world, for the Devil is their Prince, and tyrannically rules them: He is
their god and Master, and badly pays them their wages. Death and destruction
is their payment, which in the end of their service they receive from him. O
keep not company then with the wicked (unless your desires and endeavors are
to convert them) but as occasion and opportunity shall serve, delight the
fellowship of the godly. And this Saint Peter would have us to do, saying;
Love brotherly fellowship: 1. Epist. 2, 17. Heb. 10.25.
And the Apostle Paul agrees hereunto, exhorting us not to forsake the
fellowship that we have among our selves. For to forsake the company of the
good, is hurtful, as it may appear by the example of Judas, who forsook the
company of the Apostles and perished: and of Thomas, who was not with the other
ten Apostles, when Christ appeared to them after his Resurrection: and
therefore seeing him not with the rest, doubted.

To conclude this point: As a Bird leaving her nest and Eggs, never hatcheth
her young ones: but the Eggs rot, and the fruit must needs perish: Even so,
every one which forsakes his first love, leaves the way of truth, departs
from the society of the good, remains not in the unity of the Church, but
goes in the way of Cain: even this man with the froward, becomes froward, is
corrupted in the error of Balaam, becomes abominable in his studies, and
perishes in the gaine-saying of Corah.

5. Last of all, the bad Steward is accused of wastefulnesse, quod dissiparet
bona ipsius. Helm.
A Learned man writing upon this place, has these words: Dissipare, hoc loco
est, non ad honorem Dei and vtilitatem suam, and proximorum, vti rebus
concessis, sed ad profanos, malos, and odibiles vsus eas detorquere. To waste
or to scatter abroad (for so the word does properly signify) is not to use
things granted to the honor of God, to a man's own profit, and his neighbors:
but to wrest them to profane, evil, and detestable uses. Luke 15.
The Prodigal Son was such a Steward: for he craved his portion of goods
which belonged to him, and got it of his Father: and not many days after, when
he had gathered all that he could together, he took his journey into a far
Country, and there he wasted his goods with ryotous living. Every man that has
good gifts given him of God, and does mis-imploy them, is guilty of this sin
of wastefulnesse. And so much concerning the heinous crimes whereof the bad
Steward is accused.

The end of the second Sermon.
THE THIRD SERMON.
NOw next, of his calling, in these words: And he called him.

God may be said to call a man many ways.

Sometimes he lovingly inuiteth, inticeth, and calls us unto him by his
benefits, showing himself very bountiful unto us, and patient; to draw us
hereby, (as the Father does his Child, with an Apple, Romans 2.4.
or some pleasing thing) to repentance. And thus kindly God dealt with the
Jews: Ier. 5.
but all the Lords loving kindnesses toward them were lost, the people were so
unthankful. Again, the Israelites were thus called, and invited. For they
had Moses and Aaron to declare the Law of God unto them, to guide them, and
which by prayers put away all hurtful things from them, and by the same
obtained all necessary things for them, even Manna from Heaven: but they like
wanton and undutiful children, abused the goodness and lenity of God toward
them. And thus the Lord calls and inuiteth us. For what singular blessings
has the Lord bestowed upon us, not only common and general to all his
people: as our Election, Redemption, Vocation, Justification, and other
spiritual and perfect good things; but private also, which other Nations want.
For we have a most gracious, learned, godly, and virtuous King, peace and all
other good things under him, which other Nations do lack. For which the Lord
make us thankful.

God calls man by castigations, and the Rod of correction, Reu. 3.19. and
Heb. 12.
which are arguments of Gods love to his children, and proceed from it. The
Lord says, Whom I love, I correct. And again, My son, despise not thou the
chastening of the Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him. For whom
the Lord loves he chastneth, and he scourges every son that he receives.
Afflictions are the rod which our loving Father takes in his hand, and
wherewith he whippeth his children round, to make them repent, and obey his
calling: and this may be a great comfort to Gods children, that their
heaviness and afflictions are but short, they have a prosperous issue, a
speedy deliverance: for heaviness endures for a night, and joy comes in the
morning. As after storms and tempests comes sunne-shining weather: and after a
bloody and red even, a fair bright morning: Even so, after momentanie
afflictions patiently endured, the Children of God shall have a far more
excellent and an eternal weight of glory. 2. Cor. 4.17.
Hereby the Children of God are bettered in this life. For as iron is more
bright, when the rust is scowred from it: Wheat more pure, when the Chafe is
blown from it, and the Weeds sifted out: and Gold when it is tried in the fire
is more precious; So are the Children of God when they are tried in the fiery
furnace of afflictions, and found faithful. This makes them to repent, to
seek unto God, to pray unto him, to hope for deliverance from him: and to end,
as it were in a word, is the plain high way to Heaven. Act. 14.22.
For through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Wherefore (all ye that suffer in a good cause) take the comfortable
exhortation of Saint James: Iam. 1.2, 3, 4.
My brethren, count it exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse tentations:
knowing, that the trying of your Faith, brings forth patience; and let
patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect, and entire, lacking
nothing.

God calls man by his Word: and this calling is twofold: General. Special.


The General calling, is an inuitation and bidding of all good and bad, tagge
and ragge, to come from the kingdom of Satan, sin and darkness, to the
Kingdom of Christ, of grace, and light, executed by the outward preaching, and
reading of the Word. For God which is rich in mercy, and would have all men to
be saved, 1. Tim. 2.4.
and to come to the knowledge of his Truth, vouchsafes his means to all,
would have his Gospel to be preached to all, Math. 28.
that all might believe, yield their obedience, and be saved: or else,
wilfully contemning their calling, be left inexcusable. This we may see to be
true, by his bountiful feast, and the liberal inuitation which he made, and
appointed, Luk 14. This is, and has been even from the beginning the
administration of the Lords Kingdom. Thus God called Adam, saying; Adam, Where
art thou? Thus he called the people in Noah his time, by Noah himself: and so
the people in the Prophets time, by the Prophets themselves. So he called them
in the New Testament by John Baptist: Mat. 3. Math. 11.
Yea, Christ himself so called, saying: Come unto me, all ye that travel, and
are heavy laden, etc. And he commanded the Apostles so to do, giving them
their message, saying: Go ye, and teach all Nations, etc. Mat. 28.19, 20. Mar.
16.
And now Ministers do it, yea, and shall do it in Christ's stead, to the end
of the world. 2. Cor. 5.20.
Now then (says the Apostle) are we Messengers for Christ; even as though God
did beseech you through us; so pray we you in Christ's stead, that ye be
reconciled unto God.

But (alas) this general Calling, this bountiful offering of Grace, takes no
place among the wicked, moves their hearts nothing at all. For although their
souls are almost famished, and they are even sick unto death: yet they refuse
all Physic, and relief: and therefore are left inexcusable, Musc.
and worthily perish. Merito perit aegrotus, qui medicum non solum, non vocat,
sed vltro venientem recusat, that is, the sick man worthily perishes, which
not only refuses to call a Physician, but when he is come, repelleth him.
Some being called, say, as the rebellious Jews said: Ier. 44.16, 17.
The word that thou have spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord, we will not
hear it of thee: But we will do whatsoever thing goes out of our own
mouth, as to burn incense to the Queen of Heaven, etc. Others are persecuters
of them that call them: as they that were bidden to the great wedding, who
took the Kings servants, and entreated them sharply, Mat. 22.6.
and slew them. Such a one was Herod to John Baptist, Mat. 14.
who could not abide him, calling him from his filthy incestuous sin with
Herodias his brother Philips Wife: Mark. 6.
but as soon as he was reproved, took a light occasion, instigated by the
curtizan, to put him to death. But now (God be thanked) the Laws are so well
established, and executed, that no man dares to lay violent hands upon his
Minister; but yet the wicked will hurt him with their slanderous tongue many
times, and keep his dues from him, sometimes privily, that he shall not know
it: And if he does know it, then many times they will plead a custom, their
custom to deceive: yea, they will say, Our custom is an ancient custom.
Whereas, Mala consuetudo est erroris vetustas: that is, An evil custom is the
antiquity of an error.

Some when they are called, are somewhat more Formal, Moral, and mannerly,
then the former were. For although they are mere Worldlings, and prefer
earthly things, before heavenly; yet they cover their affections, and make
comely excuses, and reasonable, as they think, and will say, when they are
absent from a Sermon, We were hindered by such and such means that we could
not be at it; very like to them that were bidden to the great Supper, and made
several excuses: One said, Luke 14.
I have bought a Farm, and I go to see it: Another said, I have bought five
yoke of Oxen, and I go to prove them: and the third said, I have married a
Wife, and therefore I cannot come. But none of these excuses pleased the Lord,
the maker of the Feast. For he being angry with these, said, None of these
shall taste of my Supper, of my spiritual and heavenly dish-meates, and of my
costly banquet. What greater ingratitude and churlishness could any show? Nay,
what greater sottishness can the whole world bewray, then to prefer Chafe,
before pure Wheat; rust, before Iron; Lead, before Silver, Copper, before pure
Gold; earthly and frail things, before heavenly, and eternal good things? And
yet so foolish are we, and ignorant; yea, so void of discretion, and piety,
that we will still pretend and allege one cause or another to hinder our
coming, when we are called, thinking that we thereby help our selves, when we
most of all hurt our own souls. We pretend lets, as that man did, who when
our Savior called him, said: Suffer me first to go and bury my Father: and we
are worse then he that would go and bid them that were of his household,
Farewell, and then resolved to come. For many never resolve to obey their
calling at any time, but stand back with wily shifts, good for nothing but to
beguile themselves. So truly spoke Christ. No man comes to me (says he)
unless the Father draw him. Mark the word, (draw) as though a man were holden
back of some Tyrant (as of Satan:) or were of himself so unwilling to come,
that he must be drawn and haled along. Let us make excuses no longer, but pray
unto God to give us both to will, and power to perform: Phil. 2.
for in him it is to perform both.

The special and effectual calling (a benefit proper to Gods Children,) has
ever election going before it (for it is the first fruit of it, and comes next
from it) and therefore Paul sets our falling next to predestination. Romans 8.30.
This special and effectual calling takes place only in them that are elect,
when as God does by the preaching of the Gospel, call us out of the kingdom of
Satan and sin, and (as it were) out of this world of wickednesses, to the
kingdom of Christ, of grace, and of light, to be of the number of his
children, to be sheep of his fold. And here we are to note, that God does not
call us all at one time, but at sundry times, as it shall please him to
dispense his grace unto us, as we may see by his sending of laborers at
several hours into his Vineyard. Mat. 20.
Some are sanctified in their mothers womb, and speedily called and sent to
their offices, Mat. 3.
as John Baptist in his youth, Peter when he was of ripe age, Paul somewhat
late, and the thief when he was ready to be crucified. Before the time of
their calling they wander in the vast solitude and wilderness of this world,
nothing differing from other men in outward shape, but in qualities and manners,
and they being Christ's sheep are so saved and guided by him, that they cannot
be taken from him, Ioh. 10.
neither run into the pit of destruction. This effectual calling is wrought
by the preaching of the Word, and by these three means:

First, God opens and prepares the ears, which are the mouths of the
soul: the body has but one mouth to receive corporal nutriment, to sustain
it, but the soul being the better part of man, has two mouths, (I mean, his
two ears) to receive in food for it, which God opens to that purpose: as
David does teach us by his own example, Psalm. 40.
saying, Sacrifice and offerings thou did not desire, for mine ears have
thou prepared.

Secondly, attendance is given to that which is preached and taught: for he
that has cares to hear, is commanded to hear. Mat. 13. Revel 2. Esa. 55.3.
And the Prophet Esaias craves and calls for this attendance, saying, Incline
your ears, and draw near, hear, and your souls shall live.

Thirdly, there follows this preaching, ears opening, and good attendance
given, a wonderful compunction and pricking of the heart, as it may appear by
the example of those people that heard the Sermon of Peter, who said unto Peter
and the other Apostles, Act. 2.37.
Men and brethren, What shall we do? Well, Peter followed them so earnestly
(when he saw them coming) with good doctrine and exhortation, that he did win
them, and there was added to the Church about three thousand souls. But
(beloved) note this, that there is ever much ado, before that the Law,
compared to an hammer, can break the knottie affections of the heart, and so
currie and make the ground of man's heart fit to receive the seed of the
Gospel, and there plant faith that may purify it. Acts 15.9.
But here (perhaps) some may desire to know, by what characters, marks, and
signs a man may assure his soul, that he is predestined to eternal life,
that he may take comfort by this doctrine. For resolution, mark this, which I
have penned for thy good. If thou see thy sins, and perceiuest Gods wrath
and anger ready to fall on thee for them, dislikest them, art grieved for them,
bewailest them, and heartily crauest pardon for them, and beginnest to become a
new man, continuest with increase in the faith of Jesus Christ, and do seek
after the kingdom of God, then no doubt thou art elected, and effectually
called. Moreover, if thou art ready, as it were, with an Echo, to answer to
every thing that the Spirit of God shall endite, and the Preacher shall speak
truly out of Gods Book, then thou art effectually called. Look to David's
example, Psalm. 40. Psalm. 40.
In the volume (or roll) of thy book, it is written of me, that I should do
thy will, O my God: I am content to do it, or, I am delighted with it, yea thy
Law is in my heart. Again, God said to David, Seek ye my face: David's spirit,
heart and soul did answer, Thy face, Lord, will I seek.

Many go to the Church to avoid the danger of the Laws, that they may not be
presented to the spiritual courts, or come into the danger of the temporal
Laws, or be noted of their neighbors to be house-lurdins at home: but not
moved with religion, piety, or any good devotion, to pray, or any godly
preparation to receive the holy Communion. O careless security, and blind
impiety! from the which the Lord deliver us. I fear much, that there are many
temporizers, that go to the Church to free themselves from the danger of the
Laws, or for company sake. These men are so far from their effectual
calling, as the East is from the West. For every one that is but in the way to
this, carries this resolution, that whatsoever he hears truly taught out of
Gods Book, he will follow. Iam. 1.
He will not be an idle hearer, but a doer of the Word. He will walk after the
Lord, keep his commandments, as much as in him lies, and his Statutes with
all his heart, as the people consented to do, that heard Josias the king read
the Law unto them. 2. Kings 23. 2. Chron. 34.
This good resolution did the people make, which when Moses had told them all
the words of the Lord, said: All the things which the Lord has said, Exodus 14.
will we do. And so ought every man and woman be resolved: In which good
resolution, O God, settle us all for thy mercies sake. But here it may be (O
Christian Reader) that you desire to know, what manner of calling this Steward
had, which was so grievously accused to his Master. To this I answer: His
calling was neither of the former, but fearful, and very disconsolate, a
sudden, and unexpected calling to reckoning after manifest crimes, and false
dealings against his Master; and upon the same an account taken, and he found
faulty, expulsion, and final departure from his office for ever following.
This Stewards Master dealt with him after the order and fashion of great men in
this world, which when they find their servants unjust, will presently call
them to account, and set them packing. This is a great loss to poor servants,
that have nothing but their service to trust unto. But this Stewards loss went
beyond all common servants losses: for it was of service, goods, life present,
and the life to come: from all which wicked men depart, as the rich man, Luke
12. and the rich Glutton, Luk 16.

Thus much of his calling. Next, of his reprehension or increpation, in these
words: How comes it to pass, that I hear this of thee?

These words give singular instructions to all sorts of people, taken literally
and plainly, or Allegorically.


If you take them plainly, as the words are, and understand by the rich man,
any Magistrate whatsoever: and by the Steward or servant, the subject: Or by
the rich man, any great Master; and by the servant, them that serve in his
house. They give four instructions and informations to these great men of
authority.

First, that they may not cover sins and enormious offenses, but ought to
reprove and correct them, neither spare the rod, and sword, and deal too
gently, like old Eli, when faults are committed. 1. Kings 2. Romans 13. 1. Pet.
2.14.
For Magistrates are set over the people, for the punishment of evil doers,
and for the praise of them that do well.

Secondly, they ought to enquire out the truth of the same, and examine the
matter diligently. Which thing we are taught by the example of the best, even
God himself, concerning the cry, and exceeding grievous sin of Sodom and
Gomorrha: for thus the Lord said, Genesis 18.21.
I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to
that cry which is come unto me; and if not, that I may know. This Job reported
that he did: Job 29.16.
I was a father (says he) unto the poor, and when I knew not the cause, I
sought it out diligently.

Thirdly, the accusers of the true bringers of the news, (when the truth is
known) are not always to be disclosed and uttered to them that are accused,
for fear of dissension and debate. For here he says not: This man or that man
told me: but he spoke indefinitely, saying, How comes it to pass, that I
hear this of thee? He would not set the fellow servants together by the ears,
but would maintain charity, the bond of all perfection, Col. 3.14.

Fourthly, he discloseth not openly to others, the principal point whereof the
Steward was accused, to cause murmuring, but calls him, unto him privily, and
tells him privately of the evil report that went of him, saying, How comes
it to pass that I hear this of thee? following the sweet, charitable, and
wholesome counsel and advice of our Savior, Mat. 18.15.
teaching us thus: If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his
fault between thee and him alone: if he hear thee, thou have won thy
brother.

How comes it to pass that I hear this of thee?

These words (as I said before) being taken allegorically, containing aliud
verbis, aliud sensu, speaking of a rich man, and yet meaning God; and speaking
of a rich man's Steward, and yet understanding all mankind, a large collectiue
or Nowne of multitude, do give us to note two things worthy all godly men's
considerations:

First, that our faults are not hid from the Lord.

Secondly, that the Lord is displeased with them.

Man's faults are not hid from the Lord: but although man works them never so
secretly and closely, which wicked men still affect, (for which cause their
works are called the works of darkness, Romans 13.
because they proceed from the darkness of man's understanding, are done in
darkness, and lead men to extreme darkness) yet all are known of the
omniscient God, the all-seeing God, the searcher of the heart and reins, who
is totus animi, totus animae, knowing, seeing, and foreseeing all things. Which
thing who will be so mad as to deny? seeing that the Psalmograph truly and
reuerendly tells God so, saying, O Lord, thou have searched me out and known
me, Psalm. 139.
thou know my downe-sitting and mine vprising, thou understand my
thoughts long before, and that is most of all. He holds on in his speech, and
speaks further, saying, Thou art about my path, and about my bed, and speest
out all my ways. He sees every thing that is done on the face of the earth:
For his eyes are like a flame of fire, Revel. 1. Psalm. 121. Psalm. 142.
they are most clear and bright, and never sleep. He looks down upon the
children of men, to see if there were any that would understand and seek after
God. He sees both good and evil: for as David has, The eyes of the Lord are
over the righteous, and his ears are open unto their prayers. Again, Psalm.
34.15, 16.
The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off their
remembrance from off the earth. And this we may persuade our selves to be true,
because he is the only true Vbiquitarie, present every where with his Spirit,
and from whose presence no man can fly. And therefore the Psalmist by way of
interrogation speaks thus unto God: Psalm. 139.
Whither shall I go then from thy Spirit? or whither shall I go then from thy
presence? If I climb up into heaven, thou art there; if I go down to hell,
thou art there also: If I take the wings of the morning, and remain in the
uttermost parts of the sea, even there also shall thine hand lead me, and thy
right hand shall hold me. If I say, peradventure the darkness shall cover me,
then shall my night be turned to day, yea the darkness is no darkness with
thee, but the night is as clear as the day; the darkness and light to thee
are both alike. No man then can hide himself from the Lord, no place is fit:
Amos 2.
For though they dig down to hell, says the Lord, thence shall my hand take
them; though they climb up to the heavens, thence will I bring them down;
though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search them, and take
them out thence; though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the sea,
thence will I command the serpent, and he shall bite them. The wicked Steward
cannot then flee from the Lord, his cause must come to the hearing of his
Master, he must endure sharp reprehension, strict examination, and come to an
account, as after. If the unjust Steward, the evil man, the thief, adulterer,
and such like offenders, were persuaded that God did hear of their
misdemeanors, and evil carriages, or that he did look upon them, when they
perpetrated their wickednesses, me thinks it should be a great terror and
shame unto them. If an earthly Prince, a Noble man, a Master, or a Magistrate
should look upon a man, and see him deal falsely and unjustly, or otherwise
to play the filthy adulterer, would it not make man to tremble, fear, and to
be ashamed? How much more then to consider, that the King of kings, and Lord of
lords, the high Master, Magistrate and Judge of all does hear of his sins,
and look upon his sinful and filthy facts. Let us all be ashamed to commit
sin, 2. Sam. 16.
and not be like Absalom, who shamed not to lie with his fathers concubines in
the open Sun, in the top of the house, even in the sight of all Israel: for
the Lord hears, sees, and knows all the sins of man. This wicked Steward
before he was accused, called, and reprehended, and brought to account, was
persuaded that the Lord had not intelligence of his falsehood: but how much was
he deceived? For here the Lord says, How comes it to pass that I hear this
of thee? There are three foolish and vain conceits suggested of Satan, which
embolden a wicked man in the perpetration of his wickednesses: 1. They think
that the Lord neither sees, nor knows their wickednesses. 2. He punishes
not straight, but either delayeth long, or punishes not at all. 3. If the Lord
knows man's faults, yet he concealeth them, etc.


Concerning the first vain conceit, concerning the Lords not seeing, and not
knowing their sins, how frivolous and impious it is, this place does prove:
for here the Lord says, How comes it to pass that I hear this of thee? The
Master therefore heard it, and had notice of all. Although (I hope) that I have
spoken sufficiently of this point, yet I beseech you hearken to two examples,
to ground you thoroughly in this point. The first is, of David, which committed
adultery and murder, 2. Sam. 11.
and presently the Lord saw it, knew it, and it was evil in his sight, and
sent Nathan the Prophet to reprove him, 2. Sam. 12.
who boldly laid his great sins to his charge. The second example, of Ahab
that vile king of Israel, and Iezabel his queen, 1. Kings 21.
worse then himself, an instigatrix of his evils: (as Eua was to Adam) when
they had wrought poor Naboths death, the Lord knew it, and sent Elias to
rebuke him. To end this point in a word: Apoc. 2. and 3. chapt.
The Lord did bid John write to the Angels, that is to say, the Ministers of
the seven Churches: I know thy works.

The second vain conceit suggested of Satan, is, The Lord punishes not
straight, nor presently, but suffers the ungodly Steward to flourish. To
which I answer: That the pleasures of the wicked being taken with evil
consciences, neither are, nor can be durable; they flourish but for a time, and
in the midst of them are taken away. David, a man after Gods own heart,
Psalm. 37.
saw that by his own experience, and therefore said, I my self have seen the
ungodly in great prosperity, and flourishing like a green bay tree, and I went
by, and lo, he was gone, I sought him, and his place could no where be found.
Therefore fret not thy self because of the ungodly, neither be thou envious
against the evil doers: for he shall soon be cut down like the green grass,
and be withered like the green herb. For the Lord does set them in slippery
places, and at last casts them down to desolation, suddenly do they
consume, perish, and come to a fearful end. What plainer example, to this
purpose, Luke 12.
can be produced, then that of the rich man, who in the midst of his
prosperity and worldly pleasures, heard this doleful voice: Thou fool, this
night will they fetch away from thee thy soul: then whose shall those things
be which thou have provided? So that, whereas they have been fed fat in the
great and large green pastures of pleasures, wasting their Masters goods, as
this bad Steward did, yet all ends in sorrow, even as the fat Ox, after his
pleasant feeding, comes to the slaughter; and the end of these is confusion.
For even as a Snayle by little and a little, creeps up from the root of an
Herb, unto the top, and as she goes, consumes the Leaves, and leaves her
nothing but foul and filthy slimy steps: so likewise lust and pleasure, if we
consent unto them, will creep into our souls, and will deprive them of all
ornaments of virtue, and will leave behind nothing, but a foul filthy
conscience, and reproach, to us and our posterity.

The third vain conceit, suggested of Satan, is the Lords taciturnitie. For
although he knows every sin, when the world does not; yet for a time he
holds his peace, and it comes not out to the eyes of the world. The impure
person sins, and so does the Thief and other offenders; the Lord hears of
it, and sees it, and yet for a time (it may be) neither speaks, nor
punishes. But this silence is temporary. And therefore the Psalmist truly
said, Our Lord will come, and will not keep silence. And the time also will
come, that every man's work shall be made manifest. 2. Cor. 3. 1. Cor. 4. 1.
Tim. 3.
And the Lord will lighten the hidden things of darkness, and open the
counsels of the heart, and then the madness of the wicked shall be manifested to
all men. This doctrine teaches us, that the time will come, when all things
shall be made known: although Satan, in the mean time, work never so
cunningly, to deceive men; and sets counterfeit colors, and false shows upon
every sinful action of man, being more skillful herein, then any Dyer is, in
setting colors upon his cloth. For we have but few Dyers that can set any Dye
or color upon a cloth, and please the owner in the color that he has most
mind unto: the Devil can do it in suggesting sin to a wicked man. First,
he plu^meth, sounds, and finds man's nature, unto what sin he is most
inclined, and offers the same sin unto man, and then he sets another color
upon the same sin. As for example, if a man is inclined to adultery and
uncleanness, he calls the same, touches and prankes incident to youth; and
covetousness, he calls honest provision for a man's self and his. Cyprian
says, Diabolus, quando decipere quenquam quaerit, prius naturam vniuscuiusque
intendit, and inde applicat, vnde aptum hominem ad peccandum inspexerit: that
is, When the Devil goes about to deceive any man, first he finds out his
nature, and then ministers unto him that sin, whereunto he finds him most
inclined. Genesis 3.5, 6.
When the Devil went about to deceive our first Parents, he told them that
they should be as gods, knowing but good and evil, pretending friendship unto
them, and offering a pleasant fruit withal. 2. Sam. 11.
David he deceived with his pleasing sin, wantonness: Ahab with
covetousness: Pharaoh his heart he hardened with lying words: The Heathens
with universalities, and antiquities. To conclude, no shifts, no crafts, no
deceits, but they are known unto him, and put in practice by him, and in the
cunningest fashion that may be.

How comes it to pass that I hear this of thee? These words, as I said, do
also teach that the Lord is displeased with the sins of a bad Steward, a
wicked and sinful man. For they secretly, and openly do include and carry a
kind of reprehension, and increpation, as though he should say, Why have thou
dealt falsely in thy Stewardship, and gotten thee so ill a report? Thou are
worthy to be blamed for thy perfidiousnesse and treachery. The consideration
whereof, should make us to flee from sin and wickedness, as from the sting and
poison of a Serpent. For who would perpetrate and commit those things which
displease his Lord and Master: The Psalmograph says, The Lord does abhor
both the bloodthirsty and deceitful man. Again he says: I hate the sins
of unfaithfulness, there shall no such cleave unto me.

These four things may persuade us that God most perfectly hates sin, and
all manner of naughtiness. 1. Comminations and threatenings in the Scriptures.
2. Sin breaks friendship between God and Man. 3. God never made sin, he
never procured it, he desires it not, nor allows it. 4. The Lords
punishments inflicted upon sinners.


As touching the first, the Lords threatenings and comminations: we may easily
persuade our selves that God detesteth sin; because he so horribly, and
fearfully thundereth out most dreadful sentences against sinners, such as
these. Mat. 3.10.
Now also is the Axe put to the root of the Trees: therefore Every Tree which
brings not forth good fruit, is hewne down, Ezekiel. 8.4.
and cast into the fire: Again, The soul that sins, Rom 6. Romans 2.9.
shall dye the death. And that saying of Paul. The reward of sin, is death.
Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of every one that does evil.
All which, and many other such terrible sayings are true, and in force, against
all impenitent faithless persons.

Secondly, sin breaks friendship between God and Man: and therefore must
needs be most displeasing unto God. If two are dear friends, and love one
another entirely, and are loath to live at variance: If these fall at variance,
then we make no doubt but that, that which breaks friendship, is most
displeasing unto him, which forsakes his old friend. Now God is most loving,
kind, gracious, and merciful unto man, till sin does domineere and reign
in his body, and then man breaking, and treacherously dealing, sinning, and
offending his God, there is a present separation, Esai. 59.1, 2, 3.
as Esaias does testify. Behold, says he, the hand of the Lord is not so
shortened, but that it can save, nor his ear so dull, but that it can hear:
But your iniquities do make a separation between you and your God; and your
sins do make him to hide his face from you, and not hear; for your hands
are defiled with blood, and your fingers with cruelty; your lips do speak that
which is false, and your tongue does speak frowardness. Note, I beseech you,
the cause of the breach of friendship, and falling out between God and the
people: Their sins, their iniquities. This is also proved by those speeches
that Samuel used to Saul. 1. Sam. 15.23.
Thou have (said he) cast away the words of the Lord: therefore the Lord has
cast away thee. Where it is proved, that the cause of Saul's abiection, was his
own wilful reiection of God and his Word first.

Thirdly, God never made sin: For he saw all things that he had made, and lo
they were very good. Genesis 1.31.
He approves it not, nor allows the perpetration of it, but threatens
destruction to the Liar and Doer of wickedness: For his heart abhors such,
Psalm. 5.4, 5, 6. where the Prophet speaks unto God, thus: Thou art not a God
that loves wickedness: neither shall evil dwell with thee. The foolish shall
not stand in thy sight: for thou hate all them that work iniquity. Thou
shall destroy them that speak lies: Psalm. 92.15.
the Lord will abhor the bloody man and deceitful. As he is righteous, and
void of iniquity: So he allows righteousness, and hates sin in every
place and person.

Fourthly, the just judgments and punishments which GOD inflicteth upon the
wicked for sin, manifestly prove that he is displeased with the same. He
spared not David a King and a Prophet for Adultery and Murder; neither the
Sichemites and Beniamites, for rauishing Dina the Daughter of Jacob, nor
Absalom for treason, nor Saul for tyranny, nor Rehoboam, Iereboam, Sennacherib
for cruelty: Herod, Nebuchadnezzar, Lucifer for pride: Pharaoh for incredulity
and hardness of his heart. He pardoned not Adam and Eua for eating a
forbidden fruit, and making by the same all mankind sinners by tainture, but
cast them out of Paradise: he spared not the poor wretch for gathering sticks
on the Sabbath day: He spared not Ananias and Saphira for lying and
withholding part of their own goods from the Apostles: He spared not
Jerusalem, no nor the very Angels that sinned, but cast them down, and
delivered them into chains of darkness, to be kept unto judgment. To
conclude, he spared not Christ Jesus his dear Son, but our sins being
imputed to him, he laid the punishment also upon him, both in his body, and
also his soul, whose bloody wounds and pains were sufficient to save all, but
efficient, and effectual only, to redeem all the souls and bodies of his
elect and faithful. Therefore seeing that we know that he left no sin
unpunished in the unrepentant in all former ages: but seeing, hearing, and
knowing them all, as well the offenders, as their offenses, straightwayes armed
himself with justice and judgment, and punished them most severely. We may
assure our selves, that he having perfect knowledge and notice of all our
misdemeanors, and manifold transgressions, perpetrated against his divine
Majesty, will not spare us, but will reprehend us, and say unto every
unrepentant and bad Steward: How comes it to pass that I hear this of thee?
and presently will call us to account. Which is the fourth point, wherein the
lamentable estate of a bad Steward, a wicked man consists.

The end of the third Sermon.
THE FOVRTH SERMON. Come render account, etc.
AS the benefits which our good GOD bestows upon the good Stewards, are in
number infinite, in dignity excellent, and in measure incomprehensible: and as
the ancient Father has, Chrysostom.
Beneficia Dei omnibus horis consideranda. For who is able to express to the
full, the happy state of that Steward, to whom it is said of him that never
dissembleth, nor deludeth? O well done, thou good and faithful servant, thou
have been faithful in little, I will make thee Ruler over much: enter into
thy Masters joy. Math. 25.
So on the contrary, no man can express to the full, the lamentable estate of
an evil Steward, and unprofitable servant, to whom it will be said of the true
Judge: Cast that unprofitable servant into utter darkness: there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth: two bad dishes to come in at the last; where the
first dish is weeping, and the second gnashing of teeth. And to this pass is
this bad Steward come: before him is praecipitium, a place to fall down
forward: behind him is, occipitium, a place to fall down backward: on the one
side, Scilla; on the other side, Charybdis, so that he can flee no way without
great danger. He must needs stand still, and endure all hazzards and perils,
and come to his account, to the true audit. For now he must take his vltimum
vale, his last farewell, and sing his doleful and everlasting even song. Such
a great and horrible day is come, Joel 2. Mal. 4.
as the Prophet speaks of: Yea the day shall burn like an Oven. But first
the account shall be taken: For as a Prince and Nobleman, when he takes a
dislike of his Steward, first reckons with him, and then puts him out of
his Office. So this Rich man is here said to deal with his Steward, and Christ
with all, at the last day, yea, his account shall be more exactly and
accurately taken, then of any other in this world. For he is God the Searcher
of the heart, and according to the same he will judge righteously, having no
respect nor regard to any man's person. For before him the King and the Beggar
is all one, when he shall come to take an account, and judge, then Scepters and
Shepherds shall be all one; Princes and Pesants; noble, and ignoble; yea, the
very King and the Beggar shall be fellows: no better regarded shall be the
highest then the lowest: but as when men put gold and silver into a bag, many
pieces are shuffled together and yet the best may be the lowest: So will it be
at this general audit. If the greatest men of this world are the worst in
faith, and godly life, and conversation, there will be no partiality used by
the Judge, but they shall be tumbled to the bottom of the pit, as soon as the
poorest delinquent in the world. For when our Lord shall come with his holy
Angels, to take an account, and judge the world, all are alike. For if great
men and mean persons are in the same sin, they shall be bound together, and
cast as a faggot into hellfire. The glorious Angels at the great Harvest shall
first gather the Tares, separating them from the Wheat: Mat 25.32.
which is, poena damni, that is, the punishment of that a man loses, a plain
privation of God, and all that is good, Angels, Saints, Friends; and then they
shall bind them in Sheaues to be burnt: which is, poena sensus: the sense of
punishment, as it were a possession of Hell, and all that is evil. Ludolphus
thinks that they shall not be bound all in one, but in many Faggots. An
Adulterer with an Adulteress shall make one Faggot, a Drunkard with a Drunkard
another faggot, etc. He thinks that they shall not be bound together that
have committed distinct and several sins, neither according to the greatness
of their Persons, as King and King together, rich and rich, base and base. But
as there are several sins, so several Sheaues: and all this shall be done
without respect of person. This account shall be taken not only of external
things, but also of internal: that is to say, both of bodies and souls. No
man can excuse himself, or use any cunning to deceive, as before an earthly
Judge; but every man shall appear rightly as he is. For Christ (to whom the
Father has given all judgment) will respect no man for his purse sake, nor
friends. Ioh. 5.
Therefore let us deal sincerely toward God and Man, knowing that we shall be
called to account most strictly, and accurately, for every idle word, much more
for every wicked deed: and because a good conscience is a perpetual and best
supersedeas in this point: let us follow the example of Paul, who said, Act.
24.16.
that in this he exercised himself, that he might have a good conscience
toward God and men.

Tremble and quake (O sinner) at the cogitation of these things. Repent,
reuert, and turn unto the Lord. For what art thou to stand in the presence of
this Judge; being frail, vain, weak, naked miserable, filthy, and horrible?
A man that has imperfections in his eyes, cannot look on the brightness of
the Sun. And how can thou be persuaded, that thou being an Infidel,
frail, and full of blemishes, shall look upon the Sun of righteousness
Christ Jesus? Repent, and believe, and thou shall look upon him, otherwise thou
shall be rejected. For as the Eagle, when she has young ones, takes them out
of the nest, and such as can look on the Sun, them she keeps; and such as
cannot, she casts away; Even so, they that with the eyes of their Faith,
look on Jesus Christ, shall be preserved at this general and great Assize,
and they that cannot, shall be tumbled down to the pit of perdition.

But because secure and careless men, Epicures and Atheists, deny this great
and strict account that shall be taken at the last Day, 2. Pet. 3.3, 4.
according to Saint Peter's prediction, which tells us, that in the last
days, there shall come mockers of Christ's coming to Judgment to take this
account; And these are the last days, in which we see by many works of the
wicked, living in Atheism and Epicurisme, that they are so persuaded, and
differ nothing (as appears) from the wicked judgment of Paulus Tertius the
Pope, who when there was a speech made unto him of this account at the last
Judgment, said unto Cardinal Bembus: O Bembe, Bembe, quantum nobis profuit
fabula de Christo! making this doctrine a fabulous thing. Therefore (the more
is the pity) the question (An sit?) whether there is any last judgment, is
most necessary to be discussed, and spoken of. Which whiles I endeavor
affirmatively to prove, I beseech you without partiality, lend me your
yielding resolutions unto the truth, as it shall be proved. And -- Si tu quid
rectius istis,
Candidus imperti, si non, his vtere mecum.
If better then these, thou have in store,
Let us have part, and say no more:
But if thine own do thee not please,
Use that I have, and rest at ease.


Psalm. 100.
The first proof is the Word of God, an eternal an infallible truth, as our
Savior does witness, speaking thus to his Father a maintainer of it: Ioh.
17.17.
Sermo tuus est veritas, thy Word is the Truth. Enoch the seventh from Adam
prophesied, prophesied of this day of the Lords coming to take an account,
saying, Behold, Jude 14.
the Lord comes with thousands of Saints, to give judgment against all men,
and to rebuke all that are ungodly among them, of all their wicked deeds, which
they have ungodly committed: and of all their cruel speakings, which ungodly
sinners have spoken against him. In which place, the Lords coming to judgment
is plainly foretold: and because it is a thing certain and sure to be,
therefore he speaks in the present Tense, and said: Behold, the Lord
comes. And so the high Judge himself speaks, saying, Behold, I come as a
Thief, Reu. 16.
speaking in the present Tense (as before) and not in the future Tense, saying,
I will come. And Peter reports, Act. 10.
that the high Judge, our Savior Jesus Christ, commanded him, and the other
Apostles, to preach unto the people, and to testify, that it is he, that is
ordained of God, a Judge of quick and dead. And Paul prepares men by
repentance against that Day, saying: Act. 17.30, 31.
Now he admonishes all men every where to repent; because he has appointed
a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness, etc. The same
Paul assures us, that we all must appear before the Judgment seat of
Christ, 2. Cor. 5.
that every man may receive the things which are done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or evil. The same Apostle most plainly
sets down the order and manner of the Lords descension from Heaven to do
this weighty business, when as he says, 1. These. 4.16, 17
The Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, and with the voice
of the Archangell, and with the Trumpet of God: And the dead in Christ shall
rise first: then we which live and remain, shall be caught up with them also
in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air: and so shall we ever be with the
Lord. This coming of our Savior to judge, and to take this account, was
foretold of the Angels, who standing by him when he ascended into Heaven, and
seeing the men of Galilee gazing after him, said, This Jesus which is taken up
from you, shall so come, as ye have seen him go into heaven. And how can we
doubt hereof, seeing that our Savior himself, even the high Judge,
foresheweth the same? Mat. 27. and 25.
And Saint Matthew sets down the order and manner of this Judgment so
plainly, that no man, led by the Spirit of God, can once mutter against his
doctrine.

The second proof is taken from the end unto which mankind was made of God.
God necessarily obtains his end. And this was the end for which he made
mankind, that he might be his Image, and his eternal Temple wherein he might
and should be celebrated: to whom he might communicate himself, his chief
wisdom, goodness, righteousness, and felicity; which felicity is part of
the Image of God, but this is destroyed and defaced of the Devil: Therefore
God, which is stronger then the Devil, will restore it. And although the end
for which man was made, is hindered diverse ways in this life, yet the Lord once
will attain unto it. Wherefore there must of necessity once be a change, and
an adiudging unto the same end. And here it is admirable to consider, how like
a Divine the learned Philosopher aimed and leuelled at this mark and matter:
For thus he said, Verisimile est hominem ad has miserias non esse conditum,
sed and long verissimum est, praestantissimam creaturam omnium, ad meliorem
finem conditam esse: That is to say, It is like to be true, that man was not
made to endure these miseries, but rather it is far most true, that the most
excellent creature of all was made to a better end.

The third proof is taken from the righteousness of God, his goodness and
divine truth, which require that the godly should be perfectly well, and the
wicked perfectly evil, and this falls not out so many times in this life.
For here we see the wicked many times flourish with all worldly prosperity,
Psalm 37.35. luke 16.
according to David's report, and the example of the rich Glutton. Therefore
there must be another life, wherein this justice of God may appear, that both
bodies and souls, as they have been joint partakers of good actions and bad,
may have either joy and comfort, or pain, terror, and discomforts; the wicked
may have tribulation, the godly, rest. And the inchoation of this, shall be at
this day and time: as Paul proves, where he comfort the Church of the
Thessalonians, showing, that their persecuters shall be afflicted, and
everlastingly punished at this day and time, and the godly rewarded. The words
are these: 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
It is a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you, and to you which are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
shall show himself from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire,
rendering vengeance to them that do not know God, and which obey not the Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall be punished with everlasting perdition,
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, when he shall
come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be made marvelous in all them that
believe. Abraham, in his conference which he had with the rich Glutton
tormented in hell, speaks to this purpose when he said: Remember that thou in
thy life time receiuedst thy pleasures, and likewise Lazarus pains, Luke 16 25.
now therefore is he comforted, and thou art tormented.

The fourth reason standing for a proof, may be drawn from Christ's glory:
that as he was dishonored at his first coming in the flesh, wonderfully
abased, disgraced, and humbled: so at his second coming, he shall appear in
glory, Matthew. 25.31.

The fifth reason which the ancient Father sets down in stead of a proof, is
probable; and it is taken from the Rainbow: in which are two colors, ceruleus,
seu aqueus color; and purpureus, seu igneus color, The gray and watrie color,
and the purple or fiery color. Ceruleus seu aqueus color, indicat mundum aquis
diluvij perijsse; and eo modo nunquam deinceps deleturum iri. That is, the gray
or watery color does show, that the world perished with the waters of the
Flood, and never after shall be destroyed after that manner. That is proved,
Genesis 9. where it is said, That God set the Rainbow in the sky, as a true
external sign, that the earth shall never be overflowed again with the
waters of a Flood. Now the other color, purpureus seu igneus color significat
mundum deinceps in extremo iudicio igne transiturum: That is to say, The purple
or fiery color does show unto us, that the world hereafter in the last
Judgment shall pass away, and be purged with fire. And this is proved, and
will fall out true, 2. Pet. 3.7.

The sixth, is the horrible promulgation of the Law in mount Sinai, in
thundering, lightning, and flames of fire, threatening most horrible punishment
to the offenders, and enforce withal the maledictions and tortures denounced
in the same, against all impenitent persons and infidels: which does prove,
that there is a day of Judgment and account. For whereas these wicked ones
rather flourish here, then receive punishment: there must needs be a
judgment and account taken of these delinquents, and another life, that those
things that God has spoken, may take true effect, that the fulfillers of the
Law (which are the faithful in Christ) may have life, and the impenitent
transgressors, death eternal. For the Lord knows how to deliver the godly
out of temptation, 2. Pet. 2.9.
and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment for to be punished. And
according to this, a man's conscience does minister many times fear, or hope
unto him, according as his deeds have been.

Ovid. Fast. pri.
Conscia men's vt cuique sua est, ita concipit intra
Pectora, pro meritis spemque metumque suis.
Lastly, diverse signs and tokens of the last Judgment, which were foretold of
the Prophets, of Christ, and the Apostles, that should go before this Day, and
time of account, are accomplished. And therefore there is a day of Judgment
and an account, 1. Pet. 4.7. Mat. 24.33.
and it is at hand. These predictions and foresignes are most set down, Math.
24. where it is showed, that there shall be many false Christ's, and false
prophets, many heresies, errors and sects. Which we see to be true, not only
among the Romanists and Rhemists, but even (the more is the pity) many
sectaries, and factious persons arise among our selves. Again, we have had
wars and rumors of wars. Moreover, there have been famines, pestilences,
and earthquakes, and that within our times that are now living; we need not
seek for further proofs nor examples; for if we would, we might have many.
To speak of signs in the Sun, Moon, or Stars, coldness of charity, and
the rest, would make me too tedious: therefore I will leave them, and many
other foretellings, as apparent truths already fulfilled, and yielded unto of
all them that are true and settled Christians. Only let me beg of you that
are Readers of this Treatise, to hearken to the use of my doctrine, wherein I
will be so brief, that my beginning and end shall almost be knit together.

First, this doctrine avails to confute Epicures, and Atheists, and mockers
of this doctrine of Christ's coming to Judgment to take this account, who
say, as the Apostle has, 2. Pet. 3. Where is the promise of his coming? For
since the Fathers died, all things continue alike from the beginning of the
Creation. 2. Epist. 3.
These the Apostle overthrows by two reasons; First, in that the false
mockers say, that all things continue alike since the Creation: he proves it
to be false by the Flood in the days of Noah. Verse 5.
For this they know not (says he) and that wilfully, how that the heavens were
of old, and the earth consisting of the water, and by the water, by the Word of
God: by the which thing the world that then was perished, being then ouerrunne
with water.

Secondly, he shows the manner of the purging of the world in the day of
Judgment by fire, saying, But the heavens and the earth which are now, be kept
by his Word in store, and reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and
perdition of ungodly men. Therefore all things have not, neither will continue
always alike, and yet these wicked Atheists, as heretofore, so still persevere
in their wicked course of life, and encourage one another to security and
pleasures, Esa. 56.12.
they say, Come, let us take wine, and we will fill our selves with strong
drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, Wisdom. 2.
and much more abundant. They say, Come, and let us enjoy the pleasures that
are present, and let us cheerfully use the creatures as in youth; let us fill
our selves with costly wine and ointments, and let not the flower of life pass
by us. Let us crown our selves with Rose-buds before they be withered: Let us
be partakers of our wantonness, let us leave some tokens of our pleasures in
every place: for that is our portion, and this is our lot. These men live
rocked and lulled in the cradle of security, as though there were no death
certain, no account to be made, no hell at all. Which thing the Poet
lamented, when he said even mournfully, Eheu sic viuunt homines tanquam mors
nulla sequatur,
Et veluti infernus fabula vana foret.


Heb. 9.27.28.
But let these men consider, that (as it is in holy Writ) it is appointed to all
men to die once; and after death comes judgment: and that the careless and
bad Steward must come to reckoning. And as the Wise man has, God will call man
to account for all these things; for all these fooleries and sins.

Secondly, this doctrine avails to comfort the godly afflicted: Erit olim
viciscitudo, there will once be a change: Their sorrow will once be turned into
joy eternal. All tears once shall be wiped from their eyes. When we are in
extremity, let us consider, yea and comfort our selves with that consolation
which the Lord gave to the Church of Philadelphia, Revel. 3.11, 12.
saying, Behold, I come shortly: and so he comforted the other Churches. And
the like joy and consolation may we all conceive in all our tribulations and
miseries. Let us ever consider, that the Lord will come quickly, and that he
that endures temptation is blessed, and shall at the last receive the crown
of glory, James 1.12.
which the Lord has promised to them that love him.

The third use. We should, by the knowledge and remembrance of this day, keep
us in the fear of God, and care to do our duties. 1. Epist. 4.7, 8.
And this Saint Peter teaches us to do, saying: The end of all things is at
hand, be ye therefore sober, and watching in prayer. But above all things, have
fervent love among you: for love covers the multitude of sins. The same
Apostle declaring the fearefulnelsse of this day, 2. Pet. 3.
to wit, how it shall come as a thief in the night; and that the heavens shall
pass away with a noise, and the Elements shall melt with heat, and the earth
with the works that are therein shall be burnt up, makes this use, thus
concluding of his former doctrines. Seeing therefore, Verse 11.
that all these things must be dissolved, what manner persons ought ye to be in
holy conversation and godliness, etc? As though he should say, You ought to be
most religious, most godly, of a most pure life and conversation. Verse 14.
And me thinks we should have a care to be most holy without spot and
undefiled, even blameless; because we shall, at that day, stand before the
righteous and vncorrupt Judge, and shall stand openly in the sight of the holy
Angels. S. Augustine writing upon these words, Reu. 20.12.
(And I saw the dead both small and great stand before God, etc.) has these
words; Rogo vos (fratres) vt quotidie cogitemus, quales esse debemus in die
iudicij, purissimis Angelorum conspectibus offerendi, and aeterno Iudici
rationem de libris conscientiae reddituri: that is, O brethren, I beseech you,
let us consider what manner of persons we ought to be in the last day of
judgment, that shall be presented to the most pure sight of Angels, and that
shall render an account to the most high Judge, of the books of our
conscience. It seemed that the good Father kept himself in good order, in the
fear of God, and in his Christian duty, with the daily cogitation of this
Day, and serious meditation how to make a good reckoning at the last day, and
that he exhorted others to the like vigilance and carfulness. Hierom
reports, Tract. 5. cap. 3.
that whatsoever he did, he always bore in mind this Day, and thought that he
was going to Judgment: Sieve comedam, sieve hibam, sieve aliquid aliud agam,
semper videtur vox illa sonare in auribus, Surgite mortui, and venite ad
iudicium: that is to say, Whether I eat, or drink, or do any thing else, me
thinks I always hear this speech ring in my ears: Rise ye dead, and come to
Judgment; and so by this means he kept himself in awe, and refreinad to
commit sin and wickedness.

As the Lord would have us to know, that there is a day of judgment for his
own glory, our own comfort, the confutation of Epicures and Atheists, and to
keep us in our duties: so he has concealed from us the certain time when it
shall be, as it may be proved out of the sacred Scriptures, these two ways: 1.
By plain sayings and sentences. 2. By Parables or similitudes.


Mat. 24.42.
First, by plain speeches, such as these: Watch, for ye know neither the day,
nor the hour when the Son of man will come. Mat. 25.13.
Again, Watch ye therefore, for ye know not, when the Master of the house will
come, at even, or at midnight, at the cock crowing, or in the dawning, lest if
he come suddenly, he should find you sleeping: And those things that I say
unto you, I say unto all men, Mar. 13.35.
Watch. Note the words: Watch ye therefore, for ye know not the day, nor the
hour, etc. And to this purpose speaks Saint Augustine, Epist. 78.
writing to Hesychius, Tempora computare, hoc est, CHRONOS vt sciamus, quando
sit huius saeculi finis, vel aduentus Domini, nihil mihi aliud videtur, quam
scire, velle, quod Christus ait, Scire neminem. That is to say, To count times,
that is, to know the seasons, when shall be the end of this world, or the
coming of the Lord, this seems to me, that a man is willing to know no other
thing, but that which Christ says, No man shall know. And why should a man
diue into the Lords secrets, which he is not willing to reveal unto us, Act.
1.7.
and which it is not expedient for us to know. Our Savior said unto the
Apostles; Mark. 13.
It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father has put
in his own power. He has not revealed this secret to Man, nor Angel, Math.
24.36.

Secondly, this is proved by Parables, as of the ten Virgins that went to meet
the Bridegroom, these slept, Mat. 25.
and suddenly at midnight, when they looked not for him, there was a cry that
the Bridegroom came, and these words were uttered; Go out to meet him. Note
the words I beseech you: (and suddenly at midnight, when they looked not for
him.) This proves that the Lords coming to Judgment shall be sudden, and
that he shall find the wicked ones secure and careless. Again, the Parable
of the Talents does admonish us to be watchful, because the day and time of
the Lords coming to take an account, is uncertain, and unknown. For as the
deliverer of the Talents, going into a strange Country, gave the receivers of
them a charge to occupy them till he came, and did not tell when he would come;
but yet after a long season came to reckon with them, and to call them to
account, and to reward them in his mercy, according to their several
employments: Even so, our Savior being gone as it were into a strange
country, into Heaven, where he never was in body before, has delivered unto
sundry and several persons excellent gifts, which he would have them use to
his glory, and the good of his Church; and he will come after a season, (he
tells not when, and therefore no man knows the time) to take a strict
account of all the receivers of them.

The sodainenesse and uncertainty of his coming, 1. These. 5.2. Reu. 16.15.
Luke 17.24.
is compared to the coming of a Thief which gives no warning, to lightening
that gives a sudden flash, and lighteneth out of the one part under Heaven,
and shines unto the other part under Heaven; to the days of Noah, wherein the
careless people did eat and drink, Luke 17.
married wives, and gave in marriage, unto the day that Noah went into the
Arc, and the Flood came and destroyed them all, even suddenly when they never
thought, much less knew of the certain and prescript time. For the same
reason, those days wherein Christ shall come, are compared to the days of Lot.
These similitudes do tell and teach us, that the Lords coming to Judgment is
unknown, and shall be sudden. For to this purpose, the Evangelist most aptly
applies this doctrine, Luke 17.30. Luke 17.30.
saying, After these ensamples shall it be in the day, when the Son of Man is
revealed. Epist. 88.
Augustine writing to Hesichius, has an excellent saying to this purpose, Ego
namque de Saluatoris aduentu, qui expectatur in fine, tempora dinumerare non
audeo, nec aliquem propheta, de hac re numerum annorum existimo praefinsse,
that is to say, I dare not number the times of the coming of our Savior,
which in the end is looked for; neither do I think that any Prophet has
determined the number of years. I therefore conclude this point, thus: Man
knows not that day and hour, nor the Angels; Nay (which is most of all) not
the Son, as touching his humanity and mediatorship, Math. 24. Mar. 13.
but the Father only and yet I stand assured, that in his Godhead he knows
this time.

3. Reasons wherefore the Lord concealeth the times of his coming. 1. It is
not expedient for us to know them. 2. That we might exercise our faith and
patience. 3. To make us more vigilant, etc.


First, it is not expedient nor meet for us to know these things; I mean those
secrets which the Father has kept in his own power. Act. 1.6.
The Apostles asked our Savior Jesus Christ, whether he at that time would
restore the Kingdom to Israel, that is to say, to his old ancient state? He
answered, It is not for you to know the times and seasons, which the Father
has put in his own power: as though he should say, it belongs not to you to
know the moments of times, and occasions of abstruse, secret and mystical
things, not revealed in the Word: as what hour a man shall dye; what hour the
Lord will come to Judgment; when he will utterly destroy the kingdom of
Satan; at what moment he will bring his subjects into the Kingdom of his
Father. There is a time when these things shall be performed, but hid from us,
and therefore we ought to believe them: for they are true, and in their due
times shall truly be performed, but we ought not curiously pry into these
secrets. For this (as Hugo has) is curiositas superflua, inuestigatio rerum ad
se non pertinentium; that is, this is superfluous curiosity, a searching out
of matters that do not belong to us. This is no doctrine of the Spirit. For
(as Bernard writing upon the Canticles has) Doctrina spiritus non curiositatem
acuit, sed charitatem accendit: The doctrine of the Spirit does not whet on
curiosity, but inflameth charity. Therefore let us learn to refrain from
curious questions, as the Apostle teaches Timothy and Titus: let us not search
and diue too deep in dangerous whirlepooles, lest we should be drowned. This
is good for the Teacher, and profitable for the Hearer. And this good counsel
Augustine gives in his eightieth Epistle, answering Hesychius; and in his
doctrine; teaching men not curiously to search into the times and seasons: but
to study the Death and Resurrection of Christ, that is to say, matters of
salvation.

Secondly, Christ concealeth this day and hour, to exercise men's faith, and
patience. Chap. 5.
And to this purpose James gives this good exhortation: Be patient, brethren,
unto the coming of the Lord, etc. In which place he does comfort the poor,
oppressed of the rich, warning them to wait for the Lords coming patiently,
who will revenge the injuries which the rich men do to them, and give unto
them, waiting in Faith and Hope, and yielding patience, a prosperous issue and
deliverance; and in the mean time, when a man is in misery, patience will make
the grief lighter and easier to be borne. This made the Poet say: Horace.
Durum, sed leuius fit patientia, quicquid corrigere est nefas. It is hard, I
confess, that thou can not redress, yet lighter through patience, if
quietly thou bear it.

Thirdly, the Lord tells us not when he will come to call us to account,
that we assured of his coming, and not knowing when, should at all times be
vigilant, watchful, and careful to do our duties, to have all things in a
godly and good order at our Lord and Masters coming. As good domestical
servants, when their Master is gone from them, assuring themselves that he
will come again unto them, and not knowing when: and that he will call them to
an account, (if they have any care) will at all times have all things in
readiness, and good order, that their earthly Master may not come upon them
unawares, and find them idle, and ill occupied, and all things out of right
course: So we, servants to Christ Jesus our Savior; and knowing that he is
gone from us into Heaven, and standing assured that he will come to take a
reckoning of us, of our lives and conuersations, and not knowing when; should
at all times have our accounts straight, have all things in readiness and good
order, that our heavenly Judge and Master, when he comes to judge the quick
and the dead, may not come upon us unawares at the last Day, and find us idle,
or ill occupied, and all things out of good order. And to this purpose tends
that exhortation of our Savior Christ: Luke 12.35, 36.
Let your loins be girt, and your lights burning, and ye your selves like
unto men, that wait for their Master when he will return from the wedding,
that when he comes and knocks, they may open unto him immediately. Blessed
are those servants, whom the Lord, when he comes, shall find waking, etc.
And Paul gives the like godly exhortation: But of the times and seasons, 1.
These. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you: for ye your selves know
perfectly, that the Day of the Lord shall come, even as a Thief in the night.
For when they shall say, Peace, and safety, then shall come upon them sudden
destruction, as the travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not
escape. But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should come on
you, as it were a Thief. Ye are all the children of light, and the children
of the day: we are not of the night, neither of darkness. Therefore let us
not sleep as do others, but let us watch, and be sober. And what plainer
exhortation can there be delivered to this purpose, Mar. 24.42. and 44. Mar.
13.35.
then that which the blessed Evangelist Matthew sets down, saying, Wake
therefore: for ye know not what hour your Master will come. Many other
exhortations we have to move, incite, and stir us to a godly life, drawn
from this day of Judgment: as that of Paul, Act. 17.30, 31. verses, where he
preached against idolatry, and told the idolatrous people, that God admonished
all men every where now to repent: Because he has appointed a day wherein he
will judge the world in righteousness, etc. Let the recordation hereof make us
to be sober, and watch, and have fervent love, as Saint Peter exhorted the
faithful, 1. Pet. 4.7, 8. saying, Now the end of all things is at hand: be ye
therefore sober, and watching in Prayer: But above all things, have fervent
love among your selves. Watch therefore, beloved, and again I say, Watch. Take
instruction of the Hare, who not knowing when her enemy may come upon her, yet
fearing the worst, sleeps with her eyes open, and by that means sees the
least glimpse of her enemy that may steal upon her. The Nightingale fearing
lest she should be devoured of a Serpent, sets her breast against a sharp
Thorn, or some hard thing, that when she, oppressed which sleep, noddeth,
she may by and by be awaked, and then she will sing most cheerfully and
melodiously. So do you, dear brethren, sleep as the Hare does, with her eyes
open, that you may awake, and suddenly avoid, when your enemy, Satan, with his
alluring temptations, would steal upon you. Sleep also when you are heavy and
drowsy, as the Nightingale does, with some sharp thing at your breast (I mean
sorrow for sin at your heart) that though against your will, you nodde sometimes
with sleep, yet you may with the Nightingale speedily awake, and sing
melodious, but yet spiritual songs; Ephesians. 5.19.
I mean Psalms of thanksgiving unto the Lord; as David does exhort us,
saying, Sing we merrily unto our Lord God, Psalm. 81.
make a cheerful noise unto the God of Jacob. O let us be mindful of our
latter end, of death, and this last account; which that we may the better do,
let us call to mind diverse domestical and familiar things, daily conversant
before our eyes, that they may put us in mind of our latter end, and all
circumstances touching the same, all antecedents, coniuncts, and consequents.
Our beds may bring to our remembrances, our graves; our sheets that we lie in,
1. These. 4.
our winding sheet; our sleep, death: (for unto the same Death is compared)
the very Flea that bites us, the worm of Conscience, that shall gnaw the
wicked: the crowing of the Cock that awaketh us out of sleep, and warns us
of the passing away of the night, may presage unto us the Trumpe of the Lord,
the sweet Bells of Aaron sounding out and ringing alowd, to call us to the
Church, the society of the faithful, to knowledge, faith, and a godly life
here in this world, yea, and our awaking out of the sleep of death at the last
Day, the last audit and account at the time of the Resurrection. Therefore
(beloved) give me leave for your good, to shake you out of the cradle of your
sleep, security and carelessness: be lulled and rocked therein no longer. For
then you are said to be asleep in the Scriptures, when all the powers of the
mind and senses are so overcome with the sound and dead sleep of sin, that
you cannot hear when Christ calls; nor see him when he comes unto you; nor
feel him, when he knocks at your hearts; nor taste him how gracious he is,
when ye come to receive the Sacraments, but only to your condemnation, when ye
do not smell him whether he be a savor of life unto life, or death unto
death, so that ye cannot know the day of your visitation, when such darkness
ouershaddoweth you, that you cannot comprehend Christ the light, when he
comes among his own. On the contrary, then are we said to watch, when all
our senses are apt to all godly exercises; when our ears are open to hear
Christ our Master; when we continue our watch and ward, never putting off our
armor, or betaking our selves to our rest, least Death, the Lords Bayliffe,
should suddenly arrest us, or our Savior the high Judge coming to Judgment,
when we least think of his coming, 1. These. 5. 2. Pet. 3.
(and therefore it is compared to the coming of a Thief, who gives no warning)
should suddenly (we unprovided, and not looking for him) steal upon us. And
this is the reason that my Text gives me occasion to press you with now. The
special exercise that we are to use in our Watch and Ward, is Prayer. 1. Pet.
4. Mat. 24.42.
And because we know not the certain time of the Lords coming to take this
account, we should be the more vigilant and watchful, having on our
spiritual armor, Ephesians. 6.
whereof Paul speaks. Watch therefore (good Christians) whiles it is the time
of light, the time of grace, before the night of death comes, wherein no man
can work out his salvation, Ezekiel 7. Augustine yields a reason, why man
knows not the time of his death, nor the Day of Judgment. His words are
these: Magna Dei misericordia monuit, In Psalm. 34.
vt recte viuamus, and ideo diem mortis, and extremi Iudicij nobis abscondit,
ne nobis in futurum aliquid promittamus: that is, the great mercy of God has
taught us to live well, and for this cause he has kept us from the day of our
death, and of the last Judgment, that we might not promise any thing to our
selves afterward. August. de disciplina Christiana.
The same says, Latet vltimus dies, vt obseruentur omnes dies: that is to say,
the last day is unknown, that we should observe all days. Therefore, I say,
Watch, for you are not certain to live one hour: and I will tell you how I
would have you watch: Vigilate recte credendo, Helm.
firmiter sperando, sincere Deum and proximum diligendo, mandata Dei
custodiendo, sancte, pie and just viuendo, sine intermissione orando, in
patientia Deo in omnibus bonis operibus fructificando, quae edificationis sunt,
vbique sectando, in omni bonitate vsque in finem permanendo, that is to say,
Watch, truly believing, steadfastly hoping, sincerely loving God and our
neighbor, keeping the commandments of God, living holily, godly, and justly,
praying without ceasing, in patience fructifying to GOD in all good works,
following in every place those things that tend to edification, continuing in
all goodness to the end. If thou do these things, thou shall never perish,
neither in this world, nor in the world to come.

The doctrine of the uncertainty of the day of Judgment, overthrows all the
coniecturall and doubtful opinions of them which have gone about to set down
the certain time of Christ's coming to Judgment, and the purging of the world
by fire. Elias, whether the Prophet, or rather some other Elias of the Rabbis,
because it is not found in the sacred Scriptures, but in the Thalmud of the
Jews, has set down his opinion thus: Sex millia annorum mundus durabit, and
deinde conflagratio: that is, The world shall continue six thousand years,
and then burning makes an end of it. And because of sins which shall be many
and great, some years shall be wanting. Irenaeus the Martyr was of the same
mind: these are his words, Quot diebus factus est hic mundus, tot millenarijs
consummabitur, (nam mill anni apud Dominum quasi dies vnus) Psalm. 90. and 2.
Pet. 3.8. Now all things were finished perfectly in six days, and the seventh
day was a time of rest. Therefore the consummation of all those things shall be
in the seven thousandth year the perpetual Sabbath, the everlasting rest. This
is their fallible collection and conclusion, altogether repugnant to the
Scriptures. The greatest reason, or rather show of reason, that made Elias and
Ireneus, and their followers to err, was, for that they upon these words, (A
thousand years are with the Lord as one day) do say, that the world was made
in six days, and the seventh day was a day of rest: therefore the world shall
stand and continue six thousand years, and in the seventh thousand shall be
the consummation and end of all. In very deed I must needs confess, that these
men were learned. But Bernardus non vidit omnia, neither these men: for in my
opinion herein they were deceived, in that they thought, that in eternal life,
in the world to come with God, were spaces of times, years, days, and hours,
as well as with men in this mortal life; which is not true: for in heaven (I
mean not the aereum Coelum, ayrie heaven, containing the space from us unto
the Firmament, nor coelum coelatum, the engraven heaven; which I so call,
because it is as it were engraven, and enameled with glorious lights, the
Sun, the Moon, and the Stars) but the heaven which is called of the
Philosopher Empyreum, but by Divines in Scripture, the glorious Heaven of
heavens, or Heaven above the visible heavens, wherein is our Savior, the
Angels, and glorified Saints. In this are no spaces, nor seasons of years,
days, months, hours, or other times: which thus I prove, because there is no
Sun, nor Moon, nor Stars, nor no use, need, nor necessity of any of them. For
the claritie and brightness of the Lord shines there: There is no night, no
Clockes, nor Dyals, nor Watches. How then is it possible for a man to know the
spaces of times there? Wherefore in the life to come, a thousand years are as
one day, and one day as a thousand years. The Psalmist therefore well said, A
thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday, Psalm. 90.4.
seeing that is past as a watch in the night. Again, there is so much joy in
heaven, that for the greatness and pleasantness thereof, a thousand years
seem to be but one day. But in no wise can it be hereby gathered, that,
because in six days the world was made, and in the seventh was rest, that
therefore the world shall continue six thousand years, and in the seventh
shall be a perpetual rest, and Sabbath, and an end of all, and so a certain
time known.

Besides the maintainers of the opinion abouesaid, there are others, which have
taken upon them to guess at the year when there should be an end of all
things. In this number are they which thought, that the end of the world shall
be in the year from Christ's birth, 1656. because there were so many years
from the creation of Adam unto the Flood: and the rather they have so supposed,
because our Savior and Saint Peter do compare the times of the Flood, Mat.
24. 2. Epist. 3.
and of the fire in the last day together. Whereas therefore from the Creation
of Adam unto the Deluge, were 1656. years and six days, they collect, that
there shall be so many years unto the last Judgment, when the World shall be
purged by fire. Some thought that it should be in the year 1588. among which
number was Regiomantanus, who left to the world certain Verses, showing his too
far reaching opinion. Which Verses are these following.

Post mill expletos a partu Virginis annos,
Et post quingentos rursus ab orb datos,
Octo gesimus octauus mirabilis annus
Ingruet, is secum iristia fata trahet.
Si non hoc anno totus malus occidet orbis,
Si non in nihilum terra fretumque ruent:
Cuncta tamen mundi sursum ibu^t atque deorsum
Imperia, and luctus vndique grandis erit.
After one thousand years, full explere and ended,
And five hundred more upon the same,
And eighty eight just added
From the Virgins birth without all stain,
A wonderful year shall come upon,
And doleful deaths shall follow on.
If not this evil world this year
With Land and Sea decay:
Yet all the Empires every where
Assuredly shall sway,
And mourning much will follow.
Albeit (beloved Christians) there was some show of alteration that year, yet
many that are here, lived then; and all can speak by experience, that in this
matter of the last Judgment, Regiomontanus was deceived, as well as others:
and although there were some show of troubles, yet GOD be thanked, the fears
were greater then the harms, and we that live, can relate the same to Gods
glory, who mercifully and miraculously protected us, making the Seas and Winds
to fight for us, and to get the conquest, that all the praise might be the
Lords.

Some would have the time to be certainly known, or very nearly pointed at,
because our Savior says, Behold the Fig Tree and all the trees, Luke 21.
when they shoot forth their buds, ye beholding, know of your own selves,
that Summer is then nie at hand: So likewise ye, when ye see these things
come to pass, be ye sure that the Kingdom of GOD is nigh. This similitude
teaches, that as when we see Trees begin to budde, then we know assuredly
that Summer is nigh: So when we see and know these things performed, that the
Evangelists have by the Spirit of GOD penned, and set down, and our Savior
foretold, and which Daniel prophesied of, then we may assure our selves, that
the day and time is near at hand: but we cannot out of these words gather the
particular and certain time. Again, men should consider that our Savior
spoke by a similitude, which illustrateth, but proves not any set time known
to man. In very truth, I confess that the time of the last Judgment may be
known, quod ad genus, that is, that certainly it will come, but it cannot be
known, quod ad speciem, to wit, as touching the hour, day, month and
certain year. I therefore assure my self, and I beseech you all be so
persuaded, that no man knows the certain time, the very day nor hour of the
Lords coming; no, nor the Angels in Heaven: nay, which is most of all, not our
Savior Jesus Christ in his humanity; but in his Deity knows all. And let
this work in us all a serious kind of watchfulness. Luke 12.40.
Be ye ready (says our Savior) for the Son of Man will come at an hour
when ye think not.

The end of the fourth Sermon.
THE FIFTH SERMON.
God in his inscrutable wisdom, and infinite goodness toward man, deferreth
this day of judgment for 3 reasons. 1. To stir up in us a vigilant
expectance, and a patient waiting for his appearance. 2. That his Church, his
flock, may be increased. 3. To grant all men time and space to repent.


AS touching the first, Chap. 5.7, 8.
James teaches us to perform the same, by precept and pattern: by precept,
in the beginning of the seventh Verse, where he says, Be patient unto the
coming of the Lord; and he in effect repeateth the same doctrine in the
eighth Verse, saying; Be ye also patient therefore, and settle your hearts:
for the coming of the Lord draws near. His example is taken from
Husbandmen, who patiently wait for the precious fruit of the earth, until they
receive the former and the latter rain. His words serving for doctrine, and
example, are these: Be patient therefore unto the coming of the Lord: Behold,
the Husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long
patience for it, until he receive the former and the latter rain. Be ye also
patient therefore, and settle your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draws
near. He that waits in Faith, Reu. 16.15.
hope, and patience for the Lords coming, Luke 12.37.
is blessed: for he shall appear the second time without sin unto them that
look for him unto salvation, as we may see, Heb. 9. the last Verse.

Secondly, the Lord deferreth his coming to Judgment, that all the Elect may
be gathered together to his Church, may be effectually called, be of the Lords
flock, who although they are the Lords already in his eternal Decree, yet
there is a time wherein they are called. The Lord would have them hear the
Word, and by the same to be born again, unto which time is required: and
therefore that they may have time, the Lord delayeth his coming; for their
sakes the world consists, and for them all the good things on the earth are
prepared. For the ungodly use them as Robbers and Thieves. The Apostle says,
1. Tim. 4.3.
God has prepared meats to be received of the faithful with thanksgiving,
and of such as know the Truth. The like place the Apostle has, speaking to
this purpose, thus: Unto the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are
defiled, Ti^us 1.^5.
and unbelieving, is nothing pure: but even the mind and conscience of them is
defiled.

The third reason why the Lord is so long before he come to take this account,
is very like to the former reason, and it is to grant all men time and space to
repent, that they may be saved, which the godly will not pretermit nor
neglect. The Lord (says the Apostle) that has promised is not slack, as some
men count slacknesse, but is patient toward us, for as much as he would have
no man lost, but would receive all men to repentance. Unto which purpose he
speaks after in the 15. Verse. Suppose (says he) that the long suffering of
the Lord is salvation. This time and space to repent, and prepare themselves
for this account, the godly will never let slip unprofitably. Contrarily, the
wicked neglect time, and therefore by the same are made inexcusable, making a
fuller measure of their sin, in that they despise the goodness and
bountifulness of the Lord, Romans 2.4.
calling them to repentance. These wicked ones are afraid of this Judgment,
and therefore never wish for it: but the godly desire it, because at that time
they shall be delivered from the miseries wherein they live in this world. Romans
7.24.
O wretched man that I am (says the Apostle) who shall deliver me from the
body of this death? In Revelation 22. The Brideman, and Bridewoman say, Come,
Lord Jesus, Come: which they say not, that are not ready to entertain the Lord.

Having before proved, that there is a day of Judgment, and that God would
have us to know it, and the reasons wherefore: and also having showed that the
certain time, the year, month, weeks, days, and hours are unknown, and
the reasons also of the same; with a confutation of the gaine-sayers, and the
use of both: And lastly, having yielded reasons, why the Lord delayeth this
Day: In the rest, I will be as compendious and short as I may be, so as I may
lay down the truth with perspicuitie. Which that I may the better do, observe
with me these points, which I think fittest to be spoken of: And first,
having before manifested that there is a day of Judgment and account-taking;
next, it will be most profitable to show,

First, what this Judgment is.

Secondly, the terrible signs, and dreadful preparations for the wicked.

Thirdly, the manner and coming of the Judge, and settling him in his Throne,
and raising of the dead to come to Judgment.

Fourthly, the trial of the sinner by Accusers and Witnesses.

Fifthly, the Book and touchstone of the sinners trial at the last Day.

Sixthly, the lamentable case of the sinner condemned.

Seventhly, the sentence given of both godly and ungodly. First, what this
Judgment is.

First, it is that Judgment which God will exercise in the end of the World by
Christ, which shall come down from Heaven into the Clouds visibly, in great
glory and Majesty, and will take this account: and by him all men shall be
raised up, which have been dead from the beginning of the world, even to the
end: the rest then being alive, shall be suddenly changed, and all shall stand
before the Tribunal Seat of Christ, who shall give sentence of all, and will
cast the evil with the Devils into eternal punishment; and will take the
godly to him, that with him, and the blessed Angels, they may in Heaven enjoy
eternal felicity. This long description is taken out of the known
Scriptures: and therefore if I should labor to prove it, I should hold up a
Candle to lighten the Sun. I will therefore leave this matter as yielded unto,
and hasten to the next point, to wit, what shall be done at that time, at that
fearful time of reckoning: that men warned of the dangers, may be danted and
discouraged from doing evil, and walking any longer securely in the broad way
that leads to destruction; and by serious repentance be brought to the narrow
way that leads to salvation.

Secondly, at this Day of Judgment, when this strict reckoning shall be taken,
there shall be such terrible signs, and dreadful preparations for the wicked,
that they shall be at their wits ends; their hearts shall fail them for
fear, and they shall wish that the Hills may cover them. For it shall be at
midnight, when men commonly are asleep. 1. These. 4.16.
The Trumpet, the Word of the Lord, compared to a Trumpet, because of the
fearful, shrill, and loud sound thereof, shall sound out a most dreadful
taratantara. (Surgite mortui, and venite ad Iudicium,) that is, Rise ye dead,
and come to Judgment. At which voice, these dreadful and terrible effects
shall follow: Mat. 24.29.
The Sea and the Waters shall roar, the Hills shall move out of their places,
the Earth shake, the Sun shall be dark, the Moon shall not give her light,
the Stars shall fall from Heaven, the whole Element shiuer in pieces, the
world shall be in a consuming fire, the Graves shall open, and yield forth the
bodies lying in them, yea, and the Sea, and all other places also: Reu. 20.13.
they that then shall be alive, shall with a sudden mutation be renewed, and all
corruption wiped from their bodies, 1. Cor. 15. 1. These. 4.
and all mortality removed, they shall be made incorruptible, and immortal
(which changing shall be instead of death unto them) and all shall come to meet
the Lord in the Air, as thick as swarms of Bees. The Angels shall separate
the good from the bad, Math. 13.41.
the Tares from the Wheat, the Sheep from the Goats, and every one shall
receive according to that he has done in this life, 2. Cor. 5.
whether good or bad. The World, 2. Pet. 3.
Heaven and Earth shall be dissolved by fire: there shall be a change of this
present state, and a purging of the Creatures, and not an utter consumption.

Thirdly, the Judge himself, even Christ Jesus, the Son of God (to whom the
Father has given all judgment) shall be seen coming in the Clouds of
Heaven, Ioh. 5.22.
Math. 24.
in his very humane Nature; not in poor and base state and sort, as at his
first coming in the flesh, which was to good purpose, to give us an example of
true humility, of true lowliness; but in glory and great power, waited on,
not with mortal and sinful men; but with the immortal and holy Angels. And
then he being most Regal, maiesticall, and powerful, Math. 25.31. The
settling of him in his Throne.
and being also upright and pure, will ascend into his great white Throne, most
beseeming his Imperial and immaculate person. And this John saw plainly in a
vision revealed unto him by Christ Jesus, Re. 20.11. Reu. 20.11.
where he thus reports: And I saw a great white Throne, etc. The greatness
of this Throne shows his might and Majesty. For he is a King, having on his
head a golden crown. The whitenes of it, his purity and holiness. Reu. 14.14.
Heb. 7.26.
For he is a Priest and a Judge, holy, innocent, undefiled, separate from
sinners, and made higher then the Heavens. When this Regal, mighty, and
vncorrupt Judge, has settled himself in his Tribunal Seat; then at the shrill
sound of the Trumpet, The Resurrection of the dead to come to Judgment. Job.
19.
all that are dead shall rise, even in the same state and form as they were
when they dyed, covered again with the same skin, and having the same flesh,
shall also behold God, not with other, but with the same eyes as they had when
they departed out of this life: and all this shall come to pass, although a
man is burnt to ashes. For God who is Omnipotent, and made man of nothing, is
much more able of ashes to reedifie and make man again, then a simple man of
ashes can make a beautiful glass. And if a Goldsmith, or a Pewterer, of a
melted vessel, can make another again: then much more God, of a man returned
to dust, can make a man again. He made man (I say) at the first of nothing:
therefore much more is able to make him again of something, and to bring
together all parts and pieces of him, wheresoever they be scattered and
dispersed. An excellent example and demonstration whereof we have in Ezechiel
37. where the Prophet foreshewing the bringing again of the people, being in
captivity, tells how the Lord set him down in the midst of a field which
was full of dry bones, and led him round about by them, Ezec. 37.
and said unto him, Son of Man, can these bones live? And the Prophet
answered, O Lord God, thou know. Then the Lord proceeded further, and said
unto the bones, Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and you shall
live, and I will lay sinnewes upon you, and make flesh grow upon you, and cover
you with skin, and put breath in you that ye may live. And as soon as the
Lord spoke the word, all this was done: showing plainly unto us our
restoration to life at the Resurrection in the last Day. All that are dead
shall live, shall rise again and come to be judged: for the dead shall live,
they shall rise again with their body: Esaias 26.19.
Awake and sing, ye that sleep in the dust: for thy dew is as the dew of
Herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. Let us therefore resolve our
selves, that the hour shall come, in the which all that are in their graves,
shall hear Christ's voice, Ioh. 5.28, 29.
and they shall come forth that have done good, unto the Resurrection of life:
but they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation. Ioh.
11.24.
Martha therefore truly said to Christ of Lazarus, I know that he shall rise
again at the last Day. Martha knew this to be true, and so did Job: and in
this point let us all be resolved: Job 19. 2. King 4. Luke 7. Math. 9. John 11.
for as truly as Elizeus called to life a dead Boy: Christ the Widows son
in Naim, and Iairus Daughter, and Lazarus: so we shall be raised again to
life, and stand before this high Judge, sitting in his Imperial Throne of
Majesty. I pray God that we may appear before him clothed with his
holiness and righteousness.

Now although some shall be alive at the last Day, 1. These. 4.17.
yet they shall not prevent them that sleep: for they shall be caught up with
them also in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and shall come to
Judgment: that both the dead, 2. Cor. 5.10.
and they that then shall be living, may receive the things that are done in
their bodies, according to that which they have done, whether it be good or
bad. For God by his Son Christ Jesus, Acts 17.31.
will Judge the world in righteousness. It shall therefore go well with the
righteous, the godly, but ill with the wicked. It shall be with the godly and
the wicked at the Resurrection in the last Day, Genesis 40.
as it was with Pharaoh his servants, his chief Butler, and his chief Baker.
Both of them were taken out of Prison; the one to be restored to his Office, to
minister before the King, but the other to be put to torments and cruel death.
In like manner shall it be with the Elect, and Reprobate; faithful, and
unfaithful; the godly and the wicked at this general and great Assize: both
shall arise out of their close prison (I mean their Graves) but the one sort
to be ever with the Lord, and to be ever in a continual joyful practice,
ministering praises, and Songs of Thanksgiving: saying, Salvation, and glory,
and honor be to the Lord our God, etc. Math. 25.
The other to be banished from the presence of the Lord, and to be finally
adjudged to everlasting fire and torments. Therefore (O godly man) hold on and
go forward in a godly course of life. Thou shall have comfort and joy at the
last, even a solace sempiterne and perpetual. For eye has not seen, ear
has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, 1. Pet. 1.4.
what good things the Lord has prepared for them that love him: and the
inheritance of Gods Children is incorruptible, undefiled, and never fades
away, But if thou art a wicked man, and have walked in the broad way that
leads to destruction, and continuest in thy wicked life without repentance,
then thou shall rise in the last Day, but to judgment, to torment, to be cast
into the lake of fire and brimstone, where are pains endless, Luke 16.
caselesse, and remediless. Look to the example of the rich Glutton.

At this day and time of account, Kings, Queens, Princes, Earls, Barons and
Baronets, Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Yeomen, rich and poor, young and old,
all, one as well as another, shall be demanded, how they have occupied their
Talents, as we may gather by the Parable. Mat. 25.
The Virgins that expect the Bridegroom with Oil and Lamps prepared, shall
be blessed. The wicked shall be sifted with straight examination, and shall
give an account of a thousand matters, whereof they would have scorned to have
been told of in this life, by Minister, or Magistrate: as how they have spent
their time? whether they have fought against the world, the Flesh, and the
Devil? Of which, and many other things, they must give an account of, The
sinners Trial.
yea, of every idle word. And here we are to note, that as when persons are
tried at our Assizes, upon matters of life and death, there are usually
accusers and witnesses, written and printed Laws and Books, by which men are
tried: (for no man is condemned upon a bare accusation, without testimony,
some apparent proof, or at leastwise some great probability that cannot be
spoken against, and the breach of the some branch of the Laws:) So the
Scriptures speaking after the manner of men, prove, that there shall be both
accusers and witnesses against a false Steward, a wicked man at this great
Assize.

The accusers are a man's own thoughts, after which sort the thoughts of the
Gentiles are said to accuse them, or excuse them, Romans 2.15, 16.
at the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ. A man's
wicked thoughts then, are sins; and, unless a man repent him of them,
deserve death. And therefore Peter bad Simon Magus pray to God, if perhaps the
thoughts of his heart may be forgiven him. And for this cause our Savior
speaking of an evil heart, says, that out of it proceed evil thoughts: Mat.
15.19.
from these wicked thoughts, come many evil and wicked words, whereof the
sinner must give an account, yea, Mat. 12.36.
many sins and wickednesses that shall correct a man, and many turnings back
that shall reprove him. Ier. 2.19.
Our thoughts therefore may well be said to accuse us at this day of
reckoning. And here it is strange to see, how wonderfully worldly men are
deceived in this point: they will say, Thought is free; as though it were
lawful for them to think at pleasure without sinning, or punishment. It is
true, that man may think what he will, freed from man's knowledge and
punishment. For as it is true, that no man knows the thoughts of man; so it
is as true, that no man can justly inflict punishment upon man for his
thoughts: for he knows not them. Only God, the searcher of the hearts and
reins, knows man's thoughts, and punishes them if they are wicked, and that
deservedly. For evil thoughts defile man, Mat. 15.19, 20.
and therefore worthily are condemned, Zech. 8.17.

The witnesses against man, are four. 1. God. 2. Heaven and Earth. 3. Rust of
the Gold and Silver of wicked rich men. 4. A man's Conscience.


First, God is a witness, who knows all things, yea, the very secrets of the
heart; therefore the truest and best witness. This is proved, Malachy 3.5.
Mal. 3.5.
I will (said he) come near to you in judgment, and I will be a swift
witness against the Southsayers, and against the Adulterers, and against false
swearers, and against those that wrongfully keep back the hirelings wages,
and vex the widow and the fatherless, and oppress the stranger, and fear
not me, says the Lord. This righteous Lord, and true witness, will set
before man's face, the things that he has done. He will bring to light the
hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the heart, that
every one that thinks well, and does well, may have praise of God: and he
that thinks not well, Math. 25.
nor does well, may be cast into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels.

Deuteronomy. 4.26.
The second witness, Heaven and earth. The Lord says to Israel: when thou
shall beget children, and childrens children, and shall have remained long in
the land, if ye corrupt your selves, and make any graven image, or likeness
of any thing, and work evil in the sight of the Lord thy God, to provoke him
to anger, I call Heaven and Earth to record against you this day, that ye
shall shortly perish from the land whereunto ye go over Jordan to possess it:
ye shall not prolong your days therein, but shall utterly be destroyed. The
like place we have, Deuteronomy. 30.19. Deuteronomy. 30.19.
Where the Lord calls Heaven and Earth to witness against them, saying, that
he had set before them life, and death, a blessing, and a curse, and bids them
choose life, that they may live with their seed. Beloved Christians, let us take
heed what we do here on the earth. For our sayings and doings are known and
seen from above: and the earth, upon which our sins are committed, can bear
witness of the same against us, if our words and deeds are evil.

Thirdly, the rust of the gold and silver of covetous worldlings, shall be a
witness against them, which has been laid up till it rusted, for want of
using and well employing to the use of the poor. And as their gold and silver
is eaten up and fretted with rust: so they, for not using their treasure well,
shall be eaten up and devoured with the fire of hell, that is, they shall be
tormented with everlasting flames of fire. This does James teach us, saying,
Iam. 5.1, 2, 3.
Go to now, ye rich men: weep and howl for your miseries that shall come
upon you: your riches are corrupt; and your garments are moth-eaten: your gold
and silver is cankred, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you,
and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. Ye have heaped up treasures for the
last days. How foolish then are greedy covetous men, Romans 1.
which heap up wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the
just judgment of God? Mat. 5.
How much better were it for them to lay up treasures, not upon earth, where
the rust and moth does corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal; but
rather to lay up treasures in heaven; where neither rust nor moth does corrupt,
and where thieves do not break through nor steal?

Fourthly, a man's conscience shall witness with him or against him, as the
Apostle does testify, Romans 2.
speaking thus of the Gentiles: When the Gentiles (says he) which have not the
Law, do of nature the things contained in the Law, they having not the Law are
a law unto themselves, which show the effect of the Law, written in their
hearts; their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing one
another or excusing, at the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by
Jesus Christ according to my Gospel. Note (I beseech you) the Apostles words:
He says, That the conscience of the Gentiles shall bear witness: and he
tells when she shall do this; to wit, when God shall judge the secrets of
men by Jesus Christ, meaning, the day of Judgment. But that I may speak more
plainly, note, I beseech you (beloved Christians) that as men's doings are
twofold: good, or bad: They are good which proceed from faith, and are
agreeable to the Law of God: and they are evil, which proceed from
infidelity, and are repugnant to the Laws of God: So the motions of men's
hearts are twofold; either joyful, which concomitate good deeds; or
sorrowful, which always accompany evil deeds. Hereupon it comes to pass,
that one Conscience may be called good, another bad. Omnis Conscientia cum
scientia.
Now a good conscience, is a joyful motion of the heart, arising from a
certain knowledge of well-doing: or it is the judgment of the mind, grounded
upon knowledge concerning a man's good deeds, ministering joy unto him. Hereupon
Paul said, Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of a good conscience. 2. Cor.
1.12.
Paul bended his wit, and will, and labored earnestly to have a good
conscience toward God and man; and he had such an one, and with it could truly
say, I am pure from the blood of all men. And further, at his end, his
conscience so comforted, strengthened, and emboldened him, that he without any
scruple or hesitation, 2. Tim. 4.7.8.
said, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith, etc. A good conscience makes a merry heart, whiles we live, makes us
to sleep more quietly, then if we laid our heads on a Doune-pillow: and when
death approaches, she causes man not to fear to die; and then will not
forsake him, when all worldly vanities and shadows vanish and fade away: and
yet she will do him the best service that she can; she will plead for him, and
witness with him. O what a treasure is a good conscience! She is as it were
mount Tabor, a glimpse of glory upon earth, a comfortresse of thy heart at the
hour of death, and a faithful friend and witness, to stand by thee at the
day of Judgment, when thou shall have most need. But an evil conscience is in
this world, as it were, an hellish Hagge, an infernal Fury, ever tormenteth
man, follows him; she always keeps a true record of all man's evil
thoughts, words, and works, troubles man with direful suggestions and
temptations; she is never at peace and quietness; she brings man to
destruction, as it may appear by the examples of Cain, Judas, Arrius, and many
others: and yet she has not done, but continuing an enemy, at the last Day
will witness against a man all his sins: his swearing, forswearing, lying,
stealing, injuries, oppressions, and all other his works of the flesh and
darkness. She will not, nor cannot forget them. For all men's faults are so
perfectly known unto her, and so firmly impressed in her, that she is
compared to a book; a book of remembrance, wherein all things are so
perfectly recorded, that they cannot be forgotten. Reu. 20 12.
Job says, Thou have sealed up our sins in a bag: to show the exact and
strict kind of keeping of them against that Day of account: So that not an
evil thought, not an evil word, not an evil deed, can be forgotten, they are
all so surely recorded; and the time of opening this book, and reading them
over to the hearing of the world, is the day of Judgment. For then all men's
faults shall be known, and in them that have offended, they shall be punished.
Foolish men and women think, that all their wicked thoughts, all their idle and
evil words pass away with the wind: but it is not so: for in this book they
are written and recorded; and once the book shall be opened, and thy secret
sins discovered. Now if we come to the lives of men and women, alas, they
are most wicked; they are nothing else but a continual practice of sin.
Well, let us labor to keep a good conscience, an vnblotted, and vnblurred
book, and then we shall prevent and escape the danger.

The book and touchstone of the trial, The Book and touchstone.
whereby all our thoughts, words, and works shall be examined and tried, is
the Word of God: it is (I say) the Rule and Line, by which they ought to be
leuelled, squared, and wrought by. The Apostle Paul says, Romans 1.16.
That at the day of Judgment, God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus
Christ, according to his Gospel: he means that Gospel whereof he was a
preacher, not an author. Our thoughts, words, and works must be tried by the
Word of God. If therefore our thoughts, words, and works are not agreeable to
the Word of God, to Gods rules and commandments, they are as odious,
distastefull, and unpleasing unto the Lord, as the offering up of bruised things
were in the time of the Law. Therefore let the Word of God (O man) be a
lantern to thy feet, and a light unto thy paths, that thou may not wander
out of the old ancient ways of the Lord, but go the straight ways to Heaven,
always directing thy steps by this Word of God.

When the poor wretched sinner, accused by his own thoughts, is found culpable
in his words and works, and is convicted by evident and plain testimonies (as
before) because he made no conscience of his ways, and never directed his
goings according to the Word of God: behold in what lamentable case he shall
stand in: The lamentable case of the sinner condemned.
For above him he shall have the Judge offended for his wickedness: beneath
him, the burning pit of Hell open, and boiling, ready to swallow him up: on his
right hand, his sins accusing: on his left hand, the Devils, as it were
Iaylors, and Executioners, ready to execute Gods Sentence upon him: within him,
his conscience shall gnaw him, pain him, grieve him, and testify against him:
before him, judgment without mercy; behind him, his evil life: on every
side, all damned souls bewailing, and which way soever you cast your eyes, you
shall behold a burning fire. O consider this, ye that forget God, lest he
tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

Sentence given of godly, and ungodly; and first, of the godly.
The just Judge will pronounce sentence righteously, both of the Sheep on his
right hand, and Goats on his left hand, of both godly, and ungodly; just, and
unjust; faithful, and unfaithful. Sentence shall be given of the godly,
according to the Gospel, not only offering, but now giving salvation to Gods
faithful children, by the merits of Jesus Christ. And the sentence will be a
kind inuitation, or rather receiving to joy, in these words. Come ye blessed
of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the
world, etc.

On the contrary, sentence shall be given of the Goats, of the wicked and
ungodly on the Judges left hand, according to the rigor of the Law, with all
it maledictions, tortures, and torments, then presently to be put in execution
against a lewd liver: these shall then endure their deserved endless
punishments. The Sentence against these is, Depart ye cursed, into everlasting
fire, Sentence given against the wicked.
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, etc. All this is ratified with a
clause of an irreuocable sentence, to wit, These shall go into everlasting
pain, etc. Of these pains of Hell, as also of the joys of Heaven, I had
thought to have written: that by the consideration of the one, the wicked may
be deterred from sinning, and so avoid the punishment; and by the
consideration of the other, they may be allured to well doing, to seek those
things that are above, and tread the straight way that leads to everlasting
life. But having spent so much time already, as I could well spare, I will end
for this present, promising (if my labors are accepted, and God grants time
of life to perform it) that I will write of the same at some other convenient
time. I will therefore now end, praying all Christians to listen to the
exhortation following: Beloved, let us prepare our selves for this judgment
daily and every moment. Let the commandment of the Lord stir us up to watch,
provide, and be in a readiness. Luke 12.35.
Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning, and ye your selves
like unto men that wait for their Master when he will return from the wedding,
that when he comes and knocks, they may open unto him immediately. Blessed
are those servants, whom the Lord when he comes, shall find waking, etc. Let
the example of the sudden flood proposed by Peter, 2. Pet. 3.
strike a care into us, and make us afraid to be secure. Let the consideration
of the High Judge, which judges with justice and equity all men of every
order, age and kind, make us prepare our selves against this day. Let the
signs now accomplished, and fulfilled, make us fully resolved that the Day is
at hand, and strike a care into us to be prepared against the Lords coming.
Let the uncertain hour to us when it shall come, and yet certain that once it
will come, and sooner then we think, make us obseruant and watchful. To
conclude, let the execution it self, to wit, everlasting rewards, and
everlasting punishments, wanting all ease and mitigation of torments, strike a
fear in us not to offend, and make us careful to please God. For God, as the
Apostle has, 2. These. 1.
will render vengeance in flaming fire, to them which know him not, and that
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: Which shall be punished with
everlasting damnation from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his
power, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be made
marvelous in all them that believe. Let us prepare our selves against that
Day; Aug. ad Demet. Epist. 142.
wherein Mundi gloria finienda est, that is, the glory of the world must take
his end: I say, against that day and time, which shall take tardy in deceitful
security many, and therefore compared to the coming in of the Flood, 2. Pet.
3. 1. These. 5.
in the days of Noah; and to the coming of a Thief. If a band of men should
enter into a City, and begin to destroy with fire and sword, would not every
man tremble and quake? If we thus fear our mortal enemies, and the hand of
man, what shall we do, when as the fearful Trumpet shall sound from Heaven,
and at that voice of the Archangell more clear and shrill then any Trumpet;
all the whole world shall rumble? when we shall see not weapons made with
hands, but the whole powers of Heaven to be moved, and to threaten vengeance
unto us. If a manslayer, or any other wicked person, of whom punishment were
to be taken by the judgment of an earthly Judge, will tremble, and quake, at
the sight of the Judge, and others standing about in judgment, and at the
bloody hand of the Hangman, or Tormenter, although he know that his end will
be but short: then (beloved) consider what shame, fear, dolor, and grief
will be at the Day of Judgment, when all the evils and sorrows, that can be
imagined and devised, shall be broached, and ready to be inflicted upon the
wicked men of this world. These, and many other evils shall befall them which
are holden with many cares of this world, and think not of this last end of
all things. But we which repent, believe, and think of Christ's coming,
conceive joy, and wish for his coming, as the certain time of our Redemption,
and reward, saying, Come, Lord Jesus, Come. To this Lord Jesus, together with
the Father and the Holy Ghost, three Persons, in one Essence, be rendered all
honor, and glory, power, and service, in Heaven, and in Earth, henceforth and
for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

