A FRVITful Sermon, preached at Occham, in the County of Rutland, the Second of
November. 1583.

By Thomas Gybson.

PROVERB. 29.8. Where there is no Vision, the people decay. GOD IS MY DEFENDER

GOD IS MY DEFENDER


AT LONDON; Printed by Robert Walde-graue dwelling without Temple-Barre. 1584.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Lord, FRAVNCES, Earl of BEDFORD, and one of her
Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel Knight of the Noble order of the
Garter: With the Right Honourarable, Sir WALTER MILDEMAY Knight, Chancelour
of the Queens Majesty's Court of Exchequer, and one of her Highness most
honorable privy Counsel, Grace, Mercy, and peace be multiplied from God our
Heavenly Father, and from our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
THE blessed and holy Evangelist Saint Luke, (Right Honorable) penning and
publishing the Heavenly story and blessed Gospel of Jesus Christ, does also
dedicate the same to one Theophilus, a Noble and famous man, of singular credit
and authority. The reason and cause that moved him thereto, is because in
those times, the pureness of the Gospel was hindered, and persecuted, whereby
many erroures began to be spread and allowed: and therefore in great Wisdom it
pleased the holy Ghost, not only to write a faithful, sure, and perfect
story: but also to offer and present the custody and defense of the same, to
one of Religion and Power. The very same cause, partly has moved me at this
time, to be so bold as to offer and Dedicate this poor and simple testimony
of my travail to your Honors. For although I do confess, we live under a
Gracious Prince (whom the Lord long continue to his glory, to the shame and
confusion of his enemies, and to the daily profit of his Church) although (I
say) we live in so peaceable, happy, and gracious a time, under the flowrishing
state of the Gospel; yet truly the dearest Children of God, and the sincerity
of Religion, is subject to bitter Persecution. These words at the first may
seem very grievous, hard and heinous, and yet they are most certain and
true. The holy Apostle S. Paul, writing to the Galatians, 4.29. speaks on
this manner: As he that was borne after the Flesh, persecuted him that was borne
after the Spirit; even so is it now: he speaks of Ismael and Isaac, and
yet we do not read in the scripture of any persecution between them, neither
did Ismael persecute his Brother Isaac, with hand or sword, but that which is
worse, proudly and arrogantly, he raised him self against him, mocking him,
and as it were, treading under feet the promise of God. And this dealing by
the apostle is called a persecution, and in deed there is not any persecution
more grievous to the Children of God then this. Now who does not daily see,
that the best Christians, and the pureness of Religion are greatly persecuted,
by Papists, Atheists, and Hipocrites, as Isaac was by his Brother Ismael, And
of all matters of religion, I think there is scarce any in these days more
generally hated of such kind of men, then that, which is most altogether, and
almost only hand led in this simple Sermon. For these and such like men, many
of them can be content with a common ordinarye profession, to hear Mattins
and Euensong, and sometimes a Sermon, by such men as they like of, but that
there should be any continual course of the pure preaching of the word of
God, they can in no case allow or like of. This I say, is hated, rejected and
persecuted so far as may be, of the greater sort, and therefore not without
cause have I attempted to dedicate this my labor, to your honors as special
Patrons, and defendors of the Lords cause, and tried Friends and Favorers of
God and his truth. But yet this attempt may seem very raish and needles: For
who am I, that I should take upon me to set forth and to publish any thing.
The unworthiest I confess of many hundreths, and the vnablest of many
thousands, and yet seeing many things more simple, less needful and
profitable, are not only suffered, but allowed to come abroad: I am not
altogether discouraged, neither has any man just cause to accuse me in this
my simple enterprise. I know these be days of knowledge and learning, there
be great store of famous and learned divines in our land (whom I beseech the
Lord to bless, that they may assist their weak brethren, in the defense of
this, and such good causes,) and yet the two mites of the pore widow cast into
the treasury, amongst the great gifts of the wealthy, are not to be refused.
I know your Honors be daily hearers of famous and learned men, both in your
houses and abroad, you are acquainted with the sermons of profound and deep
divines, and such as are mighty in the scriptures: notwithstanding having in my
self sufficient trial and experience of your honors most courteous humble, and
favorable dealing toward me, and also of some liking of my simple and my poor
trauelles in preaching heretofore. I am not ashamed or afraid after such trial
and proof, to offer this so small and simple a thing unto your Honors. The
great necessity of the matter I deal withal, the care of Gods glory, the zeal
of his house, the benefit that his church may have by it, has especially
moved me that it should be published and come abroad. Let not therefore
hypocrites be too rash in judging, the Lord the searcher of the hearts and
reins knows my purpose and affection, in preaching and publishing this
matter. The cause that has moved me to present it to your Honors, rather then
to other, is the long proof and acquayntance of your honorable courtesies, and
friendlye good will toward me, which for my part, I am never able to requite,
for the which I think my self as long as breath is in me, most bound and
indebted to your Honors. And here I offer this poor fruit of my travail, as
some Testimony of good will and thankfulness. And whereas we are wont commonly
to offer and present to our dearest Friends, some gifts, as tokens of good
will, or else of special duty. Amongst many great and precious presents,
which are no doubt given and presented to your honors; I also offer this
simple mite, and yet I hope more pleasant and acceptable to the receivers, then
thousands of gold or silver, or any earthly thing whatsoever. And in deed, can
there be any matter more sweet and pleasant, to the chief Patrons and
Defenders of the Godly Preachers, and the word of God, then to hear of the
necessity, profit, and excellency of preaching: which things, are set forth
plainly and largely in this little Sermon. For howsoever many me^ hate and
abhor this matter, and can in no case digest it: yet your honors zeal,
courage, liking, goodwill and countenance, to this and other good causes is
commonly known and spread abroad. A further reason why I publishe this Sermon,
is because there is some matter in it, for the which I have been in the
country where I dwell, oopenly slaundered and evil spoken off, and therefore
to clear my self from such false reports, to satisfy my friends which are
ready to answer in my cause, to let the enemies know, I have spoken nothing
whereof I am ashamed, but dare put it to the witnessing and testimony of the
Christian reader: and also to resolve more fully, the weaker sort, in such
things as at the first seem strange and absurd: for these and such like
causes, I say, I am content and willing that this my travel come to light:
although the whole or most part of this Sermon is unsavory and unpleasant to
the greater sort, and specially to the ignorant people, to the hypocrit, to the
idol or dumb minister: yet this is that, which chiefly misliketh and grieueth
them; because, both in the place where I preched this Sermon, and also
elsewhere, I said and affirmed, that the minister which preaches not, and has
not those gifts which the Lord requires in his Ministers, that such a one is
no Minister, approved of GOD, neither has any right and authority from the
Lord, to mynister his Sacraments; which matter, how strange and absurd
soever it seem to ignorant and carnal men: yet I hope it is here
sufficiently confirmed by authority and examples of the holy Scripture. I
could allege further, the allowaunce and judgment of most famous and pure
Divines, and such as are gennerally received and allowed of all true
Christians. Master JOHN CALVIN, about the latter end of his Catechism, which
is allowed by her Majesty's authority, says in plain words, that the
ministration of the Sacraments belongs to them, who have the charge to
preach openly in the Church. For the preaching of Gods word, and the
ministration of the Sacraments, be things jointly belonging to one kind of
office: these be his very words which are as plain as may be. M: Rodolphus
Gualter in his 118. Homely upon Mark, speaking of the institution of the Lords
supper, and of the right order in ministering that sacrament, amongst other
things says on this manner. Peccant qui coenam absque verbi predicatione
peragunt, adeoque illam huic praeferunt, quasi vel ad dei cultum, vel ad
salutem plus conferat, quam verbum, cum tamen huius maiorem quam sacramentorum
rationem habuerunt Christus and Apostoli. They sin against the institution of
Christ, which do minister the supper without preaching of the word, and so
prefer the Sacrament before preaching: as though that auayled more to
salvation and service of God, then the word preached; whereas notwithstanding,
both Christ and the Apostles esteemed more the preaching of the Word, then
the Sacrament: these are his words. I might allege many other testimonies
for this cause, not only from the most worthy, Godly, and learned divines,
both old and new of other Nations: But also from famous Martyrs and Bishops in
this our Land, in their sermons and writings, published and priuileged by
authority. I hope then there is no cause why this doctrine should not receive a
favorable intertainment and allowance, as of your honors, so of al faithful
Christians, having such warrant from so pure and learned men, and from the
testimony of the holy word. What soever I spoke in delivering and uttering
this sermon, I have here set it down (so nere as I could remember) both in
form and matter. To conclude, I most heartily desire in the Lord, the
Christian reader, and especially your honors, to accept this my pore travel. I
am bold to ioyn you both in one, not only because the Lord has joined you
together in the bond of friendship, and in a care of my good estate: but also
that which is greatest of all, in a zeal of Gods glory and furtherance of his
religion. Now the very God of peace, sanctify you through out: and I pray God
that your whole spirits and souls, and bodies, may be kept blameless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Your Honors in the Lord; THOMAS GYBSON.

Hearken with fear and reverence to the word of the Lord, written by the
holy Apostle Saint Paul, in his first epistle to the Corinthians.
Chap. 9. verse 16. Woe be to me, if I preach not the Gospel.


OUR Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in the 17. chapter of the blessed
Evangelist Luke, amongst many other excellent things, utters and propounds
this parable, Who is it of you, that having a servant plowing or feeding
cattle, Luke 17.7.8.^.
would say unto him by and by when he were come from the field. Go and sit
down at table, etc. And afterward in the tenth verse applies it on this
manner. So like wise ye, when ye have done all those things which are
commanded you, say, we are unprofitable seruauants: we have done that which
was our duty to do. The holy Apostle and servant of Christ in this place,
avouches and confesses in him self, the saying of his Master to be most
true. For although amongst many good works, there is not a more excellent or
better work, then the preaching of the word of God (which was done most purely,
effectually, and diligently by the Apostle) yet he is so far from accounting
it meritorious, that he says, a necessity is laid upon him, that duty
binds him to do it. In the former verses from the beginning of this Chapter.
S. Paul shows, and that with diligence and large copy of words, that
being amongst the Corrinthians, he was content to give place to his own
right, to forbear that which he might lawfully do, to take no maintenance at
all from them, least he should give occasion of cauilling to the false
Apostles: as though he under the pretense of the calling of an Apostle, should
seem to seek his own gain and lucre. Amongst other things he has said,
and that in the former verse: It were better for me to dye then that any man
should make my rejoicing in vain. The which words may seem to proceed and
flow from an ambitious and vaineglorious spirit. And therefore it might be
said, What now Paul? What needs all this? Thou art wont to glory in Christ
alone, and do thou now glory in thine own doings? To such a question or
objection the Apostle aunsweareth qualifiyng his former speech, as if he should
say: Although it be an excellent work to preach the Gospel, and that freely,
yet take not my words ^o, as though I repose any merit of salvation in this
work, for I am called to it, and bound to it, by duty and commandment from
my master Christ. And if I do it not I provoke and procure the anger of God,
and the sentence of his curse and condemnation on me.

Woe be to me if I preach not the Gospel: Of these words, being but a part of
the verse, I have taken upon me to speak at this time. From whence I mean by
Gods grace to speak of these three points. First I will gather some
description of preaching, that you may know what it is. Secondly, I mean to
prove the necessity of preaching, and that every Minister is bound to preach.

Thirdly, I will show what they ought to preach. The first point as in many
other places, so here it is named, but not fully set down what it is, but in
other places we may easily gather what it is. The second is here named and
proved. For Saint Paul being a Minister, and saying, VVoe be unto me, if I
preach not the gospel, does plainly affirm as much. The third is here set
down most plainly, the matter that we must preach of, namely the Gospel.

As touching the first, let us see how the scripture speaks of it, as it is
particularly and specially applied to the public office of the Minister,
otherwise I know this word preaching to have a further and more general
signification: But I speak of it, as Christ and the Apostles do, applying it
to the Ministers. Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 14.3.
He that prophecieth speaks unto men to edifiyng, 2. Tim. 4.2.
to exhortation, and to comfort. The same Apostle charging Timothy and in him
every minister, to preach the word, adds immediately, Ioh. 21.15.
Improoue, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine. 1. Pet. 5.2.
The blessed Apostle Peter, as he received of his Master a charge to feed his
flock, so he exhorts al other to do the same.

The holy Evangelist Luke says that Christ taught or preached in Nazareth. He
first read, Luke 4.16.
then shut the book, afterward he expounded that scripture which he read, and
so applied it to the hearers. By these and such like places we may gather, that
preaching properly as we speak of it, is an exposition and application of the
scriptures, by the lively voice of the minister, to the edifiyng of the people:
whereby it may easily appear that reading is not preaching, nor yet sufficient
in a minister approved of God. Saint Paul will have him apt to teach.

1. Tim. 3.2.
The Prophet Malachy affirms, that the Priests lips must preserve knowledge.
Mal^. 2.7.
Christ after reading shut the book and expounded, and yet some are not
ashamed to count simple reading sufficient, saying, it will serve the turn,
and there may be as much good done by it, as by preaching. As for reading, we
speak not against it we disalowe it not, but account it a holy, lawful,
necessary, and profitable mean, whereby great good and benefit is wrought
to the Church of God: but yet, it does not follow yt it is sufficient in a
minister, yt it will serve simply of it self in the public congregation. The
Lord has set down another order, and requires greater things at the hands
of his special servant. But this matter shall appear more plain in the words
following. For my purpose in this part is, only to show you by some
circumstances and discriptions what preaching is, and that reading is not
preaching, or at least that kind of preaching, which the Lord requires in his
ministers, as may appear by comparing them together, and by using some apt
similitudes for the explanation of this matter. The smell or sight of meat does
good to the hungry man, but it will not feed him, except he taste of it: so by
reading men may have some smell of Religion, but they shall never thoroughly
taste of it, without preaching, Ephesians. 4.11.
and therefore it is called a feeding, as we heard before and Preachers are
counted Pastors and feeders. Again, meat that is raw and fat, may be called
good, but it is not to be eaten before it be made ready and dressed: so are
the Scriptures read good, holy and pure, but not sufficient food for the
people, without preaching. Again, bare reading is as though one should cast a
whole loaf, before them which want strength to cut it, 2. Tim. 2.15.
Preaching is a cutting and dividing of the bread of life, that every one may
have his several portion. Again, bare reading without preaching is even as the
husbandman should cast whole strikes and bushels of Corn, on his Land together
on heaps, not scattering of it. Mat. 13.
Preaching is a spreading and a sowing of the seed. Again. bare reading is as
though the Fisher should shuffle his nets on heaps, not opening them:
Preaching is a wise opening, laying and handling of the Net.

Bare reading is as one should offer good treasures, and yet such as were hid,
shut up and fast locked, and could not beco^e by: preching is an opening of the
Treasures, to the joy of Gods Children. Reading is like to fire covered with
Ashes, which does smally profit them that stand by it. Preaching is an opening
and discovering of the fire. Let us consider one example amongst many, for the
further explaning of this matter. Act. 8.27.
The Chamberlain that Noble Treasurer of Aethiopia, going to Jerusalem, to
worship God as he went, read the scriptures, if reading would have served his
turn, Philip needed not to have come to him, but he understood not before be
had a guide, he was not converted, neither had he says sufficient to
salvation, before he heard the preaching of the Word, which in deed is that
especial, effectual, blessed and excellent ordinarye mean of faith, as it
appears more plainly and fully in the next part of our text.

Which being rightly waighed, confirms the great necessitye of preaching,
and proves that every Minister ought to preach. Woe be to me, if I preach
not the Gospel. And why so? because I am called to it, because I am a
Minister, because the Lord requires it of me. Although Saint Paul and the
other Apostles had privileges and prerogatives, which we have not, although we
have not fullye so large a commission, as he and they had: Although they did
many things, which we neither may, nor can do: yet as touching the office of
preaching, it appertains as well to us as to them. And for the further proof
of this matter I will rehearse some arguments, which before I have used in
this place, adding diverse others to them.

1 It is the commandment of Christ and the holy Apostles, therefore necessary.
Christ said to his Apostles, Go preach the Gospel. Mar. 16.15.
The which commandment, in this behalf belongs to all the ministers of God.
Saint Paul straightly charge the ministers of Ephesus. Take heed unto your
selves, and to all the flock, whereof the holy Ghost has made you overseers,
to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. And
most weightily of al, he requires it in the place already alleged, he
leaves it not as a thing indifferent, that may be done, or undone, but
speaks with a wonderful and mighty protestation, he joins the Scripture and
preaching together. For having before in the former Chapter, set forth the
great profit of the scriptures, straight way he necessarilye adds this
forecible exhortation. 2. Tim. 4.1.
I charge thee therefore before God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, which
shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and in his kingdom,
preach the word, be instant, in season and out of season, improoue, rebuke,
exhort.

2 It is an argument and token of the love the Minister owes unto Christ and
to the people, as it appears Ioh. 21.15. where Jesus Christ says to Peter
after his resurrection. John. 21.15.16.17.
Simon son of Iona, love thou me more then these? He said unto him, yea
Lord, thou know that I love thee: he said to him, feed my Lambs. He said
unto him the second time. Simon the son of Iona, love thou me? He said
unto him, yea Lord, thou know that I love thee: he said unto him feed my
sheep. Christ said to him the third time. Simon the son of Iona, love thou
me? Peter was sorry because he said to him the third time, love thou me, and
said unto him, Lord thou know all things: thou know that I love thee.
Jesus said unto him: feed my sheep. Whereby it is evident, that those which
feed not, love not Christ: Seeing then that feeding or preaching is so plain a
token of the love that the minister owes to Christ, it is most necessarily
required if any do preach and yet not upon this love, they have their
condemnation.

3 The Church of God is begun and grounded, by the preaching of the word:
Romans 10.17.
and therefore necessary. Paul says, Faith comes by the word preached.

1. Cor. 3.6.
Again, he counts his preaching amongst the Corrinthians, a planting of them
in faith and religion. S. Peter says, 1. Pet. 1.23.
We are borne a new, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the word of
God, who lives and indureth for ever. And presently adds. This is the word
which is preached among you,

1. Cor. 3.1. Heb. 5 12. and 6.1.
4 By preaching, the church of God is not only begun, but also amplified,
buildes and enlarged. It will not only make us babes in Christ, but strong and
spiritual men. It has not only milk for the weak, but strong meat for
them, that are of age. By it we are brought not only to the beginning of
Christ, and first rudimentes of Christian religion, but also we are led
forward unto perfection. The holy Apostle affyrmeth this, when as he says,
that Jesus gave some to be Apostles, and Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastoures and Teachers, for the gathering of Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ unto a perfect man,
and unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ.

5 The Church of God begun and brought to that perfection which can be in
earth, is also stayed, strengthened, vpholden and preserved, by the preaching
of the word, against sin and error. And therefore for these causes also,
the preaching of the word is most necessary, yea and that daily and
continually, because some are weak and have need of daily strengthening, some
fall into errors, and some into grievous Sins, from the which they are to
be drawn out by the effectual preaching of the word. This does the holy
Apostle confirm, whereas he says, that The whole Scripture is profitable to
teach, 2. Tim. 3.16.
to improoue, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of
God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works.

6 Again, to the pure preaching of the word, the Lord has promised a
blessing, the minister shall be blessed, the people also blessed through it.
They that be wise says Daniell, Dani. 12.3.
shall shine as the brightness of the firmament: And they that turn many
unto righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. Mat.
24.45.46.47.
The wise and faithful Steward, that gives meat to the household in due
season, when his master comes he shall be blessed, and made partaker of
exceeding joy and glory. 1. Tim. 4.16.
Take heed says the Apostle to thy self, and to learning: continue therein,
for in doing this, thou shall both save thy self and them that hear thee. God
so blessed the preaching of his Servant Jonas, Jonas. 3.4.
that through it the Ninevites believed God, humbled them selves, and forsook
their former wicked ways. Act. 2.41.
At one preaching of Peter there were won to the Lord about three thousand
souls. Thus does the Lord bless his own order, the minister by pure and
faithful preaching, discharges his own soul, obtayneth peace in conscience,
and so is blessed in this life, but shall be far more blessed in the life to
come, when he has finished his course, he shall receive an incorruptible
crown of glory. The people also by this means are many ways blessed, they
receive knowledge, faith, Act. 2^.18.
and salvation: their eyes are opened, they are turned from darkness to light,
and from ye power of satan unto God All these great and notable blessings, do
ensue the preaching of the word, and therefore required most necessarily in
every minister.

7 On the other side, without this, both the minister and the people are
accursed, the blood of the people shall be required at his hands, because he
has not as a faithful watchman, Ezec. 3.17
forewarned them of danger, and yet they shall die in their own sins.

The Lord complains by his Prophet Hosea saying, Hosea. 4.6.
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge, because thou haste refused
knowledge, I will also refuse thee, that thou shall be no Priest to me. Mat.
5.13.
To this agrees our Savior Christ, If the salt have lost his saltnes, it is
good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men. And
if these Ministers which sometimes have had Salt in them, zeal, and knowledge
to season the people, and by negligence and carelesnes, decay and loose it

If these I say be worthy to be cast out, how miserable and cursed are they
which never had nor yet have any Salt in them. It must needs be fulfilled of
them which our Savior speaks in an other place, They be blind leaders of
the blind, and if the blind lead the blind, Mat. 15.14.
both shall fall into the ditch, (that is) both the ignorant Minister and the
ignorant people shall perish. And in another place it is said, Mat. 25.30.
Cast that unprofitable Servant into utter darkness, there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. And here it is said, Woe be to me if I preach not the
Gospel.

Seeing then that every way there hangs so many grievous curses, both upon
the minister and people, where the word is not preached, it is most requysite
and necessary, that every minister look to this, even as he will escape the
fearful and heavy curse of God.

8 Moreover the chief end and use why the scriptures were written, does
require preaching. Romans 15.4. 1. Cor. 14.
They are left for our comfort, instruction, and edifying. But we are most
comforted, instructed, and edifyed, if they be opened and applied to us, and
therefore most necessary that they be so used.

9 Also the Corruption and dullness of our nature requires the same, we are
dull, ignorant, and careless. We please our selves in our own sins, the
Devil goes about continually to devour us, and therefore we have need to have
continual preaching of the word. 1. Cor. 2, 14.
The natural man perceives not the things that are of Gods spirit. David, 2.
Sam. 12.
after he had sinned, continued in his sin, until the Prophet reproved him
for it, yea and would not take it to him self, although Nathan spoke a very
plain parable, till it was particularly applied to him. Seeing then there is
in our nature such corruption, such blindness, such slothfulness, and also
forgetfulness: what can be more necessary for the curing of these so great
diseases, then the continual and daily preaching of the word:

Besides all this, it has been an usual order in the church of God under the
law, by Christ and the Apostles, not only to read, but also to expound and
apply the Scriptures, and therefore the same order is to be observed of us.
Nehe. 8.8.
It is said of the Levites that they red in the book of the law of God
distinctly and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the reading.
Christ as we have heard already continually preached and commanded the same to
his Apostles, who as they obeyed in them selves their Masters commandment,
so they required it as a continual and usual rule to be observed for ever of
all the Ministers of God in his church.

And most specially the Apostle in those Epistles which he wrote unto Timothy
and Titus very largely and effectually urges this matter. I refer you also
unto the 14. Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians: wherein so highly
he commends the gift of Prophesieing, 1. Cor. 1^
Interpretation or preaching, that he prefers it before all other gifts,
and accounts it so necessary, that he would have it continually observed in
the Church of God.

Again Christ commands us, and we do daily pray for the enlarging of
his Kingdom, whereas he has taught us to say thy kingdom come: Now, the
singular and excellent means to establish the kingdom of Jesus Christ is, by
the pure and effectual preaching of the word, and therefore he says in an
other place, Pray to the Lord of the Harvest, Math. 9.38.
to send forth Laborers into the Harvest. And how ca^ they pray with any safe
conscience, for the enlarging and establishing of the kingdom of Christ, which
by their ignorance and carelessness, do altogether hinder it. Furthermore, all
and every one of the names which are given by the holy Ghost to the
ministers, in ye word of God, do necessarily require at their hands
Preaching: They are called the light of the world, the salt of the earth. They
are called Pastors and Sheepheards. They are called Husbandmen, Guides,
Stewards and Messengers, besides many other excellent titles given to them. Now
how can they be called Lights, which have no light in them, which either are
in ignorance and darkness themselves, or else hide their ca^dle under a
Bushel? How can they be called the Salt of the earth, which cannot or will not
season the vnfauorie and sinful people, with the heavenly and wholesome
doctrine of eternal life: How can they be called Pastors and teachers, which
do not feed or have no food at all to give to the flock? How can they be
called the Lords Husbandmen, which have no skill at all in tilling his ground,
and sowing his seed? How can they be called Guides unto other, which either
know not the way themselves, or else will not vouchsafe to open and declare it
to other: How can they be called Stewards, which have no care of the household,
which either cannot or will not feed them? And how can they be called the
Lords Messengers, which are not able to do their message, or have no care at
all to do it.

If the Minister be a light to the people, of necessity he must needs go
and shine before them in knowledge and doctrine. If he be the Salt, he must
needs season. If he be a Pastor or Shepherd, he must needs feed. If he be a
Husbandman, he must needs have a care of the Lords Husbandry. If he be a
Guide, he must needs show the way. If he be a Steward, he must provide for
the household. If he be a Messenger, he must be willing and able to do his
message: Naie I say more, it stands for the Lords glory and credit to have
such Pastors, and such Husbandmen, such Stewardes and Messengers, as have
wisdom and knowledge. The poor people of the Country will not hire him to
be a Shepherd to their Sheep, whom they know to be ignorant and careless,
and shall the Lord choose such to govern and guide his flock? The Gentleman
and the Yeman will not hire any to be overseers of their Husbandry, except they
know them to have sufficient discretion and experience: and will he think ye
be content with simple, foolish, and recklesse overseers of his so dear and
precious a Husbandry? The Noble man for his honors sake, will seek to have
such a one to be the Steward of his house, as is trusty, wise, and of
sufficient to guide and govern a whole household, and shall the Lord be less
careful of his honor? shall he be content with unwise and unfaithful
Stewardes? The Prince will have a special care to send such to be his
messengers and Ambassadors, as be most wise and faithful, and are able
discreetly and cunningly to do their message, and shall the Lords messengers
be without knowledge? What can be more to the discredit and dishonor of his
holy name? This argument I amplify the more, because it is very plain and
effectual. Mark I beseech you well, all these and other names given to us in
the holy Scripture, do require of every minister of God that he preach the
word, as we have a rare to answer to our names, and a care of the glory and
credit of our God: even so let us be careful in doing this so necessary a
duty. What shall I say more, the end and purpose of our calling and
Ministry requires at our hands Preaching. The Lord has ordained Pastors
and Teachers for the gathering together of his Saints, and to the edification
of the body of Christ: Seeing then we are called to this end, seeing we are
ordained to this purpose, there is no remedy, we that are the Ministers of
God, must needs of necessity preach his word. For a further proof and
conclusion of this matter, I call you to record, I appeal to your own
consciences, which are now won to the Lord, which have some measure of
knowledge, which are called out of darkness to light, from ignorance to
knowledge: ye that sometime have been content with reading Ministers, and
quarter Sermons, but now hunger and thirst for the word preached. I call you I
say, as witnesses in this cause, what comfort you feel, what profit, what
power in the effectual preaching of ye word? How careless, how profane, how
ignorant, how leaude you were before, notwithstanding the daily and the
ordinary Readinges which diligently you had? What has wrought in you that
measure of faith, that heavenly knowledge which you now have? What is it, that
has wrought in you such a sorrow of your former life, such a grief and
hatred of sin and superstition, both in your selves and others, such an
earnest zeal of the word, such a conscience and a care to reform your selves
and your housholdes. What (I say) has wrought these things in you? How came
you by them? What is it that has so altered your minds, deeds and
affections: Let your conscience be witness to me in this matter: I am sure you
will approve that which I have spoken, and acknowledge the profit, the power
and necessity of the word preached.

All and every one of these arguments do prove and confirm as I think, that
every Minister necessarilye ought to preach, and otherwise, that he is no
Minister approved of God. All and every one of these, or most of them do quite
overthrow and condemn, all dumb, idle and careless Ministers whatsoever. One
day they shall know what accounte he makes of the souls of his people, for
seeing the word of the Lord, in so many places, requires in a Minister
preaching, yea, diligent and careful preaching, in what a miserable and
damnable state do these men stand? The Apostle says woe be to me if I preach
not the Gospel. Well, it may be whatsoever I have yet spoken will be
granted. It is necessary that every Minister preach: but what shall all
those be condemned which have not such full measure of knowledge as other have,
which be not accounted and allowed for public Prachers, God forbid? I know
these difference in gifts, there was so amongst the Apostles, but they all
suficiently preached. Amongst us and such others as use this place, and such
like places, there is difference, every one of us have not the like measure,
but for my part I speak as I think, our measure is small enough, yet the
Lord be thanked for that we have, and give us grace to use it to his glory
and the benefit of his Church, in my self I profess and grant very small and
weak measure, insufficiency and lack of gifts, and the Lord the searcher of
the hearts knows, that the consideration of this has and does make me to
fear and trimble often times, to sigh and lament that so great a charge, and
so weighty a burden is laid upon me, so simple and weak a wretch.

To you that have any measure of those gifts which the Lord requires in his
Ministers, to you (I say) quench not the spirit, use the means to increase
your measure, if you be painful, careful, watchful, and faithful in your
ministry with a holy and pure affection, the Lord will bless you. Act. 18.26.
To him that has shall be given, we cannot at the first come to perfection.
Appollos a learned Docter, feruente in the spirit, and mighty in the
scriptures, yet was he ignorant in some things, and received instructions from
Aquila and Priscilla. Some have more then others, Math. 25.14.
some have ten talentes, some five, and some but one, yet always remember,
and let it never slip out of your minds, that the slothful and unprofitable
servant shall be cast into utter darkness, there shall be weepying and gnashyng
of teeth. Against such I speak which in deed never had any one talente, or
any gifts of Ministers, or having any do either abuse them, or at least do
not put them forth to any profitable use. Consider a little the state of our
ministry. There be some amongst us sacrificeing and mas^ing Priests full of
manifest superstition and hypocrisy, and in truth enemies to Christ's religion.
Others there be altogether ignorant, unlearned, very idols, they can do what?
Even just nothing. Others there be which may have some ground of learning, but
in deed they utter very little, neither is the people better by them. Some are
idle, some careless, some altogether leude and profaine, some join living to
living, and take more upon them, then they can discharge although it may be
they speak in one place, yet are they du^^e in an other. All these and such
like are worthte of blame, to be openly spoken against because they open
offense. All these stand daily in a miserable and damnable state without
repentance. But my chief drifte at this time in this part of my text, is to
prove as you have hard, that every Minister approved of God must preach, that
is, he must teede the people, he must cut the word of God, he must improve,
rebuke, exhort, he must not simply or barely read, or hear the people say
some Catachisme, but he is to be able in some sufficient measure to open and
interpret the holy Scripture, and apply them, and I hope that this is already
proved: only I exhort you to account the Lord wisest to rest in his holy
decrees, and allow his own order as best. Let us not take upon us to
appointe him what he should do. Seeing he has set down preaching, as the most
excellent, and ordinary means to salvation, let not us say that reading will
serve the turn: seeing that he requires that his Ministers be apt to teach,
let us not coumpt them his Ministers which never taught, nor ever had any
aptness in them. If he may be counted a lawful Minister and Teacher that
only reads the ordinary Service, and sometime hears a few children to
say a Catechism without book, as it is set down before him, then may the
Clarke also of the Town be coumpted a Minister, and teacher: then may every
Husbandman, Serving man, nay every boy or child that can do as much, be so
counted. Let not some say for defense of ignorant Ministers, that if they do
that, which they can do, it will serve the turn: for in the building of an
house, as there be some Master builders which bring timber and stone, so other
there be, which bring mortar and fillinges, and serve to necessary use, but
let us remember that every Minister in his charge, is or ought to be a
builder, yea a Master builder, and if the chief builder bring nothing but
fillinges, how shall the Lords building in that place go forward? The Apostle
in that place which has been already twice alleged, Ephe. 4.
says That the Lord has ordained the Minister for the gathering together of
his Saints, and for the edification of the body of Christ, till we all meet
together in the unity of faith and knowledge of the Son of GOD, unto a
perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ. Oh
these be no small things, these are no trifles, this is no vile, simple, and
drudgerie work, no small measure, but very great, weighty, high, and most
excellent. The holy Ghost in an other place says, Leaving the doctrine of the
beginning of Christ, ^eb. 6.^.
let us be led forward unto perfection, not laying again the foundation of
repentance from dead works, and of faith toward GOD, of the doctrine of
Baptism and laying on of hands, and of the resurrection from the dead, and of
eternal judgment. Mark I beseech you these words. There be many people, yea
and Ministers also that are ignorant of the first rudimentes of Christ, that
of repentance, of Baptism, of the resurrection, of eternal judgment, are
able to say nothing to any purpose: but yet let it be so that some can do
this, they can teach as they say in some measure: their an Catechize, and ay
the grounds of Religion, yet this will not serve the turn, there must be
building after the foundation, there must be a leading forward to perfection.
The Lord in building the material Tabernacle, did choose men of singular
wisdom, and understanding, and will he be content, with every drudge and
bungler in the building and erecting of his spiritual Tabernacle: But herein
chiefly have some gathered offense and grief, because I have said in this place
before, and also other where, that such Ministers have no right to administer
the Sacraments.

This seems a strange and hard doctrine, yea, some are not ashamed to count
it erroneous and heretical, if I would stand upon the authority of men, I
could allege for the confirmation of the very words which I have spoken, the
judgment of those which by common consent of all true Christians are received
and allowed, as the best, most learned and most pure Divines that ever were
since the time of the Apostles, but this I hope shall not need: for if of
necessity every Minister ought to preach, or if all the former arguments will
serve to prove this, then also that other doctrine, how strange and obsurde
soever some count it, I must I say needs necessarily and consequently
follow, none ought of right to deal with the Lords Sacraments but his
Ministers. Christ requires of him that Baptiseth, that he teach: saiing, Go
teach and Baptize: Math. 28.19.
No Teacher, no Baptiser, that which God has joined together, let no man put
asunder. ^. Cor. 11.26.
Saint Paul speaking of the Lords Supper: As often says he, as ye shall
eat this bread, and drink this cupp, ye show the Lords death till he come.
If the people at the receiving of the Sacrament, ought to have an effectual
and thankful remembrance of the death of Christ, it must needs follow that
the Minister is bound, sufficiently to instruct them in the same. If any will
say that this done by the dumb Minister in reading the words of the
institution, he preaches, he shows and publishes Jesus Christ crucified, so
may I say that he or any other does the same, and that more effectually, if
they do but say their belief openly before the Congregation, but we speak
of a singular, of an effectual, of an excellent and lively showing of his
death, which is by preaching. The Apostle speaking to the Galatians says,
Gala. 3.^.
That Jesus Christ was described in their sight, and among them crucified. His
meaning is that Christ was so lively preached to them, as his lively Image was
set before their eyes, or else had been crucified amongst them. This is the
power of preaching, this is the duty of the Minister, plainly and effectually
to discribe and set forth the merit of Christ his Passion, so that it may be
seen as it were before the eyes.

The first Minister of Baptism John the Baptist was a Preacher, Math. ^.
he joined Preaching and Baptism together, and in no dou^t the Lord would
leave to his Church an example and pattern, and a form of the right
ministration of the Sacraments. Mark. 1.^.
Christ although there were sundry causes why he would not Baptize, yet he
ministered the Supper to his Apostles, Math. 16.^^.
but Christ was a Preacher, yea he preached then of his death before that first
ministration and institution of that Sacrament, leaving us an example to do
the like.

Act. 2.38. Act. 8.12.38. Act. 10.34. Act. 20.7.
The Apostles ministered the Sacraments but they all preached, yea, the
Evangelist Luke in the story of the Acts, sets Preaching always before
the ministration of the Sacraments. John the Baptist, Christ, the Apostles and
Primative Church are the best examples that I know, and best worthy to be
followed.

Consider further I beseech you, the great inconveniences which follow in
these places where the word is not preached, the people are still in ignorance
and blindness, and kept still in their old and Popish errors, received from
their forefathers, they know not the use of the Sacraments, or to what end
they serve, they hold still their Papisticall transubstantiation: some say,
they receive their maker: other say, they never heard what a Sacrament meant:
some say they do it in a good intent, and yet they know not their own
intent: other say they hope that they receive it as others do: few make any
conscience with knowledge, fear and reverence to prepare themselves. The
greatest cause of this, is lack of Preaching, and in deed how can their great
ignorance be taken away, how can their old supersticious errors be
effectually confuted, but by the continual and pure preaching of the word?
And is it not then most fit and convenient, when the Sacrament is to be
ministered: but we are so far from having any usual preaching before the
Sacrament, that be many thousands which never heard any preaching at al of
the Sacraments in all their life, they have lived these 25. years in a
Christian land under the Gospel, and yet they have profited no further: and if
they should live still dubble and triple the same years, they should be never
a whit the better, except they had better Ministers, Woe be to me if I preach
not the Gospel. Learn one thing further before I go to the next part of my
Text, if there depend a woe over the Minister if he preach not the same, woe
is also against the people if they hear not, and obey not the word preached:
Woe Chorazin: Math. 11.2^.
woe Bethsaida, woe Capernaum, woe to these Countries, Cities, Towns and
People, which neglect and contemn the word preached, it shall be easier for
the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of Judgment, then for such a
people. The same God, the same word which requires preaching of the
Minister, requires also hearing and obedience of the people. He that is of God
hears Gods word, Ihon 8.4^.
and therefore do ye not hear it because ye are not of GOD. Ihon. 10.27.
My Sheep (says Christ) hear my voice. And to the true Minister it is said,
Luke. 10.16.
He that hears you hears me, and he that dispiseth you, dispiseth me, and
he that dispiseth me dispiseth him that sent me. Ihon. 13.20.
And again, Verily verily I say unto you, if I send any, he that receives
him receives me. Heb. 2.
Wherefore we ought diligently to give heed to the things which we have heard,
least at any time we should let them slip. For if the word spoken by Angels
was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward, how shall we escape, if we neglect so great sa^^ation,
which at the first began to be preached by the Lord, and afterward was
confirmed unto us by them that heard him, GOD bearing witness thereto, both
with signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles, and gifts of the holy
Ghost, according to his own will? Woe then unto all Papists, Infidells,
Atheistes, Hypocrites, ignorant and carnal men, for none of these in truth do
make account of the Gospel.

And now let us come to the third part of our Text, The third part.
wherein is set down what every Minister ought to preach, namely the
Gospel. They are not bound to deliver the Counselles of men, the Traditions
of the Fathers, the Statutes of earthly Princes, or the authority of mort^ll
men: but as they are the servants of Jesus Christ, Prince of all Princes,
Ierem. 1.
so are they bound only to preach his Gospel. Ezec. 3.
The true Prophets never speak of them selves to the people, but as they
received warning from the Lord. They had no authority to speak their own
words, nor the words of any mortal man. The Apostles might not teach their own
doctrine, Math. 28.20.
but only that which they had received from their Master, who enioyneth them
to teach all things what soever he had commanded them: Go (says he) and
preach the Gospel. Marc 16.
The holy Apostle writing to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11.23.
avouches that he received of the Lord, that which he delivered to them, 1.
Cor. 15.3.
whereby we may see all these Teachers confuted, which stand upon the
authority of men, which add or diminishe any thing from the Scriptures,
which join their own fantasies and the traditions of men, with the holy pure
and perfect word of God: Woe be to those sons of vanities for in deed they
preach not the Gospel, they preach not Christ but themselves. They deface
and weaken the authority of the holy Scriptures: Psalm. 19.
The law of GOD is a perfect law converting souls. ^. Tim. 3.
The Scripture is able to make the man of God absolute and perfect to all good
works. The Lord says by his Prophet: He that has a dream, Ierem. 23.28.
let him tell a dream, and he that has my word, let him speak my word
faithfully: and what is the chafe to the wheat, says the Lord? Is not my
word even like a fire, says the Lord, and like a hammer that breaks the
stone? Our Savior in the Gospel speaks against such teachers: saying, Math
15.^.
In vain they worship me, teaching the doctrine and precepts of men. Let us
remember that which is spoken in the last Chapter of the Revelation. Reave.
22.18.
I protest unto every man that hears the prophecy of this book, if any man
add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues, that are written in
this book. And if any man shall diminishe of the words of this prophecy, God
shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy
City, and from these things which are written in this book. Woe be to them
which preach and yet preach not the Gospel. But that we may know the better
how the Gospel should be preached, let us consider a little what it is, and
what it contains. The Evangelists call it the Gospel of the Kingdom. Romans
13.16.
Saint Paul accoumpteth it that which was promised before by the Prophets
in the holy Scriptures concerning Jesus Christ our Lord: And in the same
Chapter he says, 2. Cor. 5.18.
It is the power of GOD unto salvation to every one that believes. And in an
other place he calls it the word and ministry of Reconciliation. Reave. 1.2.
Saint John calls it the testimony of Jesus Christ. From these and such
like places may be easily gathered a full definition of the Gospel, which I
leave to your godly consideration: Only this I add, that under the voice of
the Gospel, is comprehended the whole history of Jesus Christ in the fl^she,
and also the fruit and use of the same History. Luke. 24.46.
As touching the first, namely the history of Christ, it is sommarily
comprehended under his Passion and Resurrection: the use and end of all is,
that we should have repentance and remission of sins in his name, and this
does Christ himself witness, when as he laid to his Apostles after his
Resurrection: Thus it is written and thus it behooued Christ to suffer, and to
rise again from the dead the third day, and that repentance and remission of
sins should be preached in his name among all Nations. To this agrees the
holy Apostle Saint Peter, Act. 5.30.
when as he says with other the Apostles, to the Counsel and chief Priests.
The God of our Fathers has raised up Jesus, whom ye slew, and hanged on a
tree. Him has God lift up with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior,
to give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins. By this we may
see how the Gospel must be preached, the people must be taught what Christ
has done for them. The whole Story of his Incarnation, Conception, Birth,
Sufferinges, Resurrection and Assention, these things I say must be often
times and effectually preached to the people, as they are set down by the holy
Evangelists and Apostles: But yet this is not enough to show what Christ has
done, to rehearse the Story of his Incarnation, but also the Minister must be
careful to preach the use, the end and fruit of the same Story: which is,
that the people may repent, be turned unfeignedly unto God, and so by faith
made pertakers of remission of sins through Jesus Christ. Repentance is a
true tournyng to GOD, a chaungyng of the outward and inward man, a dying to
sin, a living to righteousness, and a mendement of the whole life: which
this doctrine we must begin, this we must first of all and chiefly urge:
This is that doctrine chiefly and most of all preached by the holy Prophets:
Ierem. 4.1. Ezec. 18.1.
This is the common and usual voice, O Israel return to the Lord. Hose. 14
1. Math 3.2. Math. 4.17.
John the Baptist the Messenger, and also Jesus Christ his Master, they cry
both of them: Repent for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand. The Apostles also
every where exhort men to repentance to amendment of life, Romans 3.2.
to mortification and regeneration. This is an usual doctrine in all their
Epistles. Now, Romans 7.7.
they can never truly repent which know not the greatness of their sins and
the punishment due to them. And how shall they know this, except their sins
be reproved and laid open by preaching the law of GOD, for by the law
comes the knowledge of sin: so that the doctrine of the law must not be
separated from the preaching of the Gospel, for it is a Schoolemaister to
bring us to Christ. This then is necessarily required of every Minister, freely
and boldly to reprove sin in all states and degrees whatsoever. This is it
that the Lord says to his Prophet. Isai. 58.^.
Cry aloude, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show my people
their transgressions, and to the house of Jacob their sins. Our Savior
Christ accounts it as an office and duty of the holy Ghost, Ihon. 16.8.
to reprove the world of sin. And in deed there is no doctrine more
necessary for this age, wherein we live, although few can away it, but cry
out against such as preach it. And as in other places, so in this place
heretofore I have had proof in this matter. For upon just occasion noting the
certainty of Gods iugements and condemnation of the wicked, I find then that
the impenitent and such as continue in their sins could not be saved, God
could not forgive them, here upon some have said and do say still of me, that
I preached, that God could not forgive sins. I said, and I say again, the
Lord is as true in his justice, as in his mercy. Christ says, except ye
amend, ye shall all perish: and again, he that believes not is damned. Saint
Paul says, no whoremonger, nor adulterer, no unrighteous or unclean person
shall inherit the kingdom of Heaven. This is as much as I said, and in
effect all that I said, woe be to me if I preach not the Gospel.

Now Repentance is a part of the Gospel, and that we may repent, it is
needful to know our sins, and as the sins of all men must be reproved,
and the judgments of GOD threatened against them, so especially the sins of
public persons as Magistrates and Ministers: And if this in no case will be
borne, but he that does it, is straight way blamed, alas, what shall we do?
If we speak against the people, they are grieved, they say we deal hardly
with them, but look not to our selves or to the higher powers. If we deal
against Gentlemen and great men, we are hated, evil spoken of and abused: If
we speak against the ignorant and careless Ministers, they are also
offended, and say we lack discretion, charity and modesty. Thus dangerous
a thing it is to preach the Gospel, yea even amongst them that glory in the
Gospel, so that as our state stands it mate be said clean contrary to
the saying of the Apostle in this place: Woe to them that preach the Gospel:
and happy are they which preach not the Gospel, and they are coumpted wisest
which either hold their peace, or else meddle not with this part of the
Gospel. But the faithful Minister how soever he seem to be discouraged by
such wicked and unthankful dealinges of the world, yet he is to comfort
himself in the Lord, and to fear GOD more then men: It is far better to
discharge our duties faithfully with a good conscience, although we procure
displeasure of men, then by leaving our duty undone, or by doing the Lords
work negligently and unfaithfully to procure the displeasure and heavy curse
of God.

The holy Apostle has spoken it, woe be to me it I preach not the Gospel:
And to answer them somewhat which blame us for dealing so hardly and openly
against the sins of the Ministers. Is it not a part of discretion to reprove
their sins which do most hurt, and are the causes of many other sins:
this is that discretion which was used by the holy Prophets every where: They
cry out against the negligence of the Priests, against their ignorance,
carelessness, and leude conversation. Amongst many and infinite places, I
refer you that one place in the Prophet Malachie, who deals so hardly and
particularly with the Priests, as though all sin had been in them. No doubt
there were many sins amongst the people, and yet in all his Prophecy, he
seems to deal specially almost only against the Priests, being in deed
the causes and the authors of the sins of the people: yea, and these were
such Priests, as were ordained of GOD, as were the successors of Aaron, and
the tipes of Jesus Christ, and yet are so sharply and publicly reproved by
the Prophet. This discretion was used by Christ himself. Math. 28.^3.
How often times together does he pronounce woe against the Scribes and
Pharisees, calling them Hypocrites, fools, blind guides, Serpents, and
generation of Uypers: yea, how often times does he most sharply and openly
rebuke his own Apostles. Marc. ^.^7.
Perceive ye not yet (says he) neither understand, have you your hearts yet
hardened? have you eyes and see not, have ye ears and hear not, and do ye
not remember? Are not these my brethren very hard words, and such words as
are used in the Scriptures against the very reprobate, and yet the Lord Jesus
uses them against his own Apostles. Marc. 16.14.
In an other place he reproves them for their unbelief and hardness of
heart. How sharply does the Apostle deal in all his Epistles against false
Apostles: Nay, did he not repoue openly to his face, Gala. 2.^^.
Peter the Apostle, and his fellow minister, because he went not the right
way to the truth of the Gospel? So that it is not only lawful, but also
necessary, that the sins of all states, and specially of the greatest, and
of the Ministers be sharply and openly reproved. The holy Apostle says,
Them that sin openly, rebuke openly, that the rest also may fear. But are
not the sins of our Ministers open? Is not their ignorance apparent? Is not
their idleness and carelessness known? Does not the common sort of people
see it? And are not some of them feign to seek for instruction in other
places? Do not many complain of the lives of the Ministers? Do they not
say commonly of them, they speak well and do evil? They be as covetous as
others, they have never enough, do not the people see this and a great deal
more? Are not these open offenders? Does not duty, discretion and charity
bind the Preacher, if he will faithfully preach the Gospel, to reprove them
severally which give cause of such offenses? The Apostle uses this modesty
against himself, Woe be to me if I preach not the Gospel: which woe signifies
no light, small or easy matter, but grievous curse of GOD in this life, and
that fearful condemnation in the life to come. Can they be too sharply
reproved, or can any speeches be too hard for them, which are ignorant and
careless in so great a light of the Gospel, after so long profession, which
should be guides to others, which have so many excellent means, so great
helps of knowledge, offered to them by the Lord, in these days which we
live in? Can they be too much or to often spoken against, which are
ignorant, and will be ignorant, which mistike those that reprove them,
which hate all that are not like themselves, which seek to deface the
painful Minister, yea, and stand in defense of their own wickedness? Is
not this to bind sin together with Cart-ropes? Sin not twice, says the
wise man, for one sin shall not be unpunished, and therefore take heed in
time and amend, or else you perish: Say what you will think what you will, the
Lord is my witness I speak the truth. I know I might be better thought of
to pass ever such matters, but woe be to me if I preach not the Gospel.
But it may be yet that some will say although this be true that you have
spoken, yet all truth is not to be spoken at all times, in all places, and to
all persons. The Minister must cut the word of GOD aright: like a wise
Steward, he must give meat in due season. To these men I answer, that no
necessary truth is to be hidden from the Church of GOD. And to speak more
fully and directly to the purpose, as touching this matter of the necessity of
preaching, of the miserable estate of them that be with out it, and of such
Ministers as preathe not, this matter I say in my conscience, with wisdom and
discretion may be spoken privately or openly, where soever, when so ever, and
before whom soever, there is no place, but it has need of this doctrine, no
time but it requires it, no persons that it is not meet for. It is most fit
and convenient, most profitable and necessary for all states and degrees of
men, high and low, rich and poor, strong and weak, learned and unlearned,
Princes, Nobles, Bishops, Preachers, dumb Ministers and people, all have need
of this doctrine. They which have knowledge, have need of it, that they may
know what they have been, that they may see what they are, etc be thankful
to God. The ignorant sort have need of this doctrine, that they may feel their
miserable estate, and so seek for help and remedy. Princes, Nobles and
gentlemen, have need of this doctrine, and it is fit and necessary to be
preached before them, that knowing the necessity and worthiness of preaching,
they may be more careful and liberal to maintain it, and with better
conscience bestow their liuinges. The learned Bishops have need of this
doctrine, it is chiefly to be urged before them, and they are continually to
remember it, least they lay hands rashly on any man, and so be partakers of
other men's sins. The wise and Godly Preachers have need of this doctrine, that
they may be comforted and stirred up to greater zeal and trauail: ignorant
ministers have need of this doctrine, that they may see the damnable state they
stand in, and so either amend if it will be, or else give themselves to some
other calling, more fit and profitable for them. Let this doctrine be stayed:
Let men be persuaded, as they are of them selves that they are in good state
without the word preached, that bare reading will serve the turn, the people
wax careless, and make no account of preaching. For they think they are well
enough, and best of al without it, the people of God shall lack their
stre^gthening, their growing in faith and knowledge, Princes and Gentlemen will
make no account (as they do but little already) how, or on whom they bestow
their liuinges. The preachers shall be nothing set by, the Idol ministers
encouraged: ye famous universities decated and ouerthrown: and in a word yt
concealing, hindering, and withstanding this doctrine, is the next way to cast
down al religion and learning: to bring princes, nobles, rich and poor,
ministers and people, to hypocrisy and Atheism. The lord therefore open ye
mouths of his faithful ministers, to ye daily urging of this so necessary a
doctrine, yt the prince may be strengthened, the Nobles stirred up, all good
ministers encouraged, the poor people instructed, ignorance and idolatry
defaced, religion and knowledge of God, may flow through the whole land, that at
ye length, al ignorant and careless ministers may be ashamed, and every
congregation may have a faithful, several, and a resident Pastor. Thus we have
seen at large, yt whosoever will preach yt Gospel faithfully and profitably, he
must first of all, and chiefly, urge the doctrine of repentance, which men can
never have, before they know their sins by the law of God, and therefore the
sins of all men must be thoroughly and sharply reproved, and chiefly the sins
of them which do most hurt, and give greatest occasion of offense: as the sin
of the magistrate and the minister. Now indeed to repentance, there must be
joined also the doctrine of remission of sins through Christ. But this
belongs only to them that repent, that are humbled and cast down, that feel
in their conscience the torment of sin and condemnation, to such belongs
remission of sins, to such it is to be offered and preached, but it does not
appertain to ignorant and senseless men, to hipocrites, infidels, Atheistes,
Iusticiaries, profane and carnal men, these have nothing to do with the
doctrine of remission of sins.

And because this age is altogether secure and careless, full of iniquity, of
ignorance, disobedience, unthankfulness, and contempt of the word, it is
unworthy of the doctrine of mercy, and remission of sins, so much the more
unworthy, as the benefits of God in so great measure, and so long a time have
been received without any profit at all, so that in many there is nothing still,
but ignorance and Idolatry, in others less zeal and religion, less godliness
of life then was in them many years ago: and are these men worthy of mercy?
Is remission of sins to be preached and offered to them, nay the former doctrine
of repentance, of the law of reproouing sin, of denouncing the judgments
of God against all states and degrees. This part of the Gospel, I say is most
fit and needful for such an age. And woe be to us, if we preach not the Gospel.

Consider also, I beseech you here before we go to an end, the excellency and
worthiness of the preaching of the gospel. It is small accounted of in the
world, it is thought a vile and a simple office, it is contemned and despised
of the most part: But if these me^ knew the sweet and excellent things
contained and offered in the Gospel, which is the matter of preaching, they
would also know the worthiness of this so high a calling, and that the
excellency thereof may more clearly appear, let us add some further proof of
this matter. And first remember, that this calling of the ministry and
preaching of ye word, is no devise of any mortal man, but the ordinance of the
living God. 2. Peter. 1.
It was he ye ordained Moses and the prophets. The prophesy came not in the
old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by
the holy Ghost. Mark. 3.13.
The Lord Jesus himself, called, appointed, and sent forth into ye world his
Apostles to preach ye gospel: Acts 20.
It is the holy ghost, which ordains faithful overseers to feed the Church
of God. Ephe. 4.
It is Christ also at this day, which appoints pastors and teachers, for the
gathering together of his saints. It must needs be a worthy and an honorable
calling, which has so worthy authors, even God him self, his son Christ
Jesus, and the holy ghost: yea, and not only so, but as worthy have exercised
and practiced this calling. The first preacher yt ever was in the world was God
him self, he preached to Adam in paradise that comfortable Gospel, the seed of
ye woman, shall destroy the Serpents head. After that he stirred up Noe, and
Lot, Moses and the prophets, men of singular credit and authority. Nay what
shall I speak of David and Solomon, of the which, the one was a most victorious
prince, and the other most wealthy, and yet they have gotten more glory and
credits, by their doctrines and instructions, then by all their riches and
triumphs. These are gone and they are gone, but their good counsel, their
proverbs, their Psalms, and Preachings, remain and abide for ever for their
everlasting memory, to the glory of God, and daily profit of his church. The
first minister and preacher of the new Testament, was John the Baptist, of whom
Christ our Savior says, Mark. 2.
there was not a greater Prophet amongst women's children. Nay Christ himself
was also a preacher of the gospel, and witnesses that he came into the world
even to that purpose. After him ye Apostles also were sent into the world, even
to this end. Seeing then that God him self, and his son Christ Jesus, have
vouchsafed to preach the word, seeing so famous men as the Prophets and
Apostles were ordained to this purpose, it must needs follow that the office
of preaching is most famous, worthy and excellent. The worthiness also of our
calling most evidently appears in the worthiness and price of the things
committed unto us, which is the people of God, the Church of Christ, his dear
spouse, the very price of his blood: It so great things be committed to us.
If the Lord put us in trust with so dear and precious things, our calling
must needs be worthy and notable. Remember the notable effect and fruit of
this calling, the winning of souls, the conversion and salvation of the
faithful. 1. Cor. 1.
It pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. And
further, the worthy matter of preaching, is both here and other where set
down, namely the gospel, the word of reconciliation, the word of grace, the
good news and glad tidinges of salvation, the testimony of Jesus Christ,
repentance and remission of sins. O that al men would consider this, that
the glory of Gods ministry might appear. If Princes noble men, and Patrons,
would remember this, they would have more care and conscience in bestowing
their liuinges, and in defending the good minister. Pharaoh, Genesis 47.23.
king of Egypt in the time of famine, had such a care to provide for his
idolatrous priests, yt he would not suffer the^ to sell their land, but gave
the^ a sufficient ordinary to live upon. This example of an idolater in
providing for idolatrous priests shall condemn many christian gentlemen, which
have a great deal less care for true and Christian ministers, which are so
far from adding any thing of their own to their maintainaunce, yt rather
daily by deceit or violence, they take that from the Minister, which long ago
was given by others. Let the papist, the Atheist and hipocrite remember and
consider the worthy calling of the minister, that laying aside all contempt,
skoffing, disdain and railing, they might in heart, reverence and honor the
Lords ordinance, and let al people remember this that they may cheerfully
yield honor obedience, reverence and maintenance to the faithful minister,
remember that his calling is of the Lord, that he has to deal with your
souls, that his purpose is to win you to the Lord, that he preaches no less
a thing then the holy gospel of Jesus Christ. Now these things righty
considered, is he not worthy to be obeyed and maintained. Romans 10.
How beautiful are the feet of them, that bring the glad tidinges of peace:
And read al which is gone before in the chapter, that you may know that he
which preaches the gospel, by right and equity ought to live of the Gospel.
Let al good Ministers remember this for their comfort, and instruction, that
howsoever the world think of them, they have a worthy and high calling, and
let the^ not faint, but make their ministry fully known, and end their course
with joy: and let al ignorant and careless ministers, especially remember
this doctrine, that so they may either amend, or else come to shame and
confusion. If the Lord be the author of the ministry, the souls of the
people are committed to us: If the effect of our calling be to save the souls
of the people: if we have to deal with the gospel of Christ: If so famous
and notable men have always been in this calling, what a man ought ye
minister to be? what care? what conscience? what knowledge? what zeal and holy
conversation is required at his hands? You may see and witness with me, I
speak nothing to the defacing and discredit of the minister of God, but
rather to his great credit and glory: his calling is most worthy and
honorable, he is worthy of double honor, he is to be obeyed and
sufficiently maintained, he is the steward of the Lords house, and the
messenger of the Lord of hosts. But as the faithful minister is to have his
credit and commendation, so the ignorant and careless sort, as we have
sufficiently already proved, are to be cast down and defaced, because by their
ignorance, idleness and lewd conversation, they greatly dishonor the Lord,
and deface his glory, I conclude and end with the holy Apostle: I beseech you
brethren, that you know them which labor among you, and are over you in the
Lord, and admonish you, that you have them in singular love for their work
sake. By the which place, we see that such as labor not, admonish not, and work
not (such I say) are not worthy of any love or honor, but rather to be thrust
out and bannished, as unprofitable members out of ye Church of God. The which
ye Lord of the harvest, grant for his tender mercies, in Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

