A Discourse of the subtle Practices of Deuilles by Witches and Sorcerers. By
which men are and have bin greatly deluded: the antiquity of them: their
diverse sorts and Names.

With an Answer unto diverse frivolous Reasons which some do make to prove
that the Devils did not make those Aperations in any bodily shape.

By G. Gyfford.

Imprinted at London for Toby Cook. 1587.

To the right woorshipfull Master Richard Martin, Alderman, and Warden of her
Majesty's Mint.
THE sacred Scriptures (right worshipful) both of the old and new Testament,
do speak in sundrieplaces of Witches, Coniurers, and Sorcerers, and that such
doings are in high detestation before God: but what these can do few of the
vulgar sort do rightly understand. For the most part do ascribe unto them very
foolishly, such power and efficacy in working, as in deed the devil is not
able to perform, though God should enlarge his chain and give him full scope
to do all that he desires. Again, some few are of the mind, that whatsoever
is spoken in the holy Scriptures, or in other writers concerning things wrought
by such kind of people, it was not done by the devil, but was a mere craft
and cosenage of the deceiptfull men and women, which have taken upon them such
matters* That the holy scriptures have no meaning to teach that devils ever did
any thing that way* And that all other writers have erred which maintain the
same power of devils. The opinion of these latter is gross, and in some sort
contumelious, being against the direct testimonies of Gods word. The vain
conceit of those former, that is to say, of the multitude, which imagine that
Witches can work at their pleasure, and so are the common plague of the earth,
breeds so innumerable sins, that it is as a monster with many heads. It is no
marvel that ignorant men which despise the light of the gospel are deceived
by the crafty illusions of Satan: but this may seem strange, that men
instructed in the truth should be abused and err though not in the grossest
manner, yet grossly: but in deed the things are sildome handled by the preachers
of the holy word, at the least, in such full manner as might cut down all false
opinions conceived in men's minds about the same. I have therefore bin moved
upon such consideration to take some travel, and set forth somewhat to
convince men's vain opinions therein. I had not this mind, to set forth any
large discourse what has bin Judged and deemed in former times by learned men,
and what they testify concerning the slights of devils by oracles,
diuinations and such vain deceit: but only to give a taste to the simpler
sort even from the doctrine of the bible unto which I do only lea^e. It may
be some which have lofty minds, whom nothing can content, but that which is to
their thincking absolutely perfect, will say it is slender, and to no purpose.
It is that which I am able, not written for those which know more, nether to
seek the commendation of a learned work: but in very deed to apply that
small measure of knowledge which God in mercy has given me, to the benefit of
those that want it. If any with deeper skill shall reveal that which I have not
attained unto, I will be right glad, not only for my self, but also for our
countrymen which greatly need instruction in the same. I present it unto your
worship, not for the greatness of the work, but to testify my hearty
good will: which in respect of that loving favor, and friendship which your
worship has for certain years showed toward me, is great: but far
greater, because that your zeal has bin showed toward the gospel, and love
toward al those that publish and profess it. I trust your worship will take
in good part this poor gift, considering from what mind it comes: there be
some things handled in it, which are usually committed both in the city and in
the country, that are horrible before God, and to be severely punished by such
as are placed in authority, and therefore not unfit to be perused by them. The
Lord which has enriched your worship diverse ways with his good gyfts,
increase and double the same to his honor and your eternal comfort. Amen.

Your worships to command. George Gyfford.

A BRIEF DISCOVRSE wherein is declared the subtle practice of devils by
witches and sorcerers, by which men are and have been greatly seduced.
The 1 Chapter.
I Am not ignorant touching this one point, that the discovery, and laying open
of Satan's wylines which he practices by witchcraft, is a matter of no small
difficulty, the reason is manifest, and without all controversy to be
admitted, which does prove the same: for if politic wise men can dig so deep
to hide their counsels and intents, that no man can epsy them: how shall we
discry the practice of devils, who are far more deep and subtle, and can cover
their sleights and false conueiances more craftily then men* let no man
therefore suppose that I take upon me, or profess so great skill as to uncover
and make manifest, as it were the groundworke of those treacheries which he
practices by Sorcerers and Witches. The very truth is, I have not curiously
serched them out, nether do I account it the labor ^est spent. I only purpose
so far to open Satan's pack, and to make show of so many of his false and
counterfeit wares, as may instruct the simple sort to discern the better and
to judge of all the rest, which I trust every modest and sober mind will allow
to be in some measure sufficient. Seeing we have this advantage, that we are
most sure that al his finest stuff is no better then his coursest wares,
because that all his doings are for naughty and wicked purpose, howsoever they
may seem to be profitable. Whereas then the light of Gods word does dispell
the thick darkness wherewith this sly enemy hydeth himself, and manifests
his most pestiferous and deadly poison in some things, let it be a sufficient
warning for all his doings, without further examination. I am moved to deal
with this matter, (and I wish it were dealt thoroughly in by such as are fully
able) for this consideration, that I see many through ignorance of such things
are greatly ouerreached by Satan, and so entangled and snared with errors, that
they fall into very foul and horrible sins: those that understand the Latin
tongue, may very well satisfy themselves with that which wearines with great
judgment and travel has written touching this argument, I have not seen any
that have written in our tongue, which lead not into error on the one side or the
other: for there be extremities on both sides into which men do fall. The most
part have been besotted, even such as did take themselves to be very wise: for
they have verily believed that witches could do great wonders, ascribing such
power unto devils as belongs only to God. Others there be which do stiffly
maintain (but how wisely let it appear) that all witchcraft spoken of, either
in the holy Scriptures, or testified by other writers to have been among the
heathen, or in thee latter days, has been, and is no more but either more
cosenage, or poisoning: so that in the opinion of these men, the devil has
never done, nor can do any thing by witches and sorceres. It may be some man
will object, and say, what hurt can grow from this opinion? Who can tell what
hurt will ensue and grow thereof, unless he saw first somewhat by experience,
this we all do see, that one carnell of wheat being sown, does grow up and
bring forth a whole ear, with an hundredth carnels in it sometime. If one error
be planted, who can tell what increase it may yield in time? the grownd does
not bring forth the corn with such increase, as man's heart does errors. If a
man draw in one link of a chain, another follows and is by and by in sight,
which draws we know not how many after it, until we see the last. There is
no error that goes alone, or that is not linked unto other. The holy
Scriptures (which make the man of God perfect, and perfectly instructed unto
enery good work) are for to judge and to decide all controversy in this case.
I will therefore only stick unto them for testimony and proof.

The definition of a witch: the antiquity of witchcraft. The 2 Chapter.
THe perfect and right knowledge of things is, when a man does know the
causes. A definition does consist of those causes which give the whole essence
and contain the perfect nature of the thing defined: therefore where that is
found out, there is a very clear light. If it be perfect, it is much the
greater, though it be not fully perfect, yet it gives some good light. For
which respect though I dare not affirm, that I can give a perfect definition
in this matter, which is hard to do even in known things, because the
essential form is hard to be found, yet I do give a definition, which may at
the least give notice what manner of persons they be, of whom I mind to speak.
A Witch is one that woorketh by the Devil, or by some deuelish or curious art,
either hurting or healing, revealing things secret, or foretelling things to
come, which the devil has devised to entangle and snare men's souls withal
unto damnation. The coniurer, the enchaunter, the sorcerer, the deuiner, and
whatsoever other sort there is, are in deed compassed within this circle. The
Devil after diverse sorts no doubt, and after diverse forms does deal in
these, but who is able to show an essential difference in each of them from
all the rest? I hold it no wisdom, nor labor well spent to travel much
therein, one artificer has devised them al: they be all to one end and
purpose, howsoever they may differ in outward rules for practice of them, that
is little or nothing besides mere dilusion. Who will not confess that the father
of lies is not to be trusted? who knows not that all his doings are hidden
under colorable shows? shall men seek for stedfastnes in his ways? shall
they be so folish as to Imagine, that things are effected vy the virtue of
words, gestures, figures, or such like? doubtless all those are but to deceive,
and to draw men forward, and to plunge them more deeply into errors and sins.
And now touching the antiquity of witchcraft, we must needs confess that it
has been of very ancient time: because the holy Scriptures do plainly testify
so much. For in the time of Moses it was very ryfe in Egypt. Neither was it
newly sprung up: being common and grown unto such ripenes among the nations,
that the Lord reckoning up diverse kinds, says that the gentiles did commit
such abominations, for which he would cast them out before the children of
Israel, Deuteronomy. 18.
Deutron. 18. How long it was before that time, can not for certainty be
discussed: saving that (as we have said) it was not young in those days, when
Moses wrote. And if we maintain that it was before the flood, there is great
reason to uphold and justify the a^ertion. We know that the Devil was
exceeding crafty from the beginning. Always laboring to seduce and deceive
after the woorst manner. If he failed of his desire, it was because men had
not procured Gods displeasure to come upon them, to deliver them over unto
strong delusion. ^ These. 2.
But we see how God complains, that men had wonderfully corrupted their
ways, long before the flood. God being Geu. 6.
thus provoked by the wickedness of the world, what should make us doubt, but
that through his just judgment, the devil had power given him, and was let
lose, that he might seduce and lead the profane Nations into the depth of the
gulf of all abominable sins, that they might have the sorer condemnation?

That there be 8. sorts of Witches and practisers of deuilish art, mentioned,
Deuter. 18. whose names and their interpretation do here follow. The 3. Chapter.
There are no doubt a thousand ways differing every one from the rest in one
circumstance or other, under which Satan does hide and cover his craft and
deadly poison. But yet the holy Ghost to warn al men to beware, does mention
only 8. sorts, under which no doubt he comprehends all other: for there
be other names in the Scriptures, but yet such as do note in the Egyptian and
Chaldean tongue, those that are the same with some of these. I suppose that this
one reason may suffice for to prove, that under eight names all are
comprehended, because that here is a general matter dealt in. For the Lord
showing that those gentiles caused their children to pass through the fire does
by the trope synecdoche of the part for the whole, understand all that false
worship and idolatry into which they were blindly led and seduced. Then he
names who they were, whose help Satan did use as chief instruments to
seduce withal. And lastly against all these he does oppose the true Prophet,
whom he would raise up from time to time, unto his people, at whose mouth they
were to learn his holy will and the true and acceptable worship.

Now then let us come unto the names by which those evil people are named by
the holy ghost in the Hebrew tongue, for their interpretation, so far as we
may attain, will bring some light hereunto.

The most of them be set down in the form of participles. The first is called
Kosem Kesamim, that is, one which deuia^th by diuinations: the latter word is
added for to distinguish, because the deuining was more general then by
diuinations, as appears by that speech which Saul used unto the witch, when
he requested her to divine by her spirit, and to bring up him whom he should
name. The word is sometime used in good part For in the third chapter of Esaias,
God does threten for a plague that he will take away Kosem. And king Solomon
Prou. 16. does commend Kesem, that is divination in the lips of the king,
which should guide him in judgment. For in those places, Kosem is put for a
man of excellent and rare gifts for government. In other places of the holy
Scriptures, where it is taken in evil part, it is put for false prophets which
with their lying and vain diuinations did seduce the people. These Icch ^3. 6*
Mich. 3.
did sometime devise lies: sometime they did dream dreams, which they followed
and propounded to the people, as if they had received them from God, for God
did use that as one way to reveal himself to his servants, when as in deed
they were in these diuiners but the vanities of their own hearts, and
illusions of unclean spirits which always counterfeit the holy spirit of
God. Sometime the devil did inspire them, and show them visions, as if he had
been the holy Ghost, and made them utter his wares under the name of God. This
matter is is sufficiently proved by the history which is written 1 Reg. 22 for
there it is showed, that to the end king Ahab might be seduced and go up to
Ramoth Gyliad unto battle, a devil has power given him to be a lying
spirit in the mouth of the 400 false prophets which were Ahabs. Diverse things
are in that place set forth to the reach of our capacity, but this is clear
what effect it wrought, for both the Prophets and Ahab were ^eceiued. Sometime
the Lord himself did speak unto Kosem, though we never read that any true
Prophet was so called but sorcerers, which did fetch answers and diuinations
from the devil, whom they took to be God, he did so cunningly handle the
matter. But we do not read in the holy Scripture of any more but one sorcerer,
whom the Lord spoke unto. And that was Balaam, for he is called Kosem Ios. 13.
ver. 22 which name shows that he was no Prophet of the Lord. he was
accustomed to fetch answers from the Devil, why else did he will those that
were sent from the King to stay all night, to see what answer he should have?
It is said afterward, that he went Likkath Kesamim, that is, to meet with
diuinations. A thing which he was accustomed unto: but at this time God
himself did speak unto him.

The second is called Megnonen, from whence this name was derived, none can for
certainty affirm, for it may come Gnun, whereof comes Gnonah, which
signifies a set time for any purpose. It may also as well be derived from
Gnanan, which is a clowd. Of whether of them it comes, it is usually taken
for such as did practice Indiciarie Astrology, which from the course of the
heavens, and the stars, did take upon them to foreshew wars, pestilences,
sedicions, treasons, and the death of great Princes. Moreover they did teach
the fit and prosperous times for to buy or to sell: to journey by Sea or by
Land, to make peace, to undertake war, or to marry. These also did take upon
them to show unto ever man (so that they did know the instant of his birth)
whether he were borne under a lucky or an unlucky planet. What virtue or what
vice he should be given unto: whether he should be rich or poor, learned. or
unlearned, what manner of death he should dye. Against these God did inuey by
his Prophets, declaring their vanity, accompting them among the witches and
sorcerers. Their errors are very vile and abominable by which they did seduce
the blind. We may see how the Lord does speak of them Iesay chapter 47. ver.
15. where he calls them Hobere schammaim, that is, obseruers of the Heavens,
and Chozim baccahochabim, gazers upon the Stars.

It is not the mind of the Lord to condemn the observing and beholding of the
course of the Heavens, and the Stars: for they set forth the great glory of
the Creator, as those are Psalm 8. Psalm 19*
much to blame, which do not diligently behold them, to be stirred up unto
admiration and worshipping of the great God. But those Astrologians did behold
them aiuisse, ascribing all good things unto them, which are peculier unto
God, like wise the evil things which are from the devil, and from the
corrupted nature of man by original sin. Yea they tie the providence of God
unto the Stars. For if there be any sound virtue in a man, it is of grace
through faith, and not from the Stars, drookennes, adultery, murder,
disobedience, cruelty, and such like are of the Devil, and from the nature of
man by him corrupted in the fall of Adam. If a man should ask these vain
fools whether the nature of the stars be changed since man's fall, what will
they answer? for this they must needs confess, that if the Stars be the
cause and fountain of vice in men, then they be either changed from their
first creation from good into evil, or else that God created the cause and
fountain of evil. And so as they commit vile sacrilege on the one side,
when they make the stars the bestowers of virtues, likewise on the other side
they fall into horrible blasphemy when they make God the creator of the cause
of evil. The holy Scriptures do teach, that vice and uncleanness is in us from
our sinful parents, and that the Devil brought it in and does increase the
same: famins, pestilences, and cruel wars are sent by the wrath of God for
sin. The wise Astrologians tell us of this and that conjunction of planets,
which will cause tyrants to rage, friends to be false one to an other, women
will be disobedient to their husbands: these things in deed come much to
pass, and folish people believe that the Astrologians did foresee it by the
Stars. If men did prosper, it was ascribed unto that lucky planet under which
they were borne. In adversity they blamed the Stars, wars, pestilences, and
famins being thought to come from them, men never consider their sins which
have been the cause of Gods indignation (for those things he sends as the
rods and scourges of his wrath) but are led into a further mischief: for
(...) they f^ll to worship the host of Heaven. And as the Lord says, Ierem.
10. They fear the signs of Heaven. For this is man's nature, that where he is
persuaded that there is the power to bring prosperity and aduersitye, there
will he woorship. In respect therefore of this, the Astrologians are little
better then witches. For the devil does seduce by them. Some will exclaim
that we do now condemn the excellent and noble skill of Astronomy. But that
is nothing so. For it is a precious gift which God has given unto men, whereby
they are able to take view of his works which are so high above them. Men do
behold goodly things so sone as they cast their eyes upon the heavens. But such
as have the skill of Astronomy do behold a great deal more. All men do see a
glorious trim work, but yet a far off. Whereas the Astronomers are after a
sort carried up hard to it, and see those things which common sense does not
attain. It is verifyed upon all which the Prophet says: the heavens declare
the glory of God. For what mind is so blunt, but does conceive that the divine
power is great, and glorious, which made, set in order, and susteineth such a
work? The rudest sort do find that the course of the Sun and the Moon do
order the days, and the nights, months, and years, Winter and Summer? Who
perceives not what great power the Sun has with his cherishing heat to
cause things to grow? the Moon bears a great sway in the waters. Diverse
other things there be which are manifest to the simple. But how far beyond
al these go the learned Astronomers, which do come nigh to gather the
distance, and withal the wonderful greatness of the celestial bodies. and
their incomprehensible swiftness? incomprehensible I say unto man. When from
these they turn their cies toward the Creator, How can they but be amazed
at the consideration of his greatness? they see the several courses of planets,
and their motions, and the same fixed by an ^changeable decree: how can they
cease wondering at the wisdom of God, who has so skilfully fashioned them
all? that which is secret unto others, as the influences and powers, is
apparent in some measure unto them. Men's death eather for the time or for the
manner is not subject to the stares: much less virtue or vice (...) engendered
in men's minds by them. The Astronomers do very grossly err in these
predictions about winds and showrs: but yet no doubt there be many things
which depend much upon the course of the heavens: which is no derogation to the
providence of God, who has ordained, and does use them as instruments for the
same. Great operations in the bodies of men and beasts, as al skilful
physicians do find, come from the planets. And no doubt the devil took
occasion hereby for to lead men further in these things then they should have
gone. The third is called Menachesh. Nachash signifies to conjecture, from
whence the same is derived. Laban when he entreated Jacob to abide still with
him, does use that word. I have (says he) coniectured, or found by
experiments that God has blessed me for thy sake. For he felt that his cattle
did increase Genesis 30.
and thrive under his hand. Joseph* when he had caused his silver cup to be
put into the sack of his brother Benjamin, and upon search being found in the
same, speaks after the same manner: and says he did divine or conjecture by
that cup what manner of men they were. It seems that the word was used
indifferently, and often times taken in good part. When it is taken in evil
part, it seems to note such as in Latin are called Augures: A kind of sooth
sayiers, which did conjecture and prophecy by the voices, and by the flying of
Birds by the intrals of beasts, and other like observations. These were common
among the heathen, and had in great estimation. For the wiser sort did believe
that the Gods (as they use to say) did use the tongues of birds as their
interpreters, to make things known unto men. The like for the flying of
birds, which they did observe when they went about any matter. Hereupon some
were accounted luckie and some unlucky birds. And how the devil did play to
del^ men by the intrals of beasts, who knows? the thing is not now in
practice: but yet some relics and dregs of this kind of witch craft (if I may
so call it) do remain among us. For some will gather by the chattring of pyes,
that they shall have gestes come unto them. The raven he sits upon the
steeple and cries: which way does he look says one, from thence ye shall have
an eye ere it be long. Another goes abroad early in the morning, and a hare
crosses his way: a very unlucky sign he takes it to be, and looks not to
speed well that day. Friends meet together and make merry: some one at unawares
does turn down the salt: the man or the woman toward whom it falls, does
blush and take little comfort of the dainty banquet. For that is taken to be a
grievous evil sign of mishap that will follow. Heavy news is brought unto
some, that her father, or her mother, or her brother is dead: I did even look
for such a matter (says she) for my nose this day did suddenly break forth a
bleeding. Thus has the devil crept into the minds of unbelieving people, and
causes them to turn their eyes from God. These things must we condemn, but
we must take heed that we do not withal disalow those things which are to be
approved. For no doubt, as we see by experience, fowls and beasts do foreshew
some things, but yet by a natural cause. The goose and the ducke, and diverse
other water fowls, do diue and wash them and make a great stir against
rain. The crow he cries otherwise then ordinary. Other fowls there be, which
do flock together and come up from the sea, when a cold blast is toward. The
cow, though she be not very nimble, nor takes great pride in her running,
yet set^eth up her tail, and about she goes the fields. The little gnat
foundeth her trompet and gives warning of a shower. What shall we say to
these and a number such like? that they be as the heathen said the interprters
of the gods: no verily, but there is a natural cause, and that is this: the
disposition of the air is changed, and that do these fowls and beasts feel in
their bodies, which makes them so to deal, that there is such a change in the
disposition of the air, though common sense in men, do not perceive it, yet
many things do show. What makes the salt to be wet, but that the moisture of
the air does dissolve it? what makes the marble stone to sweat against rain,
but even the moisture of the air which it draws to it? what makes the soot
to fall down by lumps and gobs out of the chimney, but the moist air against
rain does loosen it? If any man will yet doubt how the sowls or beasts should
feel the change of the air in their bodies: he may see it is not a thing
strange. For a man whose arm or his leg has been broken, or that has had
some mayme or sore bruise in his body, does feel a great ache against rain:
this does come of the alteration of the air. And thus we see it behooves men
to discern between such things as have a natural cause, and thereby do after a
sort foreshew things: and those which have no cause in nature, but are to be
rejected. The 4 is called, Mechashshepha. It is derived from Cashaph, which is
found in the holy scriptures, and that is 2 cron. 33. 6. what the word does
properly signify, or from whence it is drawn, can no man tell. More then this,
that it is used for a kind of witches and sorcerers. Some do imagine that it
was such a one as did deal, not by the devil, but by poison only, so that in
their opinion, where it is translated, thou shall not suffer a witch to live
Ex. 22. It should be more fitly said, thou shall not suffer a poisoner to live.
But this is of ignorance, for the matter is far otherwise, as shall be showed:
their opinion is grounded upon the greek translation, which is asscribed unto
the 70 interpreters: for they do translate this word Mechashshepha Pharmacous,
which say they do signify such as did make and use poison. The first error is
in this, that they consider not that Pharmas* are as well good confections and
holsom medicines, as poisons: this is manifest that witches do take upon them
to deal with medicines and confections which they use together with their
charms: they make diverse ointmentes, which satan does use to delude them
withal. He teaches them also to make poisons: whereupon this is clear that
the greek word Pharmakeia is used as a general name for witchcraft and
sorcery, as we may se in diverse places of the new testament. S. Paul. Gal. 5.
reciting the works of the flesh uses that word for witchcraft. Babylon is
charged that she had seduced the nations by her witchcraft: whereas in deed that
word is used. But if any man shall say these profes are weak, and do not make
the matter so clear as to be out of all controversy, then let them consider a
second error in those which hold opinion, that Mechashshepha, was one which
dealt only with poison, and not by the devil: for howsoever the signification
of the wordcan not be found, yet we find plainly expressed in the scriptures
what this kind of witch did. In the 2 chap. of Dan. Nabuchadnezer among others
whom he would have to interpret his dream, sends also for Mechashshephim.
If these were poisoners what should they do about such a business? we see that
among the Chaldeans, and even in the kings court, they were had in great
estimation, as wise men, and interpreters of secrets. If either the name it
self had signified, or their practice showed them to be poisoners, how could
they have bin esteemed? Is any man so ^bsurd as to think that kings would
take poisoners for their chief wise men? Moses does report that when Aaron had
cast down his staff before the R. of Egypt, and it was turned into a serpent,
he sent for his wise men, and his enchauntrrs and they did the like, For every
man cast down his staff before Pharaoh, and they were turned into serpents.
These enchaunters which made the appearance of serpents, and of frogs, and
of turning water into blood, are first in that place called Mechashshephim, and
then Chartummim: what shall we say then, that the king of Egypt called for
poisoners, and that they were indeed but poisoners that wrought such feats
before him? I suppose this is plain enough unto all that will not wilfully bend
themselves to cavil, for to prove that Mechashshepha is not a poisoner, but a
witch. This kind is that which I mind chiefly to speak off, with some that
follow and therefore in this place I do omit to speak further.

The 5 is called Chober chabar, which is one that does enchaunt by
enchauntment. Chabar does signify to associat and join together: this
enchaunter as it seems is so called of the society which he has with the
devil. Lacha^h seems to be the same: for they are put both for one Psalm. 58. 4
And this latter word does signify to whisper. For Chober had his charm of
words and sentences, which he did whisper: they took upon the^ to do many
things by their charms: but the holy scriptures do mention but one. And that is
of snakes and serpents which they did charm. From hence the prophet David
fetches a comparison Psalm. 58. by which he shows that there is no good
counsel, though it be given by most excellent men, which can recover the wicked
from their ungodliness. But they stop their ears against it, or it does not
sincke into them: this his comparison is in the* word^, pethen which he uses,
is not the adder, but the basiliske or some kind of exceeding venomous serpent
which stops his ears, and will not hear the voice of the charmer though he
were a most skilful enchanter. Solomon giving instruction Eccl. 10.
how a man is to appease the wrath of the ruler, does bring a comparison also
from hence to admonish a man that has wisdom to use it so in this matter, of
asswaging the anger of the prince, that it com not to late. Thus he speaks,
if ye serpent bite where there is no charm, what profit is there to him that is
lord of y^ tongue? he calls there the lord or master of y^ tongue, not as it is
commonly taken, a babbler, but he that had skill to use his tongue by charms as
enchau^tments: which came to late and could stand him in no stead after the
serpent had stong him and so the wisdom which is in a man may come to late. The
Schoel ob, which is as much as to say, one which enquireth, (...) Ob, sometime
bagnalath Ob, one that possesses Ob. And sometime it is said, the man or the
woman in whom there is Ob, as Liuit. I Sam. 28
20. Ob is used for a bottle, or some hollow vessel. But by these places which
I have cited it is manifest that the witch and Ob are distinguished: for ye
witch is not called Ob, but enquireth at Ob: and is said to possess Ob: whereby
we may see that the devil was called Ob: for what cause I know not, but it is
supposed, because he did speak with a hollow voice, as it were out of a tub or
a botle, (...) as it is said, Thy voice shall be like Esaias. 29.
Ob out of the ground: this same kind is thought of the most learned to be that
devil which the Gretians called Python. S. Luke does report Act. 16. that at
Philippos there was a maid which had a devil in her whom he calls a spirit
of Pytho: and this maid did divine, and brought great gain to her masters
thereby. The oracles of the heathen in old time, were from such. And of this we
are also to speak more afterward: but I take it a thing very manifest, that if
Pytho were only a devil which spoke out of a maid, as this in the Acts, and
the (...) ^llae were maids for the devil which feigned himself to be a great
God* seemed yt it must be a virgin priest out of who^ he must speak then Ob
was more general. For he did not always speak out of the witch, nether did
they always demand to know y^ matter of him, but he was sent to fetch up the
soul of him, whom ye party would speak withal, as appears by the words of
Saul For he bids her divine by Ob, and fetch up him who^ he should name. The
7. is named Iiddegnoni. Iadang is to know, from whence this word seems to be
derived. For such as deal with devils do know many things, which other men can
not know so far as God does permit unto the devil to reveal: this kind is
commonly joined with Shoel Ob, and therefore thought to differ little from the
same. For they both wrought with the Devil as do the Witches, and also the
Coniurers.

Either of them no doubt may very well set forth both our Witches and
Coniurers, though there seem to be great difference between them, which is no
more in deed, but the craft of the devil. His ancient manner of practice with
Shoelob and Iiddegnoni have been detected, and therefore he has turned things
into an other form, but the matter is the same. Coniurer goes one way to
work, and the witch an other, the one as it seems for on purpose, the other
for an other, but yet the chief end is all one. The eight and last is called
Doresh el hammethim, that is as much as to say, on which enquireth at the dead.
This kind of witch was called of the grecians Necromantes, that is one which
uses diuinations by the dead. And the art it self was called Necromancia. I
see not how this could much differ from Bagnalath Ob, which took upon her to
fetch up the souls of dead men. These were so called not that they were able
by any means to featch up the soul of any man either good or bad. But the
devil feined him self to be the soul of such or such a body, and handled the
matter so that they could perceive none other. Thus much may suffice for the
names used in the holy scriptures. There be other, but no doubt the same indeed
with some of these. Now to proceed forward, and to show what any of these did
or could do by soceries, it is requisite in the first place to speak of the
chief doe^, which is the devil.

The nature of devils described with there operations and effects. The 4
Chapter.
THe Devils being the principal agents, and chief practisers in witchcrafts
and sorceryes, It is much to the purpose to descrybe and set the^ for wheree by
we shall be the better instructed to see what he is able to do, in what manner,
and to what end and purpose. At y^ beginning (as Gods word does teach us) they
were createdholy Angels, full of power, and 2 Pet. 2. Jude.
glory. They sinned, they were cast down from heaven, they were utterly
deprived of glory, and ^reserued for judgment. This therefore, and this change
of theirs, did not destroy nor take away their former faculties: but utterly
corrupt, pervert, and deprave the same: the essence of spirits remained, and
not only but also power and understanding, such as is in Angels* y^ heavenly
Angels are very mighty and strong, far above all earthly creatures in the whole
world: The infernal angels are for their strength called principalityes and
powers: those blessed ones apply all their might to set up and advance the
glgry of God, to Ephesians. Psalm. 34. Heb. 1. Revel. 21. 1. Pet. 5.
defend and succor his children* the devils bend all their force against God,
against his glory, his truth and his people. And this is done with such
fiercenes, rage, and cruelty, that the holy ghost paynteth them out under the
figure of a great red or fiery dragon, and roaring lion, in very deed any thing
comparable to the^: He has such power and authority indeed, that he is called
the God of the world. His kingdom is bound and enclosed within certain
limits, for he is ye prince but of darkness: but yet within his said dominion
(which is in ignorance of God, he exercises a mighty tyrany* our Savior
compares him to a strong man armed which keeps his castle.

And what shall we say for the wisdom and understanding Mat. 12.
of Angels, which was given them in their creation, was it not far above that
which men can reach unto? When they became devils (even those reprobate angels)
their understanding was not taken away, but turned into malicious craft and
subtlety. He never does any thing but of an evil purpose, and yet he can set
such a color, that the Apostle says he does change himself into the
likeness of an angel of light. For the same cause he is called the old
serpent, he was subtle at the beginning, but he is now grown much more
subtle up long experience, and continual practice, he has searched out and
knows all the ways that may be to deceive. So that if God should not chain
him up, as it is set forth Revel. 20. his power and subtlety joined together,
would overcome and seduce the whole world.

There be great multitudes of infernal spirits, as the holy scriptures do
every where show, but yet they do so join together inone, that they be
called the devil in the singular number. They do all join together (as our
savior Mat. 12.
teaches) to uphold one kingdom. For though they can not love one another
indeed, yet the hatred they bear against God, is as a band that does tie them
together. The holy angels are ministering spirits, sent forth for their sakes
which shall inherit the promise. They have no bodily shape of themselves: but
to set forth their speediness, the scripture applies it self unto our rude
capacity, and painteth them out with wings.

When they are to rescue and succor the servants of God, they can straight
way from the high heavens, which are thousands of thousands of miles distant
from the earth, be present with them. Such quickness is also in the devils:
for their nature being spiritual, and not laden with any heavy matter as our
bodies are, does afford unto them such a nimbleues as we can not conceive. By
this they fly through the world over sea and land, and epsy out al advantages
and occasions to do evil.

Now to declare what these malignant wicked devils have effected and brought to
pass, or what great success they have attained, would be a long and tedious
piece of work. A few short sentences of the word of God only to note the Genesis
3.
same, may suffice in this behalf: he prevailed by his great craft against our
first parents: he is called the prince of this 2. Cor. 4.
world, and the God of this world. The Gentiles did worship ^* Cor. 10.
devils, since the coming of our Savior Christ, when he was bound for a
thousand years, being let loose again, he Revel. 20.
seduced the world: yea he was the means, and it was by the efficacy of his
power, that Antichrist the Pope and his false 2. These. 2.
religion was set up. And so all the world woondered and followed the beast
(for so the holy ghost terms Antichrist) and they worshipped the beast, and
they woorshipped the dragon Revel. 1^.
which gave power to the beast.

This seems horrible and monstrous, that all nations of the world should
worship the devil: doubtless they never meant it, but when they forsook the
true worship prescribed in the holy word, and embraced idolatry, and woorship
devised by man, whatsoever intent they had, God lays to their charge that
they woorshipped devils. What victories the devil has gotten at other times
in the world, does sufficiently appear by this, that he is described with
seven crowns. He has raised up all kinds of heretics, he has Revel. 12.
stirred up sore persecutions against the Church, and caused the servants of
God to be cruel^ie murdered. Thus much touching Devils.

Devils have no power to hurt men's bodies or goods, but upon special leave
given unto them. The 5. Chapter.
THe reprobat angels are mighty, fierce and subtle, as we have briefly
noted. They be instruments of Gods vengance, and executioners of his wrath,
they do not exercise power and authority which is absolute, and at their own
will and appointment, but so far as God lets forth the chain to give
them scope. Touching the reprobat, which despise the ways of God and are
disobedient, we are taught, that God in righteous vengeance gives the^ over
into their hands, for they would not love his laws, nor honor him as their
God: therefore they come under the tirannie of wicked devils, which work in
them with power, their hearts do they Ephesians. 2.
harden, their eyes, even the eyes of their minds do they blind, they kindle
and stir up in them all filthy lusts, and carry them headlong into foul and
abominable sins.

Here is their throne and kingdom, not that they be able to carry these so
far as they would, but as every one does more grievously provoke God, so are
they plunged y^ deeper, either into monstrous heresies, or abominable
wickedness, for God gives them over into a reprobat mind, some indeed are
carried further tha^ other into the depth of impiety, because Romans ^.
God lets him more strongly invade them, and takes away his graces and
gifts, but yet he reigns in them all, in as much as they be void of the power
of grace to resist him, and are carried captives by him unto eternal damnation.

These wicked fiends do also set upon the faithful and elect people of God,
for God uses them also as instruments Ephesians. 6. 2. Cor. 12.
for their trial, they tempt and try them, they do wrestle and fight against
them, they buffet them, every way seeking to annoy and molest them both in
body and soul. God indeed turns all unto the good of these. He lets him
have power and scope no further upon them, than he gives strength and power of
grace to resist, at the least so far that the wicked one can not cause them
to sin unto death. This then being out of al controversy, that his power
even in that John. 5.
wherein it is greatest, and where he seems to have his chief right, is
limited: how shall it be deemed but that touching the bodies of both men and
beasts, or of any other creature, he can do nothing but upon special leave
and commission granted unto him. He can not do violence to the body of a
poor swine, naie he can not at his pleasure kill so much as a seely fly.
When God will have him to touch any creature, either man, beast, fish, foul,
tree, corn, or whatsoever, he flies upon it, and makes the greatest show
that he can.

These things are we plainly taught in the holy scriptures, not only by
those which were possessed with devils, and were greeuouslie tormented in
body: but also by destroying both men and cattle. In the book of Job the
first chapter, we are plainly taught, first that the devil could not touch
Job, nor any thing that was his, then that having leave, he slew his children,
destroyed his servants and cattle, and plagued him in his body with sores,
the holy ghost does so manifestly teach that the devil did this, that to
deny it is flat impiety, and the vain and frivolous cautls to prove the
contrary not worth the answering. The holy ghost does apply himself in
that place to our rude capacity, It is very true: and so does he in many
places of the holy scriptures, does it follow therefore that the things were
not? We are not capable of things spiritual, and therefore they be set forth
under the form of things corporal and visible. We may not imagine that devils
thrust in themselves amongst the holy angels into the glorious presence of God
in heaven. Neither must we suppose that GOD talks with the devil and he with
him: but these and such like things are borrowed to set before us things
invisible.

God uses the devils by his providence to accomplish the work which he
determines, either in wrath upon the wicked, or for chastisement and trial of
his Children. What could more fitly express the same, then to liken him to a
king which has servants and officers for every purpose, who came before him to
give an account what they have done, and to receive commandment what they
shall do? God limitteth their bounds, he restrains, he enlarges them at
his good pleasure. But how Satan does know where leave is given him, we cannot
conceive. For as it is said, God told him, all that he has is in thy hand:
for us he is brought in speaking in this wise, thou have hedged about him, and
about all that he has. Yea but Job says, God did all? And Job says very
true, but Job did know God did it by appointing the Devil to do it. He knew
that the thieves and murderers which slew his servant and drove away his
cattle, were stirred up by the Devil, he stays not about them nor yet
about the Devil, but looks and addresseth himself unto him which has rule
over men and Devils, shall we say then God did it, therefore the Devil did it
not? It may be objected, that if the Devil did those things, then is he able
to raise up mighty winds, tempests, lightning and thunders. If he sent that
mighty wind, which did throw down the house upon Jobs Children: if he cast
down that fire upon the Cattle and Servants, Why may not men think that
upon leave he can do the other? I answer, that the scripture ascribes the
Winds, the Tempests, the Hail and the mighty Thunders and Lightnings unto God
even as works peculier to his Majesty, by which he does set forth his
magnificence and glory. Because he alone has created them, the devils are not
able to create any thing, though never so small, much less those great
things. He sees right well the matter whereof they consiste and how they are*
by the natural course which God has set, brought forth, upon leave granted
unto him, he is able in some sort to collect the matter of them, or being
prepared by the Lord, to make them more violent: he does covet also in the
darkest tempests, in the most raging winds, and terrible crackes of thunder
to convey himself into the storm, to come with it, and to show some terror
of his presence, (...) if (...) granted he appears unto some in an vglye
shape, or renteth up trees. And this he does to bring men in belief that all
those terrible things wherein there is so glorious and so mighty power showed,
are his works. And herein he has greatly bewitched the blind world, for it
is a common opinion, when there are any mighty winds and thunders with
terrible lightninges, that the Devil is abroad and does it. When they hear
of houses burnt, or trees rent up and other harms by Sea or by Land, by and
by they begin to suspect that there have been coniurors abroad, then rumors
are spread, the coniurors, says one, are taken, they have confessed that they
raised up Devils, and that three are broken loose, yea five, says another, and
how they will get them in again God knows, this wicked folly which possesses
the minds of the ignorant sort, is a fruit of Popery. For they tookeaway the
light, and the Devil did delude them in the dark at his pleasure, for behold
the wisdom of their great Prelates in this point.

Had they not hallowed belles to ring in great tempests, that the Devil
might be driven away, as not able to come within the sound of them? Did not
these grave fathers believe that those great and terrible things were wrought
by the Devil? And the greater they were, the rather men ascribed them unto
Devils, a vile and brutish impiety, that the more glory did appear, the
sooner they should attribute the same unto the Devil, but in very deed it is
the Psalm. 29.
glorious GOD which causes it to thunder. but it may be thought for all this,
that the Devil does bring lightning and thunder, and mighty winds, because
as it seems those were no less which he did for to plague Job.

I will show therefore that there is great difference between the mighty
works of God, and those which are asscribed there, unto the Devil, they
indeed seem to be as great lightning, and thundering, as strong winds, but
yet they are not, the Deull causes fire to fall down upon the servants and
the cattle of Job and burns them. Let us see whether that be like unto the
lightning and thunder, God creates them and sends them in the Clouds with
mighty power and terror, they pass through the earth and upon the seas at his
commandment, the Devils did not make nor create that fire, but being already
scattered in the air a company of them di^ gather it together and cast it
upon the men and the beasts, and make it kindle upon them, this may seem a
very great matter above that which it is, unless we consider how it was done.
First this is evident that the sun (...) beams (...), being the fountain of
heat, there is fire dispersed: because when they he collected* or the
scattered heat which is in them, draw together, they do burn, as experience
does teach by some glasses which (...) holden in y^ sun, Plutarch shows
concerning the holy fire which the virgins called vestals, did keep, ordained
by Numa, that when it was out, either by negligence or mishap, it might not be
kindled from common fire: but they had a way to collect the beams of the sun.
We see also that by striking a sharp flint and a sharp Iron together, there
comes very burning fire. It does not come out of the stone, nor yet out of
the Iron, for so much fire as with a multitude of strokes is brought out of a
little stone and a small Iron, could not be in them, but they must needs be
very hot, whereas indeed they be very cold, thus therefore it is: God has so
ordained that in this whole world there cannot be Uacuum, that is to say, any
place void or emptye, but it must needs be filled with so^what, there is no
power in man to make such empty place, so much as a pins head: for somewhat must
fill the room, we see therefore that water will not run out at the bottom of a
vessel that has holes, unless there be way for the air to come in, to fill
the room, put a bottle into the water being empty, you shall well perceive
that it is full of air, for no water will into it but as the air goes out,
even so when a man strikes a sharp stone, upon the sharp edge of Steel, he
parts the Air in sun^er at some strokes, that if there were not a quicker
thing then air, there would for some moment of time be Uacuum, the fire
therefore being dispersed does gather to a spark and fill the place where the
air was parted. What marvel is it the^ though a sort of malig^ant spirits,
which have far greater power and skill then men, do collect the fire which is
scattered in the air, and draw it down upon men. This is nothing to the
terrible lighteninges and thunders, which the mighty God has created and
orders. But what for the ^oisterous winds, did not Satan raise as great as
it seems as the greatest when it threw down the house, which no doubt was
strong, for Jobs Children (...) no begger's. (...) answer that this wind was
even the Devil, or a company of Devils which moved the air and came rushing
upon the house themselves with noise, and threw it down. It does follow
hereof that the Devil can send forth winds as the Lord does, which at his
commandment go forth over the large kingdoms of the earth, and over the
wide Seaes, this is a work far above the power of Devils, and therefore the
Devil has bewitched those whieh believe that he can do such things. The
Devils have power also to infect the humors in men's bodies, and of beasts
likewise* to bring sores and diseases, when God gives him leave* this might
suffice to prove that the Devils have no power to hurt, but upon granted,
and that the same obtained, they can do much, but yet I will add one
testimony, because it is very clear, and brings the matter out of all
doubt, leaving no place for any cavil* the Evangelists do report that our
Savior did cast Devils out of a man possessed, They besought him that they
might enter into a great heard of swine which was feeding in the mountains, he
gave them leave, and the whole herds was carried into the Sea and drowned in
the waters. We see they could not touch the Swine without leave, and when that
was granted, what mischief they wrought, thus much for this point.

Devils can appear in a bodily shape, and use speech and conference with men.
The 6. Chapter.
OUR Savior Christ says that a spirit has neither flesh nor bones. Luke. 24.
A spirit has a substance, but yet such as is invisible, whereupon it must
needs he granted, that Devils in their own nature have no bodilye shape, nor
visible form* moreover it is against the truth, and against piety to believe,
that Devils can create or make bodies, or change one body into another for
those things are proper to God: It follows therefore that whenever they
appear in a visible form, it is no more but an apparition and counterfeit
show of a body, unless a body be at any time lent them. And when as they
make one body to bear the likeness of another* it is but a color. But some man
will say, what reason is there to show that they can do so much, being of an
essence invisible? We may not stay here within the limits of our own
reason, which is not able to reach unto, or to comprehend what way Devils
should be able to have such operations. We may not I say measure their
nimblenes, and power, and subtilties in working, by our own understanding or
capacity. But we must look what the holy scripture does testify in this
behalf, and therein rest and stay our selves. We have a manifest proof, Exodus
7. that the Devil can take a b^dily shape. For when Aaron had cast down his
staff and it was turned into a Serpent, the Enchaunters of Egypt cast down
their staves and they became Serpents, which was indeed, but in show and
appearance which the Devil made* for he deluded the senses, both in hiding the
form of the staves which indeed were not any way changed: and also in making
a show of such bodies as were not* this was done openly and in y^ clear
light, for otherwise it might be thought to be a mere illusion. For we see
that men in extreme sickness think they hear a voice and see a shape, which
none other in presence either hears or sees, some are so melancholic that
they imagine they hear and see that which they do not, for Satan deludeth the
fantasy so ^ore, that the party does suppose that his very outward senses do
perceive the matter* but here was no such thing: but all which were with Pharao
think the^e (...) very Serpents indeed, saving that Moses and Aaron did know
it was the iugling of the Devil. King Saul when God had ^. Sam. 28.
forsaken him, and being in distress sought unto a Witch, He is desirous to
talk with Samuel which was dead, for he annainted him to be king over
Israel. He requesteth of the witch that she would bring him up, she takes the
matter upon her, there comes up one which takes upon him to be Samuel, and
the Scripture calls him so, Saul and the witch take it to be so He appears
in a bodily shape, and uses goodly plain speech. It was not the true, but a
false and counterfeit Samuel, even a wicked Devil. For he handles the matter
very* cunningly, but yet in diverse things bewrays himself. He was content
that Saull should fall down and worship him, which the true Samuel would
never have suffered* He does not rebuke him for seeking unto a witch, which the
scripture condemns. And the Lord imputes it unto Saull 1. Cro. 10.
for one of the sins for which he did destroy him. In which place the Lord
says he sought to consult with Ob. This is out of doubt that the holy Ghost is
far from calling the soul of Samuel Ob. and as for the woman she is not called
Ob* but Bagnalath Ob* on which possesses Ob. Now let us consider his speech,
why, says he, have thou disquieted me, by calling me up? Mark what subtilty
there is in these few words. This is most certain, that the souls of
righteous men are not subject to the call of a witch, but the crafty Devil
would make men believe that they be, and even drawn forth and troubled, or
disquieted. For his speech is Lammah Hirgaztan^, which is as much as to say,
wherefore have thou caused me to shake or be disquieted with fear? It is
derived of Ragaz which is to shake and tremble. Would the true Samuel make men
believe that the witch with her Ob. had such power to fetch him up? If it were
Samuel indeed, why did he not rather say that God sent him? Again the common
error was that the souls of the righteous were in some place beneath in the
earth where the witches familier spirit could come, and bring them up, and for
this cause also this counterfeite Samuel says he had made him come up.
Abraham's bosom was Paradise, and S. Paul was taken up into the third 2. Cor.
12.
heaven and that he says was Paradise. Then Samuel must have come down, and
not have come up. We see then that his speech ^endeth to confirm wicked and
abominable errors, which may suffice to prove that it was a Devil.
Furthermore Moses does show that at the beginning the Devil Genesis 3.
did talk with Eua, using the serpent for his instrument. If he could then
immediately after his fall use speech, shall we doubt that he cannot now? Is it
not appara^tly set forth in the gospel, that Devils came out of many crying
and saying, what have we to do with Jesus, etc. S. Luke Act. 19. does show that
certain did take upon them to name over those which had unclean spirits the
name of the Lord Jesus, saying we adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preaches, and
he says, that the evil spirit made answer and said, Jesus I know, and Paul
I know, but who are ye? I conclude therefore out of these places of scripture,
that Devils can take a bodily shape, and use speech.

An answer unto certain frivolous reasons, which some do make to prove that
the Devils did not make those apparitions, and that he cannot appear in any
bodily shape. The 7. Chapter.
THere is nothing almost so plain, but that there may be cauils made against
it, and some probable show of reason, such therefore as take upon them to
maintain that Witches and coniurers do nothing by the help of Devils, and
that spyrites can take no visible shape, devise all the shifts which they are
able, to avoid those testimonies of scripture which I have alleged. It is
necessary therefore that ere I proceed any further, (...) the futility and
vanity be showed of the chief reasons which are brought for that purpose.
First touching the Enchaunters of Egypt, might it not be that they made
Serpents indeed by natural Magic, for they which do know the secrets of
nature may do things strange and meruellous, To this I answer, that if Iannes
and Iambres did by their skill in the secret power of nature, turn their
staves into very serpents, I know few of the miracles of Christ, which they
might not either do, or as great. Christ turned water into Wine. If those
Enchaunters had been there and by natural Magic had turned their staves into
serpents, who would not, or might not justly have affirmed their miracle to be
the greater? The works which Christ did bear witness of him, as he says, to
declare that he was the son of god. How could this testimony be infallible,
if so great things might be wrought by the power of nature, we see then it
is against piety to bring such a thing in question, any way to beat it into
men's heads. Again, if those Magicians had such skill to work by nature, they
must needs go beyond nature her self, which were a foul absurdity to be any
way granted, for they could bring forth serpents at an instant, and she can
not bring forth the least things that grow, or that have life but by degrees:
take a little fly, first it is a fliblow, then a maggot, and afterward
comes to have wings, both godliness and nature condemning such opinion of
natural magike, I will speak no further of it. It will be objected that yet
notwithstanding it does not follow of necessity that they did it by the
devil, for there is a third way by which by all likelihood it was done, If
there be but a third, as indeed it is impossible to find a fourth, and that it
be proved not to be by that, then it must of necessity be left unto the first,
that is to the devil. Let us see what that is: what absurdity say some can
follow, if we affirm that they were very serpents indeed, and that God himself
did make them, to the end that Pharaos heart might be hardened: I answer that
here will greater absurdity follow, than by affirming that the sorcerers by
their enchantments did make a show of serpents, and that he which coueteth to
avoid Charibdis does fall into Scylla, shunning one danger, lights into a
greater* for (if men will see) there is no absurdity at all to affirm that
the devil did make appearance of serpents, but to say the staves were turned
into very serpents indeed, and that God did it, does draw a tail after it
which is not sweet. If this may be, or that these two might stand together,
that God does condemn enchantments, and now work by inchanters, yet how
absurd were this for any man to affirm, that the power of God did resist and
withstand himself, for Moses and Aaron came in the power of God, Paul says
Iannes and Iambres withstood them, if God turned their staves into Serpents,
then God withstood them, and his power was opposed against himself, his
woonders were for to fight one against another. The Lord is brought in here on
both sides, I know not what other men can see, but so far as I can judge,
this is gross impiette.

Moreover, these Magicians were in great credit and estimation with Pharaoh and
his princes for doing such like matters before (...): otherwise how should it
come into Pharaos mind so readely to send for them for such a purpose.

Admit the king were a slely fool, and his nobles simple men, which could not
epsy cosenage, yet how comes it to pass that these Sorcerers go so boldly
unto the matter? Here is no place for cosenage now, there is no slight, nor no
conueiance wrought only by man, which is able to carry away the matter. They
must now show somewhat which is not in man's power, or else all is marred, for
they shall bewray themselves to be mere coseners, and so become ridiculous,
and not only that, but also the king espying their former deceits it will cost
them their lives. They be not afraid, they draw not back, they make no
excuses, shall we imagine they did know God would turn their staves into
serpents? No, we see they took Moses to be such an one as themselves, and
therefore were bold to oppose themselves, and to withstand him, until such
time as they were even forciblie constrained to acknowledge that Moses and
Aaron did work by the power of God. This, say they, is the finger of God,
whereby they secretly confess that theirs was no such Exodus 8.
power. The witch that K. Saul went unto, wrought by the devil, the thing is
clear and manifest, but there is nothing so evident, but that some show of
reason may be made against it, and that with such coullors as may deceive the
dim sight of ignorant persons* this therefore must come also to be scanned, for
sundry vain and ridiculous cauils are gathered and patched together, to prove
that it was neither the Devil nor Samuel, but a mere cousenage by the Witch,
or by some companion, to say it was Samuel is very absurd, as we have also
before showed, and to prove that it was not the Devil, first there is brought
for help the blind opinion of a Papist, who says that the Devil cannot abide
the hearing of the name Jehovah which is five times named in that communication
between Samuel and Saull, it is to be accounted among the vile and filthy
abominations of popery, that they ascribe a power to drive away Devils unto
words and sillabes pronounced; is every wicked man able to drive away the
Devil? For there is none so vile but is able to pronounce the word Jehovah,
and in deed the name Jehovah is seven times used in that place, and all by the
Devil himself there speaking unto King Saul. I do hold most firmly that
every supernatural work is by the power of God, and to give witness to the
truth, but here is none, this is no miracle but such as the nature of the
Devil is fit and able to accomplish. A man may wonder to see, that the same
pen should write, that every supernatural work or miracle is of God, and is
a testimony of truth: and y^ God turned the staves of Pharaos Enchaunters into
Serpents, which in very deed withstode the truth, but thus some argue the
Witch did know Saul, and dissembled in saying that she did not, and therefore
did connterfait in all the rest* to make this a necessary consequence, there
must first be proved that which is omitted, namely that dissimulation and
witchcraft are such dissentanea as cannot be found at once in one subject, or
that a woman can not be both a dissembler and a Witch, proof is made that the
woman did know Saul, but with that which is weak^, and with that which is
false.

Saul was a very tall man therefore she did know him so soon as she saw him,
did she know his just stature, or was she sure there was none in all those
parts so tall as the king. A wise man might sooner be deceived that way, then
a man of mean wit with this argument. It is said that her house was nigh unto
Saules house, which diverse circumstaunces do declare, and thereby she must
needs know him, this is utterly false, for Saul did not come unto her from
his house but from the Camp. The Town where this Witch dwelt was Endor in the
tribe of Manasses. Joshua. 17. ver. 11. Saules house was at Gybeah a City of
the Beniamites, of which tribe he was. 1. sam. 15. 34 the Philistines had
pitched their camp at Shunem in the border of Issacher.

Saul had gathered the men of Israel and went and pitched nigh unto them, and
from thence he went unto the witches house, which was not far off. The like
may be said of Samuel, that he was not her neigbhour, for he dwelt at Rama in
mount Ephraim* whether Saul did see any apparition or not, the words do not
flatly affirm, but most like that he did, though not so soon as she. If he
did not see but hear a voice, can it be concluded that therefore it was
consenage, it appears that Saul fell down upon his face to worship and that
he which spoke unto him was now in his presence. Neither is it said that the
woman came out unto Saul, or that she went in unto him, but that she went unto
him being sore troubled and lieng upon the ground. But the strongest reason of
all is yet behind to be gathered out of the speech used unto Saul. The speech
and phrase is such as agrees not with the nature and purpose of a devil, for
the papists do confess that the devil can not abide at the naming of God.
They do indeed, and such as believe them are not much wiser than they. The
devil seeks for to draw men into sin, and not to warn and rebuke them for
evil as he does Saul.

If this had been a devil, he would have been more crafty than to leave so
godly an admonition which should be prejudicial unto his kingdom. Alack,
alack, I see that those which take upon them to be wiser than all men, are
soonest deceived by the devil. Does not saint Paul affirm that Satan can
transform himself into the likeness of an Angel of light* Can not he or
doath not he use right excellent godly speeches mixed with bad, to the end he
may deceive? There can not almost be a more subtle speech to establish
abominable errors, than that which he here uses unto Saul? It is not
disagreeing from his nature, nor any prejudice unto his kingdom to speak good
words, to the end he may do hurt.

Those were good words, and might seem to be uttered unwisely to the decay of
their own kingdom, when devils came out of many crieng and testifieng, That
Jesus was the son of God: but they were craftily spoken, and for a pestilent
purpose, and therefore Christ charge them to keep silence.

What an excellent speech does the Dauill utter out of the maid at Philippos,
when she followed Paul and the other ministers Act. 16.
of the gospel which were with him? These men, says that Devil, be the
sernants of the most high God which declare unto you the way of salvation? What
can be spoken more pithely in few words to set forth the dignity of the
Apostle and his companions? What can more commend the certainty and
preciousnesse of their doctrine, he sets forth, and commends those
ministers of the Gospel, to be the servants of the most high God. What says
the Apostle more by the spirtte of God when he does move men to esteem of him
not as of a common person? Is not this the greatest dignity he challenges,
Paul a servant of God, an Apostle of Jesus Christ? What is more precious then
salvation? Who ought to be more welcome? Then they whose doctrine does guide
men in the way thereunto? God himself does send it, it must needs be
infallible. Does S. Paul say any more in effect, when he calls the Gospel
the word of reconciliation? And says they were Ambassadors from God to do the
message? Did the Devil forget himself at this time? Was he desirous indeed
that Paul should be had in honor, and that men should harken unto his
doctrine, to learn the way of salvation? Would he go about to throw down
or diminish his own kingdom, or was he so sottish that he did not know what
was against himself? This is more strange, that the Devils which gave
aunsweres being accounted Gods, and credit given unto them and worshipped as
Gods among the Heathen, would yet give such a testimony, there was no
commendation esteemed so among the Heathen, such as at that time were the
people of Philippos, so much as the commendation which Apollo gave of any man.
For now they thought, even a God had spoken it which could not lie. This might
seem to be the way to set all in admiration of Paul. But the blessed servant
of GOD, did know the craft and ^lice of this cursed fiend: and took it
grievously that he should take upon him to be as a fellow minister with them,
even a Preacher of the Gospel. If any man will be so bold or rather impudent,
to affirm that this was not the Devil which gave aunsweres in the word, and
which vetre^this goodly speech, but was some cousenage, I will say no more but
this: let all men peruse the history set down by S. Luke, and judge
indifferently, whether the holy spirit of truth affirming one thing be to be
credited, or vain ^ men maintayning the contrary. Let us observe further some
other circumstances and we shall easily see it was not the Witch nor any man or
woman which spoke thus unto Saul. First this is a clear case, that the Witch
could not for certaintye know that Saul should be ouerthrown. For to say that
the people had forsaken him is utterly false, he had (as the holy ghost
reports) gathered all Israel unto the battle, and mustred a great army,
Saul was afraid, but yet he kept it close from the people, for they set
valiantly upon the host of the Philistians, and fought with them, then if the
woman could not know for certainty that Saul should at that time be
overthrown, how durst she plainly tell him that he should die, and that within
so short a space, even the next day? If he had escaped at that time, would it
not have cost her the best blood in her body?

Would not her cousenage have been espied, and how she had certefied the king
to his danger? no punishment could be sharp enough for such a fact. It will be
answered that the Devil could not know for certainey that Saul should be
ouerthrown. It is very true, but yet he could collect more certainly then any
man, he did see more on both sides then the Witch could gather by a few
words, he knew what was the strength and courage of the Philistians, and that
they purposed to fight the next day, and what doubt was in the heart of Saul,
the woman could not be sure when the battle would be. He did know y^ God would
cast off Saul, as he had spoken by Samuel, the most part of the people did not
regard what God spoke by his servant the Prophets, so that we may well think
(that if the poor Witch heard h^e what Samuel said) yet she could not tell
when, nor in what manner, nay she was one which regarded not the voice of gods
Prophets, for if she had, she would not have been a Witch. If the devil were
deceived and that the K. had escaped yet he needed not to fear, there was no
way to punish him, he durst speak boldly and reprove the king, the surest way
for the Witch (if she had used but cousenage) had bin to tell Saul a smoth tale
to flatter him, and to encourage him unto the battle, for then if he had
fallen, he could not come again to reprove her, if he had escaped, she should
have been had in great estimation, and richly rewarded. And who is so simple in
the knoweledg of Gods word and the Histories set forth therein, but must needs
confess, that it has always bin the manner of couseners and flatterers to
tell Kings of prosperous and good success, and to speak pleasant things.
Wherefore do couseners and flatterers practice their lewdenesse, but for favor
and gain? Can any be fit for such a purpose, which is so foolish as to tell a
King that he shall be destroyed? Was this King Saul grown contemptible and
of no power? We may see in the History that he was of great force and
dealte cruelly. For he destroyed Nob the City of the Priests with the edge of
the sword, he persecuted David, and had many to set him on, durst now a
poor woman despise him? Was the form of words used by Samuel so commonly
bruted abroad, and in every man's mouth, that the very Witch had it so
perfectly. Men will not speak that which is against the King and to his
dishonor in the days that he lives. If those words of Samuel were publikly
spread among the people, yet they were not believed, but of the smalest part
this is plainly proved by this, that after the death of Saul, the most of the
Tribes of Israel did not admit of David whom Samuel had anoyn^ed, but cleave
unto the house of Saul, and made war. David was now in Banishmente fled out
of the Country, there was no show that he should be King, and yet in this
speech unto Saull it is said expressly, God will rend the kingdom from out of
thy hand, and give it to David. I doubt not but whosoever considers these
things, and is not wilfully bent to maintain his own conceit, he will
confess that this was the Devil, who knows what God speaks by his
Prophets, and is right sure it will come to pass. Whereas the most part of
men never regard what the Lord has spoken.

The Devil did speak unto Eua out of the Serpent. A Genesis 3.
thing manifest to prove that Devils can speak, unless we immagine that age
has made him forgetful and toungue tide. Some hold that there was no visible
Serpent before Eua, but an invisible thing described after that manner, that we
might be capable thereof. The reasons which are brought for proof are more then
frivolous, and therefore I will but briefly touch them. It was the Devil
himself and not a snake which seduced Eua, that is most true. For who does
maintain that the beast was any more but the outward ininstrument which the
Devil used. This instrument was not a snake, but one of the greater beasts.
For Nachash does not only signify a snake, but also the beast which is
called a serpent. Whereof there be diverse kinds and some greater then other.
Behemoth are beasts, among which worms are not reckoned, and this Serpent is
matched with them, as one of them* When it is said thou art cursed above
every beast. It is further said, that if here by the name Serpent were meant
both the Devil and a beast, the holy ghost would have made some distinction,
that we might be informed, as though it were such an absurdity to set forth
the story as it did at that time appear unto Eua, and to comprehend under the
name of that which was visible and known being the instrument, the chief
worker who was unknown and invisible? Eua did not as yet know of the fall of
Angels, she knew no name of Devil or Satan, she did not understand that
there was a Devil, no doubt God did instruct both Adam and Eua that there was
another besides that visible serpent, when he promised them victory by Christ*
further this is objected, that the Devil is called a Serpent by an Allegory,
and therefore what necessity to take it there of a beast? I answer that the
Devil indeed is by a metaphor called a serpent in many places of holy
scripture. But does it therefore follow* that in this place was no^e but he?
The storye does plainly euince that he covering his practice by the beast and
using him for his instrument, has ever after the same name given unto him.

And for learned interpretors of that History, as Master Clauine and others,
what iugling is it to allege some of their sayings contrary unto their
meanings, which do very well accord with this, that the Devil spoke out of a
beast indeed. It is thought a poor Snake should not have the curse laid
upon him, for how could he be guilty of any sin? This cannot stand with
the justice of GOD. I answer that Master Painter has deceived many which
take it to be a Snake, and touching this beast the serpent, it stands with
the justice of God that he should be accursed above every beast. He is an
ignorant man that knows not that every beast, and the very earth it self
had a curse laid upon them for man's sin, they did not offend but were made
for man's sake.

Then if God in justice laid a curse upon them, as to say it were not (...)
justice because they did not sin were blasphemy* how should it seeeme
strange that God should curse the Serpent above every beast, who was the
instrument of man's fall, though he knew not what he did? But to let those
go, this is the chief and principal, for the matter which I have undertaken,
to show even by the very storye that there was not only the Devil, but also
a very corporal beast. If this question be demanded, did Eua know there
was any Devil, or any wicked reprobate Angels. What man of knowledge will
say that she did? She did not as yet know good and evil. She knew not the
author of evil. When the Lord said the Lord said unto her, What is this
which thou have done? she answers by and by, The serpent deceived me. She
saw there was one which had deceived her, she names him a serpent, whence had
she that name for the devil whom she had not imagined to he? It is plain
that she speaks of a thing which had before this received his name.

It is yet more evident by that she says, yonder serpent, or that serpent, for
she not^th him out as pointing to a thing visible: for she uses the
demonstratiue particle He in the Hebrew language, which seuereth him from
other. Any man of a sound mind may easily see that Eua names and points
at a visible beast, which was nombred among the Beasts of the field. The
curse is directed to both under one, because they were joined in one touching
the work, some thing in it cannot belong to the Serpent, as the victory by
Christ* Likewise no allegory can well mollify some speeches to apply them
unto a spirit, as to go upon his breast, to eat dust all the days of his
life, then we see that Devils can speak. And the Devil did speak out of a
man Act. 19. for the holy ghost does affirm it. (...) 19.


There were says Saint Luke, certain of the runnagate Jews, which were
exorcistes that took upon them to name over those that had evil Spirits,
the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, we adjure you by Jesus whom Paul
preaches. And they were certain sons of Sceua a chief Priest a Jew,
which did this thing, the evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, Paul
I know, but who are ye? the man in whom the evil spirit was, ran upon them
and did prevail against them. We see it flatly said, the evil spirit, and not
the man said, Jesus I know, Paul I know, etc. Why should we doubt then, but
that devils, when God does permit can speak? I know not what color of reason
can be alleged against this, unless some will say it was long ago: let it be
showed that such a thing has been of later times. There might be, ye see, if
God permit, and no doubt there have been many at all times: though there have
been also and are many notorious counterfeits* ^f devils can speak, yet there
is a reason made by some, which boasts it self to be unanswerable, that
spirits can take no visible shape. It is gathered from the words of Christ unto
Thomas, thou do John 20.
believe because thou have seen Thomas, he says not because thou have felt.
I answer that as Thomas would not trust his sight, but would have it
confirmed by feeling, which was granted him: so Christ puts the one sense,
namely the sight, for both sight and feeling, or for a sight confirmed by ^ee
ling, this is proved by Christ's own words in Luke 24. For Luke 24.
he says handle me and see: when they were afraid and thought it had been a
spirit* why does he not say handle and feel? I conclude therefore that it is
a thing most certain by the word of God, that Devils can both speak, and
take a visible shape upon them, when God does permit.

No man nor woman can give power unto the devil to do hurt, neither does
their sending authorize him, but he uses them only for a color. The 8.
Chapter.
HItherto we have declared in some measure the nature and power of Devils. Now
it rests that we speak somewhat touching those instruments whom they use
for the practice of their wicked deceit. For the unclean spirits are the
doers in sorceries and witchcraftes: men and women are but instruments. It is
the common opinion among the blind ignorant people, that the cause and the
procuring of harm by witchcraft, proceeds from the Witch, and that either
the Devil could or would do nothing unless he were sent by her.

How absurd this conceit is, shall easily appear if we weigh these few
rules. First al men that have the use but of natural reason, must needs
confess that witchcraft and coniuration are to be nombred among these filthy
sins which are most abominable and odious in Gods sight, this is also as
clear, that the fowlest sins do spring and flow from the most unclean
Fountain, though men be corrupt by nature and very vile, yet the Devils are
much worse. They be the authors and deuisers of sin, they draw men into
it, the Devil then has devised witcherye, coniuration, and Enchauntment. The
Devil allure th and seduceth men to become Witches, Coniurors, or Enchaunters,
he seems to be a servant unto the Witch, but she is his servant. The
coniurors suppose that they bind him by the power of coniuration in which they
reckon up the names of God, but he is voluntarily bound, or does indeed but
feign himself to be bound* for shall we think y^ he would devise and teach an
art whereby he should indeed be bound? Or can any man be so blockish as to
imagine that god will in deed bind him by his power at the will of a Coniuror.
Again we may not think that he which is more forward unto evil and
mischief, is set on and procured by the less forward unto evil, for that is
preposterous, then must we grant that the Witch does not provoke forward
the Devil, but the Devil bearing swaye in the heart sets her on. He says
she sent him, but from whence comes it that she sent him? Did he move her
(...) to do so? He does harm, shall we suppose that she gave him commission
and power* let it be examined, first we confess that god rules all by his
providence. Next this is taught us also in the holy scriptures, y^ the devil
Ephe^. 2. ^. Cor 4.
rules with power in the children of disobedience, he is the god of ye world,
sinful men are by a righteous bengance of god subject unto him, what shall we
say then, can y^ less give power unto the greater, shall a silly old creature
scarce able to bite a ^ust in su^der, give autortiy and power to y^ prince of
darkness? is any man so simple to believe that the Devil can have power given
him but from a greater then himself? or when he has liberty, will he not
execute his power unless some witch send him? what is a witch then? what is a
coniurer? what is an enchaunter? surely the very vassals and bondslaues of the
devil: they have no power to do, or to authorize him to do any thing. But he
being the minister and executioner of Gods vengeance* when God gives him power
he uses them as his instruments: not to receive help by them (for when can
they help him? but only for a color, that he may draw multitudes into sin
by means, as indeed he does. This shall appear fully in that which
follows: and therefore I will only touch it here by the way, and stand no
longer about this point which is manifest enough.

That the Devil practicing his mischief by sorcerers, does lead the wicked
world into many horrible sins which snare the souls of men unto eternal
condemnation. The 9. Chapter.
IF this be mayntained that y^ witch is but an instrue^mt under a color, then
some will demand what great thing Satan gains by such. I answer that he
gains that which he endeavors above all things to bring to pass: and that
it is to lead men into the depth of sin, that they may be drowned in the
deeper cendemnation. He wayeth not so much the plaguing of men's bodies, or
hurting their cattle, as he does that. Here therefore is the chief matter of
all, which is to disclose, and lay open the subtilty, the errors, and sins,
which by this means he draws men unto. I will first begin with the coniurer
and the witch, and all those which use enthauntment. How miserable is their
case, which are so fallen from the living God, to have society and fellowship
with devils? The coniurer estemeth him self to be a great Lord and commander
even of devils, and in deed has no power to do any thing further then Satan is
willing and receives power from God, and moves his wicked heart to deal in.
This great bynder and commander of Devils, has his own soul bound and
commanded by them, and is in miserable and vile captivity.

The Witch is not also great, but yet the pore old hagge thinks her self
strong, that she has two or three servants as she may seem to plague such as
she is offended withal. Alas what an horrible state has the feind brought her
into, who seems to be her servant, and yet commands her, and r^leth in her
heart even as her God. What greater victory then that which he has gotten
ouersuch? The charmer often times knoeth no devil: but with his charm of words
he can catch rattes, and burst snakes, take away the pain of the tooth a^he,
with a pair of sheares and a sieve, find out a theife. Many other pretty
knackes he glories in, as if he had attained great wisdom. The art is
deuillish, when any thing is done the devil works it, he is the instructor of
the enchaunter, and so indeed his Lord. What should I speak of all the rest,
one word may suffice, they be horrible deluded by the subtle serpent, and made
his bondslaues. This were much, though Satan could obtain no more but even to
draw those miserable caitifs into so deep a degree of wickedness. But this is
not the chief thing he seeks by means of these to plunge the blind world
headlong in the gulf of wicked apostasy. And how he has prevailed were a
great and long travel to set forth, only a taste may suffice. In old time among
the heathen, and profane nations he prevailed so far that he was taken to
be God. His illusions, were esteemed to be by a divine power, for so S. Luke
reports. Act. 8. where he shows that Simon Magus had long time by Magike
astonished the Samaritans, and they said he was the great power of God: until
the power of God did appear indeed by the woonders which Phillip wrought, for
then his were disclosed to be but illusions, sleights and shows of wonders.
For though the devil can do things which are strange and wonderful unto man
(as he did by Simon make the Samaritans wonder) yet in very deed* they be no
true miracles, neither can he work any, though God should give him leave to
show all his power. Further also among the heathen his answers were taken for
the very oracles of God. From hence sprung the f^lthy manner of woorshipping
devils, abominable idolatry, and superstitions. Therefore the Lord commands
his people when he had brought them out of Egypt that they should not give
ear unto such as the heathen did. He promises for to raise up always unto
them a Prophet, as whose mouth they should learn to know his will, unto whom
they should harken. Deuteron. 18. We see then it is very manifest that while
Satan stood in reputation to be God, He applied himself by witches and
enchau^ters to set up a religion where he might be most devoutly worshipped.
The most of all his practices tended to that purpose. At the coming of Christ,
by the light of Christ, by the light of the Gospel, he was disclosed, and could
cover himself no longer under so goodly a covering but was known indeed to be
a Devil. Now he must walk as a Devil and seek to deceive after an other sort.

And herein his subtilties have also excelled, to the great increase of
wickedness among the people. For when the light of Gods word was suppressed, as
it was in the popery, then was a way made for him, to work all his feats.
Then did coninrers and witches, and enchanters abond. Then were al manner of
charms rife and common. Then were a thousand magical inventions and toys. To
set forth all particulers were infiuite, therefore some few shall serve for all
the rest. Satan has a throne and a kingdom in the heart of every man, until
such time as he be regenerate by the holy word of God, and that the power
thereof be in him. He holds the heart in blindness and infidelity, and fills
it full of all filthy lusts of sin. He knows well that if he be espied,
men could not but with horror abhor there miserable estate, and seek after
some remedy. He does therefore seek to deal ^losly. He would make men
believe that he is not nigh them. What redier way has he to bring men into
that opinion, then that they may suppose he is not abroad unless he be fetched
up by coniurers, and break away from them? If there be any terrible tempests,
and mighty thunders which set forth the glory of God, then is he abroad. If
he can then get leave of God, (as the wicked world is worthy that God should
give him power to deceive them) he will show himself by some likelines in the
midst of the storm, or else declare his presence by rending up some trees or
showing some terror one way or other. Now there is great fear, for many
believe that the devil is abroad indeed, and has raised up the winds, and
brought the thunders.

Then tales fly, and rumors are spread abroad, that there have been coniurers.
They be taken say some, and the matter confessed. Three devils are broken
loose, and others say five: thus is Satan magnifyed, when as the great works
of God are ascrybed unto him. He carries away the glory which the almighty
should have. How vile a thing is this? most miserable in this behalf was the
state of popery: for the great prelates and grave fathers did believe this and
led the people unto it. And see what devise they had. When any violent tempest
came, they had the hollowed bell in every steeple to be rung, which did repel
and keep him back. For he could not come within the sound of that. They had
coniured water to sprincle in every corner of their houses, they had holy bread
and crosses, that he could rest no where. These were his own inventions for to
mock the people, for he made them believe he was ^riuen away by these, when
as in the mean time he ruled in their hearts. To come now to the witch, what
hurt does she? If ye ask the common people, ye shall have this answer:
she is the very pestilence of the earth, all calamity is brought upon men by
her. She kills men and beasts. She tormenteth men, and she destroys men's
goods. No man can be in safety so long as she lives. Woe be unto him which
does displease her, thrice happy are they which do not meddle with her. Is not
this foul havoc trow ye, which the witches do make? Yea but how is it
possible that poor old women should do such things? O sir, they do it not by
themselves. They have their spirits which they keep at home in a corner, some
of them two, some three, some five: these they send when they be displeased,
and wi^ them for to plague a man in his body, or in his cattle. This matter
has been tried: for diverse well disposed men, even for very pity to see what
hurt witches do by sending their spirits, have seriously taken the matter in
hand, and have hunted those puckrils out of their neaites. And what have they
found? they have found that some one woman has had three. They have found
where she kept them in wool.

What meat she gave them, What likeness they had, What were their names,
Whether they were he is or she is, and how many men they had killed. Some have
been hanged, and have at the gallows confessed the whole matter. Who is able
to declare the brutish errors and foul sins which multitudes are led into,
by this craftye dealing of the dealing of the Devil. For my self I do not
think that I can show the tenth part. But yet I see so much as may make any
Christian heart bleed to behold. I will endeavor to open the collusion of Satan
and his purpose in this thing, so far as I can: with the follies which the
blind multitude fall into, and do not epsy the same.

First then for the manner. The poor old witch, pined with hunger, goes abroad
unto some of her neighbors, and there beg a little milk which is denied.
She threatens that she will be even with them. Home she returns in great
fury, cursing, and raging, Forth she calls her spirit, and wills him to
plague such a man. Away goes he. Within few hours after the man is in such
torment, that he can not tell what he may do. He does think himself
unhappy that he was so foolish to displease her.

What shall we say unto these things? Is here no packing? Is not here first of
all a way taken by the wiely and wicked serpent to bring men in belief that
he is not nigh them, nor medleth not unless his dame send him? He goes
about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, as Saint Peter says,
Shall we be so sottish to believe that he lies at the witches house? he is
a mighty tyrant, if God do suffer him, that he being a spirit do take upon
him the shape of some little vermin, as cat or weasill, it is but to deceive.
He lies and sleeps in warm wool, the witch does give him milk, or a
chicken, and he does eat, these are vain illusions, what needs he such
things? he rests not, he eats not, he slepeth not. How much greater folly
is it to enquire of his sex? as though there were he devils and she devils?
But to come nigher unto this tragedy. Does not she send him? yes she does
send him which did send her first. Who put into her heart to beg of that man?
had he no stroke in the matter that he would deny her request? are they not
for the most part in as great blindness and infidelity almost as the witch is,
which are bewitched: he knows well enough where he makes his match: She
does furiously rage and curse: does not the devil work it in her heart? well,
the man is tormented indeed, who does that? here is great cunning. Sometime he
does it: some* time he makes a show that he does it, when it is not so: when
he does it who gives him the power? did the witch? they be void of reason
which think so. Had he power and lay still while she sent him, not minding
to do any thing, unless he were requested? what fool can imagine that? How
is this thing then? doubtless this wicked devil either did know that God had
given him power, and so did stir up and set on the witch: or else he did see
great likelihood that God would give him leave to torment the man in his body
or his goods because of his wicked life and infidelity, For he is never
weary, but secketh all occasions. And we have so flat testimonies of Gods
word, that (where God gave him leave) he tormented the bodies of men, that
such as affirm he can not plague that way, show themselves over bold against
the truth. We see then it must needs be one of these (...)* he tormenteth
(...) man: For God did give him power, but he would for many causes be set on
by the witch, where she could not increase his power: or else he does
conjecture that the Lord will give him leave when he is sent, because the
people are worthy to be seduced and lead into vile errors: sometime he seems
to do that which he does not, and that is with much subtilty.

For he sees the humors in the bodies of men, and beasts. He sees the
roots and causes of diseases, and when they will come forth. He stirs his
dame, or rather his poor vass^l and sets her in quarrel with that man. She
sends him, the man falls lame, or into some languishing sickness, his hogs
or his kyne do die. There was natural cause of lamenes of sickness and death
which the Lord sent, and Satan would have it laid upon him. The witch sees
such effects follow, and gathers for certaynty that she did it. The man
calls to mind how he displeased her, and how she did threaten him, and now
is sure she did it. These are part of his ways, let us look further. He is a
bloody murderer and delights to draw men into perjury and cruelty. He
seeks therefore to bring many such unto their death for witchcraft as are no
witches. Some woman does fall out bitterly with her neighbor: there follows
some great hurt, either that God has permitted the devil to vex him: or
otherwise. There is a suspicion conceived. Within few years after she is in
some jar with an other. He is also plagued. This is noted of all. Great fame
is spread of the matter. Mother W. is a witch. She has bewitched goodman B.
Two hogs which died strangely: or else he is taken lame. Well, mother W does
begin to be very odious and terrible unto many. her neighbors, dare say
nothing but yet in their hearts they wish she were hanged. Shortly after an
other falls sick and does pine, he can have no stomach unto his mea^e, nor
he can not sleep. The neighbors come to visit him. Well neighbor, says
one, do ye not suspect some naughty dealing? did ye never anger mother W?
truly neighbor (says he) I have not liked the woman a long time. I can not
tell how I should displease her, unless it were this other day, my wife prayed
her, and so did I, that she would keep her hens out of my garden. We spoke
her as fair as we could for our lives. I think verily she has bewitched
me. Every body says now that mother W is a witch in deed, and has bewitched
the good man B. He can not eat his meat. It is out of all doubt: for there
were which saw a weasil run from her housward into his yard even a little
before he fell sick. The sick man dies, and takes it upon his death that
he is bewitched: then is mother W apprehended, and sent to prison, she is
arrayned and condemned, and being at the gallows, takes it upon her death,
that she is not gylty: and doubtless some are put to death not being gylty. Now
let us see what the devil has gained by this practice. For though at sometimes
the conjectures fall out right, yet many times there is innocent blood shed:
which is a grievous sin. The jury commit perjury and cruel murder, which upon
blind surmises of ignorant persons, do give their v^tduit: for they should see
what knowledge of God, the accusers have. Yea sundry times the evidence of
children is taken accusing their own mothers, that they did see them give
milk unto little things which they kept in wool, The children coming to
years of discretion confess they were entised to accuse. What vile and
monstruouse impieties are here committed: It falls out sometime that some
visitation lights upon some person man or woman, Either the devil does
torment indeed, or else the party faineth to be tormented (which has been often
seeue) and then accuses such a woman to have sent the devil. It is strange to
see the madness of the people, that will ask the devil who sent him. And then
he tells who is his dame, and to how many she has sent him, and how many he
has killed. If it were the Devil indeed, would they believe him? Is it not
his desire to bring innocent persons into danger? Would not be very gladly
have a number of men periure and forswear themselves? does the Lord will men
to go upon their oath in a matter, at the testimony of a devil?

Who would think that ever such brutish ignorance should be found in men, in
the time of the Gospel? This is also a practice which would make a man tremble
to think upon it, that there should ever such abominable beastliness be
found in a land where Christianity is professed: If they do suppose that one
is bewitched, they enquire after a wise man or a wise woman, to learn who has
done the deed. If it be not mere deceit but that the party has a devil,
and tells them indeed the man is bewitched, and describes such or such an
old woman, Yet let me ask a few questions. First, I demand whether it be
allowed for any man to deal with the devil? Is not that man by the
commandment of God to be put to death which has a familiar spirit? Are not
they then almost as evil as he, which seek unto him? No doubt it is a clear
case and cannot be colored. But I shall after have occasion to prove it by
the testimonies of the holy Scripture, and therefore I do omit the same now.
Then further I do demand whether they will believe the devil? Do they think
he will accuse a guilty person or an innocent soonest? Do they or can they
imagine that the devil will bewray any thing that shall do good? Will one devil
do that which shall be to the hinderance of another? No doubt it is a just
vengaunce upon men that have despised the light, that they be thus given over
to forsake God, and to follow after devils. I will proceed yet further to lay
open the filthy vices which the people are drawn into by witchcraft, whiles
indeed they bewitch themselves through infidelity. A man is sick, his
sickness does linger upon him, Some do put into his head that he is
bewitched, He is counseled to send unto a cunning woman, She says he is
forspoken indeed, she prescribes them what to use, there must be some charm
and sorcerie used. The party finds ease, and is a glad man, he takes it
that he has made a good market, it was a luckie hour when he sent to that
woman. For doubtless he did think that if he had not found so speedy a
remedy, the Witch would utterly have spoiled him. Now the devil is driven out
of him and is gone. The wise woman with her Familer was too strong for him. O
that the hearts of men were not turned into the hearts of beasts, but that they
would consider. Is Satan become a weldoer? Is he so charitable and so pitiful
that he will relieve men's miseries? Or does one devil cast forth another?
Does the weaker give place unto the stronger? Is Satan divided against Satan?
Some man will replye that this is a common thing and well tried by experience,
that many in great distress have bin relieved and recovered by sending unto
such wise men or wise women, when they could not tell what should else become of
them, and of all that they had. Shall not men take help where they can find
it? Why do men go unto Phisicions? Let it be granted that men find help by
Witches, Yet this must needs be granted, that as it is for the most part a
plague and token of Gods displeasure, where he has power granted him to vex:
so is it a more heavy judgment, which the wicked world has deserved, that he
is suffered to heal. For now they cannot say that the Lord is their health and
salvation, but their Physician is the devil. As all the works of God are
good, and unto right good end: so of necessity all Satan's works be evil and
to most deuilish purpose. If he have power given him to possess and to plague
the body: he is not driven out, (for Satan does not drive out Satan) but
heals the body, to the end he may the more fully possess and destroy the
soul. His charity and his pity are no better. O miserable health so
recovered. O wretched men so relieved: they do imagine that the devil is
driven out of them, and he has entered in deeper. For can that which is
deuilish, as a charm, drive out the devil? They say it is such as does consist
of good words. It is so much the more blasphemous and abominable. For the name
of God and the sentences of his holy word, are most shamefully abused unto
sorceries, which is one special thing which the devil does covet. He which
seeks help in sickness at the hands of a Physician, does that which is
lawful being ordained of God, For he has given the nature and properties unto
things, which shall serve for medicine. Shall a man therefore hold it lawful to
seek help at the devil. Well, to proceed further. A man has a silver cup
missing, all corners are sought but yet it cannot be found: strangers there
came none unto his house: needs must it be one of his own servants that has
played the thief. Every man deuyeth the matter, and says he saw it not. Here
is dubble grief, not so much for the loss of the cup, as that a man should
have a thief in his house and not know him. And which is more, it may be that
he whom he most suspecteth is least guilty: were it not good to have means for
to try out such a matter? He could be content to ride xl. miles to have it
tried. He enquireth secretly where there is any cunning man of great fame,
Thither he hastes. Home he returns and in very deed finds the cup, and
knows ye thief, though he may not bewray him. What shall we think of this?
Even that one devil has played the whole play, and every part thereof: and
therefore it is all alike for good. First the devil tempted the servant to
steal the cup: The self same devil put into the mind of the master to seek
unto a cunning man. The self same devil knows best where the cup lies hid
and who stale it. He therefore is ye most fit and does give the direction. But
what has y^ devil gained by this? he has gained even his desire: for God
letting him loose for to tempt, here follow great sins. First there is
theft: then seeking unto devils, But because men are blind and suppose that
such a seeking is no great offense, I will show what the Lord speaks thereof
in the holy scriptures. I will first refer men unto that which the holy Ghost
says of King Saul. 1. Cronic. 10. For there we may see that there are two
sins mentioned for which the Lord did destroy Saul. The one that he spared
Agag. The other, that he enquired (...) ^ho. The Lord has given an express
commandment D^. 18. that his people shall not seek unto such. The Prophet
Esaias chap. 8. ver. 20. affirms that there is no spark of light in those which
do enquire at those which have familiar spirits. It is as much as if he
should say, they have no sound knowledge of God at all in them. This is a thing
to be woondred at, that in places where the Gospel has been many years
taught, there should be men found that are ignorant of God. But indeed they
have not reverenced, but despised the light in their hearts. The Lord does
threaten sharply Liuiti. 20. verse. 6. that person which shall seek unto those
that work with the devil. The words be these: The soul which shall turn it
self unto Oboth (that is, to the Spirits of ^ytho) or to the Soothsayers, to
go a whoring after them: I will set my face against that soul, and will cut
him off from among his people. God says here that such persons as seek unto
Coniurers and Witches, do go a whoring after deuilles. The soul of man
should be kept pure and chaste unto God as a wife unto her only husband. They
should not commit spiritual whoredom with deuilles, as the Lord does here
charge those which seek unto deuilles. What a foul thing is this, that such
as have made a solemn vow in baptism, to forsake the devil and all his
works, should now seek unto deuilles for help? He that commits adultery
in the flesh, is not to be suffered. Then how much more are these worthy to
be rooted out, which have so unfaithfully broken their vow made unto GOD, and
have committed whoredom with devils. If there were no other hurt but this by
witchcraft, you see the devil has gained much: when many give counsel, and
many do seek unto such as have familiare spirits, and so in effect, fall from
the living God. I might stay here and proceed no further to show what does
move the devil to do such things by Witches, as he could do as well without
them: and what does move him to heal such as are hurt, to reveal things
which are lost or stolen, and as it were to do good: But I go a little
further, and show great and general mischiefs. What greater advantage unto
the devil, then to hold men from turning unto God by repentance* And this he
does bring to pass by Witches. All chastisements come from God, whether they
be such as he does with his own hand inflict: or such as he gives the
devil point to lay upon men. So that whether the Lord God do it with his
own hand, or by the devil, (as he did unto Job) or whether the devil do it
without a Witch or by a Witch, all is one in this respect, that it comes from
God, and should humble men, and bring them unto true repentance. But men look
no further the^ unto ye witch: they fret and rage against her: they never look
so high as unto God: they look not to the cause why y^ devil has power over
them: they seek not to appease Gods wrath, But they fly upon y^ witch: they
think if she were not, they should do well enough: she is made the cause of
all plagues and mischiefs: whereas in very deed she is but an Instrument
which the devil uses for a color: their own wickedness has provoked God
to anger, and to give the devil power over them. It is their own infidelity
which has bewitched them: they should now turn unto God, and they run after
the devil: For some fall upon the Witch and beat her, or clawe her, to fetch
blood: that so her spirit may have no power. These are well after, for the
devil is glad to make them Witches. For when as they ascribe power unto such
things to drive out devils, what are they but Witches? Some run unto the
Witch when any friend of theirs is bewitched, and threaten her, that if she do
not take home her spirit, and if that he come any more they will cause her to
be hanged. They should run only unto God by a lively faith, true repentance
and hearty prayer, to have the devil removed; and they run unto the Witch,
and ascribe unto her that which does belong only unto God: for they think that
she has power to send the devil, and to take him off. Alas, is there any true
faith in these men? The devil has bewitched them, to keep them out of the
way of repentance, and to make them his bondslaues.

Others there be which have their Hogs distragely or some other cattle. It
may be, they be so blind and so wicked, that God has given power unto the
devil to make havoc indeed. He moves the Witch, and she sends him.
Their sins they look not upon, but how to overcome the power of the Witch,
as they imagine. And what do they? They take a Hog or some other beast and
burn it alive. Does this drive away the devil? Sure if it do, it is not
because it does overcome him, but because he is delighted with their burnt
offering which they offer unto him. What should I stand to reckon up all the
devises which they have to drive away the devil, if he have begun to hurt
them, to vnwitch as they call it, or to keep him off with their charms, or
with their nightspell which they have learned? What need is there to rehearse
the knackes which they have to drive away the ague, the Toothache, to make the
Whay Curd: to make Butter come, to make Cheese run? They be all very
witcheries, wrought by the devil. For it is by (...) natural means, and to
tie the extraordinary power of GOD unto such things, is very blasphemous.
These be the fruits of Popery, which has removed away the light, and left
the people in the dark to be deluded by the devil: which removed away the
spiritual armor wherewith the soul should be defended and taught the people
very witcheries. We see then (or at the least all may easily see) that while
men are thus blinded with wicked errors about witches, they are so far from
the way of repentance, that they are carried headlong into y^ pits of filthy
sins which do drown men in destruction. We see that it is a most clear case,
that God ordreth all by his good providence. The witch can do nothing, for the
devil which is far greater then she can do nothing. But the wicked world
full of all contempt of God* does deserve that the devil should have power to
work many feats, to the end they may have strange delusion, and the efficacy
of error come upon them. This does S. Paul set forth 2 Thessalonians. 2. For there
we may see that Satan has liberty given him to show his efficacy with the
power of lying Signs and woonders. If Satan could make no show or appearance
of woonders, by doing things which are beyond the reach of man to counterfeit,
why should it be called a power and efficacy, and why should they be called
signs and lying woonders? Our Savior him self, Math. 24. verse. 24. does show
that there should arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and should give
great signs and woonders. I conclude therefore, that as the righteous God does
permit and suffer the devil, for the wickedness of the world, to show forth an
efficacy and power, By giving signs and woonders (y^ is such things as men
are not able to do, and therefore do account them woonders, though they be no
true woonders in deed, nor wrought unto a good end, but to establish false
religion) so does he let loose the same devil, or suffer him to do many
things by Witches and Coniurers, that the despisers of the holy religion may
be seduced. There has been mere cosinage in most of the popish miracies:
(For if they had been done as they report, they should have been miracles in
deed, and the devil is able to do no miracle, but to make a show by
illusion) yet were they believed by occasion of those shows which he made at
some times. In like manner there are strange woonders reported of Witches and
Coniurers, they* have been believed, as also many counterfaite things, because
he has power at many times given unto him to torment men, and because he does
make his vain apparitions

The sharp punishment appointed in the word of God for such as work with the
devil, and the true cause of the same, and that it is no godly zeal but
furious rage, wherewith the common sort are carried against witches. Chapt. 10.
THe Lord God did by Moses appoint and prescribe penalties for the offenses,
and transgressions of his holy laws. These were not all of one kind, but
according to the degree of the trespass, was the punishment less or greater.
Some sins are more horrible then others, and do more provoke the displeasure
of God: unto such he appointed the sharpest penalty (that is to say) death
without mercy. Among these were such as fell into Apostasy from the law of
Moses, as we may see Hebrew. 10. verse. 28. Or such as did persuade others unto
Apostasy, Deuteronomy. 23. verse. 5. The murthe^er might not be redeemed. Numb. 35.
verse. 31. The self same* severity is required against such as work by the
devil, or that dealt with familiare spirits: for it is said, thou shall not
suffer a Witch to live, Exodus 22. Mechashshepha by the tropesinecdo^he is in
this place being but one kind, put for all that practice deuilishe art. For it
is very vain and friuolouse to take it, that death should be appointed, as to
a murderer with poison. For in another place, namely Leuit. 20. verse. 27. The
Lord does take two other kinds where he appoynteth the penalty of death.
These be his words, the man or the woman in whom there shall be Ob or
Iiddegnoni, shall dye the death. Out of which places we may collect the true
cause of this severity to be in very deed the familiarity with devils. The
devils be the utter enemies of GOD, which seek by all means to dishonor him
and to deface his glory. How can any then use familiarity with them, use
their help, or seek unto them, but he commits a monstrous enormitie, and
such as deserves a thousand deaths. Moreover the Witch, the Coniurer, the
Enchaunter, the Sorcerer, and the rest are the cause of foul errors and much
wickedness, much horrible abusing Gods holy and sacred name, and therefore are
worthy to dye. This being the true cause why God does abhor such, as it is
manifest, we may easily see the gross error of the blind multitude, in this
behalf. For they hold that witches should be put to death, and not only
that, but are inflamed with a wonderful rage and fury to have it accomplished.
I call it rage and not zeal, because it is not to a right end. For if they
were so zealous of it for Gods honor it were a merueilous good thing: but in
deed it is not for any zeal of God y^ they be so forward, but for an other
consideration. Thieues and murderers say they be put to common deaths: how
much more sharp death and torments are witches worthy to have laid upon them?
But ask them why: Oh say they, the witches send their spirits and kill and
lame men: they kill young infantes: they kill cattle, they ^aise winds and
tempests, they be the very plagues of men. Here is a false cause, for where do
we ever find in the holy scriptures, that Witches or Coniurers have such
things laid unto their charge? I have showed the privy packing which Satan
uses in this behalf. When men are once so be witched as to think, who can
live in safety while witches remain: they run with madness to seek all
means to put them to death, and not only them, but all such as are suspected.
They run to Coniurers to know if they be not witches who they suspect. They
examine witches to know whether their spirits have not told them how many
witches be within certain miles of them, and who they be. The Lord does not
allow one witness being a man in a cause of death to be sufficient: but these
would allow the accusation of one devil if he accuse xl. persons: they think
it a merueilouse charitable deed where there is one that has been suspected
for witchery, to hi^ or entice children to accus^ them, to practice with some
subtle maid which faineth her self to be bewitched, to get some matter of
accusation. Many Iurers never weigh the force of the evidence which is brought,
but as if they had their oath for conjectures or likelihoodes, they are
oftentimes very forward to find guilty, being sick of the same disease that
the accusers be. But some man will reply and demand why the people should not
be so earnest to seek their death and rooting out? why should it be reputed as
a fault? they do it of a good mind, and to the glory of God. In deed if it
could be showed that they do it in regard of Gods glory it were of a good
mind and much to be commended: but it is manifestly to be proved that Gods
glory is not regarded. For if the people did regard Gods glory, they would hate
witchchraft, and show their vehemence against it, because his dishonor is much
procured thereby, as when men go for help unto his enemy: but we see they hate
not that. But if a man or child be sick, they run unto a witch, they hate not
y^ joining in compact with devils, when as they run for help unto them: they
have somewhat lost or stole: they do by and by fly unto devils: they make
account that those be good witches and do no harm. But in very deed they be as
evil as other witches, for they have fellowship with devils which is the
chief fault, for those da^mages which they ascribe unto witches, are not in
their hand to give power to the devil for to do: Then if they did it for love
of God they would hate these also: but we see they do not only allow them, but
make of them. God commands in his law that all that have familier spirits
should be put to death, and yet I say the faithles people do make much of
them, and allow of them. Moreover there be none more extreme haters of witches,
then such as be infected with a kind of witchcraft them selves: for what are
they but witches (if a man look well into y^ matter) which have their night
spell, and so many charms and devises to avoid the dangers of witchcraft, or
to vnwitch? none are more furious against witches then these, and such as of
all others are y^ readiest to run for help unto the devil: therefore I may
boldly affirm, that it is of a mad rage, and not of a good zeal that the most
are carried withal against witches: which ought to teach men wisdom,
discreation and warines when they be for to deal in such matters, especially
when as it does concern life or death.

What manner of persons are fittest for the devil to make his instruments in
witchcraft and sorceries, and who are subject unto his harms. Chapt. 11.
WHen Satan at the first enterprised the ruin and destruction of man, he did
not unadvisedly set up on the work, but in great subtilty chose him a fit
instrument for the purpose, even the serpent who was more subtle then any
beast of the field. He is now an old serpent, and long practiced, and has
increased his subtilty by much approved experience. He does not now attempt
his wicked work, but (...) all y^ fittest ways and means that he can: he
does observe time and place, with all other circumstances: and look of what
sort soever his work shall be, he seeks convenient persons as matter to work
upon; he chooses out fit instruments to work withall*when he raises up some
heresy to destroy y^ true faith, which is with subtle show to be defended: he
suggesteth not the same into the mind of a blunt unlearned fool which is able
to say little: but if it be possible, he espieth out a subtle mind, which is
also proud, vain glorious, and stiff to maintain any purpose. Likewise when
he will seem by witchcraft, he does not hope to draw a godly man well
instructed in Gods word into his net and to make him a witch: for he is not
subject unto his illusions: there is light in him which the darkness can not
smother. What then: he seeks for ungodly persons, which are blind, full of
infidelity, and overwhelmed and drowned in dark ignorance. If there be above
all these a melancholic constitution of body, his impressions print the deeper
in the mind. If they be fell and given to anger, and ready to revenge, they be
so much the fitter: poverty also will help in some respect. When such a person
is moved with fury, she curses and bids a vengeance light upon him with
whom she is displeased: she bids the devil and all the devils in hell take
him: the wicked spirit who inflamed her heart is ready at hand (and if he have
power to hurt y^ party given him of God, or see any probability that he shall
have, or know any disease ready to break forth) and in some likeness or with some
voice, does demand what he shall do: it may the woman does think it very
strange at the first and is a fraid to hear a thing like a cat speak: but this
fear in time is removed. The co^iurer is one that has a mind addicted unto
curiosity and vain estimation: he takes him self by deep skill and power to
rule over devils, and therefore though he appear fierce and terrible before
him, it is not amiss: nay it confirms him y^ more. Now for convenient matter
to work upon, I confess y^ the devils are instruments which God uses not only
to be executioners of vengeance upon the reprobate, and to plague y^ wicked:
but also to assault, to te^pt, to vex and to chastise his dear children: and
therefore they have sometimes leave to afflict some of these in body or
substance: but y^ is rare: and when it is so, Gods holy servant do look up
unto him, and confess their sins with humble hearts, seeking favor and
release at his hands, as Job did: they turn not their eyes unto witches, they
cry not out upon them, as if they were the cause: you hear not these wish they
were rooted out, because they fear hurt by the^: but they abhor the sin, and
in zeal of Gods glory, desire that due execution may be done upon them. The
devil then by his witches and coniurers prevails not among these: he does
prevail among an other sort of men greatly: he has power given him to plague
and to vex many of them: they have no power of true and lively faith to
withstand him: they be full of all darkness and ignorance, the heavenly light
and power of Gods holy word is not abiding in them: mark it who will, and he
shall find this most true, that y^ greatest part of those which cry out yt
they are bewitched, that run unto witches for help, that use their charms, and
seek so many ways to vnwitch, are even as ignorant, as far from zeal and
love of y^ gospel, and as full of vices as the very witches them selves: so
that y^ devil does even with as much ease seduce and lead these men into errors
by witches and coniurers, finding them in y^ dark, as he does allure the poor
siley old woman to be a witch, and the Idolatro^s, and adulterous mass priest
to be a coniurer. Thus much may suffice to show what persons y^ devil does make
choice of to be his instruments, and what manner of persons he deceives and
hurts by them.

The true remedy whereby men are delivered from all fear and danger of
witchcraft. Chapt. 12.
MEn are glad to find a medicine that will drive away and rid them off an
ague: how much gladder would they be to find a present remedy to preserve
them safe and free from the fear off all imagined hurt and danger which comes
by witchcraft* but it is a merueilous thing to see in what fear men are and
yet will not embrace y^ wholesome remedy which the Lord has prescribed: they
seek many means, and that with cost and travel, but yet they are never the
better: for if they find some ease unto the body, it is with the loss of y^
soul: the devil himself did invent those medicines which they fly unto, for
God never appointed them, is he so foolish as to make weapons against himself?
if they be vexed or hanted with a spirit (as they use to say) and a witch drive
him out, it is the devil yt drives him out, if he be indeed driven out. But
the truth is, he is not: for Satan does not drive out Satan. Put the case that
one devil did expel another, what comfort could it be unto the possessed,
more then this, that a weaker devil is driven out of him to give place to a
stronger: For the stronger devil would never expel the weaker, unless it
were to enter there himself. To let this pass, it will be demanded where
there is any remedy prescribed by the Lord against witcherie? The Lord says
he would raise up a Prophet unto the people Deuteronomy. 18. Those which give ear
unto him shall be safe. Some man will say that is but in this one point, that he
shall not be deceived by such as wrought by the devil, nor led into error. But
where is there any remedy mentioned to preserve a man from the bodily harms
done by Witches? I answer, that it were a strange thing for the holy
Scriptures to appoint a medicine for such a disease as it never mentions. The
word of the Lord does never mention that Witches can hurt the body at all: and
therefore it does no where prescribe any remedy for that which is not. The
malignant spirits or wicked devils, do hurt both bodies and souls: and
therefore there is a way taught how to be free from the^: They have no increase
of power by a Witch: but only thus much, that for the just vengeance of God
upon the ungodly, the is glad to be sent, and obteyneth power: but he that is
armed against them alone, is armed against both witch and them. Against them
there is no power can prevail, but the power of God. Therefore when the holy
Apostle does set men in battle against devils, he wills them to be strong in
the Lord, and in the power of his might. This mighty power of God is made ours
only by faith. For which cause S. John says that faith is our victory. He
that believes does overcome the world: which cannot be unless he do
overcome the prince of the world. This faith is the free gift of God: but yet
because he has ordained outward means to come unto it, we are willed to take
unto us all the whole armor of God wherein this might consists. And to the
end that the exhortation may the more affect us, Saint Paul does express the
whole matter under the likeness and terms of war. For thereby appears
that there is need of Gods power, that we may escape out of the great perrill.
The Apostle as a chief Captain in the Lords Army, does stir up and prepare
all Christian soldiers. He shows who be the enemies. He declares their
terror in sundry respects. But yet undoubted victory unto all those which
follow his prescript. All the power of God wherewith we resist and overcome
the devil, is conveyed into us by faith alone. But because he speaks as of a
soldier in his complete armor, he applies but one part unto faith, and the
rest unto those things which do go unseperably with faith. The soldier had
his head and all parts of his body with his legs and feet armed: then had
he his sword in his right hand, and his shield in the left. Even so in this
spiritual armor applied by similitude unto the soul, here is armor for the
head, for the feet and legs, and for all the whole body, and then the shield
of faith to hold forth in the one hand, and the spiritual sword which is the
word of God in the other hand. The sum of the whole is, that by faith in the
Gospel of Jesus Christ we are armed with power of grace, with true knowledge
and light, with sincere integrity of heart, and with a godly life, with zeal,
with patience, and with all other heavenly virtues, so that the fiery darts of
the devil, neither in tempting unto filthy sins, nor yet in damnable
heresies and opinions, can fasten upon us. If we want the true faith, we want
grace: we be not in Christ, we have not his spirit. This faith is grounded upon
the word of God: for the word is sent to be preached, that men may hear and
believe. If men be ignorant in the word of God, they cannot have power to
resist the devil: they have no sword to fight with him. Christ our great
Captain has left unto us an example which we ought to follow, when he
resisted the devil. For at every temptation, he draws forth this same
spiritual sword, and says it is written, and so wounds Satan therewith,
that he takes the foil. Moreover, as men are to be armed with the power of
GOD, so are they continually to pray, for by faithful prayer they shall
obtain a continual supply of grace, to overcome the new and fresh assalts of
the devil. We are to give thanks also unto God at all times for his benefits,
to depend upon his providence, to commend unto his keeping both our souls and
bodies, and all that we possess. Thus shall the devil have no power for to
hunt us: but if the Lord do give him leave to afflict us, yet shall it be no
further then may tend unto our good. For all things work together for good
unto those which do love God. Let it move us to seek increase of faith, by
often hearing of Gods word taught: let it drive us unto continual Romans 8.
meditation in the same, and unto a godly life. For all those which despise the
glorious Gospel of Christ, or the publishing of the same, and most especially
such as fight against it, do to their power set up the kingdom of the devil,
and bring in all witcherie. The light of the Gospel does beat him down: and
therefore when Christ sent forth his Disciples at the first to preach, and
they returning rejoiced, that even the deuilles were made subject unto them: he
says, I saw Satan fall down from heaven like lightning. The Lord send abroad
the light of his truth to throw down Satan, and to drive away darkness from the
minds of the people.

Amen.
FINIS.

