ARCHITECTONICE CONSOLATIONIS: OR, THE ART OF BVILDING COMFORT: OCCASIONED BY
THE DEATH OF THAT RELIGIOUS GENTLEWOMAN, JANE GILBERT; TO BE STVDIED: AND WITH
ALL A PLATFORM OF COMFORT TO BE RAISED UP BY HER HUSBAND WILLIAM GILBERT
DOCTOR IN DIVINITY.

Ierem. 8. 22. Question. Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician
there? Romans 15 4 Answer. Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written
for our learning, that we through Comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.
Reason. Aegrotanti animo Medious est Oration Consolatoria.

Comfortable words are a Physician for one not well in mind: even to cure One
Sick at the Heart.

1 These. 4. 18. Illation. Wherefore Comfort one another with these Words.
London, Printed by John Legatt, for G. Lantham and are to be sold at the sign
of the Bishops-head in Pauls-Church-yard. 1640.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD LORD VISCOUNT CONAWAY, AND ^ILVLTA, BARON OF
RADGLEY MARSHALL OF IRELAND, AND ONE OF HIS Majesty's Most Honorable Privy
Council of (...).
May it please your Honor,
TO admit this Act of Recordation, that it is full Fourteen years since the
happy Aspect of your gracious Favor did reflect upon me, for my good both by
Sea, and Land: which left in me such an Impression of the Character of your
Noble and Religious Disposition, that to this very Day edgeth a fresh desire to
take this advantageous (though in another respect, a sad) Opportunity to
testify my dutiful respect to your Honor. It may be, this Art of Building
Comfort is not so artificially, and laboriously composed, as you have heard,
and was pleased to countenance some Vniversitie-Pieces of mine: there might be
more oil bestowed on them, to varnish the Face of their style; but this
Treatise is allowed more Wine to comfort the Heart of the Reader. This induced
me to present to your gracious Acceptance, this Earnest of that Debt of
Thankfulness, wherein both your Favors, and Deserts (tam Art, quam Mart)
have bound me to you: a small Earnest is sufficient to bind the greatest
Contract 'twi^t a bountiful hand, and a thankful Heart. Let this be such of
my Gratitude, and not only a Pledge of Mine, but a Remembrance of Hers, (I
mean my dead Wife) whose Living Thankfulness to God for your Favors to me,
you had, though not made known unto you. And if your more then ordinary
Employments will permit you to read over, either Her deserved Commendation: or
Her Epitaph which is much too narrow for her worth, (both are in the adjoining
Pages) then I hope your Lordship will have no cause to repent the Dedication of
this Treatise. In the mean time my Experimental knowledge, that in you the
Nobility of Descent and Mind concur: the Eminency of Parts in your self,
and Affability of Disposition to others do mutually reflect each on the other:
which Harmony may well challenge this my voluntary Oblation, as a necessary
Obligation, that for ever ties me to fix my Devotions on Heaven, and heartily
to pray for your temporal, spiritual, and eternal Happiness.

Your Honors to dispose of William Gilbert.

EPITAPH. AND A DEFENSE OF IT.
THE Imputation of Superstition or Gentilisme in them that raise up Memorials
of the Dead is easily wiped away. 1. By Reason. 1. By Reason.
1. It Is an Honor to the Dead, to have their Memories survive them. 2. It Is a
comfort to the Living to treasure up the worthy Acts of the Dead. 3. The
Religious, virtuous Practice of the Dead, is an admirable Pattern for the
Living to work by. 2. By 2. By Scripture.
Scripture; where are Pillars set up as Civil Monuments, and Remembrances of
men's Fame Absalom reared up for himself a 2 Samuel 18. 18.
Pillar to keep his Name in Remembrance. But yet which is more apposite and
adaequate to my purpose. Rachel dyed, And Jacob set a Pillar upon her grave
Genesis 35. 19, 20.
. Jacob? a President unparalled. Therefore will I lay a Gravestone on my
wife, and set this Commemorative Epitaph upon it.

The Remains of Jane Gilbert.
Favor is deceitful, and Beauty is vain: but a woman that Fears the Lord,
She shall be praised. Prove. 31. 30.
The Ring of her Life set with the Diamond of Fear:
The Poesy of Faith: to Trust in my God, All my Care.
Her Hope tried like Gold: And the Circle of Her Love
From God to man, from man to God again did move.
1639. September. 4. And She dyed.
TO THE DISCONSOLATE AND SORROWFVLL FRIENDS OF JANE GILBERT DECEASED: WILLIAM
GILBERT WISHES TRVE COMFORT OVT OF GODS WORD.
IN this Case, that of the Psalmist is the Pinnacle of Comfort, to be placed on
the top of this Building, Psalm. 112. 6.
The Righteous shall be had in everlasting Remembrance. The Righteous; Such a
One was this our Sister and my Wife, One clothed with the Roabe of
Righteousness, which was woven out of Christ's side, adorned and embroidered
with sanctifying graces in her life and conversation. Is it not a Christian
Duty, that such a One should be had in Remembrance so far as we can propagate
her worth to Posterity? She did not seek Fame by well doing to be remembered,
but Fame comes unsought for: and Her well doing shall be remembered after Her
death; for it is worth our observation that David sets it not down in the
present time, (are) but in the future, (shall be had in remembrance.) What
though the Righteous in their life time are little thought of, except to be ill
spoken of? yet Time the Mother of Truth shall bring all things to light, and
cause the Righteous to be had in everlasting Remembrance before God and his
Angels, and the whole Theater of Righteous just Men. Satis est coram Deo, and
Angelis, totoque piorum theatro, benedictam esse eorum Memoriam. Call. in locum.
The Fame of the Righteous buds forth when He is in the grave; then we may best
speak of the Mariner, when He is at his Haven: and praise the Captain, when He
has got the Triumph: and set the Crown of Praise upon this our Sister, now
She has fought her long fight, and finished her course with Joy: who every day
for many months before Her Death, did pray that Prayer, which is the last in
the Handmaide to Devotion Worthy Dr (...) Manual.
and thus begins. Welcome blessed hour, the Period of my Pilgrimage: the End
of my Cares: the Close of my Sighs: the Bound of my travailes: the Goal of my
race: the Heaven of my Hopes. Is She not worthy to be had in remembrance, who
did give the hour of Death so good Entertainment, as so long before to bid it
heartily welcome with so many sweet Names; as End, Period, Close, Bound, Goal,
Heaven? What shall I say next for your Comfort, But this? the the better She
was, the greater her Gain for ever: and my loss for the present. Yet her
Gain waighes down my loss; I confess the loss of her enters deep into my
heart, and deeper it would go; but that her Gain cannot enter into the Heart
of man to conceive it: her Gain to the tongue of man, unspeakable; but my
loss is unvaluable only according to the Common waights of the World, because
She was of great Estimate, according to the very weight of the Sanctuary. My
knowledge of it is now doubled, tam carendo, quam fruendo: for eleven years
and half I enjoyed a rare Religious Piece of Gods making, and now God has
made up this his Jewel fit for His own Cabinet, it is most fit that I should
want it. And to my wants this is added, that I want words to tell others what I
want. I want my Fellow-Helper, my Bosome-Comforter; my second Heart, which did
command my first Heart in a Religious way. 1. Her Faith was founded upon the
Rock, 1.
Christ Jesus: witness Her every Days task, which was to say by Heart, and
in Her Heart, the eight chapter to the Romans; which chapter alone in it self
is a complete Confectionarie of spiritual Comfort beginning with, No
condemnation Rom 8. verse. first and last.
to them that are in Christ Jesus: and ending with, No Separation from the Love
of God in Christ Jesus. 2. Her Hope and Trust was fixed upon Her God, witness
2.
that answer She gave me the last Day that She lived out in this World; Now
what is my Hope? my Hope is in thee o Lord (...)39. 7.
. There was in her an admirable mixture of Godly sorrow for sin, and holy Joy
for that Sorrow, which Joy I perceived to be backed by her Hope, to get the
upperhand: though S. Jerome sums up the devout souls private carriage with
God in these words, Dolet, and de dolor gaudet. Surely 'twas her Practice to
sorrow after a godly manner, and to rejoice for that Sorrow. 3. Her 3.
love to man let all that knew her, speak it; Her love to God, I judge it
sincere by the most clear Expressions of it; She loved his house so dearly,
that the large distance of her Habitation from Church (nigh a mile) was no
Remora to keep her at home; the last Lords Day She lived, She was twice at
Church. She prayed Constantly eight several times every Day; I knew it to be
most true, who was nearest to her, when she drew near to her Father in secret.
She had by heart a distinct Prayer for every Evening and Morning in the seven
days of the week, besides other Prayers for other times. What a loving
Mistress She was to her servants, they would quickly speak, if they could for
crying. How transcendent her love was to me, her Husband? my tongue would
fail, because my heart is ready to faint for want of such love, and faint it
might, had not Gods Spirit brought to my remembrance how earnestly on her
Deathbed She desired me not to grieve so immoderately for her, for we should
meet in Heaven: and it is my Hope that as we were Caro una on Earth, we shall
be sydus unum in Heaven Sydus is properly a Company of Stars together.
, of that one Holy Company of Stars attending the Sun of Righteousness. And
here I cannot but fix my Contemplation on those rays of divine Beauty which
shined in her soul, for She mightily delighted to set before her Solomon's
Copy of a good wife, Prove. 31. They that knew her Prove. 31.
may easily compare her life written according to that exact Copy: Sure I am,
her Sisters child (whom She educated) can rise up and call her blessed, Her
Husband also praises her, Prove. 31. verse. 28. How? why thus in Solomon's style,
Favor is deceitful and Beauty is vain, but a Woman that fears the Lord,
She shall be praised, Verse. 30. the Pronowne (...) (...). She.
Emphatically argues a Negation of any other Woman worthy to be praised, but
She that fears the Lord, She shall be praised: Ipsa, Trem. Ipsa, Mont.
the garland of praise only to be set on her head. This is her Remuneration,
therefore Solomon's last verse. shall be mine. Give her of the fruit of her hands,
and let her own works praise her in the Gates: that is, in public. This,
This is the Woman, the Woman to whom I

Subscribe: William Gilbert perdidit.
TO THE SEEKER OF COMFORT, NOT READER ONLY.
MOST sorry I am for the Occasion The Death of my Wife.
that induced me to Preach, and now moved me to Print; but the Providence of
God being the First Mover may not only command bounds to my Sorrow, Hither and
no further; but also give me a license as to Preach, so to Print it, both for
the Commemoration of the Dead, and Consolation of the Living. What though I lie
open to some Exceptions? I had rather do it in this partlcular, then not do
all the Right I can to the Dead: and wish all true Comfort to the Living; who
shall read this Art of Building Comfort, not to censure one another; but to
Comfort one another, according to this Apostolical Exhortation, which is my
Text, 1 These. 4. 18. 1 These. 4. 18.
Wherefore Comfort one another with these words: which if thou do, I am

Thine, in Christ the Fountain of Comfort: William Gilbert.

A GENERAL REPRESENTATION OF THE Method of this Manuell Scarce half a
handful: but with Gods blessing it may be a whole Heart-full of Comfort.
, or rather Cordial of Comfort, containing the Ingredients of Five Sermons.
1. THe Accommodation of the Text to the Times calling for comfort p. 1. 3. 2.
4. 5 2. The Division following the Metaphore of Building in the eight Parts of
it p. 6. 1. The Specificall Difference of this from other Buildings p. 7. 8. 2.
The Necessity of this Building in a Christian Commonwealth p. 9. 10. 11. 12.
3. Perswasives inducing to go about this Building, and to study this Art of
Divine Comfort p. 13. 14. 4. Disswasives from the Neglect of going forward with
it p. 15. 5. The Materials of this Building: These words, in the Text. 1. In a
particular Relation to S. Paul's former Doctrine p. 16. 17, 18. 19. 2. In a
general Relation to Gods Word p. 20. 21. 22. 23. 6. The Habitual Ability to
make good use of this Art of Comforting p. 24. 25. 7. The Actual Ability to
make good use of it, in the Platform of Comfort set up according to the exact
Rule of Gods Word p. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 8. The Strength and Duration of this
Building where ye shall see p. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. 1. The Contignation and
Knitting of the Building of Comfort by five Attributes of God Wisdom. p. 36.
Power. p. 37. Justice. p. 38. Mercy. ibid. Truth. p. 39.
2. The Butteresses of the Building set up by three Duties of man. 1.
Submission to Gods Will. p. 40. 2. Right Reason sanctified. p. 41. 3. Prayer
for strength and Continuance of Comfort. p. 42. etc.
1 These. 4. 18. Wherefore Comfort one another with these words.
MAY it please your Attention to begin with the accommodation of the Text to
the Times, which (like a woman in Labor) cry out for Comfort: sickly Times,
most uncomfortable Times, God knows: a rare thing even an house without one or
other sick in it, if not dead out of it. Is it not Time then to exhort you to
comfort one another? The Naturalists write of a precious Stone Caussin parab.
Hist.
called (...) Thunder.
Ceraunias that is found only in a day of thunder, glistering when the sky is
overcast with darkness: such a qualified Gemme is mutual Comfort shining
most brightly in the gloomy times of adversity, when God thunders from Heaven,
and all the Earth is full of dark, sad, melancholy sickness, that consumes
the eyes and causes sorrow of heart Levit. 26. 16.
; thus when the heart is overcast with sorrow, and the eyes clowded with
dimnes, then to open the bowels of Consolation one to another is the most
comfortable Christian Sunshine. Was it not Time then to exhort you to comfort
one another, when there is vox querelae, a voice of complaint of sickness and
Mortality in our Streets, and in our houses? is it not time there be vox
Doctrinae, a voice of Instruction preaching Comfort in our Churches? that as
that learned S. Ierom.
Father compares the Church of God persecuted, and yet flourishing, to the Bush
out of which Gods glory shined to Moses; the Exodus 3. 2.
Bush burned, yet consumed not, so many Members of Gods Church in our Land
burned, yet consumed not with Strange Agues, out of which shines Gods glory and
our Comfort so far as to compose the like excellent Harmony that Saint Paul 2
Cor. 4. 8. 9.
makes of seeming Discords. We are troubled on every side with sickness, yet
not distressed as without Hope: Perplexed with strange, new Diseases, but not
in Despair, (...), premimur, non opprimimur, pressed under, not trodden under,
and oppressed as altogether without help. Persecuted by cold and hot fits, but
not forsaken by him that rebuked Peter's Wifes Mothers Fever. Cast down on our
sick beds, but not destroyed, but raised up by him who made our beds in our
sickness: devoute David often harpes upon this sweet String; hear one
admirable lesson Psalm. 118. 18.
, The Lord has chastned me sore, but he has not given me over unto Death; how
many this year that may set this doleful Ditty, the Lord has chastened me
sore, but with this comfortable close, but he has not given me over unto
Death? When I fall, I shall rise, when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a
light unto me Mic. 7. 8.
. Christians cannot look to be so nice and tenderly brought up as not to
endure the sight of their heavenly Fathers rod; they must look to fall into
sickness, to sit in Darkness, to be chastened sore: and because the bitter
cup of trembling cannot pass, but first or last, we must all drink it, 'twas
David's diet-drinke, and Job took it all off, we are not better then they, and
who is too good to pledge his Savior? Wherefore that we faint not under the
rod, that the draught overcome us not, let us sweeten it for one another, let
us daily strengthen one another with Cordialls of Comfort against the evil
Day, Wherefore comfort one another with these words.

Glance but upon the Coherence ye shall quickly perceive this Consolatory
Exhortation of Saint Paul to be very opportune and most seasonable, which may
produce this Observable. That the seasonable opportunity of Comforting one
another is to be taken. Stale Comfort is unacceptable to the palate of the
Memory, it is the freshness of the occasion that ingratiates Comfort to the
Appetite of the longing soul. Comfort may come too late, and although it be
never so good of it self, the tarditie and latenesse will argue the Messenger
of no little indiscretion. Justly in this did Tiberius Sueton. in vita Tiber.
tax the Indiscretion of the Ilienses comforting him long after the Death of
his son, Paulo serius consolantibus, says the Historian, something too late
reviving the obliterated Memory of his Grief, he taxed them with this
Sarcasme: Se quoque vicem eorum dolere, quod egregium civem Hectorem
amisissent. That he also was sorry for them, because they had lost that worthy
Citizen Hector; one dead many hundred years before. Time eats away grief,
which otherwise would eat out the Heart, grief for losses is commonly worn
away in time; this is the Reason why the late Comforter is a Comforter both
Miserable, and Ridiculous. Miserable, by Application of a good Remedy to a very
ill purpose even to force healed wounds to bleed a fresh. Ridiculous for a man
out of Time to do that which Time it self has done before him: unseasonable
Physic exasperates the Disease, when as give it but Time and Patience, 'twill
do well enough, else apply a timely Consolation. Were he not to be laughed at
that brings a Handkerchiefe to wipe away tears already dried? But better late,
then never: nay, in the Case of Consolation, better never then too late: better
not do that which is good, then to do it, when 'twill do hurt. Whilst the
Occasion of grief is hot, strike: and if thou can beat upon the very (...),
the very Instant of Grief, say not to thy Neighbor, Go, and come again to
morrow for Comfort. To day is Gods voice of Comfort: To morrow may be the
Devils of being swallowed up with grief; at least Delay breeds danger, and the
Raven of Hell still puts in this his Caveat against Comfort, Cras, Cras, to
morrow is soon enough; but ye see that the Dove from Heaven lighting upon St
Paul did inspire him to set down the Time present in my Text, the very instant
of the time present, no deferring of the matter; for ye are not now to seek
for Comfort, it is at hand in these words, Wherefore Comfort one another with
these words.

In these words I find the Art of Building Division.
Comfort, a very useful Art for all Christians to study thoroughly, therefore
my Method shall keep close to the Metaphore of Building.

1. The specificall Difference of this from other Buildings. 2. The Necessity
of this Buildlng in a Christian Commonwealth. 3. The Perswasives inducing to
go about this Building to study the Art. 4. The Disswasives from the neglect
of going forward with it. 5. The Materials of this Building; These words, in
the Text. 6. The Habitual Ability to make good use of this Art of Comfort. 7.
The Actual Ability to make good use of it in the Platform of Comfort set up
according to the exact Rule of Gods Word. 8. The Strength and Duration of this
Building.
1. The specificall Difference of this from other Buildings: It Is the
spiritual comfort in this life, 1. Part.
differenced. 1. From carnal Comfort in this life. 2. From Eternal joy in the
Life to come. 1. Spiritual Comfort is the Lighting or easing of the Heart of
that sorrow or fear, wherewith it is surcharged, (...) in the Text is the
exciting, encouraging, and strengthening of our fainting and languishing
spirits. Carnal Comfort is raised up from the creature by corrupt Nature, no
higher then the sensitive apprehension of a Natural man: whose belly is his
God Phil. 3. 18.
, whose glory is his Shame; and such was the glory of that great King, who
dyed, commanding this Epitaph to be set upon his tomb, Haec habeo, quae edi;
this I have, that I have eaten: it seems all the rest was lost to the brutish
swine, as Tully censured him a little more sparingly that it was an Epitaph fit
for an Ox or a bruit Beast; my Belly is my God, my Stomach is my Altar, my
Church is my Kitchen, my Priest is my Cook, this the voice of these brutish
men, who find the Possession of no Comfort from any thing, but from that which
was driven into the Paunch, and so into the draught. But Christians that study
the right Art of true Comfort have another language, our spiritual Comfort is
left us, when our life is about to leave us. Spiritual Comfort is raised from
the Creator by the Mediation of the Creature, or from the Creature by the
working of the Creator in the Apprehension of the Regenerate Man. Thus the Holy
Ghost is the first Mover of spiritual Comfort, as the Promises of Gods Word
are the grounds of this Comfort, and our Believing hearts are the seats of
Comfort, so the Holy Ghost is the Head-worker of Comfort, and the Act of
Comfort wrought is to strengthen our Hearts: therefore Romans 1. 11. and 12.
(...), to be established and strengthened, and (...), to be comforted are put
one for the other, St Paul being the Interpreter; but long before him the
Prophet Isaiah 40. 2.
intimates the like, for in the Hebrew and Greek Sept: speak comfortably to
Jerusalem, is (...) Hebrew: and (...), Greek: both imply in this phrase, speak
to the heart, or speak comfortably, that Comfort is the Hearts Peculiar, and
the Searcher of the Heart the Holy Ghost is therefore called the Comforter John
16. 7.
by an Excellency, (...); where the Spirit of God is made known to us by a
name in the New Testament not heard of in the old, the Comforter within a man;
the natural man may have outward Comforts, a Land flowing with Milk and
Honey, and a Table with a fruitful Vine and Olive Branches about, but the
Regenerate Man has a soul flowing with Milk and Honey of Comfort, because
the Comforter makes him fruitful, as the Greek Father Cyrillus Hierosoly
mitanus.
gives the Etymon of it, (...); called the Comforter from comforting and
succouring and helping our Infirmities, hence issues the act of spiritual
comfort in my Text differenced from carnal Comfort. 2. Spiritual Comfort in
this life is to be differenced from Eternal Joy in the life to come. The
Herald of Schoole-Divinity ranks Comfort Aquinas.
under the head of Joy; indeed all Comfort is a Joy to the Heart, but all Joy
is not Comfort; for there is Joy in Heaven, but no Comfort there, for properly
need of Comfort forespeakes misery and distress according to that of the
Golden-mouthed S. Chrysostom.
Father, (...), there is often mention made of the Comforter in Scripture,
because of the calamities and afflictions imminent to the Disciples, but the
blessed Estate of Heaven cannot admit any such Misery and Distress: we shall
joy in one another in Heaven, but not Comfort one another there, no such
Comfort in Heaven, all joy, all Rest; I find a Reason of it in Aquinas, 2a.
2ae. q. 28.
Gaudium sie habet ad Desiderium, ut quies ad motum. The soul is restless in
her Desire, but quieted in her Joy; now Comfort on Earth brings some Rest for
the soul, but Joy in Heaven is the only absolute Rest. Comfort is Rest to the
weary for a time, and a way to enable them for further travail: but Joy is
Rest for Eternity: even to sit down, and rest for ever, that is Joy in Heaven;
to stand and take a draught by the way, not to sit by it, that is Comfort on
Earth; true Joy frees from all sorrows, wipes all tears from our Eyes: but it
may be true Comfort which only upholds us in our sorrow; and dryes up our
tears as they fall. Yet fall they will, and sorrow we shall, else we need no
Comfort, for it must be a necessitous estate that stands in need of Comfort;
thus is Comfort differenced from Eternal Joy that needs nothing. Yea and thus
it is in this life as Nature necessitates the spark to fly upward: so sin
carries us downward to the Center, Misery. This Center is every where below
the Moon; corrupt Nature is the Circumference, no man without some lines
drawn from, or drawing him to Misery; Nulla Dies sine linea. Every Day in this
life, line upon line, line upon line, misery upon misery, misery upon misery;
it is well too, when it is here a little, and there a little. But this may
suffice to put a Difference 'twixt spiritual Comfort in this life and eternal
Joy in the life to come, and by this ye easily perceive my passage from the
first general Part to the Second, which is the Necessity of this Building in a
Christian Commonwealth, else S. Paul would not have used so serious an
Exhortation as this in my Text; Wherefore Comfort one another with these words.

The Necessity of this Building in a Christian Commonwealth. The Necessity is
threefold. 1. In respect of 2. Part.
the command of the Contriver and Overseer of the Building, God. 2. In respect
of the principal Instruments employed in this work, Gods Ministers. 3. In
respect of the common Worke-men, which are Gods People under the Title of One
another in the Text; if this threefold cord is not strong enough, I shall join
unto it the fourth Necessity, which is in respect of the Place where Comfort is
ordained by God to be preached, Gods Temple; This fourefold Cord is that that
tied me to study, and preach, you to hear, and learn this Necessary Art of
Building Comfort. 1. In respect of the command of the Contriver, and Overseer
of the Building, God: the God 1.
of all Consolation would have his Servants Ambassadors, Messengers of Comfort,
God doubles and trebles this charge upon them to press the Necessity of the
discharge of it, Isai. 40. 1. 2. Comfort ye my Isaiah 40. 1. 2.
people, comfort ye my people, says my God, nay the third time, speak
comfortably to Jerusalem. 2. The 2.
Disposition of Ministers is but now and then, seldom to be Boanerges, filii
tomitrui, sons of thunder, every Minister for the most part must be Barnabas,
filius Consolationis, the Son of Comfort: for though thunder is good to work
on a hard Heart, yet as thunder commonly brings rain, your sons of thunder
should do well always to conclude with a comfortable shower to refresh the
Heart: though Ministers may not be too curious to speak to the Ear, yet they
cannot be too careful to speak to the Heart of the People, that is to speak
comfortably to the people; Spiritual Bees must draw Honey, out of what flower
soever they light to preach upon. These Living Instruments of divine Comfort
are sweet Messengers, rare Interpreters, Job 33. 23. One of a thousand to
declare unto a Man his uprightness. i. Christ's Righteousness, they have a
Declarative power in publishing the glad tidings of the Gospel; these were
Jobs best Comforters, better then all his Friends, in his extremity; a Minister
may be a greater Comfort to a Man in his sickness, then all his Friends,
because Ministers are the Bridegroomes friends, and bring the espoused soul
good tidings of the Marriage day, those blessed Nuptials with her Lord Christ
Jesus: therefore spiritual comforts are often in Scripture compared to oil, and
the pouring forth of those Comforts to anointing, peruse but one place, Isaiah
61. 1, 2, 3.
The Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings, verse. 1. to comfort all that
mourn, verse. 2. to give the oil of Joy for Mourning. ver. 3. God does anoint
his Ministers, that they may anoint his people with the oil of gladness:
Every Sermon should be as a Feast to the Hearers, and Preachers must do as the
Jews used to do in their Feasts; they used in token of welcome to anoint
their guests, Luke 7. 46. Mine head with oil thou did not anoint, i. thou
have not bid me welcome, nor cheared me; but Ministers must feast poor souls
pouring upon their heads that Alabaster box of precious ointment, the word of
Consolation; as we are the principal Instruments of Comfort, we must cheer
them up and bid them heartily welcome to Gods house with some comfortable
Exhortation like this of St Paul in my Text, Comfort one another with these
words. 3. In respect of the common workmen, which are Gods people under 3.
the Title of One another in the Text. Expositors use the word, Invicem, by
course, each Christian when his course comes, must comfort another, (...), one
(...). One another.
another, no man is exempted from this office, that is, One or Other; as the
Ministers must make uses of Comfort, it is their office, it is the right way of
preaching: so the people must make good use of them, it is their duty, it is the
right way of hearing to lay up Comforts in store, both for themselves and
others, to be able to bring forth both new and old, as occasion serves to
comfort one another. For all the members of the Militant Church are but of two
sorts. 1. Those that are comforted, but in fear of affliction. 2. Those that
are afflicted, but in hope of comfort. Wherefore either for fear, or hope, be
well provided with comforts before hand; the Virgin Mary had not been left so
completely furnished with Comforts after her Sons death, had She not laid in
her heart those sayings that She heard from her living Savior: imitate the
blessed Virgin, what comfortable saying ye hear commit it to safe custody in
your hearts, for ye know not what need any of you, or any of your friends may
have of it in the day of sickness; or at the hour of death at furthest. We
may set before you heavenly treasure, and show you the golden pots of Manna,
these words of comfort in my text, but if ye will be enriched by them, ye
must receive by the hand of faith, and distribute them by the tongue of
comforting; then ye own the Pearls, when they are yours to give to one
another. Why to hear one who has the tongue of comforting, (as Saint Paul had
in the words before my text) enlightening the mind, rectifying the will,
moderating the desires, quieting the affections, and filling the soul with
unspeakable joy is or would be a great delight to you; yet nothing to that ye
will find, when by the wills, grace of God working upon your understandings and
ye shall be able to produce all these divine effects (upon occasion) both in
your selves and in others, wherefore it is needful to comfort one another with
these words. 4. In respect of the place, where comfort is ordained 4. Necessity.
by God to be preached, Gods Temple; Gods House is to be called the House of
comfort, and if the Heathen Orator making an Oration in aede Concordiae (a
Temple consecrated to their goddess Concord) used the place for a Topic, and
drew an argument from the house inscription where they met, to enforce the
Necessity of Peace and Concord: much more may I making a Sermon in aede
consolationis (a Temple consecrated to the God of all Consolation) use the
place for a Topic, and draw a strong enforcement to mutual Comfort and
Consolation; for as this is the best place in which to bury the dead; so it is
also to raise up comfort to the living: A place of dust and ashes to the dead,
but a place appointed for the giving of Beauty for ashes to the living: As the
Prophet speaks, Isaiah 61. 3.
the house of mourning for the dead; but here the oil of joy for mourning to
the living. Sometimes the fittest place for the spirit of heaviness; and
sometimes the fittest place to change that, to put on the Garment of praise, as
the Prophet continues the Allegory, to have our hearts, lips, and countenances
clothed and adorned with the large roab of praise of our God, who still
comforts us according, or far beyond the time wherein he afflicts us,
wherefore in the house of comfort, learn we how to comfort one another with
these words.

The Perswasives inducing us to go about this Building, 3. General Part.
and to study this Art of divine Comfort.

Now to press this duty hard upon us. 1. from our Christian relation one to
another in the Text. Who One another. Invicem, mutually.
should do this good office of comfort, but members of the same body? As
Christians in the mysti^^ll body of Christ, if a thorn be in the foot, a
sharp affliction in the meanest member of Christ, why out of a Sympathy, the
back must bow, the strong Christian, and the rich man, rich in grace must put
to his helping hand to pluck it out, and the eye the watchful Minister must be
busy to pry into the hurt, and ready to apply a wholesome salve, a word of
Comfort. Again beloved in the Lord of Heaven, are we not fellow-travellers to
heaven? why then as good travelers cheer up one another both by word and by
example; especially in the red Sea of Affliction, the wheels of the soul are
taken off, like Pharaohs Chariot wheels, they drive heavily; they want this
oil to put them on comfortably. Whence is it that so many droope under the
burden of so many cares, and are sore battered with so many temptations? it is
because they are left comfortless, only to their own spirits. Dead stones in
an Arch uphold one another, and shall not the living? it is the work of an
Angel to comfort, nay it pleases Gods Spirit to take this office upon him, to
be the Comforter: thus also one Christian Friend may become an Angel, nay a
God to another, with feeding lips and a healing tongue of Comfort; the very
leafes, the words of the tree of Righteousness have a curing virtue in them,
strengthening and corroborating the heart, there are words (even those words in
my text) that are Cordialls against all faintings of spirit, they will beget
new spirits in a man, Wherefore comfort one another with such words. Every
relation wherein we stand toward others are so many bonds and sinews, whereby
one member of Christ is fitted to derive comfort to another through love the
bond of Perfection, Col. 3. 14. we can attain to no perfection of comforting
without love, if ye love one another, ye will comfort one another, ye are of
relation near enough, that is the chief enforcement of this duty from our
Christian Sympathy. Now very briefly of other Perswasives which have their
force too, and no doubt but if they all concenter and meet together in our
practice, there will quickly be comfort sealed up to one another souls. 2.
Persuasive, others may comfort 2. Persuasive.
us as much another time, when we may suffer what others now feel, wherefore
comfort one another. 3. Sorrow is a gulf, in which many are swallowed up 3.
for want of comfort, and if God commands us to pull an ox out of the pit, and
to cover the pit that the ox fall not into it again, does God take care for
oxen, and not we for one another? 4. We receive comfort 4.
from God to this very end that we might be able to comfort one another, 2 Cor.
1. 4. Let us give to others as we receive from God. 5. By comforting others we
5.
improve the stock of our own comfort, it is not empaired, but increased by
giving it to others: the heat of comfort by warming others is not abated, but
enflamed. In strengthening others, we strengthen our selves at the same time,
with the same act, this should encourage us to comfort one another. Lastly 6.
we derive upon our selves the blessing pronounced on those that consider the
needy. Psalm. 41. 1. the Hebrew signifies the needinesse of the soul as well
(...)
as of the body, Depauperari, to be any way impoverished; now the want of
comfort is a miserable poverty of the soul, better be a beggar then need
comfort, and it is better to give spiritual alms, then any other, they may do
more good. Now 'twill be our comfort here, and crown hereafter, a double
recompense, God and man shall bless us if we comfort one another; thus blessed
is the man that gives comfort to them that need; and if I cannot persuade you
to be happy, give me leave to pass from the Perswasives to the Disswasives.

The Disswasives from the neglect of going forward 4. General Part.
with the Building of Comfort. 1. It Is a vilifying and slighting of an
Ambassador sent from Heaven, his 1. Disswasive
Ambassie is this weighty business (in the Text) of mutual comfort, any
neglect of an Ambassador is a disrespect to the Master; if ye care little for
Saint Paul's exhortation ye despite, despite ye the Holy Spirit dictating to
St Paul? and what shall we be guilty of, if we will not come in by fair
entreaty, when St Paul exhorts us but to do our Duty? 2. It Is no less then
high Treason, a revolting from our God; 2.
ye may read this heavy imputation on those that comforted not the weak,
Ezekiel. 34. 4. and Job 6. 14. Job 6. 14.
if we neglect to pay this due debt of comforting each other, mark the heavy
censure, it is no less then the forsaking of the fear of the Almighty; oh
fearful Revolt! they fear not God, that comfort not men in misery. Thus it is
when men will not own men in trouble, but as the heard of dear forsake and
push away the wounded dear from them: they will turn their backs, and only
cry, God comfort thee; indeed immediate comforts from God are the sweetest; yet
for the most part the Sun of Righteousness, that has this healing in his
wings, conveigheth the Beams of comfort by the help of others, and he is an
unworthy Servant that thinks scorn to carry a message of comfort from his
Master to any one of his Fellow Servants. Now if ye love to fly such an heavy
imputation and censure from God and man; or if ye love the blessing of God and
man; or if ye love the increase of your own comfort, or if ye love to
attain to the end of Gods comforting you; or if ye love to keep others, or to
be kept your selves out of the gulf of sorrow, or if ye love to carry your
selves as fellow-travellors to heaven, as members of Christ, and as good
Christians, neglect not this Apostolical exhortation, Wherefore comfort one
another with these words.

The materials of this Building, these words, in the 5. General Part. With
these words.
Text. We must use the right and lawful means of comfort, (...), these words.
Either in the particular relation of these words to St Paul's former Doctrine:
or in the general relation to the whole Word of God, Pars prototo, comfort one
another with these words, or any the like words of comfort out of Gods Word.

1. These words in the particular relation to St Paul's 1.
former Doctrine, the first word of the Note of Illation, (...), Wherefore, is
St Paul's inference of a good use of Consolation raised from his former
Doctrine, touching the estate of the dead in Christ; a blessed change they make
that dye in the Lord, that's our Christian Hope. Give hopeless menleave to
tremble at Death, whose portion is in this life; let Gods children lift up
their heads for joy toward their dissolution, and solace themselves on their
deathbeds, as Simeon sings his Nunc Dimittis, quasi necesitate teneretur S.
Ambrose.
in hac vita, non voluntate, St Ambrose descants De bono Mortis.
as if the Child of God staide in this life of necessity, and not by his good
will: sure I am St Paul by his good will, would feign be with Christ, which is
much more the better, Phil. 1. 23. (...), by far very Phil. 1. 23.
far much more, and very much more the better, both simply in it self, and
in respect of St Paul himself, had there been no necessity of his living in
respect of others. For as St Cyprian reasons it in his Book to this purpose De
Mortalitate.
, Cum mundus oderit Christianum, quid amas eum, qui te odit? and non magis
sequeris Christum, qui te and redemit, and diligit? The World hates a
Christian, Christ does not command us to love the World that hates us, but
rather to follow Christ, who is our Redeemer and best Lover too. Wherefore, if
ye be Christians, comfort one another, as not to fear the death of your
selves; so not to mourn immoderately for the death of others, though never so
near to us, that dye in the Lord. Here I shall trouble you to cite the
forenamed Father S. Cyprian.
, Hoc nos oftendamus esse quod credimus, ut neque Charorum lugeamus excessum:
and cum accersitionis propriae Dies venerit, incunctanter, and libenter ad
Dominum ipso vocante veniamus, Let us show our selves to be the same in our
life, that we are in our Faith, that we may not over-mourne for our dearest
friends, and when the appointed day of Gods sending to any one of us shall
come: Come, let us go without delay and willingly to the Lord, who himself
calls us. Here after that Father, before I fall into him again, I can quickly
tell you all that Oecumenius does on my Text, it is to interpret my Oecumenius
in locum.
Text by those foregoing words of St Paul, that ye sorrow not even as others
that have no hope; i. As the Heathen that had no hope of the Resurrection,
(...). Oecumenius holds it proper for such only to grieve excessively for the
dead, who have no hope of the Resurrection: and how does it traduce hopeful
Christians as hopeless men, when we bewail as utterly lost and extinct, those
whom we profess to live with God? To this purpose that elegant tongued Father
S Cyprian de Mortalit.
. Fidem quam sermon and voce depromimus, cordis and pectoris testimonio non
probemus: Spei nostrae, ac fidei praevaricatores sumus, simulata, ficta, fucata
videntur esse quae dicimus, nil prodest verbis praeferre virtutem, factis
destruere veritatem. The Profession of our hope of the Resurrection to life, is
but varnished over and dissembled because we destroy it more with our actions,
then we do prefer it by our words; else why do we take on in such a
grievous manner, when God takes our Friends away from us? I know that where
hearts have been knit together by God, they cannot be rent a sunder without
exceeding great grief, as Jacobs could not from Rachel, nor David's heart from
Jonathan. I also know that our Lord and Master himself wept for Lazarus John
11. 35.
. I find no fault with natural affection, much less with Christian
compassion, let Nature have her course, but let Religion set her bounds: let us
water our plants of sincere affection and compassion, but not drown them by
sorrowing as others do that have no hope: I find no other fault, but that St
Paul finds in the proof of the Doctrine, of which my Text is the use, when
mourning exceeds The measure of Mourning.
Christian proportion and all true Measure. Joseph loved his Father better then
the Egyptians did: yet Joseph wept but the tithe that the Egyptians did. They
mourned 70. days, Genesis 50. 3. he but seven days, verse. 10. All that I speak
is to condemn those, who are too little like Rachel in serving the living God,
but too much like Rachel in weeping for the dead. She would not be comforted;
but these hopeless Mourners cannot truly urge the Reason that Rachel did;
because they are not; for we know that they are living with God that dye in the
Lord; we know that the good thief was on the day of his death with Christ the
Lord in Paradise: and as it is a comfort to know where they are, so it is a
further comfort to know what they do; they follow the Lamb wheresoever he
goes: and is it not a height of comfort to know what they say? they cease not
to cry day and night Holy, Holy, Holy, they are still a singing Halleluiah, and
shall not we give over weeping on Earth for them, who shall never give over
singing in Heaven? shall we refuse to be comforted, because they are not on
earth, who are and enjoy all the comforts in Heaven? Wherefore comfort one
another with these words, and with the words of that judicious Father S. Aug.
sermon. 35. de diverse.
. Contristamur in nostrorum mortibus necessitate amittendi, sed cum Spe
recipiendi: inde angimur, hinc consolamur: inde infirmitas afficit, hinc fides
reficit. The necessity of loosing our friends, that cuts us, but the hope of
receiving them again, this heales us: that is our grief, this is our comfort;
wherefore against the loss of our dearest friends, comfort one another with
these words. As Apothecaries make singular use even of the dust of gold: so the
Jewish Rabbis those Apothecaries of the Hebrew simples make profession, that
great Mountains hang upon the smallest Jods in the Bible. Then surely a
discourse like a Mountain for largeness, but above a Mountain for
fruitfulness may be raised from this conjunctive particle in my Text, (...),
Itaque, Wherefore; and to make it so, I pass from the particular relation of
these words to S. Paul's former Doctrine, I pass unto the general Relation of
these words to the whole Word of God, Pars pro toto, comfort one another with
these words, or 2. The general Relation of these words.
with any the like words of Comfort out of Gods Word. In the Greek, (...),
these Ratiocinations, Arguments rather then bare words, so it is that Scripture
words are the strongest Reasons to evince and persuade Comfort; the true Hearts
ease grows only in Gods Paradise, in Gods Word. There may be some Tulip of
Comfort, some color, bark, or flower in the words, and writings of men, but
the very pith and marrow of comfort effectual for all the souls Maladies is
no where to be found but in the Word of God, in these words. As it was said of
the words spoken by the Word, God, Christ Jesus, that He taught with
Authority, and not us the Scribes Matthew. 7. verse ult.
, the Scribes taught poor, jejune, heartlesse matter unprofitable,
uncomfortable; and their form of teaching was without Majesty, without any
command, but our Saviors both Matter and Form of teaching carried Authority
with it; the unusual unheard of Majesty of the words accompanied with matter
most profitable and most comfortable, did command his Auditors. Now Christ has
still left the same Matter to us, it is true of all the Word of God, that it
comforts as having Authority, and not as the Scribes, not as humane writers,
who would usurp upon this Authority, which is the absolute Prerogative of Gods
Word; so that the maine point is this, Only Gods Word has full power and
Authority to comfort man's heart. 1. a Causa. 2. a Subjecto. 3. a Doctrinae
certitudine. 1. From the Efficient cause, 1. a Causa.
the Scriptures Authority of comforting is the same with Gods Spirit dictating
both matter and words: the saving work of the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, that
also goes along with the Word of God; Gods Spirit and Gods Word go together by
way of Covenant, Isaiah 59. 21. This is my Covenant with them, Isaiah 59. 21.
says the Lord, My Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in
thy mouth, where Gods Word is the Counselor, Gods Spirit is the Comforter. 2.
a 2. a Subjecto.
Subjecto, the Subject of Gods Word carries with it the greatest and most
infallible Authority of Comforting, because it is the only Storehouse of true
Comfort, in it is that supreme Treasure, the Mediator Christ Jesus, that dyed
to reconcile us to God, Romans 5. 10. That is the Fountain of all Comfort, Rom 5
10.
Zech. 4. 12. Christ is the Fountain out of which all Comfort is emptied, the
two Testaments of God are the two Olive branches, as Beda, but Christ is the
root and juycy oil; and what though many Expositors Ribera in Zechar. 4 12.
make the two Olive branches Enoch and Elias converting the Jews to be
Christians, yet that cannot be but by preaching and emptying out the golden
Oil that makes a cheerful countenance, a joyful Convert to Christ, so that
still Christ is the Fountain of saving soule-suppling Oil. A sealed Fountain
to the world, but for Gods Word to reveal it and set it open. Indeed Tully and
Seneca writ No solid comfort in Tully or Seneca.
large discourses of Comfort, but St Augustine ravished with Tullies style, yet
one thing discomforted so far as not to care so much for Tully, Quia Nomen
Christi non fuit ibi. That Treasury of Comfort, the name (Jesus) of Christ not
once to be found in all Tully. And surely had Seneca been so well acquainted
with S. Paul, as some will have him, being of Neroes household, then Seneca
might have learnt to have known nothing for his Souls comfort, but Christ
Jesus and him crucified: and not have stood so much upon those common Pleas of
Comfort against death, as he does Ea lege nascimur, the Law of being borne
Senera.
is to dye, Death is inevitable, foolish for a man to grieve for that no man
can avoyde, Exitus communis, none scapes it, alas poor Comfort! But what
Comfort is to be looked for in their writings who knew not how that to die in
the Lord is to rest from our labors; Revel. 14. 13.
but God be praised we know it, out of Gods Words, and happy are we if we
believe that Death separates not from the Love of God in Christ Jesus Romans 8.
. That is Comfort indeed. And not to grieve for the Death of friends as without
Hope of the Resurrection of the Dead, that is the very point S. Paul treats of
in my Text. The wisest of the Heathen judged it the best Optimum non nasci:
Proximum cito mori.
thing, first not to be borne; the next to dye as soon as we are borne; any
Christian may be wiser to judge it the best thing, first to be borne again in
Christ Jesus; the next to dye in the Lord as soon as it pleases God; we must
not leave off work, till he that sets us a work, calls us off. Seneca used to
comfort his friends at Funerals thus, praemittimus, non amittimus. We send our
friends before us, we loose them not, yet they were at a sore loss, they knew
not to what place they sent their dead friends before them. But beloved to
gather Grapes of thorns, comfort from them, who had not the true comfort; if
they so esteemed of death, who knew of no life after death, no abiding out of
the body, what is fit, that we Christians should prize death at? who ought to
make reckoning of no life, but after death: no abiding, but out of the body: no
dwelling but in heaven. We have here no abiding City, but we look for one
that is to come Heb. 13. 14.
. The Greek is, we seek out, we look out earnestly for one to come; and that we
may not loose all our looking, our Savior directs us where to look for it John
14. 2.
, In my Fathers house are many Mansions, it is my Fathers house, and it is your
Fathers house as ye are in me: that is the Comfort, and to fill up the comfort,
they are Mansions there, places of abode there, but Innes here, or rather
Tents, or Booths, moveable. Everlasting habitants there, Luke 16. 9. but
nothing Luke 16. 9.
will last here: yea, here we thrust one another out of house and home, there
are several Mansions enough for us all to live by one another, Wherefore
comfort one another with these words.

3. And briefly, a Doctrinae certitudine. Only Gods 3. a Doctrinae certitudine.
Word has full power and authority to comfort man's heart from the certainty of
the Doctrine, which the Word of God has from God himself. 1. Virtute, the
strength and virtue of Gods Word accompanied 1.
with Gods Spirit can never fail to work comfort. 2. Veritate, the whole
Truth of solid Comfort that is communicable to mankind, is sincerely and truly
2.
published in Gods Word, in that only, and yet in that perfectly. 3.
Complemento, in fulfilling, and in the 3.
accomplishment of all the comforts prescribed in Gods Word; for they are all
most certain and true, as in the substance; so in the event of them. Heaven
and Earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away Matthew. 24. 35.
: there shall be a revolution and a passing away too of all things in this
world, but this very Word of God, that all things shall pass away, this Word
shall not pass away; no, nor any one Word of comfort in Christ Jesus shall
ever pass away, Wherefore comfort one another with these words.

But what good does the bare knowledge of the Materials without Habitual and
Actual Ability to use them?

1. The Habitual Ability to make good use of 6. General Part.
this Art of comforting, that is the sixth general Part. Now the spring head of
comfort infusing into this habitual ability, either we must go out of the
world for that, or that must come from another world for us: but we cannot stir
one foot of the soul, the least affection: or so much as one winged thought
to go to that, that must come to us, to raise our flight, with the wings of
that Dove, whose wings are silver, and her feathers like gold, I mean the Holy
Ghost. The Eternal Breath of the Father and the Son must breath into us the
breath of Life, a Life of comfort: the Love of the Father and the Son
descending upon the Son in the likeness of a Dove without gall, must purge
out of us all gall of malice and bitterness that we may comfort one another in
all meekness of spirit: the invisible spirit descending visibly upon the
sons of men in the liknesse of fiery tongues must enable us to give light and
warmth of comfort to one another. If it be urged, that Faith is Objection.
the only strong Conveyance and true Receiver of spiritual Comfort. It Is
quickly satisfied, that even Faith also is Answer.
the gift of the Spirit. The Comforter gives us Faith to take Comfort from him,
else we can take none at all, so that in the conclusion, it is the Comforter
that works all in all in us. For as it was said of the Mass and Chaos Genesis 1.
2.
, Tohu, vavohu, an empty, vast, solitary, solitude; 'Twas without form and
void, darkness (that is a Privation of Light) was upon the Face of the Earth,
before the Spirit of God moved upon the Face of the Waters. The soul of a
natural man is like the earth, lumpish, sad, without form and void of
comfort, darkness of discontent is upon the face of the man inward and
outward; a vacuity, a vast solitary Privation of comfort; until the Spirit of
God move upon the face of the waters (that is) the swelling, tumultuous,
restless thoughts, and comfortless apprehensions. The Hebrew is an apt
Metaphor, Rachaph, Incubare; from birds that sit brood on their Eggs to
sustain and cherish them: the Spirit of God does not only form and sustain
the thoughts of man from vanishing into nothing; but also nourish, and cherish,
and foster them, to support a regenerate man in the comfortable estate of well
being, a Christian. Not a thought of comfort can rise in the heart, but first
hatched by the Spirit of God: we are quite void and empty, not the least
Motion of Comfort, before the Spirit of God move upon our thoughts. Beloved, at
the first coming of the Holy Ghost, Acts 2. 2. a rushing mighty wind Acts 2. 2.
filled all the house; the wind has one property to cleanse and purge the
Air, to make it comfortable and refreshing: nor is there any true refreshing
or comfort, until we are filled with the Spirit of God, as the sail of a Ship
is filled with wind. For let a ship be never so well tackled and provided, yet
all is in vain without a wind: and let never so eloquent Sermons spread their
sails in the ship of the Church, unless the good wind of Gods Spirit blows
where it list, when it list, how it list, and upon whom it list; I say Gods
Spirit must be both wind to drive us, and Pilot to direct us to the Port of
Comfort. Now if Caesar did encourage that Ship-Master, who feared Shipwreck,
with a Caesarem vehis; fear not thou carriest Caesar, the Worlds Conqueror;
yet by his leave, as great as he was, he was not the Seas Commander, nor the
obeyed rebuker of the Winds, and Waves, as he is whom we carry in our tossed
breasts; cheer thy thy self with a Paracletum vehis; thou carriest the
Comforter in thy heart, the rebuker of heart-risings, the Lord controller of
Troubles, the commander of stormy swelling afflictions, the Conqueror of
temptations. Whose very conquest is a mighty comfort to the conquered Soul,
because his Conquest is achieved by Love, for as the Holy Ghost proceeds from
the Father and the Son per modum Amoris, as the School speaks, so the
Spirit works in us by way of Love; sweetly St Bernard styles the Holy Ghost,
Osculum Patris, and filii, the kiss of the Father and the Son; God the
Father kisseth by his Son, but we feel not this kiss, until God the Son
kisseth us by his Spirit. Now what more comfortable to a chaste wife, then a
sweet kiss from her Husband? so prays the Bride, Cant. 1. 2. Let him kiss
Cant. 1. 2.
me with the kisses of his lips, and she gives a reason why She would be
kissed, for thy love is better then Wine, more comfortable then wine; that is,
(to close this) let Christ unite himself to his Church with this sweet
expression of his special favor, even by his Spirit to seal up the lips of
our hearts, our thoughts, to the most comfortable day of Redemption. Thus have
we seen the Springhead whence flows the Habitual Ability of all true
Comfort.

The actual Ability to make good use of this Art of comforting, 7. General
Part.
in the Platform of Comfort set up according to the exact Rule of Gods Word,
employed in these words in the Text. Justly reprehended are they, who take the
wrong way of Comfort, Play books and fabulous stories, forsaking this
Fountain of living waters; they dig pits that can hold no water, no true
refreshment of comfort. The God of all consolation did cause his Word to be
written for our Comfort, shall we frustrate the End why it was written? He that
made man's heart best does know what Maladies and what Cordialls to give; let us
follow his Prescripts, away with all other shallow sandy comforts of the worlds
Mountebanks, which the weary soul cannot rest and build upon, David a King
could not want the comforts of this life, yet he disclaimes them all in
comparison of Gods Word Psalm. 119. 50.
. This is my Comfort in my affliction, for thy Word has quickened me, Gods Word
did revive David's dead spirits. David did look out for comfort, but found none
but this Psalm. 119. 82.
, mine eyes fail for thy Word, saying, when will thou comfort me? Debiles
effecti sunt animae meae Oculi Euthymius in Psalm. 119.
. The Eyes of my soul fail me, my desires fail with looking out for Comfort,
which makes me cry, when will thou comfort me? David thought it long till God
did comfort him. It seems David had forgot the right way to comfort himself,
till he went this way to work. Psalm. 119. 52.
I remembered thy Judgments of old O Lord, and have comforted my self. Now as
St Paul exhorts, Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ; so be ye followers
of me as I am of David, for I know words especially prevail, when they are
uttered more from the bowels, then the brain, and from our own Experience:
which made Christ himself a more compassionate High Priest. Therefore out of
compassion I shall now comfort others, with the same precious Comforts,
wherewith I have comforted my self out of David's Psalms Psalmus, Angelorum
allectio: alacer Animae Ordo ac status: clypeus insuperabilis: Euthymius.
Praef. in Psalmos.
. He that has the key of David opening and no man shuts, assist me
effectually to open unto you a few words of Comfort out of the Psalms of
David. The truth is that in the extremity of her sickness, and since her
death, who was flesh of my flesh and bone of my bone, that which I then most
desired was to repose my troubled thoughts, and to compose the jarring strings
of my heart to rest; which at last I pegged up to some concord and harmony, by
listening to the sweet Songs of Sion set to David's well tuned Harp and heavenly
tuned Heart. For my Meditations did bring together four Verses, The orderly
proceeding in raising the Platform of Comfort.
out of four several Psalms, which being put well together by the Spirit of
God, in the heart of man, are sufficient Materials to raise up a Platform of
the strong and stately Building of true Christian Comfort. The four Verses may
challenge this Method, the first verse is the Removing of the Rubbish. The 1.
2. 3. 4. 1.
second Verse is the laying of the Foundation. The third Verse is the Raising
up of the Body of the Building. The fourth Verse is the laying on of the Roof.
1. The Removing of the Rubbish to fit the place for the Foundation, that is
done by taking away and clearing the Soul of all dejections, and disquietments
in this life, Psalm 42. last verse. Why art thou Psalm 42. v. ult.
cast down oh my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in
God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my
God. King David finding his soul over sensible of troubles, checks and chides
his soul sharply for it, with why and why? and this chiding goes so far as
to lay a strict charge upon his soul to the contrary, Hope thou in God, for
why should that soul be cast down and disquieted, that can Answer that
Question; now Lord what is my Hope? my Hope is in thee Psalm. 39. 7. It was the
last verse of Scripture I heard my wife speak on the last day of her life.
: Hope thou in God: and this charge to hope in God is grounded upon confidence
of better times to come, times of praising God, for I shall yet praise him,
this small word, Adhuc, yet, it is the strong voice of confidence after a long
combat. 1. Vox anhelantis, the voice of David breathing and panting under the
conflict of troubles and disquietments, what though I am thus now for the
present, I shall yet praise him: 2. Vox triumphantis, the voice of David
getting the victory over all his troubles, and triumphing with this voice of
Joy uttered with confidence, I shall yet praise him. And this confidence is
strengthened by his Experience, that God is the Health of his countenance.
Omnimodam Tremell.
Salutum faciei meae, he is all of the Salvations of my Countenance; the
Countenance is as the glass of the heart, in it ye may see the naked Face of
the heart; God first speaks saving health to the inward Man of the heart,
which he causes to shine forth in the cheerfulness of the outward man of the
countenance. Lastly, this experience is well backed by the interest David had
in God, my God; anima mea quid perstrepis in me? Trem. significantly, if God be
Tremell.
my God, why make thou such a troublesome noise within me oh my soul? why
art thou grumbling and complaining of this or that? As once Seneca told the
Roman Courtier that mourned for his sons death; Non fas tibi, salvo Caesare
de Fortuna queri, in illo omnia: Much more Salvo Salvatore, and nos salvante,
as long as God is our Savior, we must not be cast down with any thing, in illo
omnia; Friends, Sons, Husbands, Wifes, health, wealth, all things in my God,
my God, says David, Deus meus and omnia, says that confident one Luther.
, As bold as a Lion, God, my God, and all things mine. If God be with me, what
can be against me so far as to disquiet me? whatsoever is against me, it will
be with me for my good, if God be but my God, which is the 2d thing in the
Building 2.
of Spiritual Comfort, the laying of a sure Foundation, and that is no other
then God to be our God alone. Psalm. 73. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee?
Psalm. 73. 25.
and there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee. This is an expression
of our Faith, whom have we in heaven but thee, to rely upon in all our
necessities? this is an expression of our affection; whom have we in heaven but
thee, to love? the Giver of all things to be beloved; whom but thee to fear?
the Disposer of all things to be feared; whom but thee to desire? the Satisfier
of all lawful desires; the Foundation must be but One, whom but thee? and,
none on earth besides thee. Yet with a difference, other Foundations are laid
deep in the Earth, this must be laid high in Heaven. Whom in heaven but thee?
and, none on Earth besides thee, as the Foundation of Comfort: but we may An
objection anticipated.
desire other things besides God, as the means of comfort as Gods Ordinances,
and blessings spiritual and temporal, the fat Calfe must be killed for the
Prodigal, a temporal blessing too must be had, but take that too as from God,
for whatsoever is desiderable in any creature, they are but drops of sweetness
let fall from the Fountain of Comfort, God. Whom have I in heaven but thee for
my sole Refuge and Trust? or whom have I in heaven but thee for my chief Joy,
and whole hearts-delight? yet the soul that is thus wedded to God, may love
what God loves, and what God commands her love, for him, and in him, but not as
him: in so doing She would play the Harlot, Adultera Christo as St Cyprian
speaks, St Cyprian.
but the soul as a most loyal wife must cast no part of her conjugall
affection upon any but God: above him, without him, besides him I love nothing,
but all things in him, and for him; it is St Augustines Confession, Lib. 10.
Confess.
Cum quo solo, and de quo solo, and in quo solo, anima intellectualis vere
beata est. With God alone, and from God alone, and in God alone, the
understanding soul is truly happy; whom to love freely is a due debt, whom to
embrace is chastity, whom to marry is virginity, whom to serve is liberty, whom
to imitate is Perfection, whom to desire on Earth is contentment, whom to enjoy
in heaven is everlasting Happiness. Now Lord let me live out of the world with
thee in Heaven: but let me not live in the world without thee on Earth. For
whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none on Earth that I desire
besides thee.

The Devoute soul that lays so good a Foundation as this may go on and
prosper with the Building of Comfort, even to raise the Body of the work to 3.
that height of Comfort, that David does, Psalm. 94. 19. In the multitude of my
thoughts within me, thy Psalm. 94. 19.
comforts delight my soul. My perplexed thoughts, that are wreathed one within
another with the many sorrows of my heart, so the Sept: (...). Though there be
a great multitude of vexing griefs in my heart, yet the plaster is large
enough for the sore, thy comforts proportionable to my Sorrows, (...),
according to the multitude of my Sorrows thou do proportion out thy
comforts, be my Sorrows what they will for quantity or quality, thy comforts
can extricate and rid me of them all, be they near so intricate and enwrapped,
as branches of trees returning back are blended and entangled, so the Hebrew in
the Text, for our thoughts in Hebrew come from (...), Redundare, (...).
to rebound, and return back, and wrap themselves one within another; nothing
can set our thoughts free, but thy comforts oh God. The comforts of thy
Providence as a Faithful Creator and Preserver: The comforts of thy providing
and protecting care, as a loving Father, and Redeemer; providing all good,
grace, mercy, and favor: protecting from all evil; sin, Satan, death, the
grave and hell: our loving Father will not suffer us to want any thing that is
good: our dear Redeemer will not suffer any thing that is evil to come near
us, but for our good. These thy comforts delight my soul, says David. These,
or nothing, can truly and really delight the soul; earthly things may delight
the body that is made of earth, but the spiritual soul must have spiritual
things to delight it, worldly things delight not the soul within a man; the
worldly man may draw a curtain betwixt the world and his heart, and seem the
only merry man in the world, when there is many a bitter pull in the heart:
vides laetitiam in ore, St Ambrose, ye may hear shouting from his tongue, but
ask what cheer within, like a poor Tavern with a bush, but no good wine
within; as merry as he is about the mouth, his soul finds but poor
entertainment within: the wine of the wicked has lost it nature, to cheer the
heart of man, and like oil it only makes him have a cheerful countenance,
but the wine of the godly comforts the spirits within a man; David's merry
soul, was given from God, thy comforts delight my soul; (...) Sept. Thy
comforts have loved Sept.
my soul, have embraced my soul with love, Exhortationes tuaejocundaverunt,
St August. Thy Exhortations S. August. in locum.
make my soul merry, and pleasant, and cheerful. He only is merry at heart,
and delighted in his very soul, who does what God exhorts him to do, whose
soul takes daily many a Comfortable walk in the several rooms and
conveyances of the Palace of divine Comfort. He often makes it his souls
Recreation and delight to view the Divisions and the distinctions that God has
made of Creation, Preservation, Redemption, Provision, Protection: the rare
Contrivances of Election, Vocation, Justification, Sanctification, and the
stately Mansions of Glorification prepared for us, these are the Comforts that
will delight our souls, our very souls. Wherefore comfort one another with
these words.

Now we have seen the maine Body of the Building of divine comfort, what
remains but to lay on 4.
the roof, Psalm. 55. 22. Cast thy Burden upon the Lord, Psalm. 55. 22.
and he shall sustain thee, do but thou cast thy burden on him, and let him
alone to sustain thee; this Roof will hold out against all weather of
affliction, storms and tempests may beat, but God is able to bear the
Burden, which we cannot bear. But what burden may we be bold to cast upon the
Lord? Any, either the greatest burden that is in the world, sin; cast thy
sins upon the Lord Jesus: or the lesser burdens, crosses, troubles, and
losses. In all and under Patience is that one thing necessary to bear crosses
and losses.
all the Lord shall sustain thee with things necessary, at least with that one
thing necessary, Patience; So long as thou losest not thy Patience, so long
thou losest not the Lord, who shall sustain thee to sustain thy losses. Be it
the burden of the loss of health, wealth, wife, child, friend, cast thy burden
upon the Lord by remembering that they were the blessings of the Lord upon thee,
and unless by Impatience, thou lose the Lord too, the Lord knows how to
bless thee again with all these, as he did Job, of whom S. Augustine speaks
thus: Haec amisit, sed illum tenet, qui abstulit. Job lost his goods, but he
took hold of him, who took them away, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes, says
that pattern of Patience Job 1.
, the Lord takes, and no matter what he takes from us, so long as we have him
still, that takes them, who is able to regive them with advantage. It was S.
Chrysostomes way of comforting his Auditors at Antioch S. Chrysostom. Hom 4. ad
Antioc.
, (...). It is a great part of true Piety and godliness, to cast thy burden
upon the Lord, and he will give thee better things then ever thou lost; the
like Cordial the judicious Father has S. August. in Psalm. 66.
, quamvis arca exinanita sit auro, cor tamen plenum est fide: the less in the
chest, there may be the more in the heart. The want of a husband may fill the
heart with her best husband Christ Jesus. The loss of a wife may make the
stronger contract betwixt the soul and her God. The loss of a child may be a
Testimony to my heart, that God receives me as his child, for he chasteneth
every son whom he receives: Vbi multum crucis, multum lucis, that Heb. 12. 6.
Luther.
man of crosses r was wont to say, the more affliction from God, may prove the
more instruction to the soul. The real Alphabet of Christianity is speld out
by suffering Christ's Cross; and not by reading of Christ's Sufferings. Faith
comes by hearing, and by feeling too, by suffering, that is the best trial of
Faith; by suffering losses we learn to believe what God can do for us. What
wicked Cain said of his sins, they are greater then can be forgiven; no
child of God must think of his losses, they are greater then can be given
again: sin the cause of all losses, is not greater then can be forgiven: much
less any loss, the effect, greater then can be given again. Cast thy burden,
Pagn ine reads it, Pondus, thy heavy crosses, and weighty losses; but Montanus,
Donum, Pagnine. Montanus.
punctually to the Hebrew root; and every loss or cross is the gift of God
sent to thee from God, sometimes greater gifts, sometimes lesser: now return
these gifts whence they came, cast them upon the Lord. The Sept. use a word by
themselves, (...), thy anxious care, thy cutting, dividing, solicitude, look
Sept.
to thine own work, cast thy burden upon the Lord, that is thine own work,
look to that, and be not solicitous what is Gods work, to sustain thee; eke
out thy Patience, awaite the Lords goodness, cast it all upon God and he shall
sustain thee. This is the fairest roof, the greatest height we can raise up
the Building of Comfort to: yet I might give you another Platform of the
particular furniture, belonging to every several Room of Comfort; look how
many things we had need to be comforted against, so many several Rooms of
Comfort, but not knowing what entertainment this Art of Building Comfort will
find, if ye like to make use of it, this is enough by way of direction; but
if ye like it not, this is toomuch; therefore I hasten to the last general
Part proposed in our Method.

The eight Part is the strength and duration of this 8. Part.
Building, for if it were but slight, weak, or not lasting long, it were but
poor comfort.

The Building of Comfort not only stands by the benefit of the Foundation that
sustaines and supports it: but the strength of the Building is much augmented
and increased by the benefit of the contignations that knit and unite the Parts
together; and also of the butteresses that comprehend and embrace them without.
The Foundation being surely laid will not suffer the Building of Comfort to
sink: the contignation and knitting will not suffer it to cleave: the
Butteresses will not suffer it to swerve: all these together by a joint force
(which is the stronger) make greatly for the strength and duration of the
building of Comfort. Ye see the Foundation laid before in it proper place:
briefly here of the contignations, and the Butteresses as they are necessary
for the strength and duration of Comfort. 1. Gods The Contignation of the
Building of Comfort.
Wisdom, Power, Justice, Mercy, Truth will abundantly do all the Offices of
the Contignation of this Building. 2. We must supply the Butteresses from
without, and they are three special ones among the rest. 1. Submission to Gods
Will. 2. Right reason, rectified, sanctified Reason. 3. Prayer for strength and
continuance of comfort. But before we look to the strength of the outworks,
let us consider seriously the Contignation within, which requires no less then
five Attributes of God each of them will Minister strength of Comfort, then
surely their union will prove a blessed Communion of Comfort.

1. Gods Wisdom is absolute, and transcendently 1. Gods Wisdom.
matchless in prescribing us convenient, congruent and fitting comforts: God
knows what is better for us, then the best of us can for himself; because God
is (...), wise of himself, wisdom it self; for his wisdom is not by
infusion, or gift, or instruction, or experience, or observation, but of
himself, from himself, without any counsel taking all wise. Now this was the
way the Prophets were commanded to take in comforting the People of God,
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, Isai. 40. 1. But how must Isaiah 40. 1. and
13, 14.
they do it? they must go this way to work; verse. 13, 14. they must teach the
people, that their God is a God of such infinite incommunicable Wisdom he
needs no Director, no Counselor, no Instructor, no Teacher: I use not so many
Synonymies as the Prophet does there, but by this we collect that the all-wise
Disposer of all things good or evil, secret or manifest, universal or
singular, necessary or contingent, must needs by the forceable influences of
his Wisdom dart warmth and comfort into his people, who are called the
children of wisdom, because they are able both by reason and experience to
justify all the ways of wisdom: as that the Reproach of Christ is better
then the pleasure of sin for a season, witness Moses: and one day in the
Courts of God better then a thousand elsewhere, witness David. The ground they
build upon is this, that God knows what is best for every one of his, so says
David, Psalm. 1. The Lord knows the way of the Psalm. 1. ult.
Righteous, that is, the beams of Gods Wisdom in acknowledging their miseries
are so settled upon them, that they are wonderfully comforted and refreshed in
all their ways. This is the first contignation giving strength to the Building
of Comfort, Gods Wisdom.

The second needs little Probation, for all strength 2. Gods Power.
is from Gods Power, it being the Principle of active strength in every thing,
as God is purissimus Actus, so by his power God is principium activum,
primitive power in himself, derivative from him to all things created; this
omnipotency does knit and unite the whole Building of Comfort, because nothing
can resist the Power of God, there is more strength of power with us then
against us, this is that other comfortable Argument urged by the Prophet,
Isaiah 40. Isai. 40 12.
12. Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand? and meted out
Heaven with the spanne? and comprehended the Dust of the Earth in a measure?
and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance? therefore for
our infinite comfort, God (maugre all the adverse power) can do whatsoever he
will, as having his Name, the mighty God, Isaiah 9. 6. Isai. 9. 6. 3. Gods
Justice.


The third Contignation of the building of comfort, Gods Justice, is so
absolute, He can do us no wrong, that is our comfort, do what he please: the
sorest chastisement that ever child of God stood under, was but his just Anger
against him, even the way of his displeasure was not unequal, to punish our
sins so severely in his own Son. What more comfortable then this, that all
affliction is but Gods just pursuit of sin in us, to drive sin out of us,
and us out of ourselves, to fly wholly to our God? David's meat may be ashes,
and his tears mingled with his drink, yet this proves a comfortable repast, a
sweet refreshing, by reason that out of the Eater comes meat, out of the strong
comes honey, out of Gods Justice against sin issues true Comfort.

Fourth Contignation, Gods Mercy; God has not 4. Gods Mercy.
more power, then willingness to comfort us, his Son being flesh of our
flesh, and bone of our bone; in our Saviors desertion in the Garden, and on
the cross, he was content to want that unspeakable comfort in the presence of
his Father both to bear the wrath of the Lord for a time for us, and likewise
to know the better how to comfort us in our greatest extremities; it is the
Mercy of God that we are not consumed, but tried, not for his pleasure, but for
our profit: as a Father scourges his son, yet pities his son, so there is
mercy with God that he may be feared as a Father, and that we may be comforted
as his children. Thus the Father of mercies cannot but 2 Cor. 1. 3.
show himself a God of all Consolation, as St Paul joins them together; so
the child of God finds by Experience, the Father of mercies, is always the
God of all Comfort, that is the fourth knitting and uniting of the Building of
Comfort.

5. Contignation, Gods Truth; it is no small Comfort 5. Gods Truth. Romans 2. 2.
that we are sure (says the Apostle Romans 2.) that the Judgment of God is
according to Truth; Truth it self must needs according to Truth in the inward
parts judge all things, but the height of Comfort is that Truth it self cannot
but keep promise, all the promises of Comfort in the Gospel, the Word of
truth, ye may take Gods Word, were it for a thousand Comforts, why the world
proposes a thousand counterfeit Comforts, but our God in his Word does furnish
us with ten thousand true real Comforts. Shortly, all this knitting, uniting
faculty of comforting is by one joynt-view apprehended in Christ our Savior
thus. 1. The Wisdom of his Father to know how and when to comfort us. 2. From
the Father all power is given him and authority of comforting us. 3. His
Fathers Justice is satisfied in him, by becoming a man of sorrows, to comfort
us; a curse, that we should not be accursed; cursed be that man, who accounts
not this the greatest Comfort. 4. and 5. for I find them joined together, Heb.
2. 17. Christ made like to his brethren, that he might be a merciful and
faithful high Priest, the words, (...) are comfortable words, not only to
compassionate us, but to be true and Faithful to us, not to fail, Christ will
never fail us in the knitting and uniting of our Comfort within, if we do not
fail our selves in setting up the Butteresses from without; Christ is
faithful, if we be not faithless.

There are three special Butteresses of the Building Butteresses of the
Building of Comfort. 1. Submission to Gods Will.
of Comfort. 1. Submission to Gods Will: a resignation of our selves to do
what he will with us is the main Fulciment, Butteresse or spiritual shore of
true Comfort. For in all crosses, and losses of wife, children, friends, etc.
the whole business is not to express sorrow; but a submissive subjection to
Gods good pleasure and will. Eli failed much in the education of his sons,
yet he himself was a most dutiful child to God his heavenly Father, even when
he heard that heavy judgment, able to make both the ears of the hearer to
tingle, he did then subject himself unto God, with that excellent in comparable
Speech of Submission, It is the Lord, let him do what 1 Samuel 3. 18.
seems him good. 1. Sam. 3. Though the matter concerned him and his so nigh,
yet the good man thought that he had nothing more to do then to set to the
seal of his approbation of Gods Will, which was a willing Submission to it. It
is the Lord, it becomes not man to reason with him, why he does thus and
thus, there is no good to be got by such contention, all the Comfort lies in
this, out of the abundance of the heart the mouth must speak after this
admirable manner; It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. Nay, a
greater then Eli, the first High Priest that ever was, Aaron who was appointed
by God to be a mouth to Moses, he could speak so well; yet when God burnt his
sons for offering strange fire, he had not a word to say, but as the Text
says, Aaron held his Peace; by holding his peace in this case, Aaron did
glorify God more then if he had spoken with the tongues of men and Angels;
Aaron silencing his sorrow by subjecting his will to Gods Will, did show forth
his inward Comfort. Once more, for it is a greater then Aaron, our High Priest
according to the order of Melchisedech was never without Comfort, because never
without Submission to his heavenly Father: when he was alone, and none to
comfort him indeed, he prayed (bearing our infirmities) Let this cup pass from
me, but with a pull back of restraint, Not my Will, but thy Will be done. Ipse
erat voluntas and Potestas Patris, and tamen ad Demonstrationem sufferentiae
debitae, voluntati se Patris tradidit, Tertull. Tertull. in Orat. Domin.
last words on the third Petition; Christ was both the Will and the Power of
his Father, yet to demonstrate to us that Submission is always due to Gods
Will, He subjects himself in all things, Not my Will, but thy Will be done.
This is a strong supporter of true comfort, to lay our hands upon our mouths,
and not to open them except with Jobs thankful Echo, Blessed be the Name of
the Lord, O happy Comfort! and well upheld, to bless God in all things by
freely submitting our wills to His Will; let the Lord do what he will, and let
us be sure to bless His Name for it, that is the first Butteresse of Comfort.

2. Butteresse, and a very strong one too, is Right 2. Butteresse of Comfort.
Right Reason.
Reason, rectified, sanctified Reason. What is discontentednesse, and
uncomfortablenesse, but the confusion, distemper, and disorder of our
affections and actions? but when they are well ordered according to the
commands of rectified Reason, then rises comfort and contentedness of mind:
when our Passions and Actions are subject to the straight Rule of Reason, then
is the soul at comfort; a man of Right Reason is a man rich in Comfort, a
happy Dives, he may say, Soul, soul, take thy rest, for thou have comfort,
much riches of comfort, laid up for as long, as thy Reason is rectified and is
guided by the Word of God, and the whole course of thy affections ordered by
that rectified Reason. When a man smothers himself under sorrow, and
discontent, let him see what reason he has for it out of Gods Word: when a man
rejoices and comfort himself with anything, let him see what good reason he
can find for it: believe me, this is a strong bridle and curb to stop the
course of all discontentednesse and uncomfortablenesse in our Christian
journey: and withal a very strong keen-metled Spur to put us forward in the
free course of true Comfort: even this is the ready way, to try all things that
we do by sound Right Reason.

Now that the two former Butteresses may stand fast, and the whole Building
continue durable, we must not fail to put up the third Butteresse, that is 3.
Butteresse. Prayer for strength of Comfort.
to put up Prayer for strength of Comfort. If any of you lack wisdom (James
1. 5.) let him ask God, and he will give it him. Thomas expounds that Text to
this purpose now in hand. Si quis vestrum indiget Sapientia, Aquin.
id est, sapida Scientia ad condiendam amaritudinem tribulationum, vel ad
degustandum patientiae fructum. If any of you want the salt of wisdom to
season affliction, or to make the fruit of Patience savoury, and comfortable,
let him pray to God for it, who is very liberal of comfort to him that asks
it; the good thief on the Cross did but ask Christ to remember him in his
Kingdom, and he gave him Paradise that very day, To day thou shall be with me
in Paradise: dum memoria poscitur, regnum concedit, says the Father. S. Ambr.
in locum.
Prayer is a faithful messenger and Ambassador to dispatch all our business
with God, ask and have comfort, seek and find it by prayer, knock, and a
door of comfort shall be opened; Prayer is a strange kind of key that opens
if you do but knock with it, Matthew. 7. 7. O then knock strongly, that thou
Matthew. 7. 7.
may have strength of comfort. Why but Prayer is only of things possible,
because Prayer is an Act of Hope; and Hope is still fixed upon a possibility of
enjoying the object: now if there must be hope of embracing what we pray for,
and a likely possibility of what we hope for, what (I pray) encouragement do
they give us, to put up our Prayers for strength of Comfort, who make a
question, whether it be possible for a man in this life to have absolute firm
strength of comfort against all evil? True it is, here is a question started
by the Casuists, let us pursue it a Question.
little, for it is about the strength of this Building. Whether a true believer
may have firm and strong consolation against all evil. The Affirmative is
thus Answer.
established, that though there may sometime be a mixture of grief or fear
with comfort, yet that comfort is a repression, mitigation and lenition of that
grief or fear, and will in time get the victory. 1. Because, God the Father,
who works victoriously, is the God of all comfort 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4.
, comforting us in all our tribulation and in any trouble, Verse. 4. of that
Chapter. 2. Because, Christ is the Fountain of all comfort to us, so our
consolation also abounds by Christ. Verse. 5. of that Chapter. 3. The holy
Spirit is the comforter, to this end that the knowledge of the truth might make
us Conquerors, that our hearts might not be troubled nor afraid John 14. 26.
and 27.
. 4. The whole Scripture was written for our comfort, that we through comfort
of the Scriptures might have hope; strong comfort, and strong hope Romans 15. 4.
. 5. Because of the immutability of Gods Counsel, confirmed by an oath, that
by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might
have a strong consolation Heb. 6. 17, 18.
, (...), a mighty, potent, firm and solid Consolation. The Greek Epithet is
so expressive. 6. Consolation never goes single without confortation; a
strengthening power of the Grace of God accompanies it; this is a reparation of
our Christian forces, and a congruous fortification against all evil Dan. 10.
17, 18, 19.
. There remained no strength in Daniel, until one touched him, and said, O man
greatly beloved, fear not, be strong, yea be strong; and when he had spoken
unto me, I was strengthened, says Daniel; Gods comforting of us is a
strengthening comfort. Beloved, this is a strong durable Building of Comfort,
for no Earthquake, no heart quake can shake the foundation of it: no Canon
shot with all the powder and power of hell can batter down the walls of it: no
Tempest of affliction can beat down the Roof of it: no thieves, though they be
subtle evil spirits, can rifle the rooms of it: no cruel Landlord to
thrust us out of doors; but a loving kind Lord, our God, who does all to
keep us within doors, within comfort: no false Neighbors can take our house
over our heads: no envying at one another dwellings: here are several Rooms
of comfort for young, and old, rich and poor, well and sick, men and women,
husbands and wifes, King and Subject, widows and orphans; comfort enough for
all believers of all Families, Towns, Cities, Countries, Nations and Languages
under Heaven. Now where can I better lodge my discourse then in this strong
durable Building of most divine comfort? and so I shall at this very instant,
if ye will but promise me, to do your best to comfort one another with these
words, or with any the like words of comfort, out of Gods holy Word. And we
beseech thee O Lord, to teach us this art, and to make us all such spiritual
Builders, that we may not be cast down under the Burden of temporal losses
and crosses, or of spiritual temptations, but that every one upon all
occasions, may expostulate the matter seriously with his own soul, Why art
thou cast down o my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in
God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my
God. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I desire
besides thee, and thy Comforts: for in the multitude of my thoughts within me,
thy comforts delight my Soul. Therefore o my soul cast thy Burden upon the
Lord, and he shall sustain thee: Even so O God of all Comfort, now and ever
sustain us with the Comforts of thy sacred Word, and of thy Holy Spirit.

Amen.
An Electuary in form of a Prayer called Apothecaries have an Electuary called
Manus Christi.
Manus Christiani: a comfortable Confection out of the former Treatise to
repel the Infection of all kind of Affliction.
O Lord my God, and I believe there is no Take it thus next the heart, it will
work the better.
other Gods besides, I believe, therefore I call upon thee: that as the first
Commandment thou give to me, is to have no other gods but thee; so my first
care may be to settle all my thoughts and affections, words and actions upon
nothing in Heaven or in Earth besides thee. Psalm. 73. 25.
For whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I desire
besides thee. Thou art my Refuge, my Rock of defense, my sure stay, my whole
Hearts delight; O Lord accept this Expression of my Faith, whom have I in
Heaven to rely on but thee in all my Necessities? accept this expression of my
devotion, whom have I in Heaven but thee to call upon in all my troubles?
accept this expression of my affections, whom have I in Heaven to love but
thee? the Giver of all things to be beloved; whom have I in heaven to fear but
thee? the Disposer of all things to be feared; Whom have I in Heaven to rejoice
in but thee? the Infuser of all true Joy; Whom have I in Heaven to desire but
thee? the Satisfier of all lawful desires; and there is none upon Earth that I
desire besides thee; yea, I confess there is nothing in the World that is
worth the desiring, but in thee, and from thee. Psalm* 94. 19.
In the multitude of my thoughts within me thy Comforts delight my soul. In
the great throng of all my perplexed thoughts thy Comforts delight my soul;
the Comforts of thy Providence over me as a faithful Creator and Preserver,
thou did create me of nothing, have preserved me from nothing, even from my
Mothers womb, and wilt still preserve me even to my last hour, these thy
Comforts delight my soul. Nay more, Comfort of thy special care as a gracious
Father and Redeemer, Care of Provision and Protection; of all good, from all
evil; of Mercy, Grace, and Favor, from Sin, Satan, Death, the Grave and
Hell. These are thy Comforts O Lord. And whenever these thy Comforts do not
delight my soul, give me grace to check and chide my soul sharply for it.
Psalm. 42. ult.
Why art thou cast down o my soul? why art thou disquieted within me? thou
have no reason to be cast down or to be disquieted at all, as long as thou have
a God to hope in; hope thou in God, I lay this charge upon thee, O my soul;
and this my charge is grounded upon my confidence of better times to come, when
I shall yet praise him; and this my confidence is strengthened by my experience
of what God is unto me, the health of my countenance, Salvation to my inward
man, Joy to my heart (...) my outward man, cheerfulness (...). And this my
experience is well backed by my interest that I have in God, my God in Christ
Jesus my Saviout; and if my God be with me what can be against me? neither
health, nor sickness, neither wealth, nor want, neither principalities, nor
powers nor death, nor life (...), nor depth, nor things present, nor things to
come, nothing can separate me from the Love of God, my God in Christ. Therefore
will I now and ever cast my Burden upon thee O Lord, with assurance that thou will sustain me. Psalm. 55. 22.
the greatest Burden in the world, Sin, My sins are gone over my head, and
are too heavy a Burden for me to bear, therefore will I cast them upon thee my
Lord and my Savior: yea, the afflictions and punishments that lie at the door
of my sins; they are able to press me down to the lowest pit, but in an
humble awful submission to thy will, (trusting that thou will lay no more upon
me, then I am able to bear) I will bear according to my Ability, and awaite
thy goodness either to deliver me from, or to sustain me in all; thy Will be
done O Lord, and give me Patience.

Amen.
Glory be to God on high, On Earth Comfort.
FINIS.
Imprimatur.

Johannes Hansley.
Feb. 4. Anno Dom. 1639.

