THE SACRED PHILOSOPHY Of the HOLY SCRIPTURE, Laid down as Conclusions on the
Articles of our Faith, commonly called the Apostles Creed.

Proved by the Principles or rules taught and received in the light of
understanding.

Written by ALEXANDER GIL, Master of Paul's Schole.

Psalm. 116 v. 10. I have believed; therefore have I spoken.

Imprinted at London by Anne Griffin for Joyce Norton and Rich. Whitaker. 1635

THE SACRED PHILOSOPHY OF THE HOLY SCRIPTVRE: Laid down as Conclusions in the
Articles of our Faith, commonly called the Apostles Creed.

Proved by the Principles or Rules taught and received in the Light of
Understanding.

Whereby it is made plain to every one endued with Reason, what the
steadfastness of the Truth and Mercy of God toward Mankind is, concerning the
attainment of everlasting happiness: And what is the glory and excellency of
the Christian Religion, over all heathenish idolatry, all Turkish, Jewish,
Athean, and heretical Infidelity.

Written by Alexander Gil, Mr. of Paul's School.

Psalm. 116. verse. 10. I have believed, therefore have I spoken.

LONDON. Printed by Anne Griffin for Joyce Norton, and Richard Whitaker, and
are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the
Kings-Armes. 1635.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the
Honorable C^m^^nie of MER^^^S in London, my worthy friends and Patrons, etc.
IT is now six and twenty years, since by the great love and favor of the
Company, I had the government of that ancient, and religious foundation of
Paul's Schole, committed to my trust, and care In all which time (until Nature
gave place unto extreme age and infirmity) if my ability assisted with
industry has advanced those, that were commended to my institution, in
manners, and learning; I desire that they may render and attribute the sole
thanks unto you. For by your courtesy and discreet liberality I was
cherished, and furthered, not only to do you service in my self, but
likewise to give such education to my sons, as has made them fit, in their
qualities, to perform the like duty.

Now so it is, worthy Gentlemen, that Nature being not only declined in me,
but almost quite worn out, by reason of a sedentarie life, much study, and
continual pains; I thought it fit, before I go hence, in grateful
acknowledgment of the many and great obligations, which your goodness has
from time to time fastened upon me, ever since my entrance into your service, to
dedicate the best of my labors to your acceptance. This is it, which if it
have the blessing to do (as doubtless it will in some measure) any benefit to
the Church and country, wherein I live, I shall likewise entreat them to
confer the thanks upon you, by whom I was enabled to perfect a work of so
high and necessary an argument. I shall not live to receive your thanks my
self: and therefore I beseech you to accept of them, as the legacy of a dying
man, and, with them, the dedication of this work. Which as it was begun, and
finished under your roof: so I know none more fit to patronize the work, than
your-selves, who have been the Patrons of the author.

Thus in all humility I take leave, committing you to God; my surviving sons
to the continuance of your love and care; and this other child of my old age to
your fostering, a more living witness of your favors toward me, and my
thankfulness toward you.

Your much obliged Servant, ALEX. GIL.

THE PREFACE to the Reader.
WHen in the year 1601 I gave out a little treatise concerning the Trinity of
persons in the Unity of the Deity, for such reasons as appear therein, I made
a conditional promise of a further assertion of every Article of our Christian
faith. This promise of mine has oftentimes since that been exacted both by
friends, and strangers. That treatise tried the common fortune of all books;
some slighted it, because it brought nothing but that which was common, others
condemned it, as thinking it unfit that matiers of faith should be persuaded by
reason. They of the first sort were not only mine acquaintance, who might
commend my Book for affection to me, but some strangers, who for their liking
of the book became afterward my friends. And these encouraged me to the
performance of my promise. The second sort did not a little comfort me, because
I had in no sort troubled the peace of the Church. The third sort have held me
disheartened until now: for although I there showed, that even in matiers where
faith is most required, both our Lord and his Apostles persuaded by common
reasons, as also the Prophets before-time had done: yet though I knew no reason
of their dislike, I did forbear, because I would not offend of ignorance. But
seeing the everlasting saving or loss o the soul, is a thing which of all
other concerns a man most to think of; and that all sorts and sects of men,
which far exceed us Christians in multitude, See Brere woods inquiry of
Religion Chap. 14. have hope of immortal life as well as we, it concerns us
not a little to se^ wherein our advantage is, and what assurance we have more
than they. Now to let pass the false Religion of the Paynim idolaters in
Lapland, in Africa, in the East and West Indies, and that great continent of
the South; what is our pre-eminence over the Jews, Turks and Heretics of
the former times? of them that are, and still will be until the time that all
things shall be restored? The Jews hold firmly as we, the authority of the
Old Testament, and deny the New. The Turks also, though they speak
honorably of Christ, as of more than a Prophet: yet of the holy Scriptures
which we receive, they make little reckoning; and although they read the
Psalter Azoa 7 yet they set up their Alcoran as their Idol which they worship.
Do not the fathers, Tertullian contra Marcionem, and Augustine de Haeres. Cap.
(See also the epistle of Orig. cited by John Picus Miran. page 206.) witness
how the authority of Scriptures was ^based by the Heretics? some they
rejected, the rest they corrupted by false interpretations, by adding, and
taking away what was for their purpose. It seems therefore, that the
authorities on all sides respectively being of like regard, the maine advantage
which we have, is ^n reason, as it shall hereafter appear, in every Article of
our Faith. And therefore they that deny us the use of reason in a matier of so
great importance as our Religion is, bereave us of our chief advantage; and
(as much as in them is) turn us out of the fold of Christ, to choose at large
what Religion we like best. But if man were created in the image of God that
he might know and serve him as he ought, and if common reason rightly guided
be that image of God in us yet remaining, as it is plain, because that image
and wisdom of the Father is that light which lightens every man that comes
into the world, John 1. I see no cause why reason, that especial and
principal gift of God to mankind, should not be serviceable to the principal
and especial end for which man himself is created, that is, his drawing near
unto God by faith in him: for the excellency of every thing is in the
excellency of the End for which it is. And that common sense and reason have
their especial use in things pertaining unto God, it is most manifest. For all
our knowledge proceeds from mere ignorance, first knowing words, by their
meaning, then things by sense and experiments, from whence the reason ascending
by inquiry into the causes comes at last into the knowledge thereof, and so
unto the chiefest and first cause, wherein alone it finds rest. And seeing man
alone of all the visible creatures is framed and formed of God unto this
search, by the outward sense and reason to find the wisdom and power of God
in the creature, that so honoring him therefore as he ought he might be made
happy thereby: if it be no way possible by reason and discourse to come to
this end, then should God want of his honor by some of those means by which
it might be given unto him; then should the creature be failing to man in the
special use, which he should make thereof to God, then should reason the
chief faculty of our soul, and principal means of our knowledge, have
been given unto man in vain; that is, as sense is to the beasts, only for
this life; if it were either no help at all, or an unfit, or an insufficient
mean to know that which is most necessary and worthy to be known; and yet
obscure, to stir up our industry, that as faithful servants we may improve
those gifts wherewith God has entrusted us: See Luke 19.1. And so the purpose
of God should be frustrate, both in the inferior creature, and in man, and
that in their chiefest and uttermost end. See Prove. 16.4. But these things are
impossible, and therefore we are commanded Deuteronomy. 6.5. to love and serve the
Lord our God with all our heart, the seat of reason: 1 King. 3.12. with all our
soul, the seat of the will and understanding in heavenly things, and all our
affections, there styled by a word of vehemency or excess. And thus do we
fulfill the counsel of the wise Pro. 3.9. to honor the Lord with all our
substance, that is, whatsoever is ours without or within, as sense, reason,
understanding, affections, and will. But still you say that reason is an
unsufficient mean, and unable to bring us to the knowledge of those things
which we are bound to believe: for else the Heathen which know not the
Scriptures, might have known the truth of Religion as well as we. Ans. There be
diverse kinds of questions about every subject, as I showed Log Chap 3. Now the
conclusion or Article of our faith by the Atheist or Infidel or weak Believer
being made a question, the reasons brought are to prove only that the
conclusion is true, not always why it is true: for there be many conclusions
in our faith which cannot be known and proved prioristice (as they speak)
that is, by their immediate and necessary causes, seen and understood in the
effects necessarily following thereon: for then that humility which ought to
be joined with our faith, should be without reward; but yet the foundation of
our faith is sure, because the Spirit of God which understands the things which
are of God, has revealed in the Scriptures whatsoever is necessary for us to
know or believe concerning God: and thus posterioristice or by way of induction
are all the Articles of our faith approved by reason: so that our faith and
hope are not of things impossible, but such as are true and necessary to be.
Moreover, if there be but one God, one Lord of all, one faith, the only way
to come unto God, Ephesians. 4.6. as it is plain there is but one Mediator, 1.
Tim. 2.5. without whom none can come to the Father. John 14.6. It cannot be
denied, but that the same glorious faith which we are taught in the holy
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament (excepting only the historical
circumstances thereof, as names and times, as that the Mediator Jesus was to
be borne of a Virgin, Mary, and to suffer death under Pontius Pilate, etc.)
must be that very same faith by which all the Saints of God were saved for
above two hundred and fifty years before there were any Scriptures written. And
therefore that although this faith was delivered and reverently embraced by the
faithful before the Law of Moses, who also so delivered it, as that they could
not look unto the and of the law, 2 Cor. 3.13. Yet they who either received it
not by tradition, as most of the Gentiles, or understood it not in the Law, as
few among the Jews did, beside the Prophets, must of necessity through the
light of reason alone hold with us some maine and fundamental points,
according to which, if they lived in obedience, they might find mercy, for
that whereof they were ignorant, as it is said Act. 17.30 that God oversaw or
neglected the ignorance of the time before Christ. For if the representative
Priest, by foreign blood found forgiveness for himself and the ignorances of
the people concerning all punishment in this life: how much more might the
everlasting high priest by his own offering of himself find eternal
redemp^ion for their ignorances, who sought mercy of God, although they knew
him not by whom they did obtain it? yet might they therefore assure themselves
to obtain it, because they could not seek forgiveness but by his Spirit who
framed their hearts to seek it, and thereby gave them an earnest or pledge that
they should find it. Compare herewith, Romans 10.18.20. Ioh 14 6. Now those
maine points, of which I spoke, which by the light of reason they might know,
are these. First, that there is a God infinite in goodness, in glory, in
wisdom, in power, as it is manifest, Psalm. 19. Romans 1.19.20. and elsewhere.
Secondly, that this God the maker of all things, according to that goodness,
made every thing to an end infinitely good, ^s far as the creature could be
capable thereof. And that therefore the happiness of man could not be in this
life short and miserable, but that his hope must be for hereafter And
therefore thirdly, that he must needs persuade himself that he was
immortal, and that there was an immortal life, at least as appertaining to
his soul. Fourthly, because a man's wretchedness is for the most part from him
self, in the unlawfulness of his own ill deeds, which proceed from the
bitter fountain of his affections, and ill desires tormenting himself:
therefore he must needs confess his sin against himself, and know that
he that finds himself so displeasing to himself, can no way hope, that for
his own worthiness he can any way be acceptable unto God: and that
therefore he has no succor nor hope, but only in his mercy that has made him
thereunto, if he will, desire, and trust in his mercy. And thus far the reasons
of the heathens, and the Religion of the Turks do drive them. But here that
foolish Religion of the Turks is content to stay, not holding it necessary to
believe a Mediator: because (say they) God infinite in mercy made his Creature
only, because he loved it. Thus while they truly magnify the mercy of God,
they utterly forget that he is Just. Unto which infinite Justice of God if
they had taken due regard, the same light of reason would further have showed
unto them, that the soul that sins must bear a punishment answerable to his
sin: And because by every sin against God an infinite Justice is offended;
therefore it is impossible that any man by his own righteousness (which can
never be any more than by the Law of God he is bound unto) should be able to
make any satisfaction for his sin. Upon which true principle it will follow
necessarily in the light of reason, either that there is no possible return to
the favor of God: which conclusion a man would by all means avoid; or else
that the reconciliation of mankind unto God must needs be by the mediation of
a man in every respect free from Sin, who bearing the punishment due to
sinners, might find redemption and mercy for all them that would believe it,
and live worthy thereof. But because all men conceived in lust and sin are
originally tainted therewith; for our of uncleanness who can bring that which
is clean? therefore must the generation of this Mediator be wonderful and
not after the common manner of all men; but so that no sin or taint of the
flesh must be therein. So that being both borne and living, without sin, he
might by his death become a ransom acceptable for the sins of others. And
although reason could not conceive nor find how this should be; yet seeing
that in the necessity of the divine justice it must be thus; reason would as
easily yield that it might be, as it did find and see the creation of
mankind and the whole creature out of nothing, as by the discourse ensuing it
will hereafter appear. If this were not thus, how should the whole world of
Infidels and misbeleevers be hable to the justice of God for their ignorance
of him, for their neglect, and for their unbelief? So taking it as granted,
till it does further appear by the Treatise following, that reason has right
good and necessary use in the things of faith; it is too manifest, that these
wretched times are such as seem to call aloud for the publishing of some such
work as this: for though the fools, that have said in their hearts, there is
no God, dare not in words profes it; yet by their continuance in their sinful
deeds they do proclaim that their thoughts are so. Neither are they altogether
wanting which say, that Religion is but a politic invention to keep men in
civil obedience: but if the conclusions of the Christian Religion be inferred
upon necessary principles, then are they not made out of policy, as these
Atheists say, but cannot prove it, except they could also make it appear that
policy was able to make natural reason. I will not deny that Mahumed settled
his religion so, as they say; but he forbids to dispute of the principles
thereof, because it is against both reason and Scripture; and so perhaps it may
be said of those Will-worships that are, or have been among other Gentiles,
to whom God vouchsafed not the knowledge of his Law. But our most holy faith
because it alone is true, has no other author than God himself, who has
revealed it by his word: and because no man shall be excused if he believe it
not, he has commanded reason, whereof all men are partakers, to seal thereto
in every point: but because in the Treatise before mentioned, and by the whole
practice of this book this thing is manifest, I will here turn me only to
answer those doubts which may be brought against the persuading of matiers of
faith by humane reason. First it may be objected, that the matiers of faith
are far above humane reason, and that therefore it is a great presumption to
question or skan them thereby: for it is said by S. Paul Romans 11.33. that his
ways and wisdom are past finding out. I confess, we know nothing of God, but
what he has revealed of himself by his works, or by his words, for he
dwells in the light that none can approach unto, even as S. Paul speaks
there of his calling and election to faith, a will unrevealed: but the Articles
of our faith he has most plainly taught and revealed. And further to the
argument, I confess that humane reason turning it self to behold the divine
truths, is as the eye of a Bat to look on the Sun. But yet the eternal and
infinite truths are so apprehended by man's finite understanding, as the light
of the Sun is by the eye, that is verily and indeed the same light, and no
other: for though the eye cannot receive all the light of the Sun; yet that
which it does receive is truly that same light which is in or from the Sun.
But you say, that if in things of common use, as honey, salt, or any other
things vegetable or mineral, we must confess our exceeding ignorance of
their nature, properties and possibilities, both alone, and much more in all
manner of compositions; it may seem that our dullness may much rather be
acknowledged in things divine. I yield not altogether to this consequence: for
to the knowledge of natural things, we have our own witless experience to
help us, and the deceitful authority of mistaking men: but all those truths
whereon our faith relies, are grounded on the infallible rules of Gods own
word revealed by himself unto us, for this end, that we should not be
deceived or mistaken. And although it was impossible for humane reason ever to
find out the conclusions and most fundamental points of our faith, as the
mystery of the Trinity, the incarnation of God, the resurrection of the body,
etc. yet being by the clear light of Gods own word made known unto us, we
approve the same truth by the judgment and voice of reason. So the reasons
that are brought hereunto are not to establish any truth new or unheard of, but
for that faith which was heretofore taught and delivered unto the Saints; and
if the reasons of themselves be weak, and by their weakness show how man's
understanding is dazzled at the divine light; yet the conclusions stand sure and
unmovable: but if the reasons be certain and true; then questionless they
are grounded in the Word and truth of God, and the conclusion true, either for
the reason delivered, or for a higher reason which we cannot find. To this
purpose the Father Anselm. de Conc. Gratiae and lib. arbit. says not unfitlie,
Sacra Scriptura, omnis veritatis quam ratio colligit, authoritatem continet,
cum illam aut aperie continet, aut nullatenus negat. Quod enim aperta ratione
colligitur, and illi ex nulla part Scripturae contradicitur quoniam ipsa sicut
nulli adversatur veritati, ita nulli favet falsitati, hoc ipso quia non negat,
ejus auctoritate suscipitur. Yet you will say, that this endeavor is
altogether needless, seeing the conclusion of it self is more manifest than
the reason. I answer; The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the
understanding with knowledge: and if the eye be not able to behold the beams
of the Sun, either direct from it self, or reflected in a looking glass;
yet it joys to see that shining lamp when his beams are retract, or as it
were broken off; as in water, a thin cloud, or a colored glass: so man's
understanding not able to understand the glorious light of Gods holy truth
shining from himself, for that is his garment; nor yet reflected on it by his
word, a word, like the speaker, of infinite wisdom; yet takes it infinite
delight to see, if it be but a glimps of that clear light, through the thick
cloud of humane reason, through which being refracted, it is better fitted to be
looked upon: for because reason and understanding is more natural to the soul
of man, than to believe, and because the soul as every other thing, joys in
the natural abilities of it self, therefore though the reasonable soul do
believe what it is taught by the spirit of Christ instructing it; yet if that
blessed Spirit vouchsafe further to enable the natural abilities, that it may
see the reasons of the lessons taught, it triumphs much more therein: for faith
is a supply of reason in things understandable, as the imagination is of sight
in things that are visible: now as the imagination takes the shapes,
proportions, and distances of persons and places by their description, til it
be better satisfied by the very sight of the things themselves; so the soul
through faith embraces the truth of that which is taught, and relies on the
steadfastness of that which is promised, and this in full assurance and hope
without wavering. Yet because the things believed are of so great importance,
it is glad of the help of reason whereon to stay it self; as a weak man
though upheld in his going by one that is strong and able to bear him, yet
will not forgo his staff, which without further aid could not support him.
Secondly, it is objected, that many learned men hold it not fit to examine the
things of faith by humane reason. Answer. The 19. Sermon. of Athanasius clearly
refutes this opinion by many arguments. And I have known some able Preachers,
as they have judged their hearers fit thereto, to persuade even the chiefest
points of our faith by common reason. And are not the Bereans praised Acts
17.10. because they examined the things delivered of Paul by the Scriptures?
And is not reason the Scripture of God, which he has written in every man's
heart? yet I examine not these things of faith, whether they be true or no, as
the Bereans did; but knowing, acknowledging, and to death holding them true, I
bring all the strength of my understanding to approve them so. And although it
be not lawful for me to handle either sword or spear; yet because I wish
well to these holy wars, I have as a stragler brought my baskets of stones,
whence the cunning slingers our David's (if they please) may choose what they
like, if any uncircumcised Philistim, shall defy the host of Israel. And
thereto they want neither reason nor example. For no man makes due account of
the Holy Scripture, whose heart God has not touched, and so is already won.
But there is none so brutish, which does not willingly hearken to reason. And
did S. Paul at Athens, or elsewhere among Idolaters, persuade the worship of
the true God, and Christ the Savior of the world by the authority of
Scripture, or by common reason, and their own poets? beside Aratus whose words
he cites, you shall find that his speech is in their own phrase and style,
and much of the matier in Plato, and in special his Phaedon, of the souls
immortality. Did the valiant champions or Martyrs of Christ defend the
Christian Religion before Ethnic Emperors, by the authority of the
Scriptures? Did the persecutor Dioclesian give any credit to the holy text,
when he commanded it to be burnt? Did not the Apostata, nicknamed Idolianus,
therefore forbid the Christians to instruct their Children in Grammar, Logic
and other liberal arts, because they wounded the Heathens with their own
weapons? because they defended their own Religion, and showed the madness of
Idolatry, by common reason? The books of Iustine the Martyr, of Tertullian, of
Arnobius, and other are yet extant: do they defend the Christian Religion by
Scripture, or rather by reason? by the innocent life of the Christians; and the
infinite good which the Heathens themselves received by them. Who blames the
later writers, I mean the Schoolmen, Aquinas, both the Raimunds, and the
rest? if their reasons be good, allow them, if ill, amend them. What man of
learning, praises not the endeavor of the learned Mornay concerning the
trueness of the Christian Religion? The Lutherans, I confess, though learned,
do not every where like of this learning, because it strangles their
consubstantiation even in the birth. The Papists doubtless as learned as they,
yet in this point are much more temperate. For though their transubstantiation
cannot stand with natural reason, yet they do not therefore thrust the use of
natural reason out of Religion, but confess Transubstantiation to be a thing
miraculous and transcendent. Therefore let these declaimers and froward
opposers against reason vanish away in their own opinion; because it is known
by experience that none are so forward to thrust new doctrine and rules of life
upon the Church by their own authority, as they that gainesay both reason and
authority. Other cavils like to these you may see answered note (a) on chap.
11. where for further satisfaction, the manner of our arguing is plainly
declared. Thirdly, it will be objected against my self in particular, that
seeing other men have handled divinity by common reason before, my pains
herein might well have been spared; And so much the rather, because that I,
neither a Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet, might (if any supply at least
had been needful to their former pains) full well have let this burden
alone, too heavy for my shoulders, for them to take up who being professed to
divinity, might better have borne it. Vouchsafe to hear: For I heartily
profess that this task had been fitter for them to undertake, who had both
more ability, and leisure than I to perform it. But if either they thought not
hereon, or held it not fit, or that their pains were otherwise employed; their
greater and more profitable labors deserve more praises. And though I have
stood all day in the market, because no man has hired me; yet seeing I would
as fame have the penny as he that has borne the burden and heat of the day, I
would not be idle. But because the knowledge and study of heavenly things, and
the means whereby the soul may be saved, concerns all men alike, even Amos
among the herdmen of Tekoa, as much as Azariah the Priest in the Temple of
Jerusalem; And that every one as he has received, so is he bound to make
account of his talent; Therefore although the burden I confess, was more fit
for a man in the strength of his memory and understanding and too heavy for me
now wasted in seventy years, with age, sickness, and continual pains, yet I
trusted in him that directed my heart to take it up, that he would give me
strength in some sort to bear it. But concerning those men that have labored
herein before me, although I praise their pains, yet I think them nor fit for
every man's use. Aquinas according to the greatness of his active understanding
in his books against the Gentiles, has moved an endless number of questions,
of which (as it seems to me) many are very needless and impertinent to this
my purpose, and would draw an English Reader into a maze out of which he could
hardly wind himself. Raimund de Sabunde though his writings be easy and
quick, yet his matiers are scattered, and not according to that method which I
intend. Savanarola wanders up and down, means well, says something out of
Thomas; but in his Triumphus Crucis, as in all the Schoolmen, and so in both
the former, very many things are left our, which most necessarily belong to
this our purpose, and many things brought in, which are not here at all
questioned. Mornay though he deserves much praise for his great reading, and
his plain and easy style; yet beside that which he persuades concerning some
few questions here moved, he referres us to the Scriptures for proof of the
rest. A most certain proof indeed, and above all other with a Christian: but
my purpose is to add an overplus of proof to the persuasion which the
Christian has; and to justify his faith against all adversaries, not by
authority of Scripture only, which with Heretics, Turks, and Infidels is of
small regard. Moreover that which he persuades, is by reasons in a manner
altogether inductive: which kind of proof, although it be more usual in the
Scriptures than any other, and is of force sufficient with them that hold the
principles and maine grounds of Religion, for whom only they were written, and
not for them who are without, Romans 15.4. yet with infidels or adversaries
inductive arguments are of small force, except they be laid down with their
supposition as I call it, log. cap. 14. For otherwise the understanding has no
foundation whereon it may stay it self. And he that in matiers of faith brings
in reasons which are not of force to compel the understanding to yield to the
truth, gives occasion to infidels and Atheists to scoff at Religion, and
leaves the wavering minded more unsettled than before: As I knew a young
Scholar, who reading Euphues, refuting his Atheist by such slight inductions
and arguments, only probable, became much perplexed in his mind, till it
pleased God by his light to settle his understanding. The reasons of Raimund
Lully and his manner of arguing gives more full satisfaction; And he it is
from whose enlightened Spirit I borrowed most, because he only of the rest
has written particularly to almost all the Articles of the Creed: yet that
treatise has great need, both to be cleared, and of supply. And although for
examples sake in his art general, and inventive, he handle some of the
questions, yet while he strives therein to show the use of his art, rather than
the truth of the things, he proposes his reasons with great confusion, and
exceeding difficulty to be understood, as it will easily appear to him that
reads him. But to yield that, I took my light from those illuminate doctors
Aquinas and Lully (for I seek not mine own praise, but the manifestation of
the truth of God and the joy and comfort of the Christian souls among mine
own nation) was the light theirs? is not reason the common light of every man
which can either find it out, or see it being found? is the light in a Church
his light that made the windows through which it shines? what interest has he
therein more than any stranger that injoyes the light, yet knows not the
mason? But if my knowledge of the mason, that is my reading of Aquinas, make
the reasons his, then his reading of Aristotle shall make the reasons
Aristotle's, from whom he has gathered his reasons, some where whole and
entire, every where from his principles. And so if my reasons gathered from the
practice of Raimunds art, or from his own practice, be therefore Raimunds
reasons, because he delivered that excellent art, then the light shall be the
Masons. But if they for their goodly buildings, made Bay windows to let in
much light: And I for my low, yet sure built house have made but casements and
loopeholes, yet so disposed them as they may let in light enough to lighten
every corner of my little rooms; Let every one that is pleased come in and
enjoy the benefit of the light, and thereby behold the truth of God, and
rejoice in His light; And when he understands the reasons; let him account
them his own, either to strengthen himself and others thereby against
misbeleefe and doubting; or especially against such as shall either wilfully or
ignorantly withstand the truth. And if I for my long and great study earne not
so much as the name of a diligent translator, or an Abridger, or a gatherer
hereby; yet if any man gather either profit or content, I shallbe glad, for the
pains that I took herein, brought unto me an abundant reward. And having thus
defended my self I will tell you, for what reasons I have at last taken heart,
to discharge my self of my former promise. First of all, when in the earnest
thought of these things, I found that the holy religion of the Christians,
howsoever tried by Scriptures or by the clear evidence of understanding, had
such light and manifestation of the truth therein, as that all the darkness
of hell could not dim it I confess I had such assurance of joy therein, that
I judged I ought not to conceal it alone. For what greater joy can any man
have in all the miseries and discontents of this wretched life, than to know
and see; that his hopes proposed for a better life are such as cannot fail?
then to see the exceeding mercy of God such, as that he requires nothing to
be believed for which he does not abundantly satisfy the understanding, if
it will enlarge it self, and desire to be satisfied. Is it nothing that the
mouths of all Heretics are stopped hereby? I mean not every difference in
opinion to be an heresy, no not in an Article of Faith, but there is not any
heresy in any maine point, but by the strength of reason alone, it may be
overthrown, as it will hereafter at large appear. Besides when the Christian
Religion is found to be so reasonable, and to stand on such sure Fundamenta
ejus in montibus Sanctitatis. i. Scriptura sacra, et ratioris. Psalm 87.1.
Foundations, as that it only is able, only worthy to bind the conscience of a
reasonable man; whereas all other religions, or rather false worships, although
examined in themselves only by their own principles, are found to be false
and against common sense: what triumph is this of a Christian over all Heathens
and misbeleevers, that, will they nill they, if they will be men, and stand to
reason, they must confess that the Christian religion is only true. And
seeing the world has been called to the marriage of the Kings Son, Luc.
14.16, etc. First by the voice of nature, declaring the wisdom and power of
God in the creature, and that they that were so called would not come, because
their minds were set on earthly things. Secondly by the Law: but the Jew who
sought righteousness by the Law, would try what his five yoke of oxen, that
is, his keeping of the Ceremonial Law, contained in the five books of Moses
could do, and so would be excused. Thirdly by the Gospel; but the carnal
Gospeller and false Christian could not come, because he is married to
pleasure, and worldly lusts; what remains but that they who are yet strangers,
and walk in the broad ways of sin and the bypath of their own
inventions, should by reason, that servant of God be compelled to come in? And
seeing the time cannot be far off, that all the nations of the earth are to
be called to the knowledge of Christ; For great shall his name be from the
rising of the Sun to the going down of the same, Psalm. 103.3. What hinders
that the truth of Christ be taught according to common reason, whereto every
man does listen? For it cannot be but that all Idolatry and false worship, all
heresies and dissentions about Religion must then cease, when the truth is
taught in the evidence of that Spirit whereby every man is guided. For as God
made man reasonable, so does he command nothing to be done which in true
reason is not the best: nor require any thing to be believed, which in true
reason is not most true. You will say, is there no difference then between
faith and reason? yes, very great. For Reason is busied in the proof of some
general conclusion which is to be held for a truth, and so received of every
man; but faith is the application of that conclusion to a man's own self. As
if it be concluded, that because Christ being so conceived and so borne had no
sin, and therefore he suffered not death for himself, but to save them that
should believe on him: faith applies this general conclusion thus: but I do
believe, and therefore I shall be saved. Now this application is not made by
reason, but by the special instruction of the Spirit of God in the heart of
the believer, although it were inferred upon such a conclusion as was proved by
reason. I have not endeavored herein to heap up arguments by numbers, but by
weight, and therefore have I let pass all reasons from foreign authority, and
all that were but likely only, and of small importance, neither have I brought
any one, but such as seemed to me sufficient of it self to confirm the
question. The reasons here used are for the most part from the goodness,
power, wisdom, and other dignities of God; because the questions are
concerning the things of God, and no arguments can be of greater force, and
more immediate, then such as are drawn from the very being or immediate
properties of the things in question, they are handled by necessities, and
impossibilities, to show that all things that are, and are not, stand for the
truth of the promises of God to us, that by all means we might have strong
hope and comfort in Christ. And though I sometimes bring one argument for
diverse conclusions, yet it is not therefore of less force, no more than a good
tool is of less worth because it serves for diverse uses. I have studied for
plainenes as much as I may; and therefore have I sometimes handled the same
reason both affirmatively and negatively, that he that cannot take it with one
hand, might hold it with the other: and for that purpose also are diverse
reasons brought, though all satisfying (as I think) yet perhaps all of every
one not equally understood: but he that understands all, may upon these grounds
or the like, bring many other to the same purpose, and give glory to that
infinite mercy, which has so fortified this glorious truth which he has
bound us to believe, with such walls, bulwarks, ravelings and counterscarpes
of reason, that all the power of hell, all the batterye of Atheists, Turks,
Jews and other adversaries, shall never be able to overcome it. And because a
little light is soon lost, if dispersed, as in the Stars called Nebulosae,
and those of endless number and distance in the milkie way; I have proposed
the reasons together in as short and few words as I can, that the light of the
reason may more easily appear. For oftentimes while men desire to enlarge
themselves, the reason vanishes into words. The autorities of the sacred Text I
bring as need is, that the Christian may see whence the Article of faith in
question is taken, and whereon it is grounded, and that in the proof thereof I
bring no other doctrine than the holy Scripture does teach. Let no man carry
my words or meaning awry: for although in this search of causes and reasons,
other conclusions offered themselves, yet I held it not meet to propose any
other things than the holy Church of old thought fit to be held as sufficient
for the saving faith of Christians, contained in the Creed which is called the
Apostles, as being gathered from their writings, and that according to that
order as it is therein delivered, yet with such prefaces and notes, as the
necessity of the things did drive me unto, leaving those other things to the
higher speculation of them, whom God shall vouchsafe to enlighten for their
further progress from faith to faith, from knowledge to knowledge, till all
the holy Church come to be partakers of those things new and old, that are
kept for her in store, when she shall come unto the fullness of the measure of
the age of Christ; that is the perfect knowledge of all those things which our
Lord in his time taught his Disciples, who were not able then to bear them,
till they had received the light of the holy Spirit from above. If any man
learned be pleased to read in this book, let him forgive me the harshnesse of
my speech, being to teach the unlearned in English a language not taught that
nicetie of words, whereby to express the difference of things, which I easily
hope he will do, because he knows that the infinite differences of things do
much exceed the sharpness of our understanding, and yet the subtlety of man's
understanding does go far beyond the rudeness and scarcity of all words
and speech. The Treatise, whatsoever it is, with all humility and reverence I
submit unto the undefiled Spouse of Jesus Christ my dearest mother, the Church
of England: and if I have done any thing herein which is pleasing to God, or
useful to his Church, let the glory be given to him, by whose only mercy
and favor I have been enabled to perform it. But let his holy Church
graciously pardon whatsoever is herein amiss through my weakness, or
error: And if any thing be offensive; let it by her censure, be as if it had
never been written or thought of.

Alexander Gil.

Reader.
BEcause the Printers are unwilling to be troubled with notes on the sides;
therefore the authorities, and references are put in the leaf th s marked
(ooo) but seeing the words and their meaning are perfect in themselves, beside
those references, you may pass over all such places without hurt to the sense,
except you think good to try it by the authority.

January. XXXI. 1634.
PErlegi uniuersum hoc opus, cui titulus (The sacred Philosophy of the holy
Scripture laid down as conclusions, etc.) quod continet in toto paginas, 492.
aut circiter, in quibus reperio nihil sanae doctrinae aut bonis moribus
contrarium, quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimi queant; ita tamen, ut si
non intra quinquennium typis mandentur, haec licentia sit omnino irrita.

Guil. Haywood. capell. domest. Archiep. Cant.

THE ENTRANCE to the Treatise.
LUKE 12.57. Why even of your selves judge ye not what is right?


THe principal virtue of man's soul is Reason, unto whose power the soul
would have every thing subject, if it might; because that is the Standard to
try the truth; in the knowledge whereof principally the soul is delighted But
because arguments always appear not, by the weight of which reason may try
the truth; the soul is content to believe or unbeleeve such things, as it
cannot try by reason; either for the credit of the author, or for the desire
which it self has, that they should be so, or not so. The first degree then
of the powers of the soul above reason is faith: but because the soul is loath
to be deceived, therefore will it not always come so far as to believe, or
discredit a thing, but is content to hold it in opinion: and yet upon a more
slight view, to suppose something to be, or not to be, true or false for a
time: for a man may suppose that to be, of which he will not entertain an
opinion that it is, yea and have an opinion of that, which he does not
constantly believe; yea and believe that for which he cannot give a sound
proof that it is. So that faith, opinion, and supposition, are of larger
compass one than another, and all of greater circuit than reason Yet because
the imagination that lovely Dalilah is ever serviceable to reason her Samson,
though never faithful; and because there is nothing in any of these three,
which the imagination dares not be busy with; therefore by the help of
imagination, reason enquires into the works of all these, using thereto saying
and gainsaying, likelihood and unlikelyhood, and arguing on every side, till
it come to a conclusion, in which it will rest, at least for a time. And as
every mind or soul is more noble and excellent than another, (for there are
many more degrees of excellency in spiritual substances than there be in
bodily) so does it exercise it self in the most hard and excellent things. And
to set all other matters aside (for all other are far beneath the knowledge
of God, and the assurance of our faith in him, which is our present search) let
us see by what degrees we are come unto that task which we have undertaken.

Religion is a band or tyall of the conscience in things pertaining unto God,
in respect of the excellency of the reward to them that do well, or of the
punishment of them that do ill: for there was never any religion true or
false, but it was set in the service of some God, whom the worshippers believed
to be just in rewarding both good deeds and bad, and that not only in this
life, but much more in another, where they persuaded themselves the soul was
immortal, as one of their false prophets truly said, Virtus recludit non
meritis mori Coelum. -- Seeing then that religion (as every other thing that is
reasonably undertaken) proceeds from the knowledge of the End; and that all
religion does suppose an everlasting happiness, or punishment to the soul in
immortality (excepting only that of the pestilentiall Sect of the Sadduces, who
though they confessed God, yet thought that the promises and threatenings of the
Law stretched no farther than to this life only, and therefore denied the
resurrection, the souls immortality, Angels, Devils) It might seem that I,
who enquire of religion according to the discourse of reason, might hold it
sufficient to lay down the reasons of the positive Doctrine without any
mention of heresies or contrary opinions, and that I ought first to enquire,
See Chap. 39.
whether there be any such happiness at all, as is supposed in the life to
come. See Chap. 40.
Secondly, whether the soul be immortal, and so capable of eternal
happiness. Thirdly, whether the soul although immortal, do remain a
separate and an entyre being by it self, or whether when it departs out of the
body, it does not return into the Chaos of life, as a drop of water falling
into a river: for if any one of all these points fail; that is, if there be no
happiness at all after death, or if the soul enjoy it not, because it dies,
or if that happiness be not peculiar and entyre to the soul by it self, and
in it self, then the end of all our religion is utterlie frustrate. But for
the present, they shall be only as postulata, or suppositions; the proof
shall appear hereafter in the Article of Everlasting life. And concerning
heresies, I confess that in this disputing age, wherein men will rather seem
to know, that they may oppose the truth, than willingly to submit themselves
thereto, I had great doubt in my self, whether by the remembrance of them, I
might not give occasion to such as itch after opinions, to be tainted with
these stinking ulcers, or at least cause a doubting, or falling away of them
that are weak, when they consider the diversities that have been, and still
are concerning religion. But when I remembered the saying of S. Paul 1 Cor.
11.19. There must be heresies even among you, that they that are approved might
be known: I supposed that this benefit would grow thereby, that men in the
examination of opinions might be more firmly grounded in the truth of God,
while they take heed to his word, as to a light that shines in a dark place.
Therefore as Mariners set Buoyes and Seamarkes for avoiding of shipwreck; or
as Physicians describe Aconitum and other poisonous herbs, that they may be
avoided, so are these heresies here set out.

Moreover in this triumph of the truth of Christ, a great part of the captive
train should have been wanting, if they had not been driven before the
triumphant Coach: Whereas now the Christian may have comfort to see how the
truth has been fought against, but yet has overcome; has been besieged, not
taken, battered, not shaken: so that hereafter he may contemn the force of any
adversary. And for fear of danger, I think there is none, when both by
Scripture and reason these heresies mentioned are so utterly overthrown. But
if any contrary to both these will yet be licking of that foul vomit, Let him
that is filthy, be filthy still; and let him that is holy, be holy still.
The heresies I mention under the most usual and known name, not reckoning up
for ostentation, all those that were followers of that opinion. The word
Heresy I use at large, for any opinion which a man does choose to maintain
against the truth; known or unknown. And herein I put not only the perverse
opinions of them that have been called Christians, but also those false
positions of the Heathens, who professed Philosophy, of whose traditions and
false principles we are admonished to beware Col. 2.8. And these things being
thus remembered, let us now with due reverence and regard first be assured, That
God is, that we may know what that glorious truth is, which is the ground and
rule of all truth, and the foundation of our most holy and Christian religion:
because that this foundation being once laid, the spiritual building of our
most glorious faith may on that firm Rock be raised up in all the parts
thereof perfect and entyre. And as we know that the author of all truth has no
need of our Lie, whereby to be justified: so where the truth is manifest, let
us not shut our eyes against it, because we know that it is the shine of his
being upon our understanding; and that for this end, that our understanding and
will being enlightened thereby, we may find the way to everlasting happiness.

ARTICLE. I. J believe in God.
That GOD is. CHAP. I.
IN the Grammatical interpretation of the words, I follow only that sense
which the Church of England holds; my purpose is not to dwell therein, but
only to ascertaine these doubts where about question may arise.

Therefore let the Atheist hear, and the fool that says in his heart, There
is no God: for certainly, There is a God. And although no word or speech can
be uttered, of which it is confessed that it is true or false, but that it
does from thence follow necessarily That God is: yet I will take only those
nearest attributes, which we know to belong essentially unto him, and so
affirm that by this name God is meant a being eternal, and infinite in all
perfection of goodness, wisdom, power, will, truth, virtue, glory, and all
those excellencies which may be in so glorious and infinite a being. And again
convertibly, that this being most perfect in infinity, eternity, goodness,
wisdom, glory, etc. is God. The first reason is from the eternity.

If there be not a being which had no beginning, then that which was first
existent or begun, must be a beginning unto it self, by causing it self to
be when it was not. But it is impossible that any thing should be a cause, and
not be: for so should it both be, and not be. Therefore there is an eternal
being, the beginning of all things, himself without beginning. And that
eternal being is God.

2. Seeing there is being which could not possibly raise it self out of not
being; it follows, that being was before not being, and therefore of necessity
must be eternal: for otherwise there was a (a)
time wherein it might be said, that being is not being, and so not being
should have been eternal, and (b)
contradictories might have stood together; that is; not being in eternity,
and yet eternity is most of all being. But these things are impossible:
therefore there is an eternal being, and this eternal being we call God.

3. Eternity is. For neither can Nature which in continuance took her
beginning together with time: ^or yet can man's understanding put any point of
beginning in continuance, before which some other continuance may not be
understood to be. Therefore all Nature and Reason must needs yield, that there
is Eternity. Therefore there is an eternal being: for if in eternity you put
privation, or not being, it would be impossible that any thing should be
brought out thereby. Therefore God is.

4. Whatsoever enforces the privation, or taking away of a being infinitely and
eternally good, brings in an infinite and eternal ill: But to deny that God
is, enforces the privation or taking away of a being infinitely and eternally
good: Therefore to deny that God is, brings in an infinite and eternal ill.
Hear Atheist and consider, how thou do put ill to have the prioritie before
good, both in being and in action: For that which is first, must needs be a
cause to all things that follow; so that the cause of all things being ill
(every effect necessarily answering the cause) every thing should in the very
being have been ill: whereas ill is only moral in the wickedness of the
qualities, or action, not of the being. [ Genesis 1.31.]

The greatest excellency or perfection of every thing, is in the likeness
thereof unto the first cause: but every thing is more excellent in the being
thereof, than in the not being: therefore in the being it is most like the
first cause; whereupon it follows that the first cause of all, is most of all
being: therefore before not being, and so eternal. And that is God.

All truths inferior and created, depend necessarily upon a superior and
increated truth: for nothing can be in the effect, which is not first in the
power of the cause. Wherefore seeing no space can be given so great, but that
it is possible for the understanding, a created being, truly to conceive a
space yet more large: nor any number so multiplied, but that still a greater
number than it may be given; the understanding must needs yield, that there is
a being infinite in extension, that fills all space, and yet is infinitely
greater than it: and a wisdom or mind numbering, which is also infinite, which
no number can either exceed or equal, but only that most simple unity of his
own most pure and absolute perfection. (c)
Therefore there is a God.

Notes.
IF any man desire to see other reasons to this purpose, let him read those
arguments that are brought by Tho. Aquinas lib. 1. cap. 13. contra Gentiles;
and Sum. Theol. part. 1. cap. 2. out of Aristotle, and out of Thom. in
Savanarola in his book called Triumphus Crucis, cap. 6. The arguments also,
that are here brought in the chapters following to prove the Eternity,
Infinity, Omnipotency, etc. of God; do prove that there is a God: for because
these terms are conuertible essentially, they are so many several
demonstrations of the same thing, as was showed log. chap. 18. n. 3. And so no
less are all those arguments for proof of this question, which follow in cap.
13. against the Eternity of the World. The inductive arguments of Cleanthes you
shall find in Tullie de Not. Deorum lib. 2. and out of him in Philip Mornay,
Of the trueness of Christian Religion. cap. 1. and in Peter Moulin de
Cognitione Dei, and others.

(a) There was a time] Time is commonly taken for a certain continuance
measured by the motion of the heavens. But here it signifies at large and
improperlie as much as any lasting continuance, or duration which may be
thought distinguishable in Eternity.

(b) Contradictories, Reason 2.] The second part of Logonomia, which I call
Logic, written by me, among other reasons there mentioned, was especially
meant to be an help to them that needed help for the understanding of this
book. And therefore for this, and all such dark words, you that need help
must seek it there; and having read that book diligently first, and somewhat
understood it; you shall come better furnished to this book, or the like; and
let this note be sufficient for all such words of art as this.

(c) Therefore there is a God.] All these reasons conclude directly the being
of that one only true God whom we adore. And as there was never any nation so
barbarous, which did not confess some God; one thing or other, which their
imaginations lead them unto: So have few men been found so shameless as to
deny it. Yet if any such there be, as Diagorat of Melos, and Theodorus of
Cyrene were said to be: they shall be reckoned the principal heretics against
this conclusion. Protagoras also shall go in that number, because he made it
doubtful whether there were Gods or no; whom the Athenians did therefore
banish, and burnt his books. The second sort is of Paynims and Idolaters; who
in stead of the true God worship false gods, Idols and devils Ephesians. 2.12. The
third sort of Atheists are they, who although they deny not God in their
words, and being overcome in their consciences cannot deny him: yet in their
actions and affections have no remembrance and regard of him. These have the
sentence of their judgment already pronounced upon them Psalm. 9.17. For
whosoever prefers any thing before God and his fear; either honor, riches,
pleasure, the favor of men, or whatsoever else; they set up other gods, and so
forsake the true God, and his Religion, which had not power over their
consciences to bind them to his fear. For he, that comes to God must believe
that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him Heb. 11.6. A
fourth error is of them, who make the idols of the heathens to be the same
with the true God, known and worshipped among the Hebrews, blessed therein
above all people, because (...) was their God. Psalm. 144.15. and 147.20. You
shall have their opinion delivered by Hermesianax, translated by Mr. G. Sandys.
lib. 2. of his Relation.

Pluto, Persephone, Ceres, Venus, Love,
Triton, Nereus, Thetis, Neptune, and Jove.
Pan, Juno, Vulcan, He with th'awfull rod,
Phaebe, and Archer Phoebus, all one God.
And so all the Panim Idolaters, in spite of their noses, shall be worshippers
of the true God. But how agrees this with the truth of the Scripture Deuteronomy.
32.16.17. where strange Gods are called devils. Psalm. 106.36.37. They served
idols and offered unto devils. 1 Cor. 10.20. The Gentiles sacrifice to devils,
and not to God. But has not this opinion gotten strength of late, when we are
taught to believe by S^nf. and Park de descensu sect. 6.7. etc. that these
Heathenish devils had their names also from the glorious names of the true God?
And for this purpose we must of Elohim have H l on. But if I should not be
^^ccessary to this folly, I would ask why not rather of (...) Eliou?
especially, seeing the interpretation (...), and (...) Page 11. bind us
thereto, from the signification of (...) which signifies Strong and yet the
fiction of the Suns horses proved out of Chrysostom. sect. 7. would have fetched
it better and with less dishonor to God, from Helias. Will you have any more?
then of (...) shaddai take Di^: So this rare Cabalist takes the Epithete of the
blessed God, Genesis 17.1. to the prince of their devils, of (...), which we read
Jehova; you shall have I^o, Euios, Phaebos, Bacchos, I, and the Peruvian Hi^h:
and of Adonai, the lovely boy Adonis: horresco referens. And Anion the
B^asilian devil, and Kiwassa the idol of Virginia, if they had thought on it,
with as much likelihood. But it is proved by the authority of the devil of
Claros himself, Cunctorum dicas supremum numen Iao;
Hic tibi vere novo sit Jupiter, Helius aestu;
Dis, eum saevit hyems; Autumno mollis Iao.
And again, the Rhodian devil said as much, Magnum Atton placate deum, qui
castus Adonis,
Euios est largitor opum, pulcher Dionysus.


The devil is a Liar from the beginning; And I easily think, that he would
and did help the Heathen to believe all Hesiods genealogy of the gods: And
that he would as willingly suffer them to profane the holy titles of the
only true God for their greater condemnation, that would attribute them unto
him. But if the Heathens would falsely give these names to their Devils See
Aug. de ^^v. D. lib. 9. cap. 23.
Gods, a Christian should avenge that unjust claim, and not with such hard
strayning thrust them upon them. And how sticks this with their own learning,
that Moses, who was never called Iehova, should be Bacchus, and the hill Sina,
the city Nisa? and Arabia, the India to which Bacchus went? Did any Geographer
so describe the earth, as to bring India into Arabia? Father Ptolomie tells us,
that no part of India is near to Sina by forty five degrees, which of the
Aequators longitude is two thousand seven hundred miles. And the history of
Alexander refutes this fancy Just. hist. lib. 12. So Joshua is sometimes
Hercules, sometime Apollo: And Deos and Deus were used for any God
indifferently; but (...) began to be restrained to the true God. When? where?
by whom? in prose, or in verse? he looked on (...), and did but think so. Is
not this that (...) that shreeves himself to his wife Juno for all his
slipperie prancks with Danae, Sem^le, Latona, and the rest? Ili^d. x. that
threatens to clapper claw her Iliad. ^. that gave her the strappado with two
Anvils at her heels? Iliad. ^. yet see how we are bound to believe it. Ante
haec tempora repertum non putamus, qui hanc ex literarum hyperthesi theologiam
vulgarit. -- felicia tempora quae te! But if you take away (hanc) the rest is
the praise of the Cabalists. Read Johannes Picus de Mirandula, Archangel.
Reuchlin, and in special his books de Verbo mirifico. But to what purpose is
all this grammar learning, which he presumes to know alone? did ever any man
brag so loud for two sheets of paper? forsooth, to prove that Hades is derived
of Adamah, it proves it not. But I will rather give it, than I will trouble you
further with it.

CHAP. II. What God is, And that He is Everlasting.
HOw is it possible to define or bound an infinite Being? If we look upon the
Creature to find a name for him thereby, though He be the cause of all,
though all things speak his praise; yet He for ever dwelt in Eternity, before
any thing in the Creature was. If we look upon the excellencies of the
Creature, the goodness, or wisdom, or power, or glory, or virtue, or
whatsoever else our words or thoughts can reach unto; yet all these
excellencies are from him, the footsteps only of his passage by them. The
whole Creature therefore with all the excellencies thereof cannot afford him a
name, whereby to know what his Being is: So wonderful is He, so superexcellent
above all names. Yet such is his mercy, as that in his holy word, he has been
pleased to lisp with us, as a mother with her infant, and to give us names as
certain remembrances whereby our hearts may be lifted up unto him. Of these,
some are given only by way of comparison, of which you may read more in the
8. Chap. Some are only negative, by which we may better understand what he is
not, than what he is, as S. Paul speaks 1. Tim. 1.17. Unto the King
Everlasting, Immortal, Invisible, the only wise God be honor and glory for
ever and ever, Amen. Other attributes we give unto God, which signify
perfections supereminently; as that he is the Chiefest good, the first
beginning, the prime and principal perfection, and such like; which although
by the force of reason we are compelled to give unto God: yet because these
general expressions are too far from our experimental knowledge, we
attribute unto Him better, and more fitly those perfections for which we have
example in his word; whereof there be certain likenesses and experiments in the
visible creature; which because it is his workmanship, we know there can be
nothing therein, which is not supereminently in him that is the cause: as
goodness, wisdom, virtue and such like; wherein after a sort we are his
image. Now among these, there can be none like that description which God does
make of himself Exo. 34.6, 7. where, of fifteen attributes which God does
take to himself, the first three show to us his eternity, his infinity, and
his omnipotency, one his truth, eight (according to the number of the
blessings Matthew 5.) are all of mercy; three only concern his justice. And all
th^se things follow necessarily one upon another.

For if God be without beginning (as was showed before) Cap. 1. Re. 1.2. etc.
it must needs be, that he be also without ending: because, He can have nothing
before him, and so can have no superior which might bring him to nothing.
Therefore God is eternal, both before, and after; as they speak, a part
ante, and a part post. Now eternity is an infinite continuance, therefore
whatsoever is eternal, is also infinite. Moreover whatsoever has infinite
continuance, has an infinite a power to continue infinitely. Therefore God is
Almighty, and of endless power. By this therefore that God is everlasting,
infinite and almighty, we may very well conclude, that this glorious Being is
most worthy to be God; seeing nothing can be before or after him, being
eternal, nothing greater than he, nor yet equal unto him, seeing he is
infinite; neither all things, nor nothing able to resist him, because he is
Almighty. If God then be most worthy to be God, it is necessary that he be
most wise, most good, most true, most merciful, most just, and most glorious.
For otherwise he were neither worthy, nor yet possibly could he be God, if any
thing might be more wise, good true, merciful, just, or glorious than He.
Therefore God is wise, and wisdom it self, good, and goodness it self,
true, merciful, just and glorious, truth, mercy, justice, and glory it
self. Neither can he move, or be moved from place to place; who fills all, and
is infinite beyond all places: Neither can he be subject to any accident, whose
being is most simple and pure perfection. And this is our God, thus described,
as far as the dim sight of our understanding is able to descry him. But
that the truth of all these things may better appear; seeing we now lay the
ground of those proofs which must follow hereafter: you shall for every one of
these, or as many as is needful, have a reason or two, and first.

That God is Eternal or Everlasting.
1 IF God be not eternal, then it follows that he was brought forth from not
being, into being: but it is impossible that God should be brought forth from
not being into being: for not being cannot be a cause: or if he were brought
forth from not being by another that was before him; then should that other be
more worthy to be God. But this is confessed, that nothing can either be, or
yet be conceived to be more worthy than God. Therefore God is, and was for ever
that which he is: and whatsoever has been for ever, has power to continue for
ever: for otherwise the act of being should be without the power of being (that
is to say, a thing might be when it were not possible to be) but that is
impossible. Therefore God is everlasting, and can neither have beginning nor
ending.

2. Whatsoever is being, and once was not, must of necessity bring on the
being of some cause which brought it to that being which it has: for nothing
which only may be, can come into perfect and actual being, but by such a
powerful being, as is already actual. Therefore there is either one first and
chief being, the cause of all things, which is of it self actually perfect,
and powerful eternally; or else nothing at all is, or else there is a
subordination of causes infinitely. The former of these two is false and
against sense: for I am, and thou art; the latter is impossible: therefore the
first is b necessarily true. Now the falsehood of this later appears in this;
for if there be a subordination of causes infinitely, then seeing every effect
is brought to perfection in a finite time, it must follow that c infinite
causes may work in a time finite, and so infinite may be in that which is
limited and finite. But this is impossible; therefore there cannot be a
subordination of causes infinitely. Moreover seeing every effect does naturally
answer the cause thereof, and seeing the effects are of so different kinds, it
must follow, that there is not only an infinite subordination of causes; but
also that there be infinite subordinations of causes of kinds infinitely
different, according to the different effects brought forth. But this is
impossible: for the causes being ordained for the effect, and the effect being
the end of those causes, that which is finite should be more noble and
excellent than that which is infinite. Thirdly if there be a subordination of
causes infinitely, of which one is moved orderly by another, it must needs
follow that there is no moving, and consequently no causing at all: for every
cause being moved by that which is before or above it, if there be no first
cause given, there can be no moving. But it is apparent, that in infinity of
causes there can be no first nor last, and so there should be no moving, nor no
immediate cause of the effect. Therefore there is one cause of all, which is
infinite and eternal.

3 If God be not eternal, then either the world was a beginning unto it self,
or else it was eternally, and so shall continue eternally. But neither was the
world a beginning unto it self, as is proved Cap. 1 Re. 1. neither is the
world eternal, as shall be proved Cap. 13. Therefore God is eternal.

4. And this truth of Gods everlasting being, the holy Scripture teaches every
where, as Genesis 21.33. And Abraham called on the ^ame of the everlasting God.
Exodus 15.18. The Lord shall reign for ever and ever. Deuteronomy. 32.40. I live for
ever. Psalm. 90.2. Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth
and the world were made, thou art God from everlasting to everlasting. So Psalm.
41.13. and 106.48. and Rev. 11.17. We give thee thanks Lord God Almighty, which
art, which wast, and which art to come. Psalm 145.13. Thy kingdom is of all
eternity, and thy dominion in every generation.

Notes.
(a) Has power to continue infinitely] the Schoolmen say, Thom. contra Gentes
lib. 1. cap 16. and often elsewhere. Quod potest esse, potest etiam non esse;
which you may construe, That which has power to be, has also power not to be;
or that which may be, may also not be; which seems directly to cross this
argument. But you must understand the Doctor there, to speak of a thing which
is in the power of being, whereto it has not yet attained, as a kernel is in
power to become a tree; in which the power of being is passive, importing a
privation of the being to come. But in this place power to be, means an
actual power, not privative, but positive, whereby the thing which has the
power, shows by the actions the power which it has: as of the understanding
to apply it self to this or that. The passive power can no way be in God. The
second is a power of absolute perfection, without which he could not be God.

(b) Impossible necessarily.] See the rule of this consequence Logono. Cap. 18.
n. 7. and Cap. 26. n. 1.

(c) Infinite causes. Re. 2.] That which is infinite in power may work in a
time finite; not that which is infinite in number only which is here meant.

That God is Infinite. CHAP. III.
Infinity cannot here be meant of multitude: for the more that multitude is
increased in any kind the more the dignities of one are abated. Neither yet can
this infinity be of quantity: for infinity cannot be in quantity, no more
than eternity can be in time. a Neither is God a body, which only is capable
of quantity; yet is not infinity of extension denied; in as much as he fills all
places infinitely beyond all place, as the Prophet Esaias speaks Chap. 40.12.
That he measures the waters in his fist and the heavens in his span. Neither is
God infinite privatively, in regard of any defect or want of being: because he
has the complement of all perfections in himself. But he is infinite
negatively: because there is no limit or bound to be set to his being, to his
perfection, or superabundance in goodness, wisdom, power, truth and glory.
The reasons are these.

1. Whatsoever is supersupreme, or highest in all degrees of perfection, must
needs be infinite; because there is nothing above it which may limit or
restrain it. But such is the being of God, above which it is confessed, that
nothing can be thought more excellent. Therefore God is infinite.

2. Being taken absolutely; that is, simply by it self without any limitation,
must needs be infinite: because infinite things by infinite means may be
partakers thereof. But such is the being of God, that is absolute and simple:
for neither is his being from another as the cause thereof, seeing he is
eternal; neither yet in another, as a form in the matter: for so something
should be more excellent than he; as every total is more excellent than any
part thereof: or as the accident in the subject; for so something should be
before him, and also be more worthy than he, as every subject in regard of the
accidents. Neither yet is he for any other as the end thereof: for as all
things are from him and by him as the first cause; so are they for him, as for
their first and chiefest end, and secondly for themselves, to find themselves
happy in him as far as they are capable, as the Apostle concludes Romans 11.36.
Of him, through him, and for him are all things, to him be glory for ever,
Amen. Therefore God is infinite.

3. If the being of God be not actually infinite, then should it be inferior
to the possibilities of the creature: for man's understanding though actually
finite, yet admits the possibility of an infinite actual being, as was showed
in space and in numbers. Chap. 1. Re. 6. But it is impossible that the being of
God should be inferior to those possibilities which the creature can
reasonably give unto him: for so the activitie of the understanding should be
created in vain, if there were no being actually infinite to be apprehended
thereby. So also the effect, that is the understanding, should be extended
beyond the being of the cause, that is God, if it could conceive any excellency
of being, goodness, wisdom, etc. greater than his. Therefore it is necessary
that God be infinite. You may see more Reasons Chap. 10. and there also the
ground of this discourse.

4. The authorities of Scripture are these. Psalm. 143.3. Great is the Lord, and
most worthy to be praised, and his greatness is incomprehensible. Psalm. 93.3.
The Lord is a great God, a great king above all Gods. Psalm. 104.1. O Lord my
God, thou art exceeding great, thou art clothed with majesty and honor.

Note.
(a) God is not a body pref.] The proof of this, see in the ninth chapter.

That God is infinitely good. CHAP. IIII.
THings in their being are the object of our understanding, that we may know
the truth of their being; and therein is the understanding perfected: But
things, as far as they are good are the ob^ect of our desire; as far as we
find the likeness of our selves, or of something in our selves therein. But
good is of diverse kinds; the first and lowest kind is conditional or civil,
as riches, honor, favor of great men, authority; which are good or ill,
according as they are used. Secondly moral, as the virtues and abilities of
the mind, and the fruits thereof. Thirdly natural, which is in every thing:
and that either essentially, in the perfection of the being whereto it is
ordained; which every thing desires, as the proper good thereof: or
specifically, in respect of those proper effects which proceed from the
essential form; inasmuch as every good thing imparts the goodness of it
self as much as it may. But the goodness of God comes not into account with
these: for although for that loves sake which he has of goodness, he were
pleased to imprint certain likenesses of himself in the creature; yet this
was not out of any need which he had of the creature, without which he was and
is infinitely happy in himself, Psalm. 16.2. Therefore the creation only
manifested the goodness of God, that the creature according to the measure
thereof might be good, perfect, and blessed in him, who is infinitely good in
himself, as is manifest by these reasons.

1. It is proved Chap 2. that the being of God is infinite. Hence it follows
thus. Whatsoever is equal to an infinite being, must of necessity be infinite.
The goodness of God is equal to his infinite being: for otherwise his being
should be defective, and ill, if by his goodness it should not be wholly and
infinitely good. And if in any thing his being were defective, then should it
not be infinitely distant from not being, and so his being should not be
infinite: but all these things are impossible. Therefore the goodness of God
is infinite.

2. Being and Goodness are terms convertible, inasmuch as every thing desires
the perfection of it own being, as the proper goodness thereof. But it is
necessary that some thing be chief and superexcellent in being, as the cause
of all other beings; therefore also in goodness; and this is most eminently
true in God, that his goodness is his being; because it cannot be in him as a
property proceeding from any form, he being utterly free from any composition;
nor yet by any superaddition, or putting to of any thing unto his being, he
being the cause of all and utterlie free from suffering any thing from without.
Therefore God is infinitely and essentially good.

3. In the order of things being, it is necessary that something be
supereminent and chief, either good or ill, which must of necessity be that
which is the first, and cause of all other things. Good is a positive being,
and brings in perfection: Ill is only privative, and puts nothing in being.
And seeing the excellency of every effect is in the multitude of the
likenesses thereof unto the cause, if the first cause thereof be not
supereminently good, then that which is ill and privative, shall be more
actual, perfect, and excellent, than that which is good: and every thing the
worse it is, shall be more like unto it, and that which is worst of all shall
be most like unto it; and that which is most of all not being, to wit, that
which is utterly impossible to be, most actual and perfect: but these things
are manifest contradictions and utterly impossible. Therefore God the first
cause of all, is supereminently and infinitely good.

4. Whatsoever has all the perfections of being in it, must needs be
infinitely good. But God has all the perfections of being in himself, as
being the cause of all. Therefore God is infinitely good.

5. And this is that goodness which our Lord would not suffer to be given unto
any other. There is none good but one, even God. Mark 10.18. But the
representation of this infinite goodness is diversely imparted, first without
measure, John 3.34. To him that is the image of his being. Hebr. 1.3. Then to
them who of his fullness have received, even grace for grace, John 1.16.
Thirdly to every thing in the being thereof, as I spoke before Genesis 1.31. And
hereby you may see the force of that argument which our Savior uses, Matthew.
7.11. If you then which are ill can give good gifts to your children; how much
more shall your heavenly father give good things to them that ask him? Seeing
he is goodness it self, and this goodness of God is the argument of so many
Psalms: Praise ye the Lord, because he is good; for his mercy endures for
ever. Psalm. 118.136: etc.

CHAP. V. That the wisdom of God is infinite.
EVery thing naturally seeks the preservation of it self in the being which
it has, as the perfection and happiness of it self, and therefore first
avoids those things that are contrary thereto, as you may see in a green
stick put into the fire, how the water shunnes the heat, as the greatest
enemy it has. Secondly increases it self by those things which it can make
like, and turn into it self, as I have elsewhere showed, how every seed
increases by the earth and moisture thereof, which cannot be but with a
wehling out, or choice of things that are homogeneous, or of parts like
thereto; and a refusing of those things that are heterogeneous, that is of
unlike parts, or of another kind. And over and above this, every thing does
spread it self in that goodness which it has, upon those things that are
capable thereof, as it appears in the effect of every medicine. And nothing of
all these things can be done, but by a certain degree of natural knowledge
inbred in every thing; according to which it does choose or avoid those things
which are within the compass of that knowledge. And this is seen in every
thing simple, or compound, in things elementall, mineral and vegetable. But in
things wherein life is more manifest, by moving, which we call Animal, the
fruits of knowledge and understanding appear in far greater differences of
degrees, as you may find between the oyster, or the snaile, and the fox, the
horse, or the elephant; of which they write, he may be taught to know letters.
Plin. hist. not. lib. 8 cap. 3. and Aquin. contra Gent. lib. 3. Cap. 57. what
knowledge these things have of the Creator, it is not easy to define. See
Plin. hist. lib. 8. Cap. 1. But certain it is, that the whole creature has a
most earnest desire and hope to be delivered from that corruption and change
whereto it is subject, Romans 8.19. But that man, though knowing nothing at all,
but by the help of things sensible, was created to know and honor the creator
by, and for his knowledge, is most manifest: for otherwise the Creator should
lose his honor, which he might, and consequently ought to have, by the outward
senses, from things sensible. And this was the condemnation of the world, that
thus knowing by the creature, they did not honor him accordingly, Romans 1.17.
Of how much sorer punishment then shall the Jew, and yet much more the false
Christian be worthy of? who having not only the dawning light in the creature,
whereby to see the power, the wisdom and goodness of God; but also the clear
Sunshine and use thereof in the Scriptures of the old Testament, and yet much
more evidence and proof of the same in Jesus Christ; for neglect of that grace
so freely offered? The Angels yet in more excellent manner, though with their
differences and degrees of understanding, without either sense or imagination,
by the only sight or beholding of things, know the truth of their being,
properties, and possibilities: or else yet in a superexcellent manner,
beholding the Creator, know by him his admirable workmanship. But how much
more wonderful is his wisdom, Who is made more excellent than the Angels?
Hebr. 1.4. Whom God has exalted and given him a name (and being also) above
every name? Philip. 2.9. Who is the image of the invisible God, the first
begotten of every creature? Colos. 1.15. And lastly, how superabundantly
infinite is that wisdom, whose brightness shines, first upon that image, and
thence reflected upon the creatures, becomes that light which enlightens the
Angels, and every man that comes into the world? John 1.9. And that this
wisdom of God is infinite, it is apparent, not only by these degrees before
declared, but also by the reasons following.

1 Whatsoever is imperfect and yet ordained unto a degree of further
perfection, must needs be from that which is perfect, and able to bring it to
that perfection, whereto it is ordained. But such is the wisdom and knowledge
of man; both by his own experience of the present imperfection, and sacred
authority of our future hopes: For now we know in part: now we see through a
glass darkely. But hereafter we shall know as we are known, perfectly. 1
Cor. 13.9. to 12. Therefore the wisdom of God is perfect and beseeming
himself; that is infinite.

2. The apprehension of the truth of things, is the object and delight of the
understanding; and infinite truth of an infinite understanding. Seeing then,
that the truth of things being is so manifold; and the possibilities of truths,
in the possibilities of all beings much more indefinite: and the Fountain of
all these truths infinite: a if the wisdom of God were not infinite, that it
might be answerable to all truths: then should they be in vain, and the
knowledge thereof wanting in Him, in whom, and from whom, all truth both
created and increated is. But this is impossible. For although the
understanding of the Creature be admitted to see the truths of things created;
yea, and all the possibilities thereof, that God may have his glory from the
Creature which is due unto him; yet cannot all the wisdom of all the Creature
sound the depth of that Sea, whence all these truths proceed, but that must be
understood only by that wisdom, and glorified only within that glory which
is in himself. Therefore it is necessary, that the wisdom of God be infinite.

3. If the truth of Gods being be infinite, then it is necessary that his
wisdom also be infinite; For otherwise he could not know the truth of his own
being, and so not desire, nor will it; nor yet be happy and glorious in his
own being. But all this is impossible. But the truth of Gods being is
infinite. For as all falsehood is in not being, and necessary falsehood in the
impossibility of being; So all truth is grounded in being, b necessary truth in
actual being, and possible truth in the possibility of being. And it is
manifest before, cap. 3. that the being of God is infinite. Therefore his
Truth, and so necessarily his wisdom is infinite.

4 No perfection which is in any kind of being, can be wanting unto God, which
is the cause of all being, as it is manifest in this, that he is eternal and
made all things. But if infinite wisdom be wanting unto him, a principal
perfection is wanting. Therefore God is infinitely wise.

5. And this Argument the Prophet uses. Psalm. 94.8. O ye fools when will ye
be wise? shall not he that planted the care hear? or be that formed the eye,
see? He that teaches man knowledge, shall not He know? That is, He that
has given to every thing a degree of knowledge answerable to the perfection of
that being, shall not He according to the infinity of his own being, have the
infinity and perfection of knowledge? as Job speaks, 37.16. So again, Psalm.
147.5. Great is our Lord, and great is his power, his wisdom is infinite. Read
Psalm. 139. also Rom 11.33. O the depth, both of the wisdom, and knowledge of
God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!

Notes.
(a) IF the wisdom of God were not infinite, that it might be answerable to
all these 1. truths. Rea. 2.] Because the wisdom of God is infinite, and such
as no addition can be made thereto; it must of force be held for an undoubted
truth; That God does know not only the infinity of his own Being, but also He
has the most certain, most particular, and uttermost knowledge of all things
that are, or are any way possible to be, or not to be; past, present, or to
come; how infinite soever in number; how mean, how ill, how uncertain soever
they seem to us: yet to Him they are good, certain, and determined: yea, our
very desires, and thoughts, He understands long before us: As by many reasons,
and these Texts of Scripture, and many more it may appear, Psalm. 33.14.15. and
94.11. and 139 all. 113.9. Heb. 4.13. And yet because it is as certain, that
whatsoever is in God, is essentially Himself; As it will be manifest, Chap. 8.
and 9. And that the being of the Creature is no way necessary to His being,
infinitely and absolutely perfect without it: it will be necessary to enquire,
how the multitude of things created can be in the wisdom and knowledge of God.
And because it is necessary to put this: that the understanding of God, is by
the most excellent and perfect way of knowing: therefore it cannot be either by
infusion from another: nor gotten by experience and practice; nor by discourse;
as all the knowledge of man is by some of these; nor yet by the view of the
things in themselves, or of the things in another; as is the knowledge of the
Angels; but only by the pure and simple fight of His own being; which
although it be most simple, and one* yet it is the pattern and sample of all
things, that can either be, or be known. Because that on his being and power
alone, the being and possibilities of al things depend. Neither can any thing
be, live, or understand; but that i^ one or more of these it expresses his
Image. So that he in that one simple working of his own understanding and
sight of himself, sees at once, both himself, and in himself; the being and
possibilities of all things beside. For seeing his understanding i^ his being,
chap. 8. if He did understand by any other means than by the sight of his
own Being; then He should have in himself a Being and a Being: then there
should be a cause of understanding to him without himself. So his
understanding should be in possibility only, actuated, or brought to work by
an outward understandable object: So his understanding should be accidental to
Him, as ours to us; and so it should not be infinite. For nothing can be
infinite which is in possibility of being: because it has not all those
perfections of being which it may possibly have. So then, God by the sight of
his own being, knows all things being S^^^^ ^. n^^^.
or not being. And to know all things in their cause, and by their cause, is
the excellency or perfection of knowledge. For al^hough the effect be not
necessary to the being of the cause; yet is the first cause more essential to
the effect, than all other succeeding causes whatsoever they are. And therefore
it is said. Act. 17.28. In him we live, m^ve, and have our b^ing. Seeing then
that all effects are in the power of the cause; and that every thing which is
in another, must be therein according to the manner of that being wherein it
is. If God be understanding and wisdom it self: they must be in Him
understandably, and therefore be perfectly known by Him.

But (you say) If the creature be known and seen by the infinite wisdom;
and if nothing can be in God, beside His very being, chap. 9. then that
knowledge of the Creature must be in the very being of God, because it is in
Him. Then it is necessary that in the divine being there be a manifold or
diverse being, because a different knowledge; one, that whereby He knows
himself which will easily be yielded to be essential, and his very being, see
chap. 8. and another of the creature: which if it be essential, His essence
must be d verse. Because the essence and being of the Creator, and of the
creature are most different. If not essential, it must be accidental to Him;
and so His being should not be infinite, and in absolute perfection of being,
if capable of accidents.

I say, that if the divine wisdom should view the being of the creature in any
other being beside himself, then the divine understanding, for as much as
concerns the creature, should be dependent on that, which must be inferior
and after Him. Therefore all this quarrel is, because that which was first
deluded, was either not understood, or not remembered. It was said, that the
knowledge of all things is in God most certainly, most particularly, and that
not according to the being of things as they are; but according to all
possibilities whereto they are subject. But as the being of the creature comes
not unto it, but by Him: so this knowledge of the creature in God, comes not to
Him, as raised or gathered from the things in their own being (for so it
should be chancefull, as they had happened to be) But by that being which they
have in Him, as in their cause. For God knowing his power answerable to all
possibilities of being, and Himself able thereby to work according to the
pleasure of his own will, according to that pleasure, appointed of all causes
to the bringing forth of things in their being. Therefore as the power of all
causes is from Him, the first of causes; so that knowledge of His, is a
creating knowledge and essential to Him. For because He is the first of
beings, it is necessary, and essential to him, not only to be the best, most
wise, powerful, infinite, etc. and yet the most simple, and pure of all
beings, but also the cause of all beings that can come after Him. Therefore as
the being, so the knowledge of the creature also is in God; that is, in the
object of his understanding, which is his word, seen by one infinite action of
understanding: For by his own absolute perfection, does He measure all the
distances of imperfection, as by one simple unity all the proportions in
numbers are both made and measured. Neither does it any way follow, that
because the beings of God and the creature are diverse, therefore his knowledge
of Himself and the creature should be also different so far, as to make a
different essence or being in Him. For the understanding of man though one in
it self, yet sees and knows the things that are most different and contrary.
As a looking glass may represent all bodily shows without any change in the
being of it, either essential, or accidental: Beside, that being of the
creature, which He beholdes, is no other than that being which it has in Him
increated, eternally, intellectually, and causally. And if our imagination, or
thought, which takes hold of nothing but by the outward sense, does yet turn
it self from the sense, to view the same likeness though absent, though long
ago beheld; and the understanding much more taking that likeness from the
imagination, and utterly withdrawing it from matter, does frame to it self a
pattern or likeness of the common or universal being, under which all things
of the same kind are contained, expressed in the definition: how much more
shall the divine wisdom know the being, and possibilities of all things? not
by that being which is in them, derived and dependant, whereby the Angels know;
but most perfectly by that being which all things have in Him, which is
independent. Of which being of the Creature, you shall have further occasion to
consider in the 13. chap. when we shall speak of the eternity of the world,
and the original being of the creature.

2. This may seem an answer (you say) for things that are being, if good, if
worthy His knowledge. But seeing that every thing that is known is after some
sort in Him that does know: it may seem that the excellency of his being and
understanding cannot suffer, that the knowledge of things that are vile, and
base, or especially, that are ill, should be in Him. For seeing those things
that are base and ill, seem altogether to be in want and defect of
perfection, if the knowledge of them be in God, and consequently his essence,
then his being should be of things which are in defect, which cannot agree to
Him that is the most perfect of all being. Moreover, if the things that are
known by Him be in Him, as in their cause; then must it follow necessarily,
that if He know things that are ill, He should also be the cause of ill; which
can no way stand with the infinity of his goodness.

I answer. Base or vile, and excellent are only words of Comparison; And if
all things created were excellent alike, then could nothing at all be
excellent. But because it is necessary for the beauty of the whole frame of the
creature, that there be difference of degrees in greater or less excellency;
therefore are these things which have fewer degrees of perfection in them,
called mean, or vile, though not truly and indeed such. For there is nothing
so mean or base, but as it is being, it is a proof and image of His being who
created it, and so though not of it self, yet in it self is exceeding good
Genesis 1.31. And if the order of Nature be well marked, as we know that the whole
Creature was brought out of not being, into the meanest and first degree of
being, which was water, Genesis 1.2. 2 Pet. 3.5. so all the excellency that is in
the creature, is but by addition of one degree of perfection unto another,
which perfections taken together, with their cause and original, are in their
many differences; first being, then life, after sense; fourthly Reason, as in a
man; Fifthly understanding by the only sight of the being, as in the Angels:
the sixth is of the received power of the Mediator, Ioh. 17.2. Ephesians.
1.20.21.22. Heb. 1.2. that runs into infinity; the seventh is Infinity it
self, in the simplicity of self being, beyond which is nothing. But whether
these perfections of the creature, come into it by addition, as I have spoken,
or that it be so raised from nothing immediately into those perfections which
it has: it is necessary that these differences of degrees be therein, that
that (...), Ephesians. 3.10. that manifold wisdom of God may be manifest in the
Creature. In which creature how perfect soever in it self, no degree can be
found so excellent, but that it must differ infinitely on the one side from the
perfection of the Creator: not none so mean, but that on the other side it
must differ infinitely from not being: I mean that not being which it had of
it self and in it self, for in him it had an eternal being, being eternally
foreseen and appointed in him.

. 3. But in things that are ill, you think this answer will not serve; For
though you can be content to think, that the glory of the divine wisdom is
nothing abated in the beholding of things, no not in their present being, how
differing soever in their degrees of perfection, as it is said Psalm. 113.5. Who
is like unto Iehova our God, that lifts up Himself high to sit; that abaseth
Himself low to see in the heavens and in the earth? no more then the luster
and shine of the Sun is more or less clear, whether it light upon the
beautiful hill of Libanus or Carmell; or the dirty land of Cabul: yet if he
know also things that are ill; and that his knowledge be a causing or creating
knowledge, it cannot be avoided, but that he must also be the cause of ill.

I answer. Ill is of three kinds; one natural, whereby every thing is
subjected to some other thing contrary thereto, whereby it may be corrupted,
for the destruction of that particular being, that some other thing may be
raised thereout, according to the possibility of the matter, and the manner of
the corrupting. Hitherto we may bring poisons and all those things that we call
hurtful and ill, because if they be not rightly used, they are harmefull to
our kind, which are not simply ill, but only accidentally; seeing that if they
be rightly used, they may be helpefull to our nature: as it appears in the
trocisks of the vipers flesh, and other medicines, as Physic teaches. So
these things of themselves naturally good, may be ill; that is, good causes of
ill effects: as riches, and authority, things civilly indifferent, may be ill,
if abused to pride, idleness, and the oppression of others.

The second kind of ill is that of punishment, which cannot justly be termed
ill, if you consider the use and benefit thereof, as S. Paul has taught Heb.
12. from ver. 5. to ver. 12. For neither can wisdom be in things civil, or
moral; but with the judgment of good and bad: neither is that judgment in
the discerning of good and ill ought worth, if the good be not praised and
rewarded, and the ill punished. So that without justice and mercy, in reward
and punishment; neither wisdom, nor goodness can be either perfect or
praised. Therefore this kind of ill, because it is just that the ill-doer
should bear the burden of his own desert, is no way ill, but only in the
smart of the guilty sufferer deserving it. So these two kinds of ill (only so
called for some respects) though in themselves necessary, and therefore good;
will easily be acknowledged to be from God.

The maine question therefore is only about that ill of ills which is sin:
for sin, both in regard of the effect, which is punishment, and in it self
the deserving cause thereof; and much more taking occasion by the Law holy and
good to work death in the sinner; must needs be exceedingly sinful, as it is
concluded, Romans 7.11.13. And because it is as certainly and necessarily true,
that sin is sin, and ill is ill; as it is, that good is good: and that the
knowledge of the truth in every thing, is in the perfection of the
understanding; it cannot be, but that all ill and sin is perfectly known
unto the infinite wisdom. Moreover, whether ill be only a privation, or
taking away of that good which ought to be in the creature; or whether it be
any thing of very being therein: it is necessary that the infinite wisdom
know all manner of beings, both according to their perfections, and all their
possibilities and defects. But concerning the manner of this knowledge, the
Doct^rs say, That because the very being of ill (you remember what ill I speak
of) is nothing else but the privation of that goodness which ought to be in
the creature; it is known of God only by the contrary goodness, as by the
d^finition, that is to say, to be a defect or privation of goodness. Neither
is it any defect in the divine knowledge, to know that which is only a def ct
by the contrary perfection; seeing nothing can be known further then
according to that being which it has. And therefore they say further, See
Them. Aquin. and his Comment. lib. 1. Cap 71. and lib 3. Cap. 4, 5, 6, etc.
contra Gentes. That ill, inasmuch as it is such, is in the number of things not
being: and that of things not being, there can be no cause efficient, but
deficient and privative only. For every agent works as f^rre forth as it is
in actual being, to bring forth something into act or perfection, and that to
a good end; so that ill comes into effect by accident, beside the purpose and
intent of the doer. Ah blessed Origin! has thy too much charity been blamed so
long? who art said (though unjustly, see the defense of Pamphilus for O^igen,
and Ioh. Picus Mirandula de Salute Origenis) to have taught, that all sinners,
yea, even the devil himself shall be saved at the last; now thou art
justified. Sin is not being, it has no cause of being, but comes in by
chance, beside the good intent of the worker: he answers more directly
elsewhere, as you shall hear by and by. It is strange that this Doctor, who
sticks every where so close to Aristotle, should here depart so far from him,
as to make privation in the number of things not being, whereas Aristotle
rancks it in the order of beginnings with matier and form. In the mean while
understand, things not being are either utterly not being, or not being such.
In the first kind you may account the second term of contradiction, S^e Log.
Chap. 9. nu. 15, 16. as not a stone, not wise. By the affirming of which no
being at all is put to the subject, as to say, Thomas is not a stone. The not
being such, which they call Non ens tale, may hold all those terms which we
call privative. But privation may mean, at large, either the absence only of
any form not due to the subject; and thus it is in the number of things simply
not being: for seeing the presence of one form shuts out all other forms
unfit for that subject: (although all matier in the root of nature be subject
indifferently to all forms successively) the privation of other forms follow
thereon necess^rily. As the form of iron in the matier of iron is a privation
of the matter of gold, so a horse naturally covered with hair is thereby
deprived of a covering of feathers like a bird. But this privation is not in
the number of things that are ill, seeing it is the law of nature that every
thing be upright in that proper kind in which it is. Secondly privation may
signify the taking away of that form which was in the subject, as blindness
in the eye, which as it may be said to be not being in respect of the taking
away of the sight; yet in respect of the causes whence it may proceed, it is in
the number of things being, yet ill in both respects; that is, of the want of
that which ought to be in nature; and the cause, being such as ought not to be,
and so of all other sicknesses. Thirdly privation may be in a subject in
respect of the form to which it has not yet attained, as Tartar or dreggs in
the wine, by the spirit of salt may be hardened into a hard stone; and so the
dispositions to other diseases before they show themselves. And this privation
or want of form, is in the number of causes: as drought is in a thirsty man
to make him drink. Now sin must be one or both of these two last orders of
privation, and not in any order of things not being absolutely: for so, first
it should not be ill: for that which is not at all, is neither good nor ill.
Secondly it would bring upon God the greatest injustice that might be, to
punish the creature for sin, if sin were utterly not being. And thirdly, if
sin were not being, then our Lord should have died without cause: but it is
plain that sin was the cause of his death, that thereby he might destroy
death, and the power of the devil over us, to which we were subject because of
sin: but that which is utterly not being, cannot be a cause. Fourthly, if
sin be not being, where is then the way which God does weigh out to his
anger, Psalm 78.50. when he does balance the punishment with the sin? Are all
the punishments of sin, all the sorrows of this life, and death at last,
both bodily and eternal, nothing? for if they be any thing, they cannot be an
answerable punishment to that which is nothing. So many commandments of God,
so many threatenings by his Prophets, and Apostles, so many woes denounced by
our Lord, so many sacrifices and clensings from all the temporary punishments,
and at last the death of the Son of God himself for the eternal remission
of sins, and is sin not being? How much more true is it to say, that our
righteousness (as far forth as it is of our selves) is nothing; and to
confess with the Prophet, that it is like a soiled ragge? as S. Paul knew,
that in himself as a natural man, dwelt nothing that was good, that he had
not power, no not to think a good thought, as our Savior has taught us, that
without him we can do nothing. And he that has had experience of the combat,
that has so often been foiled in the bickering, must needs confess the
strength of sin, and cry out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body of death? I say not, as some heretics heretofore, that sin is
a substance either material or formal: or as the author of that book which
is entitled Ratio Rationum, that it came into mankind by that poisonous
slaver which the Serpent put upon that apple which he reached unto Eve; but
yet I say that sin is something, but the worst of beings: It is that
pestilentiall contagion, wherewith the devil has infected the mass of all
mankind: it is that sickness of the whole man, of which he languisheth unto
death; but principally the sickness of the soul, whereto nevertheless the
body is also subject, in fulfilling the unorderly lusts both of it self, and
of the mind: for one of these works upon another, both for good and bad.
Therefore to answer, how God does will that which is ill; it is not nor can be
denied, but that Gods punishments of all sorts, being weighed with the sin
are just, so one sin as it is the punishment of another, may stand with
justice, and both sins together in justice may be punished. When David was
in plenty and ease at Jerusalem, and had forgotten him that had delivered him
out of all his troubles; O treason of prosperity! his eyes wandered in the
beauty of Bathsheba, and led his heart to lust: so sin conceived, brought forth
adultery, that murder: thus one si^^e was the punishment of another; which were
altogether at last punished to every degree, in the treason and death of his
son Absalom: So if you compare the sins and degrees thereof in the
Egyptians, you shall find one sin the punishment of another, and all
together at last balanced in their plagues; so that it is most truly observed
by the Wise, Sap. 11.13. that wherein a man sins, thereby he shall be
punished. Now it is a clear case, that all the sin of mankind proceeds from
the corruption of his own nature, after which we are most justly suffered to
wander; because that knowing both the rottenesse of our own hearts, and the
punishment due to sin, yet we do not strive and and fight against our
selves, to subdue those wicked thoughts, from whence is the stream of all our
sin. Here you will question what strength we have to fight, and universal
grace, and free will: but they are beside this present purpose; whereby it is
clear, that all our sins being but issues of our own corruption, against
which we strive not; it is just with God, both to punish our carelessness, and
neglect of his commandment, and our own safety, with sin, and to leave us
in that corruption, to be guided by him whom we choose to serve, having forsaken
our true Lord and owner. But because this corruption is from our birth, and
that we made not our selves such; but that by the fault of Adam, sin and
death reign over all; the sum of the question is knit up in that one sin
of our first father, concerning whose fall we are brought to this point. If
God so foresaw the fall of Adam, that he willed it; it was impossible but that
he should fall; if he willed it not, it was impossible that he should. To which
doubt Thomas Aquinas in lib 1. Sen. Did. 46. q. 4. answers wittily and
modestly: that although the proposition be true and necessary, yet it is not
necessary that the will should be carried to either side of the contradiction.
His reason (as I think) is, because truth is not the object of the will, but
of the understanding only; and therefore he says, that God does permit ill
only, not because it is ill: but because of the annexes or dependances
thereon; either precedent, as because it is good that the creature should have
the power, whereby it may be enabled to do ill, or not to do ill: or
consequent, which is that good that is occasioned by the ill. I reverence the
judgment: but yet (Doctor) the question is here concerning good and ill, the
proper object of the will: and as the understanding cannot avoid it, but must
consent to a truth which it knows; so neither can the will in that which it
takes to be good or ill, but that it must choose one, and refuse the other. For
as the outward senses cannot refuse to be moved by their proper objects; as the
ear to hear a sound within a meet distance; no more can the inward faculties
of the mind. Besides, the question is here of the will of God, an infinite
will, and convertible with an infinite understanding: for in God there is not
one being of his will, and another being of his understanding; as will appear
more large hereafter in the 8. and 9. Chap. Neither is the will of God as man's
will, which may sit still while his understanding works; but what he
understands, he wills it also to be, or not to be; as his promises are not yea
and nay, but in him, all is yea, and Amen. Therefore to let pass those
questions which are moved hereabout, concerning the freedom of Adams will; why
God should forbid that to Adam, wherein he saw that Adam would transgress, and
so make his eating to be sin: for where no law is, there is no sin; and
such unnecessary questions; I answer directly, that it is utterly impossible,
but that God did foresee the fall of Adam, the taint of all mankind thereby,
all the sins and all the punishments whereunto any one particular person is
liable, all the wanderings, backslidings, and wants which can be in the
creature. Neither will I blush to affirm with the Apostle, Romans 11.32. That
God has shut up all under sin, that he might have mercy upon all. But it
follows not hereupon that he decreed our misery in Adam; because he foresaw
it: yet such was his mercy, that out of this great evil, he wrought a greater
good; so that it may seem by consequence we are rather gainers by Adams fall:
for though we lost by the sin of Adam an inheritance of holiness, etc. Yet
that holiness was like the morning dew, that vanished at the heat of the first
tentation; it was a created holiness, it was in a low degree; fit to his being
in whom it was. Is not the present inheritance of our holiness more sure, more
excellent, who are made partakers of his holiness, who is holiness it self?
his knowledge was but of worldly things, ours of eternal: and though our
natural knowledge be by Adams sin corrupted, or lost; yet shall it at last
be restored again with endless advantage: for the gift is not as the sin.
Romans 5.15. His life but a natural life; so that if Adam had not sinned, he
might have lived a natural life till now, and afterward; free from sickness,
and want, abounding in all the knowledge of nature, and natural blessings; but
that should have been the end of his hope (as far as I can see) though some
there be that give us hopes of the same degrees of happiness and glory, which
now we have, although Adam had not sinned. Yet because they see that that could
not be brought to pass, except God should take our nature, that thereby we
might be lifted up to that estate of glory; they think that Christ our Lord
should have come in the place of Henoch, the seventh from Adam, and that
therefore Henoch was taken away in stead of Christ. See Pastellus de Nativitate
Mediatoris page 116. But we are bound both by reason and authority of holy
Writ to know and confess; that the first Adam was of the earth earthly, and
such should our happiness have been, if we had continued in our created
innocence; the second Adam is the Lord from heaven, heavenly; into whose image
being renewed, we are made partakers of his superexcellent and heavenly glory.
The means whereby we come to this state of glory is also our assurance that it
shall be fully accomplished. God dwells in our flesh, O unspeakeable mystery!
he has taken upon himself our sins, O unspeakeable love! he calls them his
own sins. Psalm. 40.12. 2. Cor. 5.21. He has healed us with his stripes, and
is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, holiness, redemption, life, with an
over-abounding weight of glory. Is not the exchange well made with this
advantage? who would not lose himself that he might win Christ, with all his
demerits? who would not forfeit the life and happiness of Adam in his
innocence, that he might gain the life and glory of Christ in his eternity?
And thus much briefly for the advantage.

Is it nothing to see the infinity of the wisdom and goodness of God, which
out of the greatest ill, could bring the greatest good? The greatest ill on
Adams part was his sin which from him spread it self over all mankind, to
make it liable to eternal death: on the devils part his malice and murder; yea
such a murder as could not be in the world beside, in one man to murder the
whole world of men. Is it nothing (I say) that out of this great ill, God could
bring the greatest good; that is, our assured and everlasting righteousness
and glory? is it nothing that he has caught the wily in his own
craftiness? for whereas the devil envying that happy estate wherein man was
created, sought his overthrow by making him subject to sin, and so to death;
He our Creator, to show to the principalities and powers, the riches of his
wisdom, and goodness in man; did not only redeem him from that thraldom of
sin and death; but also exalted him unto an estate of glory and happiness,
far above that in which he was created. Thus out of the eater comes me^t, and
out of the strong comes sweetness. Iud. 14.14. Thus the head of Leviathan is
broken in pieces, and given to be meat to us in the wilderness of this world
Psalm. 74.15. Therefore seeing it was the good will and pleasure of Almighty God
to mankind, to make him partaker of these unspeakable mercies, which his
goodness has wrought unto us out of the ill of our sin; and because he that
wills the end, wills also those means that lead unto the end, we may with
reverence to his wisdom and truth affirm, that although God by his revealed
will forbad the tree of knowledge unto Adam, and so made his eating sin, yet in
his secret counsel he did foresee that sin in Adam, not as an enforcing or a
working cause, but leaving him to himself. But here a doubt must be answered;
first, if we be indeed redeemed from the thraldom of sin, why does God suffer
sin still to remain in us, yea so far forth, as that we cannot cease to sin,
yea so far forth as that it makes our best actions, even our prayers
abominable, while our tongue utters one thing, and our heart wanders after
another? Answer. It was possible and easy to God so to have renewed the heart
of m^^ so as that he should not sin: but yet God would let sin to dwell in us
for diverse advantages to us; but especially for two; first that at the sight of
our sin, we might cast down our selves before him, and utterly renouncing our
own worthiness, we might seek that righteousness which is of him, and in him
alone; the second, that by the perpetual remembrance of our sin, and the
punishment due unto us for the same, we might be thankful unto our most
merciful Redeemer, by faith the anchor of our souls, holding out our hope, that
although we fall, we shall not be cast away: and hereupon depends our repentance,
our patience, and our endeavor to the masterdome of our own wickedness. Thus
as the wise Physician for long continuing and deep rooted maladies, gives
strong purging medicines of Seamony, or Colocynthis, and after applies his
cordialls; so our most gracious Healer, to let us know what we are of
ourselves, lest through pride the sin of the rebellious Angels, we should be
lost for ever, does not only suffer us to taste the bitter fruits of our own
corruption: but suffers sin also, as the flesh of the venomous tire to be
still in us, that by it, the virtues of the precious spices of his graces may
be conveyed to our hearts, to preserve us from eternal death, that balefull
infection of the devil, unto everlasting life.

(b) Necessary truth in actual being, R. 3] Necessary truth is not here meant
that truth which depends upon the necessary being of the thing, in respect of
the cause thereof: but that necessity which binds the understanding or words
to be agreeable to the present being. And thus this proposition Peter sits, is
as necessarily true while he does fit, as to say, Peter is a man.

CHAP. VI. That God is Almighty.
MIght or power is of diverse kinds, as you may read log. appendix of Sect. 3.
introduct. I will not stand repeating, nor in this question make any mention of
that power which they call passive, because it means a power only to suffer
in things that are weak and imperfect. The might which I mean here is
absolute, perfect, infinite, which belongs to God, and to him alone, as it
appears by these reasons.

1. What power soever it is, which is equally powerful over all being, either
in act, or in possibility of being, must needs be infinite or almighty: but
such is the power of God; therefore God is Almighty. It was manifest before
Chap. 2. that God was everlasting, and so not by any other; but that all things
either being, or possible to be, are from him above, as it will further appear
Chap. 13. and upon this consequence it will further follow necessarily, that
God is Almighty, a in respect of the creature.

2. b If God be not Almighty, then either that which is, or that which is not
must be able to resist him: but neither that which is, nor that which is not,
is able to withstand him; therefore God is Almighty. The proposition is
plain, that he may do what he will do, who can find no hinderance or let
in his doing. The assumption also is as true: for the things that are, are all
from him, as the fountain of all being, as it is confessed by the voice of
heaven, Reve. Cap. 4.11. Thou art worthy O Lord, to receive glory, and honor,
and power: for thou have created all things; and for thy wills sake, they are,
and have been created. And that the things that are not, should be able to
withstand him is utterly impossible; for so, not being should be more powerful
than being, and being more powerful must of necessity be; and so should both
be and not be, which is an absolute contradiction, and utterlie impossible.
Therefore the first, that God is Almighty, is true of necessity.

3. If God be not Almighty, so that his power may be answerable to his other
dignities in infinity; then either his power must be accidental to him, or
else his being must differ essentiallie from it self; but both these things
are impossible: for in him is no accident, nor shadow of change, Ia 1.17. as it
shall appear more at large Chap. 9. And for the second consequence, it is as
plain: for that which is infinite, and that which is finite must needs differ
essentially, so that if his goodness, his eternity, wisdom, etc. being
essentially himself, as is showed Chap. 8. be infinite, and his power likewise
essential to him, and yet finite, then his being must needs differ essentially
from his being. Therefore it is necessary that God be Almighty.

4. Nothing can either be or work; but by that power which it has, both to be
that which it is, and to do that which it does; so that if the power of God
were not infinite or almighty, neither could his being be everlasting by his
eternity, neither could his inward action in himself be infinite and
eternal, neither could his goodness, his greatness, his truth, glory, etc.
be that which they are neither by his wisdom could he know himself infinite
and eternal, nor yet able to do any thing answerable to his goodness, truth,
and glory, Read Psalm. 111. Neither could he delight himself and be so happy
infinitely in his own goodness, greatness and glory; and so he should not be
God. But all these things are impossible: therefore God is Almighty. And this
the holy Scripture every where proclaims, first by the voice of God himself,
Genesis 17.1. and 35.11. I am God Almighty, and Exodus 6.3. I appeared unto
Abraham, Isaac, aad Jacob, by the name of the Almighty God. Then by his
Prophets, Job 27.3. This is the portion of Tyrants from the Almighty. This is
also the voice of heaven Revel. 4.8. Holy holy Lord God Almighty, and Revel.
15.3. Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty.

Notes.
(a) IN respect of the Creature, Re^: 1.] The first argument is the effect of
those which Tho. Aquin. has brought to this question, in his second book,
Cont. Gent. cap. 22. And although this infinite power be one of the inward
perfections of the being of God; no less than His goodness, eternity,
infinity, etc. which the Doctor saw well enough; yet because he could manifest
it best by the effects in the Creation, therefore he deferred it to that
place. Yet by this means He left the question proved but in the smallest part,
because the infinity of Gods power, though manifested in the Creation of a
Million of worlds, of which every one should be greater and better than this;
yet could they no way be an object answerable to his power, to which nothing
can be equal but only Himself. Wherefore the Doctor was compelled to add
hereto two chapters, 23. and 24. as certain supplies. That God wrought not the
Creature by any necessity, but according to the purpose of his own will and
wisdom: yet would I not be thought to blame these or the like arguments,
though in effect only inductive. For the Holy Scripture, in infinite places
uses the like. And to this purpose principally (is concerning the literal
interpretation) are all those reasons and instances which are brought in Job,
from the beginning of the 37. chap. to the end of the 41.

(b) If God be not Almighty, then either that which is, or that which is not,
R. 2.] Many questions have been moved, and still are by idle and presuming
wits, concerning the knowledge, will, and power of God. In the will and fore
knowledge of God is that great doubt, which is about predestination, and
reprobation, wherein I have said so much, note a in the 5. chap. as may direct
the honest minded, who enquires thereinto, not for controversies and
disputations, wherein the practice of godliness does not at all consist.
Concerning the power of God, some questions are moved, merely captious and
idle; some, though unnecessarily, yet more pardonablie: but because that in
every thing which we know truly of God, there is exceeding comfort; it is not
unfit to hear some of them, and to give an answer. First it is demanded; If
God be Almighty and all knowing, whether he be able to do that, which he
knows to be impossible to be done. I answer, That only such things are
utterlie impossible to be done, whereof there is neither power nor knowledge;
neither do they come into the account of things. But possibility and
impossibility are not to be measured by us: for though to man many things
seem impossible; yet to God all things are possible. Mar. 10.17. And this
difference we our selves either out of our own wits, or in our best wits
acknowledge, when in sudden or great dangers, out of which we see no possible
avoydance, we call upon God, as acknowledging our escape possible to him.

2. Whether God can call back or undo the things that have been. Solomon
Eccles. 1.9, 10. says, That which has been, is that which shall be, and
there is no new thing under the Sun. Is there any thing new? it has been
already in the time that was before us. But whereas Solomon speaks by way of
comparison or likeness; or that things past may be figures and prophecies of
things to come: I think you mean the same in number, and that in respect of
their being only; then I answer, No. For that which has been, is as
necessary to have been, as it is necessary for that to be, which is. Now to
be, and not to be, implies a contradiction, or a saying and gainesaying of the
same thing. And that any thing be, infolds necessarily the will and power of
God thereto; so that any thing should have been, and not have been, it must
of necessity enforce that God should both will, and not will the same thing:
but to will, and not to will proceeds from extreme weakness of foresight, and
want of judgment in the difference of things that are good and bad. But
nothing of weakness can belong to God; as to be less then he is, in any of
his dignities, to cease to be, or will that which is ill, to be inglorious, to
forget, to suffer violence, to be weary, sorry, angry, to deny himself 2.
Tim. 2.13. as it is said, Heb. 6.18. That by two immutable things, a promise
and an oath, wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we may have strong
consolation; which lay hold on the hope which is set before us. Neither yet
can that belong to God, which is against the necessity of being: as because
the being of God must of necessity be independent, therefore God cannot make
another God besides himself, which shall be equal to himself, and
independent. Neither yet in things being, because all his works are done in
truth and judgment, Psalm. 111.7. is it possible to change them, as that 2. and
3 should not be 5. that a tryangle should not have three corners: and
therefore thirdly, if it be questioned;

3. Whether the same things which God has wrought, were possible to be done
otherwise than they are done? I answer, The power of God in the creature is
conformable to his will; his will to his goodness; his goodness to his
wisdom. So as God in his wisdom seeing what was good in the creature,
according to the pleasure of His will, so framed the creature, as it is said,
Psalm. 134.6. Whatsoever pleased the Lord, that did he in heaven, and in earth;
in the sea, and in all deep places. Therefore supposing that it was His will,
so to work in the creature as he has framed it, it was not possible to be
done otherwise than it is. For so his will should not be absolute, and
unchangeable: nor yet his will and power should be convertible. But yet seeing
the creature is no way a proportionable object to his wisdom, and his power;
if it had seemed good unto him, He might have done the same things otherwise
then he has, in respect of any limitation which he found in the creature; And
may create other worlds and beings, different from this, according as it shall
seem good to His infinite wisdom. Therefore all the possibilities mentioned
before are in respect of the creature only; not in respect of the infinite
power of the Creator, who by that which H^e has wrought in the creature, has
put an impossibility to change or undo that which He has done.

CHAP. VII. 1. That the Will. 2. the Truth. 3. the Glory. 4. And all the other
dignities of God, are Infinite.
1. WHatsoever is equal to an infinite being, must of necessity be infinite.
But the Will, the Truth, the Glory of God, and all his other dignities, are
equal to his infinite being. Therefore they are infinite. Concerning his Will,
it is apparent, for every thing being (in this representation of God) does
naturally will or desire the being of it self in all the perfections thereof.
So a God wills his own being, because his being is infinitely good, powerful,
glorious, etc. And if he did not will his own being; He should be against his
will; and in that case be most miserable, as being the chiefest of beings. And
seeing He is the greatest good that can be, if his will should not Will such a
being, then were it defective and ill, if any way opposite to the chiefest
good. But all these things are utterly impossible. Therefore his Will is
infinite. And as these reasons confirm the infinity of His Will in his own
being: So the Holy Scripture witnesses the absolute freedom of his will in the
creature, as Psalm. 115.3. He does whatsoever He will, Job. 23.13. He is one
and who can turn him? whatsoever His mind desires, He does.

2. And concerning his Truth, it is also manifest. Truth is either real, that
is, in the being of the thing, which elsewhere, log. sect. 3.9. I call
metaphysicall, or intellectual; that is, where the understanding apprehends
the thing according to the truth of the being: and if it conceive it otherwise
than it is, then deceit or falsehood is in the understanding only, or in the
words the expression of the understanding, but not in the thing as Agrippa
makes it. Comment, in Artem brevem Lulli. The real truth is that, whereby the
thing is truly that which it is, in what sort of being soever it is. So that if
the being of God be infinite, as was proved cap 3. then it is necessary, that
his truth also be infinite. And this is that which God said of himself, Exodus
3.14. I am that I am. speaking of the truth of his infinite being. Or you may
take it thus: Seeing every thing is that which it is, by the truth of the
being, if the truth of God were not infinite, then could neither His being nor
His goodness, not any of those dignities which we have before proved to be
infinite, be such as they are proved to be, and so all the impossibilities
should of necessity follow. But these things cannot be so. Therefore it is most
necessary that his truth be infinite. Secondly, seeing the truth of all
understanding and of all speech is founded in the truth of the being of things.
If the truth of God were not infinite, and answerable to his being, but that
his being were infinite, and his truth finite, the understanding could not be
assured what to conceive truly of God, neither could we know what we might
truly affirm or deny concerning him, and so our faith and hope in him should
never be settled, neither could we be assured of any truth, either in Religion
or any thing else. For if certain truth be not in Him, much less in the
things that are by Him; so that all truth should stand only in opinion, and
according to that idle fancy of the Scepticks. But this, as it is against all
reverence we owe to God, so is it against all reason and sense: and those
certain truths that have hitherto been proved. Therefore the Prophet Psalm.
31.6. calls him the God of Truth, in as much as all truth, which can be in any
understanding, or uttered by any speech, must be grounded in the being of
things, and all being is only in Him, and from Him. And therefore he says,
Psalm. 119.160. Truth is the beginning of his word. So Psalm. 100.5. His mercy is
everlasting, and his Truth from generation to generation. And Psalm. 107.2. The
truth of the Lord endures for ever.

3. Happiness is imputed to every prosperous success in any man's undertaking,
and that not only in the last end of his Aims, but likewise in all his means
thereunto. Blessedness is only in the last end which a man proposes, as the
Covetous blesses himself in the multitude of his riches, the proud in his
honor, and every Malicious man, when he can make his mischievous imagination
to prosper. But the Glory whereof I speak, holds all that holy blessedness or
delight, which is in God by the superexcellencie of his own being; which if it
be not infinite, then must it be, either because there is a greaternesse in
his being, and a lessenes of His enjoying of himself; which cannot stand with
the action of His Infinity, showed, chap. 10. or because he knows not his own
worthiness, which stands not within his wisdom, or for some defect or other
which cannot stand with the possibility of his perfection, who has in Himself
all things that he can desire. Therefore his glory is infinite.

Moreover if no perfection can come to Him from without, it must follow
necessarily that he has all possible perfections in Himself. But it is
plain, that no perfection can come to him from without, who gave to all things
their being and welfare. Therefore his blessedness or Glory is infinite; As it
is said Psalm. 104.1. O Lord my God, thou art exceeding glorious; thou art
clothed with glory and honor. And Apoc. 4.10. Thou art worthy O Lord, to
receive glory and honor and power. And Reu. 5.13 I heard all the Creatures
saying: Praise and honor, and glory, and power be to him that sits upon the
throne. And Reu. 7.12. Praise, and glory and wisdom, and think, and honor,
and power, and might be unto our God forevermore, Amen.

4. And because God is one infinite being, as shall by and by be more fully
proved; therefore the proposition of the first Syllogism, N. 1. may serve
either for any one of all the dignities of God before spoken; or for any other
attribute properly given unto God, as you shall find them in the holy
Scripture, as 1. Holiness. 2. Righteousness or Justice. 3. Mercy. 4. Grace.
5. Life. 6. Light. 7. Love, or the like. And because unto the proposition you
may take which of these you will, and I hasten forward; therefore I will only
bring some few authorities of the holy Scripture, for every one of these. And
first Holiness.

1. Levit. 11.44. 1 Pet. 1.15. Be ye holy, for I am holy. Psalm. 99.9. Exalt the
Lord our God, for the Lord our God is Holy. And for this he is called The Holy
one of Israel. Psalm. 71.22. and 74.41.

2. Righteousness, Psalm. 71.15. My mouth shall daily rehearse thy
righteousness, for I know no end thereof.

3. Mercy Psalm. 103.17. His mercy is from eternity to eternity on them that
fear him, and his Righteousness on childrens children. Exodus 20. Showing
mercy to thousands. 2 Cor. 1.3. He is the Father of mercies. This Mercy is the
ground of many Psalms, and in especial of the 136.

4. Grace Genesis 6.8. But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord. And Saint
Paul in every Epistle wishes Grace from God to the Churches; so Saint John.
Reu. 1 4.

5. 6. Life an^ Light, Psalm. 36.9. For with thee is the well of life, and in
thy Light we shall see light.

7. Love, 1 Ioh. 4.6. God is Love. And whatsoever is answerable to an infinite
being, must of necessity be infinite. Therefore the Love of God is infinite.
And so of the rest.

Notes.
(a) GOd wills his own infinite being. Therefore his will is infinite.] And we
also will his being; that is, not only desire that he be; but also love him,
and desire our selves in him, as being the cause and upholder of our present
Being, and much more the hope of our happy Being hereafter: yet is not our will
therefore infinite. It may seem therefore that the first reason holds not. I
answer. We will as far as we know: For of that which is unknown there is no
desire nor will; And we know that He is; not what He is. For our most certain
knowledge of Him (beside that revelation which he has made of himself in his
own word) is rather by denying what he is not, than by affirming what he is.
For although we follow by certain steps of his imprinted in the Creature, and
most of all in our own understanding, that He is eternal, almighty, etc. yet
for all this we cannot apprehend in any degree what His infinite being, what
his eternity, power, and goodness is. But his knowledge of Himself, equals
His own being. And because his being is good, and desirable, and a good
known moves the will, and an infinite Good apprehended by an infinite
knowledge moves an infinite Will; Therefore because His infinite being is
known to himself to be infinitely Good, does he also infinitely will and
delight Himself in His own being and Goodness. But our will or desire of his
being cannot stretch beyond our knowledge, which is also in the lowest degree,
as was declared in the entrance of the 5. chap. So God wills and loves His own
infinite Being, and is blessed, and glorious therein infinitely, and
necessarily: but we will and love Him, as far as we know, and are drawn
near to him by his Spirit, and promises.

CHAP. VIII. That all the dignities which we give unto God, as Eternity,
Infinity, Wisdom, Power, etc. are essentially one God.
THe art of heavenly meditation is taught every where in the holy Scripture, if
we had Eyes to see, or Ears to hear the voice of wisdom, as it is showed,
Pro. 8. For there is nothing which offers it self to our senses, but by that
voice which it has, which is the voice of God in it; it calls, yea clamours
upon us to know, and acknowledge, and to return to the author thereof. And if
for this special end and use we have our senses, thereby to draw our
understanding to look up unto Him; how wretchedly sinful are we, if we use
them not to that right end; and how abominable, if we abuse them to sinful
and wordly lusts? The Things that are, are either artificial, wherein is
knowledge: or natural, wherein is understanding: or supernatural and divine,
(...) Exodus ^1 3.
wherein is wisdom. The two first are of things sensible, and subordinate to
the last. The Holy Text is the rule, and teaches the use of all. If the things
be artificial; consider who it is that teaches man knowledge, and to what
end: so you find the abuse to avoid the sin, and let your meditation dwell
therein, by such remembrances as the Scripture affords you. If natural,
remember likewise what you read thereof in the holy Text and so shall you be
led by the hand to the rig^t use. For instance: In the sight; the first object
thereof is light: remember then what you read. Thy word is a lantern unto my
feet, and a light unto my Paths. Then, ye are the children of the light, that
ye should not walk in darkness. And thus if you will follow your light and
guide, the Spirit of Christ; you shall at last be brought to him, that dwells
in the light that none can approach unto. Add your prayer hereto, that you may
so be guided by the light of his word in this life, that you may see his
everlasting light in the world to come, you can turn you to no side, you can
make use of none of your senses, but if you remember what you read concerning
that which your sense lights on, you shall have all your senses to guide you in
the way to God, and to hold in that skittish imagination, that will draw you
away and betray you, if you do not hold herein. But of all these things, which
draw us immediately to God, those Attributes are chief which he has taken to
himself by way of comparison, wherein there is almost nothing so mean, or so
vile, whither the kindness and love of God has not abased it self to win
our thoughts to Him, by our senses. As Luke 15.30. Thou have for his sake
killed the fat calfe. All the sacrifices of the Law, the Tabernacle, the
Temple, and all their furniture may be brought hereto. And yet more meanly,
Luke 17.37. Where the carcass is, thither will the Eagles be gathered. So Hos.
5.12. I will be to Ephraim, as a moth, and to Judah as rottenness. You say,
what is this to the matiers in hand? very much, For if I teach you the right
use of your senses, that your senses by custom maybe exercised to the
discerning of things both good and ill: you shall by your knowledge and
understanding in things sensible, have a ready way to the more easy
apprehension of those points of wisdom, which are the matiers of faith
concerning God. The Attributes which concern his high, and superexcellent
perf^ctions I have proved to be infinite; it must appear, that all those
perfections are but one absolute wonderful being, from which as from one
fountain they all arise. And although with us truly distinguished, yet in Him
are they but his own most simple being; which may appear by the ensuing
reasons.

1. If all the excellencies of God, his goodness, wisdom, power, truth etc.
be not essentially in the perfection of his own being: then must they be in
him, either as accidents arising from his being, or else they must come to him
from without by some other. But in him there can be no accident (as shall
appear in the next chapter) neither yet can they come to Him from without. For
so his being should not be good, powerful, nor true of it self, nor he wise
in Himself, but by the influence of another: So something should be given
before him, greater and more excellent then he, from whom these perfections
should come unto Him. For nothing can be in defect, but by something which is
in act or perfect being, which raised it from not being to that estate which it
has in possibility of further perfection. But it is granted at first, that
nothing can be of greater excellency than God. Therefore the dignities of God
are essentially in the perfection of his own being, and so are his absolute
and essential Being.

2. Every thing whose goodness, power, wisdom, glory, etc. are not
essentially one with the being thereof, must of necessity be in defect, and in
possibility only, to become that which it is not. But the being of God cannot
be such. For so should not he be God eternally. So also his goodness, power,
glory, etc. should not be infinite. But these things are impossible. Therefore
his goodness, power, glory, etc. are essentially his very being; And He is
essentially his own goodness, glory, wisdom, power, etc. For the being is
always convertible with that whose being it is, as every man is a reasonable
creature, every reasonable creature is a man, see, log. cap. 8. n. 2.

3. Whatsoever is simple and utterly uncompounded, must needs be pure and one
in it self: neither can it be this and that; one and another; for so the
simplicity were taken away. But the being of God is simple and uncompounded,
as shall appear by and by. Therefore in Him is nothing but his own pure
essence or being. So then his goodness, truth, wisdom, glory, etc. is no
other thing than himself; nor he any other thing than his goodness, wisdom,
or glory etc. Nor his goodness, any other thing in Him than his power etc. nor
his truth, than his wisdom etc. nor any other dignity, any other thing than
another, to wit, in that one perfection of his most pure and absolute being,
which comprises all these. Which pure being, because it is neither
understandable, nor nameable by us, we speak of goodness, of power, etc. as
of the effluences or prime acts thereof, in which it is one, and they one in
it, with the concord of samenesse or unity of being; but with respect of one
toward another, they are this one, and that other, with the difference of
concord, or concord of difference. For though we say truly, goodness, is God
himself, and God is wholly goodness; yet not exclusively; For truth is God
himself, and God is wholly truth; yet not excluding Almightinesse, eternity,
etc. Therefore goodness, truth, eternity, etc. are different with the
difference of concord, not of opposition, see chap. 9. note (h)

4. Whatsoever has the infinity of being, must of necessity be essentially
and actually, whatsoever it is possible to be. But God has the infinity of
being as was proved cap. 3. Therefore he must be. 1. of Necessity, not by
chance. 2. Essentially, not an accident, nor accidentally: for so he might both
be, and not be. 3. Actually whatsoever He is: not with possibility of being
that which He is not: for so there should be defect of being, which cannot
stand with the infinity of being. Therefore God is of necessity essentially,
and actually goodness, eternity, power, wisdom, will, truth, glory, life,
etc. and convertibly. And this is it (as far as I know) which God says of
himself, Exodus 3.14. I am that I am, or I will be that which I will be.
Whereby we may know, first that whatsoever is in God, is essentially and
actually himself as is showed. Secondly, that all the understanding or wisdom
of the Creature, Angels, and Men, being all finite, cannot conceive what he is
in Himself, being altogether infinite. This the Chaldean wisdom knew well
enough, (...). Because the superessentiall being excels all words or
signification, all thoughts, all the uttermost excess of understanding, as the
Clarian oracle confessed (...), his name cannot be contained in words: And
therefore does Jacob, Genesis 32.29. and Manoah Iud. 13.18. enquiring herein
receive an answerlesse answer, because it is a wonderful secret, and beyond
their knowledge. No not Moses himself, like to whom there arose no Prophet,
whom Iehova knew face to face Deuteronomy. 34.10. might see the face of his glory.
Exodus 33.20. only the Mediator, because he knew that name. Psalm. 21.14. Ioh.
8.55. was exalted above every name that is named in this world, or in the world
to come. Ephesians. 1.21.

Seeing then that all the excellencies of God in their infinity are his very
being; it follows from hence as a corollary or consequence. First, that God is
wholly or absolutely perfect in himself. Secondly, that he is but one.

The reasons of the first.
1. Where the whole power of being is infinitely, there no excellency can be
wanting but as it has the infinity of being, and thereby differs infinitely
from not being; so all defect or want must needs be far therefrom. But the
whole power of being is in God infinitely, as has been proved. Therefore God
in himself is wholly perfect.

2. Moreover seeing He is the first cause of all being, and took nothing from
any other (as was showed in the first reason) therefore it is necessary that He
be perfect in Himself.

3. Whatsoever is actually all that it can be, must needs be perfect in it
self. But God is such (as was showed in the fourth reason) Therefore God is
pure perfection in himself, not having any thing of weakness, of want, of
possibility to be a more excellent or perfect than he is.

The reasons of the second Consequence, That God is One.
1. An infinite being is that which holds all beings in it self, and is not
it self comprehended of any other. By which it is apparent, that of infinites,
there can be but one, and consequently but one God. For if there should be mo
Gods; every one infinite; then every one must hold in himself the being of the
other and so still there could be but one infinity, and if they be not
contained one of another, then they cannot be infinite, and so not God, who is
already proved to be infinite; and therefore but one.

2. If there be several indivisible almighties, or Gods of several infinite
power; then it must follow, that none of these powers are absolutely infinite,
because each one has not the infinite power of the other: and besides, that
all these infinite powers are conjoined with infinite weakness, because they
must be mutually subject to the infinite power one of another, or if they be
not subject each to others power, it will follow that none of their powers is
infinite. And so none of these supposed Gods, to be God indeed. Therefore
there is one only God Almighty.

3. Whatsoever is superexcellent, must be such as cannot be equalled by any
other. For multitude abates the dignity of one, as many kings of equal power
in a commonwealth would make that state no kingdom. And if there be many Gods,
one must be equaled with another, and so none should be superexcellent. But it
is manifest in reason, and before proved, Chap. 4. R. 3. that God is super
excellent in all his dignities. b Therefore God is one alone. This argument
with many other inductions to the like purpose you may read in Athanasius in
his oration against the Gentiles.

4. One individeable and peculiar being cannot belong to more than one, as the
being of Thomas cannot be the very same being which is of Peter or John, but
the being understood by this name (God) is one individeable and peculiar being,
as was put in the beginning of cap. 1. Therefore it cannot belong to more than
one.

5. If there be two Gods, or more, it is necessary that they be distinguished
by something added either to one or to both; which addition, if it be an
accident, whether it be of inherence, or circumstance, will not make such
difference, but that in essence they may be one: and if no accident can be in
God (as shall by and by appear) then this kind of difference will be none:
but if the addition make an essential difference, then the being must be
compounded: but such a being cannot be God, which must be independent, and
uncompounded.

6. Besides, seeing they must be in the highest degree of being, and that He
unto whom we confess, is proved to be infinitely and essentially good, wise,
powerful, true, glorious, eternal, etc. it must needs be, that whatsoever
differs therefrom in the excess of being must be infinitely ill, foolish,
weak, false, contemptible, of no continuance, and so none at al, see hereto
Plotini Enuead. lib. 7. cap. 23.

The truth of this the Holy Scripture confirms Deuteronomy. 4.35. and 39. The Lord is
God, and there is none but he alone. Deuteronomy. 6.4. and Mar. 12.29. Hear O Israel,
The Lord our God is one Lord. Mal. 2.10. Have we not all one Father? has not
one God made us? Mar. 12.32. There is one God, and there is none but He. 1 Cor.
8.4. There is none other God but one. Ephesians. 4.6. There is one God and Father of
all, which is above all, and through all, and in you all.

Notes.
(a) TO be more excellent or perfect than He. Carol. 1. Re. 3.] Tho. Aquinas
lib. 1. Cap. 28. cont. Gent. to this conclusion brings another reason; which is
this. In every kind or order of beings there is something most perfect,
whereby every thing in that kind is to be measured, because that the greater
or less perfection of every thing is tried, by how much it is nearer to to
that most perfect being, or further off: therefore in the order of being also,
there must be one thing most perfect, which is God; who if he were not most
perfect, could not be the common measure of all things. For respect to the
person I would feign have let this reason stand, but that it stands not with
reason nor the truth: for it puts the Creator and the creature in one rank or
order of being, and the difference only in degrees of perfection, and
imperfection, which can no way be admitted: for the being of God is absolute,
and of it self; the being of the creature is only of Him; His infinite,
theirs finite: and how can that which is infinite, be a measure to that which
is finite? what proportion is there between them? does not the Creator which
is infinite differ as much from that which is in the highest perfection of
being created and finite, as from that which is in the lowest? does not he as
much exceed an Angel, or a man, as the least more of dust on the earth? how
then is that true which the Prophet has, Esaias 40.15.17. All nations are unto
him a^ nothing, yea less than nothing; and vanity, as the dust in the
balance, which no man puffs away because it has no weight. And that he should
think this reason good, or the comparison tolerable, is so much the more to
be marvelled at; because that in the same book, Chap. 32. he proves that
nothing can be affirmeable of God and the creature univocably, but only
analogically Chap. 34. And again, in his questions on the first book of the
Senten. did. 8. q. 6. 7. Though all created beings be brought into the orders
and distributions of being, which we call predicaments, either directly or
collaterally: yet he proves that God can no way be brought into any
predicament; and that because his being conteines the excellencies of all
beings, as the cause and susteiner of all. And if he cannot come into the
predicament of substance, either as the most general substance affirmeable of
all, or as any thing contained thereunder, because his being is simple and
without addition, or difference, much less can he be brought into any other
predicament. And if wisdom be in God, as his very being, and substance; but in
an Angel as a quality only: What affinity or neerenesse can there be
between a quality in one, and the substance of another? therefore the
comparison of perfection and imperfection is in the creatures only, and not
with the Creator: for as the distance is endless from not being to being; and
therefore the least atome could not be brought out from not being into being
but by an infinite power; so again from a finite being, how excellent soever
in respect of other finites, the distance is as great to a being that is
infinite. For as in a number actually infinite (if any such could be) five
could not be contained oftener than ten, nor one than five; so the greatest
per^ection of a finite being, is as near unto nothing, and as much exceeded by
an infinite Being, as that which is accounted the meanest of Beings.

(b) 1. Therefore God is one alone, Corol. 2. Re. 3.] If the Fathers and
Historians of the Church, till toward four hundred years after Christ,
recorded the Heresies of those times, as of the diverse sects of Christians; I
think they were too light of belief to settle their thoughts in things so
foul, and filthy; So against Nature, if not impossible. But if not believing
them, they thought themselves forced to proclaim them Heretics that were said
to do such deeds. Because the shameless lying Ethnicks put such things upon
the Christians, by the malice of the Devil invented, only to disgrace the
glorious faith: it was a worse deed to brand the Christian name with such
villainy, only because the enemies of the faith were past all shame to lay
such things to their charge. For in all heathenisme you shall not read of any
deeds so foul, of any opinions so far from reason: but if they whom they
call heretics were only the censurers of all opinions in those times,
themselves being Libertines or Atheists, and so among other their opinions
broached what liked them best concerning Christianity; I see no reason why they
should be called Heretics more than Celsus, Porphyrie, Lucian, and such
professed adversaries, or any of the Philosophers that were before: for if he
only can be an Heretic, who being baptized, does stubbornely maintain a
false opinion contrary to some article of our faith; How can the Manichees be
counted Heretics who were neither baptized, nor acknowledged one God, nor
believed his Scriptures, but as another profane writing so far as they liked
it; who worshiped the Sun, the Moon, and all their Idols: and although they
celebrated their assemblies in coming together as the Christians; yet can you
account those mysteries of Beelzebub to be Christian, which were performed with
such accursed uncleanness; as I must forbear to write; which I could hardly
have been brought to believe, if S. Augustine himself, who had been among
them, and proves it by witnesses, had not recorded it de Haeres. Cap. 46. The
filthiness of the Gnostics was yet more abominable, if it be possible to be
true which they write; will you account them Christians? The Philosopher
Plotinus, no Christian Ennead. 2. lib 9. entitled against the Gnostics shows
the falsehood of their opinions concerning the creation of the world, and proves
that in the government thereof their opinion was more wicked than that of
Epicurus: and though Simon the Sorcerer was baptized, Acts. 8. yet when his
gall of bitterness had made him a professed enemy, and father of all those
heresies that followed; will you count him a Christian? Therefore you may with
the Apostle say of these, of Cerinthus, of Carpocrates, and of many of the
rest; They went out from us, but they were not of us. But because I am busied
in things of more importance than this (and yet the honor of the Christian
name is no small matier) I will most briefly recount the contrary opinions,
whether they be of the elder Philosophers, or the later Heretics, as they have
been gathered, by the most ancient among the Fathers, Irenaeus, Epiphanius, S.
Augustine and others: I say, most briefly and only for a taste, that you may
love the truth the better, and adore that mercy which has manifested it unto
us. And therefore I will not tell you of Varros thousands of gods, nor trouble
you needleslie with remembrance of those gods of the Heathen, which you may
read in the holy Scripture, and know better by Master Seldens just Commentary
de Djs Syris, if you understand Latin.

2. Above forty disagreeing opinions among the Philosophers concerning the
gods, are reckoned up by Cic. de natura Deorum. lib. 1. of which some directly
gainsay this conclusion of the Unity of the Godhead: for although Antisthenes
confessed there was but one God, the God of all nature; yet he added, that
there were diverse Gods for diverse peoples and countries. Xenocrates said there
were eight gods, in the seven planets, and one that ruled over all the Stars.
Anaximander held many gods, and so many gods, so many worlds; but said that
these gods were brought forth in time, and after many ages dyed again. Al^meon
seemed to acknowledge three gods, inasmuch as he gives divinity to the Sun,
to the Moon, and to the soul of man. Xenophanes would have all that is
infinite to be god, whether in being, or in working, as he held the
understanding. Democritus would have all the Ideas or representations of things
being, and that understanding whence they proceed, and man's understanding also
to be gods. The inconstancy of the Philosophers in their own opinions brought
us in yet more gods. Cleanthes one while said the world was god, sometime the
soul, whereby it was quickened, and governed; then again the pure and
uppermost air that compasses the whole Globe of heaven and earth; sometime
the Stars, otherwhile reason; as so the rest, as you may hear hereafter. And
if the Philosophers, the guides were blind, it is no marvel though the
blockish rout ran into all Idolatry, as they are described Wisd. Chap. 14. But
to suppose it reasonable to give honor to the memory of the dead, who where
founders of cities, or procurers of some great and public good, because they
(though dead) were thought to favor and maintain their own endeavors: or to
be so unreasonable, as to think with the Egyptians, that there was something
divine in all those things by which they received any kind of good; and so to
worship men, horses, birds, serpents, wolves, dogs, and cats. See Iuvenall.
Sat. 15. Cic. de natura Deorum lib. 3. yet what could so mad the old Romans
not only to allow all the he gods, and the she gods of others; but to
consecrate imaginations, as Victory, Concord, P^ace; yea and among these their
own plagues and punishments, as the Ague, Mildew, and blasting, ill fortune,
etc? Cic. loc. cit.

3. But there was no opinion among all these more foolish than that which went
out in the name of the Heretics. Cerdon first of all August. cont. advers.
leg. and Proph. l. 2. c. 12. said there were two gods; one good, whom they
called Oromazes, and another stark naught, whom they named Areimanius. This
opinion his scholar Marcion upheld, but added Tertullian, who dispu es against
him in five books, has it not, nor Irenaeus, and Augustine brings it
doubtfully out of Epiphanius.
a third whom he called the Just. After that the Gnostics recal'd the opinion
of the two gods with many additions. The Manichees also followed this madness,
and added their fiction, that the good God set upon the wicked god to have
suppressed him. but in that conflict the powers of darkness took many parts of
the good god prisoners, and tied them unto earthly m^tiers; for the ransoming
of which, this good but very weak god, takes great thought, but as these
parts of his come to be eaten in the matiers wherein they are tied, by their
Catharists or Puritanes, they are parted from the impure matiers, and so
restored to the God again. Are these Heretics? are these Christians? found
you any thing like to this among the pure naturallists of the heathen? Phil.
Mornay de verit. Christ. Relig. Cap. 2. draws this opinion of two gods by the
authority of Plutarch de Iside and Osiride. First from Zoroaster, and so among
the Persians: thence to the Manichees. It is true, that Manes their father was
a Persian; but it is manifest that Plutarch was most grossly deceived, first in
the circumstance of the time, wherein he mistakes about some four thousand
two hundred years, a great fault in an Historian: for if Zoroaster lived in
the reign of Ninus, as the best Records do make him, See Fra. Patr. in Zor.
about three hundred years after the flood, it will not be above eight hundred
ninety, or nine hundred years before the destruction of Troy, which is put
about the year of the world two thousand eight hundred forty; so that
Plutarch who makes him to have lived five thousand years before the
destruction of Troy, makes him above two thousand years elder than Adam. Then
in the substance of the matier, the mistaking is nothing less: for by the
diligence of worthy men, diverse of those magical oracles of Zoroaster, who was
the Son of O^omazes, Plato Alcib. 1. are come to light, and printed at Paris
in the year one thousand six hundred and seven, and before that many more of
them gathered out of the old autors by Fra. Patricius, and printed at Venice
1593. and since that elsewhere. By which it is apparent that Zoroaster held the
mystery of the Trinity, in Unity of the Deity, and one God above all, the
Creator of all things, who according to his own goodness made every thing
perfect and good, as his words witness.

(...).
For from the Fathers workmanship naught runs wast,
Or yet imperfect; as though it were made in haste.
But that every thing according to that order of being which it has, has all
the perfections that belong thereto. Neither can the learned Mornay be excused,
that having seen, and citing Zoroaster would believe Plutarch in that wherein
he knew the Oracle of Zoroaster was quite contrary. He cites his consent to the
Christian positions concerning original sin, Cap. 7. for the immortality of
the soul, and resurrection of the body. Cap. 15. yea and for this very point
of the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Deity, de ver. Christ. Rel.
Cap. 6.

(...)
(...).
The Father having made all things, to the Second wisdom gave:
Whom all mankind account the first, all honor due to have.
But how could Plutarch, so grave a Writer be so mistaken? He flourished in
the Reign of Trajan, before which time Simon Magus had taught that God did not
make the world, but certain Angels: which opinion his Scholar Menander
upheld: and over and above the filthiness with women, and things offered to
Idols, the Nicholaitans also. Cernthus yet added, that the God which made the
world, was but a lower power, who did not so much as know the true God, Iren.
lib. 1. Ca. 25. From these, and especially from Menander and the Nicholaitans,
proceeded the Gnostics, though not under that name til afterward. These
vaunted of all knowledge, and held Plato as one that knew little or nothing of
Philosophy; And this their high knowledge they boasted to have out of the
Oracles of Zoroaster, which they pretended to have, and thence falsely gave out
what they list, to bring the holy Scripture into contempt. By the falsehood and
impudency of these it seems that Plutarch was deceived; which yet is further
manifest in this, that in the same place, de Is. and os. he mentions the
opinion of the Chialists, as the doctrine of Zeroaster: wherein by his gloss
Cerinthus had corrupted the holy Text Apoc. 20. as the Turks at this day
understand their Paradise. Now this doctrine of heaven upon earth (for ought
that ever I read) was never mentioned in any profane Writer before the time of
S. John: but it was no new matier for Plutarch to be deceived in matiers of
Religion; as well that of the Chaldees, further from his knowledge; as in the
Swine and Ass of the Jews; which he might have known better, if by the Jews
themselves he would have been informed: See I. S. de Diis Syris synt. 2. Ca.
16. But to return to our Heretics; for all these follies and contrary
opinions before mentioned, if you compare with the reasons and authorities
aforesaid, will vanish into nothing. Of all the heresies about this point there
is none so wicked, as that which Augustine writes somewhere to Basilides,
Contr. Adver. leg. supra; who first durst affirm, that the God which the
Nation of the Jews honored, was not the true God; Then he writes that
Carpocrates, denied that God gave the Law to Moses: elsewhere that Cerdon
affirmed, that the God of the Law and the Prophets was not the Father of
Christ, de haer. Cap. 21. this last the Jews like well of; but to us all these
are one heresy, who hold according to that which is Heb. 1. That God which at
sundry times, and after sundry manners had spoken of old to the Fathers, spoke
to us in these last days by his son. For evidence of which, because it is
the ground of all our hopes, you shall have a reason or two; and if you desire
more, read the books of Tertullian against Marcion, especially the third,
fourth, and fifth.

1. 4. If that God, which was honored by the Nation of the Jews, whom the
Christians acknowledge the Father of Christ, be not the true God; then it will
follow, either that the true God has hitherto been utterly unknown to the
world, or else that some of those false gods (as we term them) whom the
heathens worshipped, as Jupiter, Juno, Neptune, etc. must be the true God: But
both these things are false. Therefore the God which the nation of the Jews
adored was the true God. Now that none of the gods of the heathens could be the
true God is manifest by this, that (although they were liars) yet durst never
any of them take this to himself, that he was God; as may appear by the
answer of that Apollo of Cla^os, where after a long description of God, by
which yet he would uphold devill-worship, he concludes with a lie of him and
his fellows: (...). This is God: but we Angels are a little portion of God:
where (you see) to save his credit and uphold his sacrifices he gave himself
out as a part of God, as if the being of God were divisible into parts.
Moreover, whereas the true God in regard of his Lordship and power over the
creature, might challenge the service and obedience thereof and give rules how
he would be worshipped thereby, as he did to Abraham, Moses, etc. yet none of
these devils ever taught their worshippers any other service to themselves,
but as enemies of mankind to Read further to this purpose the second book of
S. August. de Civit. Dei and see what Religion they taught their worshippers:
murder one another, as is manifest by the sacrifices of Molech, and other
Idols of the Canaanites Psalm. 106.37.38. And in profane writers, who knows
not the altar of the she-devill among the Tauri, which had no sacrifices, but
of man's blood, strangers, and enemies overcome in war? Such was the altar of
Saturn among the Cretians, and Carthaginians, and such a Priest for Jupiter
Chamon was Busiris in Egypt: And Marius upon a dream which the devil showed
him, became the butcher of his own daughter Calphurnia. Beside this, if any of
these gods of the heathens had been the true God; as their will, so their
wisdom, goodness, and justice should have been known unto men. Their will
you see was murder, their wisdom such, that their chief fortune tellers Apollo
of Delphi was called (...), of his crooked and doubtful answers which he made
concerning such things to come as he did not know, or knowing would yet deceive
therein as a devil. Compare herewith the answers of God to Gedem, to David,
etc. As their wisdom, such was their goodness: for what can be remembered
wherein any of these devils did ever any good to any nation, country, city or
private man, wherein the providence and wisdom of man was not chief? as you
may account the safety of the Athenians in their wooden walls at Salamis, to
the wisdom of Themistocles. And although Castor and Pollux saved Simonides for
his song, yet they slew his host and all his friends. And for their power it
easily appears how weak it was, in that they could not defend their own
right in man; which doubtless they had, if any among them had been the true
God: but at the name of Christ all their worshippers forsook their service;
and set them at naught: so that their (...), whether he would or no, must
plainly confess, as as he did to Augustus after the birth of Christ.

(...),
(...).
The Hebrew Child me bids, who over the Gods does reign,
To leave this house; and to return to Hell again.
Now to the other part of this long historical argument, it is likewise
plain, that the true God has not hitherto been unknown unto the world: for
neither could it stand with His goodness, and mercy to suffer the most holy
men to wander ever in error, and to spend their best thoughts and devotions on
him that was no God, and thereby also to be unjust to himself, not only
refusing the honor due to him, but also excluding himself for ever out of
that right which he has in his creature: for who will now acknowledge any God
hereafter besides him, in whom we have hitherto believed, and acknowledged the
most High? neither yet could it stand with his truth, to suffer the truth of
his own being to be for ever concealed from man, that with all humility and
desire has hitherto sought it. If then neither any of the heathen gods were
the true God, neither yet can it stand with the Goodness, Justice, or Truth of
the true God, to deny to man that knowledge of himself, which man was capable
of; nor to refuse that service which he could do Him: it must needs follow of
necessity, that the God which the Nation of the Jews worshipped, which we
acknowledge the Father of Christ, is the true God; and this his devilship was
forced to acknowledge.

(...)
(...).
Only the Caldees, and Hebrews, have learned true wisdoms love;
Who selfe-begotten God and King in purity adore.
Where you must, understand that Abraham the Caldee and his son Izaac and
Jacob are put in the first place, and after all they that hold the faith of
Abraham, the honor of Hebers race.

2. Either that God which the Jews did serve, and we by his own instruction
know to be the Father of Christ, was the true God; or else that other supposed
true God cannot be free from the uttermost injustice that can be done. But
this last is impossible: therefore the former is true. The consequence is
necessary: for if God the Father of Christ be not the true God; all the world
has hitherto been utterlie ignorant of the true God: and if that supposed god
should either condemn all the world to hell for ignorance of himself, when
he had afforded no means to know him, it were the uttermost injustice that
could be done, and to save all indifferently, all being ignorant, as well
them that cared not to know and serve him, as them that made it their whole
life and search, and thought themselves borne for no other end, were as great
injustice on the other side. Therefore that God which the Jews knew and
served, is the true God.

3. That God whose wisdom is infinite, must needs be the only true God. But
the Nation of the Jews worshipped that God of infinite wisdom; which appears
in this, that He alone declared from the beginning what should come to pass
at the last, which no other God or Idol of the Heathens has done; if they
have, show it: Let it appear that they are able to do either good, or ill.
This argument might not be passed over, because it is the reason which God
himself uses to justify himself. Esaias Chap. 41. verse. 21.22.23.26.27. And
could that God of Basilides and Cerdon be content to be thus dared to his face,
to yield his honor to another, if he had either might, courage, or justice?
This sottish opinion was not worth half this pains and time; neither have I
vouchsafed it to Basilides: but that we of the Gentiles, which were once far
off and served those Idols, may know, and be thankful that we are now by
Christ drawn near unto God, that is rich in mercy to all them that call upon
Him. For is God the God of the Jews only, and not of the Gentiles? yes
verily, even of the Gentiles also Romans 3.29. And he is that one God, and there
is none other, there is no other God beside him. Read Esaias 45. and especially
verses 5.18.20.21. and 22. And if you require further proof hereof by
authority of holy Scripture, read that elegant treatise of S. Origin to this
purpose (...) lib. 2. Cap. 4. and the answer to the contrary objections you
shall find in Irenaeus lib. 4. and Epiphanius haer. 23.

CHAP. IX. Sect. 1. That God is neither matier. 2. Form. 3. Compound. 4.
Bodily. 5. Nor subject to any accident. 6. And that His being is most simple
and pure.
We have hitherto dwelt on the consideration of the divine being and according
to the weakness of man's understanding have assayed to show what He is. Now as
well for further clearing of the premises, as for the avoiding of some
left handed opinions concerning Him, it is likewise fit that we consider what
he is not; And because the author of that book which by him is styled Soiga,
(by which forsooth in his deep Cabala, you must understand (...) that is
(holy) and by sude, deus, and such deep mysteries) does most falsely affirm
page 12. that God is the matier of all things that have existence, or a
peculiar being; it may appear unto you for these reasons following.

Section. 1. That God is not Matier.
1. NO matier is eternal. But God is eternal: a therefore God is not matier.
The rule or proposition is thus proved. Whatsoever is moved by any kind of
motion cannot be eternal: because it supposes another being whereby it is
moved, either from the pure possibility of not being into being, as the first
matier of all things; or in being, from one state of being into another. But
all matier is one of these: therefore no matier is, or can be eternal; and
therefore not God. And if no matier can be God, then God cannot be matier. See
log. Cap. 13. B. rule 1.

2. All matier is in possibility to become this or that; that is, to change
from one form to another, as the moisture of the earth by the virtue of the
root turns to grass, thence by the virtue of the stomach of the ox, becomes
blood, then flesh; which in the stomach of the man being digested again,
becomes his blood, then flesh, and so returns to earth again, and is capable
of as many forms or shapes as it was before. But God is actually whatsoever he
is, and without possibility of change to become this or that. Therefore God is
not matier.

3. No matier is a beginning of natural action, but of sufferance only. But
God is the beginning of all natural actions. Therefore God is not matier, you
may bring hither diverse of the reasons following in 2.3.4.

Section. 2. That God is not the form of other things being.
1. Every natural compound is a third thing arising from the matier and the
form, in which b the parts that were before understood separate, had power to
be joined, and to become that which they were not before. But God can neither
be a part of another, nor be joined with another, nor be in possibility to
another, nor yet become that which he was not before. Therefore He is neither
matier nor form.

2. No form is totally and only for the being of it self, c but is destinate
unto another total, as a thing more excellent than it self. But God is wholly
his own being only, not for another; for all things are for him: neither can
any thing be more excellent than He. Therefore d God is not the form of any
other being.

3. No form of any thing begun can be eternal. But God is eternal: therefore
God is not the form of any thing begun. And so you may conclude likewise of
matier.

4. The matier and form are the essential being of all bodily things, and
being is affirmable of that, whose being it is. If God then were the being of
other things, it were as truly said, This man is God, as this man is a living
creature endued with reason; but this is most false, and would justify the
Idolatry of all the heathen, yea even of the Egyptians. Therefore God is
neither matier nor form. And if God be neither matier nor form, it must needs
follow.

3. Section. 3. That God is no Compound.
1. FOr in every compound the parts being actually joined must needs be such as
were possible to be joined together, so that there must be therein both actor
perfection, in respect of the total wherein the parts are actually joined, and
possibility or imperfection in regard of the parts that may be both joined,
and consequently disioyned again: so that the total in possibility not to be,
as it was not before the parts were joined together. But nothing of all this is
possible to be in God; neither parts, nor imperfection; nor possibility to
be, and not to be, e Therefore God is no Compound.

2. Every Compound is a second thing in Nature, whose being follows upon the
uniting of the parts compounded. But God is the prime or first being, as was
showed. Therefore no compound.

3. Every compound supposes necessarily a cause efficient which brought the
parts together; which cause efficient must needs be before the effect or
compound. But nothing of this belongs to God. Therefore He is no compound.

Every compound is liable to division and so to destruction. But this is
against the eternity of God; and therefore God is no compound or made of diverse
things. And if no compound, then necessarily it follows.

Section. 4. 4. That God is not a Body.
1. FOr every body whether it be Physical, or Mathematical has parts
divideable into parts. It is also finite, and may be measured. But nothing of
all this belongs to God, one infinite being. f Therefore God is not a Body.

3. No bodily being can be the first of Beings, and the cause of all other:
For if it be a body only, it cannot possibly move it self: And if it be a
body enlived and quickened by another, then it cannot be the first of beings,
because it is compounded. But God is the first, and cause of all beings, as
has been proved. Therefore no Body.

3. No bodily being is abundantly sufficient for it self. For if it be a
whole and entire body, it needs the parts, without which it could not be whole;
and if it be a part, it needs the other parts as helpers, and the whole as the
sustayner; And yet the outward being or causer which brought altogether. But
God is abundantly sufficient for himself; of whom alone all other things have
their sufficiency. Therefore God is no body. And if God in himself be
abundantly sufficient for himself, it follows necessarily, that he needs not
any thing from without, And therefore.

Section. 5. 5. That no Accident can be in God.
1. FOr every Accident, whether it be of Inherence, or circumstance, comes to
the subject beside the being thereof. The accidents of circumstance come to the
subject, for the better being thereof; as to be clothed, to have a wife, etc.
But all these come from without; And as they are needless to him that has all
sufficiency in Himself so are they impossible to belong unto God. The
accidents of inherence proceed either from the matier, form, or composition
of the subject. In God is neither matier, form or composition, as has bin
proved, g Therefore in God is no accident.

2. Nothing can be in any thing most excellently and perfectly but only the
being thereof. Whatsoever is in God is in Him most excellently and perfectly.
Therefore whatsoever is in God is only his being; And then no accident.

3. If no addition can be unto God, to make him any thing other than He is;
then can no accident be in him: which ever makes the subject somewhat that it
was not before. But no addition, taking away, or change can come to Him, who is
eternally, infinitely, and actually whatsoever He may be. Therefore no
accident can be in God.

4. Every Accid^nt is near unto not being, as having no being but in that
subject wherein it is. But the being of God is infinitely distant from not
being. And therefore God is no way subject to Accidents.

5. If any thing can come to God as an Accident, it must come to Him, either
from Himself, or from another. Not from himself, as having neither matier,
form, composition, or bodily being, from which all accidents do proceed.
Neither can it suffer any thing from another; for all such accidents as proceed
from without, proceed from the possibility, or weakness of the subject unable
to resist, as heat is in water. But his being is infinitely perfect and such as
cannot suffer: For so should he cease to be happy, and to be God; and therefore
nothing can be in him but essentially.

6. And moreover seeing He is the first of all beings, and the only thing
being of himself eternally; it is impossible that he should either suffer
violence, or have any thing added to him by another, or be moved by another;
seeing he is the first cause and mover of all things. If then no accident can
be in God, neither from himself, nor yet from without; it is manifest that in
him can be no accident at all. And seeing nothing of all these things before
spoken matter, form, composition, body or accident can be in God, it follows
necessarily.

Section. 6. 6. That the Being of God is most simple and pure.
1. WHich is further manifest by this. That He is the first of beings, and so
must needs be simple. And again, that which is simple, must needs be the
first. For that which is not the first of all beings, must needs have
dependence on another, and so two things must be therein. First somewhat from
the cause whereby it is; Secondly somewhat peculiar to it self, whereby it
differs from the cause. But God is the first of all Beings, because he is
eternal and one, as was proved, cap. 2. and 8. h Therefore his being is most
simple and pure.

2. If nothing can be in God, but only his own essence or being, then purity
it self, or simplicity must needs be his being: which being, because it is
proved to be infinite, it necessarily follows that his purity is also
infinite, beyond which no purity or simplicity can be greater.

3. Whatsoever is infinite and no way limited must needs be most simple or
uncompounded and only one. The being of God is infinite; Therefore most simple
and pure.

4. God is no compound, as was proved, therefore his being is most simple.

And because all our knowledge which we have of all things being, is only by
the help of our senses, taking them either directly or further of by
comparison, by composition, or by negation; whereby we judge of the properties
or accidents which we find in the things; and not by the understanding of the
most inward and true being thereof; no not of our own very souls, whereby we
live, or that whereby we are most guided, our very imagination; we must
confess that this highest and first being of all, being so utterly without all
our senses, must needs be as far beyond all our words, and all our
understanding; and must ever assure our selves that that cannot be that
infinite God, which can come into our most finite understanding; Neither that
we can assign any name which may equal his being, see Cusan. de Deo
abscondito. And that we may end as we did begin, let us return by the ways
we came, and we shall find that all these names and beings, which we have
given unto God, yea even all together cannot equal him. For if we call him the
beginning of all things, we make him not an absolute Being, but speak with
relation to that which is began. If we say he is infinity, eternity, power,
wisdom, and the rest of those dignities which we have viewed, they are but so
many particular essential attributes to one most perfect being: yet when we
have said Most perfect Being, we have not said right. For He by his Infinity
and Almightin^s is utterlie beyond both being and not being, for he has power
over not being to make it to be, and over being to make it not to be: Neither
can not being be even very nothing, but by him that commanded it to be
nothing. Such therefore is He, Infinite beyond both being, and not being. If we
say he is most perfect only, we cannot understand his perfection to be any
thing else than the union of his essential attributes. If by unity though most
simple and absolute without respect to number or magnitude, we say he is One;
yet we cannot truly say so, but by his truth. And although that which is first
must needs be one, and nothing can be more simple than unity: yet seeing we
cannot think but that he which is the first of beings, must needs be the best
of beings, we are enforced to return from the Center of his unity into that
infinite circle of his goodness, his power, his glory, his wisdom, his truth.
Therefore whether in the innermost center, and first consideration of that most
one and absolute simplicity, (...). as the Philosopher Plotinus Ennead. 6. l.
8. cap. 11. says we ought in silence to adore as the Psalmist speaks (...)
silence is praise to thee, Psalm. 65.2. or whether in the circumference, we
dwell in the consideration of those tytles which He for our understanding has
bin pleased to fit unto himself; because we would as the Areopagite speaks
lib. de Div. nom. cap. 13. understand and speak something of that unspeakeable
excellency, let us ever endeavor a further knowledge of him; because we know
that the least knowledge that we have of the most excellent being is more
worth than the knowledge of all things beside. And although the endeavor be
high and hard, yet have we so much the more encouragement by the helps or
means of our knowledge; and so much the greater hopes in respect of the
reward. The means common to every man are in sum either discursive; or
experimental. The discursive are two, and in our power; two are experimental
and above it, but yet not hopeless if we endeavor. The first of these
discursive ways whereby we endeavor to come to the knowledge of God, is by
denying unto Him all those things which are common; and every where meeting our
senses; such are all things, that have matier, outward shape, composition, that
are bodily; subject to motion, place, time, and other accidents. And hitherto
you must bring all those things which are spoken in the holy Scripture by way
of Example and for our understanding only, as when God is said to have hands,
feet, eyes, jealousy, anger, and such like, wherein we must forsake that
which is outward and sensible, and inward in our selves, because these titles
are only to lift up our understanding by sensible and well known things to
those that are truly and essential in him; as by his hand, is meant his power;
by his feet, his continual presence in every place; by his eyes, his wisdom;
by his jealousy and anger, his justice against Sinners, etc. And thus by the
help of our senses in things that are, and in things that are not, our
understanding is furthered in the knowledge of God; and that especially if in
both these ways of discourse, that is, denying things that agree not to God,
and affirming those honorable dignities that are due unto him, we use the rule
and guidance of the holy Scripture, and the strength of our best understanding,
to approve those things that are excellent, and to reprove that which stands
not with his truth, as I have already showed in both kinds, as well as I can.

The first of those ways that are experimental in the knowledge of God are
those inbred thoughts, and apprehensions of Him, whereby every man, will he,
nill he, confesses in his heart that there is something greater than himself,
whereof he stands in awe and dread; which he cannot choose but acknowledge an
avenger of all wickedness and sin. And this the witness of God in every
man, his conscience within accusing or excusing him, in the judgment of his
own heart. This Plotinus often, and Iamblichus De mist. cap. 1. call the touch
of the deity, and affirm truly that it is more powerful over the mind than
that discursive knowledge of which I spoke before. But because this knowledge
is ever with affrighting, and addressed only as the two former, to the last:
it beseemes every man that would know God truly, as he may be known for his
own comfort, to cleanse his own heart with all his diligence, in prayer, in
meditation, in reading of the holy Scripture, in denying of himself in all his
ungodlie and sinful lusts; that he may become a holy and a meet Temple for
God to dwell in. And so he may assure himself that God will give him
experience of himself; as he has promised. Ioh. 14.23. That he will come
and make his abode with him. This is that wise merchant who for this precious
pearl sels all that he has, to buy it. This is he that eats of the hidden
Manna. Ioh. 6.50.51. Rev. 2.17. that receives that white stone, and a new name
written, which none knows saving he that receives it: This is he that in
the face of Jesus Christ, as in a mirror, beholds the glory of the Lord, so
that he is changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, as by the spirit
of the Lord.

Notes.
(a) GOd is not matier] Anaximenes said the air was God; that he was therefore
unmeasureable, but had a beginning, and was always in motion. Diagoras of
Apollonia (for he of Melos was the Atheist) consented unto him as concerning
the matier. The opinion of Cleanthes I told you before, which one while held
God to be matier in this sensible world, in the uppermost air and in the
Stars. Parmenides imagined a mighty wide circle which encompast the world
like a Crown or garland (therefore called by him Stephane) to be God.
Xenophon, and with him Plato where he speaks in jest, says the world was
God, which we call Mammon, and yields there were more such, but where he speaks
in earnest, (as in his Epistles) he speaks of one God the Author of all
things, as we do. Aristotle could not tell how to gainsay his master with
his own credit, and so followed his judgment. Heraclides of Pontus somewhiles
said the Stars were Gods, then heaven, and earth. So Theophrastus, and
sometime Zeno was for the Stars. Chrisippus that was accounted most subtle
amongst the scholars of Zeno, was most wavering in his opinions; sometime he
thought the world was God: sometime the uttermost or burning air: then water:
now earth; after this air below; and by and by the Sun, and the Moon, and
the Stars, at last all together was but one God, yet men canonized for their
virtues must needs be Gods apart; and then much more the virtues for which
they were immortal. And thus they that would seem wise, while they cared to
know more than the truth of God, became idle in their imaginations, and there
foolish heart was full of darkness.

The parts which were before separate. 2.1.] (b) All parts are understood
apart, as things differing. And therefore although diverse forms are brought
out of the power of the matier, or propagate with the matier; yet that affords
no objection to weaken this argument.

But is destinate unto another total. 2.2.] (c) If you look on the question,
you shall find it only to be about such forms as these. For it is not said
that God is utterly no form. For form is the most simple or pure being which
we can conceive; but he is none of those forms, which are allied to matier.
The Angels are accounted forms, but separate. But I run not with that
opinion. The Ideas are conceived to be forms altogether separate, not
destinate unto matier, much less is that most simple form of forms, the
original of all forms.

God is not the form of any other Being. 2.2.] (d) The opinion of Democritus
is contrary to this conclusion, in that he makes man's soul to be God. Straton
thought that God was only a certain divine power in Nature: so said Chrisippus
otherwhile; and so Cleanthes, where he affirmed that God was the life of the
world. His opinion that reason was God, was an error, against this conclusion
also, if by reason he meant that reasonable soul, the form of man's b^dy.
Heraclides supposed God to change his shape at his pleasure. Zeno said that
reason in every thing was God, or that he was that living law, that gave life
to every thing. Wavering Chrisippus sometime held the life of the world to be
God, somewhile he called him destiny.

Therefore God is no compound. 3.1.] (c) Among the matiers reckoned up before
[note a.] some you see are compounded, and they belong properly to this place,
as earth, water, and our air below, of which none are simple elements, but
mixed one with another for generation sake, and fitted to the inhabitants that
dwell therein; of which none could live in elements that are pure being
themselves compounded.

Therefore God is not a body. 4.1.] (f) The school of Epicurus taught that God
was in shape like a man; and that he was also bodily For they thought that if
he were without a body (as Plato taught) he could neither have sense nor
wisdom, and so could no way be partaker of any pleasure, or happiness. But
concerning the pleasure which God enjoyes, Plato teaches, Epist. ad Dionys.
that it is not in outward or bodily things; which hinder the happiness of the
mind. The weakness of Epicurus argument is showed by Cotta a follower of Plato,
Cic. de Not. D. l. 1. and the opinion it self confuted by the arguments here
brought; especially against the Audean heretics, that were called
Anthropomorphites, who upheld the opinion of the Epicurean Philosophers,
because the holy Scripture, teaching men by their senses, speaks of Gods
powerful right hand, and treading down his enemies; that he was sorry in
heart, and specially where it is said, Genesis 1. Let us make man in our own
likeness: They here understood the likeness of the body, not of the mind, in
holiness and knowledge, which we have lost, must endeavor our selves to
recover, as we are exhorted, Ephesians. 4.24. Put on the new man which is created
according to God, in righteousness and holiness of the truth, and again, Put
on the new man which is renewed (in you) unto knowledge, according to the Image
of Him that created him.

Therefore in God is no accident, 5.1.] Zeno (g) sometime affirmed that the
year and the seasons thereof, the spring, the harvest, the months also were
God. Chrisippus said, the truth of things was God. And if you account truth an
accident, you may refer his opinion hither. You have now heard the difference
of opinions among the Philosophers; But how much wiser was Simonides that
learned Poet, who being demanded by Hiero king of Siracuse, what God was; He
desired a day to think of his answer: being the next day asked again, he
desired two days: And thus being often asked, still doubled his time. Being
demanded the reason, he answered, that the longer he thought thereon, the more
hard and dark the thing seemed unto him. What thanks therefore can we give
unto God who by his holy word has so fully revealed himself unto us, that the
holy Angels themselves with wonder desire to pry into those mysteries, which
he has made manifest unto his Church by Christ, 1 Pet. 1.12.

1. Therefore his being is most simple. 6.1.] Against this conclusion, a doubt
or two may be raised. 1. being without addition, is affirmable of every thing.
But the being of God is not so. For we say the body, or soul of a Man, or an
Angel is being, yet not God. Therefore the being of God is not a being without
Addition. And if addition be made to the being of God, whereby it may be
distinguished from other beings, it will seem not to be a simple, but a
compound being. I answer, that the proposition being without addition, is
affirmable of every thing, is true of that common predicate or transcendent
being only of which I speak, Introd. logic. sect. 3 n. 2 and 3. But the being
of God is that one proper and pure being which belongs to him alone, and
receives no addition, nor is affirmable of any other thing beside himself.
Secondly, I answer, that the conclusion of this syllogism, the being of God is
not without additition, being granted, takes not away the former conclusion,
that his being is simple and pure; Neither is the consequence rightly gathered
thereon: that if Addition be made, it is not then a simple being. For these
additions bring in no such beings, as to make the being of God either compound,
or mixed, but only distinguishable from other beings. For to say the being of
God is one, is pure, is simple, is incommunicable, are here only negation
differences, as one, therefore it cannot belong to any beside himself; Pure,
that is, not mixed. Simple, that is, not compounded. Incommunicable, whereof
none can be partaker beside himself. Nay, those very positive additions of
Goodness, eternity, infinity, power, wisdom, etc. are not additions of new
beings, but only essential conditions of the same most simple being
distinguished by us in our understanding. For, because our understanding
receives nothing but by the senses from the creatures; Therefore when it finds
these several perfections in the creature, and acknowledges that no perfection
can be in the effect, which is not more eminently and excellently in the cause
thereof; it is compelled, as it received these perfections in the creature with
differences, so also to refer them unto the Creator. So this difference or
plurality of attributes in God, grows, first in regard of the weakness of
our understanding; and secondly by that superexcellency of the divine nature,
whereby the understanding is so far exceeded. Therefore although our
understanding be no way able to compare all these several perfections of
goodness, power, wisdom, etc. together; and then to conceive them as one, but
only in one: yet our undertakings how ever wandering, or unable to conceive
them as one infinite being, can no way make any difference or othernesse in
them, or put any thing to the purity and simplicity thereof; but must
acknowledge the more pure the being is, the more powerful; and therefore by
one only action of that simplicity, and one manner of working, does it bring
forth most different and manifold effects, both of the object, and in the
object or matier whereon it works.

2. Secondly it may be objected, that the simplicity is more where there is no
distinction, than where there is. But in the Godhead there is distinction of
persons. Therefore it may seem his being is not most simple. I answer. That
the distinction is not made in the nature or being of the Godhead, which thing
only takes away simplicity; but only in the real relations, in which the being
is still one and the same in all. And although the relations be truly and
really distinct: yet that real distinction, or distinct realitie is but only
relative, and not bringing in any other being than is in the Godhead,
understood without these relations, but only imports the order or manner of
being.

3. Thirdly, it may be objected, that every thing that is, must participate of
being that it may be, and of some other thing, that it may be something, or a
being in it self, distinct from other beings. So God by his being is; and by
his greatness, and power, He is infinite, and almighty. Therefore it may
seem, his being is not simple. I say the proposition is true only in things
that are by participation. But God is absolutely of himself, not by
participation; and that absolute and simple being of His, is of it self
essentially infinite, and almighty, and not by participation, as was showed,
chap. 8. ante. in the answer, to the first objection.

CHAP. X. That God is altogether as infinite in working, as he is in Being.
A Most necessary truth, and needing sufficient proof, not only for the
clearing of that which has been spoken; but especially for laying the sure
groundwork of that which is to follow concerning the Trinity. Therefore lend
me the ear of your understanding that we may go together, in a matter of such
weight; And although the word work in our common English, in which I desire to
speak, is grown to mean almost only bodily toil; yet you know there is the
working of the mind also, and according to the things spoken of, you are bound
either in your wit, or honesty, ever to be as gentle as you can in the meaning
of words, and to take them according to their greatest fitness. But first (you
will say) it ought to appear that God does work. For as Epicurus thought, He
neither troubles himself with any care or business of his own; neither yet
is troublous to any other; or minds what they do, or say. For if so: then (as
he supposed) He cannot in any wise be happy, that has so many things to think
of. But against this thickeskin lazy opinion of Epicurus it shall appear, that
this working or Action of God is his endless glory. But you must understand
that this work whereof I speak, is not meant of that, whereby the dignities
of God are manifested without in the creature; but of that which is in himself
alone. And that he does work is most plain.

1. For as an infinite action cannot be without an infinite power, so an
infinite resting cannot be but either with an infinite unablenesse, or want of
skill, or infinite unwillingnesse to work; but an infinite unablenesse cannot
stand with an infinite power, nor want of skill with infinite wisdom, nor
unwillingnesse with infinite will. And it was proved before, that the power,
wisdom, and will of God are infinite; therefore he works also infinitely:
but if the resting be not infinite, but supposed to be slacknesse only, or by
turns, because of weariness; that cannot stand with an infinite power, nor
with the simplicity of the divine being: for weariness cannot befall but to
such a being only as has heaviness of parts: but in God is neither
heaviness nor parts. And so He works, and that infinitely.

2. God is infinite, and so evermore as great as he may be, and that not in
being only, but also in working: for otherwise greatenesse and lesnesse should
be in him. And because nothing can be in him, beside His very being: if the
infinity of greatness were in his being, and a lesnesse in his working,
greaternesse and lesnesse should be his very being; so finite and infinite,
perfection and want, good and ill, should be convertible in him: but these
things are impossible. Therefore God does either work infinitely, or else he
cannot work at all; but so should he not be worthy to be God, so should not
his power be infinite: and if his power be infinite and yet he cannot work at
all, then should his power be altogether in vain. But all these things are
impossible, therefore God does work, and that infinitely.

3. The wisdom of God is infinite, as was proved, and by the infinity of his
wisdom he does understand the infinity of his own being; but that cannot be
but by an infinite action of understanding: therefore the working of Gods
wisdom is infinite. And as these reasons against Epicurus, that God does work
and that infinitely; so also these that follow prove the question fully: for
if the being of God be one, and that most simple, and that nothing can be in
him but essentially, as was proved Chap. 9.. 5. and 6. if he work as is
showed, then his working or action must be his very being; which because it is
proved to be infinite, it must follow, that his action is also infinite.

4. The working of infinite goodness, wisdom, power, life, truth, etc. in
eternity is the most desirable thing that may be, and wherein the greatest
glory can consist; which action of God, if by his will He would not; then must
he will a ceasing of the action of goodness, wisdom, power, etc. and that in
eternity. So should these dignities be infinite in vain, so his will were not
answerable to the rest of his dignities, so should he not will the infinity
of his own glory, nor being. But all these things are impossible: therefore
the working of his dignities are answerable to their being; and therefore
infinite.

5. The power of God is infinite, as was proved; by which infinity of power,
all the other dignities of God, may both be and work infinitely. And if the
goodness and other dignities of God did not work infinitely when by his power
they might; there should be an inequality or want in his goodness, which
should not be answerable to his power; and the deprivation of the working of an
infinite goodness, would enforce an infinite ill, so God should cease to be
infinitely good. But all these things are impossible. Therefore the action of
Gods goodness, is of necessity infinite.

6. The power of God is such, as that he is thereby enabled to work, and if
by his infinity, he were not able to work infinitely; then his infinity
should be of less force to withstand littleness and not being; than his power
is to withstand weakness: so defect and want should be in his infinity,
which of all his other dignities is set most against it, and so his power
should be infinite only in the possibility of working, but finite in the
action. But these things are impossible: therefore the power of God is as
infinite in the working as it is in the being.

7. If the working of God were not infinite, he could not know it to be
infinite, but finite only and in defect: but a God cannot know any defect in
himself, in whom no defect is possible to be; Therefore his working is
infinite.

8. If infinite working and being be not all one in God, then there must of
necessity be in him, either a multiplicitie of being, or of accidents, or of
being and accidents. But all these things have been showed to be impossible:
chap 8. and 9. therefore infinite being and working are in God all one. So then
his working is infinite.

9. An infinite glory cannot be without the conditions of infinity, and
eternity; nor yet without the being of goodness: but neither can it be said
to have the being of goodness, if it spread not it self in the action of
goodness; neither yet of infinite and eternal goodness, if it work not
infinitely and eternally: but the glory of God is infinite, with all the
conditions of infinity, eternity and goodness. Therefore it works
infinitely and eternally, according to the being of infinite and eternal
goodness.

10 The truth of God was proved to be infinite and one: but if in the divine
dignities there be a greatness in being and a lesnesse in working; the truth
in God must likewise be diverse and not one, so neither simple nor infinite. But
this is impossible: therefore the working of his dignities is infinite as his
being.

11. The infinity of God is such, that b no abatement, want or lesnesse may be
understood or found therein: but littleness or abatement might be found
therein, if it were not as great in the action thereof, as in the being: for
every abatement or want, whether it be of the being, or of the working, in
goodness, power, wisdom, etc. is not only a lessening, but even an utter
taking away of the infinity thereof. So that to deny the infinite working of
God, is to deny his infinity, and so his being.

12. If all the dignities of God be infinite both in being and working, it will
follow that their equality and concord one with another, is also infinite; so
that they be essentially one God, and the same convertibly one with another,
the respects only different as has been showed Chap. 9. note (h) ob. 1. But
if these dignities be not infinite in working, as they are in being, the
disagreement will be infinite: because between no working or a finite
working, and a being every way infinite, there is an infinite distance; and to
put this distance in God, whose being i^ most simple and one, would be utterlie
impossible: therefore God is altogether infinite in being and working. If
further proof seem yet needful, you may take hereto an inducement or two.

13. The understanding of man is the image of God in him, and as the
understanding will not rest: so is it much more meet to think of an endless
wisdom. Nay the very fantasy or thought though bodily, though tied to the
five outward wits alone, yet will it not rest: and when it cannot work upon
the reason, as in sleep (because reason will see that the fantasy was not
deceived in the outward senses) then will it press upon the remembrance, as it
appears in dreams.

14. If He which is cause of all working should cease to work, then all
things at once should cease also both to work and to be, because c the first
mover ceasing to move, all the ensuing motion must be at a stand. And if his
power and the working thereof upon the creature did cease; as the creature by
his power was raised from nothing, so would it return to nothing, if by the
same it were not continually upheld. Therefore God does work continually, and
as the worker is infinite, d so is his working infinitely.

Notes.
(a) GOd cannot know any defect in himself. R. 6.] See the reason of this
speech Chap. 6. note. (b) n. 2. and 3.

(b) No abatement may be understood therein. R. 10.] You have need to know
that this reason, and the like which we make from our own understanding, has
a most sure foundation and ground in the truth of God: for therefore is the
light of reason and understanding in man, as a glass or image of the divine
wisdom created by him in us John 1.4. Ephesians. 4.24. that we thereby might be
led unto the knowledge of Him, and so unto that happiness for which we are
created: therefore the understanding does evermore apply it self unto the
truth, and makes the will to joy therein, and to hate that which is false, and
impossible. For reason in man being the image of Christ the second Adam, is set
in the Paradise of God, freely to eat of every tree therein, that is, to
consider the whole creature, which yields unto reason infinite truths as fruit
whereon to feed, to the praise of him that has created it: but if she that is
given to him for his help, that is, the imagination his Hevah the mother of all
living (for by the imagination alone the forms of all things live and are
lively presented to reason) if she (I say) deal treacherously with him, and
without him entertain speech with the crafty Serpent: then is he by her
easily persuaded to taste of the forbidden fruit; to follow her foolish and
wicked suggestions, and to let into his understanding falsehood and errors,
which cannot stand with the light of the truth, but are only according to the
traditions of Arts, falsely so called, and the authorities of men misled by
opinions. Concerning authorities See Postell. de Not. Med. page 16. 17. and
log. Cap. 23. n. 8. and note (a)

(c) The first Mover ceasing to move. R. 14.] Though this reason show the truth
of the conclusion a posteriori, yet is not this argument proper to this place,
because the question here is only about the inward actions of God in himself,
not that which is outward upon the creature, of which you shall hereafter
understand more at large in the 13. Chapter.

(d) So is his working infinitely. ib.] Seeing it is firmly agreed unto, both
by Divines and Philosophers, that God is altogether unmovable, not only by
those kinds of motion properly so called, See Log. introduct. sect. 4. Append.
n. 1. but also improper and metaphorical; as change of the will, anger,
desire, or other passions; it may seem that this conclusion of Gods infinite
action or working is enforced utterly against the truth: because it seems that
no working can be without motion. I answer, that motion and operation or
working are very different; these are like to motions, but neither are motions,
nor yet with motions: for to feel, to see, to understand, to will, or any
other action immanent or dwelling in the worker, are actions, operations or
workings of the fences, the understanding and will: but yet no motions, but
most improperly, and only in likeness: for all working, action, or operation,
is of a thing that is in perfection; but motion properly so called, is always
with imperfection, and leaves the thing wherein the motion is, in possibility
only to a further perfection. And yet the very moving from place to place may
be an example of this working, which I have proved in God to be infinite. For
if you set a ruler upon a pin, and turn it with violence upon that center, you
shall perceive no part of the surface over which it is turned, which you shall
not see covered every where with the ruler, and the swifter it is carried
about, the better and more closely does it cover it: so that if you suppose
that motion to be infinite in swiftness, with continuance for a certain time,
then every part of the ruler in the continual succession of that time, must of
necessity be every whereupon the under surface, according to the length of that
time, which the ruler does make from the navell point to the hemme or
circumference. So that you cannot more rightly call it motion than rest, when
every part of the ruler is continually upon every part of the surface under it.
And even so this working which I have proved to be in the Godhead, because it
is infinite, may most truly according to this example be called rest; because
his own action in himself is that wherein above all other he can take most
glory and delight; as being in the perfection of goodness, power, wisdom,
truth and glory, etc. And thus according to the measure of our weak
understanding, having considered what God is in his being, it follows that we
enquire also, what He is according to the manner of his being.

The Father Almighty.
CHAP. XI. That there is a Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Deity.
Section. 1. THat the wisdom of God manifested in this lower creature, and all
the possibilities that are therein, shall at last be made known to man, for
whose sake and use they were created, I have elsewhere sufficiently proved. But
as yet how far we are from thence, every man does sufficiently know. For is
there any Dyer so overweening in his craft of dying, as that he dare take upon
him to know all the possibilities that are in the mixing and setting of
colors? nay in the service of that great god of our pampered gurmandizers, I
mean the belly, is there any Cook, that will take upon him to be able to
make all those very things which are daily sought out to please the taste? if
then in those things wherein our senses are most delighted, wherein we study
with greedines how to please our selves, we must confess our dullness; how
much more heavy must we needs be in that whereof neither our senses, nor our
reason, nor the highest and best part of our understanding, all Nature helping
us herein, can give us any knowledge? Who knows the thoughts of a man but the
spirit of a man that is within him? how much more then is it impossible to know
the mysteries of God, but by that relation which he has made unto us of
himself? Therefore the knowledge of that mystery of the holy Trinity in the
Unity of the Godhead, is that super excellency of knowledge, which we have by
the holy Scripture only; which truth we are so much the more careful to know,
and constantly to uphold: first because it concerns that most excellent and
high being, even of God himself; secondly, because the revelation thereof is
from God alone, manifested by his word; thirdly, because it is the foundation
of our faith and hope: for if Christ our Savior be not very God, and very man;
the being of our Mediator, and the alsufficiencie of his merit is utterly
vanished; fourthlie, it is one of the maine and principal differences between
our most high Religion taught us by God himself, and the false worship of
Idolaters, of the Jews, Turks, Arians, and other heretics, which from time
to time have turned the truth of God into a lie. Fifthlie, we follow herein the
holy Martyrs and the Fathers in the primitive Church, and those Counsels which
have from time to time maintained this truth against all heresies.

And although it cannot be denied, but that even among the Heathens, some of
their wisest, both Poets and Philosophers knew this mystery by hearsay, as
they had received it from the Hebrews; as you may read in Thom. Aquin. in
lib. 1. did. 3. q 2. and more at large in Struchus de peren. Philos. lib. 1.
and 2. and from them in Philip Mornay of the trueness of Christian Religion
Chap. 6. yet among the Hebrews themselves (except the Prophets, and schools
of the Prophets) this secret was not known or taught, and that, (as it may
seem) lest the misunderstanding multitude might fall into the Idolatry of many
Gods: therefore is this thing so taught in the holy text of the Old Testament,
that the wise only might understand it: for although the Prophets knew well
enough that in the days of the king Messiah this mystery should be known
even to the Gentiles: for of him it is written in the 40. Psalm verse. 9.10. I
will not refrain my lips O Lord, thou know, but I have declared thy truth
and thy salvation, I have not concealed thy mercy and thy truth from the great
Congregation: Yet because they knew they ministered those things of which they
spoke, not to themselves, nor to the people of their own times, but for us,
unto whom the treasuries of the riches of God in Christ were more fully to be
opened; therefore they taught according to the dispensation of the Holy Ghost,
who has so from time to time, opened the fountains of knowledge unto his
Church, and hereafter will; as the holy Church shall be able to receive it.
This glorious truth then being plainly discovered to us in the New Testament;
let us see with what diligence and faithfulness, reason that servant of God
does wait on the authority of his Lord, and how thereby (a) we are summoned
to hearken unto this truth: for although reason could never have found it out;
yet being taught what the truth of God is herein, it joys to see the
necessity of that truth which it is bound to believe.

But because I have written somewhat to this Argument already (which that you
miss not, I have caused to be printed at the end of this book) I may be
somewhat more brief herein. Only the reasons I take up here together; and
add such other supplies as seem to be wanting in that treatise.

. 2. The word Father is taken either personally, as it signifies the first
Person of the blessed Trinity, with the relation to the Eternal Son; or
else it is spoken essentially of all the three Persons in the Godhead, with
respect of the creature which is created, sustained, and governed thereby. Of
this (through his help) we shall speak hereafter Chap. 13. but first of the
first person of the holy Trinity. The Greek Churches by the authority of
the Apostle, Heb. 1.3. for the several distinctions of the Persons in the
Godhead, hold the word (...) hypostasis, which we from the Latin call a
Subsistence, or several substantial being by it self. But the Latin Church
turned it Persona, from an old word (Persola) because it means one only being
entire of it self: for Solus is of (...), that is whole in it self, and
entire with all the parts: but yet is Persona a title of honor given unto men
alone: for they define it to be Rationalis naturae individua substantia, that
is an individeable substance of a reasonable nature, and from thence it is
translated to God and Angels. A Person then of the holy Trinity is an
incommunicable subsistence in the Divine nature. These words have their ground
in the holy Scripture, to which in this great Article of our faith we must
ever have recourse, by reason of the many and strong heresies that have been
thereabout. Trinity, Triunitie, or a threefold being in one, has ground in
that Text which is in Matthew 28.19. Go teach all Nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. But certain it
is that in our Baptism, we bind our faith and allegiance unto G^d alone. So
1. John 5.7. There are three that bear witness in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Spirit, and these three are ^ one thing, or one being. By
subsistence understand a substantial or essential being, not coming to, or
being in the Deity by chance. It answers to the word (...), which is different
from substance, nature, being, or the like te^mes that signify any common, or
universal b ing: for an Hypostasis means a peculiar being wherein the common
nature is wholl^ and entyre, as I said before, and will say until you
understand me. For example, the whole nature or being of man is understood in
that word Man, and so the Angelical nature in that word Angel; but Peter or
Gabriel mean that particular person, in which the common being is whole and
entyre. I mean so, as that there is nothing essential in the being a man, or
Angel, whereof Peter and Gabriel are not partakers essentially; so we
understand the difference. The being or essence of the Godhead is one
individual, most simply, absolutely, and substantiallie one; which infinite
and undivideable being of the Godhead is yet nevertheless in every Person
entyre and wholly, so that nothing of the essential being of the Godhead is in
one, which is not in the other. And therefore Justin the Martyr, and from him
Damascen Dialect. Cap. 66. and after them our sound Doctors of all sides agree,
that (...), or a subsistence is (...), that manner of being propriety, or
real relation, which belongs to every one Person in the Holy Trinity. You may
here not unfitly note the difference of these words, Being, Substance, and
Subsistence. Being is that which is common to all things that are. The word
Substance, properly does not so much import the very inward being, as that
respect which it has to the accidents that are therein. Subsistence, signifies
that special manner of being which belongs to substances that are actually
being. If you will enquire further, you may see what Thom. Aquin. has writ
hereto in Sent. lib. 1. Did. 23. qu. 4. or if you will, the Introduct. to log.
Sect. 4. Incommunicable, that is, peculiar, proper, or belonging to one alone;
so that one cannot be another. The divine Nature is used 2. Pet. 1.4. and here
means that being or substance, wherein all the three Persons are essentially
one, and the same One God. One (I say) not compounded or made of the three
Persons, but One most simple and perfect being, in all the three Persons of the
Godhead.

Now the name of a Father, is most poperly given unto God the first Person of
the Trinity (for of him is (...) all fatherhood of the families both in heaven
and earth Ephesians. 3.15.) because that out of the perfection of His own being
he brings forth a Person coessentiall, that is, of the same being with
himself, and coeternall, yet distinguished from him by certain incommunicable
properties, which is the Son; and that by an eternal, most holy, infinite
and spiritual working in himself, according to that life, holiness, wisdom,
power, glory, etc. which are in him essentially; and this spiritual or
eternal working, is the holy Ghost. And because that this action of the
Godhead, in the bringing forth, or eternal generation of the Son, is only
in the essential being of the Deity eternally: therefore it is not an action
of God proceeding merely from the freedom of His will, as it is said of the
creature, Revel. 4.11. That for his will sake only they are and were created.
For all such actions are exercised only in things of themselves merely not
being; in which God has power to will, or not to will their being: but because
that God does work according to the perfection of his most excellent being, as
Prove. chap. 10. So glorious and powerful an action in himself, cannot be in
vain; therefore it is necessary that the product, effect, or object of that
action, which is the Son, be every way answerable to that action in the
infinity of glory, wisdom, power, etc. Neither yet is this action of God the
Father compelled or enforced: for then it would not be glorious; but it is with
the infinity of his own will also, because it is essential to him, and
whatsoever works according to the being thereof (b) works both necessarily,
that is, according to the unchangeable nature, and yet most willingly; because
it cannot will contrary to the being thereof. But in things wherein there is an
absolute freedom of the will, one way or other, there must a choice be
possible, which cannot be but between two at least: which not only an
infinite will does utterly exclude; but even that natural will also, whereby
every thing works according to the inclination or propriety of the kind. So
then neither can God in the infinity of his will, but will that being which is
the image of himself, the best of beings, infinite in goodness and in glory:
Neither can He but work according to the perfection of his being, for the
production of that which He does will. As all our natural senses inward and
outward work willingly, yet necessarily; that is, according to their natural
being, upon their proper object. For the Eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor
the ear with hearing.

Now is it yet further to be remembered, that although there be an infinite and
eternal production of the Persons in the deity; yet there is no bringing
forth, or multiplication of any new being. For the Godhead being eternal, it
is not possible that any new Godhead should be brought forth. Neither yet can
any addition be made thereto: because it is infinite. And so you may conclude
of all those dignities or perfections of the Godhead, as wisdom, power, glory,
goodness, etc. Yet seeing goodness does ever move that which is good to
multiply the image of it self; and power joined therewith, inableth goodness
to work; and infinity with them causes goodness and power both to be, and to
work infinitely: therefore it is necessary that in the Godhead there be an
eternal multiplication or production, of those true and real distinct
relations, which we call Persons. So that although goodness, power, infinity,
and all the other glorious dignities which are in God, be one infinite being;
one only in the most simple, pure, and perfect agreement or concord of being;
yet these relations must be distinct, in such clear difference; that that one
cannot possibly be that other from which it is really and truly
distinguished, though in essence or being they be all one infinity. c As in the
being of goodness there is an infinite producer, or brings forth of
goodness, which is the Father; an infinite goodness brought forth, which is
the Son: and an infinite production or bringing forth of goodness: which
could not be if either the efficient, or bringer forth of goodness, or the
goodness brought forth were not. For where either the agent, or the object is
wanting, it is impossible that any action at all should be. And therefore as
the Son proceeds from the Father; So the holy Ghost is most rightly said to
proceed from the Father, and the Son. And this is the distinction of the
persons, according to their original or procession. But because all these are
infinite, and that in the infinity of being, and working, there must needs be
eternity; therefore there can be no beforenesse nor afternesse, nor ceasing
either to be, or to work. And therefore is none of these Persons before, or
after another, but all three distinct Persons are one infinite, and eternal
deity.

The Reasons.
3. 1. If God be infinite in his working, as He is in his being, then he must
needs work to bring forth such as himself is, and that both infinitely and
eternally, answerable to his being; and this in the Godhead alone, seeing that
beside it, nothing can be infinite and eternal. But it is sufficiently proved
in the 10. chap. That God is infinite in his working, as he is in his being.
Therefore by his infinite working, He brings forth such as Himself is. And by
these three terms you see the holy Trinity expressed and proved. 1. God
infinite, the Father. 2. That which he works, the Son; The infinite working
it self, which combineth both together, the Holy Ghost.

2. Neither can power be infinite, nor infinity powerful, if there be not
such an agreement between them, that they may together both be and work
infinitely. But if they be and work infinitely, it is necessary that there
be a production in the Godhead: For otherwise that infinite work should be in
vain, and not powerful to produce the like. But that is impossible; therefore
there is a production in the Godhead.

3. If there be not a production of Persons in the Godhead (as is before
spoken:) then an infinite goodness is not a bringer forth of goodness, and so
follows a privation or ceasing in the working of goodness, which brings on,
either a disability in the power, or a want in the will, or in the wisdom of
the worker: which cannot stand with his infinity of power, will, and wisdom,
of whom we speak. Besides, seeing in Him, to be, and to work are all one, (as
was showed) he that denies the infinity, and eternity of his working, denies
also the infinity and eternity of his being. Wherefore seeing all these things
are false, and impossible; it follows of necessity, that there is a production
of Persons in the oneness of the Godhead. Or take it thus affirmatively.

4. That goodness is truly a great goodness, which does bring forth a great
good; and by how much more it brings forth a greater good, by so much more it
comes nearer to infinity. d Therefore God in whom infinity and goodness are
one being, does bring forth eternally an infinite good, that is, the Son,
betwixt whom and himself results an infinite Communion of goodness, viz. the
holy Ghost.

If there must needs be a distinction of terms in the actions of the Godhead,
then there must needs be a difference of Persons; otherwise the difference of
the terms were idle and vain, if the being understood thereby were not
answerable. But there must needs be a distinction of terms in the working of
the Godhead. For an infinite working (already proved) must needs be from an
infinite worker, about an infinite work. Therefore there is a difference of
Persons in the unity of the deity.

6. If there were not an infinite and eternal production in the Persons of the
Godhead; then the being of a beginning could not clearly and evidently be
therein; because though the beginner were; yet the working of the beginner, and
the being begun were yet wanting: and so these two coming after should be
inferior or less both in continuance, and infinity. And so the first and
highest cause should be an infinite beginner without any effect or thing begun
by him, which must bring on, that the first and chiefest cause of all, should
be infinitely defective, and ceasing to work: and of less force than other
causes subordinate; which all work incessantly to the bringing forth of their
effects, unless they be hindered by lets more powerful. Therefore there be
more Persons than one in the unity of the Godhead.

7. Being and the power of Being; working and the power of working are all one
in God, as was showed chap. 8. and 9. n. 6. But God by his infinite and
eternal power, can bring forth an infinite and eternal being like Himself,
by the infinite and eternal working of his power. Therefore He does bring
forth: or if he can, and will not, that power were in vain; and so his power
and will were not equal and infinite. So there should be diverse beings in
God, finite and infinite. But all these things are impossible. Therefore God
does bring forth an infinite being, his Son, by his infinite working, the
holy Ghost.

8. If the inward working of the deity be infinite with all the conditions of
Infinity; then the understanding of God (for example) must be infinite, both
in the act or perfection of it self; and in the object which it does
understand, and in the work or action of the understanding about that object.
So that God understanding his own being, must needs behold himself by an
infinite action of understanding. But the working of God is infinite, with all
the conditions of infinity, as has been proved, for otherwise there should
be a greaternesse in being, and a lessenesse in working; and so the being of
God should not be simple and one. Therefore in the unity of the infinite
deity, there is an infinite understanding, which we call the Father, an
infinite object, or image of that understanding, in the sight of which that
infinite understanding is most delighted, because nothing can be more excellent
than it; and this is God understood, that glorious Son: and an infinite
working of the understanding, and that is the Holy Ghost: which you see cannot
be conceived to be; if either the infinite understanding, or the object were
supposed not to be; and therefore he is said to proceed from them both. And
thus is it in all the other dignities of God; his goodness, his infinity, his
eternity, power, will, truth, glory, etc.

9. Now the texts whereby this doctrine is taught, more darkely in the old
Testament, lest the true Church, with the Heathen, might have fallen into the
opinion of many Gods, are these among many other. Genesis 1. v. 26. Let us make
man in our own image. and Genesis 3.22. Behold the man is become as one of us.
Genesis 11.7. Let us go down; and let us confound their language, Genesis 11.7.
which manner of speech is not borrowed for manners sake, from the custom of
Princes and great men; who for modesty, speak not in their own name alone
(We) but as having determined with their great men, and counselors, men like
themselves. But God does not so consult nor determine by advice of his
Creature; Neither yet does that language admit such form of speech; but as the
Eastern languages even to this day speak to one particular person in the
number of one: as you may read. 2 Samuel 12.7. Thou art the man. and 2 Samuel 18
3. Thou shall not go forth. Thou art worth ten thousand of us. Esth 7.3. If I
have found favor in thy sight O King. But to return to the holy Trinity. You
have a like proof in Numb. 6.24.5.6. where the word Jehovah is three times
repeated in the blessing and every time with a several accent. So that
although his name be one. Zach. 14.9. and his being one. Deuteronomy. 6.4. yet in that
one being is a Trinity of Persons; which you shall better understand, if you
consider the blessings in the new Testament, all taken from hence, as that. 2
Cor. 13.14. and Rev. 1.4.5. etc. So likewise in Job. 35.10. Where is God my
makers? and Psalm. 149. Let Israel rejoice in his makers. Eccles. 12.1. Remember
thy Creators. and again Psalm. 11.7. His faces or their faces will view the
righteous. In which places though for some reason translated singularly, Maker,
Creator, Face, yet according to the preciseness of the Hebrew it is as I have
told you. And yet a more evident proof is that in Genesis 20.13. where the word
Elohim, God, is joined with a verb of the plural number: And in Ioshuah.
24.19. The Trinity of Persons in unity of the being is most clear. For with
the word (...) Elohim is joined an adiective of the plural number (...)
Kadoshim, and a personal of the singular (...) hu, as if you would say, God He
the holy ones, or as Esaias explaneth it. Chapter 6.3. Holy, Holy, Holy art thou O
Lord. And again in the same Chapter, ver. 8. whom shall I send? there is the
unity of the Godhead; and who shall go for us? there is the Trinity of the
Persons. And again in Esaias, chap. 48.16. Christ speaks thus. There am. 1. I.
and now the. 2. Lord God. and 3. His Spirit has sent me. So you read in Psalm.
33.6. By the 1. Word of 2. Jehovah, were the heavens made; and all the host of
them by the 3. Spirit of his mouth. And in Hag. 2.5.6. From the beginning I
was; and now I am with you, says the 1. Lord of hosts, the 2. word which
covenanted with you when you came out of Egypt, my 3. Spirit shall dwell among
you. And if you desire more proofs out of the old Testament, you may read
Ficinus de Christ. Relig. Cap. 31. The word (...) Jehovah, that great and
fearful name of God, Deuteronomy. 28.58. one name of his own being, contains the
mystery of the Trinity. For in the forming of the word (...) hawah, or hayah,
whence the name is derived. Ie is the sign of that which is to come as (...)
yeheweh, He shall be, or He will be: Ho, of that which is; as (...) being, or
He that is: and wah of that which has bin, as (...) He has been and thus is
the word opened. Rev. 1.8. He which was in eternity the fountain and eternal
Father of Him which shall be in eternity, by the common band of all
continuance, that which is in eternity. And this is He that was, and is, and
is to come. And in the new Testament, besides the places cited before in the
beginning of the chapter, in Math. 3.16.17. and Luc. 3.21.22. you may hear the
witness of the Father concerning the Son, and see the Holy Ghost coming
down on Him in the likeness of a dove. And again, Ioh. 14. verse. 16.17.1. I
will pray the 2. Father, and he will send you another Comforter. even the 3.
Spirit of truth, And 2 Cor. 13.13. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
Love of God the Father, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost be with you all.
with many other texts not needful here to be cited; because that when we come
to speak of the other Persons of the Trinity, in the Articles following; some
of them must be remembered. And if the adversaries testimony be ought worth,
you may take hereto the Egyptian oracle of Serapis, (...).
(...). --
First God and then the Word, and Holy Ghost with them:
Of essence one, in one accord.


And from hence it seems had Merc. Trism: that which he teaches in Pormand of
that Light which is God the Father, the word which is the Son, and that life
which is the union of them both. See the other arguments inductive in the
Notes. a and b.

Notes.
(a) BY reason we are summoned to hearken to this truth. [Pref.] Tho. Aqu. in
his questions on the master of the sentences. lib. 1. Did. 2. q. 3. brings a
couple of reasons to prove a plurality of Persons in the unity of the Godhead,
which in effect are these. 1. with the greatest happiness there must be the
greatest pleasure and content. But in the Possession of that which is good,
there cannot be pleasure and content without company, seeing the perfection of
every good thing stands in the community of the use thereof. But company is not
without plurality The second reason is from the perfection of the divine love:
and all love ever wishes well to another. But these reasons prove no more a
Trinity than a society of Ten; and fit better for an ordinary, than the high
mystery in question. And therefore having looked well upon his reasons, and
seeing that they were very poor inductions; he resolves, it is no way
necessary to put a distinction of Persons in the Deity for the force of
reasons; but only for the justifying of our Faith, and for the authority of
the Holy Scriptures. And in the third Did. qu. 4. whether it were possible for
the old Philosophers, which knew not the Scripture, by the knowledge of the
creature only to come to the knowledge of the Trinity; he says, that by the
view of the creature they might come to the knowledge of the divine power,
wisdom, and goodness, as the cause is manifest by the effect; and conclude
that there is one God, even as Saint Paul proves, Romans 1. and again. Romans
10.18. out of the 19. Psalm: But that they could not thereby attain the
knowledge of the Trinity; because the Creature was an insufficient means, to
bring them to the knowledge of that high mystery. So in the 4 book of his
Sum Contr. Gentiles. Cap. 1. he determines even so concerning the
incarnation, and the consequents thereof. So likewise concerning the
resurrection, everlasting life and all our hopes that depend thereon. Again in
his Sum of Theology, chap. 33. he concludes that by natural reason it is
impossible to know God in the distinction of Persons: and that for these
reasons. 1. First it takes away from the worthiness of our Faith. 2. Faith is
of things not appearing, and such as exceed reason, as it is said. Heb. 11.1.
Thirdly, Infidels laugh at that which is not fully proved: and therefore (says
he) it shall be sufficient to defend, that our faith holds nothing that is
impossible. But (Doctor) reason must yield that to be impossible which it
cannot make to appear that it is possible. And therefore that our faith be
not set at naught by misbeleevers, as being of things impossible, you tie us
for defense thereof to further proof: which if it be full and sufficient, your
third reason is nothing worth. The first reason is less worth in it self: For
that is the glory of a Christian faith, and the triumph of it over all false
worships, that is so surely founded in the truth of God, that the Gates of hell
cannot prevail against it. Therefore to speak clearly to this question, I
say, the word natural reason, may either mean that reason whereof a man is
capable by that light of understanding which is naturally through the gift of
Christ in every man, Ioh. 1.4.9. the holy Scripture has opened this light most
clearly, and therefore is it called the light of Grace; or else it may mean
such reasons, as are gathered from the causes, effects and rules which are
manifest only in natural things. Now although the articles of our creed by
way of Induction only may be manifest by natural reason thus understood, as
S. Augustine de Civit. Dei. lib. 11. cap. 26. in this very question has made
it appear; yet by that first light of understanding, which we call natural
reason, because it is in every man according to the possibility of nature, they
may be understood and approved by other rules, than such as have their grounds
in natural things. For God is not the God of nature only; but much more the
God of grace; and mercy; and to the knowledge of these principles and the
conclusions gathered thereon, we are led by better guides than Aristotle ever
knew; that is, the holy Scripture, and the Spirit of Grace, who leads us to
the right meaning thereof. Yet how far even Natural light has gone in the
discovery of the great Mysteries of Divinity, even of the Trinity it self, you
may judge by this of Proclus taken out of Plato, as you may read in Stenchus
de perenni phi. lib. 2. c. 16. These two (says he) unity and Being,
consisting in the Trinity; the first begetting, the second begotten; the one
perfecting, the other perfected: it must needs be, that there is a certain
power, by the which, and with the which that unity gives subsistence and
perfection unto that being. For both the procession from that unity to being,
and the return from that being unto unity, must be by a middle power between
them both. For how can unity be Being, or Being be one, but by that power
which is in both? And this Trinity is the excellency of all understanding,
unity, power, Being, the one bringing forth, the other brought forth, and power
proceeding from unity joined with being. And this is the first Trinity that
can be understood, or conceived to be; unity, being, and the power of them
both, by which, divinity is the Father of being, and being is of unity. The
Father is the father of wisdom; and wisdom the Son of the Father; and between
these a most high power hidden, in the one of producing, in the other of being
produced, as Plato has showed it wonderfully. Thus Proclus. The argument of
Pythagoras is not of less weight. That which is unchangeable must needs be
eternal, and always one. And as al change in every body is by reason of
inequality of the parts: so that which is absolutely and ever one, must be ever
in equality, so verity and equality must be eternal: and multiplicity and
inequality must necessarily be after unity and equality. And as unity is the
cause of connection, or being one, so inequality is of division. And the effect
of the first cause must have priority before the effects of the second cause.
Therefore connection also must be before division and change: and if before
change, then also eternal. And because there can be but one eternal:
therefore unity, equality, and connection, must be one thing. And this is that
threefold unity which Pythagoras taught was to be adored. Pet. Blondus de
Trenario. page 106. 107. And Cusa de Docta ignorantia. lib. 1. cap. 7. Neither
is that reason which Cusa Exerercit. lib. 7. page 134 brings from Aristotle to
be slighted; especially by Thomas, that great Aristotelian. Aristotle says,
that the first cause of all must needs be both efficient, formal, and the end.
And three firsts there cannot be; because before all plurality there must needs
be unity. Therefore it being one first, it must be a threefold cause;
efficient, formal, and final. The efficient cause is neither Formal, nor
Final; and the formal is neither final, nor efficient. Therefore they are
three distinct causes considered in their several subsistences: but considered
in their firstnesse, they are in being one alone: many such reasons and
authorities to this purpose you may read in Struchus De perenni Phi. lib. 1.
and 2. But how much yet more fitly, and more fully, has the illuminated
Raimund, showed both this point and all those other, which Tho. Aqu. has given
over as past all proof? For Raimund taking all those conditions of the divine
being, which the holy Scripture gives to God; and without which that being
could not be perfect: and supposing and proving them to be infinite with all
the conditions of infinity, both in being and working; has taught the way to
show the Trinity of Persons in unity of being, by every one of those
conditions, see Art. mag. Part. 9. And though his words seem borrel and rude;
as bonificant, bonificabile, and Bonificare, in una bonitatis essentia;
Possificans, possificabile, and possificare in the being of power: yet they are
full of excellent meaning. The learned, and witty Cusa de visione Dei cap. 17.
gives instance in the unity: which is either unity uniting, unity united, or
the union, or knot of them both: yet all these in the most simple being of
unity. And again in love, which is either in the Person loving, or in the
Person loved, or in the knot of the Love between them, all according in the
nature of Love; and without any of these, Love cannot be perfect and complete,
yet may every one of these be understood apart; inasmuch as a man may love, and
not be loved; loved, and not love again. But where that which is Lovely, is
also loving, there the bond of love is firmly tied, and love in every part
entire: yet is this love but in shadows among us, but perfect in the endless
and perfect being of love. 1 Ioh. 4.8.16. And thus in other conditions of the
divine nature have other learned and devout men endeavored to show their
understanding and firm consent unto this high article of the christian Faith:
one in the power of God; another in his wisdom, etc. according to the proofs
you read before. And therefore, not to go about to overthrow the reasons
brought by Thomas; because the authority of so great a Doctor may cut deeper
than his reasons, and so cut off, if not the strength of the reasons in the
articles following; yet that comfort which the faithful soul might have
thereby. I say that all the reasons which are brought to this article, and so
for the most part in all the rest, are only of two kinds. First and chiefly
from the impossibilities which would follow upon the contradiction of the thing
in question: which kind of discourse I have taught (as I can) log. cap. 8. n.
7. and chap. 26. more at large. Secondly, by that kind of demonstration, which
I call by conversion of terms, as I showed, log. cap. 18. n. 3. in the
syllogisticall handling of such arguments, as in effect are all one with them
which log. cap. 13. n. 5. I showed to be by rule, in the second kind of
equivalence. Now both these kinds of argument prove the question only that it
is; that is to say, show only that the proposition is true, and neither prove
nor enquire how, or for what superior cause, which in this and in many of the
other questions here handled cannot be given. And there is no proposition, how
true, how universal, or manifest soever, but it may be proved by these means,
both in the affirmative; For in things of the same nature, and being,
whatsoever agrees to one, most needs agree to the other; and in the negative,
the ground of impossibilities and all negative discourse, whatsoever is denied
to the predicate, must also be denied to the subject. Now I think it is no
more derogation from the truth to be thus confirmed, than it is, simply to
be affirmed, as it is in the article of the Creed. As if I say, there is an
eternal being, the cause of all Beings: there is an infinite wisdom the
disposer of all: an infinite power that governes all, and thereupon conclude,
that there is a God. What dishonor is here offered to God or his truth? are
not all these terms, an eternal Being, the cause of all beings? An infinite
Wisdom, etc. convertible one with another? and all of them meaning one being,
which we call God? have they not all authority in the Holy Scripture? And
shall not that which is truly affirmed of one, be as truly affirmed of the
other? And so on the otherside by impossibilities. If there be not an eternal
being, the beginner and cause of all other beings: then that which is begun
must be a beginning to it self. But this is impossible, for so it should be
a cause, and yet not be. Therefore there is a God. And if any other kind of
argument be brought, either by rule, or induction, or syllogism, yet seeing
superior causes are not always here to be found, whereby to make analyticall
demonstration; therefore the reasons for the most part are contained within
this bound only to prove the Article that it is true. Nay, I add yet further,
that the Theologian or divine is not tied to the use of natural reasons only
for proof of his conclusions. For so you should make divinity nothing else but
natural Philosophy, except that the one should be intended to the cause of
all being, the other to the effect in nature only; But you know that all truth
whereinsoever it is, being founded in the truth of God, reason the searcher
thereof must far exceed the limits of nature or natural causes. Therefore
although that conclusion of Tho. Aquin. stand sure, that the philosophers could
not come to the knowledge of the Trinity by the view of nature; because nature
was an insufficient mean to bring them thereunto, which yet may receive
limitation, either in respect of the degree of knowledge, which nature brings
of the Creator as himself makes difference, Pro^em. in lib. 4. contr. gent. or
in respect of the manner of concluding inductive only, yet will it not follow
from thence, that the articles of our Faith are utterly beyond all proof of
reason. For as divinity is of a far higher strain than natural
Philosophy; so are the proofs and reasons thereof, from greater lights than
all nature can show. Who knows not that divinity as concerning a great part of
the practice holds all moral Philosophy, whose conclusions though from
reason, yet are not the reasons natural, but moral? Have not Grammar, Logic,
and all other Arts and Sciences, either isntrumental or principal, certain
rules, or principles which are true, (...) and (...), that is universally,
necessarily, and convertibly, or peculiar to that Science, and yet not
demonstrable by natural Causes? And to this very purpose Saint Augustine
says, De Civ. Dei. lib. 11. Cap. 24. Diligentia rationis est, non
praesumptionis audacia; ut in operibus Dei secreto quodam loquendi modo, quo
nostra exerceatur intentio, intelligatur Trinitas. That is, the Holy Trinity
may be understood by us in the works of God, by their secret manner of
speech, in which they speak to our understanding. And if this high mystery may
be understood by the creature, as the Father shows in that book, and other
Christian writers elsewhere, I doubt not but by those honorable titles which
the holy Scripture does give unto God it may much better be made to appear.
And if it were lawful to prove the first and principal Article of our faith
by reason, and by reason (I say) without presumption of perfection in
knowledge, to prove that God is, as it has been showed by the warrant of the
Apostle, is it not likewise as lawful in the Articles following? And these
things may seem the more strange in Thom. Aquin. because in the 11. chap. of
his fourth book contra Gentiles, he does so clearelie deliver this point of
our belief, both by the authority of the holy Scriptures, and the evidence of
reason, yea and that on the same grounds whereon Raymundus doctrine is builded,
that he may seem to have lighted his torch at the lamp of Thomas. Take the
meaning of his words, as they lie. Seeing that in the Divine nature, He that
understands, the action of his understanding, and his intention, or object
understood, are all one and the same being; it must needs be, that whatsoever
belongs to the perfect being of any of these, be most truly in Him. Now it is
essential to the inward word, or intention understood, that it do proceed from
him that understands, according to the action of his understanding. And seeing
that in God all these three are essentially one, (for in him nothing can be but
essentiallie) it is necessary that every one of these be God, and that the
difference which is between them, be not of being, but of relation only, or
the manner of being, as the intention is referred to him that conceives it, as
to him from whom it is: therefore the Evangelist having said, John 1. The word
was God, lest all distinction might seem to be taken away between the Father
and the Son, adds immediately, That Word was in the beginning with God. Thus
says Thomas. Oh but (say you) it is a dangerous case to commit matters of
faith to reason. I, but there is no danger to commit reason to matiers of
faith, that is, to make reason a servant of faith, neither is our reason too
good to give attendance on faith, nor faith so proud as to scorn the service
of reason: therefore let this jangling and frowardness cease. If I say any
thing to your content, accept it; if not, you are not bound to read it: but
God has not given us the knowledge of himself in his word, that as parrats in
a cage, which with much ado are taught a few words, and then can say no more;
so we should hold our selves content when we can say the Creed: but that by
continual meditation in his word, our knowledge, and so our faith, our love
and fear of him, might be increased daily. And this is it which S. Paul says,
1. Cor. 2.6. We speak wisdom among them that are perfect, and again, 1.
Cor. 1.22. The Grecians seek wisdom, and we preach Christ the wisdom of
God: for in him are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hid. Now it is
apparent that he means not the wisdom of this world, but that which is in
things concerning God, whereby we may be able to give a reason of the hope that
is in us. 1. Pet. 3.15. And this is that perfection whereto we ought to strive,
whereof the Catechism, doctrine of repentance, of faith, etc. is but only the
foundation, as it is manifest. Heb. 6.1.2. For although the least degree of
faith, even as a grain of mustard seed, be sufficient to remove the high
mountains of rebellious and wicked thoughts that rise up against the obedience
of the truth, and consequently to save the soul, through his mediation and
mercy that does not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax: yet
seeing every man, as he has received, ought as a faithful Steward of the
manifold graces of God to profit thereby; our hearts by faith being purged from
dead works, we ought to add virtue to our faith, and to this virtue
knowledge, and by these means to make our calling and election sure, 2. Pet.
1.5.10. And for this cause S. Paul prays for the Colossians, that having
through faith embraced the truth, they might be filled with knowledge of the
will of God, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding. And this is our
progress from faith to faith, Romans 1.17. that is from that pure faith, whereby
we first receive the kingdom of God as little children, to that faith, which
is strengthened through knowledge: for knowledge does neither take away faith,
nor yet abate any thing of the worthiness thereof; but rather increases it
more and more, while it is thereby rooted and grounded more firmly in him, in
whom at first we did believe, as the learned Father, August. de Trinit. Cap.
14. said, Fides in nobis per scientiam gignitur, nutritur, defenditur, and
roboratur.

(b) Works both necessarily, yet willingly. Pref.] This Will they call
concomitant, because it ever follows the very being of that wherein the will
is. The will of God whereby he gives being to the creature, is c^usall; for by
it alone the creature is, without any other working of God, but only the
pleasure or motion of his own will, power, and goodness, etc.

(c) Jn the being of goodness there is an infinite producer. Pref.] While I
was preparing materials for this building, I read the title of a Mart book,
Abstrusa abstrusorum abstrusissima, primaria Symboli Apostolici abstrusa.
Though I had been more than once gul'd with such titles, Arcana arcanorum
arcanissima arcana, and the like, wherein these writers sweat more, than for
any thing in the book beside: yet being interpreted, a pious and very profound
meditation of the deep mysteries of the Apostles Creed, I supposed that such
bumbast would never be quilted into a treatise upon the grounds of our
Religion; so that I verily hoped that all my labor was at an end. At last
having got the book, I found that it was nothing in good earnest, but a
declamation only of a certain springal for exercise sake, into which, as into
a common place book he had gathered the sentences of learned men, wherein
they justly bewail the misery of mankind, in his inabilitie to find out
the truth of things, whereupon he would utterlie shut out the use of reason in
matiers of faith. The consequence is not good, as I have showed Praef. n. 6.
His special spleen is against Keckerman and his gregales, that is, them of
his ging, I think he means the Calvinists, of whom he names only Zanchius,
and them of whom he received this learning, Melancthon, and his own very
Siren and Phoenix Scaliger; out of whose shreds he has botch't up his
declamation, such as it is, yet in this case he could not spare him, that would
manifest his understanding of the Trinity according to Raymunds principles.
The wicked conclusion that will follow thereon, Murshel the declamer goes about
to show out of Andreas Osiander; as you shall hear anon, Chap. 12. note (a).
But what have Scaliger or Raymund done herein, which the ancient Fathers had
not done before, save that they made the doctrine clear by foreign
comparisons? one, of the Sun, the beam, and the brightness or shine
thereof; another by the body, the brightness and heat of the fire; another of
the mind, wherein is the word or understanding thereof, and the will: another
says, the mind thinking, the word representing that thought, and the liking
or approving thereof: yet another will represent the Trinity by memory,
understanding and will: another by the root, the stem, and the branch.
Augustine shows it by a man's own experience of himself; who both is, and
knows himself to be, and loves both his being and knowledge thereof. de
Civit. Dei. lib. 11. cap. 26. But his reason in the 24. Chap. from Genesis 1. is
of more force, which is this; He that said, Fiat, must needs be the Father of
that Word: but you must understand that word in Himself, or that eternal word
or decree, of which our Lord speaks, John 5.19. And because the creature was
made thereby, it must follow, that it was made by his word. And where it is
further said, that all that was made was exceeding good; if by goodness you
understand the Holy Ghost, the whole Trinity is manifested unto us in his
works: another explaines it by the fountain and the stream; to which Cusa
adds the sea, and if these (says he) be supposed infinite, then must all of
necessity be one water. And the same Cusa lib. de Filiatione Dei. expresses it
by the knowledge in the mind of the master; the word signifying that
knowledge, and the spirit, life or meaning of the word proceeding from the
knowledge, and the word, whereby the scholars are instructed. And have not many
of these comparisons ground in the holy Scripture, Ioh. 1.1. Heb. 1.3. Esaias
11.1. and elsewhere? But Raymund, not by foreign comparisons, but by the
essential properties of the infinite being, in the real relations of every
term in unity of that one being, has with more cleerenesse expressed to man's
weak understanding, the unspeakeable mystery of the Trinity in the unity of
one undivideable nature; as I have showed in the Preface, in the being of
goodness, and Reason 3. of infinity or greatness, and Reason 8. of
understanding. And although I would not err from company; yet seeing I have
such company both of the ancient and later writers, which by the adversary
himself are confessed to be of incomparable learning, and Divine honesty; I
need not be ashamed of my company. But notwithstanding all this invective
against reason in things of faith; see the young man by and by in the Sorbon.
The power of God, says he, in the creation of the world, wrought upon that
which was not to cause it to be. Therefore God is Almighty: for this must be
the conclusion, howsoever he would turn it to shut out the use of reason: but
that will not follow upon the premises. So in the case of man's redemption, of
the incarnation of God, of the resurrection, he is over the head and ears in
Aristotle, and history; but all to prove these things in reason impossible.
And it is yielded, that all these things are utterly beyond the course of
nature, but yet upon better and higher principles than Aristotle knew, they
will all appear possible, and necessary, and then his reasons shall be
answered. To this order the declamer would bring their consubstantiation, and
that which does necessarily follow thereon, the bodily presence of Christ in
every place: And here he does far surpass himself, and by two bodies in
one place, will prove it possible that one body may be in all places; because
God has absolute power of all the nature of being. But if this reason be good
and sufficient, then is he injurious and unconstant to himself, so to debar
the use of reason in the questions of faith: and if that bodily presence of
Christ in every place for which he labors so, had any ground in the Scripture,
if it brought any hope or comfort to the conscience; if the Primitive Church,
or the Councels, or the ancient Fathers had ever taught it; I think that by
this time reason would have found how to make it more probable than it is: but
because it is no Article of our Creed, it is not fit to trouble you any further
hereabout.

(d) Therefore God does bring forth eternally his Son. Re. 4.] The truth of
this conclusion has been diversely gainsaid. For some have utterly denied the
Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Godhead; others with this truth have
blended their own devices. The heretics which held that as there was but one
being in the Deity, so there was but one Person called by diverse names, of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; were of diverse families, according to
the names of the special maintainers of this opinion; but best known by the
name of Sabellius, one of the most subtle defenders thereof, about the year
260. which heresy after a long sleep was again awaked about the year 1110
by one Porretanus, who affirmed that the Persons in the Godhead differ not,
save only in the apprehensions of our mind, not by any real or true
distinction. The Jews likewise among other reasons do therefore disclaim the
Christian Religion; because they suppose that by the Trinity of Persons, is
taught a plurality of Gods, contrary to that which is Deuteronomy. 6.4. The Lord our
God is one Lord. The Turks also deny the Trinity of Persons, and hold it
therefore impossible for God to have a Son, because he never had a wife. Now
of those that held a Trinity, Simon that witch, of whom you read, Acts 8.
when the gall of his bitterness had levened him thorowout, gave out of
himself, that he in the person of the Father gave the Law to Moses in the
days of Tiberius, suffered (in show) under the Person of the Son, and
afterward came down on the Apostles in fiery tongues. August. de Haeres. cap.
1. Hierarcha also, from the words of the Ni^en Creed, that Christ was light of
light, affirmed, that the three Persons were as three lights, of which one
took light of another, and so he made the beings of the persons separate and
apart, whereas the Fathers in that C^uncell meant not any division, or being
apart, but that the Son is of the substance of the Father, without any
lessening or abatement of the Fathers being, as one light takes light of
another without any love of light in the former. The Metangismonites, so called
from their opinion taken from vessels, that they might avoid the opinion of the
separate being of the Persons, held that they were as vessels contained one
within another, falselie supposing with the Anthropomorphites, or Man-shapers,
that God was bodily, and so contained within a certain space, and again
misunderstanding that text of Scripture John 14.11. where our Lord says, I am
in the Father; so that in the Divine nature they supposed some thing greater,
which was the Father, and something less, which was the Son, and a third
thing within them both, which was the Holy Ghost. But against that bodily being
which they conceived, you have reasons sufficient in the 9. Chapter. The text
of S. John makes the matter more plain: for as it is impossible that two
bodies should be each one within another (except by way of commixation) so it
quite overthrowes that foolish opinion, because it is thrice there added, that
the Father is in the Son; so that of necessity there can be but one being
of them both. For if the being of God be not most simple and pure, as was
showed before Chap. 9. And if every being answers to the Original, then the
essence of the Son must be most pure as the Father is; so that if each of the
Persons be in the other, there can be no difference but only in the manner of
being only, See August. de Civit. Dei lib. 11. Cap 10. Then concerning that
third falsehood, which they supposed of a greater and lesser being, it cannot
possibly stand with the nature of infinity, whether it be understood of
extension, or of virtue only. The Triformians likewise to cross the error of
Sabellius, affirmed three Persons, and that the whole and entyre being of the
Godhead was in all the three taken together; yet not in every person wholly,
but so, as one part of it was in the Father, another part in the Son, and a
third part in the Holy Ghost. By which falsehood it would follow, that the
Godhead were in it self a divide^ble being and so a compound, contrary to that
which is concluded Chap. 9. The Tritheites are yet more mad then the former,
that it may appear how boundless error is. They make the being of God not
one and the sam^, as the Triformians did; but affirm that there is a threefold
nature, and distinguish the Persons in their essence, or absolute being, in
place also, and other differences of particular substances, as Peter, James,
and John, and so make three Gods, different and apart each from other. The
Tetratheites would seem more subtle then all that had been before them: for
they beside the three Persons of the Godhead, supposed a fourth being, which
did communicate it self to all the three, by which communication of divine
nature, every one of those three became God. By which sottish opinion it must
follow that none of those three Persons could be either infinite, or eternal,
if they receive their being from another; if they be God by grace only and
communication of another being than their own; neither can their being be
simple and one, having one being of themselves, and another imparted unto them.
But if that being which they call that fourth common being, be that one most
simple, pure, and eternal being, which we confess to be God; then it must
follow necessarily, that in that being there be three Pers ns, (as has been
declared in the Chapter before) in every one of which, the whole Godhead is all
in all, and all in every one, not by communication from another; nor by
participation only; but by the whole and proper possession of every Person
essentially; so that the Godhead is no other being than that which is in the
three persons; nor the three Persons any other thing than that manner of being
which is in the Godhead eternally: but they prove it thus; Where are one, and
three truly and really different, there must needs be four: But in the
Deity there is one being, and three Persons really distinguished, therefore
four several beings. I answer. Where is one, and three absolute beings, there
must needs be four: but in the Godhead there is one absolute being, and three
manners of being, which are the Persons; but the manner of being does not make
a number, different from the being: as Isaac is one absolute being in himself;
yet Jsaac the son of Abraham is not a second, nor Isaac the father of Jacob a
third. So the folly of this opinion, and the weakness of their reasons
appearing; it remains for the better understanding of this most high mystery,
first that answer be given to those arguments which Sabellius brought for his
opinion; secondly, that the reasons which are brought of the Tritheits be
discussed.

But that no error or mistaking may grow concerning the faith in the truth of
the thing, it will be necessary to declare what manner of distinction or
difference that is, which is to be put between the Persons of the Godhead:
for if they be truly and really distinguished, it may seem that their essence
or being cannot be one, and this was the error of the Tritheites. But if they
be not really distinguished, then there must be but one Person in the
Godhead, called by diverse names, as Sabellius said, or distinguished by our
conceits alone, according to the opinion of Porretanus. The difference of
things is either in their absolute and essential being, and that either
general, special, or individual; as in things living, or lifelesse; men and
beasts, Peter and John: or else it is according to their proprieties,
difference of respects, or manner of being; as in Isaac, his manly subsistence
of his own soul and body is his absolute individual essence; yet in respect
of the proprieties of his being, his sonneship toward Abraham, his fatherhood
toward Jacob, his lordship toward Rebecca, his mastership toward Eleazar, etc.
are several things, and really distinguished by that reality or being which is
relative, or with peculiar respects to another. The third manner of difference
is by circumstantiall accidents only; as one part of the white wall may seem
more shining and white than another, because more light does fall upon it. The
fourth sort of differences are only such, as we in our understanding are
compelled to make. The Persons of the Godhead are not distinguished one from
another in their essence, or absolute being, as the Tritheits affirmed: for
this is only one in all substantially: but yet in the manner of this being
they are distinct truly and really; contrary to that of Sabellius and
Porretanus. For whether you respect that relation, which is among the Persons
one to another, the being of the Father, as a Father is with those properties
or respects which make a real being of a Father, distinct from the Son, and
so from that eternal action of his generation, whereby the Son is produced
or brought forth; or whether you respect the Godhead absolutely: yet seeing in
that pure and simple being nothing can be but essentiallie; it cannot be more
essential thereunto to be one in the unity of being, than it is to be a
Trinity in the difference of proprieties; that is, that God be what he is in
his essence or absolute being, and as he is in his manner of being. And as in
the absolute being of the Godhead, we say according to the necessity of the
truth, that there is wisdom, truth, goodness, etc. not as different essences,
but as so many perfections, conditions, or dignities of that one infinite
being: so likewise in the manner of his being, we are compelled both by the
sacred authority of the holy text, and the enforcement of reason, (as has
been showed) to confess a Trinity of Persons, of which every one is truly
and reallie distinguished from another; so that there cannot possibly be a
community or enterchange of their personal being. And this is that real
distinction that I mean, to wit, that clear differences of the properties in
the several Persons, whereby they are not different essences; nor different
Gods; yet different beings, or different things, that is, diverse terms of
relation with the subsistences meant thereby, and in some sort opposed. See
log. Cap. 9. n. 14. For as in the uttermost simplicity of their Divine being
which is only one; one not accidentally, or numerally, not of quantity, but
substantially one; it is not possible to suppose any difference of being,
either real, or intellectual: so in the manner, and relative properties of
that being, those differences must needs be found, whereby those terms of
relation which we call Persons, are so truly and reallie distinguished, as
that they cannot possibly be taken to be one, either in their subsistences,
or in our understanding. So then the Persons of the deity differ from the
essence of the Deity, not really, as one being differs from another being;
which the Tetratheites affirmed: but as the order or manner of being differs
from that manner of being wherein it has the foundation. But the Persons
differ one from another, as the relative properties of a being may differ among
themselves, that is, not in their essence the foundation of the properties, for
so they are but one God; but yet truly and really, according to those
differences whereby the properties or relations are distinguished: yet shall
not these differences bring in any new or different essence into the
simplicity of the Divine being, because they are only relative, and such as
follow the manner of being. But because it is essential unto the Divine being,
to have in it self all the perfection of being, therefore has God not only
a most pure, simple and absolute being, whereby he is that which he is; but
also the properties of an absolute and simple being, whereby he works that
which he works infinitely and eternally. Therefore that fear of the Jews,
that the Christian Religion by the Trinity of Persons brings in a plurality
of Gods, is only from their own error, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the
power of God, nor his eternal working.

But you ask what this manner of being or properties are, which add nothing
to the simplicity of the Divine being, and yet are therein essentially? Have I
told you all this while, and understand you not? The properties of the Divine
being are of two sorts, the first absolute, the other relative. Whatsoever you
add to the simplicity of being, must needs be a condition or property
thereof; As if you say of the being of God, that it is most simple or pure,
that is, One, Infinite, Eternal, Almighty, Glorious, Ever-working, etc. here
purity, unity, infinity, etc. are the properties or conditions of that
being, which we call God, which although they seem unto us differing in their
several respects; yet they add no other being beside that one most absolute
being of God; but only express to us the properties, conditions, or
dignities thereof, without which that being could not be perfect. The relative
properties are such as proceed from the eternity of his activitie, life, or
working: for the uttermost perfection of every thing is manifested by the
actions thereof. And because in him being and working are essentially one:
therefore whatsoever does necessarily follow, either his being, or his working,
must also be in him essentially; and therefore are these relations which we call
persons, in the Godhead essentially, whose differences notwithstanding depend
immediately upon the working of the Divine Being. S. Augustine takes up this
difference of properties gravely and wittily, thus. The being of God is said to
be simple, and so is, because he is that which he has, except that relation
which every Person has to another: For the Father has the Son, yet is not the
Son; and the Son has his Father, yet is not that Father; but yet every Person
in respect of himself is that which he has, as life, glory, goodness, etc.
This therefore is the simplicity that he has, and that which he has is not
different, that the quality is not one thing and the substance another; de
civit. Dei lib. 11. Cap. 10. we shall understand it better by instance in some
of the Divine dignities. All the dignities of God are infinite in all the
possibilities of infinity, both of being and working; for otherwise the
dignity were not infinite, and he were not worthy to be God, if any thing
might be more excellent than he. The glory therefore of God being infinite in
working; He by that infinite working of his glory, does glorify himself
infinitely. So God infinitely glorifying is God the Father, God infinitely
glorified is God the Son, and that infinite action of glorification is God
the Holy Ghost. As when the understanding of a man or Angel does view or
understand it self; then is it in it self, not only by the essence of it
self essentially; but also apprehended and understood by it self, according
to the action of the understanding: so the mind understanding, is one term
really distinct from the mind understood, which is the image, word or
expression of the mind understanding; which mind does also differ from the
action of it self, whereby it does understand it self. So God the Father
understanding himself, is in himself God understood, the image, word, or
expression of God understanding. This is that eternal Son infinitely and
eternally brought forth: thus was the Word eternally with God, and that Word
was God, and God was that Word. John 1. For as the actions of God do not
cease; for then God should cease to be God, if he were not every way
infinite: So do they not proceed de potentia in actum, that is to take a
beginning from whence to raise themselves into perfection; for then they were
not infinite a part ante, and so not eternal. But because God is wisdom or
understanding essentially: therefore is it essential unto him to understand
himself eternally. And this is that most glorious Son, God eternized, God
understood, God glorified, willed, good, infinite, powerful, etc. by the
infinite action of eternity, wisdom, glory, will, goodness, infinity and
power: which infinite action is God the Holy Ghost. Now if this infinite
working and being of God be one essentially, as has been proved, Chap. 8. it
must of necessity follow, first that all the Persons of the Godhead are
coeternall, Secondly, that as concerning their absolute essence, there is no
difference or inequality among them, inasmuch as every Person is by his own
being God eternally, as it is said of the Son, Philip. 2.6. That being in the
form or essence of the Godhead, he thought it no robbery to be equal with
God. For seeing the essence of the Godhead is one, and that which is one cannot
possibly beget it self; therefore neither the Son is from the Father, and
the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, concerning their Godhead: but the
Son is of the Father, as concerning his personal subsistence, and so the
Holy Ghost is from the Father and the Son, inasmuch as the Son is not
understood eternized or glorified; but by the action of that being which is
actuallie understanding; eternal, and glorious: neither can there be any
action of understanding, eternizing, and glorifying, where there is not both
the person understanding, eternizing, and glorifying; and the person
understood, eternized, and glorified. Then this generation of the Son being
only by the eternal action of the Deity, it may appear how beastly and
sensual that Religion of Mahomet is, which cannot think of any other
generation than that which is between a male and his female. Oh scorn and
contempt even of honest thoughts! yet thus these swine plot to themselves their
happiness in the life to come, in feasting and sporting, and fleshly pleasure
with beautiful women. See Wene (a) Bud. page 157. Woe unto that covering of
Gog, but his end is at hand, and his destruction lingereth not: But the answer
to this argument, See Chap. 34. 5. n. 8.

Concerning the person of the Son more particularly you may read hereafter
in the 24. Chapter, and of the Holy Ghost in the 33. It remains here only to
answer to those objections which may be brought against this faith of the Holy
Trinity.

1. And first it may be said by the adversaries of this truth, that the
defenders thereof do not agree among themselves: for Thom. Aquinas in Semen.
lib. 1. did. 2. q. 2. brings this as an objection. That the persons are
distinguished by their properties, or manner of being only, therefore not
really. In answer to which he says, That every term of relation inasmuch as
it is such, must needs be distinguished from that whereto it is referred,
seeing they are opposed by a relative opposition; and therefore are really
differing: For things are either absolute, as the essences or simple beings of
things in themselves; or relative, as the Father and the Son, which differ
also really; so that although they are not different essences, yet are they more
or different things. Res. understand, according to the uttermost differences
which may be in that manner of being, which is founded immediately in the
Divine essence, or which is all one, in the working thereof. Again Keckerman,
System. Theolog. Cap. 4. to that objection of the Antitrinitarians; that if
there be unity of essence, and difference of persons, a subject and a
relation, a substance and an accident; then in the Godhead there should be
composition; which because it is not possible to be; therefore there are no
such different relations; answers, and brings in the consent of Zanchius, that
relation is not any thing of real being; that it is not any accident because
it is not being, but imports only the manner, order or respect of being. If
this be true, where is then that real difference, as Thomas speaks? But these
things are nothing different, if well examined. The purpose of one, and of the
other, and of all right meaning Doctors is utterly to deny against the
Tritheits all plurality or diversity of essences or absolute beings. And as
Keckerman for avoiding of any accidental being in the distinction of the
persons, says; that relation is not a thing of being, but only imports the
order, manner, or respect of beings one toward another; so Thomas to meet fully
with that heresy of Sabellius and Porretanus, that the distinction of the
Persons was only in names, or our understanding, holds the Persons to differ
really, and to be different things eternally without and utterly beyond our
understanding, yet conceive him so, as that these real differences are only
personal, and in the order or manner of their being, as I have showed before.
But it may be that you are not yet satisfied for the seeming difference
between these Doctors: for if this relation which they make between the
Persons of the Deity, be neither substance nor accident, nor at all any thing
of very being (as Keckerman supposes) but only a manner of being, which (for
ought that I can conceive) being nothing of being, must be but a mere conceit
of ours, the opinion of Sabellius must stand for truth; and so on the other
side, if these relations be the very beings or things subsisting; nay, if the
Divine being be the very relation of the Fatherhood and Sonneship, as Thomas
affirms both, contra Gent. lib. 4. c. 14. then if the Fatherhood differ from
the Sonneship, and that reallie (as being in Divine essence, the difference
must be most real) and so the Sonneship from the Fatherhood; and both of them
from the procession of the Holy Ghost; it seems that the Divine being must
differ really from it self, and so there can be but one being of all the
Persons, as Arrius affirmed. By relation you may understand either that
logical notion which is between the terms relative and correlative, and so
the sayings of Kecker. are justifiable, or else you may mean thereby the
things spoken of, with that mutual respect which they have each to other, and
so you must understand the doctrine of S. Thomas. For your further satisfaction
remember what I told you Introduct. in log. Sect. 4. n. 11. That those
relations which I call necessary, commonly called secundum esse, are such words
as signify, first, that mutual respect which they have to their correlatives;
and then those beings whereon they depend fundamentally. As the name Father,
first has reference to a child; next, it imports the subsistence, or person,
as of Abraham or Iesse; so double, first understands single; less, greater;
next quantities. Therefore though I think it not fitly said, that the
fatherhood is the divine essence, or that the essence is in the Fatherhood, as
Thomas speaks; for essence imports the simple and absolute being, and
fatherhood that reference which is to another: yet these relations shall not
be so merely the manner of being, but that they may make a real difference
from their correlatives, not only in regard of that substratum, or thing meant
in their second signification, which is really differing from the thing
opposed; as a Father, from a Son, Iesse from David; but also in respect of
that being whereon these relations are founded immediately: as in Abraham that
lively or natural strength whereby he is enabled to beget his like, in Isaac
that lively humanity which was begotten. As unity the transcendent is
convertible with being, both which in quantities are the ground of evennesse,
or equality; in qualities, of likeness. And therefore Keckerman to shun a
plurality of being, does unnecessarily avoid that real difference, which it
is necessary to put in the Persons of the Trinity, wherein there are more or
diverse subsistent beings, if you respect the Persons, or relations: but one
thing alone, if you regard the essence. For the realty in the difference of the
relations, can no way enforce a plurality in their absolute beings, but only
an incommunicable propriety in the things that are different. For although in
natures created, some attributes be essential, which are in the thing most
perfectly: Some accidental, as learning, Justice, and such other which are not
perfect in us: some again are but only relative, which of all other most
imperfectly belong unto us, as not necessary to our being, but sometime depend
on things without; as a mastership on his servants, a fatherhood on his
children; and even those relations which are nearest, do presuppose not only
the being of the subject, but also such accidents in the subject, from whence
the Relation does arise; as the right hand, and left hand from the position of
the members, yet in the super excellency of the divine being, whereto no
perfection can be wanting, which is possible to be either in the being, or
manner of being; in the working, or manner of working; it is necessary that all
things be supereminently, according to the most perfect manner of being, that
is essentially. And therefore these relations, which are in the Godhead, are
not so called properly, as being utterly in the simplicity of that being which
is utterly independent: yet because he has reveiled himself unto us by the
name of the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, one being: in the consideration
of which we come nearest to that relation which is properly so called in the
creature: we are compeld for help of our own understanding, which we find
so dazeled at that infinite light, to hide our Eyes, and by little and little,
as by degrees, to take a glympse thereof, and so to speak according to that
light which we discern. And as in the degrees of light, first we see the
dawning, then the shine or clear light; after the Beams, and lastly the body
of the Sun: So contrariwise in the knowledge of God from that fountain of
Light. His being which is reflected in all the creatures, we view the beams,
or immediate perfections thereof. His goodness, eternity, wisdom, and glory:
and these show themselves first in their inward working; and afterward at an
infinite distance in the creature, outwardly. In their inward working, because
they are infinite, we must acknowledge an infinite agent, an infinite object,
an infinite action; or the terms or limits of all action, from whence, whereto,
and the middle term between these two, which we call Persons. And so though
our guide his word, be that Light which shines in the darkness; yet we must
confess that he dwells in the Light, whereto none can approach, which to us is
all one with that darkness which he has made his pavillion. And as in the
Being which we conceive absolute, we put different perfections of wisdom, of
power, of goodness, etc. which nevertheless we must confess to be one
perfection; though they be truly distinguished between themselves: So in the
different relations, which we call Persons, though we know and confess them
to be really different; yet must we acknowledge the subsistences one in their
absolute being. And although the understanding in the consideration of created
beings, wonders how all these things can be in that uttermost simplicity and
unity of Being, and that after one most simple manner of Being, essentially;
yet when it remembers that that being is therefore most perfect, because it is
most simple, and that no degree of perfection can be wanting to that which is
most perfect, it dispoiles it self of all those rules which it does verify in
created things; and because it is not able by one simple apprehension in it
self, either to conceive, much less to express that perfection which is in
the simplicity of the divine being; it is content with those expressions which
it is able to make thereof; so that the truth and majesty of the thing be not
hurt thereby. Therefore whether S. Thomas deliver it thus, or Zanchius thus; So
long as we know they mean no other thing than that which the holy Scripture
has taught us, we ought not to receive with the left hand, that which they
deliver with the right.

2. Now for the opinion of Sabellius, it is said, That if every one of the
Persons, be the divine Being, then shall they all be but one Person. But every
Person in the Deity is the whole divine Being: or if the Son, and the Holy
Ghost be not the whole divine being, then can they not be God, as Arrius
affirmed. Answer, Although nothing of the Divine being be without or beside
the Persons, but that every Person is perfectly God, yet the manner of being
cannot be the absolute Being of a thing, so the assumption is false. And
although every Person, in respect of his absolute Being, be very God, yet is it
not said, that any Person according to his personal properties is the whole
divine being, no more than the Sonship of Isaac is his humanity, so the
consequence for Arrius will not hold.

3. What two things soever agree in a third, must needs agree between
themselves. The Father and the Son agree in the unity of essence: therefore
they are one between themselves. Answer. The argument is fallacious from
specialty, as I showed log. chap. 22. n. 2. For the rule holds only in
equality of quantities, except you restreine it to that wherein the agreement
is: so the Father and the Son agree in the unity of their essence, but differ
in their personal properties.

4. The essence of God is most simply and substantially one, and therefore
first not differing from it self. Secondly, incommunicable to three. Answer.
First the difference is not between it self, and it self: but in the
properties which are essentially in it self, as the individual being of
Isaac differs not from it self, but his Fatherhood toward Jacob, and his
Sonship toward Abraham, are as really different, that is as diverse properties,
as Fatherhood, and Sonship can be. Secondly, The three Persons are not
several essences, but all one essence incommunicable to any other, but they
are diverse relations in that one absolute being.

5. A Person in the deity is either finite, or infinite: if finite, he cannot
be God: if infinite, then if there be three Persons, there must also be three
infinites; or if these three infinites be but one infinite, then is there but
one infinite Person, called by diverse names. Answer. Infinity in the Deity is
the condition of the absolute being, not of the propriety, or manner of being;
as to be reasonable is in Isaac, the property or condition, not of his
Fatherhood, nor of his Sonship, but of his humanity only.

6. If there be more Persons than one, in the one only absolute being of the
Godhead; then it is necessary that there be something in them whereby they
must be distinguished, and so every Person must be compounded; or if to avoid
composition, you say that this distinction is only in relation, which brings
not any new being, but only respect to another; yet relation cannot be
without some absolute being whereon it is grounded. As in a servant there is a
being besides that reference which he has to his master. Nay if this absolute
being be the individual and most simple essence of the Deity; yet that
cannot be the foundation of diverse relations, because of the uttermost unity
and simplicity thereof. And if these relations have any other foundation, it is
not possible to avoid composition: therefore there is not any plurality or
difference of Persons. Answer. You were told before; That whatsoever is in God,
is in Him essentially, that it is not more essential to Him to be one God,
then to be three in the differences of Persons, because perfection both of
being, and manner of being are in him according to his most simple being. For
the diverse perfections of the creature came thereto by the manifold forms
therein over and above the essential forms, and must of force be Accidents.
But the superexcellency of the simplicity of the divine being, being the cause
of all perfection therein, suffers neither composition nor accident, as has
been showed, chap. 9. therefore as in the divine being, neither goodness,
wisdom, nor power, add any thing of new being, so in the working, the diverse
terms of agent, action, object, or any other words whereby we express the
difference of relations, or Persons, do not add any thing to the simplicity
either of being, or working, though they be therein essentially. No nor yet
are they properly said to be founded therein as any other things different
therefrom; though we in our weak understanding can neither conceive, nor
express them but as different terms of relation properly so called. Neither
yet shall it follow from hence that the persons are not really and truly
distinguished, for the very being of the Father as he is a Father, is in this,
He does eternally bring forth his Son. And likewise the Being of the Son,
that he is brought forth of the Father, by the infinite and eternal action of
the Father, in himself; but rather, because this production is infinite and
eternal (as was showed) therefore the Persons also as concerning their
personal proprieties, must be different eternally, though in their absolute
and individual being they be one essentially; so that as in relations
properly so called, there is the substance, the attribute, and the relation
which follows thereon: so likewise here is first the absolute Being of the
Deity; then the working thereof; and lastly the terms of that action, or the
relations ensuing, which we call Persons; yet with this difference, that in the
relations of the creature, the attribute and the relation succeeding, are both
accounted accidents: But here in the deity all things are essentially, so that
although the simple or absolute Being of the deity be not the foundation of
diverse relations, yet the action thereof must needs admit these different
terms which we call relations or persons, and that without composition, either
to make distinction of the persons, or to avoid confusion in them.

7. That relation whereby the Persons are distinguished, either is something of
very being, or else it is in the understanding only. If it be in our
understanding only, then can it not make any personal distinction: if it be
any thing of very being, yet can it not be that absolute Being common to all;
and if it be anything different therefrom, then must something be in the
Persons beside their absolute essence; which because it is impossible, it
follows, that there is no distinction of Persons. Answer. This argument is in
effect all one with the former; And you ought to have remembered, that it has
often been said, that the distinction of the persons is real; and therefore
not in our understanding only. The Persons taken together in their absolute
essence admit no distinction, but are all essentially one God. And so every
person by himself in his essence is likewise God. But the persons understood
apart according to the propriety of their personal beings, are really
distinguished, and that real distinction is their Personality, and that
personality is their real distinction; and that relation whereby they are
distinguished, is nothing different from any of these; nor yet the propriety of
their personal being is any other thing than that relation. Therefore though
the persons are not distinguished by or in that absolute being wherein they are
all one; yet is it most falsely brought in thereby, that any thing shall be in
them beside their essence, whereby they are distinguished. For the distinction,
or difference of the persons arises from the action only, or working of the
Absolute Being, which yet is essentially in the absolute Being, and differs not
therefrom, no more than heat in the fire does differ essentially from the fire;
or reason, feeling, and growth in a man, does differ essentially from the soul
of man.

8. Every relative depends necessarily upon the correlative. But nothing which
is depending upon another, can be truly God. Therefore either the Persons
differ not by relations only; or none of the persons can be God; or else there
is no relation, and so no distinction of the persons at all. Answer. It is a
fallacious and froward kind of arguing, to press the propriety of speech or
use of words to darken the truth of things, see log. cap. 21. n. 5. It has
been said, 1. that the being of God is supereminently above all being, above
all created understanding to conceive. 2. That relation in created things does
not only presuppose a subject, but also some quantity, quality, action, or
other affection in the subject whereon that relation does depend. 3. That those
relations in the persons of the deity are nothing else but the very personal
proprieties, and that the word Relation (as many other beside) is taken into
use in this argument only, to help the expressing of our understanding,
though indeed properly it be not in the divine being, yet can we not conceive
but that there is an order in the procession of the persons (as I have said
elsewhere) yet not such as shall bring in any dependence, no not in the
personal proprieties, because the action or eternal working whence the
personal differences do proceed, is essentially in the Godhead; or if
dependence must needs be yielded unto, yet seeing it can be nothing but
only the order of procession in the persons of the Godhead, it brings in no
such inconvenience, as that thereupon it should follow, that either the Son,
or the Holy Ghost were not God. So the foundation of the doubt being but a hill
of sand, the whole building proves but a trifle.

And these are the principal reasons brought for the Sabellian heresy. The
authorities of the Holy Scripture which they falsely allege hereto, are such
as prove the absolute unity of the divine Being, as you have heard before in
the end of the eighth Chapter: which Texts as they do most strongly confirm
the eternal truth of the absolute being of one God: so do they nothing
gainsay the Trinity of the Persons, which other Texts of the Scripture teach,
as you have partly heard, and shall hear further hereafter, when we come to
speak in particular of the Persons of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. So it
remains now, only to answer that which is brought for the opinion of the
Tritheites, which poor fancy though it may vanish at the fight of the Reasons
which have been brought for the simple and one Being of God in the eight
Chapter: yet because it would justify it self by this doctrine of the
Trinity; you shall see what the strength of their Reason is.

9 That which is begotten and that which is not begotten, must needs be very
different. The persons of the Trinity are begotten, as the Son; and not
begotten, as the Father, and the Holy Ghost. Therefore if every person be God,
they are different Gods. Answer. The things, which in no respect are different,
must be the same; and there can be no difference put between things, which
brings not in a denial on the one side, and an affirmation on the other. And
this opposition is between all things howsoever differing. So between the
Persons of the Deity there must be a relative opposition. As the Father, ergo,
not the Son: the Son, ergo, not the Father, etc. because there is a
relative distinction; but this does nothing at all enforce a plurality of Gods,
or a difference of absolute Beings, but of the Persons only.

And if you desire to see other arguments like these, read Thomas Aquinas.
cont. Gent. lib. 4. Cap. 10. and their Answers. cap. 14. see also the note (a)
on the 24. chap. following, sect. 9. and note (a) on the 33. chap. But the
answers to all objections will be easy, if you remember what has been said,
and suffer not your self to be carried away with show of reasons taken from
natural things; which though they be most true in the creature, which had a
beginning; yet can they no way bound or bind the infinite and eternal truth
of Him that is Lord and Creator of nature, as I have remembered you elsewhere.
Remember also to consider in Christ, his essence, which in all the Persons is
coeternall and one: and His Person begotten eternally of the Father. And in
this Person distinguish His natures divine, and humane, from his offices:
wherein remember. 1. that His sending and obedience abate nothing from His
equality with the Father, concerning the unity of their essence. 2. that these
names which import His office, are spoken of Him in respect of both His natures.

CHAP. XII. That in the Glorious Deity there be Three Persons, and no more.
YOu miss here a great deal of learning and wit, which other men have showed
in the mystery of unity, and the number of the Three. But because the reasons
that might be made from thence, would be but only inductive; and I desire to
stand with you on the lower and plain ground; let us leave those high
Speculations to them that please to read them among the Cabalists, in Brixianus
his comment. Symbol. and elsewhere, and see what other reasons can be brought
for the question in hand.

1. Nothing can possibly be in the Deity but according to the uttermost
perfection of Being: that is essentially, and necessarily. Therefore if it be
not necessary to put more Persons than Three in the Godhead, then is it not
possible. But it is not necessary to put more persons in the divine Being:
either Father, Son or holy Ghost. For so the Fatherhood, Sonship, and
procession of the Holy Ghost should not be perfect in these. And if in these
Persons there should not be perfect Production; then it might follow, that
there were a disability in the producer; and so the first principle of all
should be imperfect, unable and weak. So nothing besides it, nothing after it
could be perfect. But all these things are impossible. Or if the other Person,
or Persons to be put in the Godhead, should be neither Fathers, because they
did not produce; nor Sons, because they were not produced; nor yet Holy Ghosts,
as not proceeding: then should they be most idle, and defective in the first
principle of all Being; and therefore not necessary, and therefore not possible.

2. The same number must be to the Persons of the deity, which is to the
terms or perfections of the divine dignities, for otherwise the perfections of
the dignities, and the Persons of the Deity could not be consubstantiall and
the same, as has been showed. But the perfections of the dignities are three
essentially. For in that which is essentially wisdom or understanding (as we
have proved that God is, c. 8.) the action of understanding is an essential
mean between that which does understand, and that which is understood, and
these three terms are one understanding, and one understanding has these
three essentially. Therefore in God there is unity of essence, and that
substantial: and likewise a Trinity of Persons, and yet substantial, that the
terms may differ infinitely from accident, confusion, and contrariety. But if
the Trinity be in the Deity substantially; it is impossible there should be
more, or fewer Persons therein than three.

3. If in the Godhead there be but one infinite Agent, whose Action is
likewise one infinite Action like himself, then it must needs be, that the
object of this action be also infinite and one. But it has been proved, that,
God this agent of whom I speak, is only one, chap. 8. and that his action is
infinite and one, chap. 10. For if it were not infinite, it could not be one,
nor in Him One, if not infinite: Neither yet can the action be infinite if the
object be finite; nor one, if the objects be many. And beyond these it is
impossible to assign any limit or term necessary to action; nor yet can
action be without any of these, as you may understand by this ensuing
induction. Therefore in the Deity, the Persons are three only and no more.

4. The power and propriety of all inferior causes depends only on the
highest and first cause of all. And all effects are the true images of their
causes. And no action can be perfect but in the number of three. For the
perfection of every action is in the Agent, the object, and the action
thereabout, and these are only three. So the terms of motion, from whence,
whereto, and the middle term between them are only three. a Therefore the
divine Persons are three and no more.

5. The whole Being of a beginning must needs be most perfectly in that which
is the first and chief beginning of all beginnings: so as that it cannot
receive a Beginning from another, nor yet be a beginning to it self; so can
it not be worthy the name of a beginning, if it be not a beginning to another
Being coessentiall, and like it self. But in the perfect being of a beginning
taken actively and passively, there must be three terms and no more; that is a
Beginner, a Being begun, and an action of Beginning. Therefore there be three
Persons in the Deity and no more. And this is that which is said, Ephesians. 4.6.
There is one God and Father of all, and Ioh. 1.18. The only Begotten Son
which is in the bosom of the Father has declared Him unto us. And again, Ephesians
4.4. There is one Body, one Spirit one Lord, etc. And yet more clearly, 1 Ioh.
5.7. There are three which bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the word, and
the Holy Ghost, and these three are one.

Notes.
(a) THerefore the Divine Persons are three and no more. Reason. 4.] Against
this conclusion i^ is urged, out of Andr. Osiander by Murschell the declamer of
whom I spoke before cap. 1. note. c. That if the Father by the view and
understanding of Himself does bring forth a Person like Himself; then the
Son also, and H^ly Ghost by view of Themselves, shall bring forth several
Persons like themselves: and so there shall be a multiplication of Persons
infi^itly: or if these two Persons do not bring forth Persons like themselves;
it must needs follow, either that they are destitute of the power of
understanding; or that the understanding of the Father is more noble and
powerful than theirs. But this is impossible. For so the consubstantiality of
the Persons should be taken away. And this objection in their opinion is like
those great Stones wherewith Joshua shut up the five Kings in the Cave. But I
say, rather like that seal of the Jews on the tomb of Christ, whereby they
thought to have shut up the Lord of life among the dead. But thus is He
wounded in the house of his friends. For you may not think that hereby they
prepare to Justify the Tritheites or any other Heretics, but only to set
reason against reason, and to show how inconvenient the use of reason is in
matiers of Faith. But before I go any further, I would ask a question or two
of these opposers. Is not the Son begotten of the Father? you dare not deny
it; It is the word of the Scripture, 1 Ioh. 5.1. Is He not consubstantiall
with the Father? you dare not deny it. For the Father, and He are one, Ioh.
10.30 If then Goodness, Infinity, eternity, almightinesse, wisdom, etc. be
the very being of God, as has been proved; is it not necessary that these
excellencies be active in that divine generation? for how otherwise can He be
the Image of his Father? Heb. 1. And if so, wherein have Raimund, Melancthon,
Scaliger, Keckerman, or other learned men offended, that they should be so set
at naught by a Phrase-gatherer? But I smell the Fox; they can sophisticate
authority of Scripture, of Fathers, of Councels, for their Consubstantiation,
the maine point of their private opinion: B^t by no means can they tell how to
make it stand with reason, and therefore that their consubstantiation might be a
matter of Faith, would they so fain make a divorce between faith and reason. If
this were not the very cause, so great a Clearke as Osiander, seeing his reason
was contrary to his faith, if he could not have answered it, should have
studied thereunto, lest it might turn the unstable from the Faith. But what if
wilfully he would not know? had he read nothing of Tho. Aquinas? This Thomas
proposes this same doubt, and answers it in his first book on the Master of
Sent. Did. 7. q. 3. and. 4. where he makes the objection thus. All the power
which is in the Father, is also in the Son: therefore also the power of
begetting. To which he answers, that the word Power, does signify either the
simple essence of power, and so it is in all the Persons one and the same: or
the order thereof to some determinate Act; and so the same power is in the
Father, and the Son; but in the Father to beget, and not to be begotten: in the
Son to be begotten, and not to beget, and this is the real distinction of
their Persons. So that the objection is only from that fallacy of the
Accident, see log. chap. 21.^.3. To this he brings the reasons of Anselme. The
least inconvenience is not possible to be in the Godhead, but if the Son could
beget another Son, and He again another Son, etc. the process might be
infinite. But this is impossible. Therefore the Son cannot beget, no more
than He can cease to be a Son, and to be begotten. Again, He that cannot
be the Father, cannot beget. But the Son cannot be the Father; for so all
difference and propriety of the Persons should be taken away. Therefore the
Son begets not: nor yet the Father begets any other Son. John. 1.14.18. For
as nothing of the Fatherhood can be out of the Father, so nothing of the
Sonship can be out of the Son, for so the production of the Son should not be
perfect: neither is the dignity of their essence any thing abated hereby: for
that in every Person is only one: but in the Father, it is called Fatherhood;
in the Son it is called Sonship; and in the Holy Ghost it is called
Procession. And again, in his Sum. Theol. part. 1. cap. 42. he proves there
can be but one Father, one Son, and one H^ly Ghost, for such reasons as you
may read there and judge of their force. Moreover in the 4. book cont. Gent.
cap. 13. he proposes this very obj^ction almost in so many words, and answers
it thus. The Son of God is also God, yet not another God; differing only in
this, that He proceeds from the Father. And if he be not any other God; then
also must there be one Power, one understanding of them both. So that the Son
differs from the Father, only in this, that he proceeds from Him; and this is
the propriety of the Father, that the Word proceeds from Him; and of the Son,
that he proceeds from the Father. Neither is this any weakness in the Son,
that he begets not another Son, because both the Father, and the Son, are
as the same Deity; so the same power: one of begetting, the other of being
begotten, which difference is only in the relations. And again in the 26.
chap. of the same book he answers. That he that makes this objection ought to
have considered; that the Son of God is God; not as begetting; but only as
being begotten. For the essence being one, the difference between them must
be only by that relation which is in their original, or procession. Relation
(I say) not that which is founded in quality; for so there would be
unlikenesse: nor that which is in quantity; for so there would be inequality
in their being; but that which is in action only, action (I mean) not
transient, wherein the Agent has a prerogative of power, on an outward
subject, to cause passion therein; but immanent only; wherein that which is
produced, is coessentiall and coequall with the producer: So that the
difference is only in the order of procession only. But I suppose such a
learned Master as Osiander, whose petits dare so boldly censure, and set at
naught whom they please, could not be ignorant what so great a Doctor as
Thomas, had so often answered. It may be he held the answers i^sufficient; yet
he should have showed the weakness thereof. He held it not worth his pains:
a careless answer. But let us once more be bold to look on this mighty Goliath
a little nearer, and try what cunning he has, at his weapon. If the Father by
the understanding of himself does bring forth a Person like himself, then the
Son also, and Holy Ghost by understanding themselves shall bring forth
persons like themselves: for otherwise they cannot be (...) or consubstantiall.
I deny the consequence, and why? because the reason thereof binds me to
deny it: for if the Persons be consubstantiall, that is, of one and the same
most simple being; it is necessary, first that the whole being be in every
Person: for if the being be divideable (as Hierarcha and the Triformians
thought) then can it not be most simply one. Secondly, that that one most
simple being, be likewise no other thing than the three Persons: for if that
infinite being, might by the manifold actions of the understanding be imparted
by every one of those Persons, to multiply more Persons, then should they not
be (...) but (...), as Arius granted, that is, not of one and the same, but
only of like being, as Peter, James and John, of which every one has the
common ability of kind to propagate his like. But thus the being in the three
Persons could not be individual and one, but the Father communicates his whole
being to the Son, so that there remains no difference of being, but of
principal, original, or begetting only. Moreover the consequence cannot
follow but upon this most false supposition, that there be diverse intellections
or several workings of the Divine understanding in every Person: whereas the
understanding of God, being his most simple being, and that most individually
one, the action likewise of his understanding must be but one most simple act
of understanding, infinitely and eternally: for as he cannot cease to be; so
can he not cease to understand at one action infinitely and eternally
whatsoever is understandable in himself or his creature: so that the Persons
cannot have several acts of understanding, as accidents or proprieties, nor
yet can they be any other thing than the several terms properties or
subsistences in that one infinite understanding, as our Lord teaches us John
5.19. The Son can do nothing of himself, save what he sees the Father do:
for whatsoever things he does, the same things also does the Son likewise.

Thirdly, this consequence does not only utterlie take away the distinction of
persons (as was showed) but would also thrust into the Divine understanding
that which is utterly false and utterly impossible, and that contrary to the
evidence of the Holy text: for our Lord says, John 10 15. As the Father
knows me, so know J the Father. But it is certain that the Father knows
not any thing but as it is: therefore not the Son, but as the Son; neither
does the Son know the Father, but as the Father; nor yet himself, but as the
Son: therefore it being impossible for the Persons to understand themselves
otherwise than they are; it is not possible for the Son or the Holy Ghost by
understanding themselves, to become the Father, and so to bring out other
Persons, as this lewd consequence would enforce.

But the ground of this mistaking (which I tell you of for avoiding of the like
cavils) is this, that they consider not the superexcellency of the Divine
being; but measure it by the short and scanty rules whereby they measure the
creature. It is true, in things here below, that according to those natural
causes whereby every thing is brought forth; so may it likewise bring forth the
like: because that strength or power is given thereto, for the propagation and
preservation of kind in the like, which it cannot uphold in it self; by
reason of corruption, neither is the generation of natural things but with
imperfection; and their multiplication by decision of the seed into diverse
parts. Neither does any father communicate his whole being to that which is
begotten by him, neither can the species or common nature (so far forth as it
is multiplicable even by one alone) be sav^d whole and entire in any one
individual. But nothing of all this is in the most glorious spiritual and
divine generation: for that power of generation is not received, but
essential; so that which is begotten, is eternal and incorruptible. The
generation also is in the uttermost perfection, because the whole infinite
being is communicate thereby: but that not for any abasement in the principle,
but because of the infinite perfection thereof. Neither is matier for
multiplication, either possible, or needful here; because all the fullness of
Fatherhood, Sonneship, and procession are herein perfectly, substantially,
infinitely, and eternally; because the procession is not such as tends to any
thing without: for so that which proceeds should not be coequall to the
principle from whence it does proceed. But this procession is in the Divine
being only, in every Person according to his peculiar subsistence, answerable
whereto, no generation can be found in all the creatures.

2. Another objection there is to the like purpose out of Heb. 1.3. where it is
said of the second Person, that he susteineth all things by the Word of his
power. So that if he being the Word of his Father, have also a Word whereby he
susteineth all things, which therefore is another Word, and not the things that
are sustained thereby: it may seem that there is a multiplication of Persons,
and that the former objection is not fully answered. I have said, Log. Chap.
29. n. 5. That the appointment of all natural causes to the bringing forth of
their effects, is the rule or law of Nature. Now this law is that necessity,
fate, or destiny which is ordained by his eternal decree that made Nature,
and all things therein, and blessed all the living creature with power to bring
forth according to kind, as it appears Genesis 1. And this is that Word of which
S. Paul speaks, No other divine Person, but that Word whereby he melts the
ye, and Snow, Psalm. 147.18. that ordinance which the creature cannot pass,
Psalm. 148.6. Of which you may read every where in the Holy text, and
especially in that admirable book of natural and Divine Philosophy, the
book of Job, in comparison of which all Aristotle's naturalls are not worth the
while. For seeing all natural causes have their strength from him, has not
he bound nature within those limits, beyond which he gave it no further power
to work? And within which he is truly said to work by his word, or by his
power, in the strength of which alone, Nature her self does work.

Maker of Heaven and Earth.
CHAP. XIII. That the World is not Eternal.
Section. 1. THe purity, or uttermost simplicity of the Divine being, is the
fountain from whence all the perfections which are therein, do flow: for
neither can any thing be living, powerful, wise, continual, glorious, etc.
except it be: neither can any thing be such infinitely, if it have not an
infinite being: but an infinity of being cannot be but with the uttermost
simplicity of being. For whatsoever is put to being, takes away the
simplicity thereof, and must needs be a limitation thereto, and so take away
the infinity also. The manifold perfections therefore in the Divine being, are
not additions of other beings to make composition therein, or to take away the
simplicity thereof, seeing they all signify one and the same being; but
because the most simple being must needs be the first of beings, as being
altogether in act or perfection, and no way in possibility of being: for then
wereit not a most simple being, if it were both in act of being that which it
is, and in possibility of being that which it is not: therefore must all other
beings depend hereon; nay be herein: because all things are virtually
contained in their principles. And this is that eternity of the creature which
it had in the infinite wisdom and power of God before it was, Genesis 2.5. For
seeing that in God is infinite perfection and that nothing can be wanting to
that which is perfect; neither yet can any thing be perfect but in him:
therefore the first and highest being of all things must be in his perfection.
But because absolute perfection must needs be with the uttermost simplicity,
without othernesse or change: therefore must all things in God be one, and he
though one alone, yet virtually all things. But because all things were in him
eternally one; that they might in time be different in themselves, (for
otherwise they could never at all, either have been, or have been different)
It is necessary to grant, that in that one absolute being which the creature
had in God, there must be first a possibility for it to be in it self: for as
things utterlie impossible can never be; so can there be no possibility of
being but by him. Secondly, a possibility for the things being to be different
among themselves, and that not only in their several kinds, but also in
their particular existences; and this for the manifestation of that manifold
wisdom of the Maker. And from hence thirdly succeeds that actual being, which
things that are being have, by that Holy pleasure or will, by which they are,
and continue in their several beings: which Will must needs be partaker both
of the infinite power, and infinite wisdom; that it might effect that which
was possible, and foreseen. And thus is there in the Unity of the creature, a
Trinity also in possibility, in difference, and actual being; that we
should never forget to adore the eternal Trinity in the Unity.

But the question of the worlds eternity, is only about this last manner of
actual being: for it is not denied that it is eternal in respect of that
being which it had in God, as the cause; or in it self, as possible to be:
because that while it was not being, it had not any power to resist that
Almightinesse, which called it out of not being into being; though to speak
more properly, that eternity which it had in pure possibility, was not in it
self, because it was not: and seeing that which any thing has of it self is
first therein, and more proper thereto than that which it has of another:
therefore the world of it self having not being, it could not possible be
eternal, but only in his eternal purpose which had appointed it unto this
being. The World therefore in God, the principle, is not begun, but eternal,
and one: but whatsoever is severed from this Principle, can neither be one,
nor yet eternal, but comes into the reckoning of othernesse and change, and so
of necessity must be subject to time, wherein alone all change is wrought.

2. 1. But here it will be asked, whether God who before the creation of the
world rested eternally in his own glory and happiness, suffered not some
alteration in this, that he wrought without himself that which he had not
wrought before, and how he can be said both to work and to rest, Genesis 2.2 and
yet to be without all shadow of change Iam. 1.17.

2. Then how He infinite in goodness and truth, and ever one in himself,
subjected the creature to wretchedness, continual corruption and change.

3. Thirdly, seeing that to an infinite and eternal power all things are
always possible; why the world was not brought forth many ages heretofore;
that seeing it must be subject to vanity, it might before this have been freed
from corruption, and brought to that liberty whereto it does yearne, Romans 8.22.

1. To the first I answer; that, although the creature does of necessity
supposea Creator, without which it could not be; yet on Gods part there was no
necessity to enforce him to create; but he created only according to the
pleasure of his own will, as it is confessed Revel. 4.11. For nothing was able
to impose necessity, but only that which was superior in dignity and
power, which the superexcellencie of the Divine being suffers not; neither can
the freedom of an infinite will, such as the will of God is, be guided either
by chance, by destiny, or by necessity. But because he is infinite in
goodness, he envied not to any thing the being thereof, but out of not being
brought it into being, by his Word our Lord Jesus Christ. Athanasius de
Incarnat. Verbi. But in this creation he suffered no alteration, who had
eternally wil'd the creature to be in the time appointed, and in the time
appointed brought it out, only by the motion of his will: for his will, his
wisdom, and his power being infinite and one being, no other motion, labor or
alteration needed, but only to will that the creature should then be created,
when he had from all eternity willed that it should be created. So then it
was in him both to create, that it might appear that he had no necessity of
the creature, who was absolutely perfect without it, and yet at his pleasure to
create; lest that which was not, might seem to be exempted from his power: and
again, that the creature might be blessed in his goodness, and yet he
himself without all shadow of change. As the mind of a man, which has
plotted a convenient house, and given or described the model to the builder;
suffers no alteration by the house being builded. Therefore after the
commandment of water, the first matier of all things to be: the labor of the
Creator mentioned in the six days, was only the appointment of secondarie
causes, to work in their times, to those ends which he had determined, for
the bringing forth of their several effects: for as the first agent moves all
secondarie agents; so it is necessary that all their ends be ordered to the
ends of their first mover. So then the six Evenings of the being of things,
first potentially in their immediate or next causes; and in their fieri, or way
to perfection, and the Mornings of their actual and perfect being, are the
times See Esaias 66.8.
ages or days wherein they were brought forth by their natural causes, all
moving in the power of the first cause, unto their perfection appointed by his
eternal decree. And this ordering of causes, and giving strength thereto, was
his first work: as his continual blessing and upholding the creature by his
word, is his continual work wherein he takes delight. Heb. 1.3. and Psalm.
104.31. But his rest in the seventh day, was his ceasing to bring forth new
creatures; which day is therefore said not to have any evening, because his
rest, delight, or glory is eternal: and is therefore commanded to be
sanctified by us with a Memento, because it is a pledge unto us, that after the
six ages of this worlds travel and weariness in vain, we shall at last be
made partakers of his rest. Compare herewith Genesis 1. and 2. to ver. 4. Esaias
46.10. and 2. Pet. 3.8. But this is beside my purpose, and therefore I leave it.

2. To the second question of that ill which is in the creature, though I have
answered sufficiently note (a) on Chap. 6. yet I say further, that contraries
are best known one by another: ^ight by darkness; health by sickness. And
therefore, that we may not only desire, but also better know and enjoy our
future happiness; it is fit that we should taste the momentary wretchedness
and miseries of this life; yea drink at last the gar-ans of death it self,
that we may truly enjoy the happiness of everlasting life. O death! how
bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that has rest with his possessions?
But how acceptable is thy doom to him that is vexed in all things? Eccles.
41.1. And questionless, if the elect Angels never had any experience of
sorrow; neither did at any time sin (for he found no steadfastness in his
servants, and laid folly upon his Angels. Job. 4.18. And in his beloved Son
alone is he well pleased. Matthew. 3.17.) Then do they wonderfully by our
afflictions enjoy their own happiness, while they daily behold our manifold
miseries, and yet know us to be heirs of equal glory. Luke 20.36. for
therefore are the sons of David daily scourged with the rods of men, corrected
every morning, and die at last, that they may be like unto their Lord, and be
made conformable unto his death: for if the Prince of our salvation was
consecrated in afflictions; how should we hope for any portion in his glory;
if we should not with joy be partakers of his sufferings? For therefore by his
own example did he teach us obedience, because in obedience only we must
walk the way to everlasting life. A second reason is, that we may be humbled
before him when we consider whereto we are come of our selves, that is, into
misery, but not out; and consequently that we may be thankful for that
abundant grace, by which we are delivered, when our sufferings shall be
recompensed with an exceeding weight of glory.

3. The third doubt concerning the time of the worlds creation has heretofore
so troubled some men's brains, that they thought there had been infinite
worlds, yet so, that after every a ten thousand years all things return
again to the same state wherein they had been before: for whether through the
weakness or strength of the imagination, in some fore-catchings of the shadows
of things to come, (for it may be argued both ways) a man oftentimes
persuades himself, that he has been in the same place, with the same
persons, seen or done the same things, heard or spoken the same words before;
upon which ground it seems this Pythagorean fancy was builded. But to the
doubt I answer: That it would have been as great, if the world had been made
ten thousand times the whole age of the world before and no greater, if it
should have been made as much after the present age: for as if you suppose an
infinite space; wheresoever you shall set a prick or point therein, it must
needs be in the mids thereof: so time, how long soever, yet compared to
eternity, can be no more then as an indivisible center therein. And therefore
S. Paul takes up this question Act. 17.26. That God has assigned the seasons
which were ordained before, and he that puts not all things in his power, to
do both what he will, and as he will, and when he will, denies him to be God.
Now let us see the reasons for the Christian faith, that b the world is not
eternal or everlasting, but made by Almighty God, as the Article affirms.

3. By the world you can understand no other thing, than this frame of the
whole being of things (beside the Godhead) whether heavenly or earthly,
understanding, bodily, or mixed; ethereall, or elementall; with all the causes,
and effects, proprieties, actions, or other actions that belong to every one
of them. But the word Eternal signifies diverslie. For our purpose, either it
may mean an age or state of long continuance, as the land of Canaan was
promised to Abraham and his seed for an eternal or everlasting possession Genesis
17.8. which eternity must be limited, either to that age of the world before
Christ, or at the farthest to the uttermost age and time of this world, after
the desolation determined shall be fulfilled, and they brought to their own
land again. And this must needs be the uttermost eternity of that promise
concerning the letter, as of the everlasting Covenant of Circumcision. Another
taking of eternity may be in that being which has a beginning and no ending,
as our hope is of the state of the soul, and everlasting or eternal life
after the resurrection. So the promise of the everlasting possession of Canaan,
was a type and Promise that heaven should be our eternal inheritance; whereof
we have already assurance, yea deliverie, and seizure, in that the Canaanit the
devil is driven out from thence by Jesus our unconquered Captain Apoc. 12.7,
8. etc. A third and chief meaning of eternity, is that which has neither
beginning nor ending. And so we say that God only is eternal. In the first
signification the world is eternal in that state wherein it is, and has
continued from the creation, which we hold, and so shall continue unto the
dissolution, which we hope for. In the second signification also it may be
said to be eternal, as concerning the most excellent and noble parts thereof;
as the Angels and men restored from corruption, and in them the second Ideas or
forms of all the creatures. But the last degree of eternity is utterlie
denied to the actual being of the world, and that for these reasons following.

1. Whatsoever is eternal, must also be infinite, both in the being, and the
manner of being, because there could be nothing before it, by which it might
receive any kind of limit or bounds, any defect or lesnesse of being. But c
the world is not infinite in the being thereof: for it is concluded already
Chap. 3. that God is infinite, and of infinites there can be but one. Chap. 8.
cons. 2. And in the manner of being it cannot be infinite: for in all things
brought forth, there is either quantity, contrary to infinity, or time,
contrary to eternity; there is defect, or failing, by reason of corruption
and death: there is abatement, or lesning; because that in every kind, one
particular is not so excellent as another in understanding, memory, strength,
beauty, continuance, or one virtue or other. Therefore the world is not eternal.

2. If the world be eternal, then eternity must either be the whole essence
and convertible with the essence of the world; or else it must agree thereto as
the essential form, or as a property, or as a common accident. Eternity is
not the essence of the world, for so should it belong to every part thereof
essentially: for every part is partaker of the essence of the whole. But this
is most false in all experience; neither is it the essential form thereof:
for even from thence would it follow, that the world were not eternal,
inasmuch as having matier and form, it must needs presuppose an efficient
cause, who both created the parts, and disposed the matier: for the form; it
cannot be a property thereto: for all properties proceed from the composition
or joining together of the matier and form. But composition takes away
eternity for the reason aforesaid, neither is it an accident, nor yet
appropriate thereto by accident, as any relation: for all such, by the order of
nature, are after that subject whereto they belong; whether they be immediate
accidents, or relations depending thereupon. Therefore the world in the actual
being is no way eternal.

3. Whatsoever has parts must needs be compounded, and whatsoever is
compounded or put together must needs have parts that were once asunder, and so
cannot be eternal a part ante. And again every compound, by that power
whereby it was made, may be resolved into those parts of which it was made,
whether the parts be essential, as body and soul to a man; or entyre, as
stones, timber, iron, glass, etc. to a house. But the World has parts
ethereall, elementall, incorruptible, and corruptible, animal, vegetable,
mineral, etc. Ergo, the World is not eternal.

4. All real truth is verified, first in the things of actual being, that is,
in the individuals. Secondly, in the notions or apprehensions of the things in
their intentionall or common being, either special, or more general. But if
the world be eternal, that eternity can agree only to the common being, and
not to the particular or individual beings, as to this man, that horse, that
tree, etc. So the truth of the worlds eternity, shall be intentionall only,
not real: so common intentions only may be true, where there is no
individual. But this is most false and impossible: therefore it is most false
that the world is eternal.

5. The whole World, consisting of all the parts thereof, is either a body, or
not a body. If our sense (from whence all our discourse proceeds) be judge, it
is a body. Now every body in regard of the extent thereof, is finite, is of
parts which may be measured, either one by another in halfs, quarters, etc. or
else by common measures, of inches, yards, miles, pints, gallons, etc. It has
likewise shape or figure, and dimension, by length, breadth, depth, without
which it could not be a body. But if the world be eternal; then must it be
both finite in regard of the extension, and infinite in the continuance: so
infinity shall be more powerful in a foreign subject, that is, in continuance
to make it infinite, then it can be in it own proper subject, that is, in
measure to make it unlimited: so also infinity shall be powerful in the
contrariety of good and ill, to make them eternal, and weak in the
littleness of extension. So also the world being eternal, must be for this
end, that it may be that which it is as God. Whereby it would follow that the
end of the worlds being could not be one, but contrary to it self in
generation and corruption, in good and ill; and all other contrarieties, that
are now therein. But all these things are impossible: therefore the contrary is
necessary, See Log. Cap. 26. n. 1.

6. Eternity cannot admit before and after, so that one eternal should be
before another eternal. But if the world be eternal, this must follow
necessarily: for every generation is with the corruption or taking away of
that form which was in the matier before; and every corruption is of something
that was generate before: So each of these eternals must be each before
another, and so neither of them eternal, and yet the eternity of the world
brings in these contradictions, inasmuch as generation and corruption have
been ever since the world was. Therefore the worlds eternity is impossible.

7. If the world be eternal, that eternity shall be rather ill, than good;
because the longer the continuance of the world is, the greater is the increase
of wickedness and ill, more than of that which is good: at least because of
the continuance of good and ill, the worlds eternity shall be both good and
ill. And yet because every worldly good has a beginning and an end in time,
and that every privation or taking away of any good eternally, must needs be an
eternal ill: that eternity of the world shall be nearer to ill than to good,
both because of the positive ills, and the deprivations of the goodnesses that
are therein. Moreover seeing nothing which is corrupted returns to be the same
in number, which it was before; generation shall be good and availeable to the
maintenance of the species only, not to the restoring of the actual or
individual Beings: But Corruption shall be powerful both against the
individual, and therein against the species also. And so the worlds eternity
shall be much nearer to ill than to good, and a bringing in of all these
inconveniences. Therefore it is not eternal.

8. If the world be eternal, then neither was there any first man, neither can
there be any last: without which lastnesse there cannot be any general
resurrection of men, nor place to contain them. So this eternity of the world
must be the greatest ill, as being that which brings in an impossibility of the
greatest good, that is, the hope of the resurrection and everlasting life, the
end of all our hopes. But it is impossible that this hope of man should be
frustrate, as it will appear further in the 38. chap. Therefore the world is
not eternal.

9. And if you look back on the things that have been already spoken
concerning the dignities of the Godhead, in the nine first chapters, you may
from thence make a great supply of arguments to this purpose, thus; God is,
chap. 1. And He is being essentially, with all the perfection of being
infinitely, eternally, actually; not in possibility of being any thing that he
is not, and therefore God is the perfection of being: and convertiblely the
perfection of being is God. Now terms convertible cannot possibly belong to
foreign beings: as to guide a ship at Sea, cannot belong to any but to man
alone. Therefore being cannot belong to any thing but to God alone, primarily
and of it self, but only Analogically, as it has received the Being from
Him. Therefore if the world be not God, which the fool cannot say in his
heart, the world is not eternal.

10. God is eternal, chap. 2. and eternity belongs essentially to God alone,
chap. 8. If then the world be not God; then can it not be coeternall with Him.
For as it is not possible that there should be more Gods, chap. 8. n. 7. so it
is not possible that there should be more eternals than one. Therefore the
world is not eternal. So you may reason from the simplicity of His being
proved chap. 9. n. 6.7. and from the other dignities of God which are proved to
belong to Him in the chapter before; and no less from those things which are
denied to belong to Him, as to be matier, bodily compounded; etc. chap. 9. But
in this plenty and plainness of the matier I take only that one which
follows.

11. If God be almighty and one: then it is not possible, that anything can be
but by his power alone. But it has been proved that God is almighty, chap. 6.
and one, chap. 8. n. 7. Therefore the world is by his power alone. But if it be
objected, that by his eternal power, he brought out the world eternally; yet
must it needs be, that he created it, either of nothing; or of some matier
that was not eternal; or else that he made it of a matier that was eternal.
To say that God from all eternity had created the world, either of nothing; or
of a matier not eternal, would imply a manifest contradiction. To say that he
made it of a matier which was coeternall to himself, would enforce that the
world were consubstantiall with God; or rather that it were God. For seeing his
being is most simple and one entyre being, without parts, and is not
communicated, but whole and all, and that eternity (as all his other
attributes) was proved to be God essentially, it cannot be but that the world
must be God, if it be eternal. Or if that impossibility could be avoided; yet
to say that God had eternally made the world of eternal matier, would
necessitate him to an action without himself, which would take away the
infinite freedom of his will, his glory, and perfection, which he has in
himself. Or if it be said, that the world is eternal without or beside any
action of God upon it, but of it self alone, beside the endless absurdities,
contradictions, and impossibilities that would follow thereby; It would
directly enforce, that there is no God. For if the power by which the world is,
and works; if the wisdom manifest in the ordering causes therein; if the
truth, goodness, continuance, and other attributes of worldly things, had any
other original than God; their must it of necessity follow, that God is not
infinite in these dignities of power, wisdom, truth, eternity, goodness, etc.
when so great effects of these things are altogether without Him. And to deny
unto God the infinity or perfection of these dignities, were utterly to deny
his Being, and to make him unworthy to be that which He is, contrary to all
that has heretofore been proved.

12. The holy Scriptures every where teach this truth Genesis 1. and 2. chap. Job.
38. and many places in that book beside. Neh. 9.6. confesses to God. Thou art
Lord alone: thou have made heaven, and the heaven of h^avens, with all their
host; the earth and all things that a e therein; the Seas, and all that are in
them: and thou preservest them all; and the host of heaven worshippeth Thee.
Psalm. 95.5. The Sea is His, and He made it; and his hands prepared the dryland.
Psalm. 96.5. All the gods of the people are Idols: But the Lord made the
heavens, whose armies, in Psalm. 136. are more particularly reckoned up. And
therefore does God by his own right challenge the heavens for his seat, and
the earth for his f^otstoole; because his hand has made all these things.
Esaias. 66.1.2. To this purpose you may read other Texts cited by S. Origin,
(...) lib. 3. cap. 5. The continual preservation also of the Creature, as it
is manifest in reason by the arguments before going; So it is taught, Psalm.
36.6.7. Psalm. 147.8.9. Psalm. 145.15. And Psalm. 104. is wholly in this Argument.
And that all this frame shall come to naught at last, you may read, Psalm.
102.25.26. which is also cited by S. Paul, Heb. 1. v. 10.11.12. Read moreover
to this purp se. 2 Pet. 3.10. Reu. 20.11. And that because it was made of
naught. Heb. 11.3. Sap. 11.14.

. 4. These things then being thus manifest, we are now by the way. 1. First to
consider what necessary conclusions follow here upon. 2. And then to see
whether the creation of the world do belong to every Person of the Trinity
alike, or to any one more particularly than another.

First, it is certain, that not being cannot be the beginning of Being. And
therefore it is necessary that Being be eternal. And that which is the first
of beings must needs be the cause of all the rest: So that all other beings must
acknowledge their original from thence. And because all things that are, were
in time created by that first of Beings, not according to any necessity of
natural working; as the fire according to the necessity thereof, does burn
any matier that is fit to be burnt; but only according to the pleasure of his
own will: therefore first of all it must necessarily ensue hereof, that the
continuance of all things must have the same cause, which was also of their
Being. So that for his holy wills sake alone they also continue. If he then
withdraw his supportance either from all, or from any particular creature, it
must of necessity come to naught in an instant.

Secondly, because every agent works for some end: and the greatest and best
of work-masters must needs work for the greatest and chiefest good; and seeing
there neither is, nor can be any thing greater or better than God himself;
Therefore it is necessary, that this world was created for Him. But because
He, infinitely blessed in Himself, needed not the world, nor any thing of the
world, as though he could be better thereby Psalm. 16.2. Act. 17.25. it must
follow; that the creature was for this end; that as by his Being, it was made
partaker ^f being, so by his infinite goodness it might also be partaker o^
glory and happiness. For because his goodness, and life and happiness, and
all his glories are answerable to his own being; therefore are they infinitely
sufficient for every thing, that in any sort can possibly be partaker of being.
So then the goodness of God was not increased in the creation, but manifested
only; that the creature, according to the measure thereof, might be blessed
in him. Thus then is God the end of all the creature; Because he is that
supersupreme perfection of goodness, and happiness whereof the whole creature
desires to be partaker: but that not our of any choice or purpose of the
creature; but of him alone that has created it to be partaker of that image of
his goodness.

From the first conclusion we are taught with what reverence and fear we ought
to live before him; to whose only pleasure we owe our being and continuance.
Next with what great respect and care we ought to behave our selves toward the
creature; not only men which have the same precious hopes of immortality which
we have; but likewise toward every other creature, even the least of Beings.
For although we know that all the more bodily creature was made for the use of
that which has understanding; and that not only for the exercise of the mind
in his wisdom and power that created it; but for thankefullnesse also to that
goodness which has subjected it to our use in food, in clothing, and other
such services for our ease, or conveniences; that being destitute of no good
thing, we might give our selves to his service, and praise him alone: And
lastly, that the whole creature might be blessed in man, in whom it is to
possess an eternal being: yet when we remember, that there is nothing so
mean, or seeming so base in the Creature, but that it was eternally foreseen
to that infinite wisdom even as we; that it was created by the same power,
appointed by the same foreknowledge to this or that very use; with what
reverence and fear should we carry our selves lest we abuse it, and so offer
dishonor unto the Lord and owner both of it, and us alike? especially seeing
that when we were not, he had determined so to bless us.

From the second conclusion we may learn with what patience we ought to
endure all the troubles and afflictions of this life; because we know those
precious promises whereto we are created, if we acknowledge Him faithful, and
hold our hopes unto the end, see Tit. 1.2.

The question moved, to which Person the Creation belongs, is full of
perplexity, and of any other most hard and dark, if it be well thought on.
And therefore in the solution thereof it is most safe for us to hearken to the
oracles of God alone. It is commonly and truly said, that the works of the
Holy Trinity which are without are undivided; yet so as that they receive a
certain determination or order from that man^er of Being which is in the
Persons. And therefore because the ^^ther is the fountain of Being they
commonly ascribe the creation or bringing of things into being unto Him. So
because all perfection of Sonship is in the second Person, and that there can
be no more Sons than one: therefore the redemption of mankind by the
in-dwelling of God in Man is given unto the Son, and so the sanctifying of
the church to the Holy Ghost. But if we look diligently unto the text of the
Holy Scripture, we shall find how necessary it was that the Mediator should
satisfy for the sin of the creature, because the whole creature, was made by
Him. For so we may read Ioh. 1.2.3. All things were made by that word which
in the beginning was with God. And without it was nothing made which was made.
And verse. 10. He was in the world, and the world was made by him. And verse. 14.
And that word was made flesh, (that is, took on him the whole nature of man,
body and soul) and dwelt among us, and we saw on the holy mount, Mat. 17.2.
etc. 2 Pet. 1.18. the glory thereof, that is, of that flesh or man, as the
glory of the only begotten Son of the Father. And again Col. 1.16. By him
that is the Son were all things created which are in heaven, and which are in
earth: things visible, and invisible, all things were created by him, and for
him, and in him all things consist. 1 Cor. 8.6. There is one God the Father, of
whom were all things, and we by him. Ephesians. 3.9. God has created all things by
Jesus Christ. And Heb. 1. v. 1.2. God has spoken unto us in these last days
by his Son, whom He has made heir of all things: by whom also he made the
worlds. By all which texts it is clear which S. Paul has Romans 11.36. of him,
through him, and for Him are all things. That is, that God the deliverer, which
should come out of Sion, verse. 26. And thus have these Apostles explained that
which is written. Genesis 1.1. In the beginning Elohim created heaven and earth,
which word in the whole body of the old Testament (as wisemen have observed) is
almost never spoken but of the Person of the Mediator only. I suppose then
that it is plain enough, which is spoken by our Lord, Ioh. 5. v. 19. The Son
can do nothing of Himself save what he sees the Father do: for whatsoever
things He does, the same things does the Son in like manner. That is,
whatsoever the eternal Godhead ordained in his everlasting Counsel and decree
to be done, that same does the Son execute and perform in the creature
answerably, and brings forth every thing in time according to the possibilities
and opportunities of the creature. For as the wiseman says, Ecclus. 18.1. He
that lives for ever made all things together, or at once. So the Psalmist, as
also the other Scriptures, tells us by whom and in whom, Psalm. 104.24. In
wisdom have thou made them all, that is in our Creator and Savior. So then,
it being cleared by the text of the holy Scripture that the creation of the
world was of God the Father in Christ, by Christ and for Christ; it will easily
follow how necessary it was that He our creator by His eternal Spirit should
offer himself to God for the sin of his creature, as it will further appear
when I come to that article.

Notes.
(a) EVery ten thousand years.] You may read the position in Aug. de Haer.
cap. 43. and the refutation thereof in his, 20. 21. 22. books de civit. Dei.
But the Cabalists, for the renewing of this lower world, put seven thousand
years and no more: for the restoring of the whole creature both heavenly and
earthly, they put fifty thousand years. You may read the opinion, and partly
see their reasons in Leo Hebr. de Amore. page 500. etc.

(b) The world is not eternal.] The most famoused opinions that have been
concerning the worlds eternity, are these. One, that which the Christian faith
does hold, according to the truth of the holy oracles of God, and the voice of
Reason, as you have heard: and to this truth the Stoics are said to have
consented. The second opinion is that of Plato, and his followers, who held
that the world had a beginning in time, but of an eternal matier, and that the
continuance thereof should be eternal. For seeing generation and corruption
is only by the change of forms, the matier still remaining one: therefore
they thought, that as that form which is purely without matier was
incorruptible and eternal; So likewise must matier be, which of it own
nature is utterly without form. And because matier is greedy of all forms how
differing or contrary soever; Therefore it is ever subject to change. Neither
is the heaven it self utterly freed from all power of Change, because of that
matier whereof it is, in which the power of Change is ever hid. Therefore the
world is not eternal in respect of any power in it self, either to the
production of forms or the continuance of it self under the same forms: but
first in respect of the unformed matier, and most of all in respect of that
Spirit or life, whereby it is guided and ordered; as by the internal causes:
and in respect of the divine will, and goodness, as the outward principle, and
the end: which will as it cannot repent to have done good in giving being unto
the world, and the things therein contained; so can it not will contrary to it
self, and cease to do good in the continuance of the creature in that being
which it has. You may read more to this purpose in Plot. Ennead. 2. lib. 1.
and his commentator, Marsilius Ficinus.

The third opinion is that of Aristotle, that the world was eternal, and from
God, as an eternal effect of an eternal cause. For because it seemed to him
impossible (and if you look no higher than nature alone, it is indeed
impossible) that any thing being can come out of nothing: therefore matier must
needs be eternal, and therewith generation and corruption, without which
nothing is brought forth; And because these two could not be thought to be
without the moving of the heavens, as the cause thereof, therefore both the
heavenly bodies and motion, especially circular, must be also eternal; and
herewith time, which is measured by the motion of the heavens.

But what this eternal matier should be, the Philosophers went into diverse
opinions. Heraclitus thought it to be fire: Archelans air; Empedocles all the
elements; and among the rest, one, one thing; and another, another; as you may
read in Aristotle, where he refutes them: in Tull. Acad. q. lib. 4. and
especially in Plutarch de placitis Philosophorum: and from him in many other.
Aristotle himself from Hesiod and they that had been before him, calls it
Chaos.

(...)
(...). -- In theogonia.
First was the Chaos, then the earth.
which word if they borrowed not of Moses his Tohu, which signifies empty, of
(...), that sometimes means to bring to naught: nor of that, which seem^s to
come from thence, Chohus, whereby, as Festus says, the old Latins called the
world: yet of (...), they meant by it confusion, and no way of (...), which
signifies a country, or an appointed place. Sometime this matier is called
(...), of (...), mud: For so the conclusion of earth and water is best
understood, and fittest for generation of earthly things, as Ovid delivers the
opinion, and cleeres it by comparison of the overflowing Nilus. Metam. lib. 1.

All other Creatures took their different birth,
And figures, from the voluntary Earth:
When her cold moisture with the Sun did sweat,
And Slimy Marshes grew big with heat.
So when seven mouthed Nyle forsakes the plain;
Anantient channel does his streams contain,
And late left slime the heavenly warmth does feel,
Men sundry shapes beneath the sod reveile;
Some new begun, and some to half do grow,
That half alive the rest but earth below.
But Moses, Genesis 1. delivers it unto us in the parts active and passive,
heaven, and earth; which yet before their division were both of water, as it is
manifest in that place, and 2. Pet. 3.5. According hereunto Homer. Iliad.
(...), and after him Thales affirms the first matier of all things to be
water. But the opinions of the less reckoning are those that are found amongst
the heretics of the Christians. For all the Philosophers and Poets of the
heathen, which held not the eternity of the world, acknowledged God the author
of the world under one name or other: but Simon Magus, and with him Menander,
said that the Angels were the makers of the world. Saturnius gives the honor
unto seven Angels alone, whom he makes the Creators of the world, without the
consent or knowledge of God. Carpocrates, and the Priscillianists affirmed,
that the world was made by certain inferior Angels, among whom the devil was
chief workemaster. Valentinus gave it out, that a devil which was begotten of
the thirtieth Ai^^n begot other devils, and these Sons of Avengles made the
world; and mischief, and sin are in the world, not through the wickedn^sse
and free will of man, but even by the very creation of the world it self. The
Nicholaitanes tell us, of Angels the makers of the world; and that Barbelo, who
was ruler of the eight Sphere, was overseer of the works, His mothers name was
Yaldaboth. But I have not read so far in heraldry, as to tell you who was his
Dad, nor of what house his mother came, nor yet whether his fellow workmen
were good or bad Angels. The Gnostics of the two Gods which they make (as you
have heard before) make the ill God the creator of the world; which though it
appear not, either by Irenaeus, Clement, Tertullian, Epiphanius, or by S.
Augustine; yet it is plain by Plotinus, Aenead. 2. lib. 9 who writes against
their opinions, and this in particular. Marcion made three creators: one good,
another bad, and another between them, whom they called Just. So you see how
all these heretics had madded themselves and their followers, in their
opinions concerning the Creator of all things. Others erred concerning some
parts of the creature only; as the Seleucians, and Hermians or Herm^genians,
beside their error of the worlds matier coeternall with God, denied that God
created the souls of men, but would have them created by the Angels of fire
and Spirit; contrary to that which is in Genesis 2.7. and Esaias 57.16. and 1 Pet.
4.9. That God is the faithful Creator of the soul. The Priscillianists said
that the souls of men were of the same substance and nature with God; and
being by him sent down from heaven, the devil met with them by the way, and
sowed them as seed in the flesh: whereupon it must follow, either that the
being of God is divisible into infinite parts; or that there is but one only
soul of all men; and both ways unavoydably, that God (at least in part of
Himself) must be subject to Sin; and so that either He must need a Savior;
or by His own law, be subject to eternal death. This is the fruit of
heresy. The Patricians denied God to be the Creator of the body of man, and
gave that honor to the devil; contrary to that which is in Genesis 2. v. 7. and
v. 21.22. yea, and so detested the flesh, as that to be out of the body, some
of them killed themselves. The Paternians said that the lower parts of the
body, (it seems only those that are affixed thereto for generations sake,
that flesh which the law so often commands to be washed) were made by the
devil, and thereupon took occasion to live in filthiness, and lust, contrary
to the Commandment of God. The Marcionites, and Manichees said, that
wickedness and ill, was partly from God, and partly from the matier of the
world. Florinus and his followers said, that things were created ill, according
to their substances; contrary to the Scripture, Genesis 1.31. But contrarily, the
Coluthians would not have God the Author of ill; no not that of punishment:
which nevertheless the Scripture teaches Esaias 45.7. and 54.16. Amos. 3.6. Some
also of the heretics followed the opinions of the ancient Philosophers; as
they that were called Aquei, that of Thales; and said that water was the matier
of the would, but yet eternal, and not created. The Audian and Manichean
heretics instead of Aristotle's eternals, brought in darkness, fire, and
water; you might bring hither their foolish thoughts concerning the
transplantation of souls, and such like questions: but there will be fitter
place thereto in the article of everlasting life. And because these upstart
weenings are so witless, as they are false; I will not vouchsafe to inquire
into their reasons: the only authority of the holy Scripture is sufficient to
grind them all to dust; and to bring that dust to naught at all. But least any
man contrary to the truth of God, be overswayed with the reasons of the
Philosophers, it will not be unfit to examine, and answer them.

1. And first concerning the reasons of the Platonicks, that the matier of the
world should therefore be eternal, because it is simple, and uncompounded. I
answer, That it is but petitio principii; or a taking of that which is not
granted: for it is utterlie denied that there was ever such matier as they
suppose, utterly informed. I say according to the Sacred Philosophy, that when
water the first matier of all things, was created, darkness or confusion was
upon the face of the deep: but yet with that water, under that confusion, was
concreated all manner of forms, which afterward were all brought forth out of
the possibility of the matier; so that matier was impregnate or great with all
kind of forms, which afterward were made to appear: for otherwise could not
the effect be answerable to the cause, if he being in himself the Jdeas or
forms of all beings, had not brought forth the first matier full fraught with
all material forms, by which afterward, according to the disposition of
their natural causes, the different kinds of things were informed. And
therefore here also are all things said, by him to have been made at once. And
although in the works of the fifth day, the whales, with other things which
had a life, with the power of moving, are said to be created; yet is that
spoken only in regard of that more manifest life than the vegetable had, in
the works of the third day: but that life nevertheless was brought out of the
power of the matier by more powerful causes, his blessing coming thereto;
even as it was afterward upon them to bring forth after their kind. Only in
the sixth day, because it was not in the power of all nature to bring forth a
reasonable and an immortal soul, he breathed into man a Spirit of new life,
and man became a living soul, the epitome or model of all the creature,
earthly and heavenly, bodily and spiritual. This truth is so plain, that Ovid
the prince of all the heathen Poets for wit, judgment and manifold learning,
read it in the book of nature Metam. lib. 1.

Before the Sea, the earth, and heaven all hiding,
There was one face on all the world abiding;
Which men name Chaos, an unordered load,
Wherein the seeds of things contrary aboade.
But though it be granted that the first matier was merely and purely simple,
yet can it not follow that therefore it was eternal, except it may withal
appear, that it had power to be of it self, without the power of the
Creator. But that would utterlie take away the infinite power of God; if beside
his power, any power could be supposed to another thing, which could uphold an
eternal being. And seeing in all corruption every thing returns to those
principles of which it was; as in man his body to the earth, and his Spirit
unto God that gave it, and that nothing material returns to a simple and pure
being, but that it is still found under some form or other; it is manifest,
first, that that first matier was not created simple; but by his decree ever
subject to composition: and therefore secondly impossible to be eternal.
Concerning that eternal Spirit or life of the world, in respect of which they
thought it should be eternal, both before and after; you shall understand
more in the 24. Chap. note (g) 10. yet in the mean time I answer, that if that
Spirit whereby the world both is, and is ordered, work according to that
pattern which he sees in another; it cannot follow, that the world shall
thereby be for ever, except it appear to stand with that will, according to
which he works. Now what that will is we understand better, by his own
Revelation in his own word, than Plato and all his followers could see in all
the subtilty of their understanding. By which word also we know, that the last
end and hope of the creature is more excellent and glorious by the change, than
by the continuance of the world for ever in that state wherein it is. And thus
the special reasons of that Sect are answered. See more to this question (if
you will) in Tertullian against Hermogenes.

2. But it is further objected, that whatsoever begins to work which did not
work before, must be moved thereto, either by it self, or by another. But God
is not moved, that is, changed from that which he was before, either by
himself, nor by any other: for neither can his action be new, or begun,
seeing his action is his being; neither can he be affected otherwise, than he
was before. And therefore is he an eternal cause of the world, an eternal
effect, as Aristotle affirmed. I answer, That no new motion or purpose can come
unto God concerning the creature: for all his works are known to him from
eternity, Acts 15.18. But seeing that these works of which we speak; are of
his will alone; they must be according to the limitation or appointment of that
will: so that although he had eternally willed to create the world; yet had he
eternally willed, when, by whom, and after what fashion, the world and all the
things therein should be created. And this by one only will and one only
action of the same will eternally. The newness then of the world is in the
actual being of the world, not in the will or power whereby it was wrought.
But for the better understanding of this thing, you may observe a difference of
actions, of which some are immanent, or in-dwelling in the doer and are
accounted among the perfections of the thing; such are the works of the will
or understanding: some again are transeunt, or passing from the doer upon that
which is done; as the work of the Smith upon the steel in making a sword. The
works of God in himself are immanent; neither do these of necessity put the
outward object into actual being; as a man may conceive of a house, which is
not yet built; or the Smith by his art or skill has power to make a lock
which he has not yet made. So God though he foresaw and willed eternally
that the world should be, yet the effect followed not, but according to the
determination of that will, when, by whom, and how the world should receive an
actual being.

3. But it may again be said, that God is an Eternal, and an Almighty agent;
and that not in possibility only, but in act also: for whatsoever is brought
from the possibility of doing unto the act of doing, must be enforced thereto
by a former, and more powerful agent, and that actually, which in God is
utterlie impossible: and if he be an eternal and a powerful agent, and that
actually, the effect must necessarily follow, and that actually: for otherwise
neither could the effect be answerable to the cause; nor yet the cause be said
to be sufficient and Almighty, if the cause were in act, and the effect in
possibility only: therefore it seems the world must of necessity be
eternal. Answer. Although God be actually and eternally whatsoever he may
be in himself, yet seeing he works in outward things, not according to any
necessity, but only according to the pleasure of his own will; the outward
effect of his power must be limited according to the circumstances of his
will, which I declared before. Therefore this reason does no more enforce the
eternity of the world, than it does that all the possibilities of the creature
should be actually at once; and that every thing created should be eternal,
because the cause is eternal, actual, and all sufficient. But these things as
they can no way stand with the possibility of the creature; so would they
utterly take away the working of all natural causes, by which the glory of his
manifold wisdom is declared: neither does the all-sufficiencie of the cause
bring any sufficiency to the reason to prove the world eternal. For although
the creature be an effect of the infinite power of God; yet because it is not
an adequate or proportionable object thereto, that is, wherein that power may
be wholly and only exercised; therefore is it but a foreign effect, wherein
that power works only according to the will of the worker. Therefore observe
here secondly a difference of agents, of which some work naturally, and these
work always necessarily according to their uttermost power, in the diversity
of things whereon they work, as the Sun by his heat melts that which has
thin parts, as butter, or wax, and hardens that which has parts more stiff,
as clay. Some agents again are voluntary, and these work not necessarily,
but according to the choice and freedom of their own will; as the Physician
gives not to his patient all that he can give, but that which he knows to
be with his strength to the procuring of health. Now God is first and
principal among these agents only, as concerning all things without himself;
and no way tied by any necessity: therefore the world being an effect of the
will of God; it must be subject to all the conditions of that will, that it be
such as he will have it, that it be when he will have it, that it be according
to those causes by which he will have it, that it be of that continuance as he
will have it, and this unchangeably, because there is no superior being
whereby that will can possibly be changed.

4. But what God willed he willed, from eternity, and because his will (as you
truly say) cannot be changed; therefore no new motion can come thereto, and
because no defect can be therein, nor yet any hinderance, as being convertible
with an infinite power; therefore it is necessary that the world was created
eternally, that his will eternally might take effect. Answer. It is not denied
but that the world in the purpose of God was willed to be eternally, and that
no change, defect or hinderance was or ever could be found in this will: for
if any of these things were not thus; it had been impossible that ever the
world should have been. But yet to put the eternity of the world, lest this
will should be without effect, would necessitate this will to the actual being
of the creature; in that it might seem deficient and hindered, and so,
miserable; if the creature had not been eternal: but this by no means may be
yielded unto; because it would utterlie take away the absolute liberty of of
an infinite will: for although God does not, or cannot be said both to will
and unwill the same things, in respect of the effect of his will, or the
actual being of the things themselves; because he cannot deny himself, 2.
Tim. 2.13. Yet in regard of any superior cause which might enforce his will to
the one side, or the other, it cannot be denied but that he had absolute
liberty, both to will, or not to will the being of any thing without himself:
for otherwise his will were more limited then the will of a man, who has
freedom of will to do or not to do the things that are in his own power;
and therefore his will took effect in this, neither could it be effected
otherwise than thus, that the creature was then when he had determined that it
should be. But for the better understanding and assoyling of this doubt,
remember this third difference concerning the necessity of Gods will; which is
either absolute, or conditional. The absolute necessity of Gods will is in
that which concerns himself alone; as, that he be, that his being be such
as it is, infinite, eternal, glorious, etc. The conditional necessity which
they call of supposition is of things without himself; as because he knows
his infinite being sufficient for supportance of all manner of being; his own
goodness to be likewise infinite, and yet loves the multiplicitie of
goodness, as the similitude or representation of his own; therefore wills he
that the creature be the image of his being and goodness; and although there
be but one action of the will whereby it is carried to the desire of good; yet
because goodness cannot be infinite, but in himself alone; therefore does he
will his own being with an absolute necessity of his will: but he wills other
things as he has limited the times of their being, and degrees of their
perfection. So that as by one eternal act of knowledge he knows both his
own being, and therein all the possibilities of being; so by one act of his
will, which is moved by the show of good, does he will himself as an infinite,
good, with an absolute necessity of his will, and other things as the
representations of his goodness; which goodness is that condition for which
he wills them necessarily, ex supposito, I mean, that they may be partakers
of his goodness, not that he has need of any of them. So having willed that
man should be, it is necessary that he will also all those things which are
necessary to his being; as that he have a soul endued with reason, and
election, etc. which things though he willed eternally, and necessarily; yet
not with any absolute necessity; because he is absolutely perfect in himself
without them: therefore as it follows not, that all things possible should be
at once, because he is Almighty; so neither does it follow, that any thing
created should be eternal, because he from eternity willed that it should
be; but rather because he willed that it should be in time, therefore it cannot
in any case be eternal.

5. Whatsoever begins to be that which it was not before, must needs have the
present being by some kind of change whereby it was brought to be that which
it is. But before all change it is necessary that there be something that may
be changed; and this may seem to be eternal. Answer. The proposition is true
only in things that are changed according to natural causes. But creation is
a thing above nature; by which nature her self had her beginning, not only in
regard of the subject or matier wherein she works; but also of the causes by
which she brings forth all natural effects. But you will say, that all things
are not material: for the spiritual beings, of whom it is fit to think that
they are both more in number, and in greater differences of essential forms
than the bodily are; yet are not material: in which respect, not being subject
to change, they may well be thought eternal. I may answer hereto as to the
first objection from the simplicity of the matier: for first, it is not
granted, that the spiritual beings spoken of, are utterlie without matier:
then although that were given; yet it follows not but that they were brought
into being out of not being, and so created as the Article affirms. And these
are the chief arguments brought by the Platonicks and Aristotelians to prove
the worlds eternity. Other objections of less importance you may read (if
you will) with their answers in Thomas Aquinas contra Gentes, lib. 2. Cap.
32.33.34. etc. But if you understand the answers, and the differences which
have been observed; I suppose you shall be able thereby to answer for the
truth.

The opinion of the worlds creation from a precedent matier, was recalled by
Hermogenes against whom Tertullian disputes, as you may read.
6. But infinity is not only of continuance, which we call eternity, which we
may seem to have refuted sufficiently; but of greatness or extent, of number
also, of power, of goodness, or the like: but if it has been proved, that
the world took a beginning as concerning the continuance; it may easily follow
that no manner of infinity can belong unto it. Yet Fran. Patricius Pancos.
lib. 8. upon the same arguments of the infinity of the power, goodness, and
will of God, would build up the infinity of the world, at lest concerning the
extension or space thereof. And although the answers heretofore made to the
arguments above, may seem to answer his reasons sufficiently; yet I suppose
you may better understand whatsoever is to be said hereto, if you have well
perused that which is said in the second and eighth Chapter. In the mean time
you may do well to remember who measured the water in the hollow of his hand,
and meted out heaven with his span, Esaias 40.12. And if all these things were
made in number, weight and measure, Sap. 11.17. It may well follow, that the
world cannot be infinite in any of these.

7. But the infinity or uncertaintie of number has most doubt, because it is
said, Heb. 1.2. and 11.3. That God has appointed Christ to be heir of all
things; because that by him he made the Worlds. But the word World answers to
two words in Greek, (...) and (...). The first signifies oftentimes the frame
of the whole creature, as in Matthew. 25.34. but not always: for sometimes it
signifies the world of the wicked only, as John 14.17. sometime of the elect
only, as John 3.17. sometime as age or time of the world, and the people of
that age, as S. Peter 2. Epist. 2.5. says, that God spared not the old world;
and again 2. Pet. 3.6. The world that then was, perished by waters, to which
meaning the word (...) used in that text of Heb. 1.2. does most directly
answer. So that the ages there spoken of may well receive interpretation by the
days of the creation, by which God foretold what should afterward come to
pass, as it is said, Esaias 46.10. and elsewhere. See Brocardi Mystica in Genesis
So then the first day of nature when darkness was upon the deep, signified
that time when the wickedness of man was great on the earth, and the thoughts
of his heart were only evil continually. And although they had the light of
reason in them; yet because they did not walk according to that light;
therefore God brought the flood upon the world of the ungodly. The second day
wherein was the division of the waters by the firmament of heaven, meant that
time when God separated his Church from the people of the world, and parted
them by the firmament of his Covenants, first of circumcision given to Abraham,
afterward of the ceremonial Law by Moses, which work of the second day is
therefore not praised as good; because the Law works wrath, Romans 4.15. And
because these ceremonies were not able to give life to the doers of the same:
for Moses might not bring Israel into the land of promise. Deuteronomy. 34.4. Esaias
66.3. Gal. 2.16. and 1^. and 30.10. The third day signifies the third age or
state of the Church, when the earth, that is these worldly rites, by the lively
interpretation of the Prophets, who unfolded their meaning, and taught the
people of their times to have hope in him that was to come, brought forth the
herb and fruit tree yielding seed unto everlasting life. The fourth age of the
Church was that time wherein the Sun of righteousness did shine, and brought
in that new light, that true light which lightens every man that come into the
world of his Church, that Sun which gave shine unto the Moon, the Apostolic
Church, and to the Stars, those Doctors whose knowledge, zeal, and constancy,
gave light in that dark night of persecutions and heresy which did ensue. And
these and such other are the ages (even until the great Iubile) of which the
Apostle speaks in that place Heb. 1.2. which is brought for the proof of many
worlds. So this Democritan fancy may vanish.

8. Concerning the infinity of multitude in the different species or kinds of
things, the Cabalists have an opinion that although they rise to an excessive
number, yet they must needs be definite; and that according to the difference
of words, in all the possible change and joining of the letters: for if either
the things were not different, according to the signification of words; or that
the words had not their meaning according to the difference of things: that
wisdom who both made the things, and gave words to express their differences,
should seem disproportionable, and wanting on one side or on the other;
neither could that word be verefied Genesis 2 19. which says, And whatsoever Adam
called every living creature, so was the name thereof. The opinion is delivered
in the book which they call Iezirah, the author of the tradition they make
Abraham the Patriarch, the description of Judah an ancient Rabbine, the
collection of the number is of Fr. Georgius in his 244 Probl. tit. 67. and this
You may see also the comment of Postellus on that book, and Archangels
apology of the Cabala. page 548, etc.
is the number 1124002590827719680000. that is, one thousand one hundred
twenty four millions of great millions, two thousand five hundred and
nineteen great millions, eight hundred twenty seven thousand seven hundred and
nineteen millions, six hundred and fourscore thousand. But although the
possible combination of letters be so different as they make it, yet the reason
holds not for the actions and passions as well as the proprieties of things
must be expressible with all the differences of times, past, present, and to
come, and that either alone, or with others. Besides, words express the
defects of things, the vices also and imaginations of the mind, which are
neither created beings, nor always true. Moreover although Adam had power over
all words, yet it appears not that he had knowledge also of the nature, and
differences of the heavenly and spiritual creatures; so that the words may
perhaps fall short of the number of different beings. But because they will not
be out bidden, they fix this number to the combination of consonants (it seems
for the different species) to which if you add the different vowels above or
below (as the manner of that writing is) you shall have a number so great as
may equal all the individuals, of all the specialls that ever have been or
shall be hereafter: which by Patricius must needs be infinite: for thus he
reasons, Panarch. lib. 19. from three infinities, essential, potentiall, and
actual, a fourth infinite must needs proceed, at least of number: for
otherwise the effect should not be answerable to the cause. The infinite
essence he supposes the Father; the infinite power, the Son; and the
infinite worker, the Holy Ghost. And by these three are three Trinities brought
out of spiritual creatures, or Angels, as he by Psellus understands the
Chaldean in wisdom; whether well or ill, it skils not much; For we are taught
Job. 1.3. That By the word all things were made, and without him was nothing
made that was made. But to his reason. Can an infinite Being bring forth an
effect without power, and working thereto? or can an infinite power be, but in
an infinite being? or can an infinite work be without an infinite power? so
that these three which he makes diverse Creators, and that of several
Trinities, can be but one Creator, as they are but one Trinity in unity of
essence, as has before been declared at large. And as concerning the
conclusion, it is yielded that the number of individuals or particular beings
is infinite to us, utterly beyond our reckoning: but yet to Him, without whom a
Sparrow lights not on the ground, they are all numbered. Nay I say further, that
through his blessing upon the creature to multiply according to kind, Genesis 1.
the individuals are in nature potentially infinite: but no way to Him, by whose
only power nature does work. For otherwise, His wisdom and power could not
be coequall. And thus have men wearyed themselves in vain to find out his
ways, that are past finding out.

The first supply concerning Man.
CHAP. XIV. That Man was created one alone, male and female, as the Scripture
names them, Adam and Eve. CHAP. XV. That Man was created innocent and without
sin. CHAP. XVI. That Man continued not in that innocence, but that he
sinned, and thereby became subject to eternal death. CHAP. XVII. That by the
sin of our first parents, the whole mass of mankind was corrupted, and made
liable to eternal death both of body and soul. CHAP. XVIII: That there is a
restoring of man to a better life, and further hope, than that from which our
parents fell. CHAP. XIX. That this restoring could not be made by any means
that was in man, nor by any one that was man only.
CHAP. XIIII. That Man was created one alone, male and female.
THese questions seem necessary for the knitting of that which follows, to
the conclusions that have been made before. And because they are taken as
suppositions in the brief of our Creed, and seem plain enough of themselves;
they may be handled with the more shortness, but yet may they not here be let
pass altogether untouched: for although it be given that man is the creature
of God; yet if he made many men, and many women, though one or more sinned; yet
the rest might continue in their innocence, and so the whole race of mankind
was not corrupted. Or if he made but one man; yet if he made him such as men
now are, then could not his actions be accounted any way sinful: or if Adam by
his sin lost not his estate of happiness, or his own alone, or if there were
no hope of restoring; then to believe any Savior were altogether in vain; or
if there were any other means of salvation by man or Angel, than that which
the Christian faith does hold; then were all that which follows utterlie
needless: therefore it must appear that man was created, first one, male and
female, and no more; secondly upright and without any taint of original or
actual sin; only such freewill he had, as that he might sin if he would, or
if he would not, he might not have sinned. And first that he created them
one only male, and for continuance of kind his female, it is plain by this.

1. The works of God are so made in the perfection of number, and measure, as
that it is not possible to find any defect or excess therein. But if more men
than one had been made; if without the power of bringing forth their like,
there had been defect in them, and they needless and in vain; if with such
power of multiplication as Adam had, then had there been excess in the
creature, and God had needlessly brought out mankind from many roots, which
might be brought out from one alone: but this was unnecessary in the creature;
therefore it could not be fitting in the wisdom of the Creator. And therefore
he being but one, he created man in his own image, one man, male, and female.
Genesis 1.27.

2. The excellency of Lordship or rule must be in one alone, and cannot
possibly consist in many: so that if many men had bin created, the Lordship of
man over the inferior creature had not been perfect in one: and although
there be now many millions of men; yet the Lordship over the creature is to
every one equal with Adam, or Noah, inasmuch as every man claims as the
perfection of his kind, so the dignities and prerogatives thereof from his
first original, which if it had been many, could not have been so excellent.

3. Every natural motion, or instinct of nature which is ordered according to
one rule; must needs have one author and one beginning. But all the ordinary
and natural motions of every species are according unto one rule, to join
with their like, to propagate their like, to maintain their life alike, etc.
Therefore mankind had but one author of all their kind; and so were not
brought out of stones nor trees, neither yet were they (...) or springing of
themselves out of the earth, as the fancies of the h^athen that knew not their
original, lead them to believe.

4. The work of God must needs be of the highest and greatest perfection that
may be. But the beginning of a species from one root is more noble,
excellent, and perfect than from many; because in that one both the
individual, and the whole kind also is contained. Therefore the first
creature in mankind was one alone.

5. It was necessary that the God of Unity and peace should so create man, as
it might be most availeable for the maintenance of that love and peace which
should afterward be, and flourish amongst men. But when men know themselves to
be the sons of one common father of them all, they are more straightly tied to
brotherly love, and the upholding of fellowship among themselves. And this
being the end, the means must be availeable to the end. Therefore the
beginning of mankind was only from one man, whereby it seems that Adam had
not his name from (...) Adamah which signifies earth, but rather (as a master
observed) of (...) Achad dam one blood as S. Paul urges it Act. 17.26. That God
of one blood made all the nations of men that dwell upon the face of the earth.

CHAP. XV. That Man was created innocent and without Sin.
THis may appear by the consideration of those excellencies which belong to
the Creator. For no cause can work contrary to the being, and perfections of
it self. But if the cause be powerful and able to bring forth the effect,
then must the effect also be perfect and upright, and especially free from
that which is most contrary to the cause thereof. But it is before manifest
that all things had their beginnings from God the most powerful and working of
all causes: and because of the infinity of his goodness and justice, hating
wickedness and sin above all things; therefore as all his creature was
exceeding good, so it follows likewise that man (as far as he had any being
from God) was also good and upright in his being, and so without sin.

2. The ability and excellency of the end is more then the worthiness of all
those thing which are ordained for the end. But it is manifest, that all the
visible creature of this world was created for man's use; that he was prince and
Lord of all. For by the Law of nature, and justice that ought to be chief
which has most excellency above other. Now to set aside the abilities of the
mind in the knowledge of things eternal and divine, whereof no other bodily
creature has any feeling or understanding: what creature under the whole
heaven, in the earth, or Sea, may set it self in comparison with man for those
gifts which the Creator has vouchsaf to him, in the use of all things, in the
knowledge of their nature, in memory and remembrance, in the inventions of
arts, in the guiding and compelling of the creature to his service, or utter
destruction of the rebellious. And therefore both in the creation, Genesis 1.28.
and again after the flood, the type of Regeneration, 1 Pet. 3.21. were they
all delivered into the power of man. Now if all these things were for man, and
his use, and they every one good in their kind, much more was man good and
upright in his creation.

3. Every thing is more ex^ellent, as it is for a more excellent and noble end.
But the end of man is more excellent than all the creature beside. For they are
for his use as their end, but man for the service and glory of God as his end,
in the attainement of which alone he can be happy. And because that which is
for any end, must have conditions or fitness for that end; it was necessary
that man should be created without sin, which above all other things the
soul of his Creator did hate, and for which alone he was put out of his
service.

4. Every corruption or marring of a thing must needs be of that which was
once good; and the greater the perfection thereof was, the worse is the
corruption or wickedness that is therein. But it is too manifest that the
nature of man is most corrupt; therefore it was once very good and upright.

5. If God had made man such as man now is, rebellious and unthankefull toward
Himself; a plague and calamity to other men through injury, pride, and
oppression, a slave to his own sensual desires in gluttony and filthy lust;
ignorant of the truth, an enemy to all good, following with greediness all
manner of ill; subject as to Sin, so to the due punishment thereof, all
manner of misery, sickness, and death, both of body and soul; then had He
brought the greatest disorder into the creature, even there where order was
most necessary, that is, in the prince and Lord thereof, yea such disorder as
should be contrary to it self, in respect of that hatred which men have one
toward another: then would he not in justice have brought those punishments on
men which are due for their sin in this life, and damnation in that which is
to come. But all these things are against the wisdom, goodness, and justice
of God. Therefore man was created in a Contrary estate, of innocence, Justice,
and holiness.

6. This truth the holy text does show. For beside that which is said Genesis
1.31. That God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good;
it is said of man in particular, that he was created in the image of God.
Which because it is there three times repeated; it is necessary to consider
what that threefold Image of God in man is, that it may the better appear what
his excellency was, and how great that loss was, which he endured by his
sin against so gracious a Creator. Some among the most ancient Fathers, as
Irenaeus and Tertullian, thought that the Mediator in that form wherein he
afterward appeared in our flesh and was seen and known to Adam, Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Moses, and many of the Prophets, (for which they were called Seers 1 Samuel 9.9.) formed man of the dust of the earth. The word there used is (...)
Kidmuthenu, according to our likeness, and signifies to be like by cutting or
carving, and so the word (...) used Genesis 2.7. and 8. which signifies to fashion
out of clay like a Potter, seems to favor this interpretation. (you may see
herewith Rom 9.21. and think on it) Bucanus also Inst. Theol. Loc. 8. q. 18.
confesses that there is nothing in his opinion, but according to the Analogy
of faith, and brings his reason to justify it. Yet as if he had forgot
himself, he condemns Osiander of madness that follows it lib. cit. loc. 9. q.
15. And because other late Doctors though without reason disallow this
judgment of the ancient fathers, see Med. Patr. Scult. de nevis Iren. and
Tertull. Roberts Fund. Rel cap. 17. I leave it in the midst, till further
proof of the truth be made on the one side, or the other. Notwithstanding man
is truly said to be created in the image, or according to the image of
Elohim, or Christ the Creator, either naturally, or else supernaturally:
naturally; either according to the state of his body, or of his soul, or of
the whole composition: his body is an abridgment or compound of all bodily
being, because there is nothing in the bodily creature, which is not in some
sort in that little world of man's body, as reason proves by his food, and
medicine, out of all bodies here below; and as the Physicians, and all
naturallists affirm, and as Paracelsus more particularly every where shows
and proves. So that as all things even bodily beings, were created in Christ,
and therefore were in Him eminently, by their forms, and potentially, as being
by Him brought into act, or effect: So are they all in the body of man
representatively: and though by his sin subject to the curse, as he their
Presbyter is; yet shall they be delivered from this bondage of corruption,
when the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, shall appear, Romans 8.19.20. to
24. And concerning the soul, if you look into the faculties thereof, beyond
them that concern the body alone in growth, and sense; if in the understanding
you consider the powers of the imagination or thought, of the discourse, of
memory, of the will and the freedom ther^of, in civil and moral thy gs; you
may trul^ say, that all things are subject to their Lord and Creator; so has
He made all things subject to the possibilities of man's understanding, in as
much as the Spirit of man considers all things; yea presumes to search even the
deep things of God. Now one soul with all these properties argues the
wonderful excellency thereof; and what a lively stamp of his wisdom He has
imprinted therein. But because the whole of every thing is more excellent then
the parts which are for the perfection of the whole, and that the soul out of
the body, has no power of growth, of sense, of imagination (and because it
would not be destitute of the native abilities and powers of it self, it parts
so unwillingly from the body, and cannot possibly forsake it for ever, as it
will appear hereafter) therefore the excellency of that image appears not
only in the parts, as I have showed, but much more in the compound of the body
and soul together, wherein are all things both bodily and spiritual so
represented, as that the shape of a man cannot be more lively seen in a
looking glass, than the whole creature is represented in man, the epitome or
sum of all.

Moreover, what is there in all nature which he makes not art to imitate? yea
and beyond any pattern^ in nature, adventures in a frame of wood? to compass
both land and Sea, what arts does not he find out, and because he knows he
cannot come to naught, what dares he not to undertake in peace or war? And if
every effect do represent the cause, with the power, and virtues thereof, as
it is said, Psalm. 19. and Romans 1.29. then much more that which is the sum and
principle effect of all. And this is that threefold image in which Adam was
created, and which remains unblotted out, yet wonderfully stained in every
man, Genesis 9.6. and 1 Cor. 11.7. But because it is spoken of the whole man, that
he was created in the image of God; you are to understand that Image first in
the natural composition of his body and soul, as I have showed: Secondly, in
regard of his Lordship over all this visible creature: and thirdly, and most of
all in those supernatural endowments of righteousness and holiness wherein
he was created. Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10. Wisd. 2.23. With the ability to continue
in that state, if he had not sinned, and a freedom also of will to sin, or
not to sin. And thus was Adam the Image of Elohim supernaturally, and for the
renewing of his Image being now lost, are all those benefits which God in
Christ has vouchsafed to his Church.

Object. 1. But if man were created in the image of God, what pre-eminence is
that which is given unto Christ. Col. 1.15. That he is the Image of the
invisible God? An Image is twofold, homogeneous, which is in the perfection of
the same being, as Adam, Genesis 5.3. begat a Son in his own likeness, after
his own Image; and so Christ the Son of God is the image of the Father, as
was showed, chap. 11. or heterogeneous, that is, of a different being, which is
either in the understanding only, as the Ideas or forms of things conceived in
the mind: or else material, wherein is the representation of some property
belonging to another, as the image of Alexander may express that shape which
was proper to his person. And thus man was created in the image of God, as I
showed. And if this representation be more dark and further off in some one
particular thing, it is rather called a sign, a proof, a footstep, or mark
than an Image. As the pricking of an hare in the snow, is a mark or sign that
she has been there. And thus every thing created is a sign or mark of the
power of the Creator, as the matier, form or propriety in one being, is a
step, sign or argument of the Trinity in the Unity, that is, a proof thereof,
as every effect is a proof or witness of the cause.

CHAP. XVI. That man continued not in his Innocence; but that he sinned, and
thereby became subject to eternal death.
But Man being made upright in the beginning, and left to the hand of his own
Counsel, Eccles. 15.14. they sought out many inventions, Eccles. 7.29. For as
he had power both in body and soul to perform all the duty of man if he
would; so had he received power to will or not to will all that he could; that
his sin and punishment might be of himself. But that man might know that
neither his power, nor yet his will, could be well directed without the
guidance of his Creator, Ioh. 15.5. therefore being left unto Himself he
quickly found what he was able to do of himself, that he should never after
that seek himself in himself, but in Him alone, who of his good pleasure
works in man both to will and to do, Phil. 2.13. Thus man being left to
himself sinned willingly: the woman being deceived by the craft of the devil,
the enemy of mankind, but the man with less sin, if ignorantly. But
ignorance is of three sorts, simple, willing, and wilful. Simple ignorance may
be in the state of innocence, and is without sin; as in the Angels of heaven,
Math. 24.36. as in children Luc. 2.52. And in them to whom it is not given to
know what they would, Act. 1.7. Willing ignorance is in them that care not to
know what they ought to know: this is a sin with carelessness, and excuses
not from the fewer stripes, Luke 12.48. But wilful ignorance is in them that
stubbornely refuse to know what they both may, and ought to know. This is a
sin with scorn, and excuses not from many stripes, because it is with
wilful disobedience, as of them that know and do not. If Adams eating had
been with ignorance of the first kind, he had not sinned in eating. But this
ignorance (as concerning that wherein he sinned) was not in Adam. But if he did
eat ignorantly in the second kind, his sin was in this, that he did eat
unadvisedly that which he ought to have known, and for which he ought to have
given thanks to his Creator. The third kind of ignorance could not be in him:
For then he had sinned before he did eat. But if no degree of ignorance were
in him, but that he did eat knowing; yet presuming on his mercy whom he did
offend, though his sin were greater, yet was it pardonable; because he
trusted in his mercy against whom he sinned. But this sin was not in him.
But the woman being deceived through her error was the cause of his
transgression, 1 Timothy 2.14. And if he had eaten presumptuously, then had his
sin been greater than that of Eve; whereas his lesser punishment argues his
less offense. So then it seems that the man alone having received the
commandment, did faithfully deliver it to the woman after her creation. So
that her first sin (though it were not imputed, because there was yet no law
whereby she was subjected to her husband) was, that she gave not firm credit
to the word of her husband delivering the commandment of God; but that she
suffered her self to be withdrawn by the craft of the devil, speaking in
the serpent: but that his sin was in this, that he did unaduisedly eat that
which the woman gave him, not minding what it was, as he pleads for himself
before Him with whom he could not lie, The woman gave me of the tree, and I did
eat. And thus was there mercy reserved for man, both in regard of that weak
estate wherein he was created in comparison of the Angels; and in respect of
the quality, and measure of his sin, and of the means whereby he was drawn
thereto: whereas the Angels that kept not their first estate, but wilfully
sinned against God, for their three sins, and for four could never find any
place of repentance. But it is said, Job. 31.33. If I have covered my sin as
Adam: By which it seems his sin was more than he confessed. I answer. The
word (Adam) there used, and so the word Enoch in diverse places of Scripture do
signify man in his sinful and wretched estate indefinitely, as Psalm. 8.4.
and 144.3. Jehovah, what is Adam that thou know him? the Son of Enoch,
that thou make any account of him? And therefore diverse good translations
read that text of Job, If I have covered my sin as Man, who does commonly
excuse his sin and lessen his offense. But of what sort soever the sin of man
was, it is most certain that he did sin.

1. For as the effect is manifest by the cause; so the cause appears by the
effect. Now death is the wages of sin. Romans 6.23. so then sin is the cause
of that punishment. And every punishment is for some offense. But it is
manifest that Adam was punished, even unto death it self. For otherwise he
had lived until now and hereafter. Therefore it is manifest Adam sinned.

2. It is proved before that all the creature was good and upright in every
kind, and that man was the prime and chief of all the visible creature, and
therefore that he was created for the most excellent end, which is to be
happy in Him, who is the chiefest good; of which happiness he could not have
failed, if he had continued in the state of his creation. For every thing
ordained for an end, by a cause that is powerful thereto; must be furnished
with means sufficient for the attainement of that end. But it is manifest,
that Adam has failed of that happiness by the utter loss of life, and
present being. Therefore he continued he continued not in the state of his
creation, but sinned against his Creator.

3. Death is the punishment of some great offense in the reasonable creature,
who is able to make a difference between good ill. But it is manifest that
Adam was not created sinful, and therefore not subject to death. And again,
it is manifest that that state of Ad^m was changed, because he is dead. But
that change was not made by God, because it was contrary to his ordinance;
neither could it be made by enforcement of any outward means; For then Adam
had not been made sinful thereby. Therefore it was made by the willing act of
Adam himself, and he thereby subjected to Sin.

4. Nothing can be so inseparably in the whole offspring which is not first in
the original; as the fruit cannot be wholly poisonous if the root or stem be
not first infected. But it is learned by lamentable experience, that the whole
mass of mankind is wholly sinful and corrupted; and that no man can say his
heart is clean, therefore it must needs be that the root or original from
whence they are descended (which we have already proved to have been one) wis
sinful and corrupt.

5. Man with much care and government in his youth, with much heed and
wariness in his own carriage, is hardly at last brought unto a course of a
virtuous life; and that not without many wicked desires and sinful deeds. But
if the first man had not corrupted his nature, all virtue, and that alone had
been natural to all men. But experience shows the contrary: Therefore Adam
sinned, and thereby corrupted his whole nature.

But you will say, If that sin of Adam were only a sin of ignorance, and
that in so small a thing as the eating of an apple; the punishment of death,
and that both of body and soul, can no way seem to be proportionable. For
shall not the judge of all the world do right? And if the least sin deserve
the greatest punishment, what punishment can be left for the greatest sin? or
shall we say (as the Stoi^ks taught) that all sins are equal? I answer.
That sins compared one with another, are truly said to be lesser or greater
one than another. For it is a less sin to think ill of a man undeservedly,
than to hate him; And that, than to maime him; and that, than to murder him;
and that, than to defame him. For most of these degrees hold in them, all those
sins that are under it. So that as the Stoickes truly said, every later
exceeds by the multitude of sins that are therein. Yet is there no sin in
it self, how little soever it seem, but in the rigor of Gods Justice deserves
more punishment than all that which the sinner can bear, because of his
greatness who is dishonored thereby. For the greater any person is, the
greater is the offense whereby he is dishonored. As for a word of scorn
spoken by a mean man against his equal, a small acknowledgment may make
amends; for which offense against a Peer a Scandalum Magnatum may be brought;
and if it had been spoken to the dishonor of the king, it might justly be
accounted high treason in the speaker. How great then may we hold that offense
to be, which is against the Majesty of God? before whom all the nations of the
earth, are not so much as the drop from a bucket falling into a mighty river,
Es. c. 40.15.2. Moreover every commandment of his being a rule of infinite
Justice; an infinite Justice is offended by the breach thereof. And what
satisfaction can a finite creature make to an infinite Justice that is
offended? but because it cannot bear a punishment intensive infinite, or
infinite in quantity, therefore it is just that it should bear it extensive in
the infinity of Continuance. Now as it was necessary that God should giv^ a law
unto man, that he might evermore acknowledge that duty and obedience which he
ought to his Creator: so having enabled him both in body and soul to perform
his law, which was also so easy a burden, as that it stood not in doing any
thing; but only in the forbearance of one fruit among a million: it was most
necessary, that God in His justice should require that breach of His law. Which
law, the more easy it was to be kept; so much the sorer punishment did Adam
deserve for the breach thereof. And thus did that murderer of mankind by the
sin of our first Parents set open a door for the Justice of God to break
out upon them, being now liable to eternal punishment: yet did they not hereby
bring on their own punishment alone, inasmuch as all their children are made
liable with them to the same condemnation.

. 2. It may seem a needless question to ask, how long Adam stood in his
innocence? but because opinions have been about the time of his fall, wherein
they have differed from the first day of his Creation, to three years and an
half; between which others have thought a week some ten days, or
seventeene at most, others half a year, Lidg: de Emend. temp. Omitting
conjectures, it will not be unfit to examine it by reason, and Scripture, which
has not left us without a guide and instruction in any doubt that may be moved
therein. The Hebrews compare Adam to an ox that had horns, and no hoofs; by
which they meant he had no strength at all to walk in the commandments of God;
but as soon as he was created, he pushed rebelliously against his ordinance.
The ordinances of God (over and above the preheminences which He gave him in
his creation) were three. Marriage, for the due propagation of man's natural
life, Genesis 2.24. the law of the tree of knowledge; the figure of the life of
grace, chapter 2.17. and the Sabbath, the assurance of the life of glory. For it
were a witless thing to think that God sanctified that day for his own use,
but for man to meditate in the works of God, and for remembrance of his hopes
to come. Adams transgression was against the second: but it will appear by the
circumstances of the other two, when that transgression was committed. Adam was
created a perfect man, in the prime and chief of his strength; and accordingly
received that blessing to bring forth fruit and multiply. Now, if Adam
according to that blessing had in his innocence endeavored the propagation of
mankind; it cannot be supposed, that God, who had immediately before given him
that blessing to multiply, would immediately have taken it away again. And
that act of Adam not being in vain, that first son of Adam must have bin
holy, and without the taint of original sin, although the parents had sinned
afterward before it was borne. For that stain of original sin comes from
the conception, Psalm. 51.5. not by the birth. But no such holy seed of Adam is
mentioned; nor none such could be; For the Lord looked down from heaven upon
the sons of Adam, and they were altogether become filthy. Psalm. 14.3. Now, if
Adam were created such as he was, ask any lusty young man how many nights he
would allow to his beloved and most beautiful Bride in her virginity, and give
so many to Adam before he sinned.

So then it may seem that we may take that Story of the Scripture concerning
Adam, thus. Adam being made in the morning, that God might give him experience
of the excellency of that estate wherein he was created, brought the Beasts
and Birds before him, and gave him the Lordship over them all: which that he
might exercise as he ought, he gave him perfect understanding of their nature,
and power of words whereby to express their nature, and to command them. For
as Adam named every thing, so was the name thereof. But that man might know
that he was for a more noble end than to live among beasts; He took him and
put him in the Garden of delight, furnished with fruits for every season, and
gave him power to eat of all, excepting the forbidden tree. At noone that
heavy sleep fell on him, in which the woman was made out of his side. He
awaking, the marriage was solemnized, and the woman by her husband diligently
warned to forbear to eat, or to touch the forbidden fruit. But while she
wandered from her Husband, to choose fruit to her liking (for it is manifest that
her Husband was not with her when she was deceived 1 Timothy 2.14.) she was
encountered by the devil possessing the Serpent, and drawn into sin, and this
about the ninth hour, or three of the clock in the afternoon; as all the
sacrifices of the Law, and that sacrifice for sin whereby the works of the
devil were destroyed, do sufficiently witness, Matthew. 27.46. and 50. Thus man
being in honor, (...) bal yalin, could not continue a night, but by his sin
became subject to death, as the beasts that perish. Psalm. 49.12.

The heresy of Pelagius was like a Serpent with many heads, of which this was
one; that Adam was created mortal, and though he had not sinned, yet should
he have died; not for the merit or punishment of his sin, but for the
condition or state of his creation: for being made of the elements, which in
every elementall body may be separated, and in their simple being are changed
one into another; it cannot be thought (said he) that Adams state could be
more continual than that from whence he had his beginning. Besides having in
his innocence need of meat to restore the decay of his body, his body cannot
be supposed immortal; but the answer is easy. For that immortality depended
on the soul which should not have parted from the body, but should have ever
been able to uphold the body without corruption, sickness, or death. And
although any particular change had been in the body, yet should it not have
been in the whole, no more than that corruption or change which is in the
simple elements: therefore Adam in his innocence was immortal absolutely,
inasmuch as his immortal soul should never have forsaken his body; but he was
mortal only on condition, if he did sin. So mortality was the punishment
of his sin: but that which is put upon a man as a punishment, can no way
belong unto him in the state of his innocence. But it is plain that death was
inflicted on him for his sin: for why should it be said to him, In the day
that thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the death. Genesis 2.17. if by the
necessity of his creation he should have dyed, though he had not eaten.

CHAP. XVII. That by the sin of Adam, the whole race of mankind is
corrupted, and made liable to everlasting death both of body and soul.
ANother error of Pelagius was, that Adam by his sin did hurt himself alone;
but that his posterity were no way tainted thereby with any original sin,
nor brought in danger of eternal death: which as it is contrary to the
authority of the holy Scripture; so do they thereby put an absolute necessity
on the justice of God, to admit those infants, that never committed any actual
sin, into eternal happiness: whereby, as the mercy of God; so also the death
of Christ, as far as he should be a Savior to them, is utterly in vain: for
what need they mercy or Mediator, who for their own worthiness must enter
into everlasting life? yet this poison the Socinians of late have lick't up as
a restorative; which heresy with other of theirs you may read in Wentsel a
Budowees page 232. and 233. But as Adam had received original righteousness,
so by his sin did he lose what he had received, and that not for himself
alone; but also for his posterity: for he being that common person in whom
the whole race of mankind was, whatsoever gifts or graces God gave unto him,
he gave them as a king, to him and his for ever, if he as a faithful
liege-man should perform those services that were belonging to that state
wherein he was infeoffed: but if h^e performed not that service whereto he was
bound, then must he also forfeit that estate for him and his for ever. And
because contraries are known each by other, as a crooked line by a straight;
it may easily appear what that original sin is, whereto all the sons of
Adam were made liable by his offense: for if Adam were created in original
righteousness; so that he had power both to know, and to do that which was
pleasing to God, and a freedom of his will to continue or not to continue in
that state (and without any of those conditions he could not be perfect) then
must it needs follow that by that sin of his, both he, and his posterity are
deprived both of that knowledge of the will of God, of the knowedge of the
creature also; and of all ability to do or will any thing (as of our selves)
that maybe pleasing in his sight: for as that original righteousness had with
it not only an innocence, harmelesnesse, or freedom from sin, but likewise
a positive strength to do that which was good; so likewise that original
sin brought with it a corruption of the understanding, a frowardness of the
will, a heaviness or unablenesse to all good; and more than that, a
concupiscence or ill desire leading the mind captive unto sin: for contrary
causes must have contrary effects; so, as God had created that first
righteousness in the heart of man: so when man did willingly forsake his
service, and of himself betook himself to the service of his enemy the
devil (for to whomsoever a man does yield himself to obey, his servant he is
to whom he does obey) the devil not only willingly entertained this new come
guest, whose service he so much longed for; but also gave him his livery and
infected his heart with contrary conditions, that he might never after be fit
for the entertainment of his former Lord. For of contraries about the same
subject, one must of necessity be therein, as light or darkness in the air;
health or sickness in the body, sight or blindness in the eye: so that in
stead of the former virtues, whereby the Spirit of grace did guide man's heart to
God, he is now not only utterly disabled to do that whereto his conscience
tells him he is bound, but also become a thrall of Satan, to be guided and
governed according to his will. And this wretched and sinful estate, with the
guiltiness or obligation unto the punishment thereof, which is the death both
of body and soul, is that original sin wherein every one of Adams children
is conceived and borne; and for which he is subject unto death: for so was the
sentence, that in what day he sinned he should die the death. And though Adam
instantly did not find himself to die; yet by the ^ust sentence of the Law
and justice of God did he find himself spiritually dead, that is, destitute
of the grace of God, and that strength which he had to do his will, and
therefore subject to this necessity, that he must die at last, and so in an
estate contrary to that in which he was created: neither ought it to seem
strange, or unjust, that God should punish this sin of Adam in his posterity
also: for as it was personal in respect of himself, to make himself liable
to the wrath of God; so his natural gifts being lost and corrupted, the
contrary qualities brought in in stead thereof, became a natural contagion to
all his posterity. There is here some little question, whether this
ignorance, frowardness, heaviness, and concupiscence before spoken of be the
effects of original sin, the wounds of nature (as the schools call them) or
the sin it self. But as their contraries were in original justice, as the
parts, or as the poperties, or as the effects thereof; so must these be in
original sin, to me they seem to be that spiritual death that was
threatened to Adam, and so the present punishment of that sin; and in them
that are not renewed to the life of grace, the assurance of that further
punishment that shall come upon the soul hereafter. Let us not stay in
needless questions, but look to the proofs of our conclusion: for by the
knowledge of original righteousness it will appear what these things are.

1. Because nothing can bring forth naturally any other thing than such as it
self is. If Adam were in himself corrupted, as has been showed, Chap. 16.
he could not beget any other children but such as were corrupted. And
forasmuch as all men in justice are accounted as one man, in respect of the
common nature whereof they are all partakers; it is just with God to punish all
men alike for their common corruption, from which no man can say his heart is
clean: for does any man forbear to kill an adder though he never yet stung
any man or beast? I think not; but because the whole nature of adders is
venomous, therefore will he kill him.

2. It cannot stand with the justice of God to punish any one with death who is
not liable to that punishment for some offense. Now the sin of those infants
who from their birth are carried to their grave, not being any actual sin to
which any election or consent of the mind could come; it is plain that they
are punished for their original sin. And concerning them that have lived to
take an account of their own ways, there needs no other proof than the
testimony of every man's conscience whether they find not the law of sin in
themselves warring against themselves and leading them captive unto sin,
contrary to the law of their own minds. This is that burden under which the
Saints do groan so, as that they hate themselves therefore, and desire to be
delivered from this body of death Romans 7.18. etc. And why of death? because
the wages of sin wrought in the body is death Romans 6.23. yet not of the body
only, but of the soul also; both in regard of this inbred contagion, that
bitter root, and of that consent which it gives to sin; that I say nothing of
them who through custom follow sin with greediness.

3. Every creature naturally continues in that estate and follows those things
whereto it was created, except some great contrariety befall to the hinderance
thereof. But man was created to know and to love God, and to see his wisdom in
the creature, and to honor him therefore, and doing thus to be happy for ever
thereby: yet nothing of this is done accordingly by any among all the sons of
Adam: therefore some great hindrance and contrariety is come between. But
nothing that good is could be an hindrance to this great good; nor yet any
thing which is without the man himself. Therefore man's sin alone which has
infected all, has been the only hinderance of all this good.

4. The holy Scripture shows the truth of this in Job 14.4. Who can bring a
clean thing out of uncleanness? not one. And Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen
in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me. Romans 5.12. By one man
sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all
men; for that all have sinned. Ephesians. 2.3. We re all by nature the children of
wrath. And this is that taint of original sin, which being bred in every
man's bones will never out of the flesh. And concerning actual sin, you may
read those Scriptures which are cited by S. Paul Romans 3. They are all gone out
of the way; they are altogether become filthy; there is none that does good,
no not one, etc. from v. 9. to 18.

CHAP. XVIII. That there is a restoring of Man to a better life and further
hope than that from which our parents fell.
But if the whole world be thus become guilty before God, is it for this end,
that the whole world may be subjected to eternal death? God forbid; but as
sin has abounded unto condemnation, so has the grace and righteousness of
God abounded much more unto everlasting life: for as by the offense of one,
judgment came upon all men to condemnation; so by the righteousness of one,
the free pardon came unto all men for justification unto life. See Romans 5.
Chap. Therefore lest man at the sight of his own perfections should sin
through pride unrecoverably as the devils, it was permitted that Adam should
sin as he did, that a way might be made for the justice and mercy of God
to be manifest, and that man at the sight of his sin might be humbled before
his Creator, and so received to grace. The whole world then being liable to the
justice of God by that sin of our first father, as has been showed; now it
remains in this place to prove, that there is a possibility to return to
God, in whose favor and acceptance only is life and happiness. And for the
more clear proof hereof; let us first lay this sure foundation: that all the
works of God, and all the possibilities in the creature are known to him from
all eternity. Secondly, that to do well, and right, and to withstand sin,
and the temptations of the devil requires a positive strength, and grace in
the heart of man, which grace man cannot take unto himself, because no
creature can be partaker either of being, or of strength, or any good, but
only so far forth as it is imparted thereunto; and where the want of strength
is, the effect of that want on all occasions must needs appear. So that since
Adams fall man being not only deprived of that strength to resist sin which
Adam had, but also infected with a natural corruption and inclination to sin,
which they call concupiscence: man has no help in himself to help himself,
upon which grounds the reason will follow thus. If there be not a possibility
of the restoring of man into the favor and grace of God, from which he fell
by his sin, then could not the justice of God be without great iniquity and
injustice. (Let him be merciful, that we speak according to the manner of
men; that is, according to that reason and understanding which he has given
unto men for the manifestation of his glory and grace) For if God in the
infinity of his wisdom, foreseeing that man being created would sin, and yet
would create him, and for his sin utterly cast off the whole race of mankind
to destruction, neither could any place of mercy be found with him, for which
the creature could give him glory, neither could that justice be but with
great injustice, inasmuch as they that never were should without any desert be
created to eternal punishment, and they that had done the least sins; nay
they that had done neither good nor ill, as they that die in their infancy
should be shut out to eternal death, as well as they that all their life time
had followed all manner of sin with greediness. So also all the
commandments of God tending to the amendment of life, and all his threatenings
and promises should be in vain. So also all the endeavors of holy and devout
men, who through his grace strive to the masterdome of their own wickedness,
and all the constancy of them who have suffered for the profession of his
truth and service, should be unrewarded. So virtue should have no advantage
over vice in the difference of the reward. But all these things are impossible:
therefore there is a restoring of man to that favor and grace of God, from
which he was separate by his sin.

2. If there were not a restoring of mankind to that estate from which he is
fallen, then the sin of man a finite creature should be more powerful to the
destruction of the work of God, who made man to everlasting life, than the
power and wisdom of God should to the upholding of the creature in that estate
wherein he created it. So ill, and sin, things not being should have
pre-eminence for mischief, above an infinite power and goodness for glory
and happiness. But this is impossible: therefore as by sin there was a
general wrack of mankind; so it is necessary that there be a general
restoring, powerful and sufficient for the sins of the whole world,
avayleable and effectual to all that believe it, and show the fruit of their
faith by their strife against sin, and doing such good works as God has
created that we should walk in them.

3. Faith, hope, charity, temperance, and all other Christian and moral
virtues are the work of Gods Spirit in man, who of himself is not able no not
to think a good thought. But it is impossible that the Spirit of God should
work in vain, or to no end in the heart of man, to believe the forgiveness
of his sins and to hope for everlasting life, etc. or that God should not
accept his own work in his creature, which is ever for the good of the
creature. Therefore there is a restoring of man to those hopes of happiness
which he had lost.

4. The continuance of the world, and the creatures therein by a being of
infinite power, wisdom and goodness, must be to an end exceedingly good:
therefore there is a restoring of man, that the effect of that goodness may
appear in his everlasting life and happiness: for if the continuance of the
world be for the multiplication of mankind, only for satisfaction of the
divine justice upon mankind for his sin; then should it be necessary that
the world were everlasting, that the everlasting justice might receive
everlasting satisfaction; but so the greater power of the Creator in the longer
continuance of the world should be for the greater affliction and hurt of the
creature; so the infinity of his power should be infinitely distant from his
mercy and pity, the effect of his goodness toward his creature; so he should
have made the creature and the continuance thereof because he hated it, not
because he loved it. But all these things are impossible, and against the
dignities which we have before proved to be in God one infinite being, Ergo.

. 1. From hence also it will appear that the restoring is to an estate of
further happiness, than the continuance of that natural life in which, and
unto which Adam was at first created. For if the advantage in the recoverie
were not greater than the loss was by the sin, then had the sin been
permitted to no end; then had the loss been sustained in vain, and all those
afflictions which mankind has ever since endured should be without recompense
in the reward. But it is impossible that God should permit sin in man, and
the punishment thereof afflictions and death only to set man in the same state
wherein he was before; for that had been to no end at all, it had been in
vain to suffer his own justice to be violated, in vain to give his Son to
die, only to restore man to that state which he had lost, wherein he might
have been kept, and all these inconveniences saved. Therefore the recovery is
with a super excellency of glory and happiness far above that which Adam
lost.

2. It is the glory of the wisdom of God, out of the greatest ill to bring
the greatest good. The greatest ill which the devil by sin could bring upon
man, was the loss of his worldly life and happiness, and to make him liable
to the wrath of God, and so to eternal death: therefore the infinite mercy and
wisdom prepared so powerful a remedy against this poison of the old Serpent,
that the life and happiness in this world was changed to that which is to be
in eternity in the heavens with an exceeding weight of glory which no words
can utter, neither can it come into the heart of man to conceive. And this with
that assurance of the favor and love of God in Christ, from which neither
height, nor depth, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come shall ever be able to separate us. Romans 8.38.39.

CHAP. XIX. That the restoring of Man to the favor of God, could not be by any
means that was in man, nor by any one that was man alone.
WHat have thou, O man, which thou have not received? and if thou have received
that which thou have of grace alone; whereas thou could claim nothing of
duty, what is that merit of thine, either of condignity, or of congruity for
which thou can challenge either reward or acceptance? is there not a bond of
duty and thankfulness to him of whom thou did receive it? And if man have
received of God his whole being, and whatsoever he has of outward blessings,
or inward graces; how can he give any thing to God which is not his own 1 Chronicles. 29.14.16. So that whatsoever a man can do which may seem pleasing to
God; yet when he has done all, he must acknowledge himself an unprofitable
servant, because he has done only that which he ought Luke 17.10. But being
besides in danger of the judgment of God, both for his original and actual
sin, shall he bring for his ransom ten thousand rivers of oil, or the
fruit of his body for the sin of his soul? Mic. 6.7. Oh madness of merit
and satisfaction! where are those works of supererogation, that treasury of
the Church, by the pedling and sale of which, that purple whore has lived in
pleasure, and glorified her self? But see the reasons of the conclusion.

1. Every offender against an infinite justice, must in justice either make an
infinite satisfaction, or else endure an infinite punishment. But no finite
creature either man or Angel, can make an infinite satisfaction: so then there
is no return to the favor of God by the mediation either of man or Angel.

2. Where an endless debt is still increased, there no payment can be looked
for. But man by his original sin being infinitely indebted does still
increase the debt more and more by his actual transgression. Therefore from
man no amends can be looked for.

3. No creation can be without an infinite power (as it has been prooved)
therefore much less can the restoring of the creature being fallen from the
estate of Grace. For in the Creation there was nothing which hindered the work
of the Creator; But in the estate of sin there is an impediment, first in the
corruption which is in the understanding, and frowardness of the will turned
away from God; Secondly in the concupiscence, whereby man is inthralled to the
service of sin, etc. Thirdly, the power of the devil, where to a man is
subjected by his sin. Fourthly, the Just sentence and wrath of God. The soul
that sins shall die the death. O Man! see what thou do when thou do
sin. Can thou flee from thy self? yet the devil will overtake thee.
Can thou escape the devil? yet the vengeance of God will surely lay hold on
thee. Therefore there is no Redemption of hope in him that is man alone.

4 No man can pay for another that for which he is indebted himself. But every
man, and every other Creature does owe unto God whatsoever it is, or whatsoever
it can do. Therefore no man, only man, can supply toward God the want of
another man's service, much less make satisfaction for his sin, as it is said
in the 49. Psalm. v. 7. None can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to
God a ransom for him.

And if the injury were infinite, and the satisfaction impossible to be made by
a finite creature, to which of the Angels shall man turn himself? And there
shall he find a further inconvenience. For seeing the offense was made by
man, It is necessary that Justice seek satisfaction where the offense was
made. As an unity in number once broken, cannot be made up by the same parts
into which it was broken.

Objections.
1. But you will say, a finite Creature cannot do an infinite deed, and
therefore cannot commit an infinite sin thereby to deserve an infinite
punishment. Answer. The sin is not esteemed according to the littleness of
the Sinner; but the infinity of the sin is first in regard of Him against
whom the sin was, that is God, whose infinite glory and Justice was disesteemed
therein. Then in respect of the good of which man deprived himself by his
sin, that was life eternal as the Father says, factus est dignus molo
aterno, qui in se perimit bonum, quod poterat esse aeternum. Thirdly in respect
of the manly nature, dispoyled of grace and glory, which nature by the blessing
which Adam had received, was multipliable into infinite multitudes of men. In
all which respects that sin after a sort may well be said infinite.

2. But good is more powerful and active than ill, seeing ill neither is but
in that which is good, nor works but in the power thereof. Therefore if man by
one ill deed were able to destroy himself, much more by many good deeds shall
he be able to make satisfaction. Answer. Ill is in every want or failing of
that which is good: but Good holds all perfections, whether in being, or in
working. Therefore man might easily corrupt himself; but being corrupted he
cannot possibly repair himself, nor yet do any thing that is good or
acceptable, Math. 7.18. and 12.33.

3. But the satisfaction being now made, are we not restored unto as good an
estate by the suffering of Christ, as that which Adam lost? so that if Adam for
his obedience sake might have lived a natural life eternally; we also for our
works sake may be accounted worthy of everlasting bliss. For if we be
restored by Christ, and for his sake accepted, our works likewise are for his
sake both accepted and rewarded according to their merit. Answer. I say, that
our estate is far better than Adams in this, that his hope of everlasting
life, being set in his own obedience, did instantly fail; but ours, standing
in the obedience of Christ, who is made to us righteousness, sanctification,
redemption and life, can never fail. For therefore because that precious
treasure of eternal life was so carelessly kept by Adam, God who loved the
salvation of mankind better then man himself, would in no wise commit the
keeping of that jewel to man any more. Therefore though sin have no power to
condemn them that are in Christ, yet is it still suffered to dwell in us, that
we should not trust in our selves, but in the living God. For as the Father
says, Multum nobis in hoc carue tribucremus, nisi usque ad ejus depositionem
sub venia viveremus. Aug. de Civ. lib. 10. cap. 22. And although Adam by the
grace and favor of his Creator, might have continued in the estate in which
he was created, if he had stood in his innocence: yet could he not even then
have been said to merit everlasting life. For merit, or hire, comes ever for
that which is above duty, which cannot be in the creature toward the Creator.
As to a hired servant the wages, merit, or hire, comes for his work; because
it was in his power whether he would labor for that master or no, being not
bound unto him but for his hire: but in a bondsman the possession of his Lord,
all his service and labor is his Lords to require, and employ it as it
pleases him, Luke. 17.8.9. and this is the condition of the whole creature to
the Lord and Creator of all. And if Adam in his innocence could not merit, much
less can sinful man merit any thing but affliction and death by his sin
and service to the devil, to whom he is no way bound but by his sin. And
this difference the Apostle makes, Romans 6.23. the wages of sin is death, but
the free gift of God is eternal life.

4. But are we not commanded to work out our salvation with fear and
trembling? Phil. 2.12. and is not the sentence of everlasting life pronounced
for the works of charity which were foreseen in us, and for which the
kingdom of heaven was prepared for us from the beginning of the world? Math.
25. verse. 34.35.36. Answer. What merit can any man claim for that which
another has principally wrought in him? And if God works in us to will, and
to do, Phil. 2.13. what is our work, but that we should with joy run after
Him that draws us? Cant. 1.4. Therefore although good works are ordained of
God that we should walk in them, and that we are created thereunto, Ephesians.
2.10. and that God who chose us in Christ to be heirs of glory; ordained all
the means thereto, and works in us to be ready to every good work: and
thereby makes our calling and election sure unto us: yet is not that work
solely and entirely ours, but chiefly of the grace and spirit of Christ that
dwells in us, and crowns His own good works in us with everlasting life. 1
Cor. 15.10. So then our works must vanish, that every mouth may be stopped,
and the whole world may be guilty before God. Romans 3.19. So that every man
notwithstanding his own works, even the chiefest among the Saints, may with
Job abhor himself, and repent in sackcloth and and ashes, Job. 42.6.

5. The natural desires common to all men cannot be in vain, because they
come not unto them out of any particular choice or present necessity, but by
influence or direction of that common nature which is in all men, which though
it cannot effect it, yet has it showed what is to be wrought for the
uttermost good of every particular, by the Lord of Nature. But every man by the
inclination of his own will, does desire the uttermost perfection and
happpinesse of his own being, which he acknowledges to be in being united to
that which is the greatest good, and the enjoying thereof in eternal life.
Therefore every man by the guidance of nature it self, does return unto God
as the Author and Finisher of his happiness. Answer. No agent can work of it
self above the proper strength and power of it self. And eternal life is a
thing beyond the limits of natural knowledge and desire, which minds only
the well-being and continuance of the whole man according to the present estate
of this natural life alone. But because He that wills not the death of a
sinner, Ezech. 33.11. would have all men to come to the knowledge of the truth,
1 Timothy 2.4. therefore are all men so far instructed (or at least if they do
not wilfully wink may be so farre^ instructed) either by the voice of the
creature, or by certain inbred notions, or by tradition, or by an influence of
grace denied to none: that they may know the eternal power and Godhead, Romans
1.20. and the immortality of the soul, in a better estate then this life can
afford, as has been said before, in Pref. And this is that universal grace
which we may yield to be vouchsafed to all, not only without the visible
Church, but much more within the Church, where by the clear light of the Holy
Scripture all may and ought to know particularly, whatsoever is meet for their
souls health. And this universal grace, I say further, we ought to yield
unto, because without it, neither the pagans and infidels, nor yet the false
Christians can be without excuse. But that every one that knows, does of
himself according to this knowledge frame his will constantly, and
effectually, to desire whatsoever belongs to eternal life, Pelagius will never
be able to demonstrate. For he that wills any thing constantly and effectually,
wills also those means constantly and effectually without which that thing
cannot be come unto. And because without holiness no man can see the Lord,
Heb. 12.14. in whose presence only is the fulness of blessing and joy for
evermore, Psalm. 16.11. in the narrow path of which holiness because the
godless Pagan and loose living Christian cannot nor will not walk, therefore
they cannot be said effectually either to will, or to desire everlasting life.
But this is that special grace reserved for the vessels of mercy, by which
they are not enforced against their will, but of natural men naturally
unwilling, are made willing to follow Him that draws them with the cords of
love, to love that which is pleasing in his sight, and so to will and desire
constantly and effectually to follow that which is for their souls health. So
this desire being wrought in them, by Him that is able to fulfill the desire of
them that fear Him, is a pledge unto them that their hope shall never be
ashamed. And thus the weakness of the assumption, and falsehood of the
conclusion, do plainly appear.

6. But he is accounted a cruel creditor that will exact more then his debtor
can pay: and he a cruel Lord, that requires of his servant that which he
cannot perform. Therefore the most merciful God requires of man no other
satisfaction then that which man is able to perform. Answer. It is just that
God should require of man that he enabled him to perform. For otherwise His
justice should be deficient or wanting toward Himself: and his glory
likewise unduely esteemed. And the cruelty of a Creditor is to require more
than a man is able to perform, by himself or by his surety. Therefore our
most merciful Lord foreseeing the malice of the Devil, and the sin of man
thereby, to the glory of His infinite grace, provided us a Savior before we
had sinned: For whose abundant satisfactions sake, we have a door of entrance
as wide as the Valley of Achor set open unto us, that by His merit alone we
may come boldly unto the throne of grace, there to find help in the time of
need. Of which Mediator we are now to speak in the Articles following.

ARTICLE II. And in Jesus Christ His only Son.
WE have seen the wretched estate of man to which he is subjected by reason
of his sin, whereby he is unavoydably liable unto the wrath of God, which he
is utterly unable to endure: and from which to escape there is no means in his
own power. Now consider with thy self most wretched caitif, that art afraid
to die because thou have no hope but in this life, what it were for thee to
stand justly condemned to die, and every minute to expect the execution of thy
doom, if any one could be content to die for thee that thou might enjoy the
usury of this air but for the time of thy natural life, from which thou
know thou must part at last. But being subject to an infinite wrath, to an
endless punishment, the endurance of which but for one hour, has more
misery then the suffering of a thousand untimely deaths: what love can thou
owe to him? what thanks can thou give unto him, that would free thee from
the punishment, and instead of that restore thee to an estate of life and joy
eternal? And seeing it has appeared that this cannot be done by any one that
is only man; we are now in this second place to see what are the conditions
of our Mediator; who by Himself is able to make satisfaction for our sin.
For seeing the just sentence on man was, that for his own sin he should die
the death; which because it was the word of an infinite speaker, of an infinite
truth: it must of necessity be meant according to the uttermost extension of
the truth, and so mean all death of body and soul, temporal, and eternal.
And because the Mediator for man could not endure a temporal or bodily death,
except he were man: therefore it shall first appear; That the Mediator for
the sin of man must be man. And because eternal death is such a thing as no
man only man can offer himself unto, with hope or possibility by himself to
overcome, therefore it shall appear in the second place; That our most
glorious Mediator must be God: who being of infinite life, wisdom, and power,
knew how to conquer eternal death; that having in the infinite worthiness of
his own person satisfied the infinite justice for the sin of man, He might
give eternal life to all them that by true faith should lay hold on His
merits; and in thankfulness for that unspeakeable mercy live in obedience to
his commandments. And that it may appear what the superexcellency of the
knowledge of our most holy faith in the religion of Christ is, and that for the
worthiness and glory thereof, it far surpasses all knowledge of all things
which men or angels can come unto: it shallbe made plain in the third place,
how necessary and agreeing to the wisdom, goodness, and glory of God it was;
That God should be incarnate. Great is the mystery of godliness, into which
the angels desire to look. And because our most glorious Light and guide, has
in his Holy word made these things so manifest unto us, let us with
cheerfulness and joy in the ready service of our best understanding, follow
him who in our flesh has reconciled all things to himself, and in our flesh
has led captivity captive, and triumphed over principalities and all powers of
the enemy; that we being delivered, might serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life, and be accepted of Him in life
everlasting.

CHAP. XX. That the Mediator for the sin of Man must be Man.
1. FIat justitia, and totus mundus ruat. But when man sinned, it could not
stand with the justice of God to punish any for that sin but man alone. And
whatsoever is against the justice of God, is also against his wisdom, his
godnesse and power: for we have already proved that all these dignities are
in him one most simple and absolute being Chap. 8. And whatsoever is against
the power of God, is utterly impossible to be: therefore it must necessarily
follow, either that there is no reconciliation of man unto God, contrary to
that which has been proved in the 18. Chap. or else that this reconciliation
must be made by a Mediator that is man. Therefore the Father said fitly
hereto, Propterea nobis per Mediatorem praestita est gratia, ut polluti carne
peccati, carnis peccati similitudine mundaremur. August. de Civitate Dei lib.
10. Cap. 22.

2. God might seem toward man an accepter of persons, and toward the Angels
that sinned, severe and merciless, if he should condemn them to the pains
of eternal fire, and yet accept man to mercy, when no satisfaction had been
made for man's sin in the nature that had sinned. But both these things are
utterly impossible, and against the justice of God: therefore the punishment of
the sin of man must be borne in the nature of man.

3. The just Law and sentence of the most wise Lawmaker and just judge ought to
stand sure and inviolable. But the sentence of death was decreed and pronounced
against man, if he sinned Genesis 2.17. Therefore by man is the expiation and
satisfaction to be made for sin.

4. Every restoring of any want or corruption in nature must be by that which
is of the same kind, as if any flesh in man be rotten, the member is not made
whole again but by the supply of sound flesh in stead thereof. If a bone be
broken, the breach is not made up with a stick, nor a cut sinew by a catlin;
so the nature of man being corrupted by the disobedience of one, could not be
restored again but by the obedience of one in whom the nature of man being
restored, all that are partakers of his in corruption may also be partakers of
his immortality: because man's nature does not now stand absolutely condemned
in Gods justice as before.

5. This argument the Apostle urges 1. Cor. 15.21. For since by man came
death, by man also came the resurrection of the dead. And again Romans 5.19. As
by one man's disobedience many were made sinners; so by the obedience of one
shall many be made righteous. You may yet see more reasons for this conclusion
in the Chapter next following.

CHAP. XXI. That the Mediator for the sin of man must be God.
THat the Angels in glory with such perfections as they had, should sin
maliciously, when there was no tempter, makes their sin without excuse, and
them in justice unpardonable: and although the sin of man in comparison of
theirs may seem much less and more pardonable, in respect of that low estate
of men's creation in comparison of the Angels; that his sin was not malicious;
nor without a Tempter: yet when it is well thought on, how hateful a thing to
God sin is, how His pure eyes cannot behold ungodliness and wrong, how his
infinite justice is violate thereby; and what jealousy so glorious and
infinite a being ought to have of his own honor, so set at naught by so base
and unworthie a thing as man, who also by that sin of his disordered the
whole creature, so far forth as it was for his use, and made it subject to
vanity and corruption: it may well appear of what man infinite difficulty it
was to restore man to that favor and grace from which he had fallen. For in
beings of which one is finite, the other infinite, there must be an infinite
difference; and if they be of contrary conditions, the one pure and
righteous, the other sinful and impure, that contrariety must needs
likewise be infinite, and an infinite contrariety can no way be accorded or
reconciled, but by an infinite concord, which cannot be but in Him which is
partaker both of the finite and infinite being. And because it has before
appeared chap. 18. That man was to be restored to the favor of God, and to be
reconciled again unto him, it must follow necessarily that this peacemaker
must be both God and man. For infinity is with the greatest greatness of
being, and contains all the extremities thereof, and such is the Being of God:
but the Creature being finite is set at an infinite distance from that which is
infinite, and therefore in a lessenesse of being as having no being at all of
it self, but only imparted by that infinite being, from which degree of
participation, if it fall, as man did by his sin, it still falls unto a
further lessenesse or badnesse of estate, and so becomes utterly desperate,
except it be upheld as man was by that hope, The seed of the woman shall bruise
the Serpents head. And seeing the greatest greatness of being, and the least
littleness of being cannot be accorded, but by an equality of being, which
cannot be but in that which does equally participate both of that greatness
and that littleness, that is, essentially: therefore it is most necessary
that our gracious Mediator be essentially both God and man, which will yet
further appear by these reasons that follow.

1. That all mankind by the sin of Adam is deprived of the favor and glory
of God, has been proved in the 17. Chapter, and that there is a restoring of
mankind, was showed in the 18. Chap. Now if it be not in the power of man or
of any other finite being to restore man being fallen into the favor of God,
it follows of necessity that the Mediator or restorer must be God. But the
first was abundantly proved in the 19. Chapter, Ergo the second follows of
necessity.

2. For every infinite offense an infinite amends must needs be made, or else
there is no satisfaction. The sin of man was an infinite offense, See Chap.
19. Answ. to the 1. Object. But an infinite amends could not be made by a
finite creature: Ergo the Mediator for the sin of man must be God. And
although God cannot suffer at all, yet because the punishment due to man for
sin was more than any man was able to bear; it was necessary that the
manhood in that conflict should be upheld by the Godhead, that the sin being
balanced by the punishment, the worthiness of the person might make the
suffering of infinite merit for the sins of of the whole world.

3. No effect can be eternal but by a cause that is eternal: for whatsoever
is this or that by accident, must of necessity be made such by that which is
such of it self. But the restoring of man is to an estate of life and
happiness which is to be eternal (as it will further appear in the Article
of Everlasting life) therefore it is necessary that it be wrought by a cause
which is also eternal. But it is proved that nothing can be eternal but God
alone: therefore the restorer of mankind must be God.

4. The enemy of man's everlasting salvation is the devil, a most powerful
enemy, whose power is yet greater against man because he pleades the justice
of God against sinners: therefore it was necessary, that the author and
finisher of our salvation should be God and man, that he might be able both to
satisfy the infinite justice, and by a greater power of his own, to withstand
the great power of the devil.

5. Contrary causes must have contrary effects, and so contrary effects must
have contrary causes, and one of these is ever known and discerned by the
other, so that man by his sin being subject to death, when it appears what
man's disease or sin was, the remedy likewise will be manifest: but it is
plain that man being not content with his estate would be God, as it appears
first by the temptation of the devil, Genesis 3.5. In the day that ye eat
thereof, ye shall be as God knowing good and ill. Then by the consent verse 6.
And the woman seeing that the tree was to be desired to make one wise, she
took of the tree and did eat. If then the sickness were this, that man
would be God, the only medicine must be this, that God would be man:
therefore the mediator would be both God and man.

6. To require satisfaction for the sin of man from God, was to require that
which was not due, and that is against justice. To require the satisfaction of
man, was more then he could perform, and that is against mercy: therefore
that the work both of justice and mercy might be perfect, it was necessary
that the Mediator for the sin of man should in one person be both God and
man: for as gold is molten in the fire because it has parts that may be made
running, yet by reason of the purity and perfection of those parts it cannot
be consumed by the most violent flames; so our Lord because he was truly man
did feel and endure the pangs of most bitter death, and was compassed about
with the sorrows of hell, Psalm. 18.6. yet for the innocence of his manhood,
and the glory of his deity, he could not be overcome thereby.

7. It is impossible that a pure creature should have such sufficiency of
merit, that in Gods justice the sanctification of mankind should be due to
those merits, because all holiness that can come to any creature, whether of
virtue or of works, must come thereto from God: so no praise or merit can in
justice be due to any man for that which God has wrought by him: therefore
the Mediator of mankind must be God.

8. Every particular man being only man, is of much less worth than the whole
race of mankind, and so insufficient in justice to make a sufficient
satisfaction for the sins of all men: therefore that all mankind might be
freed from their sins both original and actual, it was necessary that the
Mediator who should make satisfaction for their sins, should be both man,
from whom the satisfaction was due, and yet of more worthiness then all
mankind, that his merit might make the ransom sufficient for the sins of
all men. But nothing is of more worth then all mankind, but God alone:
therefore the Mediator for man's sin must be God. For although the Angels
be more excellent then man according to the condition of their present being,
yet not in respect of the end of their creation. First, in that they are
ministering spirits for man's sake, Heb. 1.14. Secondly in regard of their common
end, in that both the one and the other are to be blessed in God alone.
Thirdly, And if any one man cannot be accounted more worthy then any of the
whole kinds of beings that were created, as our Lord said, Ye are more worth
then may sparrowes Luke 12.7. He said not all (for no species in the creature
may be missing) and yet the health of one man was prized above the life of 2000
swine Mar. 5.2.13. How can any thing beside the Creator himself be more
worthy then all mankind?

9. The greatest benefit which God could bestow upon man must of necessity be
by the greatest gift which he could give unto him. The greatest benefit was in
this, to save and redeem him when he was utterly lost. The greatest gift
which he could give to man was himself: therefore it was necessary that God
should become one with man, that in man he might save man that was lost.

10. This is that riddle which the Psalmist takes upon him to open Psalm. 49.
where after he has showed that no man either by his wealth, or honor, can
make any ransom for another, he concludes that it is God which redeemes the
soul from the power of hell. Therefore the Prophet says Esaias 9.6. To us a
child is borne, Ergo he is man. To us a Son is given, not borne but given,
ergo he is God, even the mighty God, as S. Paul says 2. Cor. 5.19. That God
was in Christ reconciling the world to himself. To this purpose you shall have
many texts of Scripture hereafter Chap. 23. n. 5.

CHAP. XXII. That God would be incarnate.
Upon that text which is in Psalm. 91. v. 11. He shall give his Angels charge
over thee to keep thee in all thy ways; some have thought that the sins of
the rebellious Angels was, that when God had created man, and arretted the
charge of him and his posterity to the Angels, they supposing the state of
their creation to be far more excellent and honorable then the state of man
(as doubtless it was, if the hopes reserved and purchased for us, had not
been far beyond those whereto we seemed to be created) refused to perform
that service to so mean a creature, for which disobedience being cast off,
they have ever since persecuted the woman and her seed. And this opinion seems
to have had the original out of the Alkoran, See Wem. a Budowes de fab. Alk.
page 157. Some other think they were not rejected for any one offense, but for
three offenses and for four, that is, for continual rebellion they were not
spared; and so for many ages before man's creation, they were adjudged to the
pains of eternal fire; though the execution of their sentence be prorogued,
until the number of the sons of pride be utterlie fulfilled. Of this you may
see Postell. de Not. Med. ult. It is not fit to determine what is the certain
truth in those things which the holy Scripture has not declared; but because
the soul of man is his image who inspired it, and that he our Creator the
wisdom of the Father, knows all things ex fundamento, as he has seen with
the father: therefore this image of his, will also be enquiring; that although
it cannot know what the original of things is, according to all their orders
of causes, yet by the effects will it be prying into the causes of them. And if
it do this with reverence and modesty, it oftentimes finds strange helps
beyond that it hoped for, and if herein it be lawful for others also to
propose opinions, it may seem not altogether improbable that the sin of the
devil was this. That finding himself in the first order of the creature, he
thought that God (who out of his infinite goodness purposed to bring all the
understanding creature to the uttermost happiness which it could be capable
of, which could not be but in the uniting of the creature unto God: for God in
his absolute and infinite being could not be come unto, nor apprehended, much
less be enjoyed by a finite creature, except he would be pleased to dwell in
a creature that was finite) and therefore (I say) he thought that God should
rather dwell in the being of the Angels, and in their nature gather all things
unto himself; then dwelling in the tabernacle of the manly being: in which hope
seeing himself frustrate, he became an unreconcileable enemy to mankind,
whereas the holy Angels esteeming duly of the benefit, and being well content
with that means whereby God would be seen of them, 1. Tim. 3.16. expect with
patience, and desire the fulfilling of the number of the elect. And thus our
Lord having made man's peace through the blood of his cross, has reconciled
all things both in heaven and earth unto God. Col. 1.20. For certainly if the
Angels be for man; as it is said, Heb. 1.14. then can they not possibly have
the perfection of their blessedness but by man. Let us therefore with
reverence and thankfulness come unto that great mystery of our Religion, That
God was manifest in the flesh.

The incarnation of God, is the dwelling of the Godhead in the manhood in one
person, wherein the being of the Godhead and manhood remain together
everlastingly, without separation, yet in clear distinction of their several
beings; and so without commixtion to cause a third being, but that each
continuing truly that which it is in it self, the Godhead according to his
eternal decree, without any change of it self, in time took to it self the
manhood; that by himself he might reconcile all things to himself, and bring
them to that estate of happiness and glory, to which they could never have
come, if God had not so manifested himself in the flesh.

The internal actions of the eternal Deity are all infinite, eternal, and
necessary to be that which they are. But whatsoever God does work without
himself in the creature, it is only according to his own holy pleasure and
will. But yet seeing his actions upon the creature are the expressions of those
perfections which are in himself, of goodness, of wisdom, of power, of
glory, etc. and that to this end, that the creature may be blessed in him,
and by him, according to that measure of happiness which he of his goodness
has appointed thereto: therefore those reasons which are drawn from the
dignities of God, are of no less force for the truth of God in the creature,
then they were for the manifestation of the truth in himself. And therefore as
by those dignities which by the authority of his word are due to him, we have
approved that truth which the holy Scripture teaches us to believe of him,
both concerning the unity of his being, and the Trinity of the Persons; so
let us endeavor in the proof of this great question. And although the great
masters in the school have given over these questions as utterly beyond all
proof or testimony of humane understanding, See Thom. Aquin. praef. in lib. 4.
cont. Gent. yet seeing this is that maine point in our most holy faith, whereby
it differs most from all infidelity and false worships; seeing it is that one
thing wherein the ground of all our future hope and comfort does consist: if
ever the understanding of a Christian held it self bound to do service unto
his faith, most of all it is bound to give attendance herein. I may sometimes
use the word of necessity in the conclusions following; yet understand me not
as if I laid any necessity or constraint upon God to do or to suffer; but the
necessity that I mean, is in the consequence of the reason, when the
conclusion does follow necessarily upon the grounds that are laid down before.

1. For although happiness be only in the enjoying of that which is good, and
the greater the good is the greater is the happiness; but if the good be not
enjoyed and possessed, it causes no happiness at all; yet an infinite good is no
way to be come unto or possessed by that which is finite, except by the
voluntary motion and inclination of it self, it do apply and give it self
unto that which is finite. And because every good spreads it self acccording
to the power of it self, upon that which is capable of it, the greatest
goodness is ever with the greatest communication of it self: theref^re the
infinite goodness does also extend it self according to the possibility of the
creature to be possessed and enjoyed thereby; which cannot be till it have
applied it self to something in the creature, of which the rest of the
creatures being partakers, may also thereby be partakers of the infinite
goodness. Now if God who only is infinite goodness, had dwelt in the being
of the Angels (though that had been made known to man) yet because man does
not communicate with the Angels in nature, or by any merit or service toward
them, he had had no benefit thereby, whereas the Angels by the appointment of
their ministry to mankind in their continual presence and succor, and that
help which the soul has by them in the delivery thereof out of this prison
of the body, and in the conducting of it unto the Divine presence, have in
justice a reward for their service sake, and a kind of interest in all that
good whereof man by their ministry is made partaker.

2. Moreover when man had sinned, the law of justice required that the
satisfaction should be made in that nature that had sinned, so that if the
Mediator had taken on him the nature of Angels, the satisfaction therein had
not been avayleable for the sin of man.

3. Thirdly, the whole creature has interest in man, and man in the whole
creature; so that God by taking on him the nature of man, has blessed thereby
the whole creature, as you may understand by the answer which is made Cha. 17.
to the 5 Object.. 4. But if he had the nature of Angels, neither man, nor the
other elementall creatures had had hope of any restoring. See Romans 8.19. etc.
to 23.

4. Lastly if the deliverance of man had been made in the nature of Angels,
the restoring had been as unsufficient, so also man had lost of his dignity
and honor thereby: for man before his sin was bound and subjected to God
alone; but then had he been subjected and bound to the nature of Angels. And
although man by his sin, nay even our Lord himself by his suffering for
sin, was made somewhat lower then the Angels; yet being raised from the dead,
the manly nature is exalted far above all principality, and power, and might,
and every name that is named in this world, or in the world which is to come
Ephesians. 1.20.21. Whence it will follow necessarily that God would dwell in the
nature of man, not in the Angels, as you may understand by these Scriptures.
Heb. 2.14. Forasmuch as the children are partakers of flesh and blood: he also
himself likewise took part of the same. ver. 16. He took not on him the
nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham. And for their
attendance is it not said, Heb. 1.14. Are they not all ministering Spirits sent
forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation? Compare herewith
Psalm. 34.7. and 91.11. and conclude with Saint Paul 1. Cor. 3.23. All things
are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

The questions before are near to this (as all the Articles of our faith are
necessary consequents one of another) therefore let us briefly see by that
which is already proved, what we can gather to this conclusion.

1. Either the whole race of mankind must be lost and perish being tainted
with the sin of Adam, or the infinite justice against which the sin was
done, must for ever stand violated and broken, or else a Mediator must be
found who was able to satisfy the infinite justice that was offended. The
first is against the wisdom, goodness, and love of God to his creature;
either to make mankind in vain, that is to destroy it again, or to make it
unto eternal punishment. The second is impossible, that an infinite justice
infinitely able to avenge it self should endure it self for ever to to
remain violate and offended: for so should it prize a thing finite, and
wicked, before it self infinite in justice: therefore there behooves to be a
Mediator who should fully satisfy the justice offended, and utterly blot out
the guilt of sin. Now an infinite justice offended must be satisfied by a
punishment answerable, that is infinite: but no finite creature could any way
be, or be accounted infinite. Therefore when none was found worthy either in
heaven, or in earth, or under the earth; the Lamb slain from the beginning of
the world took upon him our flesh, to satisfy for the sin of his creature,
and so by his infinite obedience (for by His eternal spirit He offered
himself to God. Heb. 9.14. and by the infinite merit of his suffering, for by
that spirit the manhood both soul and flesh was enabled to endure those pangs,
and that punishment which neither all mankind, nor any other creature could
endure) was the infinite justice satisfied. And thus He became mighty to save.
Esaias 63.1. and having Himself in his own body borne our sins upon the tree,
did utterly abolish the whole body of sin, and found for us eternal
redemption.

2. The divine goodness has created all things exceeding good, Genesis 1. so
much does it delight it self in that concordance or agreement which is
between the inward and the outward good. But that agreement is the greatest
which is in the unity of one person. Therefore it is expedient that there be an
incarnation that so in one person the goodness may be most eminent, and the
concord most lovely.

3. Otherwise you may propose it thus. The excellency of the effect appears by
that conformity or agreement which it has with the cause: so then the inward
work of the infinite Goodness, and the outward being accorded in the unity of
one person; the multiplication of the agreement is so great, that it cannot
possibly be greater. Therefore it follows that the Godhead be incarnate: for
otherwise the concord in the inward and outward work of the deity, might be
greater than it is, but that is impossible.

4. The divine will concerning his works without, does will and love that
especially, wherein the excellency of all his inward dignities does most
appear. But the excellency of all his dignities appears most in this, that
God be manifest in the flesh. For thereby we are made partakers of the Divine
nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. of his glory, virtue, everlasting life, and happiness: So
that now there is but one end of God, and his creature, that is the glory of
God, of which and unto which God rejoices over his creature to bring it, and
make it partaker: And the Creature likewise reioyces to be made partaker. And
thus the end or perfection of the creature has rest or accomplishment in the
inward perfections of God, and his inward perfections are manifest in his
outward works. Therefore God would be incarnate.

5. And seeing that God infinitely blessed and happy in himself needed not the
Creature; but made it therefore that it might be blessed in him; and that of
his fulness the creature might receive that fullness of happiness which it
can possibly enjoy: therefore it is requisite that that fullness of his be
imparted unto that creature wherein all the rest of the creature has interest,
which we have already proved to be man, chap. 17.. 4. ob. 5. Therefore God
would dwell in man, that by man the whole creature might be blessed in Him.

6. If God were not incarnate, then the divine dignities should be less
Infinite one than another. For the infinite goodness, by the infinite wisdom,
seeing that uttermost and perfect happiness that might come unto man by the
incarnation; if his power, his will, and love of the creature did not answer
thereto; so that he would be pleased to dwell in his creature: then should
they be defective, and of less extent than his infinite wisdom. But that is
impossible. Therefore it follows that God would be incarnate. See the answer
to the objection that may be made from hence,. 1. on the 39 chapter. n. 4.

7. If there were not an incarnation, then the infinite wisdom should not have
the view of that highest excellency which is possible to be in the creature:
neither should the infinite power magnify it self by the multiplication of it
self in an outward subject; so these dignities should not be glorious by all
those means whereby it is possible that they might glorify themselves. But
all these things are inconvenient. Therefore it is reasonable to believe the
incarnation, lest ignorance, weakness, and defect of glory should be found
in the first principle, which must of necessity take away His infinity, proved
chapter 3. understand the reason well. For your more ease, I will propose it
affirmatively thus.

8. If there be an Incarnation, then the divine understanding may have an
outward object wherein it may be infinite both in the inward and outward
working. For whereas all created objects are absolutely finite: yet if the
Divine being understood, which heretofore we called the Son, chap. 11. take
on him our being, our nature by that assumption is deified, and so made
infinite with that uttermost infinity, whereof the Creature can any way be
capable seeing the deity is neither without the humanity nor the humanity
without the deity. And so the divine understanding may be an outward object
infinite, as much as it is possible that a creature can be infinite. And so the
wisdom also may be infinite in all possibility of infinity both in the inward
and outward working. And what I have said of the infinite wisdom of God, must
also be understood of all his other perfections, of goodness, of power, of
eternity, of life, of glory, etc. But if there be no incarnation, this
infinite outward object is taken away, and so the understanding and all the
other dignities of God, as concerning their outward working must be in
littleness and lower than that possibility whereto they may come. But this is
not to be affirmed. Therefore the incarnation follows reasonably.

9. Every efficient the more noble and excellent it is, the greater and more
excellent are the effects which it does bring forth. But the greatest effects
are not brought to pass but by the greatest means. Now there is no efficient
more noble or excellent than God, no effect better or greater to the Creature,
nor more honorable to the Creator, than the everlasting happiness of his
Creature: no means greater or more effectual than that he become one with his
creature. Therefore that the creature may be happy in Him, and his honor and
praise perfected in the Creature: it was expedient that God should dwell in His
Creature even in Man.

10. By how much any efficient is greater in power, by so much more effectually
does it work to magnify the end of his work, and so to set it free from
littleness, contempt and unworthiness of himself. From which contempt and
unworthiness the creature is set furthest, when it is deified, and God
himself is become one with man. So the incarnation is the most glorious work
which can be wrought in the creature. To deny then the indwelling of God, in
his creature, were to deny the most glorious work of God: to put an infinite
emptiness between God and his Creature, wherein no mean should be; and so
to exclude the Creature from all access unto the Creator, which were to put
the creature in everlasting contempt, and unworthiness of the Creator so
infinite and glorious. For the creature being set at an infinite distance from
the happiness which is in the Creator, should have no mean whereby it might
partake of the infinite glory. For no perfection in the Creature being simply
and absolutely finite, can be partaker of that which is infinite without the
Mediator God and man, as it is said, Ioh. 14.6. No man comes to the Father
but by me.

11. It is to be held that God the most wise workemaster of all things should
in the creation of the world propose to Himself the most noble and excellent
end: which must be concerning Himself, the manifestation of His own
dignities and perfections in the Creature: and toward the Creature the
greatest perfection which was possible to be therein. But if there be no
incarnation, neither of these things could be performed. Not the first, because
the divine goodness might have done a better work in his Creature: his
infinity a greater; his glory a more excellent, etc. Not the second, for
seeing God is that superexcellent Goodness, of which every thing according to
the measure thereof, desires to be partaker: and by man may be partaker, in as
much as man participates with every other thing, and every other thing being
with him, if there be no incarnation, this desire of the Creature is vain,
the end thereof frustrate, and thereby it is subjected to eternal pain, the
hoped end being impossible to be attained unto. But all these things are
inconvenient. Therefore it is requisite that God be incarnate.

12. God is infinitely good, chap. 4. and so the most lovely being without
comparison. And therefore are we most justly charged, to love Him with all our
heart, with all our soul, with all our might Deuteronomy. 6.5. But God would not
require to be wholly and perfectly loved by man except He himself did that for
man by which He might most of all deserve man's love; For otherwise he might
seem to require of man beyond that which were due, and so the perfection of
that love should be founded in the goodness and kindness of man toward God,
not in the goodness and mercy of God toward man. But this is not so. For we
love God because He loved us first, and gave His Son to be the propitiation
for our sins. 1 Ioh. 4.10. If then God have done that for us, by which above
all other things He might deserve our Loves, and that nothing can so much
deserve our Loves, as if he would be pleased to become one with us: it was
expedient that God would be incarnate.

13. That there is an eternal life both in soul and body, will appear
hereafter: in the mean time it shall be but a supposition. Now in eternal
life it is necessary that the manly being attain to the uttermost perfection
both of the soul and body, that as his understanding, so his outward senses be
also most pure and perfect. But if there were no incarnation (seeing the divine
glory in it self is utterly unapprehensible by our senses, and by our
understanding) neither our understanding, nor our senses could have any object
wherein to rest and sabbatize, and being created without the enjoying of their
uttermost felicity they would be the original of misery and sorrow, when as
they should be fit to receive the perfection of all intellectual, and
sensible forms from an agent natural and supernatural, as the Mediator is,
and yet received it not. So also the divine glory should not cause happiness,
nor be inioyed by all possible means whereby it may cause happiness, and be
inioyed by a mean natural and supernatural. But if there be an incarnation,
then the infinite glory dwelling in this mediator, may be apprehended and
inioyed, and make the Creature happy by all means whereby it is possible to
be happy. Therefore God would dwell in his Creature. And this argument (I
suppose) may stand well with that scripture, Exodus 33.18. and 20. verses; where
to that request of Moses, That he might see the glory of God; it was answered,
that no man can see it and live. By which it follows that after death when man
is utterly separate from sin he may see, and shall be partaker of that
promise which is in Matthew 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall
see God: which blessing is more particularly described. Psalm. 36.9.10. They
that put their trust under the shadow of his wings shall be abundantly
satisfied, made drunk, as some read it, others plenteously moistened with the
fatness of thy house and thou shall make them drink of the river of thy
pleasures, etc. all which the faithful shall see and enjoy to the full in the
Mediator God and Man, without whom there is no approaching unto God. And as
this argument is good for the soul and understanding, so is it for the outward
senses; For if the bodily senses make for the increase of punishment in them
that are damned: so shall they also be for the increase of happiness in them
that are saved. If you desire more arguments to this purpose you may consider
them in the 21. chapter. The authorities of the holy Scripture may be seen in
the end of the chapter following. The objections against this doctrine of the
incarnation you may see in Tho. Aquin. cont. Gent. lib. 4. chapter 40.49. and 53.
and 54.

CHAP. XXIII. That the Second Person of the Trinity, the Son of God only,
took on Himself our flesh.
IS it true that God will dwell with man? Behold the heavens, and the heavens
of heavens cannot contain Him, how much less a house of clay whose foundation
was in the dust, yet does wisdom take her solace in the compass of His earth,
and her delight is with the Sons of Men, Prou. 8.31. So the Word was made
flesh and dwelt in us, Ioh. 1.14. And though he were in the form of God, and
thought it no robbery to be equal to God; yet as man had been made in his
likeness and lost it: so would he be made in the likeness of man, and to
restore that first image unto man, became obedient unto death, even the death
of the cross, Phil. 2.6.7.8. O Holy and most blessed teacher of our most
glorious faith! what high doctrine what holy mysteries? what precious promises
does the Christian faith contain? That which is infinite dwells in in that
which is finite; the circumference in the center. The greatest of beings, and
the least are one. Two births eternal and temporary, and but one Son. And
because the essential proprieties of both natures do still remain, he that
is the Father of eternity is become a child, Esaias 9.6. And he that is the
wisdom of the Father, increases in knowledge, Luke 2.52. he that no place can
contain does grow in stature, and the Son of an eternal love, does grow in
favor with God and Man. In brief, he that has all things with God the
Father, save this that he is begotten, has all things with man except his
sin. But although there be two generations, and that of diverse kinds;
eternal, and in time, in which respect almost all things are double in him:
yet is not he two sons; because Sonneship respects not the diversity of the
natures divine and humane; but only the unity of the Person; so that if there
be but one Person of both natures; there can be but one Son. Wherefore seeing
the Son of God took on Him not the Person, but the nature of man: yet the
whole nature body and soul of the substance of his Mother; And seeing that
whole nature subsists in the Person of the eternal Son; He, in both respects,
both of his divine and humane generation, is still the only begotten Son of
the Father; only begotten (I say) that he may be discerned from us that are
adopted; only son, because we are not hereafter to look for any other
Savior. His only Son, not of Joseph, or any man according to the flesh. For
as according to the law of the eternal life which is in God, He is begotten of
the substance of the Father, not without, but in the Person of the Father, yet
distinct therefrom: so according to that generation whi h was in time, was He
begotten by the power of the Father, without the Person of the Father, being
conceived in the womb of the vir^in. For as a thing conceived in the mind of
a man is the first w^rd or expression of his understanding, which being spoken
or written becomes sensible and to be understood of others; So the Son is in
the Father that eternal word understood, conceived, or begotten before the
worlds, and in the fulness of time (not ceasing to be eternally begotten as
before) He was made manifest in the flesh, even that word or life which was
eternally with the Father, was seen with eyes, was looked upon, and was
handled with hands, 1 Ioh. 1.1 2. So that as there is but one Father both in
the eternal and timely generation; so is there but one Son; by a most holy,
most true, and substantial generation God and Man, the Son of God, and the
blessed virgin Mary. Now this one Son, one Christ, one Immanuel, one
Mediator, one Person is such, not by mixture, not by confusion, not by
composition of the two natures, nor yet by change of one into another: but one
by assumption or taking of the humane nature into the divine, wherein the deity
is to dwell eternally without separation, but not without distinction. And
these two natures so dwell together in the Person of our Savior, as that for
the unity of the Person, the attributes which belong to one nature are given to
the other, as Ioh. 3.13. No man has ascended up to heaven, but he that came
down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven. And again, Acts
20.28. Feed the church of God which He has purchased with his own blood. And
although I said before, chap. 11. that relation properly so called was not in
the divine generation but supereminent, because all things here are
coessentiall, a the subjects no other beings than the terms, that is the
Father and the Son; the foundation also coessential, that is the divine and
unconceiveable generation for the terms sake in the Father active, in the
Son passive: And although in the second generation, neither the subjects nor
the terms are coessentiall, the subjects are the Person of the eternal word,
and the Virgin Mary; the foundation is the generation whereby the manly being,
passively was taken of the Virgin unto the person of the word: yet in respect
of this hypostaticall union, or joining of the humanity unto the Person of the
Eternal Son, Mary the mother of Jesus is truly said the mother of God; not
that the Godhead took beginning from her, but because she brought out that
manly being, which from the time of its first union was never separated from
the Godhead; And because the supposition or person wherein both natures are, is
one Christ: of which Person she is truly called the mother, though she be
mother only according to the flesh, as is said, Math. 1.23. A virgin shall
bring forth a Son, and they shall call his name God with us. And again, Romans
9.5. of the Israelites as concerning the flesh came Christ, who is God blessed
above all for evermore, Amen. But although there be one only Son; yet in
respect of the two nativities He is truly called the Son of God, and the
Son of the virgin, though with this difference, that by the eternal
generation he took of the Father both his eternal nature, and his Person, by
which he is the son of his Father by a supereminent real relation; but of
his mother he took in time the humane nature, but not any humane Person. And
therefore this Sonship is only rational, except it be understood with the
divine person, in which the humanity subsists, and so he is truly said this
man, and the son of the virgin. For as b he took on him the humanity, soul
and body to dwell therein for ever, as the Evangelist speaks, Ioh. 1.14. The
word became flesh, (...) and made his tabernacle in us: So did he give unto
the humane nature to be one Person in him: So that God is now truly one with
us, that we hereafter may be one with him, according to that prayer of our
eternal mediator. John. 17. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be one,
as we are one. So the advantage is only on our side: For the humane nature
coming to our Lord in the perfection of the infinite deity, could add nothing
to His perfection, only the infinite love of God toward man was perfected
thereby, because the humane nature being taken unto the Son of his love, we
are assured thereby of his eternal love, that He has loved us, as He has
loved Him. Ioh. 17.23. Whereas if our Lord had assumed the person of any man,
though therewith he had taken also the common nature of mankind, yet that
Person had had peculiar interest in the eternal and infinite love, and we had
been unequally subjected one to another: but now the common nature only being
taken unto the deity, every person has equal interest as in the common
nature, so in the eternal love. Now let us see the reasons of the proposition.

1. It is necessary that all the actions of God be done according to the
perfection of that order which is most fit and agreeable unto those actions.
But seeing it stood with the Love of God to dwell in man's being (as it has bin
proved) it was most convenient that the Son of God should take our nature on
him. For first the Son is the image of God increated, man his created image;
and that all perfection of an image might be in the increated image, it was
necessary that he should be also the created image of his Father. Secondly,
seeing that by the eternal nativitie, he is the eternal Son, that the
perfection of all Sonne-ship might be in him, it was necessary that he
should be that Son that should be borne in time. Thirdly, and because it
pleased the Father that all fullness should dwell in him, Colossians 1. verse
19. Seeing he was brought forth by an eternal nativitie, he must also
perfect that nativitie which was in time. Fourthly, and because all things both
which are in heaven and in earth were created by him, it was necessary that
all things by him should be restored. Fifthly, Man's nature is the daughter of
God, therefore being led away captive by sin, was to be rescued by his Son.
Sixthly, Man fell from grace by the craft of the devil, therefore by the
wisdom of God was he to be brought to favor again. Seventhly, Mankind is
the peculiar possession of the Son by the special gift of the Father, Psalm.
2.8. John 17.2. therefore being lost, it was to be recovered by his special
purchase. And if there be any other personal propriety of the Son, of
obedience, or the like, it sorts better with him to be incarnate than either
with the Father or the holy Ghost. All the arguments which prove that it was
necessary that Christ should dye, may be brought hither. See them in the 27.
Chapter.

2. Nothing can be admitted in the actions of the Deity which takes away the
distinction of their personal proprieties, seeing God is the author of order,
not of confusion. But if either the Father or the holy Ghost had been
incarnate, then their personal proprieties were thereby in utter confusion:
for if the Father had been incarnate, then should he not be eternally a
Father, that had in time become a Son, so also neither the perfection of
fatherhood should be in the Father, nor of Sonne-ship in the Son. And
concerning the holy Ghost, seeing he is that emanation, breath or effluence of
the power, wisdom, life, etc. whereby the work of God is perfected: if he
should have been incarnate, the same being should be both the worker, and the
thing wrought. See Luke 1.35. But all these things are impossible: Therefore
the Son of God only took on him our flesh.

3. The greatest excellency which God can love in himself, is the image of
himself beheld in himself, that is, the Son of his eternal love. The
greatest excellency which God can love without himself, is the image of
himself beheld in his creature. Therefore it is necessary that the Son of
his eternal love be also incarnate, that the love of God be most perfect
toward his Son, with all perfections of love which can be either within or
without himself.

4. It was said before Chap. 11. that the goodness, infinity, eternity,
wisdom, and power of God, being viewed or objected to the infinite wisdom by
the infinite action of his understanding, was the Son. Now if the Son be
incarnate, then the actions of all the divine dignities are perfected, and may
be infinite both in their internal, and as much as may be, in their external
object. But if either the Father or holy Ghost had been incarnate, then the
object of those dignities could not be one; and if the object were not one,
then could it not be beheld with one action of understanding. But it is
impossible either that there should be two infinite objects, or two infinite
actions. Moreover, if the holy Ghost had been incarnate, then the infinite
internal action should have become the external object: if the Father, then
the fountain of the Deity should become not the objectant, or being which
understands, but only the object understood. But all these things are
impossible: for God is not the author of confusion; therefore it was necessary
that the Son should be incarnate.

5. The doctrine concerning the Mediator contained in these four Chapters, is
as the substantial ground of the Christian Religion; so is it that foundation
on which all the Prophets and Apostles have builded: for as Saint Peter says,
1. Pet. 1.11. That which the Prophets by the spirit of Christ did search into,
was the time when the sufferings of Christ should be reveiled, and the glories
that should follow after. The sum then of the whole Scripture being to show
the redemption of man by the death of our Savior, God and man, the authorities
are not far to seek. Many of the texts of the old Testament you shall find
most excellently brought together and interpreted by Iustine Martyr against the
Jews, in his dialogue of the truth of the Christian Religion, which is
entitled Tryphon. Some most evident texts you shall have out of the new
Testament, and more hereafter as need is. John 3.16.17. God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should
not perish but have everlasting life: for God sent not his Son into the world
to condemn the world; but that the world by him might be saved. Gal. 4.4. But
when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman,
made under the Law, that he might redeem them that were under the Law, that
we might receive the adoption of sons. Phil. 2.6.7. Christ Jesus being in
the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God; but took on
him the form of a servant, and was made like unto man, and was found in shape
like a man Colos. 1.13.14. God has delivered us from the power of darkness,
and has translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son, in whom we have
redemption through his blood Col. 2.9. In Christ dwells the fullness of the
Godhead bodily 1. Tim. 3.16. Great is the mystery of Godliness, God was
manifest in the flesh justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto
the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up to glory. 1. John 4.14.
Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him,
and he in God. By which texts it is plain, that the Savior of mankind must
be both man and God dwelling in man; and the second person of the holy
Trinity, which we call the Son.

Notes.
(a) THe subject no other than the terms.] For the understanding of this, see
my second part of Logonomia Introduct. Sect. 4. numb. 11.

(b) He took on him the humanity.] If it be most true which is said Col.
1.19 that all fullness should dwell in him, yea all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, how can it be but that if Christ dwell in our flesh, all the persons
likewise must be incarnate? For all the Persons together make but one infinite
fullness of the Deity. And therefore 1. Tim. 3.16. it is spoken without any
distinction of Persons, that God was manifest in the flesh. Answer. To become
man was a personal propriety of the Son of God; for the incarnation was not
of the Godhead, wherein the Persons are one; but of that subsistence according
to which the three Persons are distinguished. So that as in the Trinity there
be three persons in one nature; so in the mystery of the incarnation there is
one person in two natures. Now why the person of the Son and none other could
become man, the reasons before do make it plain. And although it be most
true, that all the Persons together are but one God in the infinity or
fullness of the Deity; yet is it as true that the infinite fullness of the
Deity is in all and every person alike, as the fullness, or perfection of
mankind is in every man equally. Neither is that in Tim. spoken without
distinction of the persons: for it follows immediately, He was justified in
the Spirit. What is that? but that the Spirit of God the holy Ghost, did
justify his doctrine and Gospel as most true, in causing the hearts of all
the faithful to believe it. But it is most manifest, that the witness is
neither the thing witnessed, nor the person in whose behalf the witness is
given. Neither was this witness of the Holy Ghost only, but also of the
Father from heaven 2. Peter 4.17. 1. John 5.9, 10, 11. Compare herewith, if you
please, the note (g) on Chap. 24. 9. Object. 1. In the end of which Chapter you
may see other objections fully answered.

Our Lord.
CHAP. XXIIII. That this Jesus the Son of the Virgin Mary, whom the Christian
faith confesses, is the Savior of the world.
THat reverend and fearful name of God, is a name of glory, but the word Lord
imports the title of that right which he has in his creature. And how justly
this belongs to our Lord Christ may appear by that interest which he has in
us; ^oth by the right of our creation, and of our redempti^n, and of all the
benefits which we hope thereby. What right he ^ath in us for our creation it
has appeared, in that we are his workmanship Chap. 13. 9. Now it remains
that we make it manifest, that he alone is our Mediator, and that besides him
there is no other: for if the Savior of the world must of necessity be man,
that he might satisfy the justice of God for the sin of man, as we have
proved Chap. 20. and likewise that he must be God, that he may be able to
hear, and to save all them that come unto him, as was manifest Chap. 21. and
that the Son of God took on him our flesh, that by him the love of God might
be manifest to the creature, as it was proved Chap. 23. If there can be but one
Son of God, as it was showed Chap. 12. and the note thereto; it must follow
of necessity that there can be but one only Savior of mankind, which Savior
is our Lord Jesus the Son of the blessed Virgin Mary, as it is further
manifest by these reasons following.

1. It is necessary that all the dignities of God be magnified in the
creature, according to the uttermost greatness which they can have therein:
But if this Jesus whom we confess, be the Savior of the world, then all the
dignities of God are magnified, according to the uttermost extent of greatness
which it is possible they should have in the creature and that without any
abatement, or l^sning in any one of them: for his mercy is magnified to the
uttermost in pardoning the sins of many for the merit of one; his justice and
love in this, that he spared not his only Son, but gave him to death for a
satisfaction for the sin of mankind; his glory, in that ^he creature once
sinful and mortal, is made partaker of glory and immortality; his wisdom,
that out of the greatest ill, the destructi n of the creature by the malice of
the devil, he has brought the greatest good, that is the exaltation of the
creature beyond that state of happiness wherein it was created, Chap. 18. 2.
and so in the rest. But if this Jesus be not the Savior of the world (as the
Jews affirm) if when that other Bar-Coziba of theirs shall come, he preach
the same doctrine, and do the same glorious miracles which our Lord has done
(though it be impossible that God should suffer the world to be so mocked) then
the same most high and glorious truth should be both preached and confirmed by
a most false and lying Prophet, who should profess himself the Savior of the
world, and was not; yet nevertheless, seeing our Lord was the author and
manifester of that truth, he shall have the honor to be believed, and the
falsehood shall dwell with that other to come. But if he shall preach any other
doctrine than this which we have received, then neither can the dignities of
God be magnified in his greatest and most excellent work in the creature that
is in the salvation of mankind, as was showed before; neither can his
Scriptures be of absolute authority, when another manner of Savior shall come
than they have described unto us: but both these things are utterly impossible,
and therefore this Jesus whom the Christian faith confesses to be our Lord, is
the Savior of the world, and beside him there is no other.

2. If this Jesus whom we acknowledge be the Savior of the world, then the
expectation of the most excellent and virtuous men is quieted, and at rest in
the assurance of his heavenly promise. But if this be not he, but that the
Savior is yet to come (for we have already proved that man having sinned
should be restored by a Savior that should be both God and man) then since
that time that Christ the Son of God and the virgin Mary came, we that have
believed in him, are in the greatest error that may be, and all our hope in
God (through the satisfaction of Christ) must be ashamed, all our belief in
his word is vain, and all the virtues, the constancy, love and patience of
the Martyrs is perished; so that when that pretended Messiah shall come, he
shall not be believed, or if he be believed, then Gospel shall be against
Gospel, faith against faith, love against love, hope against hope, virtue
against virtue, and all this about the same thing, that is the means of
everlasting life. So the love of God toward his creature should not be
manifest, in that he had not made man to know assuredly that which concerned
him most to know. So his justice should find no place to condemn the world of
ignorance and misbeleefe. But all these things are absurd and not to be
granted: therefore this Jesus the Son of the virgin Mary, is the Savior of
the world.

3. Religion is the band or obligation of the creature unto God to serve him,
in hope of the excellency of the reward. So that the most excellent Religion
must give hope of the most high reward. Now if this Jesus whom we confess be
the Savior of the world, the hope of the faithful is at rest, in the
assurance of that hope of everlasting life, in the uttermost perfection of all
happiness and joy. But if this be not he who was desired before he came, and
believed on since his coming; then that Savior when he comes must give us
assurance of greater hopes, and promises of greater joys than yet we have
received. But this is impossible: therefore this Jesus in whom we believe is
the Savior of the world.

4. It is necessary that the Savior of mankind do love mankind with the
uttermost perfection of love; so that for that loves sake he offer himself
most willingly to the endurance of all those things whereby he may procure the
salvation of man, and the uttermost good which may befall him. And if this
Jesus whom we confess be not the Savior of the world, then it is requisite
that the Savior which is to come should love mankind more and endure greater
things for man than he has done. But this is impossible Ioh. 15.13. and Ioh.
10.15. Therefore this Jesus our Lord is the Savior of the world.

5. It is impossible that the greatest work of God toward his creature, that
is the salvation of mankind should be in vain, or that the preaching of the
truth thereof should be utterly unbeleeved. But if this Jesus which the
Christian faith confesses, be not the Savior of the world, then the preaching
of that truth when the pretended Savior should come, will not be believed: and
so the greatest work of God toward mankind will be in vain, that is without
glory to God and fruitless to man, that will not receive it: for the
Christians know that salvation is in none other but only in this Jesus in whom
they believe. And although the Mabumetans confess many glorious things of
Christ, as that he is the power, wisdom, breath, and word of God, borne of
Mary a perpetual virgin by a divine inspiring, that he raised the dead, and
did all those miracles which we affirm, and that he was the greatest Prophet
of all that were before him, as you may read in Cusa Crib. Alcor. lib. 1. Cap.
12. Gul. Postel. de Concord. orbis lib. 2. Mars. Ficin. de Rel. Chr. Cap. 12.
and elsewhere. Yet they neither believe that he did or could dye, or that it
was necessary that he should, neither do they believe that he was the Son
of God, which conditions we have before proved to belong necessarily to the
Savior of the world. So that if he that shall come, do come according to these
conditions, yet will they not receive him, no more than they receive Christ of
whom they speak such honorable things. And concerning the Jews; although it
be manifest by the word of the Scripture, that the veil shall at last be taken
from their hearts, that they may understand, and be turned to our Lord the
Savior of the world, Hos. 3.5. Romans 11.31. Yet seeing that our Lord in respect
of his humility, became unto them a rock of offense, and restored not the
temporary kingdom which they expected (for his kingdom was not of this
world) If any other shall come in the same estate and condition, they will not
believe. And concerning the idolatrous Gentiles, much less will they believe,
if they may say that the Christians which believed before in such a Savior,
were not saved by him: therefore the condition stands sure; that if this Jesus
whom we confess be not the Savior of the world, then that pretended Savior
when he comes shall not be believed; and so the greatest work of God toward
mankind should be in vain.

6. If this Jesus in whom we believe be not the Savior of the world, then
the greatest love and thanks which we give unto God therefore, is less
lovely and less acceptable; and the greater number of men saved by this faith
is less willed of God than that less love, thanks, and number of them which
shall hereafter believe the truth: so the greater love shall be despised for
the less, and the greater number misprised for the less: but this is not
agreeable to the justice of God, and his love to his creature, and therefore
not to be admitted: Ergo this Jesus in whom we believe is the Savior of
mankind.

7. The superexcellent or rather infinite height of that truth which we
profess in the Articles of our faith concerning God the Creator, Redeemer, and
Sanctifier of mankind, and those unspeakeable benefits which we hope for in
the life to come, is such as no created understanding could have come unto,
except God himself by his word and spirit had first manifested the same unto
man. And seeing it is the truth of God, the wisdom and goodness of God could
not suffer that the full, perfect and most clear manifestation thereof
concerning the person by whom, and the time when it was to be fulfilled by his
own promise, should be by a false prophet, or that a false Christ should take
his honor to himself, for so the most high truth should suffer such discredit
thereby, as that it should never be believed. But this is absurd and
inconvenient. And therefore this Christ in whom we believe is the true Christ,
and the Savior of the world.

8. The whole time of the world is either for preparation to receive the
Savior when he shall come, or manifestation of him when he is come. But God
has long since ceased to prepare any people to receive him. And therefore the
Savior is already come: for although the Jews expect a Messiah, yet have they
no country nor form of Religion appointed by God to uphold that expectation:
for the use of the ceremonial Law, wherein the Messiah was figured, was
commanded only in their own land, out of which they being now banished their
ceremonies have no use. See Deuteronomy. 12.1. Ios. 5.5.7. Amos 5.25. Hebr. 10.
Therefore this Jesus is the true Messiah.

9 Neither may that argument be omitted, whereby our Lord justified himself.
Ioh. 7.18. He that seeks his glory that sent him, the same is true. Seeing
therefore that our Lord sought not his own glory, but came in the greatest
humility, to endure the greatest affliction, and most cruel death only for
the glory of his Father and the salvation of mankind. And moreover, seeing God
did seal unto his words that they were true, by those glorious miracles which
he wrought by him, it follows in great probability, that this Jesus is the
Mediator by whom alone we may come unto God, as he testifies of himself.
No man comes to the Father but by me, Ioh. 14.6 and again, John 17.3. This
is eternal life to know thee the only true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus
Christ.

10 (a) He unto whom all the prophecies of all the Prophets of the Old
Testament concerning the Savior to come do agree, must needs be that true
Messiah or Savior of the world. But all the Prophecies of the Old Testament
concerning the Savior of the world, do most precisely agree unto this Jesus
whom the Christian faith does confess, and to none other: therefore this Jesus
the Son of the virgin Mary is the Savior of the world. For it cannot stand
with the mercy of God to his creature; to give us signs whereby to know that
which concerns us most to know, which should not be sure and certain:
therefore the proposition is manifest, and the Jews themselves do not gainsay
it: the assumption will be manifest, if the Scriptures of the Old Testament be
compared with the history of the New. First concerning his being both God and
man, Psalm. 2.7. Esaias 9.6, 7. Ier. 33.15, 16. Mich. 5.2. compared with Romans 1.3,
4. and those other texts which you had before in the end of the 23 Chapter.

Then in all the circumstances, first of the forerunner of Christ foretold by
Esaias Chap. 40. v. 3.4.5. and Malach. 3.1. compared with Mat. 11.10.14. John
1.23. Secondly, of the time, foretold b Genesis 49.10. c Dan. 9.24, 25, 26, 27.
and c Hag. 2.9. and Mal. 3.1. comp^red with Luke 2.25, 26. Matthew. 16.3. Luke
12.56. Thirdly of the place of his birth prophesied Michah 5.2. fulfilled
Matthew. 2.6. Luke 2.4.6. John 7.42. Fourthly, of his mother a virgin, Esaias 7.14.
Ier. 31.22. compared with Matthew. 1.23. Luke 1.27.34. Fifthly, of the wisemen of
the East that came to worship him, prophesied Psalm. 72.9, 10, 11, 15, and
fulfilled Matthew. 2.11. Sixthly, of his prophetical authority equal to Moses,
Deuteronomy. 18.15. and 18. Esaias 42.1.3, 4. and Esaias 61.1, 2, 3. compared with Matthew.
12.18.21. and 17.5. Luke 4. from v. 18 to v. 23. John 1.4.5. and 5.46. and
6.14. Acts 6.14. Hebr. 12.26. Seventhly, of his miracles, Esaias 35.5, 6.
compared with Mat. 11.5. Ioh. 5.36. and 7.31. and 15.24. Eighthly of his
humiliation, which appeared first in his low estate and poverty, Esaias 53.2, 3,
4. verefied Luke 2.7. Then in his flight to Egypt, Psalm. 80.8.15.17. Hos. 11.1.
verefied Mat. 2.15. Thirdly in the murder of the innocents of his own age;
prophesied, Ier. 31.15. fulfilled, Matthew. 2.16.4. by his mean bringing up in
Galile, not in the University at Jerusalem; foretold Psalm 22.6. Esaias 9.1.
fulfilled Mat. 2.22, 23. and 13.55. Mar. 6.3. John 7.15. Fifthly by his lowly
riding on an ass, Zach. 9.9. Mat. 21.7. Ioh. 12.14. Sixthly in his reproach
and scornful usage before the high Priests and Pilate, where you may remember
his meekness and silence, prophesied Psalm. 22.22. and 69.21. where the lots,
the spear, his own words and his enemies, the vinegar and the sponge of
Colocynthis, are not forgotten. Esaias 50.6. and 53. all Micah 5.1. fulfilled in
all the Gospels. Then in his crucifying with the thieves prophesied Numb.
21.8.9. Deuteronomy. 21.23. Esaias 53.12. fulfilled in all the Gospels, and Gal. 3.13.
Eighthly in his death Esaias 53.8.10. and Matt. 27.50. Lastly in his burial,
Esaias 53.9. John 19.40.

A ninth argument from the prophecies of the Old Testament. That this Jesus is
the Savior of the world; is from his exaltation and the glories that should
follow his sufferings. As first, his resurrection; prophesied Psalm. 16.10. and
68.20. Hos. 6.2. fulfilled Matth^w, Mark, Luke, John, Act. 2.24. 1. Cor. 15.
By virtue of which, they that had slept in his faith, did also rise as it was
prophesied, Psalm. 68. the 18. and Ioh. 5.25. fulfilled Matthew. 27.52.53.
Secondly, his Ascension; prophesied, Psalm. 24.9. and 68.18. Mic. 2.13.
fulfilled in all the Gospels, and Act. 1.9. Ephesians. 4.9.10. Thirdly, his sitting
at the right hand of God; Psalm. 16.11. and 110.1. compared with Mar. 16.19.
Act. 2.34. and 7.56. Romans 8.34. Heb. 1.13. Fourthly, the gifts wherewith he
beautified his Church of the faithful Believers; prophesied in the text cited
before, Psalm. 68.18. and Joel 2.28. fulfilled Mar. 16.17, 18. Acts 2.4. and
ver. 17.18.33. 1. Cor. 12.28. Fifthly, the increase of his Church by the
conversion of the Gentiles, prophesied Esaias 42. al. 52.13.14. and 54.1. Psalm.
2.8. and Psalm. 22.27, 28. So commanded by our Lord Matthew. 28.19. Mar. 16.8. so
performed by his Disciples Acts 8.35. Mar. 16.20. and Act. 10.34. etc. and
13.46 47. and found true by experience almost these 1600 years. Sixthly, his
taking away of the Ceremonial Law, prophesied Esaias 66.3. Ier. 31.31, 32, 33.
Dan. 9.27. Hag. e 2.6. fulfilled John 4.21.23, 24. Acts. 15. al. Gal. 2.16. and
3.10, 11, 19, 21. Heb. al. especially Chap 9 and 10. Seventhly, his destroying
the works of the devil, 1. John 3. speaking of his insatanized Prophets in
Egypt, at Delphi, at Dodone, at Colophon, and in every corner of the earth.
This was prophesied Zach. 13.2, 3, 4. and accordingly he rebuked the unclean
spirits and suffered them not to speak, Mar. 3.12. So Paul, Acts 16.18. and
this the devils themselves confessed, as you may read note b on the 8 Chapter,
number 1. The Hebrew Child, etc. answerable to that of the Poet, Iuven. Sat.
6. Delphis Oracula cessant. of Plutarch de defectu Oraculorum, and others.

A tenth argument from the prophecies of the old Testament, that this Jesus our
Lord is the Savior that was promised Genesis 3.15. is from foreign
circumstances, and among them, first from the treason of Judas prophesied Psalm.
41.9. and 53.13. fulfilled Math. 26.15. and 23. and with the hyre of his
treason, the thirty pieces of silver, take the bestowing of it prophesied in
the 11. Chap. v. 12, 13. of Zachariah, Remember the Lord, by equivalence,
Jeremiah, exalt the Lord, because he ought never to be remembered without his
praise, fulfilled Matthew. 27.7.10. Then the reward of his treason, Psalm. 55.15.
and 109.8. with Matthew. 27.5. and Acts 1.18. and 20. Secondly, from the chief
accessaries in the murder: prophesied concerning Herod and Pontius Pilate,
Psalm. 2.2. fulfilled Luke 23.12. Acts 1.26, 27. And concerning the Priests and
Scribes it was prophesied Genesis 49.6. fulfilled Matthew. 26.3. Mar. 15.11. Luke
22.2.

Thirdly from his friends forsaking Him, foretold, Psalm. 38.11. Zach. 13.7.
compared with Matthew. 26.56. and 27.55. what can the Infidel, Jew or Turk now
say for their unbeleefe? when by all these arguments, and all things else
whatsoever were prophesied of Him, our Lord bath been approved to be that
Savior that was to come into the world? yea so approved by the rule of the
Law, Deuteronomy. 18 22. and their own expositors, Moimony in Iesude hatorah cap. 10.
that even because they believe not, therefore is our Lord Jesus that true
Prophet that was to come; Because he foretold both their unbeleefe, and the
punishment thereof. Therefore beside other circumstances and proofs in this
abundance not necessary to be remembered, take for another argument the
unbeleefe of the Jews and the destruction of their city and scattering of
that nation, as the punishment of that unbeleefe. Their hardness of heart and
incredulity was prophesied, Ps. 118.22. Es. 6.9.10. etc. 8.14.15. etc.
52.1.2.3. The scattering of the whole nation is prophesied, Lev. 26. verse. 27.
to 40. Deuteronomy. 28.64. and Hos. 3.4. and 9.17. The destruction of the city and
Temple was foretold. Dan. 9.26. and by our Lord himself, Luke 19.43.44. and
chapter 21.20. with the continuance of that desolation, Luke 21.24. And of this
their unbeleefe, and scattering of the Nation, and desolation of Jerusalem, the
Jews themselves and all the world with them, are witnesses unto this day. If
you desire further conferring of the Texts of the old Testament with the new,
you may read Tertul. lib. 3. et 4. adversus Marcionem.

11. To the death and sufferings of our Lord whereby we are redeemed unto God
the Father, Rev. 5.9. we may also add the death and sufferings of his Saints,
as it is written, Psalm. 44. verse. 11. to 23. compared with Romans 8.36. For even
from Abel to Isaacke and so forward; they that have been borne after the
flesh, have persecuted them that have been borne according to the Spirit, Gal.
4.29. And although these persecutions have been more common and grievous at
some time than other; as it may appear by the books of the Maccabees, and the
ten persecutions of the primitive Church foretold. Reu. 2.10. yet that rule
holds, and still shall, till that King do come that shall reign in Justice,
that all that will live godly in Christ must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12.
For whether it be that God by afflictions and persecutions does try the
constancy and patience of his servants, and exercise their faith in his
promises: or whether by trouble and persecution, he will teach them not to
look for their portion in this life: or to make them more conformable to the
death of his Son, that they may also be partakers of his resurrection: or
that the reward of their afflictions may be with an exceeding weight of glory:
or that in the life to come they may by comparison enjoy the fulness of their
happiness in more thankefullnesse, and the perfection of love to the author
thereof: or that the devil may in Justice punish such as forsake his obedience
(for by the taint of original sin we all became his vassalls) and God is
not unjust no not to the devil himself, and therefore suffers him to afflict
them, whom he himself will comfort, Ioh 1. Reu. 2.10. or whether the devil to
keep his own vassals in firm obedience, does more eagerly persecute the
truth: this is a sure conclusion, that from Abel to this day, the truth of the
Religion of Christ, and the obedient and faithful professors thereof, have
ever been persecuted, whereas all Idolatry and superstition of how different
kinds soever, has been and is freely exercised. From whence the reason will
follow thus.

If the Religion of Christ, and the faith in him have only been persecuted by
the devil and his Instruments, even from the beginning of the world until
now; then the faith in Christ is only the true faith, and He the only
Savior of the world. But the first is true by the testimony of the holy
Scripture, and all those histories both ecclesiastical and profane that write
any thing concerning this matter; and the practice of the Turks at this day
does approve it. Therefore the Faith in Christ is only the true faith, and He
the only Savior of the world.

12. To this argument of the sufferings for the faith of Christ you may take
another from the heresies that have been thereabout. For as a malicious enemy
besieging a Castle impregnable poisons the fountain of which the defenders
must needs drink: so the faith of Christ being that only fountain of life,
by which we are sustained in our spiritual warfare, has by the malice of the
devil, been troubled g with all kinds of heresies, which the devil could
possibly forge by the wits of his Instruments: whereas in all the false
worships that have been in the world, no questions nor dissentions have been,
but every man wandered as he was led, in the darkness of his foolish heart.
And yet in all these heresies, through the gracious direction of the Spirit of
Christ, and the light of his word, the true faith has prevailed, according to
his promise, Math. 16.18. That all the devils that pass in and out at the
gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. From whence you may reason thus.
That faith which only has been attempted by all manner of heresies to be
corrupted thereby, and yet has stood uncorrupted and unreproveable in the True
Faith. But the Christian Faith only is such. Therefore the Christian Faith
only is the true Faith, and consequently our Lord Jesus is the Savior of the
world; seeing in Him only we look for redemption.

13. And this is that pole of the Loadstone whereto we may be directed by
every point within the compass of the holy Scripture. And these pointers that
follow are sufficient to show it, Act. 2.36. Let all the house of Israel know
assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus whom ye have crucified, both Lord
and Christ, Act. 4. v. 10.11.12. There is no salvation in any other: for there
is no name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved, save only
the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom God has raised from the dead, Act.
16.31. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved and thy whole
house, Act. 17.3. Paul opened and proved that Christ must needs have suffered,
and risen again from the dead: and this Jesus whom I preach unto you is the
Christ, Act. 18.28. He mightily convinced the Jews and that publicly showing
by the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ. 1 Cor. 3.11. other foundation can
no man lay, than that is laid which is Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.8.9. Though we or
an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel to you than that you have
received, let him be accursed.

Notes.
(a) HE to whom all the Prophesies.] This argument is the effect of that book
which Lud. Crocius entitled Apodixis de Messia, which with some alterations and
additions, he might in part take out of Just. Mart. his defense of the
Christians to Antoninus Pius, out of Athanasius orat. de incarnat. verbi, and
other of the Fathers, but most of all out of Hieronymus de Suncta Fide printed
at ^rancofurt 1602. by the name of Hebraeomastix. The authorities of the Talmud
and other Rabins cited by them, I have of purpose omitted, and with many
additions and proofs of the holy Scripture only, have contented my self with
this plainness and brevity which you see. But if any man desire to see those
Jewish authorities, he may find them there in Ficinus also de Christ. Rel.
cap. 27. etc. in Postel. de orbis concord. lib. 1. cap. 3. and in many others.
The authorities of the * Sibyls also, Yet those testimonies fi^ted Lactantius
well against the Gentiles, which you may read if you will Instit. lib. 4 ca 6.
and such pompous learning I have neglected of purpose because the simplicity
of the doctrine of Christ, and the certain truth of this article, can no where
be had so plainly, truly and powerfully, as in the holy Scripture it self.
And therefore having furnished you with reason against the Atheist and Infidel,
I leave it to your own diligence to compare these Scriptures together as they
are cited: they in the old testament showing what was to be fulfilled in
Christ: the other showing the accomplishment of the same. * The Jews
acknowledge the authority of the old testament: See the difference of their
sects in the 13 chapter of M. B^e^^woods Enquities.
and although they do not believe the new, yet none of their most shameless
R^bbies durst ever go about to refute it, or show the least untruth to be
therein. And although it were written in those times and amongst those people
which did most violently fight against the truth thereof; yet was it so
strongly confirmed by miracles, by the innocence of the witnesses, by the power
of the holy Ghost, by the constant sufferings of the professors thereof, and by
the self conscience of the persecutors, that all the power of the adversary
could not discredit it. And although the Atheists ever have questioned the
authority and certainty of the holy Scriptures, as you may read in the great
controversies thereabouts on both sides: yet the word of the Lord, and the
truth thereof indures for ever, 1 Pet. 1.25. The answers to their chief
objections against the old Testament you shall find most brief and plain in
Hen. Ainsw. additions to the annotations on the law, and the defense of the new
in Mars. Fic. de Christ. Rel. cap. penult. And for your case you shall find
the most necessary questions hereabout handled in chap. 34. following.

(b) Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from
between his feet until Shilob come; and unto Him shall the gathering of the
people be.] It is strange to see what wretched shifts the wicked Jews have to
wrest the true meaning of this place rather than they will acknowledge the
truth that they might be saved. Some will have this Shiloh to be Saul, others
Jeroboam, some Nebuchadnezar, as you may read in Pet. Galat. lib. 3 cap. 4.
But being convinced by other prophecies and the authority of their own
doctors: they confess that this Shiloh must be the Christ, and that he is
already come, but that he shall not be manifested till the time come that
they shall be restored to their own land again, which though it be true in a
sort, as I showed Reason 5. yet to us it is sufficient to mark the
circumstances of the text, and thereby to remove all scruple and doubt. First
the word Shiloh is interpreted, Her Son, because he was to be the Son of a
virgin without the company of any man. Then the other circumstance to whom the
gathering or obedience of the people both Jews and Gentiles should be, cannot
agree to any of the aforesaid persons. For before the days of Saul, Judah had
no government more than any other tribe, and having never had any preeminence,
it could not be said to loose it by Saul's being preferred to the kingdom. And
although Jeroboam took ten tribes from the house of David, yet the kingdom
of Judah did still continue a Kingdom. And although Nebuchadnezer ruled over
many people, yet he subdued them by force, they gathered not unto him, as the
word here signifies, a willing obedience, and is therefore by Ierom
translated, expectation, or waiting for: So that none of these could be that
Shiloh. Therefore their wisest doctors, and both their paraphrasts translate
it, until Messiah, or Christ come, the text is so plain. But yet it may be
here questioned, how this Scepter or dominion continued in Judah in the time of
the captivity in Babylon, and likewise in the time of the Machabees who were
Priests of Levi, and yet ruled as Kings somewhat more than 160. years before
Christ came. For certain it is, that after Ianna Hirecanus the grandfather of
Levi, who was the great grandfather of the blessed Virgin, Luke 3.24. none of
the Stock of David bare any rule as Prince, but the tribe of Levi swayed all,
until the time of Herod the great. To this it is answered, that by the
marriages of the Priests with the tribe of Judah and the family of David, as it
is manifest in Iehoiada, 2 King. 11. and others, the rule might be said to
remain in Judah. But descents in Israel, were accounted by the male-side only,
who is therefore called Zavar of a word that signifies to record. And therefore
in our Lords descent, though Tamar, Rahab, and Ruth are remembered for our
comfort of the Gentiles; and to show the constancy of Gods promise, His whole
genealogy by his mother is reckoned up by S Luke in the seventy seventh
generation: yet is the account by Joseph his supposed Father called the Son
of Heli, though he were only his Son in Law. And therefore the Rabbis
affirm that in the time of the captivity the great council of the seventy
elders instituted by God, numb. 11.25. did ever continue. And certain it is,
that the prince of the house of Judah, Zorobabel of the line of David, was he
under whom they did return from captivity. But yet that either the one or the
other had any authority or rule over their fellow captives in a foreign
country, stands not with any practice or policy now in use; no nor after
their return from thence, as it appears, Neh. 9.37. And although Daniel were
a chief Prince in the Court, yet he procured the business of the king only,
as Lord Treasurer, Dan. cap. 6.2. or Chancellor, Dan. cap. 2.48.49. as
Nehemiah and Mordecai by extraordinary favor only procured the wealth of their
people without any authority over them, but by special commission. But you
will say, that the right of government remained still to the tribe: yea but
Jacob speaks of an actual Shebet that should still remain. Therefore others
answer, that the word (...) Shebet signifies either a staff, a truncheon, or
Scepter, the ensign of authority, as used by leaders and commanders in war
who are therefore called (...) or (...) and so by a metonymia it may signify
authority: or else it signifies a tribe, and in this sense the tribe, or
distinction of a tribe never departed from Judah till our Lord came, whereas the
ten tribes carried away by Salmanasar in the days of Hezekiah, were ever after
utterly left out of all remembrance in the holy records, see further in the 27.
chap. R. 2. But concerning the cunning Scribe or lawyer (for so the word (...)
signifies) brought up between his feet, as Paul at the feet of Gamaliel, it is
most certain that such a Prince never failed from Judah till the time of Herod
the great, who not being able to win the Jews, either by his most sumptuous
building of the Temple, or by his Largis in their famine, or by all the favors
that he could do them, to acknowledge his right to the kingdom by the gift of
the Romans, because they daily expected him that was to come of David; murdered
their Sanbedrim and all the males that be could find of the house of David;
so that he spared not his own Son that was descended thence by his mother;
burnt also the books of the genealogy of their Kings, and afflicted them with
other calamities, till they after thirty years reign of his, were compelled
to acknowledge him their lawful king, and then according to the promise was
our Lord incarnate, that true Shiloh, her only Son. But you say Shiloh may be
interpreted his Son. I answer. The word (...) Shiloh by the consonants or
substantial letters signifies her Son, but by the vowell or spirit above it
may signify his Son: but because the van is wanting, it shall signify his
son that is invisible, and therefore our Savior is both God and man. So
there is no letter present, no letter wanting in the holy word without a deep
mystery, higher than heaven.

c Dan. 9. v. 24. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy
holy City; to restrain transgression, to seal up sin, to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness; to
seal the vision and Prophecy, and to anoint the Holy of holies etc. to the
end of the chapter.

The more evident and plain any text of Scripture is for the clearing of the
truth of Christ, the more has the devil labored to darken it, and to pervert
the truth thereof. And though by other texts of Scripture it be plain enough
to us, that this Jesus is the Christ; yet seeing no Scripture is so direct and
punctual as this for the certain defignement of the time, the devil has the
more earnestly labored to bewitch men's understanding, so that they have taken
more pains to make the time uncertain, nay some make it nothing at all
belonging to Christ our Lord. The errors of the Jews you may read in Pet.
Galatinus lib. 4. cap. 14. to the 19. the contradictions of the Christians
against the truth, and against one another you may find in D. Willet his most
diligent com. on Dan. Among the Jews one Porphyry, because he saw the text was
so plain for the truth of Christ, suffering at the time appointed by this
prophecy; said that there was no reckoning to be made of this text of Daniel,
because he was no prophet, contrary to the consent of all other Jews, and the
manifest authority of the Scriptures, as you may read, Eze. 14.14.20. and
28.3. Math. 24.15. where his innocence, wisdom, and gift of prophecy are
testified: others among them do wrest the time concerning the end thereof. For
the true Messiah not coming as they looked for Him, in pomp and worldly glory;
they still looking for him that should come, according to their fancy, have made
these weeks to mean, some 700 years, some 7. Jubilees; others 7. tens. And
because many in Scripture are styled by the title of Messiah, as you may read
Psalm. 105.19. Esaias. 41.1. and elsewhere, therefore some of them will have Cyrus
to be meant hereby, some Zerobabel, others Iehoshua, some Nehemiah: but because
neither the time nor circumstances accord, others will needs refer it to
Agrippa, who was King when the City and Temple were destroyed by Titus. And I
would the faithless Jews had wandered thus alone, and that no Christian by his
lifelesse interpretation had sided with them. But the circumstances of the text
do easily overthrow them. For this Messiah must be (...) Messiah Naghid the
Prince or chief Messiah: or of the word (...), Messiah that was to be
manifested, that Messiah that was to be anointed with the oil of gladness
above all his partners, Psalm. 45.7. because He received not the Spirit by
measure, Ioh. 3.34. Moreover who is he that can be that Holy of Holies but
only Christ our Lord, both God and man? who is he that can restrain men from
transgression? that can seal up sin? that can cover iniquity? that can bring
in eternal righteousnesses but Christ our Lord, in whom all the nations of the
earth should be blessed? Therefore the text by these circumstances is tied
only to the promised seed, Genesis 3.15. which should utterly destroy the works
of the devil. But the errors and disagreements of the Christians have been a
great cause to withhold the Jews from the acknowledgment of the truth. For
they have been more different in their opinions hereabout than the Jews, who
held constantly, that the beginning of the time, was according to the word of
the Angel, in the first year of Cyrus, when they had liberty to return, and
to build the City, and Temple. But the Christians make questions whether from
the going forth of the word from God to the Angel, or from the Angel to Daniel,
or from the king who gave the commission to the Jews, Gordomi. Chromol. cap.
15. page 237. And here again out of Ezra, because it is said, chap. 6.14. that
the house was fininished by the commandment of Cyrus, and Darius, and
Arteshaste king of Persia; question arises whether these seventy weeks begin
in the first year of Cyrus, or of Darius Hystaspis, or of Artaxerxes Longhand;
and whether in his seventh or in his twentieth year. And here while every man
is rich in his own opinion, and prizes at an high rate his own reading, and
praises his Authors, and despises, as deceived or counterfeit, such as make
against him; men have so puzzled themselves by profane stories, and the
reckoning by the olympiads; that they cannot find, as not where to begin, so
not where to end the account: whether at Pompeies taking of Jerusalem, or at
the birth of our Lord, or at his death, or with the destruction of Jerusalem,
or in the days of Adrian, when the Jews were banished out of Palestina. And
whether these sevens of years (for on that the Christians agree) be
moone-yeeres, or Sun-yeeres; for such fine subtilties they are driven unto, who
apply their wits and studies to make good their profane authorities. How much
more necessary were it to hold constantly the limits appointed by the sacred
Scripture, thereby to examine and reject the falsehoods of profane histories,
according to the counsel of S. Peter 2.1.19. And although M. Lively Pers. mon.
page 188. etc. to 193. have sufficiently refuted this fancy of moone-yeres; yet
while he sticks so close to the mudwall of these heathen stories, he is
compelled to make this Messiah the Prince, to be another thing than that Holy
of holies anointed. v. 24. Pers. mon. p. 175. and 200. and so for a full end
of the controversy turns this prophecy quite from Christ; because he cannot
see how it can stand with the just Chronology of the times, as indeed by his
account it cannot. For whereas it is manifest by Ezr. 3. v. 8. etc. that the
foundation of the house of the Lord was laid in the 2. year after their return
from Babylon, in the second of Cyrus, which he makes to be in the 2. year of
the 55. olympiad, and was finished in the sixth of Darius, Ez. 6.15. with him
Darius Nothus, in the second of the 90. olympiad, and yet were not the gates of
the palace set up til the 20. of Artaxerxes of him surnamed Memor, in the
fourth year of the 98. olympiad, the Jews must be very ignorant of their
own story, who said, Job. 2.20. Six and forty years was this Temple a
building, who by his account should have said 140. or rather 174. years: by
which reckoning also Zorobabel must be 150. or rather 199. years old, when the
building of the Temple went forward by the help of the prophets Haggai and
Zach. though he were but 15 years old when he brought the people out of
Babylon, see Zach. 4.9. So with him Christ is made to suffer in the fifth year
of the 65. weeks directly contrary to the grammar sense of the 24 verse: and
the 70 weeks of Daniel are ended, by his reckoning, not in any remarkable
event; but in the 37 year after Christ's passion, three years before
Ierus^lem, and the Temple were destroyed. Let them limp that list with their
Olympi^ns, let them stumble and fall that so blend their profane learning with
the holy Scripture, as that they make it void of that which is the chief end
thereof, that is the manifestation of Christ in the fullness of time, according
to the promises. But see this goodly reckoning by the Olympiads, and how sure
it is. Erasm. Schmid^ proleg. in Pind. puts the first author of them Hercules
the Idaean, one of the five Corybantes, that going from Crete to Elis, did
there set up these games in the honor of Jupiter his nursling; which was not
likely to be less than a thousand years before Iphitus, seeing his father
Saturn was the Son of him who first brought inhabitants thither after the
flood: after which Hercules being intermitted, they were again set up by
Jupiter himself, for his conquest over the Titans. But what meant these
Cretians to appoint their triumphs in P^l^ponnesu^? After Jupiter six renewers
of these gamebales are accounted before Hercules the Son of Amphitruo, and
after him, and Oxylus, and 400 years intermission, they were again set up by
Iphitus the King of Elis, and a solemn Mart or Fare for all strangers
appointed, and the Olympiads changed from the fifth to every fourth year. And
after this (forsooth) all accounts were exactly kept. Came such perfection so
on the sudden? But if it were so exact for ever after, as that we must
examine the times of the Scripture thereby; how is it, that the most eminent
city of the world knows not her original better? which some put in the first
year of the sixth Olympiad, other in the last; Mr. Livelie in the first of the
seventh, but Mr. Lydiat from Fabius Pict. Varro, and others proves the first
foundation of Rome by Romulus to have been in the first of the eighth Olympiad.
Now if a man should ask whether the Grecian account by the Olympiads, or the
Roman, ab urbe condita, were the surer; I think no man that has heard, O
(...) G^ae^i semp^r pue^i estis, but would take the latter: for as the
reckoning by the Olympiads was uncertain, so was it in no use till a little
before the beginning of the Greek Empire, L^dy. A. M. 3229 and therefore must
the Roman account be more sure, because it was not in common use before Julius
Caesar, when learning began to spread, and men could not so easily range from
the truth uncontrouled, A^m. 3258. Nay, such base or rather no account was
there of this leaden ruler of the Olympiads, that the author that described
almost all the reckonings used among the Greeks from Caecrop^, about 700
years before Iphitus, and his Olympicks, though he remember Cyrus, and
Croesus, and Marathon, and the iron mine found in Crete, and the coinage of
money in Aegina, and forgets not any wake, or horse-race, or poet, or fiddler of
note, and conti^ues his account to Seleucus Callinicus, within 180 years of
the uttermost end of the Grecian Monarchy, above 530 years after these
Olympiads, though he were a neighbor thereto, and takes the Isthmians in his
way, yet is there in him not one word of this goodly reckoning, that now is
grown so bold, and dares to lie so loud, as to silence the voice of the holy
Scripture, See Ma^m. Acundel. page 6. etc. Beside this, these Olympiads are
discredited in themselves, Mr. Livelie gives their beginning 775 years before
the birth of Christ, that is, in the year of the world 3154. Suidas in the
reign of Solomon, about the year 3010. Calvisius in the year 3174. others in
3187. Mr. Lydiat put them to the year 3229. Moreover, Iphitus they say, was
not the only restorer of them, but with him Lycurgus the Lawmakers of
Lacedemon; yet authorities there be that make Lycurgus 108. years elder than
the first olympiad of Iphitus, Lydiat but 97. A. M. 177^: other that make him
more than 80. years after. Moreover in this time of Daniel, here made
uncertain by these olympiads, that deadly Peloponnesian war continued twenty
seven years between the Lacedaemonians and Athenians: now ask any merchant
what Mart he would hold in that place which was the through fare between them
both: yet to make all times agreeable to these olympiads, the overthrow of
Babylon must be in the fifty five olympiad in the first year of Cyrus, after
which he reigned thirty years as M. Lively accounts, page 47, etc. But M.
Lydyat, and with him others of better account, puts the taking of Babylon by
Cyrus to the 24. year of his reign in Persia, and but seven years before his
death, De emend. temp. ad Annum Mund. 3469. as others 3472. from all which
uncertainties, and oppositions, I have only to conclude thus much. Let God be
true, and every man a liar. For why should these Gibeonites the profane stories
trouble the congregation of Israel? Let them draw water for the service of the
Tabernacle: but let them not appoint the services. And if God did choose the
Fathers, the high Saints till Abraham, and of Abraham, Isaac (for in him
should the seed be called) and of him Jacob, and made his seed to be a peculiar
people to himself, only for his sake who was to come of Judah: and for the
manifestation of the truth of his promise to Adam, recorded most precisely the
times from Adam to the promise made to Abraham by the ages of the Fathers 2078.
years when Abraham by faith forsook his country, Heb. 11.8. Vr of the Chaldees,
Act. 7. v. 2.3.4. aged 70. years, yet some men begin this account five years
after at the death of Terah, not well interpreting the word, Genesis 12.1. said,
for had said, though it be not unlikely that God called him a second time out
of Charran into Chanaan, See John Speed Cloud of witnesses, Chap. 4. and. 5.
and from the promise unto the Law four hundred thirty years, Exodus 12.40. Gal
3.17. then from the Law to the Temple built by Solomon four hundred eighty
years, 1 King. 6.1. and from this fourth year of Solomon wherein the Temple
began to be built, by the exact record of the reign of the kings of Judah and
Israel, four hundred eight years till Nebuchadnezzar, who in the first year
of his reign, and in the end of the third of Iehoiakim, besieged Jerusalem,
and took it in the fourth of the said Iehoiakim, when the seventy years of
the captivity began, Iere. 25.1.18. Dan. 1.1. compared with Dan. 2.1. If the
times (I say) were exactly accounted so far; shall be so wicked as to think,
that the Spirit of God began there in the end of the time to forget, or neglect
that which had been so long expected; that for which only the record of the
times had been hitherto so exactly kept? that which was the sure stay and
anchor-hold of all the faithful? For if this Christ be not He, in whom all
the Scriptures are fulfilled as well for the time, as for all other
circumstances, we are yet with the Jews to look for one that is to come. But
shall we to uphold the authority of heathenish records, disagreeing between
themselves from 130. years to 329. in the Persian monarchy only, disanull or
question the authority of the holy Scripture? Therefore that the linkes of that
golden chain which all the gods can neither break nor weaken the hands of him
that holds it, [ Illi. TH.] be rightly fastened one in another: to that period
of the seventy years beginning with the first of Nebuchadnezer, and ending
with the Chaldean Monarchy: put those seventy weeks, or seven of years, and
so these four hundred and ninety years having a certain beginning in the
first year of Cyrus in Babylon, according to that which Esaias prophesied of him
(not Histaspis, not Longimanus, much less of Nothus, or Mnemon) above an
hundred years before he was borne, chap. 44.28. and Ier. 29.10. they shall
likewise receive a certain ending according to the message of the Angel, at
the death of our Lord. The exactness of which account may appear first by the
Subdivision of the whole time, verse. 25. first into seven weeks, a troublous
time of forty nine years to build the city, the Temple, and the wall, as you
may read at large in Ezra and Nehemiah: then into sixty two weeks a more
troublous time, not only in respect of the perpetual wars between Syria
and Egypt, Palestina being the thorow-fare to both, and in particular of the
cruelty of Epiphanes, that compelled them to idolatry; but also of the often
and great changes of their state. First their Princes of the family of David
failing, then they of the Maccabees, after that they were conquered of the
Romans, and lastly enforced to acknowledge subjection to Herod and his
posterity. Of which most heavy and troublous times you may read Dan. 11. the
books also of the Maccabees, Philo, Josephus, and of late writers the briefest
(and therefore I think the best) Eberus. The last part of this division of the
sevens of Daniel is in the twenty seven verse, one week; in the end of which
last week, he should cause the Ceremonial Law to cease, and confirm the
covenant to the Many (...) Rabim. Romans. Babylonians. Iav^ns or Grecians.
Medes and Persians, for in every one of these chief Empires the expectation of
the eternal kingdom was proposed, Dan. 2.44. and 6.26. and whosoever had
faith in the promise of God was accepted of him.

A second argument for the preciseness of Daniels account, is from the form
of the words, Seventie weeks is cut out, a word plural is joined with a
singular; showing an agreement of the whole in every part thereof.

A third argument may be from the observation of the time of the evening
sacrifice (for here is no word empty or in vain) which as it was answerable
to the time of Adams fall, to the institution of the Passover; so should
Christ by that offering of himself once, make satisfaction for the one, and
finish the other, that the lifting up of his hands on the Cross might be as
the perpetual evening sacrifice, Matthew. 27.46. From whence I gather, that from
the last day of the seventie years captivity, the first of the going forth of
the commandment from Cyrus, from the evening of that same day, these weeks
were to receive their uttermost date, in the suffering of Christ, that the
truth of the promise of God might be according to all his works, in number,
weight, and measure, as it is said, Exodus 12.41. and 51. At the end of the
four hundred and thirty years, in the self same day, God brought out the
children of Israel out of Egypt.

Fourthly, and if this time of our Lord had not been thus defined and certain
by this prophecy, for the time of his suffering, upon what ground did our Lord
preach, Mark 1, 15. The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of heaven is at
hand. Upon what ground could Saint Paul say, Gal. 4.4. But when the fullness of
the time was come, God sent forth his Son? If there were no time in all the
Scripture limited which was to be fulfilled? and if there be any other fixed
for the death of Christ, let it appear; how also was his reprehension of the
blindness of the Scribes and Sadduces just, that they could not discern the
times of the Son of man? Matthew. 16.3. Luke 12.56. But by this account, from
the deliverance out of Babylon, they might precisely know the time of his
suffering, as Rabbi Nehumiah the Son of Hacana said, that he wanted but
fifty years, to the days of Messiah, as Galatinus writes out of the Talmud
lib. 1. Cap. 3. So Symeon, surnamed the Just, understanding the text of Daniel
aright, for his hopes sake found that favor from God, that he should not see
death till he had seen the Lord, Luke. 2.26.

I, but Nehemiah had commission to build the wall of Jerusalem in the twentieth
year of Artaxerxes, otherwise called Darius Longhand, Nehem. 2. And it is
plain by the words of the Angel, Dan. 9.25. that the account of the seventy
weeks must begin from the commission to build the wall, and so foreign
histories will accord with the Angel: a shrewd block whereat many have
stumbled; but the building of the wall, is no limit of the time, but a thing to
be done in those troublous times, ver. 25. Beside this, foreign histories
will not so accord to the death of Christ from thence, neither by Moone-yeeres,
nor Sun-yeeres, nor with exclusive or inclusive, Pers. M^n. page 183, etc. But
suppose that by some beggarly shift, some likely agreement were made, yet from
the end of the seventy years captivity to this twenty of Artax^^xes are
forty nine years at the shortest reckoning: now would I ask, with what
faithfulness the Angel discharged his message, if being sent to give Daniel
skill and understanding of the time (for that only was the thing whereof the
Prophet was ignorant) he should by four hundred ninety, give him to
understand five hundred thirty nine, or as some will have it five hundred
ninety two, or any other number; and neither in the whole nor in the parts
give him the least inc^li^g of any such reckoning? Gordon. Chronol. Cap. 19.
thinks that here is obscurity sought out of purpose; and that Daniel was
still ignorant of the time. I say that this answer is clean contrary to the
profession of the Angel in the 22. and 23. v. Was his coming to give him
skill and understanding, and would he blind him in obscurity, bind his
understanding unto falsehood, by giving him one number for another? he durst not
do it, it was against his nature; neither dare I believe the Jesuit. Beside,
where Daniel is ignorant, he professes it, as chap. 12.8. but here is not a
word to that purpose. But I answer, that the strength of this objection depends
only upon the ill interpretation of the text: for the words in 25. verse From
the going forth of the Commandment to restore and build again Jerusalem, as
the old Latin has it, Vt iterum aedificetur Jerusalem, that Jerusalem may be
built again, were in our former bibles (much better) to being again as
Montanus, ad faciendum reverti, to cause the people to return: for the word
(...) to return in the neuter signification, in the conjugation here used is
active, to make to return. Now who were to be made to return, but they that
had gone from thence? But take it at the hardest, to restore and to build, or
to build again, should not they build, that should enjoy it and dwell there?
so that of force these words must have reference to that word from Cyrus, who
gave the liberty to the people to return and to build their Temple and the
city. And all the commissions in the favor of the Jews which were after
Cyrus, were only to strengthen and make good that first grant of Cyrus, as it
is manifest Ezech. 6. and 7. and Nehem. 2.8. For the freedom of the people was
the maine and first thing, and for their convenience the building of the city;
first their own houses for necessity Ezech. 3.7. Hag. 1.4. then the house of
God for his service, Ezech. 4.3. and lastly the wall of the city for their
security, Neh. 1.3. the freedom and liberty of all this was granted by Cyrus
as it appears Ezech. 44.28. and 45.13. 1 Chronicles. 26.22. Ezech. 1.2. and
accordingly about five thousand of the people returned: and the foundation of
the Temple was laid in the second year after their return, and by the malice
of their enemies hindered, till by the encoragement of the Prophets Haggai and
Zachary the building of the Temple went forward in the second year of Darius
(most likely) Hystaspis, as Josephus, Mr. Calvin, Lydyat, Pererius, Gordon, and
others affirm. But especially Ezra observes precisely the difference between
Darius under whom the Temple was finished, and Artaxerxes in whose seventh
year he came to Jerusalem with a certain Caravan of the Jews, about 1600
Ezech. 7. And in the twentieth year of the same Artaxerxes, Nehemiah had a
further commission to build the walls, and brought none of the captivity with
him, but was compelled to desire a Convoy of the King; neither did he build
any thing besides the walls: for as for timber for any houses, he had not a
stick, only by special grace he had out of the kings Park timber for the
gates of the city, for his own house, and for the gates of the palace or
court of the Temple. Nehem. 2.7, 8. And from the foundation to this time were
forty six years John 2.20. fully complete, though the body of the house had
been finished fourteen years before, Ezech. 6.15.

Therefore I say, first, that seeing the Temple was already finished, and the
city wanted not houses, but inhabitants, Nehe. 11.1.2. it may appear easily
how far this one act of building the wall was from that which was spoken of
Cyrus, both by Esaias and the Angel. Secondly, and because the Jews were
already returned from Babylon, and that none returned with Nehemiah. And
thirdly because the wall was the last thing performed in the end of these
troublous times of the first seven Sevennits, or 49 years of which the Angel
spoke, it is impossible, and contrary to the very record of the holy Scripture,
that these four hundred ninety years should take their beginning in the
twentieth of Artaxerxes or at any time either after or before, but only at
that time when Zorobabel fanned Babel, and brought out the people thence. He
that will see more to this question may read Dr. Willet whom I cited before,
and Ioh. Speed Cloud of witnesses, Chap. 5.

(d) Haggai 2.9. The glory of this latter house shall be greater than of the
former, says the Lord of hosts, and in this place will I give peace. What the
stateliness and magnificence of Solomon's Temple was, himself exceeding all
the Kings of his days both in riches and honor; the Temple among the most
sumptuous buildings being the most excellent, and about which he took most
care; his father David a Prophet, as himself having described the pattern to
represent that Temple not made with hands wherein the king of Glory would
dwell, may easily be thought to be such, as the wisest, richest, and most
glorious king of the whole world could make it. But lest we should not
conceive sufficiently thereof, the books of the Kings, and Chronicles do
enlarge our understandings by the employment of almost two hundred thousand men
for seven years and ^o half; by the descriptions of the materials and their
preparation; the roof ^^ing set with precious stones, the walls overlaid, yea
the very pavement and hinges of the doors being of pure gold; so that no
history remembers the like building both for cost and workmanship. Now what
this second Temple buil^ by a small band of poor captives in all but forty
two thousand three hundred sixty, beside their servants a wretched number of
seven thousand three hundred thirty seven, and that in a desolate country,
amidst so many enemies that hindered their building, was like to be in
comparison of Salomons, every man may easily conjecture. And therefore this
Prophet says, Chap. 2, 3. That this new built house in comparison of the
former was nothing, as you may further see, Ez. 2.12, 13. Was this house then
more excellent in respect of the ornament or privileges? God promises by his
prophet Chap. 1. v. 8. that he would take pleasure in it, and that he would be
glorified. Where the word (...) ecabd by the want of the letter which in number
signifies five, and in sense would be translated, I will glorify it; is
supposed by the Rabins to intend the want of five things in this latter Temple
which were in the former, First the Ark with the covering and Cherubims,
secondly, the fire from heaven, thirdly, Shecinah, or the Divine presence
manifested in the oracle, Levit. 16.2. Numb. 7.89. 1 King. 6.5. Fourthly, the
holy Ghost, which spoke not by any Prophet after this Darius in whose days the
Temple was built, fifthly the Vrim and Thum^nim. And this many of our learned
do embrace, as you may read everywhere: but Pet. Galat. lib. 4. Chap. 9.
cites the book (...) yoma, or of days interpreting the five things to be.
First the Arc as before: secondly, the pot of Manna: thirdly, the oil of
anointing: fourthly, the rod of Aaron: fifthly, the box with the offering of the
Phlistines, by the side of the Arc. But the author of that book was too
careless, as it is apparent, 1 King. 8.9. 2 Chronicles. 5.10. where it is directly
affirmed, that nothing was in the Arc but only the two tables of the Law. And
is it likely, that the offering of the heathen should be brought into the most
holy place, before Christ had entered thereinto? But howsoever, seeing by all
confession it appears that this house was not to be compared with that of
Solomon, either in outward beauty, or in riches, or in outward holiness,
being so often and grievously profaned by Heliodorus, the agent of Selencus,
then by his brother Epiphanes, who set the image of Jupiter in the Temple of
God, and enforced the Jews to forsake their Religion; after by Pompey, by
Crassus and others, or in the other high and heavenly ornaments and priveleges,
the glory thereof must needs consist in this, that the Lord of glory, the
Messiah and Savior of the world would glorify that Temple with his presence,
and in that Temple preach peace with God, by his own satisfaction for the
sins of the world. You may read hereto, Ioh. 8.12. to the end, and chap.
10.23. to 40. and 18.20. And thus the substance being more excellent than the
shadows, and Christ by his suffering having finished the ceremonial Law in
the time while this house did stand, according to this prophecy, it is
necessary that this Jesus be the promised Messiah, seeing this house stood but
forty years, the time of repentance and no more, after the death of our Lord.

(e) Haggai 2.7.8. Yet one little while and I will shake the heavens and the
earth; the Sea and the dry land. And I will move all nations, and the desire of
all nations shall come, and I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord
of hosts.

Marfilius Ficinus de Rel. Christ. cap. 27. interprets this place too slackly
according to the letter only, understanding by the shaking of the heavens,
that Star which conducted the wisemen at the birth of Christ, and a supposed
Ecclips at his death. The Evangelists tell us of a darkness over all that
land, but no author of sufficient credit avowes any Eclipse of the Sun in
the full Moon when See praef. Iac. Christ. in Cat. Palast. page 2^.
the Passover was kept: by the shaking of the earth he understands that
e^^thquake at the suffering of Christ, and another mentioned by Josephus.
Hi^^^rto also he brings the taxing of all the Roman provinces by Augustus Luke
2. and the rebellion of Judas of Galilee, mentioned Acts 5.37. By the moving of
the Sea, he means the miracle spoken of, Mar. 4.35. and John 6.16. to 22.
when by his word our Lord commanded the winds and seas, and they obeyed him.
And if this interpretation had rested with Ficinus by profession a Physician,
by sect a Platonic, I had said nothing; but seeing other professed Divines, and
they not of the least account, do follow him herein, as Crocius aforesaid, I
thought it fit to clear this text rather by that interpretation which the
Apostle makes hereof, Heb. 12.26, 27. which is directly to this purpose for
which I cite it, where by the shaking is signified the removing of those things
that are shaken, that they which are not shaken may remain. Now the whole
drift of that Epistle is to prove that the Law had but the shadows of things
to come, but the body was Christ. Therefore by the heaven understand the
Ecclesiastical estate of the Jews as it was ordered under the Law, and at
Christ's suffering utterly finished: for the Law made nothing perfect, but was
only the bringing in of a better hope, Heb. 7.19. and Chap. 8. all. By the
earth understand the civil policy, which was likewise so shaken by the
Romans, that they had not power to put any man to death, John 18.31. And after
by Adrian were they utterly scattered from being a people. These things then
being thus shaken, and by the shaking removed; the sacrifice of Christ and his
kingdom must remain, that he may be yesterday, and to day, and the same for
ever, Heb. 13.8. that is, before the Law, and under the Law, and after the Law;
the only Mediator between God and man. And as it was with the Jews, so
likewise the inhabitants of the Islands of the Sea, and of the maine land, were
to be shaken, that they might forsake their service of dumb idols, to serve
the living God, Acts 14.15. 1. Cor. 12.2. that so our Lord might be the desire
and joy of all nations, and the Scripture fulfilled, which says, Rejoice thou
barren that bear not, break forth in joy thou that travellest not; for the
desolate Church of the Gentiles, has many more children than she, the
Synagogue of the Jews that had the husband. Esaias 54.1. For he came unto his
own, but his own received him not, John 1.11. And therefore was he made a
light unto the Gentiles, unto the uttermost ends of the earth, Esaias 49.6. Acts
13.46.47. that is to us, even to us of this Island, utterly removed from all
the world beside. Glory be to thee, O Lord most high.

(f) Genesis 49.5, 6. Simeon and Levi brethren, their swords are the instruments
of violence, Into their secret let not my soul enter, Let not my glory be
united to their assembly: for in their rage they slew the man, and in their
self will they houghed the ox.

The interpreters differ in the translation of this text, first about the word
(...) mecherotheikem which some bring from the root (...) chur a furnace or
crucible, but translate it, in their habitations, as if it descended of (...)
ghur to sojourne or dwell as a stranger, others derive it of (...) machar which
among other things signifies a sword; and may well be the theme of (...)
machaers in Greek a sword; by which word Arius Montanus does translate it most
fitly to the sense, and without any understanding of the word (in). Another
difference is about the word (...) shor, which being pronounced shur, signifies
a wall, and for the authority of the Chaldaean Paraphrast is by many
interpreted, they pulled or dug down the wall. In which sense though it
agree well to that purpose for which I cite it; that the high Priests of Levi,
and the Scribes of Simeon, through their malice and violence against our
Savior caused him to die, and so in their self will pulled down the wall of
partition between the Jews and Gentiles: yet the word being pronounced shor,
as it is pointed in this place, does every where signify an ox, and so with
(...) which signifies to pull out by the roots or to cut a sinew, as it is
used 2 Samuel 8.4. and 1 Chronicles. 18.4. He boughed their chariot horses, is by the
Greek and some other good interpreters here turned as you see (...) they
houghed the ox; neither is there at all any mention of digging down a wall,
Genesis 34. where this deed of the sons of Jacob is recorded, but that they made
spoil of all their cattle. And although the other sons of Jacob were actors
in this business; yet was it by the instigation of Simeon and Levi, as the
whole multitude before Pilate were persuaded by the Priests and Scribes to ask
Barabbas, and to kill the Lord of glory. Now concerning their scattering among
the other tribes; of Levi you may read Joshua 21. of Simeons scattering in the
cities of Judah, of Dan, in mount Seir also, and the country of Amalek, you may
read Ios. 19. and 1 Chronicles. 4. from verse 24. to the end. And as the Levites
though dispersed, yet for their zeal in avenging the idolatry of the
Israelites, Exodus 33.26.7, 8. had this honor from God, to teach Jacob his
judgments, Deuteronomy. 33.9, 10 so the Simeonites likewise took this honor to
themselves to be teachers of the law in the Synagogues of Jacob, as the Levites
in the schools of Israel, as the Thargum of Jerusalem has recorded, and by
these was that fulfilled which Jacob here prophesies concerning the man of men
slain by them, and that ox the great sacrifice for the sin of the whole
world, sinew-cut or deprived of all strength or life as concerning his flesh,
which fact of theirs the Patriarch does so detest, as that neither his tongue
nor thought should give consent thereto. For although the ignorant multitude
thought that the Messiah should come in worldly glory; yet the Prophets knew
that his kingdom was spiritual, and that by his death they were to be freed
from death, and him that had the power of death, to whom they were subject
because of sin. And therefore was it that David's heart smote him when he had
cut off the lap of Saul's garment (for Saul was a figure of Christ) lest by that
fact he were likewise a pattern of them, and so in some sort partaker with them
of whom he prophesied, Psalm. 22.18. They parted my garments among them. But you
say the Scripture is not to be strained, for by that means every thing may
be made of any thing: but there is one only sense of the Scripture, and that
according to the letter. I Answer: Our Lord says, That Moses writ of him. Can
you show it by the letter? he said indeed, A Prophet shall the Lord raise up
unto you from among your brethren like unto me, him shall ye hear. So he
raised up David, Solomon, Esaias and the rest, and they did hear and believe
them; but him whom the Father sent they believed not, John 5.38. Therefore this
was not he of whom Moses wrote. Is this your literal understanding? He says
also, that Jonas was a sign of his burial, and yet there is not a letter of
it in all the book of Jonas. Adam said, This is now bone of my bone, and flesh
of my flesh, and therefore shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall
be joined to his wife. Saint Paul from hence Ephesians. 5.32. and Heb. 2.14.
c^^cludes that seeing the children were partakers of flesh and blood; therefore
the Mediator also must be incarnate. But he could not prove it by the letter,
and therefore he calls it a great mystery. So then there is a mystical sense
of the Scripture, as well as a literal. And the mystical is rather to be
taken in this place; because the Patriarch himself in the first verse of this
Chapter, promises to tell them what shall befall them in the last days. Now it
is manifest, that of the three estates of the Church: First, under the law of
nature: Secondly, of the ceremonies: thirdly, and of grace; that of grace only
could be called the last days. For the estate of the Church under the law of
nature was the first, and not utterly finished, till the tables made of the
unknown matier were broken, Ex. 32.16.19. and then began the law of the
ceremonies when the same words were again written in the tables of stone which
Moses hewed, Exodus 34.1. which middle estate also lasted until the Gospel of
repentance was preached by John the Baptist, and was utterlie finished in the
Consummatum est, John 19.30. and then began this last estate of grace, called
the last days, as it is manifest, Joel 2.28. compared with Acts 2.17. and
Hebr. 1.1. and 1 John 2.18. So that this prophecy of Jacob, though it were in
some sort fulfilled as concerning their dispersion in the second state of the
Church, as I showed; yet the uttermost accomplishment of their foul offense in
slaying that man, figured by their cruelty toward the Sychemites, could not
be till the last days when Christ was manifest in the flesh. Compare herewith
(if you will) Iacobi Brocardi Mist. cap 1.49 and note (b) on Chapter 13. number
7. And he that follows that rule of one only literal sense, as he makes no
difference between the historical books of the Old Testament, and any other
true history, so does he deprive himself of that hope and comfort which he
might receive by them concerning Christ, and makes them frustrate of their
chiefest end, and directly gainesayes that of the Apostle, Heb. 1.1. After
sundry sorts God spoke in times past to the Fathers. See Iacobi Brocardi
praefat. in int^pretat. Bib. fol. 25, 26, etc. if their doings and sufferings
were not predictions of the sufferings of Christ, and of the glories that
should follow.

How much better was that saying of the father? The new Testament is hidden in
the old, and the Old is manifest in the New.

But you say, by these allegorical and mystical senses of Agar and Sinai, and
the like, any foreign sense may be concluded. I Answer, The Scriptures being to
give us hope and comfort in Christ, there is one rule for their interpretation,
which out of Saint Peter I remembered even now, that the interpretation be to
manifest the sufferings of Christ, and thereby our deliverance from the
punishment of our sin: or the glory of Christ, and therewith the hopes that
are laid up for us in heaven. And what allegorical, mystical, or anagogicall
sense soever is brought in beside this rule, the rule of our holy faith, is as
easily thrust out, as it is brought in. And this is the true Cabala of the
Scripture both old and new.

Troubled with all kind of heresies] The heresies or errors about this truth
of our Lord Christ incarnate are in brief of three kinds. The first,
concerning the person, who was this Christ: the second concerning His nature
and being: the third concerning the attributes or proprieties of his being. The
most ancient heresy concerning the person of the Messiah was that of the
Herodians, of whom you read in the Gospel, Matthew. 22.16. Mark 3.6. These, as
Epi^^anius remembers Panarii lib. 1. held that Herod the son of Antipater the
Idumean was the true Christ promised to the Fathers, because the scepter did
utterlie cease from Judah in his time: but the gathering of the nations was not
to Herod, as Jacob prophesied, so their heresy vanished. Hitherto you may
bring all those false glosses of the Jews who turn the prophecies fulfilled
in Christ, to other persons, as to Ezechiah, to Zorobabel, to Nehemiah, to
Iehoshua, and to others, as they think fittest to mock of the holy oracles
from the true Messiah, as you may read in Pet. Galat. lib. 4 cap. 17. and in
the note (h) above. But their greatest mistaking was in their counterfeit
Messiah, who from Numb. 24.17. called himself Barch^chab, that is, the son
of the Scarre, of whom they were foretold by our Lord himself, John 5.43. If
another shall come in his own nam^, him ye will receive. But it cost them the
d^struction of their city by Titus, and so many miseries as ensued thereon.
Such another Barch^zib^ they had in the days of Adrian, by whom after the
slaughter of innumerable They ci^^ the author of the book Iu^h^sia for t^i^e
so many as went out of Egypt. Postel. de orb cond. w^ites 600000 of both these
you may read Galatin. lib. 4. cap. 21.
persons, they were utterlie chased out of their country, and not so much as
the name of their citi^, f^^m his own name called Aelia, left unto them; and
thus have they lived i^ banishment ever since. But the lewdness and folly of
other succeeding heretics did equal this of the Jews. And first that of
Simon the Witch, who gave out himself to be the Christ, which though
Augustin^ affirm in so many words, yet Tertullian, and Epiphanius have only
so much in effect, that he was that virtue and great power of God as you
read, Acts 8.10. How great then was his scholar Menander? who to all the
falsehood of his M^ster added this, that he was greater than Simon, Epiphanius
in Pan. The heretics called the Sethians, held that Christ which was borne of
the Virgin Mary, was no other then Seth, named Genesis 4. the son of Adam. The
Ophites held that the Serpent which deceived Eve, was Christ, as Augustine
says: but neither Irenaeus, Tertullian, nor Epiphanius affirm it. But
Augustines authority alone is sufficient to make us think that the Maniches
held that the Serpent which taught Eve knowledge, and came in the last days to
save the souls of men, must needs be Christ. But these sotteries were so
senseless, as that they neither lasted long, nor spread far. But the enemy
of mankind would not suffer the fountain of life, the sincere doctrine of
Christ to be untroubled, and therefore beside these heresies concerning the
person, who was that Christ promised to the Fathers, he brought into this
faith, which we hold concerning Christ the son of the Virgin Mary, such
confusion of opinions concerning his nature and properties (for his offices are
in question now) that Mahumed, Alcoran Cap. 20. rejoiced in himself that he
was delivered from the opinions of the Christians, so monstrous in themselves,
so contrary one to another, that the very enemies of these heresies were in
confusion thereabout, and as here and there contrary one to another, so
sometime to themselves. You may read if you will, the stories of the heretics
in the Fathers, Irenaeus, Epiphanius, Theodoret, Isidore, Eusebius, Ruffinus,
and other historians of the Church, and in brief, he that gathered from them
all, the commentator on Aug. de haer. I, for avoiding of confusion, will
remember as occasion is, the heresies under the name or names of the most
famoused authors or defenders thereof, and that without respect either of the
time wherein they lived, or other opinions which they held beside: for I write
not the history of the wars, but the triumph only of the Christian faith.

1. The Monophysitae or heretics which held but one only nature in Christ,
were of diverse families: for Eutiches, while he went about to refute
Nestorius, who held as two natures, so two persons in Christ, confessed that
Christ was of two natures God and man before the uniting of them both; but
after the union of them, they became as one person, so one nature: because the
manly being was utterlie swallowed up of the Divine, and changed thereinto, as
a drop of vinegar in the Sea does utterly loose both the taste and being of
vinegar. This the Armenians and Iacobites heretofor^ have held, but now they
are returned to the true faith. Mr. Brerewoods Inquiry page 154. and page 173.
Euagriu^ hist. Ecclesiast. lib. 4. Cap. 9, 10, 11. charges Anthimus Bishop of
Constant. Theod sius Bishop of Alexandria, and Severus, to have taught one
only nature in Christ; but what or how, he shows not. But you may find in
Theodotus the ^e^der Collect. lib. 2. that their heresy was one with this of
Eutyches.

2. Ap^llinaris as others, Apollinarius contrarily upon that text of Io^n 1.14.
The word b^cam^ flesh, held that in Christ the flesh and the word were
c^nsubsta^tiate, or made one substance, so that somewhat of the word was turned
into flesh, not remembering the interpretation which follows in the same place,
that the word made his tabernacle or dwelling in us.

3. The Timotheans said, That of the two natures thus united in Christ, a third
thing must result, which is neither very God nor very m^n, but a confused
effect of both natures. And this third being the Theod^sians held to be
mortal; but the Armenians hold it to be immortal, and no way subject to any
suff^ring. The Cophti in Egypt hold but one nature in Christ, not by commixture
to cause a third being of both, but interpret their meaning according to the
true faith, Brerewood Enquir^e. Cap 22.

4. But on the other side, Ebion, Carpocrates and Theodotion affirmed that
Christ was pure and only man, begotten by Joseph of his wife Mary, as other
children, and that God was in him, as in Peter or Paul, or any other man, and
by a greater progress in virtue, he came to be more righteous than other,
because he received a more noble soul than other men, by which he knew and
reveiled heavenly truths, and by an assisting power of God, he wrought
miracles, as Moses or other of the Prophets had done before. This heresy the
Socinians, as Wentz. a Budowecks does charge them, have renewed of late; yet
after by him it seems, they are come to yield unto Christ as much as Arius.

5. Artem^n, Theodotus of Byzant. or Constantinople, Paulus of Samosata, and
Photinus held that Christ had no being before he took beginning of his
mother, and so was only man by nature, but that God, which Epiphanius expounds
the Word, descended into him: which error Athanasius Epistola de incarnat.
contra Paulum Samosat. holds to be all one with that of Carpocra^es.

6. Cerinthus to that progress in virtue of Ebion and Carpocrates, a^ded this,
That Christ, which he interpreted the holy Ghost, descended into Jesus the son
of Mary, when he was baptized in Jordan, and made known unto him the Father,
whom he knew not before; and hence it came to pass that Jesus afterward did
such great miracles, because Christ was in him. Thus of one he made two
Mediators, one Jesus wherein Christ was, and another Jesus without Christ: for
he added that Jesus suffered and died, but that Christ without any suffering
flew back to heaven; as Colarbasus also after him did teach. This Cerinthus is
that heretic as says Epiphanius, that troubled the Church in the Apostles
time, affirming that the Gentiles ought to be circumcised, and keep the Law,
which heresy of his the Council of Jerusalem determined, Acts 15.

7. The heretics called Alogiani, because they denied Christ to be God the
Word, hold in effect as much as the former concerning his nature, but yet deny
not, but that for his great grace and virtue he was made the Mediator for other
men. But the writings of Saint John they utterly deny; because, say they, the
other Evangelists do no where call Christ the Word. Answer. But they call him,
and prove him to be God, as Matthew. 1.23. God with us, from whence is the gift
of pophecie, and power to cast out devils, Matthew. 7.22. so Mark 1.24. The
devils confess his power, and him to be the Holy one of God. And Luke 1.
34.35. The Angel professes that holy thing which was to be borne of the
Virgin, to be the Son of God. All his glorious miracles prove as much, which
were neither wrought by the power of Baalzebub, as the old Jews, nor yet by
magic, or by the means of the Cabala, as the later Jews affirmed, but only
by the power of God, as our Lord himself proves by an unanswerable argument,
Luke 11. ^^rs. 14. to 23.

And these are the most famoused heresies of them who held but one nature in
Christ, ^i^ine as Eutyckes, who changed the humane nature into the divine: or
humane; as Apollinarius, who thought the divine nature was changed into the
humane: or one mixed nature of both these, as the Timotheans believed: or purely
humane, as Ebion, Cerinthus, Ph^tinus and the Alogians: wherein it will not be
unfit that we briefly consider their reasons, and see what answers are, or may
be mad^ thereto.

. 1. And first concerning the heresy of Eutyches, you may by this see how
dangerous it is. For if it be put, that after the union of both natures, the
humane nature was utterly swallowed up of the divine; so that the divine-nature
only remained, then it must follow of necessity, either that we are still in
the state of damnation, or that God must suffer and dye for us, in the divine
nature: which as it is impossible; so yet should we be still in the state of
c^ndem^ation. For if our redemption be not wrought for us in our own nat^re,
the divine Justice is still unsatisfied: so we are still in our si^ne. And
therefore the Council of Chal^edon, held by six hundred and thirty Fathers to
condemn these errors of his, viz. that the natures were apart before the
union, as if the humanity had had any being before it was taken to the Godhead;
or that the beings in themselves, or their proprieties were either confused, or
changed, confessed him, (...). that is, one and the same Son in the two
natures (but remember the word (...) signifies the nature together with the
proprieties thereof) neither by mixture, nor change of natures; but as one
individual being consisting of both natures inseparably. But some of the later
Eutichians minced the mattier, and said, that unity of nature was not till
after His resurrection. But that, both against the authority of the Scripture,
and reason it self. For He received power of the Father to raise the dead, to
give eternal life, to execute the Judgment as he is the Son of man, Ioh. 5.
v. 25.26.27. all these things not yet performed. And how can the heavens
contain Him, Act. 3.21. if he be only God, whom the heaven, and the heaven
of heavens cannot contain? Kings 8.27. or what hope can we have of being made
like unto Him, if He be only God? yet have we assurance, that as we have
borne the image of the earthly; so shall we also bear the image of the
heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.49. The words of our Lord himself are yet more clear,
Luke 24.39. Handle me and see me: for a Spirit has not flesh and bones; as ye
see me have. The truth of his bodily being after his resurrection is there
argued by his eating and many other infallible proofs, during the time of 40.
days Act. 1.3. And in the last two chapters of Saint John's Gospel all to this
purpose, that we may believe that he that descended into the grave, is even
the same that ascended in the perfection of His manly being to appear for us
before the Father, till the day of our redemption, when he shall present us
unblameable in his sight, as it is said, Heb. 2.3. Behold me, and the children
which thou have given me, see Ioh. 6.39.

But see the reason of this heresy of Eutyches, delivered by that second Synod
of Ephesus, called (...); which murdered the virtuous and faithful Flavian,
and blasted with their stinking curs all them that should affirm that there
were two natures in Christ, forsooth, because he is the only Son of God,
not two Sons, not two Persons, but one Son, one Person, Euagrius Hist.
Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 18. And yet our Lord says of himself, whom do men say
that I the Son of man am? Math. 16.3. And as often is he called in the
Scripture the Son of man, the Son of David, the Son of the virgin, of the
carpenter, etc. as the Son of God: and yet but one Son, and yet but one
person of both natures divine and humane, as I showed before in the beginning
of the 23. chapter. I refer you thither. But the answer of that wise Prince
of the Sarazens Alamundarus was sufficient to stop the croaking of those foul
birds of the Ephisine cage of whom some coming to tainte him with that bane,
he told them that he had received letters that Michael the Archangel was lately
dead: when they answered that it was impossible that an Angel should suffer
either sickness or death, he replied: And if Christ have not two natures
as well the manly as the divine, how could he endure the pains and death of
the Cross? For if an Angel cannot dye, much less he that is only God,
Theod. Collect. loc. cit. And this may be sufficient for all the rabble rout of
Eutyches. But if you desire more reasons against his opinion, you may find
them in Tho. Aq. cont Gent. lib. 4. cap. 35. And although this heresy be
imputed unto Eutyches (as I have showed) yet it is plain that it was an
heresy before Eutyches was borne. For Saint Athanasius in his sixth Sermon has
most wittily and plainly refuted it.

. 2. The heresy of Apollinaris is as wide from the truth on the other side,
and as it favors of the heresy of the Theopaschites (which you shall hear
anon) so it favors that sottery of the Manichees that made the Godhead
divisible into parts, as you have heard before, chap. 8. note 6. 5. 3. or
rather yet worse than so, if any thing can be worse than that which is worst,
or more false than that which is most false. 1. For if any part of God became
man, then God in part of Himself must cease to be God, and God must suffer
detriment or loss, when part of His being is either taken away or changed to
the worse. 2. So God also should be subject to composition and accidents,
contrary to that which has been proved, chap. 9 numb. 3.5.6.] 3. Whereupon it
would also follow, that seeing his being is most simple and pure, if any of his
divine being were coessentiall to his humanity, then also the whole. 4. And
moreover it would follow that God were neither infinite, nor eternal. For
whatsoever is changed into another ceases to be that which it was before. But
this is contrary to that which has bin showed c. 2 and 3. so then all these
things are impossible. And therefore the Scripture concludes against this
opinion, that God is eternally one and the same, as S. James also says c.
1.17. that in Him there is neither variableness, nor shadow of Change.

1. But see their arguments. First, The Word became flesh, Ioh. 1.14. Therefore
the Word was changed into flesh, bones, sinews, hair, etc. Answer. The word
(...), was, became, or was made, has diverse significations, because a thing
may be said to be, to become, or to be made this or that by any property or
accident that is therein, as a man at 20. years old is made or becomes able to
guide a Ship. Cicero became or was made more learned by reading the books of
Plato. But thus the Word was not made flesh when he took our nature on him,
for so should we make God subject to accidents: so also our mediator after the
union of both natures: should not be essentially both God and man, which must
of necessity fall into one of these two Gulphs, either that the manly being in
Christ was but fantastical and in show only, as the Manichees and some other
heretics held; or else that He may cease to be a mediator, between God and
the Creature, which were to take away our hope of everlasting happiness.
Again a thing may be said to be, to become, or to be made this or that
substantially, as when the food is changed into the substance of that which is
nourished, thereby then it is made or become that which it does nourish. But
thus the Word could not become flesh, but rather flesh should have bin made the
Word. For in all manner of working to the change of one thing into another, the
more noble and powerful agent must have the preeminence. But this is neither
affirmed in the Scripture, nor possible to be true.

Thirdly a thing may be said to become or to be made this or that essentially,
as every particular matier and form under every species become, or are made
one individual; as the body and soul in Plato, essentially become the proper
person which we call Plato. But thus the deity and humanity became not
essentially one individual, under any common species or kind. For the deity
came not to the humanity, as the form thereof, which had the full and perfect
proper form, the humane so^le and understanding. Moreover all forms are
ordained for their matiers, and all matiers have in them a natural appetite to
those forms whereof they are capeable. But nothing of this was in that
above-wonderfull generation. For neither could the humanity when it was not,
desire that the deity should dwell therein: neither was the deity ordained for
any such end, as to dwell in man: but of his own only holy will, and love to
man, was he pleased so to bless the creature. Therefore the Word was made
flesh only by the This wo^^^ was made signifies an ^nion, not a C^^^ers^on.
A^^^na. Sermon. 6.
uniting or taking of the manhood unto himself, whereby both the divine and
humane nature became in Him one subsistence, one Mediator, one Person, one
Immanuel, to which union in natures, n^thing in nature can be equal or like.
For this is that wonder of wonders which passes the understa^ding of men and
Angels to conceive, for which his wondrous conception by the Holy Ghost, his
wonderful birth of a virgin were, by which his glorious miracles, his
wonderful resurrection, and ascepsion, and the wonderful happiness and
eternity of his creature are wrought. And although as the two natures, so their
proprieties are different in Him: so that we may truly say of Him according
to the several natures, that he was dead, and yet could not dye, that He
suffered, and yet could not suffer, or the like: yet must all these
contradictions of necessity he understood of the distinct natures in the unity
of that one Person indistinct; so that the difference be in the natures, not
in the Person. And thus the Scripture has taught us to speak as it is said,
Ioh. 1.10. He was in the world, and the world was made by him: which clauses
though they may receive distinction by the differences of his being; yet in the
unity of his Person, none at all. For the same Person has made the world, and
yet was in the world as another man. For to respect the Son according to the
perfection of his deity, although nothing be essential unto him, but that he
be eternally begotten of the substance of the Father: yet since he was pleased
to take on him the office of our Mediator, it was necessary, that he should
take also our being wherein alone the satisfaction for us should be wrought.
For as it was necessary that our Mediator should be God, that he might be able
to save and to support the manhood enduring that punishment which might
satisfy the infinite Justice, and raise it up again to life; lest being
swallowed up of those torments He should not be able to give life to them for
whom He suffered (for the State of the members cannot be better than of the
head.) So was it necessary that he should be made flesh, that is, become
truly and essentially man, that the punishment being borne in the nature that
had offended, that nature might be restored to the favor which it had lost.
Necessary, I say; but I mean not by any absolute necessity on the behalf of
God: for He is Debtor to no man, nor on him can any necessity be laid toward
the creature without which he is infinite in glory and perfection; but yet
necessary with that necessity of supposition; that seeing God, for the praise
of his Grace, would by Himself restore His Creature that had sinned, it was
necessary that he should take on him the nature and being of that creature;
at ^east in part, if He would restore it but in part: but because the creature
had sinned in the whole; not in soul alone, nor in body alone, nor in the one
without the other; it was necessary that He should become whole and entire
man, not to take on Him the soul of man only, but to become also flesh, that
he might redeem both soul and body.

2. But they object that out of Saint John chap. 1.14. wherein it is said, that
He dwelt in us as in a tabernacle, and again it is said by Saint Paul. Romans
8.3. and Phil. 2.7. that He was made in the likeness of man. By which texts it
may be gathered that he was made man in respect of some property or accident
only. For he that dwells in an house is not said to be one thing with his house,
and may go out of it when he list, and he that is like another can no way
possible be the same. For nothing is said to be like to, but to be it self. I
answ. that neither by the one speech nor by the other is it meant but that he
was truly and very man, of soul and body as we are: but seeing the humane
nature has a certain show or resemblance of clothing to the deity, because
the Godhead is not seen or apprehensible of the creature in his own being,
but only as He is man: Therefore by that Metaphore of his dwelling in us as in
a tabernacle, are we called to the meaning and true understanding of the
M^saicall tabernacle whereby his manhood was figured and the promises after a
sort made visible to the Fathers, as by those texts of S. Paul we are brought
to remember, that as Adam was created in the likeness of God and lost it; so
the Mediator that second Adam, to restore that first image, was made true man
in the likeness of the first Adam. For this is one immortal hope, that as he
is truly and indeed partaker of our nature, and one with us; so shall we be
truly partakers of the divine nature, 1 Pet. 1.4. and one with Him, Ioh.
17.21.22.23.

3. A fourth being cannot come into the Trinity, but if that being which was
taken of the virgin do still continue a manly being, so that neither the
Godhead be changed into the flesh, nor that into the Godhead, it must needs
follow, that a fourth being is taken into the Trinity: and so we are bound to
worship a Quaternity for a Trinity. Answer. This seemed no inconvenience to the
ancient Fathers, as it appears by Athan. epist. de Incar. dom. nost. Ie.
Chri. contra Apollinar. For to this objection he answers, that the humane body
of Christ is the body of the increated word, and therefore is adored lawfully.
And the first council of Ephesus against Nestorius, see can. 7.8. and 13. do
not suffer the use of the word Coadoration or Conglorification of the body of
Christ, lest they should seem to make two Sons, or two Persons, or any way
to admit any kind of division between the divine and humane nature, as
Nestorius taught, but that with one adoration we ought to worship Immanuel.
For the two natures therein make not two Persons, but one Mediator in one
Person, in which person we adore the deity in the holy Temple of his humanity,
according to the commandment, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and Him
only thou shall serve. For neither is His humanity a person, nor yet possible
to be separate from His deity. And seeing his humanity from the very instant of
his conception never had any being but with the deity, to part one of these
from the other, were to destroy the present being of his Mediatorship, and to
put Him in that state in which He was before his incarnation, and that were to
make void his sufferings and the glories which have hitherto followed thereon.
If you desire to entangle your self further in this question, you may read,
Athanas. sermon. 6. epist. ad Epict. and epist. de incarnatione Dom. contra
Apollinar. and Epiph. advers. Dimaeritas.

. 3. Now concerning that confusion or mingling of the two natures in Christ
into one, which the Timotheans imagined: if neither the beings, nor the
proprieties of the beings divine and humane be changed: neither the Divine
into the Humane, as Eutyches imagined, nor the divine into the humane, as
Apollinarius supposed: it cannot be inferred by any reason, that any such
confusion is or ought to be yielded unto. It is true which the Timotheans
supposed, that if any such mixture were, the thing that did arise from that
mixture must needs be a third thing differing from them both. For true mixture
is the union of bodily parts changed by the mixture from their former being, so
that neither the being, nor accidents of the things mingled is saved or kept
entire in the mixture, but (at least in part) corrupted, as in the mingling of
wine and water, of black and white color, neither the one nor the other
remain in their perfection. And to admit this mixture in the union of the
divine and humane natures in Christ, as it is impossible in respect of the
divine being, which has not any bodily parts: So were it utterly to make void
the coming of Christ, which upon this mixture should have suffered in such a
third being as had never sinned.

And if this foundation of the mixture of the two natures in Christ be taken
away, all the Cage-worke of the Theodosians, that the Mediator is mortal, and
of the Armenians, that he could not suffer, must needs be rotten and unable
to stand. Therefore let us consent to that Antheme of the Church. Mira^^le
mysterium! Deus homo facius est, id quod erat permansit: id quod non erat
assumpsit: nec commixtionem passus neque confusionem. O wonderful mystery!
God was made man: He continued that which he was: He took to H mselfe that
which He was not, neither suffering commixtion to make a third being of them
both, nor confusion to change the one being into the other.

. 4. 5. 6. 7. Now it remains to show what were the holdfasts of Ebion,
Cerinthus, Photinus, and the rest of that ging. For you may perceive how that
although they had their private differences in their opinions; yet like
thieves, they all conspired in this, to rob the Lord of glory, of the Robe of
His Divinity.

The reasons of their opinions after the long and wearisome reading of the
Fathers which recite and answer them sometimes heavily and with much ado, you
shall find most briefly laid down by Saint Thomas, contra gent. lib. 4. cap
4. 9. and 28. which in effect stand only in the misinterpreting of certain
texts of the holy Scripture. For the better understanding of which, let me
remember you of these two rules. First, to hold steadfastly that the terms or
attributes which are given unto Christ in the Scripture concerning His divine
being, belong unto him essentially and properly, whereas the same terms
attributed to the Saints, belong unto them only by grace and appropriatly. And
by this difference you shall answer their cavils when being urged with such
texts as this, Heb. 1.5. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee: they
answer, the angels are also called the Sons of God, Job. 1.6. and 2.1. and
magistrates, Psalm. 82.6. yea all the Saints are called the Sons of God, Phil.
2.15. and 1 Job. 3.1. and this is only by a grace appropriate, and imparted
unto us; whereas Christ is the Son of God according to his essence and true
being, as it is said, Ioh. 10.30. I and the Father are one, not (...) one
Person, but (...) one thing, one being, as Saint Paul interprets it. Phil. 2.6.
That he was in the form of God: that is, in the most inward or essential
being, God (for he has no matier) equal to God; that every tongue may
confess that Jesus Christ is Iehova, for so the word is there to be
understood, because the Greeks every where in the old Testament interpret
Jehovah by the word (...) the Lord. The second rule is, that the proprieties of
one nature in Christ, do not destroy or deny the other nature, as where it is
said that He was hungry, that he wept; that he slept, that He was ignorant of
the Judgment day, and of the grave of Lazarus; that his soul was heavy, etc.
which belonged properly unto Him as man, and prove that he was truly man, in
body and soul; yet do they not at all take away the being of his Godhead,
but that with his manly being we ought to confess that he is God blessed
above all for ever and ever, Amen. Romans 9.5. And by this difference well
observed you may give a true answer to those texts which they falsely urge to
their conclusion; as where it is said, All power is given unto me in heaven
and in earth, Matthew. 28.18. And again, Philippians. 2.9. That God has exalted
him. So where Saint Peter says, Acts 2.36. That God has made the same Jesus
which was crucified, boil Lord and Christ. By which texts and the like, they
would conclude that he is not God by nature, but for his merit and greater
graces only called God, as it was said to Moses, Exodus 7.1. Behold, I have
made thee a god to Pharaoh. For, (say they) He that receives of another to be
exalted, to be made a Lord, is not such of himself. But this conclusion
follows not, but rather that which S. Paul affirms, Romans 1.3. and 4. That
Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of David according to the
flesh, was powerfully declared to be the Son of God by his resurrection from
the dead, when he in is humane being received all power: and was exalted above
every name, and manifestly declared to be both Lord and Christ, both God and
man. The power therefore and glory was in him, being God essential and
eternal: and in him being made man, manifested by his resurrection, to dwell
in that manhood eternally. And as that which these heretics clatter, is
directly against the authority of the holy Scripture, so is it utterly against
all sense and reason: For if our Savior were only man, then our comfort which
we should have by him, as being able to save, because he is God, were utterly
destroyed; as a Father says, I would not believe in him, if he were not God.
And this according to the Word of God, Ier. 17.5. Cursed be the man that
trusts in man. Moreover, if Christ were only man, excelling others only by
his progress in virtue; so that for his greater grace above others he might be
made a Mediator for others, then many mediators might be possible to be,
seeing Noah, Daniel, Job, and Moses, exceeded others in virtue, and by special
grace many others might exceed them; but so our Lord should not be the only
Son, the only Mediator, contrary to that which the Scripture witnesses, as
you heard in the end of the Chapter. n. 10. Therefore concerning the Mediator,
what he ought to be, let the followers of Ebion and Photin^^ hear Saint Paul,
Heb. 4.14. Seeing then that we have a great High Priest, that is passed into
the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession. And
again, Verse 15. let the Eutychian hear, and be ashamed, for, We have not an
High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but
was in all points tempted as we are, yet without sin. Therefore Jesus our
Mediator is both God and Man. Here you may remember, if you will, that which
you read before, Chap. 20, 21, and 22. More you may read to this purpose in
Just. Martyr his Dialog. Triphon; in Irenaeus also, lib. 3. Cap. from 21. to
31. Tertul. de Car^^ Christi, Epiphan. haeres. 28. and 30. And especially in
Tertul. de Trinit. if that book be his.

Thus we have seen the falsehood of the Monophysites: now it remains that we
also take a view of their opinions, that hold more natures than one in Christ,
and among them to see the heresies of Nestorius 1. and Arius 2. and then the
late opinion of Postellus 3.

. 8. Concerning the position of Nestorius, it may seem that all authors agreed
not, what it was. For he that made that addition of the Timothean, Nestorian
and Eutychian heresy unto Saint Augustine, makes the heresy of Nestorius
nothing else but a mingle-mangle of the Photinian and Timothean heresy. That
Christ was man only, not conceived of the Holy Ghost, but that afterward God
was mixed with that man. Again, Socrates, Hist. Eccles. lib. 7. cap. 32.
writes, that many supposed that Nestorius sought to bring in the Heresy of
Photinus, whereas (says he) it is plain by the writings of Nestorius, that
he only avoided this, that the virgin should be called (...), or the Mother of
God. But Tho. Aquin. contra gent. lib. 4. cap. 38. cites Damascen to this
purpose; We affirm, that there is a perfect union of the two natures, not
according to the Person, as the enemy of God Nestorius affirmed, but also
according to the Hypostasis. From whence Tho. concludes, that this was the
position of Nestorius, to confess one person in Christ, and two Hypostases. If
by Hypostases he meant the Divine and humane natures united in the one Person
of our Mediator, neither Damascen, nor Thomas can blame him for it. But if by
the manly Hypostasis consisting of body and soul, he must mean a humane
person, as Thomas in the same place out of Bo^tius, determines, you may see how
they made a quarrel more than needed. For though Nestorius had been madd, yet
would he never have held one Person of both natures, and also two persons. But
it is clear by the later Historians of the Church, that this among other, was
the heresy of Nestorius, that as in Christ there were two natures, so there
were also two persons: which opinion might easily take the original from
Cerinthus, Pho^i^us, and such as stunk of that Pumpe. For if God the Word, came
to dwell in Jesus the son of Mary, being a perfect humane person of body and
soul, (whether at his Baptism, as Cerinthus taught, or from the very instant
of his conception, as the Nestorians of this time affirm, the position of
Nestorius must follow of necessity, that there be in him, as two natures, so
two persons. For the Godhead destroyed nothing of the humane perfection which
it found: So that if it came not to the humane nature, but in the subsistence
of a manly person, then that humane nature must remain in the perfection of a
person, as it was before. Whence that follows also not unfitly, which he
further affirmed, that the things of infirmity which were in Christ, as to
eat, to drink, to sleep, to g^ow in wisdom, etc. belonged to the son of
Mary, without the Son of God; and all the glorious miracles which Christ did
work, were done by the Son of God, without the son of Mary.

But the supposition of Nestorius, that the deity came into the humanity, when
the humanity had perfect subsistence in soul and body, that is in the
perfection of a personal being, is most false: For the Word taking flesh of
the Virgin, caused it to become one person with himself; so that the body
assumed was the proper, and peculiar body of God, and the humane soul, the
soul of God, not of any other Person, but the body and soul of the Son of
God; and this not only while the soul dwelt in the body, according to the
natural life, but also while he was yet under the burden of our sins, his
body in the grave, his soul in Hell, as the Apostle cites the Scripture, Act.
2.27. Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, neither will thou give thy Holy one
to see corruption: So then the body in the grave was the Holy One of God, for
nothing else of him was subject to corruption: and though it were for a time
forsaken of the soul, yet not of the Godhead, which thing the words of the
Angel do confirm, Matthew. 28.6. Come see the place where the Lord lay: So that
our Savior on the Cross, yea, even in the bands of death (as concerning his
body) was still the Lord and God of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. And if it be most true,
that God is more inward, and more near unto every thing, than can be expressed
by any words of being, of essence, of nature, substance, moities, form,
propriety, or the like: because he is the foundation unto all these, and in
him all things consist: How much more shall he be inward and fundamental
unto that body, soul, and Spirit of Jesus, which he was pleased to make his
own, that by that body and blood of his, he might redeem his Church, as it is
said, Acts 20.28. That God purchased his Church with his own blood, that is,
with the life and blood of that body, which was proper and peculiar unto
himself. Thus then the word was made flesh, not by any transmutation or change
of the one, or the other from their true and natural being; but because that
by a secret and unspeakable conjunction the Word was made one with the flesh,
and the flesh with the Word. So then the Son of GOD took the humanity, not
that it might be another person beside himself; but being in himself perfect
God, he would also in himself be perfect man, taking flesh of the Virgin. (The
differences of union you may see (if you will) in the principles of N. Byfield
Chap. 16.)

This union of the Godhead and Manhood, is manifest by diverse Texts of the holy
Scripture. For evidence of which we will first put this infallible axiom; That
of two different persons one cannot possibly be affirmed of the other, as to
say, that Peter is John, or John is Peter, neither yet that the proprieties of
the one, can belong to the other, as to say that the Gospel of Saint John is
the Epistle of Saint Peter. Now it is said Ioh. 16.28. I came forth from the
Father, and am come into the world, which belongs to Him, as to the Son of
God, as John expounds it, 1 Epist. 4.9. and then it follows, Again I leave
the world and go to the Father, which is peculiar to him as man, as it is
said, Act. 3.21. Therefore Jesus the Son of God and the Son of the virgin
is one and the same person, so Col. 1.16. that same He by whom all things were
made v. 18. is the head of the Church, and the first borne from the dead; and
Romans 9.5. He who is of the Fathers concerning the flesh, is God blessed above
all. This our Lord affirmed of himself, Math. 26.63.64. to be the Son of
God, and the Son of man, and again, Ioh. 3.13. He that came down from heaven
is the Son of man, and again Ioh. 3.13. He that came down from heaven is
the Son of man, which is in heaven: For he that ascended is even He that
descended, Ephesians. 4.9. Moreover it is said, Heb. 9.14. That Christ by his
eternal spirit offered himself without spot unto God. But if the humanity of
Christ be another person beside the deity, then he offered not himself, but
that other person of the humanity by whose death our reconciliation was
wrought, and so not by his own blood, but by the blood of another person,
should he have entered into the holy place. So God should not have sent his
own Son into the world, that the world by him might be saved, contrary to
that which is, Heb. 9.12. and Ioh. 2.16.17. But he that is mighty to save, even
Jehovah our king has saved us, Esaias 23 22. and that not with foreign blood;
but by his own offering of himself has he purchased for us eternal
redemption.

This then being the great mystery of our salvation, that God was manifest in
the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. That God is one with us, Matthew. 1.23. That that holy
thing which was borne of the virgin is the Son of God, Luke 1.35. it may
appear how detestable that heresy of Photinus and his predecessors was, who
made our Mediator the Son of man by nature, and the Son of God by adoption
only, and how dangerous this consequence of Nestorius is, who of that one
Mediator between God and man. 1 Timothy 2.5. would make two persons. If you desire
to know the growth of this heresy, and the other positions of the Nestorians,
you may read M. Broerewoods enquiries, chap. 19.

. 9. Arius and his followers held that Christ was truly man, so that be might
truly be called the Son of the virgin Mary, borne in time as concerning his
manly body; and the Son of God, as being the first begotten of every
creature, and so the most excellent creature created by the will of God the
Father before all times and ages, but not coeternall with him, because there
was a continuance when he was not, and therefore was he not say they, (...) or
coessentiall with the Father, because he was created of that which was not,
from which Error these Arians were also called (...). This poisonous fountain
overflowed afterward into diverse streams. For the half Arians of whom Acatius
was chief, held that Christ was (...) or of the like being with the Father by
nature: but others said that this likeness was not in nature, but only in will
and powerful working. Whereupon Asterius is by some affirmed to have said that
Christ was the virtue only or a creature endued with the power of God, other
heretics again, as Aetius and his scholar Ennomius, said that Christ was
(...) or of another manner of being, unlike to the Father both in nature, and
will, and hence arose the error of the Dulians, who thought him only the
servant of God in the work of the creature, and so of the Bonosians, who held
him to be the Son of God only by adoption. And although this Hydra might
seem to have been nipt in the head by the writings of Athanasius, and other
learned men of former times, and especially by the first Council of Nice Anno
327. and other that followed afterward; yet never was there any heresy in the
primitive Church, that went on with that violence and strength, or that caused
more trouble and persecution, as being confirmed by diverse Councels, and set
forward by the authority of sundry Emperors. And for the continuance thereof,
it has been such, as that unto this day not only among the Turks, but ever
in the Church of Christ (if at least they may be said to be of his Church,
who falsely deny unto him the truth, and excellency of his being) some have
been found from time to time even since the clearer light of the truth has
shined, that have maintained this heresy of Arius in whole or in part, as
Socinus, Gittichius, David the Hollander, Servetus Neuserus, and with us,
Legate, Mannering, and others. In Polonia also and Transylvania they swarm, as
you may read in Wents. a Bud. page 229, etc.

But (say you) is it possible that an heresy so foul as this is taken to be,
should continue so long, and be upheld by Councels, and maintained by
Emperors, and justified by learned men, except there were both reason and
authority of Scripture for it? For as no man is wilfully ill but by the error
of his judgment between good and bad; so no man does err wilfully, but only
by mistaking of falsehood for the truth. Answer. Saint Paul says that there
must be heresies, and this I suppose should come to pass because men would not
be content to learn the doctrine of Christ and his truth according to the
simplicity of the truth, as he had taught it in the holy Scriptures, whereunto
if men would take heed, and try the truth as they ought, the things of God by
the word of God, matiers of Religi^n by the rule of Religion, that is, the holy
S^ripture alone, so many heresies had not sprung up. For man's understanding so
long as it does follow the true guide thereof, the revealed truth of God, it
cannot deceive nor be deceived. But if it will presume to be guide and make the
truth of the Scriptures to follow it, it is impossible not to stray; and so by
the just judgment of God men also grow hard and obstinate in their own
errors, not only to resist the truth, but also to persecute it, as these
Arians did very grievously at several times. But see their reasons and their
authorities.

1. The Godhead is in the Father wholly, or else he cannot be perfect God;
and if the Deity be wholly in the Father, then can it not be in the Son, nor
in the holy Ghost. Answer. The word wholly is equivocall, or of doubtful
meaning: for wholly may signify as much as with all the parts; but this cannot
belong to that which is infinite, or wholly may signify only, and so the
proposition is false; or it may mean as much as perfectly, and so the
proposition is true, but the consequence is false: for the Deity is wholly and
perfectly in all the persons alike.

2. He only is the true God, that is prayed unto by the Mediator: But God the
Father only is so prayed unto; therefore God the Father only is the true God.
I answer. If we worship the Godhead in the nature, or being of God, we worship
one only being in the three Persons. But if we worship the persons, we worship
them in the unity of the Godhead, that is, acknowledging every person to be
God. And this is that Father, that one God whom we pray unto by that one
Mediator of God and man, the man Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 2.5. who having himself
in his own body borne our sins upon the tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. is set at the
right hand of God, and makes intercession for us Romans 8.34. and has commanded
all them to come unto him that travail and are heavy laden, that he may
refresh them, Mat. 11.28.

3. When the Son was begotten and the holy Ghost proceeded, either he was,
or he was not: If he were before he was begotten, then was he not begotten: if
he were not, then there was a continuance when he was not: and therefore of
necessity he must be created. Answer. Eternity has no respect of time, of
before, or after, because it is one continual perpetuity, and whatsoever being
or action is once therein, it is eternal. Therefore that difference of was and
was not, has no place in eternity, seeing the generation is eternal, ever one
and the same, as you may see further in the treatise at the end of the book.

4. Whatsoever is begotten, receives the nature which it has from that which
does beget, as a man from man, fire from fire, and in all other univocall
generations, in which though the natures be of one kind, yet must they needs
be different in number, as in Isaak and Jacob. But this cannot be in the divine
generation, for so there should be more Gods than one, or if the nature of the
Son be in number the same with that of the Father, then does the Son
receive that nature either in part, which is impossible, because a most simple
and pure being cannot be divided into parts; or entyer and whole; and so the
Father should cease to be. Neither is the generation as of a river out of a
fountain, because the Divine nature is neither divisible, nor possible to be
increased. Therefore Jesus is not the Son of God by generation, but by
creation only. Answ. The being of God is not material, which only is subject
to division into parts, and that totality which is made of parts: but his being
is intellectual; and because it is infinite, and apprehended by an infinite
understanding, it is necessary that the divine being or understanding be
wholly in the word or being understood. I mean with that totality of
perfection which is in the unity of being spoken of in the first objection.

5. Either the Father begat the Son with his will, or against his will; not
against his will: for so it had been impossible that ever he should have
been begotten; if with his will, then his will must be before, and so the Son
cannot be eternal. Epiphanius rej^cts this reason, because all the kinds of
begetting are not reckoned up: for in God (says he) is no deliberation for
the inclining of his will: therefore the Deity is that nature according to
which the Father did beget the Son, neither ever ceases to beget him
eternally. But this is to beget the Son with his will, seeing the will of God
is his being, according to which he works eternally, as you may further
understand Chap. 11. note (d)

Many such arguments as these are, and many be brought to this purpose of
Arius, all which, as these that you have seen, must take their grounds from
inferior truths in the creature, which are utterly unfit for that generation
which is eternal and Divine: for to whom shall we liken the highest, or who
shall declare his generation? and therefore Athanasius Epist. contra Arianos,
cujus initium (...) said rightly, that the Divine generation was not to be
measured by the generation of man, as those Arians used to deceive women and
children. And therefore the Scripture in expressing of the Divine generation,
calls the Son the Wisdom of the Father, Prove. 8. The Word, John 1. The
brightness of his glory, and the express image of his Person, Heb. 1. That
the mind herein may be utterly withdrawn from sensible and natural things.
The Fathers also in the Nicen Council to that question of Phaedo the patron of
Arius, how the Son was begotten of the Father? answered, that this question
is not to be asked: for seeing the creatures were not ever, they could not make
answer concerning his original that was eternal. And therefore as none knows
the Father but the Son; so none knows the Son but the Father. And as I
showed you Log. Cap. 15. n. 6. and note thereunto. That the certain knowledge
of every thing must be had from the rules that are proper and peculiar thereto;
so remember here, that since the creature can have no knowledge of the Creator
but by that revelation which he makes of himself, you may ever repair to his
own holy word, to be instructed in his holy truth.

6. But from hence also Arius armed his heresy: for because Wisdom says of
her self, Pro. 8.22. The Lord possessed me the beginning of his ways; where
the word (...) being translated in the Greek (...) he created me: Arius from
thence caused much perplexity unto the Fathers in this business, and although
Athanasius in his oration (...) proves by diverse arguments that the Son, as
concerning his Godhead cannot be created: yet when he comes to give answer to
this text, he interprets it thus. The Father has appointed me a body, and
creating me among men, has ordained me the Savior of mankind: which though
it be true; yet is it not a fit interpretation for that text, if ye consider
the circumstances before and after. The Fathers also of the Nicene council
being urged with this text answered from that addition, the beginning of his
ways, that the world was created for man: so that man the reasonable or
discursive wisdom of God, as concerning the intent and purpose of God, was
first created, although last in the order of actual being. Epiphan. haeres.
69. in answer hereto, holds the distinction of wisdom created and increated:
but seeing no place of the Scripture expounds this place of Christ, therefore
(says he) it is not necessary to interpret it of the Son of God: but if you
take the other circumstances, it can belong to no other. Then if it must needs
be referred to Christ, yet shall it be verified of his humane, not of his
divine nature. At last he gives the true meaning of the word (...) kanah he
possessed or of (...) kanan he hatched as a Chickin, and reasons, that as every
chicken is of the same nature with the dam; so the word also must have the same
being with the Father; and therefore be begotten before all time eternally:
you shall find the true reason of the difference of the translation in the
tenth section following. In the mean while it is not unreasonable to think
that this Error came by some interpreter that was an enemy to the Christian
faith. And yet among them Aquila translates it (...) he possessed me as other
(...) of the same theme, which might easily be written (...) he created. Let
the students of the holy mysteries give all diligence to read the holy
Scriptures in their proper language, For there this treason of Arius and all
other heretics is easily discovered.

7. He that denies himself to be good, cannot be God. But Christ says of
himself, Math. 19.27. why call thou me good? there is none good but one,
even God. Answ. Good is either absolute and perfect, which is God alone, or
else imparted, the image of that Good: and so every thing created was very
good, Genesis 1. Goodness is likewise in the virtue and disposition of the mind,
as Barnabas was a good man, Act. 11.24. or manifest in the works, and thus
Dorcas was full of good works, Act. 9.36. and our Lord wrought many good
works among the Jews Ioh. 10.32. In these three kinds our Lord was good as
man supereminently, above all the orders of created things. In the first kind
he was good as God, which absolute goodness he denied not to himself, no more
than He denied himself to be God, at that confession of Thomas, My Lord and
my God, but rather taught that young man (if he had had wit) to follow that
perfection which he prescribed. For being by the young man's own confession
good, it must follow of necessity by that rule of perfection Follow me, that he
was God and ought to be followed and obeyed, Ephesians. 5.1.1. Cor. 11.1.

8. Like unto this are those other arguments which they bring, as where it is
said, Ioh. 6.57. Like as the living Father sent me; and I live by the Father:
So he etc. If he live not by himself he cannot be God. I answer. that this
life which the Son receives of the Father is not accidental, not of grace,
not of foresight or purpose: but substantial and eternal, seeing the
generation is according to the immutable being and eternal working of the
Father, and his spiritual perfection only. So they object from Heb. 3.2. That
he was faithful to him that made him, and Ioh. 14.28. My father is greater
than I, so 1 Cor. 15.28. when all things are subdued unto Him, then also shall
the Son himself be subject unto him, that did put all things under him; and
many other which you may find cited and answered by Athanasius, and especially
by Epiphanius in the places quoted before. Wherein observe diligently the
differences between those terms, which signify his nature, and those which
have reference to the office of his Mediatorship, as in the first place of Heb.
3. Consider what he was made. It is plain by the verses before, he was made
the Apostle and high Priest of our profession, in which office he was faithful
to him that made him, or appointed him thereunto; so in the second place, to
that, The Father is greater than I; note the difference between the Divine and
humane nature: for the Son is inferior to the Father, by nature, as man; and
so as he is the Mediator in the dispensation of his offices, as with us he
makes up the body of his Church: nay, even in the Divine nature the Father is
that eternal fountain whence the Son has his eternal original, although
the honor of sending takes not away the equality of power, nor the
excellency of nature from him that is sent; so the greatness there spoken of,
is with respect of the office of the Son sent into the world, that the world
by him might be saved. In the third place of delivering the kingdom to God the
Father, note the communication of idiomes or proprieties of speech according to
the rules of Theodoret. That the words proper to either nature, become common
and indifferent to the Person, as the God of glory was crucified, 1 Cor. 2.8.
that is, that Person which is the God of glory, was crucified concerning his
humane nature. Secondly, that the community of names makes no confusion in
natures: now the word Son belongs to Christ indifferently, either as he is
the Son of God, and so shall he reign with the Father, and the holy Ghost
eternally, and of his kingdom there shall be no end, Dan. 6.36. Luke 1.33. And
seeing that he as the Son of man, has received all power, Mat. 28.18. John
3.35. and 13 3. as to govern his Church Psalm. 45. so to raise the dead, and to
execute judgment, John 5.26, 27. Acts 17.31. He shall reign till all things
be subdued unto him, and that he has utterlie destroyed all the works of the
devil, sin, ignorance and death, John 1.3.8. that as God the Father does now
reign by him; so he having performed all things which belong to him as the
Mediator, may thereafter as God reign with the Father eternally, our
everlasting king of glory, when God shall be all in all his children, as he is
in him.

I am the more brief in this argument; because their arguments are answered in
part before. 4. And because this question is near to that which follows
immediately, and again because it is the principal subject of that treatise
by me so often mentioned: therefore for conclusion, first consider the danger
of this venom which at once poisons all our hopes of that full satisfaction
which is made unto the justice of God by the death of Christ: for if he be a
creature only, then can he not be infinite, and if not infinite, then cannot
the infinite justice that is offended by our sins, receive a full and
sufficient satisfaction by him, as you might see it proved in the 21 Chapter
before. And beside these reasons you may take with you these remembrances
against all Arians, Turks, Jews, Socinians, and other heretics whatsoever,
and give honor and glory unto Jesus our Lord and God. Esaias 9.6. Unto us a
child is borne, unto us a Son is given, and his name shall be called, The
Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the prince of peace. Ier. 33.15, 16. In
those days the branch of righteousness shall grow up unto David, and
Jerusalem shall dwell safely; and he that shall call her. See Mat. 11.28. is
Jehovah our righteousness. Micah 5.2. Out of Bethlehem shall he come forth
unto me that shall be ruler in Israel, whose goings forth are from
everlasting. Romans 9.5. Christ is over all, God blessed for ever and ever, Amen.
and 1 John 5.20. We are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ.
This is the true God and eternal life.

. 10. Thus then our Lord Jesus being declared mightily to be Son of God, by
the testimony of the Father from heaven, by his own profession of himself,
confirmed by his glorious miracles, John 5.36.37. by his resurrection from the
dead, Romans 1.4. by the consent of the Apostles and Prophets, and by the
testimony of the holy Ghost in the hearts of all his Children, and being truly
man by the testimony of his very enemies; the only question remaining
concerning his being is, that seeing all fullness must dwell in him, Col.
1.19. whether he be not also that first created being, in and by whom all other
things were created and are governed and preserved. This Postellus in his book
De nativitate Mediatoris, does firmly hold: And although it be plain by
Athanasius, Epist 1. contra Arianos, that Arius held one Word in the Father, as
we speak of the Trinity, and another Word created, which he held to be Christ:
and in his Thaleia, mentioned Epist. 2. contra Arianos, affirms to the same
purpose, a Wisdom increated, and a Wisdom created: and although Arius
affirmed as Postellus, That Christ was a creature, but not as one of the
creatures; made, but not as one of other things that were made, etc. and
therefore concluded that he held the same faith with the Church, and detracted
nothing from the glory of Christ, when he called him the first and chief
creature, Epiph. haeres. 69. yet Postellus, whether he were indeed ignorant of
it, or whether he dissembled his knowledge, makes no mention thereof, lest the
name Arius might discredit the position, although the difference between Arius
and Postellus, be as much as from the East to the West. For though Arius held
the increased Wisdom or Word to be in the Trinity, yet he could not yield to
this, that that Wisdom took flesh, and became that Savior to whom we
confess. And this was the business between him and the right meaning
Fathers. But Postellus held that the created Wisdom, that first borne of every
creature, which in the fullness of time took flesh of the Virgin Mary, and in
that flesh made satisfaction for the sins of the world, wa^ he in whom all
the fullness of the Godhead did dwell. Now by the rule of our faith both the
extremities are yielded unto, that Christ is God, blessed above all; and that
he is man, as has been proved. But this is now to be examined, whether it be
necessary, to the being of our Mediator, that he be that first creature of
God, created before all times and ages of the world, by whom all other things
were afterward made in th^i^ due times, and are governed, as Postellus
affirmed. The Authorities which Postellus brings, are either foreign, or else
out of the holy Scripture; you shall first see them of the first kind, with
their exceptions, then his reasons with their answers, and lastly those
enforcements which are by him, and may beside be brought from the Word of
truth.

1. First, he says he is urged to the declaration of this truth by the Spirit
of Christ, page 1, 3, 7, etc. but I say, these enthusiasmes and revelations are
a common claim, not only to them that speak the truth from God, as the holy
Prophets say, Thus says the Lord; but also to them that vent their own
fantasies and heresies, in stead of the truth. The second au^hority is that of
the Abisine Church, which commonly they call of Presbyter John, out of whose
Creed he cites for his purpose thus much, Page 24. and 25. We believe in the
name of the holy Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, who is one
Lord: three names, one Deity; three Faces, one Similitude: the conjunction of
the three persons is equal in their God head; one Kingdom, one Throne, one
Judge, one Love, one Word, one Spirit. But there is a Word of the Father, a
Word of the Son, and a Word of the Holy Ghost: and the Son is the same Word:
And the Word was with God, and with the Holy Ghost, and with himself, without
any defect or division; the Son of the Father, the Son of himself, and the
beginning of himself. Where in the first Article (you see) that Church
acknowledges the Trinity of Persons, in the unity of the Deity, according to
that faith which we believe. The second Article, But there is a Word of the
Father, etc. is altogether a declaration of this created Word, or Son of God,
by whom all the holy Scriptures were given, and inspired, as Postel speaks.
But concerning that Church, though Postel to make the authority thereof without
exception, say, it was never troubled with any heresy; yet it is not unlikely
to have nursed that archheretick Arius, whom all writers account to be a
Lybian. Besides, it is manifest, that they are all Monothelites, and so far
forth Iacobites or Eutychians, that they condemn the fourth general Council
of Chalcedon, for determining two natures to be in Christ. Moreover, what their
learning is like to be, you may judge by this; that their inferior Church
Ministers and Monks must live by their labor, having no other maintenance, not
being suffered to crave alms; see Mt Brerewoods Enquiry, Chap. 23. and 21. a
state of the Ministry, whereto our sacrilegious patrons, and detainers of
those livings, rightly called Impropriations, because they belong most
improperly to them that unjustly withhold them from the Church, would bring our
Church unto. But see whereto this want of maintenance has brought that Church,
which in the time of the Nicene Council was of so great regard, that their
Patriarch had the seventh place in all general Councels; yet now (as I have
read) have they of late years been compelled to send to Rome to beg a
religion, and teachers from them. And this is the Authority of that Church. But
you will say, their Creed is ancient, and of authority: I say, though it be as
ancient as Arius, yet what wit or judgment was in th^s, to put such a point
into their Creed, which they themselves by Postels own confession, do not
understand? If it were necessary to believe it, other Churches would not have
omitted it, if not necessary, why was it brought into their Creed?

But the ancient Paraphrasts, Anchelus and Jonathan are without exception, and
where the Text is, And the Lord spoke unto Moses, they explain it thus, And
the Lord spoke unto Moses by his word; which all the old Interpreters, and
especially Rambam understand to be spoken of the created Word of God; that Word
of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, or the Divinity which is
appliable to the created beeings. Page 24. The Cabalists also concurie with
this interpretation, and therefore call him the inferior VVisdome, the Throne
of Glory, the house of the Sanctuary, the heaven of heavens united to eternity;
the superior habitation, in which God dwells for ever, as his body is the
inferior habitation, after he was incarnate; the great Steward of the house of
God, who, according to the eternal decree, brings forth every thing in d^e
time. And these, as I remember, are all ^he authorities which Postellus cites
ex^ept you will add this, that whereas he writes to the Council of Trent, they
of the Council being called for other purposes, did not at all pass any
censure of the book, or this position, which is the maine point therein.

You may add to these authorities many other, and first out of Jesus the Son
of Sirach, Chap. 1. verse. 4, 5. Wisdom has been created before all things,
and the understanding of Prudence from everlasting. The Word of God most high
is the fountain of wisdom, etc. which agrees with that in the Creed before,
that he is the Word of the Son, and the beginning of himself. And again,
verse 9. The Lord created her, and saw her, and numbered her: And Chap. 24.8, 9.
He that made me caused me to rests he created me from the beginning before the
world, and I shall never fail. And this authority may seem to stand well with
the fourth reason for the worlds eternity, brought in Chap. 13. if by the world
you understand the created wisdom, spoken of by these Authors. The Hebrew
(...) Ben, a son of (...) banah, to build according to the Idea, or
representation which is in the mind, may bring some proof hereto: but
especially the word (...) bar, of (...) bara, to create: wherefore the Chaldean
Paraphrast, in Psalm. 2. verse. 7. for (...) yelidricha, I have begotten thee;
has (...) berichach, I have created thee. And Prove. 8.22. for (...) Kanani, he
possessed me, (...) barani, He created me. Where the Greeks translated, some
according to the paraphrase, some according to the Text. Among the Fathers also
some consented to this opinion, as Theophilus Bishop of Antioch, about the
year 180. ad Antolicum lib. 2. God, says he, having eternally the Word in
himself, as it is said, John 1.1. The Word was with God; did then at last
bring him forth, the first begotten of every creature, when he determined to
make the world, as it is written, Psalm. 2.7. This day have I begotten thee: But
Origin is flandered to have spoken more meanly of Christ, as of a small thing
in comparison of the Father, as that he was indeed of the essence of the
Father, but created; see Su^das, and Epip. haeres. 64. But can these things
stand together, that He should be of one being with the Father and yet
created? Or can it stick to Origin who writ according to the right faith, as
you may read In Exodus Hom. 8. But Lactantius without wavering consented to
The^philus, Inst. lib. 2. cap. 8. and lib. 4. cap. 6. The Nativitarii also
though Augustine lib. 15. de Trin cap. 20. make Enomius a follower of Arius
their Author held this same opinion with Theophilus, and Lactantius. Aug. de
haeres. cap. 80. But that place of Ps. 2. does not prove that Christ was not
brought forth till then that the world should be created. For the word this day
has not any respect to time, but to the perennity or continuance of the
action. For Christ is no otherwise brought out this day, than he was eternally,
as it is said John 17.5. and Hebr. 13.8. Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day,
and the same for ever. Some of the latter Presbyters of learning also consent
to this conclusion. See Leo Hebr. Dial. 3 page 510. So Raimund Lully A^tis
Magnae part^ 9. cap. 8. has this. By this means man's understanding knows,
that there is one great created being, which is greater than all the creature
beside; which I dare neither name nor declare in this place because this Art is
general. Also John Picus makes it the first of his conclusions, according to
the Chaldees. That the first order of separate or created beings, is that of
the fountain, which by the means of vision is superexalted above all the
rest: as I even now explaned the superior Shekinah, or habitation of the
Cabalists. But this conclusion of Picus, is after the later interpreters of the
Chaldaean Theology. For if you look unto the oracle (...), etc. You shall see
that both Plethon and Psellus interpret it thus. That the being of the Father
is utterly incomprehensible, and beyond the understanding not only of men and
Angels, but also of the Son himself: and this not out of any envy, but
only by the impossibility of the thing: that that which is infinite should be
apprehended by a finite and created being. The Arians follow this, See Aug. de
Civ. lib. 10. cap. 2
but Psellus rejects it, as contrary to our Christian doctrine. Also *
Plotinus, Iamblicus, Porphyrie, Proclus, and their scholars, (though they no
Christian yet hold that for truth, which Picus from the Caldeans has
delivered. And although Steuchus De perenni philosophia lib. 1. and 2. has
cited many authorities from them, as meeting with that truth which we defend
concerning the Trinity; yet if you examine them well, you shall find that most
of them agree with this conclusion of Postellus. For if they allow all the
conclusions of the Chaldeans entire, as Psellusin summa affirms; they must of
necessity hold the created being of this second wisdom, with Postellus. And
although Plato holds but what he likes of these conclusions, yet in this point
(as his commentator Ficinus gathers out of his Timaeus and Epinomis) he is
directly for this created divinity. See the argument on the sixth Epistle.

But to all these authorities, first and last, I answer thus much, that
although it be plain, that these authors were of this mind: yet that binds
not, that the truth does stand with them. Only it seems that seeing a famous
Christian Church, and so many great Doctors, and expositors beside (though the
Chaldaean and Platonicks be set at naught) were of this Judgment, seeing no
Synod either oecumenicall or national (for ought that I know) did ever
condemn it, it may be held as an opinion not utterly heretical; especially
seeing the book of Ecclesiasticus, both by the warrant of some fathers, and
other Churches, and especially of our own, has been commended as profitable
to the advancement of Christian virtue, though not for the establishment of
doctrine Art. 6. And many choice Chapters from thence appointed to be read in
our public Liturgy, even that twenty fourth, where this point both of the
eternal v. 18. and succeeding generation. v. 8.9. is plainly taught. See
November 7. Morning prayer.

1. But Postellus to ascertaine this matier to the understanding, brings these
reasons following. First, God is altogether unmovable, as in place, because he
fills all; so likewise in wisdom and in will, because he is every way
infinite. And therefore it was necessary in the creation (which was not but
with a most particular dispensation or providence, by which all causes and
effects are ordered) that there should be an agent which gave to every thing a
being, and that a several, and distinct individual being, which cannot be,
but by those specificall forms or proprieties by which every thing does work
according to kind; which could not be but by such an agent as has both an
infinite activity of being, by which he is one with God, and likewise an
infinite possibility of working, or not working, according to the particular
possibilities in nature, by which he must of necessity communicate with the
Creature. And this is that Wisdom created and increate, without which nothing
was made. This both the Creator and the Creature, that form of forms, in
whom, by whom, and for whom are all things: page 21. 103, etc.

I answer. That if it must of necessity be put, that God cannot work without
Himself, because He is infinite, and therefore immovable; then for the same
reason it must follow, that no such great created being can at all be, except
you will say that he created himself, and so was when He was not, or that he
had his creation from some other original than God, which must likewise be
infinite, in being able to create so excellent a being, and yet finite, that
he might move or not move himself thereto when he would. But first this
progress would be infinite, and beside that impossible. For if neither God
could move because He is infinite, nor much less the creature when it was
not, how was it possible that any thing at all should be created? Secondly,
Moreover it would follow hereupon, that that were possible to the second cause,
which was not possible to the first: but it is manifest, that all second causes
work only by the activity of the first, so that if the first cause cease to
work, much more the second. Thirdly, beside this, the power of God should not
be infinite, if it could not work according to his pleasure in things without.

But you say, as Himself, so His action is infinite, and it is impossible that
a finite being should be the subject of an infinite action. I say though
Sampson were able to break a Cable, yet might he strain one hair of Dalilah
to straightnes, not to lengthen it; to lengthen it, not to break it. This is
true (say you) because he was as every creature, partaker of being, and not
being; of act or perfection, and of possibilities, or imperfection, whereby he
might move, or not move at his pleasure. But God is not so; but always
actually, whatsoever He may be. But (say I) it is one thing to speak of the
infinite action of God in himself; and another, of his action in the creature,
limited according to his Wisdom and His Will in respect of the outward object,
as I have showed at large in answer to the objections for the worlds eternity
chap. 13. note (b) ob. 2. 3. 4. Neither is the will of God without an infinite
Wisdom to dispose of all things in their times, nor yet without an infinite
power, to cause every thing to be actually according to His Wisdom and His
will, and the application of his will, wisdom and power, is sufficient to move
all inferior causes to give all manner of being to the Creature.

2. But seeing the matier, and form of all things, are after a sort contrary;
and that the bodily composition likewise of things below is of elements
contrary in their qualities: it is impossible that these repugnances should be
brought together into one, not. Med. page 21.

Answ. The Philosophers tell us of a certain quintessence in which the
different qualities of all the elements are brought to agreement, and give us
reason to believe it: by which quintessence dwelling in every thing, the
contrarieties of the elements are accorded in every compound, Raim. Lulli. and
Ioh. de Rupesc de 5. essentia lib. 1. cap. 2. But seeing they keep the
experiment with themselves, neither their reason, nor their authority shall be
of any force with us. But this is without all doubt, that he that had power to
create all things, had likewise power out of that created mass, fruitful with
the seed of all things, to bring out every thing in due time according to the
kinds that were by him foreseen and determined. And because we have hitherto
maintained that God alone by his eternal wisdom, Our Lord Jesus Christ was
the Creator, it must follow of necessity, that the creature was also ordered
and guided by Him. For that infinite power which could do the more, and cause
that to be which was not, might also do the less, and order it at his will.
So that for this objection we are not compelled to acknowledge any such
created being, the Creator and disposer of all the rest. And concerning that
supposed repugnancy between the matier and form of every thing, it is but the
begging of the question, for all forms are produced out of possibilities of
their matier, excepting only the soul of man, and the divine endowments
thereof, as I showed at large, chap. 17.. 4. n. 2.

3. The third argument of Postellus page 28. is not much unlike the former,
drawn from the perpetual change of things, subject to generation and
corruption. For nature brings out nothing violently or in an instant: therefore
as the things that are; began by little and little to be, by the power of the
Spirit of God, which moved upon the waters: so by the power of the same Spirit,
are they still preserved in their order of being, and by it they are changed
from state to state. And this spirit of God is that first created being, that
Mediator between God and the creature: the spirit of the Universe actually
moveable, and applying it self to every thing, and working in every thing by
the power of the Trinity which dwells in Him. For nothing which proceeds
from the power of the matier, is able to move it self, no more than the matier
was, no not the soul of man, but only by His strength and activity by whose
power it is.

Answer. Concerning the progress of things natural, from the evening of their
beginning, to the morning of their perfection, I have spoken before. But for
answer to this, I say that it is not necessary to put any such spirit of the
universe, such an applyable divinity, as the Platonicks call Animam Mundi,
because things are changed from one state of being to another; seeing the Holy
Scripture tells us. Psalm. 148.5. that all the armies of the creature were made,
because God commanded. And for their changes in corruption and generation it is
plain, it must be according to that degree which they cannot pass, verse. 6.
which is the law of nature. And moreover concerning the providence of God on
every particular thing, our Lord has taught us, Math. 10.29. that not a
Sparrow falls to the ground without the will of our heavenly Father; except
Postellus will here except that that heavenly Father must signify that first
begotten of the creature, which he does mean. Which interpretation would
directly cross that text, Act. 15.18. That all the works of God were known
to Him from everlasting. And nothing can be in the second cause which was not
in the first. Therefore seeing the infinite power of God is that by which every
thing is powerful, to work unto that end, whereto it was destinate: we must
needs confess, that He by His power works what He will both in Heaven and in
earth; and yet because all the orders of causes are appointed by him, we may
safely say as our Lord has taught us, Mark. 4.28. That the earth of her own
accord brings forth fruit, and as the Prophet, Hos. 1.21.22. I will hear the
heavens, and the heavens shall hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the
corn and the wine; and the corn and the wine shall hear Israel. Which order
of causes being put, we shall not need to apply the immediate power of that
applyable divinity of the Mediator to every effect, as Postellus holds it
necessary. For the whole creature by the power of that blessing which it
received at the creation is able to work according to the end appointed. And
if it were necessary to put any common agent in the Creature, by which every
inferior Agent were to be moved, which we cannot do except we hold that
Gods decree the law of nature is too weak, or may be broken; yet I think that
the dominion of the heavens set in the earth, I^b. 38.33. or that same anima
mundi here below mentioned may better stand with the Scripture, than the
perpetual employment of this supposed mediator. That I say nothing of those
p^rticular intelligences which some Philosophers, and Postel himself page 63.
have appropriated to every thing, beside the specificall virtue of the seed.
Neither is it clear that this spirit which moved upon the waters, Genesis 1.2.
was any such being as Postellus supposes, a created divinity, or the mediator
between God and his creature; but rather that vigor, life, or heat concreated
with the Chaos that (...) nephesh, anima mundi, or spirit whereby every thing
is enlivened or made able to work to the destinate end, which ever dwells in
the watery part of the compound, as the soul in the blood, or if this
interpretation be not admitted, yet that of Saint Ambrose may stand, Hexam.
lib. 2. that Moses in these words, In the beginning God created heaven and
earth, having made mention of the Father, and the Son, does rightly add that
clause, And the spirit of God moved upon the waters, that he might show, that
the creation of the world was the work of the whole Trinity, yet may you not
hereby suppose, that that Spirit of God which fills the whole world, sap. 1. was
carried upon the waters by any local position, but rather as an artificer
whose will and understanding is busied in his work, so the holy Spirit
disposed the whole creature, to natural action according to his will and
power, Rab. Maur. Enar. in Genesis If you love to confer opinions, you may read,
Ioh. Pici Heptaplum, D. Willet and other expositors.

4. To these reasons of Postellus you may add a fourth, every action is
limited by the object, so the eternal and infinite action of God the Father
understanding himself, does thereby produce the eternal Son as has been
further said chap. 11. But because the Father does also view all the
possibilities of being in the creature, and that the creature must needs stand
in clear distinction from the Creator, therefore as the eternal Son is the
image of the Father, so that idea or image of the creature must needs be a
different being from that image of the Father, which we call the eternal
Son, and so of necessity must come into the reckoning of the creature. For
the true image of every thing, must be like to that whose image it is.

Answer. If the image of the things created, were represented to the divine
understanding from any thing which is without himself, the reason were of
force But seeing that God knows all things, only in and by his own being, by
which being of his only, as the cause of all things, all things have their
possibility of being; so that his being is the foundation of all beings; it
follows that the representation of the divine being, which we call the Son,
is also the similitude or representation of all those possibilities of being
which are in him, so that the creature is in God the Father as the first cause
of all equivalently; fith his being is equivalent to all being, and the
possibilities thereof. In the Son, the idea of all being it is as represented
or characterized eminently, or visibly, to the divine understanding, and by Him
all natural causes and possibilities are ordered, to the bringing of all
things into their actual being. And therefore as Christ our Lord, Heb. 1.3. is
called the express image of the Person of the Father, so likewise, Col. 1.15.
is he the first begotten of every creature. For seeing the understanding of
God is not by discourse, nor habitual, as gotten by experience, but that it is
His own very being unto the perfection whereof all the terms of Action must
of necessity concur, that is, both of Him that understands, and of the object
understood, and of the action of understanding, as was showed, chapter. 11.
Rea. 8. it is not possible, but that seeing they are all infinite, they must
also be c^ess^^tiall and one; and if one, then the action of understanding
whereby God vieweth himself, must also be that whereby he vieweth the
creature, for otherwise it were not infinite, if it comprehended not all beings
at once. So then in this action of Gods understanding, there cannot be a
prioritie of an infinite being understood, that is, God the Son, and a
posterioritie of a finite, that is, the creature.

By this (...) (you say) I make the Creature to be coessentiall with God, in
which inco^venience, the strength of the former objection does stand.

Answ. If you mean the Creature, according to the actual being, I put it
naturally in the pre^^^ent causes, and possibilities of nature; but as
concerning the first and pri^^e cause, it is so far from any inconvenience:
that it is most necessary, that (...), and the first cause of all being beside
Himself, be terms convertible essentially: And thus the Creature is in God as
in the cause. But seeing nothing can be in another, but according to the manner
of that being wherein it is; and s^^ing the being of God is his most Pure
understanding, the Creature is no otherwise in him, but is understood or
foreseen, and willed eternally.

And if you will stay to see, you may in the Persons of the holy Trinity view a
wonderful presentation of the perfections of the Creature. The Father is the
foundation that sustaines all: The Son or Mediator that power or efficacy
which perfecteth all. The Holy Ghost that infinite activity in the strength of
which every thing does work. The number three, supposes two: and because
neither to work outwardly, nor to will within, can be where there is not a
power thereto; therefore our Lord says John 15.5. Without me ye can do
nothing. And secondly supposes, first so, that power cannot be without a being
wherein it dwells. And thus you see the Father the foundation of all being, is
more inward to every thing than the matier thereof, the Son more essential
than the form, and the holy Ghost more proper than any working: for of his
activitie it is, that we will or do, Philip. 2.13. and thus is that Scripture
verefied which is in Acts 17. In him, first we are, secondly live, thirdly move.

5. A fifth reason of Postellus which I set over of purpose is page 74. and
this it is. Seeing that God in his infinity is utterly incomprehensible of the
creature, if such a created Mediator were not, in whom the infinite Majesty
dwelling might be apprehended, the Angels had been created in vain: for
neither had they enjoyed happiness, when they could have no sight of God in
whom alone blessedness is; nor yet God had perfected his praise in them, when
they could not see and praise the Divine Majesty. And again to the same
purpose page 118. Seeing man's understanding above all other things desires and
searches the knowledge of the truth; and that not only in things below during
this life, but most of all being separate in the eternal and infinite
goodness, wisdom, and other dignities of God, wherein above all other things
it takes most joy: it is necessary that it may come unto the knowledge of that
truth by such a mean as is proportionable and fit thereto: for otherwise the
desire were in vain if it could never be brought to effect. Therefore seeing
our understanding cannot behold the infinite being it self, it is necessary
that it behold it in the Mediator, a created being, and proportionable to our
understanding, and this may seem to be that which our Lord says of himself,
John 14.6. No man comes to the Father but by me, See John 1.18. and again
Luke 10.22. No man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son
will reveal him.

For answer to this doubt, you must remember that which was said to the last
objection concerning the being of things equivalently, and eminently; for your
easier understanding I will clear it further. Things, be they natural or
artificial, are either actually in that being which they have, whether it be
substantial or accidental, as Plato to be a man, to be a Philosopher; this
sword to be of Steel, well tempered, two foot and nine inches long; or else
potentially, and so they are in their proper principles and causes, before they
come to actual being: and these causes are either next, as the Steel out of
which the sword was forged, the Smith that made it, the fire that softened it,
the hammer, the grindstone, and such like instruments; or else the causes are
further and further off from the effect; as iron which was fined to steel, the
stone out of which the iron was molten, the quicksilver and Sulphur which were
congealed into that stone, the earth and water of which they had their
beginning. Postel put things potentially in the Angels, but ill; for they can
be but in the order of efficients at most. Thirdly, things are said to be in
their ideas or separate forms eminently, as the model of a house in the mind
of the builder; or as the form of the sword was in the mind or understanding
of the Smith, when he first purposed to make it. Fourthly, things are
equivalently in that common cause wherein all other things of the same kind
may be, as in an Organ or Virginal, all manner of tunes, all concords, and
discords are, which are possible to be made or conceived by any Musician; so
in the mind of the Smith, all the objects of Smi^hery, locks, guns, swords,
and the like are equivalently, though as yet he has not thought or purposed
any one in particular. Now from these common things enlarge your understanding
to those respects that are fit to be between things sensible and the
unsearchable Trinity. All things are in God the Father equivalently, because in
that infinite being of his all the possibility of being is founded: of all
things (I say) that have been or shall be eternally. But because his being is
actual, with all the dignities of being actually: for otherwise it were not
infinite; if it might be more excellent than it is: therefore does he in his
glorious Son understand both himself in his actual being, and actually all
things that are by his being possible to be; so that the ideas or forms of
all things are actually present with him eternally, and actually understood, as
it is said, Psalm. 139.16. In thy book all my members were written, when as yet
there was none of them. Wherefore it must follow that that Word which is the
character or express image of the Father, be also the image of all other
things whatsoever; so that all the ideas of all things possible to be, must be
in the Son eminently, that is, according to their ideas or particular forms
understood, and determined, as the idea or imagination of the sword is in the
mind of the Smith actually, as soon as the Smith has resolved to make it
thus, although the sword it self be not actually till it be made. And as
these ideas are the first causes of things; so by reason of the concurrence of
the will with the understanding, are they the most powerful for the bringing
of those things whose Ideas they are, into effect: for from that idea of the
sword in the Smith it is, that he kindles the fire, softens his steel, forges
it, grindes it, forbushes it, and makes it at last a perfect sword. And
therefore though it be true, That the Son does nothing of himself, saving
what he has seem with the Father. John 5.19. Yet because the ideas of all
things are actually in him, it is as true that in him, through him, for him,
and by him, are all things; and in him all things consist. See Chap. 13. 9.
eminently, or in the clear distinction of their several forms: for otherwise
the wisdom were not infinite, if the forms were in confusion, and not eminent
and apparent in their most clear differences and determinations of the times,
and limits, when, and how, the things themselves whose forms they are, should
actually be. If then the ideas of all things be in the Son actually; what
necessity is there of any created Mediator, when the Son of God might by any
of these Ideas which are actually in him, manifest himself either to Angels,
or to men? was not then that image of the manly being in him, in which he did
delight to dwell with the sons of men, Prove. 8.31. according to which he
created Adam? in which he manifested himself to the Fathers, to Abraham, to
Moses, to the Prophets? And although for sundry purposes known to his
wisdom, he manifested himself in other forms: of a smoking furnace, when he
entered into covenant with Abraham his friend, Genesis 15.17. of a living fire that
consumed not the bush, to Moses, Ex. 3.2.6. of a still soft voice to Eliah, 1
King. 19.12. or the like: yet none of these forms were uncouth, or foreign to
him. So that in what form soever he vouchsafed to show himself to the Angels,
in that might they behold the invisible God, and be abundantly blessed thereby;
but since the time that the faithful have beheld him with that Crown,
wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, the day of the
joy and gladness of his heart, Cant. 3.11. He is to be seen both of Angels
and men eternally, and only in the Tabernacle of our flesh; and the glory of
God is manifest only in the face of Jesus Christ. And as this (I think) is a
full answer to the argument of Postellus; so had you need to remember it,
because it may help to the understanding of some places of Scripture, which
may seem to make for this conclusion.

6. But if such a created Mediator be, as had power to execute the eternal
decree, and to create the rest of the creature, the Angels, and man, and all
this visible world from him; it may stand well with the justice and honor of
God, and the love of that Mediator toward man, to offer himself for man when
he had sinned: whereas otherwise if no such created Mediator be, then God
the party offended, must first seek the atonement: and seeing man was not
able, must likewise make satisfaction to himself, for the sin of another
against himself: But this stands neither with the honor of God, nor the rule
of Justice.

Answ. Entire aff ction hates all ^icity: And so God loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that the world through him might be saved. And if
the only begotten Son, be only that second person of the Trinity, what Son
is that created Mediator? And so far is it from dishonor to God to seek
and save that which was lost, as that without his mercy and pity on man in his
misery, the work of God in the creature had been in vain. But concerning
that satisfaction which was made for sin, although it had appeared that it
was utterly impossible to be made by one that was only man, Chap. 19. yet was
the satisfaction made only in the manhood of our Savior, dignified and
sustained by his divinity, unto the endurance of all that punishment which was
due to our sin, as it is manifest by the Prophet Esaias, chap. 53. Col. 1.22. 1
Pet. 2.24. and yet for all that, is our Savior the Lamb slain from the
beginning of the world, Re. 13.8. yet is the blood of his sacrifice upon the
Cross, called the blood of the everlasting Testament, Heb. 13.20. because that
by the eternal spirit, he offered himself for us unto God, Heb. 9.14. That he
in his manhood might present his Church unto himself, God blessed for ever,
holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5.27. So that the redemption of man is the work
of the whole Trinity, the Son by the holy Spirit offering himself unto the
Father, accepting this obedience a ransom for the world. And because the Son
offered himself by the eternal Spirit; therefore is not our Savior a created
Mediator, as Postellus supposed, for no creature can be eternal. And malgre
all the power of hell, it was an eternal Gospel, Revel. 14.6. Written in the
Volume of the Book of the eternal Decree, Psalm. 40.7. Heb. 10.7. to the
everlasting comfort of the faithful; That the sacrifice for sin was
appointed before there was a sinner.

7. Now before I come to those Texts of Scripture which Postel urges directly
hereto; it will not be unfit to let you see how he favors his own opinion,
by those Scriptures which he interprets unfaithfully; as where it is said,
Deuteronomy. 32.39. There is no God with me; as Esaias interprets it, I am God, and
there is none else; he makes the sense, page 104. he is the created wisdom,
before which there was no other God created: for he is worthily called God
(says he) for his union with the Deity. And again, page 115. for that which
is Prove. 8.23. I was set up from everlasting; he will have it, that this divine
wisdom was created not from everlasting, for then it could not be a creature;
but before any ages were numbered by men. So to that of Saint John, Cap. 1. The
Word was with God; he adds as it follows, in the Abisime Creed, and with the
Holy Ghost, and with himself, and argues that whosoever is with another, must
be different therfrom, and (for the most part) inferior indignity. I have
answered concerning the authority of that Church, the collection of inferiority
in dignity follows not; neither does this text prove the unity of any such
creature with the Creator, as he inferres, but rather the difference of
persons in the unity of the God head: for so it follows in the Text; And that
Word was God. I say nothing of other Texts which by allegorical and foreign
interpretations he would bring to his purpose, such as that, page 93. where by
the firmament, Genesis 1.6. he will understand this Mediator, who parted the
hidden waters of the Deity, from the manifest waters of the creature: whereby
it would follow, that the Chaos or waters, the light and darkness, were
created before this Mediator, see Genesis 1.13. His argument from that Spirit
which moved upon the waters, Genesis 1. brought page 29. is answered before,
Reason 3.

I impute it no fault to him, that he page 62. confounds those Texts of John,
12.28. and chap. 17.5. Charity sees no mistakings, where they make not against
the truth. But his collection is ill from that text, Glorify me with that
glory which I had with thee before the world was; to conclude, either that the
creatures were distinct in him whom he calls God man, meaning the created
Media^our, or for any other to suppose that the glory of God the Son was any
whit lessened by the taking of our flesh; only it was shadowed for a time
under the Cloud of his humanity, except that at some times a glimpse thereof
appeared in his glorious miracles. For first, if that eminent being of the
creatures in the distinction of their several beings, were not in God the
Son, that second Person of the Trinity, but in this created Mediator, it
would follow, that the wisdom of God were not infinite, nor yet essential
unto him, when the knowledge of the creature in that manner of being, must come
unto him by a creature, contrary to that which has been proved ( Chap. 5. and
8. And therefore to avoid this inconvenience, he is compelled to say, page 74.
that that second being of all things (taking the equivalent being which they
have in the Father, for the first) is not only in the eternal wisdom, but
also in the wisdom created. Whence it follows, that the Creature by the same
manner of being, shall be both in the Creator, and in the created Mediator.
But the reason: for otherwise the Angels could no see God. The position is
false, the reason insufficient, and answered before; then to think that the
Son had lost or abated any thing of his infinite glory, because he prays,
that he may be glorified as before the world was, stands neither with the
truth. For so neither had the glory been infinite, if once ended, nor he
coessentiall with the Father: neither yet accords it with the circumstance of
the Text. Therefore understand it according to the truth: That Christ the Son
of God in his manly being having glorified the Father on earth, and finished
that work which he had given him to do, Verse 4. prays verse. 5. that the
infinite glory, which was darkened under the form of a servant, Phil. 2.27.
might be manifest in the manhood, that he in that manly being might be
glorified, with the glory which is infinitely sufficient to glorify him the
head, and all the members of his mystical body, as it is manifest in that 17.
chap. of John, verse. 22, 23, 24.

8. Mal. 3.1. Christ is called the Angel or Messenger of the Covenant;
therefore he is a creature, so united to the Divinity, that God cannot work
without him, for that reason which is the first before. The reason is not of
force to the authority. I answer. The first covenant or promise which God made
to mankind was that in Paradise, Genesis 3. The seed of the woman shall bruise
the head of the Serpent. This seed of the woman is Christ our Lord, which
according to the Prophet should come in that Temple, which was built by the
Jews after their return from Babylon: So the Son of God in our flesh, is
that Angel of the Covenant of our deliverance from the power of the Devil,
which came according to the time appointed. So he has the name of an Angel
from his office, not from his nature.

9. The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall
overshadow thee, Luke 1 35. This holy Ghost is that created Spirit of the
Trinity, locally moving from place to place, which actually performed all those
things which hitherto have been ignorantly attributed to the third Person of
the Trinity: who being infi^ite, and filling all places, cannot be moved from
place to place, no more than the Father or the Son. But this created Spirit
might take on him the shape of a Dove, Luke 3.22. of a Voice Luke 9.35. and may
also change places, as he says, John 3.13. No man ascended up into heaven, but
the Son of man which is in heaven, page, 75. 75 113. 116, etc.

Answ. I have given the meaning of that text, John 3 13. before in the 23.
chapter: And as the i^fi^ite wisdom of God foresaw, what diversity of
opinions would come into men's minds, (for he understands their thoughts long
before Psalm. 1^9.2) so has he left us the rule of his holy word whereby to
guide us in the truth. Now the writings of Saint John do so clear this
question, as if they had been written in opposition to these opinions of Arius
Postellus, and those that are like minded. I cite some few texts out of his
first Epistle chap. 4 v. 10 God has loved us, and sent his Son to be a
reconciliation. But the question is, whether a created Son or no? Saint John
tells us no, not a created Son, but his only begotten Son has he sent
into the world, that we might be saved by him verse. 9. That Son or Word, who
is one with the Father and the Holy Ghost, chap. 5. verse. 7. That Son to whom
the Father Himself bare witness, verse 9.10 11. See 2 Peter 1.16 17. That Son
who is very God and eternal life, verse. 20. what can be more plain, or
particularly described, or more fully proved? If He be begotten, then
coessentiall with the Father, Ergo, not created. If begotten, then eternal
(for the actions of God in Himself are infinite and eternal) See chapter 10
Ergo, not created. If one with the Father, then also infinite. Ergo, not
crea^ed. If v^ry God, Ergo, not a Creature. But this spirit of the Trinity,
which took flesh of the Virgin, and so became our Mediator, moved from place
to place, which no Person of the Trinity could do, because they are i^finite,
and fill all places. Had this eye of the Sorbon L. Dan: in Haer. Aug. cap. 85.
which knew so well that God is in all places repletive (as they speak) never
read that Moses says, Deuteronomy. 33.26. That God rides on the Heavens for the help
of Israel, and on the Clouds in his glory? And although David knew that God did
continually, beset him round about, and that there was no place either in
Heaven or in hell, in the earth, or Sea: where he was not Psalm. 139. from v. 5.
to 11. yet as a stag embossed takes the soil, so did his heart in his flight
from Saul thirst for God; saying, when shall I come and appear before God.
Psalm. 42.2. Therefore although God fill heaven and earth, yet is he said to be
in any place more particularly where he gives more evident proof of his
presence, as at Bethel, Genesis 28.16. in the Tabernacle by the Oracle and those
manifest signs which I remembered above note (d.) Thus God descended on Mount
Sinai, when the Mountain did smoke and tremble, and thus the holy Ghost is
said to have come upon the Virgin Mary, when by that wonderful work of his in
her body, that seed of mankind was taken of her, that it might become a
tabernacle for the King of glory to dwell in eternally: Thus also our Lord says
of himself Ioh. 6.38. I came down from Heaven, not to do mine own will, but,
etc. not but that he was still in heaven c. 3.13 but because his presence in
earth was now manifest in the flesh, as it had not bin before.

10. And these reasons are, if not all, yet the most, I am sure the best, which
Postellus brings for his position. It may seem fit moreover in this place to
give answer to those texts which beside these already cited, may be br^ught for
this opinion. And first to that which is Genesis 3.2, etc. Y^a, has God said ye
shall not eat of every tree of the Garden, etc. ye shall not dye the death.
But God does know that In the day ye eat thereof your Eyes shall be opened.
The word Elohim, God, here used, is of the plural number, but God is one. And
beside it may be thought that the d vill durst not have spoken thus of Christ
his creator, if H^e had been God ^less d above all.

Answ. The reason why Christ is every where in the Scripture called Elohim ^s,
because that being eternally the Son of God He also received of the Father
power over all things, and was appointed to be that man by wh^m the world
should be redeemed and judged. So the word Elohim though sometimes given to
Angels, sometime to men, yet it abates nothing of the excellency of his being.
To the reason I answer, that the devil never persuades a man to sin, but
first he corrupts his opinion concerning God. For he that has true and
beseeming thoughts of God, is not easily drawn to a wilful sin. Therefore
the devil does here first persuade the woman to distrust the truth and
goodness of God, as being an enemy to him and his creature, man, as was said
before. chap. 22. But if the devil had in so many words affirmed that which
Postellus does, yet we know he is a liar from the beginning and abode not in
the truth.

11 Genesis 19.24. it is said that the Lord rayned upon Sodom fire and brimstone
from the Lord: by which place though it may appear that the Son is
coessentiall with the Father, for both are named by the name of Iehova; yet the
Father has the excellency of honor before Him, and that he executes no
Judgment i^ the creature but by his fathers beheast: which is yet more evident
by that which is Zach. 3.2 And the Lord said unto Satan, The Lord rebuke thee O
Satan; whereby it may seem, either that there is not an equality of power in
the Persons of the Trinity, or else that there is a created Mediator, in whom
the second Person of the Trinity does dwell.

A^s. If the dignities of the deity be essential as was proved, then if there
be one nature of the Father and the Son, it follows that their power and all
other dignities are coequall. Only the Father has the prerogative of
original in this, that the Son is of the Father, but the Father is not of the
Son, though he never were without the Son. And therefore those professions
of our Lord, all power is given unto me both in heaven and in earth, Math. 28
18. And the Father has committed all judgment to the Son Ioh. 5.22. are
first and above all to bear witness to the truth, Ioh. 18.37. For if he
received his being originally from the Father then of necessity that power also
which is essential unto him. Secondly, that as a Son he might honor His
Father in the dispensation of that power, and execution of his Mediatorship.
And thus he destroyed Sodom by the power of the Father, and thus he prays
that Satan may be rebuked, and the faith of his disciples confirmed, Luke
22.32. Thirdly, (...) as ioying in the glory and excellency of the Father, as
Ignatius speaks Epist. ad Smy^^enses. Fourthly, that we may know that we have
one and the same gracious Mediator, which did evermore save and defend his
church both before and after his incarnation.

12. But it is written, Exodus 23.20. etc. Behold I send an Angel before thee,
beware of him and obey his voice: provoke him not, for he will not pardon your
transgressions: for my name it in him. That this Speaker was Christ who had
brought the Israelites out of Egypt it is manifest, 1 Cor. 10 9 That this Angel
may mean Moses, it sorts not with some circumstances, especially that He will
not pardon your transgressions. Therefore some Rabbines understand by this
Angel, Michael, the Prince or Angel that stands for the nation of the Jews,
Dan. 10.13.21. but neither can an Angel forgive sins. Therefore being
compared with, Exodus 33. v. 2.3. I will send an Angel before thee, but I will
not go up with thee, least I consume thee in the way: it must follow of
necessity, that this Angel is not the second Person in the Trinity, but that
created Mediator the Son of man, who had power in earth to forgive sins,
Math. 9.6.

Answer. That being granted which is Ioh. 10.38. and Ioh. 14.10. That Christ is
in the Father, and the Father in Him, these words being spoken in the Person of
the Father, will prove that Christ is the worker of al deliverances for his
Church, both tempor^ll, and eter^all, and that he has power to forgive sins,
and that the name or being of God is truly in Him. So by this Angel no
created Mediator can be understood, for every sin is a breach of the law of God
against an infinite Justice, which God alone and no creature can forgive. And
therefore that son of man which had power on earth to forgive sin, must of
necessity be God and not a created Mediator. And although Israel were here
threatened, that God would depart from them for their Calfe; yet it is manifest.
verse. 17. that God at the prayer of Moses pardoned their sin, and brought
them into Canaan. But to take the objection as it may make most for this
opinion, that God does threaten to send a created Angel, yet these words My
name is in him, cannot prove him to be this created Mediator, but rather that
the Angel to be sent, should have a power delegate, whereby to punish the
rebellions of the people without sparing, and that power was the power or name
of God in him.

13. I, but Psalm. 45 6. after the Prophet had confessed unto Christ, Thy throne
O God is for ever and ever, thou have loved righteousness and hated iniquity:
he adds. verse. 7. Therefore God even thy God has anointed thee. By which
it may seem, that Christ though God, yet has a God, and is God by grace and a
created mediator, as Hermes Trismeg. in Asclep. calls the Father (...) the
Creator of this God.

Answer. Christ though God eternal, yet as man, a created Mediator, has a
God, as he says, Ioh. 20.17. I ascend to my God, and your God, and in this
sense God is his God, which has anointed Him with the oil of gladness,
above all that are partakers with him of flesh and blood. For he received not
the spirit by measure, but of his fullness have we received grace.

14. Esaias says, Chap. 43. v. 10. Before me was no God formed, neither shall
there be after me. Therefore the Mediator that spoke there must be a
created Mediator.

Answer. It follows Esaias 44.6. I am the first, and I am the last, and beside
me there is no God: therefore he is not a created Mediator, but the Creator
of all things. But that text of 43.10. (it seems) did somewhat trouble the
Greek interpreters, who with one consent translated the word (...) was formed,
by (...) was, to this sense, there was no God before me, though some of them
left out the word (...) God, and some kept it according to the Hebrew: but this
text proves nothing to that purpose for which it is cited, but rather as it
follows on the verse before, thus much. That if none of the Gods of the
nations could bring forth their witnesses that they had promised and performed;
then the Jews might witness with him, and especially his chosen servant
Jesus, in whom all his promises are yea and Amen, that he was before all their
formed Gods, and should be after them. So that if he were before and after all
their formed Gods, whom yet they did confess to be immortal (for no man
takes him for a god that must dye ( Ioh. 12.34.) therefore against themselves
they must witness that he was the true God.

15. It is said, Romans 8.26. That the Spirit makes intercession for us with
gronings that cannot be uttered: which cannot be but with earnestness of
desire, and pain: but neither of these can befall unto God, yet is our
Mediator one, yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. Therefore the
Mediator is a created being, which continually has made, and does make
intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God. verse. 27.

Answer. Though Christ be our eternal Mediator, as was said above, Object. 6.
one, as the Son of God eternal, one Son of the Virgin, eternally ordained
in the counsel of God; yet this Spirit here meant is that Spirit of the
humanity of Christ, as it appears by the circumstance of the text, For he
that searches the hearts, knows the meaning of the Spirit; so it is the
Spirit of the heart of Christ our Mediator, whereby he intreates for the
Saints. For although our Lord Jesus be glorified in body; yet is he the same
body that he was before, and his heart is touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, and even now sorrows with us for our sorrows, as when he wept
John 11.35. For as Postel truly says page 33. The beginning of his sufferings
was in the body, and though his bodily sorrow was ended in his death, yet his
sufferings in his soul and Spirit are not ended, till that which is remaining
to the sufferings of Christ be likewise fulfilled in the bodies of his Saints,
as it is plain Acts 9.4. Col. 1.24. And therefore it is said of this Savior
or Angel of his presence, in all their troubles he was troubled, Esaias 63.9.
Heb. 2.17. and 4.15.

16. But Saint Paul Colos. 2.2.3. says, That all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge are hid in that mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ.
Where the Father by a manifest distinction from God, and from Christ, must
mean this mean being or created Mediator which took flesh of the Virgin.

Answer. Not so; for although the eternal power and Godhead were manifest to
all men by the creature, that wicked men might be without excuse, Psalm. 19.
and Rom 1.20. Yet none of the Princes of this world did understand that
mystery of the Gospel of Christ. 1. Cor. 2.8. For that had been kept secret
since the world began, but was now manifest in the last times, Romans 16.25. Col.
1.26. Therefore these treasures of knowledge are first to know God one infinite
and eternal being; then to know him the Father, that is, to confess in the
unity of the Deity the three persons: 1. the Father eternal, which cannot be
without an eternal 2. Son; neither can an eternal Son be without an 3.
eternal procession or generation. Now to know this one God, and him the
Father, and that one Mediator between God and man, the eternal Son
dwelling in the man Jesus, the Son of the Virgin, is the height and
perfection of all knowledge whereto man by all his search could never attain.
Then so to acknowledge this truth, as to live in holiness as they ought that
know it, is that perfection of wisdom, that whole duty of man whereto he is
called: and this answer may serve for the like objection out of Ephesians. 1.3.

17. So Saint Paul also Heb. 1.3. seems not to give unto Christ equal glory
with the Father: for he says of him, that he is not (...) the beam which is
of one nature with the fountain of the light: nor yet (...), the shine of that
beam; but (...) a glimpse, brightness, or shine by reflection from that
glory, whereby it follows, that he is not consubstantiall with the Father, and
so of necessity a created mediator.

Answer. It is said, 1 Timothy 6.16. that God dwells in the light which no man
can approach unto, that is, that centrall or incommunicable light of the deity,
which no man has seen, or can see, for the creature cannot comprehend what
God is, except it be united unto him: but yet because the creature cannot be
blessed but in God, therefore is that light spread abroad, or dilated from the
center into the infinite circumference of the divine dignity, by the infinite
object of that light, the Son our Lord Jesus, by whom that light is
participate unto men, and Angels, in that blessed vision whereby they are
blessed in him, and this is that (...) or brightness of Saint Paul: the same
glory of God made communicable unto us by our Mediator, not any shine or
reflection of light in a foreign object, as the wisdom of God in the
creature, or the light of the Sun reflected in the Moon, or stars; in
which the light is made other then it was, as the objection mistakes it.

18. Revelation. 3.14. Christ is called the beginning of the creation of God
therefore He was the first creature.

Answer. If he be the beginning of the creation, therefore he cannot be a
creature. for so should He be the beginning of himself: so should He be, when
he was not; so should he be a cause, and yet not be: but these are
impossibilities. Compare herewith, Colos. 1.15. And see the reason of the
speech in answer to the fourth objection.

. 11. The heresies concerning the proprieties of the Mediator, are principally
three, of the 1. Acephali, the 2. Agn^etae, and the 3. Monothelites. The
Acephali or headless, because they had neither bishops, nor priests, nor set
times, nor order for the service of God; though that as the two natures in
Christ were confused (for from the Timotheans they descended) so also the
proprieties of these natur^s. But if the first befalls, as was showed,. 1. 2, 3.
before, then their confusion, is also confounded. The author of this heresy
was one Severus a bishop of Antioch, who daily cursed the Council of
Chalcedon, for that by their decree which you heard before,. 1. they had
forestalled this heresy. But his blasphemous tongue cut out, and he banished
from his chair, were worthy rewards of such a Bishop, Euag. lib. 4. c. 4.

2. From that heresy of Apollinarius, came that of the Agnoetae; that the
divine nature of Christ was ignorant of many things, as the day of judgment,
the grave of Lazarus etc. For if the Godhead were changed into flesh, as
Apollinarius held; Themistius might well conclude, that both the being and also
the proprieties of the Godhead must suffer loss thereby; and so falsely ascribe
unto the Godhead, that which was proper unto the manhood. But if the foundation
were unsure, as it appeared.. 2. their building must needs fall to the ground.

3. And because the opinion of Eutyches concerning the only divine nature in
Christ, began to be hated: therefore Cyrus bishop of Alexandria upheld it by the
opinion of one will in Christ, for (said he) the humane will of Christ either
is none, or not at all moved as the will of man, but only by God. But to take
away those proprieties which do necessarily follow the nature and being of any
thing, is to destroy the thing it self: so that to deny either the divine, or
humane will of Christ, were to make him an unsufficient mediator; and is
directly contrary to that scripture which is Luke. 22.42. Father, not my will,
but thine be done.

4. From whence Iordanus Brunus a Neapolitan in my time in Oxford, would
enforce a more wicked conclusion, That Christ was a sinner, because His will
was not in every respect answerable to the will of God. And because that which
comes into the wicked imagination of one, may prove a stumbling block to
another: I will by the way remove this out of the way. Therefore I answer. That
because man knows not, nor may presume to know what the secret will of God is,
he may in the freedom of his own Will, will, desire, pray for, and endeavor
any thing which is not contrary to the revealed will of God, and that without
sin, especially in such things as stand with the natural desire of all the
creature in the preservation of it self in the present being which it has. As
a sick man without sin may use diet, medicine, and prayer for recovery;
although God in His secret will have determined he shall dye. David's purpose to
build the Temple, though against the purpose of God, was so well accepted of
God; as that he thereupon received the promise of a perpetual succession, even
till Christ the eternal king to come of his seed, 2 Samuel 7.11. to 16. Nay,
when Hezekiah had heard the sentence of death from God Himself, by the voice
of his Prophet, Esaias 38. was his prayer, and his tears accounted sinful,
which God did so far accept, as that he confirmed his petition by a miracle?
And although our Savior knew himself to have come into the world, that He
should dye for the sins of the world: yet might he without sin pray unto
His Father to save Him from that hour John 17.17. especially diverse figures
affording that hope? was not Isaak in the very stroke of death rescued by the
voice from heaven, when the Ram was offered up in his stead? Genesis 22. was not
the escape goat Leu. 16.21.22. on which all the iniquities and sins of the
sons of Israel were put, sent away alive into the wilderness?

But wherein was this repugnancy of his will to the will of God? Not my will,
but thine be done. He denied his own will, he laid down not only his life,
but even the desire of life, that he might perform the will of his Father; so
that the true conclusions which arise from hence or the like places are these;
first, seeing all men naturally desire to live, and would not be unclothed,
that is, would not die 2 Cor. 5.4. but rather that our mortality might be
swallowed up of life, as it shall be with them who are found alive at the
coming of the Lord 1 Cor. 15.51. and 1 These. 4.15, 16, 17. Christ our Savior
was truly man both in the nature, and all the natural properties of a man,
contrary to the heresy of Eutyches, and the Monothelites, of which you may
read further (if you will) in Thom. Aquinas contra Gent. lib 4. Cap. 36.
Secondly, and because every pure and merely natural property is concreated
with the thing whose property it is, and that the desire of life, is naturally
in every thing which has life, and that without sin, lest ^e that put this
desire in the creature should be supposed a cause of sin: it was ^o sin i^
our Savior to desire life upon that condition; contrary to the folly, and
falsehood of Brunus. Thirdly, seeing that God the Father so loved the world, as
that he refused to accept the prayer of his own beloved Son, when he
besought him with strong crying and tears for life; but would give him to that
most bitter death for us: what confidence and assurance of life may we have,
when the price of our redemption is paid, and he our Redeemer restored unto
life? for if while we were enemies, we were reconciled unto God by the death of
his Son: how much more, being reconciled, shall we be saved by his life?
Romans 5.10.

ARTICLE III. Which was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
CHAP. XXV.
ALthough it were said to Abraham, That in his seed all the nations of the
earth should be blessed: so that the Humanity of Christ was in Abraham and the
fathers originally, and so descended unto Him: yet you may not think that any
determinate You may see the contrary opinion in Galatin. lib. 7. cap. 3.
matter descended from Abraham, or the rest, of which the Manhood of Christ was
to be made peculiarly, no more then the manhood of all others that descended
from them. And as no more, so no less, was He in the loins of Abraham then
the other Israelites. But yet with this difference, That whereas all other men
being borne according to the law of concupiscence, are subject to original
sin from both the parents: (a) He being not so borne, was not subject
thereto. And because He was not borne according to the flesh, but according to
the promise, according to the Law of the eternal life; that is, of the
eternal Father only, on the one side without a mother; and so of His mother
only on the other side without a father: Therefore was He, as not subject to
sin; so not tithed in Abraham, when he gave tithes of all unto Melchizedek,
Genes. 14.20. as Levi was, Hebr. 7.9, 10. for tithes are an acknowledgment of
sin in him that is tithed; and a confession that he needs a mediator unto
God. But Christ being a Priest for ever according to the order of Melchizedek,
did therefore in Melchizedek receive tithes of Abraham. and by Melchizedek
blessed him with whom He had beforehand established His promise. Genesis 12.2, 3.

Now when the fullness of time came, that this promise of God should be
fulfilled: the blessed Virgin Mary being sanctified by the Holy Ghost unto
holiness of life, and purity of affections: was so highly favored and
accepted of God, as that in her tender years (for they write that she was not
above fourteen years at the message of the Angel) she was vouchsafed worthy
to be the mother of the Savior of the World. Her heart being therefore
purified by the Holy Ghost, to believe the promise of God made to her by the
Angel, and by him to be persuaded of the possibility thereof: He wrought in
her also a free consent thereto, a full submission to the will of God, and a
desire of the performance of the promise. Read Luke 1. from 28. to 39. Thus
according to the nature of the Holy Spirit, she first conceived her son in
her Spirit, or understanding and holy desires: then by the working of the Holy
Spirit, that seed which is the original of mankind was sanctified, separate
and sequestered into the place of natural generation, and the Eternal Son
invested therein, that according to the time of life, He might be borne the
Son of man. O sacred mystery! O miraculous conception! Yet thus must His
conception be, who was to unite all things in one. But for all this, is not
Christ our Lord said to be the Son of the Holy Ghost, although he were thus
conceived by Him; nor yet the Son of the holy Trinity, as the Abissine Church
confesses. For as concerning His eternal being, He was the Son of the Father
only: so for this His manly being, He was the Son only of His mother,
having His humane nature and birth of her, and consequently His original or
descent from her Fathers, David, Abraham, etc. And being then first conceived
according to his humane nature, of which the Holy Ghost was not partaker:
therefore he was not propagate of the substance of the Holy Ghost, as Isaac of
Abraham according to kind, to which conception only the name of Father and Son
does properly belong. Now see the reasons: That our Lord was conceived by the
Holy Ghost.

You may remember how it was said in the Chapter before, 10. Answer to the
fourth objection, that the Holy Ghost is that infinite activitie, in whose
strength every thing does work. Which if it have truth in every natural
action (as I showed) much more is it true in things above nature; such as is
this conception of our Lord.

1. For if the fountain be corrupt; then also the water must be unwholesome.
And if original sin do follow every one that is conceived according to the
flesh, as it is said Psalm. 51. In sin has my mother conceived me: then as it
was necessary that He which should be a propitiation for the sin of
others, should be himself holy, and utterly separate from sinners: so was it
also necessary that his conception should be only by the Holy Ghost, that He
might be free from all taint of sin, both original and actual.

2. And as the generation according to the course of nature had been in sin
(as was showed at large Chap. 17.) so also was it utterly impossible that God
thereby should be incarnate. For (b) no agent can work beyond the power of
its own nature. But the Incarnation, whereby God and Man became one Person,
was beyond the power of all natural generation. For man, as all other natural
agents, is finite; the divine being infinite, and so impossible to be begotten
by man. Beside this, the divine being in this case of being conceived, must
have been in the state of a sufferer by a being finite. But these things are
impossible. And therefore it was (c) necessary, that the conception should be
by the Holy Ghost.

3. If the conception of our Savior had been according to the course of
natural generation, then had there been two fathers of one Person, and so the
humanity taken into the Deity of Christ, had been the cause of confusion, in
respect of the Father-hood, which had been in God the Father, and in respect
of man, the Father of the same Son. So the perfection of Father-hood had not
been wholly and perfectly in God the Father. So defect should be in the first
principle. But these things are inconvenient. Therefore (d) the conception was
not by man.

4. And why this conception was the peculiar work of the Holy Ghost, it may
yet further appear, thus. In all the works of God in the creature, the whole
Trinity works, either according to one manner common to all the Persons: or
else according to their personal properties. Now in this incarnation of the
Son, as the Father had begotten Him by eternal generation; so in the fullness
of time, did He send His Son into the world; and this sending is that second
generation or begetting. For as the thought or intent in the mind of a man, is
that inward word of his understanding, which being spoken, is made
understandable by others: So the Word of God remaining eternally in the bosom
of the Father, being sent into the world, became manifest in the flesh. And
thus the whole being of Father-hood was in the Father, and of Sonship in the
Son. And besides these two terms of begetting, belonging to the Father, and
being begotten, belonging to the Son, there is only that of conception
necessary to this most wonderful Incarnation, which must belong to the
Holy Ghost, least two offices being given to one Person, the third Person
should cease to work. So there should be inequality in their actions, and
their works without should not be conformable to their inward beings, showed
Chap. 11. and 12. But this is not to be affirmed: Therefore he was conceived
by the Holy Ghost.

5. And seeing it was necessary that the Redeemer of the world should be borne
of a Virgin (as it will appear in the Chapter following) it was also necessary
that the conception should be by the Holy Ghost. For as in the ordinary way of
all generation, the female seed is not of strength to become man, except it
receive motion, life and strength from the masculine seed conveyed into the
place of conception; which cannot be done but with the breach of Virginity: so
where the Virginity was not impaired, it was necessary that the disposing of
the seed and enabling it unto conception, should be by the power of the
Holy Ghost, who was able to supply all defects in nature, and to cause the
Virgin to conceive, and consequently to bring forth without the feeling either
of pleasure or pain.

6. Every supernatural work which proceeds from the perfection of Love, must
be performed by him who is the perfection of Love. But the Incarnation of God
in man, was a supernatural work which proceeded from the superabundant Love
of God to Mankind, See Chap. 22. Reasons 4, 5.10, 11, 12. And therefore
wrought by Him who is the perfect Love between the Father and the Son: that
the perfection of the band, union, or knot of Love, might be in the
Holy Ghost; as between the Persons of the Godhead, so between the Godhead
and the humanity.

Notes.
(a) He was not subject to original sinne] A Jew or Atheist may object, that
if He were subject to the punishments of original sin, that is the
sicknesses of mind, ignorance, forgetfulness, the passions of anger, sorrow,
and the like: and so of the body, to be weary, hungry, faint, sleepie, etc.
Then must it also follow, that He was subject to the sin; for no effect can
be, but by the precedence of the cause. But it is manifest that he was
subject unto most of these. Therefore it may seem that He was also subject to
sin, though not actual, yet original, which was the cause of these. Answer.

Though the rule be most true, that no effect can be without the precedent
cause; yet in this business, where grace and mercy is above nature, the cause
in one, wrought the effect in another. The sin was of Adam and his sons,
the punishment of CHRIST the Son of GOD. But the supposition that these
defects (if they may be so called) are the effects of original sin, is
false. For man being that creature in whom GOD would show the superexcellencie
of His goodness, wisdom, glory, etc. Ephe. 3.10. It was expedient that he
being to be brought to that height of happiness and perfection whereto no
other creature can attain, should have experience of all infirmity or
weakness, first from not being to the meanest degree of being, and so from state
to state, till he have at last arrived unto that state of perfection when God
shall be All in all. And because it was necessary that our Lord should be in
every thing like His brethren, except their sin: therefore took He on Him
whatsoever was natural unto man, the substance, not the sin; the
perfections, not the infections. But sin was contrary to man's nature, the
deformity and poison thereof wrought only by the Devil in man, after the
work of God was perfect in him. And therefore our Lord did grow in wisdom,
and Stature like other men, as all the sons of Adam should have done, though
he had never sinned. And thus Christ took on him our infirmities, and that
for this end, that He might bear our sin, that is, might set himse fe in
our stead to bear the punishment of our sins, that by His stripes we might
be healed. And thus the Lord laid on Him the burden of us all, Read Es. 53.

Cor. 5.21. that God made him to be sin for us. Answer. This text is cited
as that text of the Psalm in Matthew. 4.6. is cited by the Devil. Say that
which follows, Who know no sin, and it cuts the thro^t of the objection. But
I say that Saint Paul re^erreth us secretly to that sacrifice ^or the sin of
the High Priest, in Exodus 29.14. which is there called (...) Chattach Sin,
meaning an offering for sin, as Psalm. 118.17. the sacrifice is called (...)
Chagh, the feast or holy day, by a Metonymia, meaning the sacrifice proper for
the holy day. For the purpose of Saint Paul in that Epistle being to prove the
end of the Law in Christ, referres us to that sacrifice which shows that the
High Priest himself needed another Mediator. For although he did eat the
sin offering of the people, and so did bear or take away their sin: Levit.
10.17. Yet his own sin offering he might not eat. And therefore that was to be
burnt without the camp, as Christ did suffer without the gate. Heb. 13.11. etc.

Job says, 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one.
Where^y it is plain, that although Christ were conceived by the Holy Ghost,
and so no stain or touch of concupiscence came to the body of the Virgin by
that con e^tion: yet seeing the Virgin her se^fe was conceived and borne as all
mankind: it must likewi^e follow, that if Christ had his whole manly being
only from her, then as she her self was st^ined in her whole being with
original sin, so likewise that which was con^erved of her.

Answer. It is likewise written, Deuteronomy. 4.24. The Lord thy God is a consuming
fire. And the property of fire is to separate all such things as are
heterogeneous: to part and divide Elements, as experience shows. Now although
it be plain, that the heavens are impure in His sight: that He found no
steadfastness in His Angels: that no creature could be a Tabernacle worthy His
dwelling much less the body of sinful man: Yet seeing that glorio^s fire was
able to purify and perfect whatsoever body that was, which He would vouchsafe
to take unto Himself: therefore although for the reasons in the Chapter
following, it was meet, that Christ should be borne of a Virgin, yet not to
take any holiness from her. For if it had seemed good unto His wisdom to
take His manhood from a corrupted Rahab, or a Tamar (as he did originally)
yet was He able to sanctify and cle se it, as He does cleanse or take away the
sins of the world. And concerning that manly being which our Lord did take of
the holy Virgin, though it were the most pure in all mankind, though the
uttermost purity in all the creature, as being without the sin of the
creature, as I said before: yet was it not of it self worthy to be His
pavillion, but became a dwelling worthy of His presen e only, because He, by
that assumption of it unto himself, did make it worthy of Himself, as He
says John 17.14. For their sakes do I sanctify my self: What is that? His
Divine being is perfect holiness, and thereby did He sanctify His body, which
was Himself (contrary to the wickedness of Nestorius) that that likewise
might be Holiness to the Lord, and a sufficient sacrifice, sanctified by that
offering of Himself, for the sins of the world. And this sanctifying of that
Tabernacle of His manhood, was figured by the Cloud which filled the
Tabernacle, Exodus 40.34.35. and the Temple, 1. Kings. 8.10.11. into which,
seeing the Priests could not enter, because of the Cloud: the Holy Ghost
signified, that when God should dwell in the temple of our flesh, the
ministry of the Leviticall Priesthood must have an end.

(b) No agent can work beyond the power of its own nature.] It were a wicked
and Manichean conclusion from that text which is in Matthew. 13.38. The tares are
the Children of the Devil, to think that any of mankind should be begotten
by wicked sprights: yet such fancyes has the devil hatched in some men's
minds, to dishonor this most glorious work of God, the Incarnation of his
son. And although it appear by the manifest authority of the holy
Scripture, that man was that special creature of God, whereabout (to speak as
a man) He took most care: Let us make man in our image: Genesis 1.26. He has
made us, not we our selves. Psalm. 100. Thy hands have made me, and fashioned
me. Psalm. 119.73. and Psalm. 139. almost wholely to this purpose: yet has
Postel. in his Book de Not. Med. told us of the Alani, a people among the
Tartars, which (says he) was begotten by Spirits. Thus also has he disgraced
the noble Nation of the Hungars, beside other particular persons, among whom
our British Merlin. But beside the general truth of this rule, does not common
experience show, that different kinds bring out that which is neutrall, as the
kinds of Hor^es, and Asses, Mules? which engender not to bring out their like,
because nature will not endure so great a disgrace, as to have her kinds
multiplied contrary to kind. Moreover, seeing every thing brings forth the
like, as a Man, a Man; a Lion, a Lion; Fire, Fire, etc. What possibility is
there that a spirit should beget any thing but a spirit, as it appears in the
works of the devil in our fantasies and affections, by which secondly he may
also cause us to work on that which is in our power, not in his. I know that
in the vegetable, where much seed is hermaphroditicall, in planting, in
grafting and the like, one kind may be bettered by another; but not in perfect
animalls, much less in man. I know also what poor shifts there be to prove
the possibility of these monstrous generations, the fancy of Incubus and
Succubus; and of the devil stealing the seed from a dead body, and such like.
But that precious seed dies instantly, except it be received into the proper
vessel. And when the body is once dead, and that soul gone which kept the
whole, and every part and parcel of the body in life, that which was for a new
life in another, must also die. I know that some both of the Fathers, and
Schoolmen, are cited of a contrary opinion; but our learned King Daemonob.
lib. 3. cap. 3. upon reasons in nature unanswereable, has showed the
impossibility of this generation, to which I will add one reason out of the
Holy Scripture. We are commanded by God Exodus 20. Ephe. 6. to honor our
Fathers and Mothers. Now if Merlin, for instance, or the Nation of the Hungars
were begotten by devils, then by that commandment were they also charged to
honor the devil: which as no man under pain of Hellfire may do; so were it
a damnable sin for any man to think that God has commanded it. And yet this
fancy would take strength from Genes. 6.2, 4. where the sons of God which
Irenaeus lib. 4. cap. 70. will have to be Angels, accompanied with women; and
so by that transgression of kynds, Giants were bred: See hereto Tertull: de
virg: velandis. But those (...) Nephelim, Giants or man-quellers, who prized
themselves by their violence and cruelty, were not so called in respect of
their stature; for they are after called (...) Gibborim, men of courage or
strength, as every valiant or strong man is titled. But the sons of God, or,
as our Lord calls them. The sons of the kingdom, that is, which held the
hope of Christ to come, yet not living according to that hope, but following
their own lust, and joining in marriage with Infidells and Atheists,
neglecting the bringing up of their children in obedience and virtue; it must
needs be, that they must become graceless, and fierce, and so for their
cruelty brought the flood upon themselves. And this is that wretched and
wicked state whereto the world, especially this little world of ours is again
returned, and cries to heaven for that second baptism of the fire.

(c) Necessary that the conception should be by the Holy Ghost.] You see by
these two reasons, one taken from the humanity of Christ, the other from His
Divinity, that it was necessary that our Mediator in both respects, should be
conceived of the Holy Ghost. They that have little time to think on natural
Philosophy, need some help to understand the difference of generation, and
conception. And let us not be afraid to speak of the works of God to His
honor, according to truth, and modesty. Generation or begetting, is actively
in the Parents; for the female is also an agent in respect of the feminine seed
which she affords: generation passively, is in that which is begotten.
Conception is an action or passion concurrent or necessary to generation. For
although the seed on both sides be afforded; yet if it be weak, and unfit
for generation, as in lustful persons, or if it be not retained, and duly
nourished in the womb, there can be no conception. Therefore in this
wonderful generation of our Savior, whereby he was made a natural man, by
natural causes, as far as they were incorrupted, there was also a conception
necessary. The conception actively was in the Holy Ghost, who prepared and
fitted, first the mind of the Virgin (for if her actions or sufferings herein
had not been voluntary, they had no way been availeable unto her self for
eternal life, then her body with all the powers and parts thereof, that she
might conceive, that is, both afford, retain, and nourish that blessed
tabernacle of Him that would dwell in us. The conception passively was either
dispositive, whereby the body of the Virgin was so fitted to conceive; or
final, whereby that which was conceived, was perfected in every degree
according to all the natural causes necessary thereto. And because the
Goly-Ghost was the chief agent, or worker in all this; therefore is the
conception properly attributed unto Him.

(d) The conception was not by man.] That poor and base conceit of Ebion,
Cerinthus, and their followers, unworthy of that soul which should presume to
think on God, or His glorious works, you read before, Chap. 24.. 4, 5, 6, 7.
where it is sufficiently refuted, and their reasons answered; and before that,
you might see it strangled, by all the reasons of the 22. Chapter.

CHAP. XXVI. Borne of the Virgin Mary.
SO the Infinite Wisdom and Love of God delighted in man, that there is no
kind of perfection possible to the creature, which he has not either
manifested, or promised unto him. To frame and fashion the body of Adam out of
the earth, with His own hands, to breath into him an immortal soul, was a
wonderful work, and one a^one. Out of that virgin man to take a rib, and
thereof to make a woman, was a work no less wonderful, and one alone. The
ordinary propagation of mankind is the third way for increase: because He
that was the Lord of all kinds here below, should not be inferior unto them
in the possibility of bringing forth his like. But that fourth and last way of
man's generation, was that which out of the side of the virgin woman, brought
out that man which should restore and give perfection to all the rest. More
excellent than the third, which from corrupted and sinful parents, multiplies
more corrupted and sinful children: more powerful then the second, which out
of the more perfect sex, brought out that which was less perfect: more
glorious and availeable to us then the first, which raised Adam out of dust.
For by this, God himself to become one of us, took that which was ours, that
he might give unto us, that which was His. And for the clear proof of this
Article,

(a) That our Lord Christ was borne of a Virgin. 1. Let this be one ground,
which the holy Virgin her self did stand upon Luke 1.34. That without the
society of man, it is a thing in nature utterly impossible, that any generation
of mankind can be. Secondly, That which is impossible to nature, because the
power whereby nature does work is a limited power; and in the perfect kinds of
things according to one rule, is yet possible to God Luke 1.37. Thirdly, That
the works of God Himself, the author of Nature, are more noble, excellent,
and perfect then those of nature. Whereupon it will follow reasonably, that
since our Savior could be borne of a virgin, if He would, it was covenient so
to be; but He could, as it appears by that which is said, and also would, for
so He declared it by His Prophet, Esaias 7.14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive and
bear a Son. Therefore our Lord was borne of a virgin.

2. All the fulness of perfection ought to be in Him who was to restore man to
that perfection which he had lost. Therefore as Christ our Savior had a Father
in heaven without a mother, being begotten of the substance of His father, by
an unconceiveable and most glorious generation: So ought He in earth without a
father to have a mother, without any taint or spot, a Virgin.

3. And seeing the Incarnation or Conception and Birth of the GOD of glory, was
a grace and honor to mankind above all the creature; and a special exaltation
of her of whom He would be borne above all other women. Luke 1.28. if our Lord
had not been conceived and borne of a most pure Virgin, then had He exalted the
corrupted flesh of mankind, and tainted with lust, before that which was
vncorrupt: which as in it self it had been inconvenient; so had it brought
chastity and pureness of life into contempt. But these things are
inconvenient. Therefore it was necessary that the Savior of the world should
be borne of a Virgin.

4. Neither was it beseeming, neither was it possible, that the Creator of all
things should become a creature, but after a peculiar and special manner, the
most honorable and beseeming that could be. But neither could any conception
be more honorable than by the Holy Ghost, nor any birth be more beseeming than
of a Virgin. Therefore so was He conceived, so borne.

5. Adam was not deceived but the woman, yet a virgin being deceived, was unto
him the cause of transgression. And lest womankind should ever be subject to
the rebuke of man for this, therefore was it necessary that the Savior should
be borne of a virgin. For if, man had had any thing to do in this generation
of the Savior, the woman had not so been quit from blame, in as much as man
might have said, That a woman could bring all mankind into sin, but without
man she could afford no help, which inequality had not been meet between
them that are equal heirs of the same glorious hopes. Therefore that the
healing might be so made as was the wound, it was requisite that He that
takes away our sin, should be borne of a virgin. And thus is that fulfilled
which is spoken Ierem. 30.17. From thy wounds I will heal thee, that is, as
thy wound was made, so shall thy health be procured.

6. The virgin Eve was given to man for a help before him, yet she brought him
into sin, and the snares of the devil; but the purpose of God could not
thereby be made void. Therefore that other virgin was she that was especially
meant, who should bring forth that help of helps in man's greatest need.
Therefore that face might answer to face, it was expedient that the Savior of
the world should be borne of a virgin.

7 And seeing he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, that no taint or lust of
sin might be in the conception: and that the subject of the action of the
Holy Ghost, should be the most fit subject for such a worke-master, and such an
action: and that a pure and uncorrupted body was most fit for such a
conception. Therefore it was also necessary that he should be borne of a
virgin. For it cannot be supposed, that God who came into that harbor of His
mothers body, that he might sanctify it, would at his going out, leave it in
worse estate than He had found it.

8. One contrary cannot be an efficient cause of the other contrary. As to say,
That that which is pure and holy, should be the cause of any impurity or
corruption. But the conception which was the cause of this Birth was most pure,
as having the Holy Ghost the author thereof. Therefore could not the conception
be any cause to take away the virginity of Christ's mother. For so that divine
work of the Holy Ghost should have been ordained to an end more unnoble then
the work; whereas the end is ever more excellent than those things that are
ordained for the end. So also He that commanded parents to be honored, should
have brought a spot upon His own mother, if by His birth her virginity had
been impaired, which was not impaired by his conception. But these things are
impossible. Therefore He was borne of a virgin.

9. The birth of that child which is supernatural, as being both God and man,
must needs be most noble and supernatural. But it could not be most noble, if
it were with the dispoyling of the mothers virginity, nor yet in the highest
kind supernatural, if it were not of a virgin. And this is that mystery which
all the Churches, styled in Cant. 3.11. by the name of the daughters of Sion,
are called to take knowledge of. Go forth o ye daughters of Sion, behold King
Solomon, with the Crown wherewith His mother crowned Him in the day of His
espousals, and in the day of the gladness of His heart. And that because all
the mysteries of our salvation were accomplished in His humanity.

10. Thus as God both by Himself and by His Prophets has showed, that these
things should thus be fulfilled: So in the time appointed was Christ our Lord
borne of a virgin. The holy authorities are, First, that which is Genes. 3.15.
The seed of the woman shall bruise thy head, and if of the woman only, as the
promise stands, without any aid or mention of man, then must the conception of
necessity be by the Holy Ghost, who should give activity and working unto the
female seed: and the birth being (as it beseemed) answerable to the conception,
must of necessity be of a virgin. Neither yet does this abate any thing of the
true and perfect humanity of Christ, that He was made man only of the female
seed. For seeing every second cause works only in the strength of the first
and chief cause; it is plain, that whatsoever the second cause is able to do
by the virtue of the first, that first is able to do by it self. And
therefore God who made man of the dust of the earth, could also without any
action of the manly seed, produce a perfect man of the seed of the Virgin, in
which seed the whole humanity was, although it was not able to moove it self
to the perfection of kind. Another text is that of Esaias, cited before, Behold,
a virgin shall conceive and bear a Son; and such a birth could never be, but
that the conception must be by the Holy Ghost; And therefore it is said, The
Lord himself shall give you a sign, because He was the only worker. That
text of Jeremiah 31.22. The Lord has created a new thing in the earth: A woman
shall compass a man: does enforce as much as the former. But what new thing is
this? Is any thing more usual then a woman with child? But this is the
newness, That a woman who never knew man, should compass (...) Gaber, that
mighty One, even God and man in one person. For seeing it was a new thing, it
must be such as never was before, a miracle in the birth of a man, which could
only be in this, That He should be conceived without a father among men, and
borne of a mother that was a maid, as it is said, Matthew. 1.25. That Joseph knew
her not, till she had brought forth. The text of Ezech. 44. you shall hear
by and by. And beside these texts that are plain and manifest, others may
seem to import as much, as that in Esaias 9.7. (...) Lemarbeh hamiscah, to the
increase of His dominion; where from that close Mem, signifying in their later
Arithmeticke 600, and is not used but in the end of a word, some will define
the time from the fourth year of Achaz to the birth of Christ 600. years, but
it holds not. Others from thence will fetch the name Maria with as much ado.
See Pet: Galat. lib. 7. cap. 13. and lib. 4. cap. 10. But I like best of their
opinion who think, that the perpetual virginity of Saint Mary was meant
hereby; yet will I rather profess my ignorance, then presume to offer you any
thing whereof I am fully persuaded.

Notes.
(a) THat our Lord Christ was borne of a virgin,] It was a worthy saying of
Athanasius in Epistol: Cathol. (...). The sum of our faith is the
consubstantiall Trinity: and the true God borne of the virgin Mary. And well it
accords with that of our Savior, John 17.3. This is eternal l^fe, to know
Thee the only t ue God, and whom Thou have sent Jesus Christ. Whereto you have
the full testimony of the devil himself, in that with all his might he has
persecuted the professors of this truth, and endeavored to deface it with so
many errors, as he by his ministers has broached to the contrary. Some you
have seen before, Note (g) on the 24. Chapter; Some you shall have here in
brief against this Art^cle; And they either concern the Body of Christ, 1. or
his Soul, 2. or else the Virginity of his mother, 3.

Simon the Witch according to that spirit of Antichrist.] 1. John 4.3. denied
that Christ was come in the flesh; and so at once made void the Gospel of
Christ.

2. Valentinus denied that Christ had a true and humane body, but only
heavenly and spiritual, in which he ^assed through the Virgin Mary, as water
through a pipe, without taking any flesh of her. To the same purpose Cerdon, and
after him Marcion, denied Christ to have been borne of the Virgin Mary, or to
have had any manly body at all, but only heavenly, or to have suffered but
only in show.

3. Apelles thought the body of Christ to be a true substantial body, but yet
to have been borrowed, partly of the stars, from which he took somewhat,
as He came down from Heaven, and partly of the Elements; which body after He
had risen from the dead, was again returned into the proper principles. The
madness of the Manichees is as much as all the former came unto, and both the
one and the other unworthy your hearing, saving that you may give thanks unto
God, that has kept your heart upright in the holy faith of Christ, yet shall
you see them briefly examined, note (a) in the end of the Chapter following.

Arius, and Apollinarius, concerning the soul of Christ must here be sifted
a little nearer. Arius held that Christ took of the Virgin the humane flesh
only, and not the humane soul, but that the Word did supply all the
faculties of the soul in Him.

2. The Apollinarists called also Dimaeritae, sometime denied that Christ took
any flesh of the Virgin, but said, that He was perfect man while he was yet
in heaven, before He was borne of the Virgin; and that that same body of His
was equal and consubstantiall to the Divine Nature, because He made it unto
Himself of the Divine being: So that although He were borne of the Virgin; yet
was He in her body as in a place, not as one of the same nature with her. And
these Heretics though mungrells of Apollinarius, and Marcion, yet Apollinarius
was accounted their Sire.

3. Others among them, affirmed that Christ took a body of the Virgin, which
was also enlived with a living, but not with a reasonable soul. And hence had
they their name Dimaritae, because they give these two third parts of the manly
being unto Christ, but said that a supercelestiall understanding supplied the
want of the reasonable soul. These Heretics were either most differing, or
most un^erta^ne in their opinions, as you may find by Socrat. Eccles. hist. lib
3. cap. 36. So by Athanas. Epist. ad Epict. Epist. de Incarn. Dom. and orat. de
Salut. adventu D. I. Christi, both against this opinion of Apollinaris: And
because both these opinions are against this Article, you shall first see the
reasons of Athanasius against his first position: his second error shall go
in common with that of Arius.

1. The first reason of Athanasius is this. The Trinity only is uncreated, but
flesh had the beginning of man. But Apollinarius might except by his own
positions; That the Son made His body consubstantiall to Himself of the
Divine being.

2. Whatsoever is subject to sufferance, is created. But Christ suffered for
us. Therefore by a created body. All is most true. Yet Apollinarius might
except again by his own position. The Word became flesh, and that Word was
uncreated, therefore also that flesh into which the Word was changed. But I
loose time to dally thus with these Heretics. Therefore for full opposition to
this heresy and the rest recited before of Valentinus, Marcion, Apelles and
their rabbles, consider these reasons which are brought, Chapter 20. to prove
that the Mediator for the sin of man must be man, and see how they accord
with the Scr^ptures there cited. Se also Galat. 4.4. and Phil. 2.6, 7.

You may see the reasons of Apollinarius for his opinions, in Epiphanius
haeres. 77. of which I think these are the best.

1. A true man y body* is only by the male-seed. But Christ was not so
begotten. Therefore He had not a true manly, but a heavenly body.

Answer. The proposition is false. For Adam was not of manly seed, yet that
true man, from whom all humane nature descended. Neither was our Lord less
perfect man because he was not so begotten; See the 10. reason before.

2. That which the Scripture has pronounced sinful, may not be given to
Christ. But the flesh lusts against the spirit, Gal. 5.17. and so is sinful:
therefore not to be given to Christ.

Answer. That text of the Apostle is taken by a Metonymia. For the flesh is
not sinful, but the lusts that dwell in the flesh are against the spirit, and
sinful. But Christ took the creature, not the sin that dwelt therein.

Against the errors about the soul of Christ, whether that of Arius, or
Apollinarius, or them that had broached the opinion before their time, that
Christ had not an humane soul, Ignat. Epist. ad Philadelph. you shall have the
most effectual reasons out of Athanasius Epist. de Incarn. D. I. C. contra
Apoll.

1. There were so many parts in Christ living, as He was resolved into, when He
was dead. But He was resolved into two, the body which was buried, and the
soul which went down to hell. Therefore there were two parts of Christ's
humane being; a body, and a soul, which two together, do make a whole and
perfect man.

2. If either the Word, or a supercelestiall understanding had been in a
senseless body, then could not that body have felt either pain without, or
(much less) inward grief. But the soul of our Savior was heavy unto death,
Mat. 26.38. Therefore He had a humane soul.

3. A thing of one kind, cannot be given as a fit ransom for a thing of
another kind; but a body must be given for the ransom of a body, and a soul
for the ransom of a soul. Therefore that Christ might be a sufficient
Redeemer, it was necessary that He should have both an humane body, and a
humane soul.

4. If either the created Deity of Arius, or the supercelestiall spirit of
Apollinarius had been in Christ in stead of the humane soul, then could He
not have given His soul for His sheep. But He was that Good Sepherd, which
said down (...) His own soul, or life for His sheep; John 10.11. Therefore
He had a humane soul.

5. If Christ had not had a soul, by the departure of which His body was dead;
then had not He by His death destroyed him that had the power of death. Hebr.
2.14. neither had he triumphed over death, by His resurrection, neither had He
been a sufficient sacrifice and redemption for them that were dead in
trespasses and sins; and so had His coming been in vain. But all these
things are impossible. Therefore He was in all things like His brethren,
except their sins. Hebr. 2.17.

6. If Christ had had either a life-lesse body, or sensitive only; and in
stead of the humane soul, either a created deity, or a supercelestiall
spirit; then had He been neither God nor man, and so an unmeet and
insufficient Redeemer of the world. For neither had such a body been perfect
man, neither is a supercelestiall spirit, nor a created deity perfect God.

Yet had Apollinarius his reasons, though he erred from the truth; and by his
reasons, it seems that he had most reverent thoughts of Christ. For thus he
argues.

1. Man's soul is the seat of sin; of anger, concupiscence, and the like.
But these things could not be in Christ. Therefore neither the humane soul, in
which only they dwell.

Answer. Anger, sorrow, compassion, joy, and such motions of the soul, are
either ordinate, which are subject to Wisdom, and the rules of the divine
Justice, expressed in the Law of God, and these were in Christ, and were not
sinful. But the inordinate affections only are sinful, and could not be in
Him which knew no sin.

2. Two perfect things in their perfection could not possibly become one.
Therefore that the Godhead with the manhood might become one Mediator, it was
necessary that the manhood should be assumed imperfit; otherwise the Mediator
had been two persons.

Answ. This argument was answered before, Note (g) Chapter 24. 8. Yet in
brief, I say, that the word perfect, h^th a twofold meaning. For the Godhead
took the Manhood unto Himse^fe perfect, that is, According to those parts
wherein the perfection of the Manhood does consist, of Body and Soul. But as
our Lord in His childhood did grow in Age, Stature, Wisdom, etc. So before
His birth did he grow from state to state, till the full time of natural
birth. And thus the Manhood was assumed imperfect, that is, Not yet having
attained unto that perfection whereto it was destinate, in the Birth, the
Youth, the Manly age and state. Therefore that fear of Apollinarius, of two
persons in Christ, was needless. For beside this, that the Humane nature was
both conceived, and taken to the Divine in one instant, nothing in mankind can
be called a person till it be living, and that it be per se sola of it self,
which seems not to be before the birth. But this is without doubt, that that
which is sustained, or has the being in another, can no way of it self be
accounted a person. But it is manifest, that the Humanity of Christ is
sustained only in His divinity. You know the received opinion touching the
original of the Soul.

3. Though by all these heaps of Arguments, which you may read from Chapter
21. to this place; I have beaten out the brains of that beggarly Brat of
Ebion, which affirmed that our Lord was begotten by Joseph of his wife Mary, as
all other children; yet you may see, how the stink of that carcass does rise
up against this Article, that He was borne of a Virgin; so dangerous a thing an
heresy is in matters of Faith. But for answer to those reasons that are
brought hereto; you may read the Note (g). 4. on the 24. Chapter before. And
although it be proved by infallible arguments, that is to say, from authority
of Holy Scripture, and reasons drawn therefrom that our Lord Jesus was both
conceived, and borne of a Virgin, that He might be free from original sin,
whereto all the race of mankind is subject, which are begotten and borne
according to the common law of humane generation, yet would I not be understood
in any thing which I have said thereto, to speak contrary to that which the
Apostle has, Heb. 13.4. That marriage is honorable among all men, for whom it
is necessary. But notwithstanding the reasons that Christ must be borne of a
Virgin, the mind will still be asking, how He could be truly man, and yet His
mother a Virgin? Seeing we have detested the heresies of Valentine, Apelles,
and all such madness. Whereto I answer. That the mystery of the Gospel is,
as the treasure of the unsearchable riches; so of the manifold Wisdom of God,
into which the Angels desire to look, Ephesians. 3.8.10. 1. Pet. 1.12. And therefore
the pure and simple truth of God being delivered unto you, by His holy Apostles
and Prophets, and after, being made manifest by such proofs as reason cannot
except against; it may seem an unreasonable thing, yet further to require
satisfaction for the possibility thereof. For to an infinite power, all things
are possible. And as our Savior was conceived, so also was He borne, and His
mothers Virginity saved; As He came to the Apostles when the doors were shut,
John. 20.19.26. But (you say) His body was then changed and made Spiritual, He
being raised from the dead. I confess it. But yet that power by which He hid,
or made Himself invisible, Luke 4.30. John 8.59. and 12.36. by which He walked
on the waters, John 6.14. by which He filled the world with wonders, and that
before His body was raised from the dead. Beside it is not unreasonable for us
to think that as the woman by whom sin was brought into the world, was
brought out of the side of Adam: so that man by whom the satisfaction for our
sin was made, might likewise be brought out of the side of the Woman. For as
it was sufficient for our redemption, that our ransom was paid in our whole
and perfect nature, taken of the Virgin: so was it likewise more honorable,
and beseeming the Lord of Glory, having taken our flesh, to be so borne. Bu^
Eve (you say) was so brought to being, while Adam was in a deep sleep. I
answer, that it is not utterly improbable that the Virgin likewise in that
birth was fast asleep. For first, it was in the night, the time of sleep.
Luke 2.8. And it was according to all reason, that she which had conceived
without pleasure, should also bring forth without pain. And although I affirm
not this of any necessity to be believed; yet among those many of whom you
read, Luke 1.1. which set forth the declaration of these things, that Gospel
which was said to be written by Saint Bartholmew, affirms thus much.
Howsoever, I think that Ierom spoke too boldly, Dialog: 2. adversus Pelag:
Deum per genitalia virginis natum. Neither can I give my consent to Tertullian,
lib. de carne Christi: virgo quantum a viro, quantum a partu non virgo. That
Mary was a Virgin in respect of her husband, but no Virgin in respect of her
Son. For this in Iovinian was justly accounted an heresy. Aug. here is. cap.
82. And that because it is contrary to the voice of the Prophet, Behold a
virgin shall bring forth a Son. I, but Luke 2.23. says that He was
presented according to the Law. Every male child, that first opens the womb^,
shall be holy to the Lord, which may seem to belong so properly to Christ the
holy One of God, as to none other.

Answ. I question not the birth, but the manner only. And seeing it could not
be but miraculous, all confessing that it was not painful: I say that to Him
who only has the power of miracles, all things are easy alike. And although
the blessed Virgin at her Churching brought her offering commanded by the Law,
to show her thankfulness and obedience; yet does it not follow thereupon that
she was no virgin, as other women are, or needed any purification for that
birth, or that her Son was either borne or begotten as other children. But the
virginity of the mother of God is impugned, not only by these Ebionites, but
also by them that were called Antidicomarianitae, or Antimaritae, that is,
opposites to the Virgin Mary, of whom one Helvidius an vnletter'd fellow,
sometime a scholar of the Arians, was said to be chief, about the year 389.
Joseph: And that because it is said, Matthew. 1.25. That Joseph knew her not till
she had brought forth, from whence he would conclude that after that, he knew
her. Though in the sense of Helvidius this be unlikely, Joseph being fourscore
years old when he took her to wife, as Epiphanius writes haeres. 28. and that
she knowing how she had conceived, vowed perpetual virginity, her husband
consenting thereto, See Numb. 30.7. yet the argument is only from the
doubtful signification of the word Knew, which in this place has reference
unto the 18, and 19. verses, where Joseph suspecting her honesty, thought to
put her away; but not daring to do that, being forbidden by the Angel, he
took her, but yet knew not, that is, was not yet fully persuaded by his dream
that she was with child by the Holy Ghost. But when she had brought forth her
Son; then, By her miraculous deliverance, By the miracle toward the
Shepherds, By the prophecy of Simeon and Anna, By the coming of the Magicians
from the East-countrey, By the admonition of the Angel to flee into Egypt, and
the slaughter of the Innocents that followed thereon, he knew her to have bin
with child by the Holy Ghost, and so to be His mother that was the Savior of
the world. Others had rather answer from the meaning of the word till, unto or
until, which with a negative, in the time to come, may signify as much as
never, as it is said of Michal 2. Sam. 6.23. That she had no child till the day
of her death; As on the other side, with an affirmative, it may signify ever,
as Matt. 28.20. I am with you always unto, or until the end of the world; not
that he then forsakes them; for whom He loves, he loves unto the end, that is
eternally.

Helvidius concluded that she had another Son afterward. But Christ is not
called the first begotten of his mother, because she had other children after
Him, but because she had none before him. So first begotten in this place, is
as much, as only begotten. For as he was the only begotten of his father
according to His divine nature, because he was the perfect Son of a perfect
Father; So was it fit that He should also be the only Son of His mother,
because as He had in Himself all the perfection of Sonship; So by His birth
had He given to His mother the perfection of mother-hood above all women

Matthew. 12.46. and sundry other places, His brethren are mentioned. I answer;
The name of Brother belonged indifferently to all the men of the same family or
kindred, as Abram spoke to Lot, Genesis 13.8. We are brethren, as the Sychemites
acknowledged Abimelech their Brother, Judge. 9.3. So all the Israelites call
Benjamin, and by a Synecdoche, his tribe their Brother, Judge. 20.23, though he
had been dead above 400. years.

Therefore against Helvidius, beside these conjectures, either of Mary's vowed
virginity, or that old age of her husband: or those probabilities with
sanctified minds more then probable; That the Virgin her self had been most
unthankefull, if she had not been content with that glorious Son, for whose
fa^^e the holy women before her desired to be mothers: and if she should
wilfully have stained that virginity which she knew to have been so
miraculously preserved unto her: And Joseph likewise having received the gift
of continence, had been too presumptuous, if he had not forborne that
sanctified body, whom by the message of the Angel, and so many miracles he knew
to have conceived by the Holy Ghost. Let us look to that which is the maine
purpose and intent of the Scripture, that in the setting up of that Kingdom
which should be established unto David for ever, 2. Sam. 7. from verse. 12. to
17. Dan. 2.35.44. And although this Kingdom was to be a spiritual Kingdom of
Grace and Glory, Ioh. 8.36. yet that is not first which is spiritual; but
natural; So that our Lord JESUS, according to the right of natural descent by
His mother, See Luke 3.5. ver. 24, etc. and of legal right by His father
Joseph, See Matthew. 1. was the true and lawful King of the Jews, as he is
confessed by the Magi from the East, Matthew. 2. proclaimed by Pilate, John
19.15, 19. and professed by Himself, John 18.37. and that not by any reserved
and doubtful meaning, but by a plain and direct answer, according to the q
estion of Pilate, Art thou the King of the Jews? For, for this cause was he
borne, that He might bear witness to the truth. He therefore being both
lawful and natural King of the Jews, according to His descent from David,
and that by an unquestionable right of descent, as the succession of that
Kingdom had stood from David to Iehojaki^ above 400. years, and after the
captivity, from Zorobabel to Ianna Hircanus almost 300. years, and that by the
covenant of God Himself to David, which was to be established in Christ for
ever; it must follow of necessity, that Joseph had no children by Mary his
wife, as Helvidius barked. For so the right of that title to the Kingdom of
David, should have been to that heir who had the right by natural descent
from both parents, rather then to him which had right only by His mother and
adopted father. Neither had this which I plead, been good only for Joseph's
sons, but also for his daughters (if he had had any by Mary his wife) as it
appears in the case of the daughters of Zelophehad, Numb. 26.7, 8. Wherefore
seeing it cannot be supposed but that the holy Virgin, blessed above other
women, and freely beloved, should not have bin denied the blessing of children,
if she had desired any after her Son JESUS, it will follow of necessity, that
for the eternity of David's kingdom, to which our Lord had the only right, not
by intrusion, or disannulling of a better title, I mean in civil right; He
was that stone cut out without hands, that shall fill the whole earth, and that
the blessed body of his mother, according to that vision of Ezechiel 44. was
that Eastgate, or ordinary way of entrance into mankind in which the Prince
did sit to grow before the Lord, as he that eats bread; even until the time
of His birth when He should go out thence perfect man. And because the Lord
God of Israel had entered in by that gate, Therefore should it be shut that no
man might enter in by it, but that the holy Virgin should continue a virgin as
in the conception, and birth; so for ever after a virgin. For neither had the
outward Sanctuary of the Tabernacle, nor of the Temples afterward, any such
secluded gate, but that both Priests and People did go in and out thereat, to
do their daily service. So then that mystical Temple of Ezechiel, must needs
intend the Temple of the Virgins body, by which God Himself entered into our
Tabernacle, and came forth God-Man, blessed for ever, Amen.

ARTICLE IIII. 1. Suffered under Pontius Pilate: was 2. Crucified. 3. Dead. and
4. Buried.
CHAP. XXVII.
WHat the infinity of that glory was of which the Son of God did empty
Himself, when He clouded it under the form of a servant, all the Angels in
heaven cannot comprehend. Yet such was the infinite love of God to man, as that
for our sakes (a) He was pleased to be borne man, that (b) by His partaking of
our sufferings, He might become a faithful high Priest for us unto God, that
we might be made partakers of His glory. For a friend loves at all times, and
a Brother is borne for adversity. Proverbs 17.17. His friends we are, if we
do whatsoever He has commanded us, John 15.14. neither is He ashamed to call
us brethren, when He says, Psalm. 22.22. I will declare thy Name to my
Brethren, In the midst of the Church will I praise thee. Hebr. 2.12.

Now what these sufferings were, it is in part manifest by the Prophets, and by
the Evangelists. Such was His poverty, as that He was borne in a stable among
the beasts; A manger was His Cradle. In His infancy, He was persecuted by that
cruel King, that sought His life, and compelled Him to seek His safety by
banishment in a foreign land. The poor Trade of a Carpenter was His means
of maintenance, that had made all the world. Subject He was to our infirmities,
of Hunger, Thirst, Heat and Cold, Weari^^sse and Grief, both of mind and Body,
neither had He less afflictions, though He were free from sickness. But when
the time came that He should show Himself to be that Redeemer, that was to
come, then was He most busily tempted by the devil, railed on, and reviled by
His ministers, that praised themselves therefore: Say we not well, that thou
art a Samaritane, and have a devil? then was he laden with injury and scorn,
His life was sought by treason, and at last betrayed by His own Scholar. But
how great was the anguish of His mind, how great was His affrighting at the
sight of that death, whereby He must fight against the fierce wrath of God
inflamed against Him, that had set Himself the surety, to pay for the sins
of the whole world? Arise, o Sword! against my Shepherd, against the man that
is my fellow friend, says the Lord of hosts, I will smite the Shepherd, and
the sheep shall be scattered. Zach. 13.7. What was that anguish of His mind,
that forced Him thrice to pray with strong crying and tears and to sweat like
drops of blood running down to the earth, That that bitter Cup might pass
away? verily the sorrows of hell compassed Him about, and the snares of death
were before Him. Psalm. 18.5. Yea, so were the sorrows of His heart enlarged, as
a man that sought for comfort and could find none. He prays, and comes to His
Disciples, to seek some ease by their mutual speech, but they are fast
asleep, and there finds He none. Thus while the Godhead does rest toward Him.
Psalm. 22.1. And according to the law of Justice leaves him in His pure
humanity, to bear the burden of our sin alone, while all the waves and
storms of Gods wrath pass over Him; while the dogs of hell, with their
several temptations, compass him about; while the horrible curse of the Law
ever sounds in His ear, Cursed is every one that confirms not all the words
of this Law to do them. Deuteronomy. 27.26. which curse, He that had become our
surety, Psalm. 40.7. Hebr. 7.22. must bear for every one; What marvel was it
if He prayed, that His soul thus left alone, might be delivered from the power
of the dog, that He might be saved from the Lions mouth, being thus beset
with the horns of the Unicorns? Read Psalm. 22. and 69. But yet remembering
that for our cause He came into this hour, that He might fulfill the will of
His Father, Hebr. 10.5. and that by that one offering of Himself, He should
bring many sons unto Glory; therefore, as the valiant Captain of their
salvation, did He willingly and courageously offer Himself to the hands of
them that sought His life, having first commanded a safe conduct for His
Disciples. John 18. from 3. to 10. Then what scorn and reproaches, and
speaking against of sinners He endured before the high Priests, the holy
Prophets and Evangelists have recorded. I gave my Back to the smiters, and my
Cheek to them that plucked off the hair, I hid not my Face from shame and
spitting, Esaias 50.6. He gives His Cheek to him that smites Him, He is
filled with reproach, Lament. 3.10. See further in Micah 5.1. Matthew. 26.6, 7,
8. Mark 14.65. Luke 22.63, 64. John 18.22. But because the Article of our
Creed mentions only His sufferings under Pontius Pilate, under which all these
by a Synecdoche, are comprehended; let us look unto them in particular, for
therein was the accomplishment of our Redemption.

But first, it may be here demanded, why mention is made of Pontius Pilate, as
if the truth of God, and his most glorious work in the creature, that is, the
redemption of man by the death of His Son, should any way need or admit of
humane testimony. I answer, that as the Spirit of God in the Evangelists,
vouchsafes to apply the history of the Gospel, to the times of Tiberius, of
Pontius Pilate his proconsul, of Herod, of Philip, etc. Luke 3.1, 2. so
likewise this short abridgment of the Gospel, our Creed, does not neglect them.
For seeing the sufferin^ of Christ was for the benefit of mankind, it is
necessary that we should be made so sure and certain of the truth thereof,
that how oever that truth were tried by divine, or by humane aut^ority, of
reason, or history, it might most clearly and plainly appear. And therefore
is this truth of Christ witnessed, not only by the Prophets, and Evangelists,
as you read before, Chap. 24. Reason 10. and by the Ecclesiastical Histories,
but even the profane writers, yea, the persecutors and enemies of this truth*
are not silent herein. Pilate himself might be a witness of those things
which he had heard and seen concerning the miracles, the death, and
resurrection of Christ, whereof he writ unto Tiberius the Emperor. And
although it seemed not fit to the Wisdom of God, that that glorious truth
concerning his Son, which He himself had testified from heaven, and had
confirmed by so many miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost, should afterward
receive authority from the Senate of Rome, that Senate, by whose authority so
many thousands of false gods were worshipped, See Aug. de civ. D. lib. 3. cap.
12. yet even to that Senate, the truth of his Deity by that testimony of him
that had heard and seen, was clearly manifest, See Tertul. Apolog. cap. 5.
Eusebius. Eccl. hist. lib. 2. cap. 2. And although Lucian, and Porphyrie, and
Celsus, and such dogs barked against the holy Religion of Christ; yet even
therein they testified, that Christ did establish a faith and Religion among
His faithful followers. Plini. Epi^t. lib. 10. Epist. 97. and Tacitus Annal.
lib. 15. though they no Christians, for the first was a cruel persecuter of
them, yet have they testified so much, and have always been held faithful in
their writings: And so may Josephus, though he make it questionable, whether
Christ were only a man, Antiq. lib. 18. Cap. 4. This therefore being without
doubt, that our Lord did suffer under Pontius Pilate, it may be further asked,
why He being a Jew should be condemned to die by the authority and power of
the Romans? For this there be two reasons principal, and chief: For the
understanding of which, you need to remember that there have been four
principal Monarchies in the earth; the first of the Assyrians and Babylonians,
which took the beginning from Nimrod, of whom you read, Genesis 10.8, 9, 10. and
was after increased by Ninus, Semiramis, Salmanasar, Bellochus, and others, but
most of all by Nabuchadnezar. This Monarchy, after it had flourished about
seventeene hundred years, was overthrown by Darius the Median, and his nephew
Cyrus King of Persia; who were the founders of the second Monarchy, which
continued not much above 130. years, and was then broken by Alexander, who in
battle overthrew the last King Codoman. This Alexander began the third
Monarchy of the Grecians, which after him was divided among his Captains, of
which four were chief, See Dan. Cap. 8. of these four Kingdoms, Egypt,
Syria, Greece, and Asia; Asia continued but two descents of 23. years; the
other three one after another, were subdued by the Romans, who made the fourth
Monarchy. Syria, and by and by Judea was subdued by Pompey, and made a
Province of the Romans, about 60. years before the birth of Christ. This Syria
is a Country wide and large. Palestina inhabited by the twelve Tribes, a small
part thereof. See Ptolom. Geogr. lib. 5. cap. 14. and Asiae tab. 4. This
Country in the time of Christ, was divided into three parts, or shires, Judea
toward the South, Galile to the North, and Samaria between them. John 4. v. 3,
4. These Samaritanes were strangers in the land, sent thither only to till the
ground, after Salmanassar had carried away the ten Tribes in the days of
Hoshea, 2. King. 18. from the 9. to the 13. verse, Judea and Galilee were
possessed by the Jews, after their return from Babylon. But after they were
subdued by the Romans, they were compelled to accept of such government, as
they appointed. These Romans, for the good services and deserts of Antipater
Prince of the Idumeans, and of Herod his son after him, gave the Kingdom
over the Jews, to that Herod surnamed the great, who held it 37. years.
Augustus beside the gift of the Senate, enlarged the Kingdom of Herod, with
the Countries of Batanea, Trachonitis, Abylene, and others. But the Jews
knowing the time of Messiah to be at hand, whose Kingdom they thought should
be of this World, most obstinately refused the government of Herod a stranger:
And though he sought the establishment of a just government over them, and did
many things to their content; yet when he saw that by no fair means he
could win them to accept his government, he filled all places with cruelty
and blood, till in the 31. year of his Reign they were compelled to
acknowledge obedience to him as their King; and to his posterity after him. So
when the Scepter was utterly departed from Judah, even by their own consent:
then according to the prophecy of Jacob, in the 32. of Herod, was the Angel
sent to the holy Virgin, when the Jews had thus been taught to know, that the
true Messiah was to bring a greater deliverance, not to them only, but to all
mankind, than any could be from an earthly bondage. So in the beginning of the
33. year of Herod's reign, was Jesus borne. After six years lawful reign,
Herod died miserably: After whom, his Kingdom by Augustus was divided to his
four sons, of their number called Tetrarchs: so that Ar^helaus had Idumea,
Judea, and Samaria; Herod called Antipas had Galilee; Philip had Iturea, and
Trachonitis: And Lysanias had Abylen^. But Archelaus for his wicked government
being by Augustuss thrust from his dignity, and banished in Gallia, Roman
Presidents, Coponius, Ambivius, and Rufus, were sent thither to order that
Tetrarchy, each two years under Augustus. Then by the appointment of Tiberius,
the succeeding Emperor, Valerius Gracus held that government 11. years, and
after him Pontius Pilate; the other sons of Herod still holding their
dignity, as you read, Luke 3.1.

Now to the arguments.
Such was the mercy of God to man, that although the Gospel which was preached
in Paradise ought to have been that chief thing which man should remember;
yet because his way was corrupted, and he become abominable by his cruelty in
the earth, his whole race, except eight persons, were swept away by the flood.
This great Judgment might have taught all posterities to know what that was
which God required of men, and to desire the fulfilling of that promise of Him
that was to come. But this being neglected of all men, except some few among
the least of all nations, which God had chosen for his people, and they now in
captivity in Babylon; God did again call upon the World, to turn unto Him,
because His Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and deliverance and salvation
is by him alone. Read Dan. Chap. 2. v. 44. and Chap. 3. v. 29. and the Kings
Proclamation at large, in the 4. Chapter. Not long after, the World was
summoned again by the like Preaching, and Proclamation of Darius in the second
Monarchy of the Medes. Dan. 6.25. and later histories testify abundantly, how
Alexander marching with fury against Jerusalem, at the sight of Iaddua the
High Priest (as Paul before Damascus) of an Enemy, became a Convert, adored
the Priest, sacrificed, and offered gifts unto the true God. His successors
son in Egypt Philadelphus, had the old Testament translated into Greek, and
not long after, Jonathan Ben Vziel, translated it in Chalde, that all the world
might be prepared to receive that Savior, that was shortly after to be
manifested, in that time when the greatest and most powerful Empire did
flourish most, that is, in the days of Augustus, and his Successor Tiberius.
The argument in brief is this.

1. That seeing the satisfaction for the sin of man was to be made by the
death of Christ, believed on in the world: it was necessary, that as in every
age, and Empire of the world, He had been preached; So He should die by the
power of the greatest Empire then in the world, that all the world might take
knowledge thereof. Therefore in the greatest and most solemn feast of the
Passover, whither the Jews and Proselytes from all Countries resorted (for He
was first to be preached to them; Luke 24. 47) and by the deputy of the
greatest Emperor, was this thing done and after published in that Senate, which
ruled all; that as the salvation was wrought for all, so all might know it. For
by this means the preaching of His Apostles and Ministers afterward was more
easily believed, that He was the Savior of the world, whom after so much good
done, and so great miracles showed by Him, they did unjustly cause to die, when
they found no cause of death in Him.

2 The second argument is this. The holy Scripture is the declaration of the
will of God: Therefore it is necessary, that as all the will of God, so the
holy Scriptures also be fulfilled. Among these, that of Genesis 49.10. is
directly to this purpose, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, etc. till
Shiloh come. This Shiloh all the best Interpreters, both Jews and Christians
agree, to be Christ the King; from whence it follows necessarily, that when
Christ came, the Scepter or authority had departed; And therefore that the
Messiah being to be slain, the execution of that death must be by that
foreign authority that ruled over them. And this the Jews themselves
professed, John 18.31. It is not lawful for us to put any man to death; you
may put hereto, Esaias. 7.16. with those texts cited in the 24. Chapter, Reason
10.

But you may object, that in the captivity, that Scepter was utterly broken;
yea so, that after their return they had no Governors, but by the appointment
of the Kings of Persia, as it is manifest by the Books of Ezra, and Nehemiah,
especially Chapter 9. verse. 36.37.

I answer. That as the Jews in that captivity, knew the time of their return
by the Prophet, Iere. 29.10. so they ever held the hope of their liberty from
that subjection; and therefore after Alexander, defended it against his
successors in Syria, and Egypt; especially when they had the favor and
countenance of the Romans, See 1. of Macch. Chap. 15. verse 16. and Just. Hist.
lib. 36. But in their subjection to Herod, they gave the government of
themselves and their posterity unto him and his. And although Archelaus his
son, for his mis-government lost it, yet it returned to the Romans, of whom
he received it; and therefore in this case between Christ, and Caesar; they
utterly disclaim Christ for their King, and profess, they have no King but
Caesar, John 19.5.

So then it being clear, that our Lord was to suffer under the Lieutenant of
the Romans, which at that time was Pontius Pilate, let us see what He suffered
under him.

It is not likely that a Prophet having been condemned by the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and suffering most unjustly, such reproaches as you heard before,
should be better entreated before a civil Magistrate. Yet Pilate has more
patience to examine the cause. What accusation bring ye against him? The points
of His accusation were three. First, He is a malefactor. How prove you that?
If He were not so, we would not have delivered Him unto thee: John 18.30. A
very substantial proof, we malicious liars say so, therefore it is so. The
second point, He is a blasphemer, for He said, I am the Son of God. John
19.7. He said true, and prooved it. Mark. 2. verse 7. and 10. and John 10.
verse 35, 36, 37, 38. Thirdly, Treason! He makes Himself a King: He speaks
against Caesar -- calcemus Caesaris hostem. John 19.12. But He explained
Himself, That His Kingdom was not of this world. John 18.36. And by the rule
of your own teachers, All they shall be cut off that watch for iniquity, That
make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reprooveth
openly. Esaias 29.20, 21. So that for these crimes falsely objected, He was three
times pronounced, Not guilty. I find no fault at all in Him. John 18.38. and
19.4. and 6. No, nor yet Herod. Luke 23.15. and therefore, I will be free of
the blood of this just man, and washed his hands. Matthew. 27.24. And was He
innocent and just? most unjust and wicked Judge! ought not a Judge as well to
defend and deliver the innocent, as to punish the wicked? If He be innocent,
Why do thou, most unrighteous Judge, betray the innocent to the power of His
accusers? Take ye Him, and judge Him after your own Law. John 18.31. If He be
innocent, Why do thou torture Him with scourges and thorns, and the mockery
of a purple robe? John 19.1, 2, etc. Why do thou deliver Him to the will of
His enemies? Luke 23.35. Thus the wicked play in the credit and welfare of the
righteous, and account it no sin, if they can have any pretext to say they
are innocent. Thus our Lord was denied His right to His Kingdom, Luke 19.14.
betrayed by His rebellious Subjects: His life was set at naught, to save a
murderer, unjustly accused; stripped of His clothing; And beside all this of
loss which He endured; He suffered all that pain and punishment which they
could bring upon Him. As first, His base and scornful apprehension, as of a
thief in the night. 2. His being hurried from place to place, from Judge to
Judge. 3. The most unjust sentences of Blasphemy, of Treason, of Death. 4. His
Buffeting, Mocking, Whipping, Crowning, with all kind of contempt and scorn:
and 5. That by a most unjust Judge, who still professed Him innocent, He was
betrayed to the will of His adversaries to be Crucified. 6. And yet, because
nothing could glut the gorges of those bloody Priests, in the agonyes of death,
behold a fresh onset of Scorn and Reviling. Matthew. 27, 41. 7. Neither will the
abjects be left out, with their Gall and Vinegar. 8. No, nor yet the thieves in
the same condemnation with their upbraidings. O man of sorrows, and
contradiction! Behold and see, all you that pass by, if there were ever any
sorrow like unto that which was done unto Him, wherewith the Lord afflicted Him
in the day of His fierce anger. Yet were all these things but small
afflictions, in comparison of this, that God had withdrawn the light of His
comforts from Him. For this cause alone were His roarings powered out. My God,
my God, why have thou fo saken me? Yet may it not be thought but that He was
still one with the Person of the Godhead; and that not only in His agony on
the Cross, but in death also; when His soul was parted from the body; So that
although there was a dissolution in nature, of the Soul and the Body; yet the
unity of the Manhood with the Godhead, was still saved in the Person of the
Godhead. See Acts 2.27.

But although this act of Pilate in himself was most unjust: yet in God the
Father; whose Person Pilate, in that judgment did represent, the act was most
righteous and just. That Pilate in his Judgment represented God the Father, it
is manifest not only by this, That all power is of God; Romans 13.1. but even in
this very case, by that which our Savior answered unto Pilate; Thou could
have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above. John
19.11. In this act therefore of Pilate, God did summon and judge the whole
world to answer for their sins: And because every mouth was stopped, and the
whole world was found subject to the judgment and wrath of God, for their
sin; therefore was it necessary, that the condemnation and punishment should
fall on Him to the full, that had set Himself to answer for us, lest no flesh
should be saved. So through His sufferings, as we were condemned in Him, by Him
are we also saved. But it comes now to be enquired, Why our Savior should be
condemned to a death, so infamous, as to be

2 Crucified.
THere were four kinds of death appointed for Malefactors by the Law of God;
Stoning, Burning, the Sword, Hanging by the neck. The particular offenses you
may find gathered from the Hebrew Doctors by Henry Ainsw: on Exodus 21.12. And
although Hanging, amongst all those, was accounted the most easy death, yet on
that kind of death was the curse pronounced, as you see, Deuteronomy. 21.22. But if
they that committed the least sins, and therefore suffered the most easy
death, were accursed, as the adulterer, etc. how much more they which sinned in
higher degrees and were judged worthy of greater punishment? This kind of
death, by nailing to a Cross, more cruel then any appointed by the Law of
God, was in common use among the Romans, after their first Kings, especially
for their slaves. See M. T. Cic: orat pro Rab: perduell: and Lips: de Cruce.
lib. 1. cap. 12. over whom every Lord had power, and used to crucify them for
theft, and especially for running away. After, it grew in use for the baser
sort of malefactors though freemen, as thieves and such like, and for their
provincialls. And when the lawless power of the Emperors had made all slaves,
then they that called themselves Freemen and Citizens of Rome, were also
crucified at the will of the Emperors, as you may see Lips: de Cruce. lib.
cap. 15. et lib. 2. cap. 7. But although this kind of nayling on the tree by
which our Lord did dye, was not in use among the Jews, as Lip. de Cruce. lib.
1. cap. 11. supposes; unduly confounding the staking, strangling on a Gibbet,
or bough, and nayling on a Cross; yet by the interpretation of S. Paul Gal. 3
13. did the curse directly belong to this suffering of Christ, wherein He was
made a Curse for us. Now among those reasons, why our Savior should dye by
this most vile and infamous death of the Cross; The first shall be even from
thence, because it was most base and shameful. For seeing mankind by his
sin, had forsaken God his just and lawful Lord, and made himself a slave to
the Devil; what manner of death, but the most vile and shameful could He be
judged worthy of, that had so falsely and basely transgressed? And therefore was
it necessary, that He who had made Himself man's surety, and put Himself in
his stead, to bear his punishment, should also die by the most infamous death
of the Cross, the punishment of slaves that had run away from their Lords.

2. It is fit and necessary, that the Son of God should be exalted to the
highest degree of glory. The greatest glory is not due but to the greatest
humility. The lowest degree of humility that can be, is to be subject to the
most shameful death. Therefore that our Lord the Son of God might be exalted
to the highest degree of glory, it was necessary that He should first be abased
to the death of the Cross. Neither is this an argument of amplification, but
founded in the rules of the infinite Justice, and therefore urged by Saint
Paul. Philip. 2. verse 8, 9, 10. He humbled Himself, and became obedient unto
death, even the death of the Cross. Therefore God has exalted Him, and given
Him the Name which is above every Name, that every tongue should confess that
Christ is Iehova.

3. And seeing He suffered under the power of the Romans, it was necessary
that He should die by that manner of death which was most usual with the
Romans, which for their servants and provincialls, was the Cross. And
although it seemed unto Pilate himself an unworthy death for Him, Shall I
crucify your King? Yet nothing could content His enemies, but Crucify Him,
Crucify Him. And because our Lord had no such privilege to plead for
Himself, that He was a free man of Rome, as Saint Paul did. Act. 16.37. and
22.25, 29. and 25.11. and so lost his head by the sword* Therefore He must
needs endure that bitter, and accursed death of the Cross.

4. The tree through the craft of the devil was unto mankind a cause of
sin. Therefore lest the tree which was created good, might become a curse to
him for whom it was created, and thereby the end of the creation might be
perverted, it seemed fit to the Wisdom of God, that as the tree had been an
instrument in the work of man's condemnation, it should also be an instrument
in the work of his redemption, that man by his wound might also be healed.
And therefore that our ransom should be paid on the Cross.

5. Man by his sin had made himself subject to the curse of the Law.
Therefore that the promise to Abraham, That in his seed all the Nations of the
earth should be blessed, Genesis 12.3. might come upon them, it was necessary
that the curse should fall upon that promised seed, in whom they were to be
blessed, as Saint Paul does argue, Gal. 3.13. and 14.

6. This crucifying of our Lord was prefigured diverslie in the Law, as by the
Serpent in the Wilderness; if you compare Numb. 21.8. with John 3.14. Moses
also spreading out his hands in the form of the Cross, overcame Amalec by his
prayer, Exodus 17.11. But above all other figures: that glorious Type of Christ,
Samson, who should begin to save Israel, Iud 14.5. most lively figured our
Savior on the Cross, when he laid his hands upon the Pillars, and slew more
at his death, than he had done in all his life, Iud. 16.30. So our Lord, the
Author and Finisher of our Salvation, though by His Preaching and His miracles
He had shaken the Kingdom of the Devil, yet by His death upon the Cross He
did triumph over all the power of hell, Col. 2.15. David, Psalm. 22.16.
prophesies plainly of the wounds wherewith He was pierced in His hands, and
His feet, when He was nailed to the Cross, as the Prophet Zechary, Chap.
12.10. of that wound which through His side they made in His heart. I (the
Lord) will power upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of Grace, and
supplicatior, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced. And thus
according to the Prophesies that were before, was our Savior crucified, as you
read in the Gospel.

3. Dead.
We see JESUS made a little lower then the Angels for the suffering of death,
that He by the Grace of God should taste of death for every man. Heb. 2.9. All
the reasons for His crucifying confirm thus much. And for this cause was He
conceived and borne, that He might redeem His people from their sins. The
arguments also of the 19. Chapter, of the 21.22. and 23. come all to this
center; that Christ our Lord, and only Redeemer, must die for our sin.

1. For seeing man by his sin had made himself subject unto death, according
to the just sentence, Genesis 2.17. In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou
shall surely die; it was necessary, that He that had made Himself our surety,
Heb. 7.22. and taken our sin upon him, Esaias. 52. should die for our sin.

2. It was necessary that the highest degree of obedience, should be in him,
in whom was also the perfection of Sonne-ship. But all the perfection of
Sonship was in Christ, both that which is Eternal, and that which is in time,
as has appeared. Therefore also the perfection of obedience. But there can be
no degree of obedience beyond this, that a son should die at the will of his
father. Therefore it was necessary, that our Lord should die. For God so loved
the world, that He gave his only begotten Son to die: that the world by him
might be saved. But because it was impossible that He in his Eternal being
should be subject to death, therefore was it necessary that He should be
incarnate, that H^e should be conceived of the Holy Ghost, and be borne of a
Virgin, as it has been prooved.

3. If Isaac the shadow, were content to die at the will of His Father, how
much more ought Christ the substance, to fulfill the will of His Father?

4. The manifestation of the infinite dignities of God the Father, is the
proper and peculiar office of the Son, See John 17.6. and 26. And how could
either the infinite Justice, or Mercy, or Love of God the Father toward His
creature; or His honor in the creature be better manifested, than in the
death of that Son? For although it were far from Injustice to punish the
innocent for the wicked, when He had set Himself to answer for the sins of
the world; yet was it the uttermost, the most severe and eminent Justice that
possibly could be, to lay upon Him, in whom there was no sin, neither was
there any guile found in His mouth, the burden of us all; to break him for our
sins, to multiply His sorrows; and at once to deprive Him of all the
comforts of God, and life it self for our offenses. Neither could the Mercy or
love of God toward His creature be greater than this, that when we were
enemies, yet spared He not His own Son, to work our reconciliation. Neither
can the honor of God be more magnified by the creature, than for that mercy
and love, which he has showed toward the creature, in the Eternal Glory, and
happiness which He has reserved for it, through the satisfaction of his Son.
And because these things could not possibly be brought to pass otherwise than
by the death of the Son of God, therefore was it necessary that He should die.

5. Of contrary effects, the immediate causes must needs be contrary: The
greatest delight and joy which the natural man has, is to follow his sinful
lusts. Therefore the recovery, or restoring of man from his sinful state,
cannot be but by the suffering of the greatest sorrow, that is, of death.

6. The obedience and sufferings of Him who was to make satisfaction for the
disobedience and rebellion of all mankind, could not possibly be either
exceeded or equalled. But if our Lord had not died a most bitter and cruel
death, in those torments which He endured, both in his soul and body, then had
His sufferings been equalled, if not exceeded, by many of the holy Martyrs:
who for their love and faith in God, endured most bitter and exquisite
torments, Heb. 11.35. etc. and that with joy unspeakable, and glorious.
Therefore it was necessary, that our Savior should die a most cruel death,
and bitter, both in the sufferings of His soul, and body.

7. The greatest exaltation or glory that could come unto the creature, was in
this, that it should become one Person with the Creator, which we have proved
before to have been done in the incarnation. For the greatest glory and grace
done to the creature, the greatest love, and humility is due to the Creator.
But our Lord, who was so exalted, had not been humbled to the lowest degree of
humility, if He had not died a most shameful death. Therefore it was
expedient that He should so die.

8. Full and perfect obedience, is due from mankind, unto the Creator, and
especially from that Man of men, their Prince and Captain, who ought to be an
example unto them, of all those virtues whereby they ought to glorify His
Father. Therefore that faithful men might willingly die for the love and
service of God, it was necessary that our Lord should give the example, See 1.
Peter 2.21.

4. and Buried.
1. IT is said that death is the uttermost or last of evils. And that we
might by all arguments be assured of His death, by whose suffering of death,
we are ransomed from the power of death; it was necessary that after His
death, our Lord should be buried: Seeing that by His burial we are assured,
not only that He was truly dead; but also, that during the time of His
burial, He was held under the power of death.

2. The greatest triumph cannot be ascribed but to the greatest victory
manifest and known. The greatest victory is over the greatest enemy, Death,
and him that had the power of death, the Devil. And that Christ might be
acknowledged to have risen again, and so to have triumphed over death, it was
necessary that after His death, He should be buried: Seeing many persons in
Apoplexies, Plagues, Singer in his drunkenness; so after hanging, drowning,
falls, and other both inward sicknesses and outward violences have been
supposed to have been dead, which yet have returned to life again. But after
burial for so long time, no man ever returned to life, but by a power that was
divine. Therefore that our Lord might truly be acknowledged to have risen from
the dead, and so to have triumphed over Death, it was necessary first that He
should be buried.

3. That blessed Spirit which knew from the beginning what should come to pass
at the last, who foresaw the malice of the Priests and Scribes, and knew their
hardness of heart to believe all that was spoken by the Prophets, that the
resurrection of Christ might be most manifest, beforehand decreed and spoke,
Esaias 53.9. That He should make His grave with the rich in His death. Therefore
was He not only buried in fine linen, and perfumes of Joseph our Apostle, and
Nicodemus; but also by the plot of the Highpriests was He made sure in His
grave; the great stone which shut it up being firmly fastened in the Rock,
See Lamentations 3. verse 9.53. into which the Grave was hewed, with (c) cramps
of Iron sodered into Both, and surely guarded with a strong watch, that both
His Death, His Burial, and His Resurrection, might be witnessed even by His
very enemies Matthew. 28.11.

Notes.
(a) 1. He was pleased to be borne man.] The errors of Simon Valentin, and
Apelles, which you had before Note (a) on the 26. Chapter, though directly they
oppose the truth of the former article, yet have I referred the refutation of
them to this place, because they also take away the merit of Christ's passion
from us, wherein alone our hope consists. But seeing that Simon in his Heresy
sided with the Jews, against whom I have disputed in the 24. Chapter: and
besides them, had not many followers, though after him it were recalled from
hell by one Proclus an obscure fellow, Aug. haeres. cap. 60. Seeing no reasons
are, or can be brought, either by Simon or by the Jews, to prove the
assertion, the only authority of S. John is able utterly to strangle this
whelpe: See then Chap. 1.4. The Word was made flesh: And 1. Ep. Chap. 1. That
which was from the beginning, which we have heard and seen, and looked on, and
our hands have handled, etc. And again, Chap. 4. Every spirit that confesses
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God.

2. The doctrine of Valentin is refuted at large by Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 11.
and 32. And that by the manifest authority of S. Paul, Gal. 4.4. where it is
said, That Christ was made of a woman. So also by Tertullian, in his Book De
carne Christi. The Evangelists Matthew and Luke describe His humane generation:
Besides His manly Passions approove Him to have had the true body of a man, as
to be Hungry, Thirsty, Weary, to Sweat, to Weep, etc. Moreover, if He had not
suffered in the true and very Body of man, His suffering for us had been of
none effect, for the ransom of our bodies. Their Arguments you may see more at
large in the Books cited. But Epiphanius, Haer. 1. lays not this Heresy to
the charge of Valentin, a^ the Authors forenamed* And S. Aug. haer. cap. 12.
but rather puts it to Marcion, Haer. 42. who taught that the Incarnation o^
Christ was not in deed, but only in show; whom he refutes only by those
Scriptures which Marcion allowed of; as the Gospel of S. Luke, which Marcion
received (except that which concerns the Genealogy of Christ) and certain
Epistles of Saint Paul: For all the Old Testament and the rest of the New he
rejected. But in these Scriptures Christ calls Himself the Son of man. He
was thronged by the multitude, He lift up His eyes, He prayed on His knees, His
feet were anointed, He slept on the sea. He is made of the seed of David
a^cording to the flesh, Romans 1.3. So that if David had a true manly body, then
also the body of Christ was a true manly body. He gave up the ghost: His
lifelesse body was taken from the Cross, wrapped in Linen, and Buried. After
His Resurrection also He said, Handle me, and see me; for a Spirit has not
flesh and bones, as ye see me have, Luke 24.39. And these Texts out of those
Scriptures only are sufficient to reproove the falsehood of these Heretics. And
for full satisfaction herein, you may take the interpretation of Tho. Aqu.
cont. gent. l. 4. c. 30. to those Texts of Scripture when^e Valentin might
seem to have taken o^casion of his Heresy. First it is said John 3.13. No man
has ascended up to heaven, but He that came down from heaven, the Son of
man which is in heaven. A swer. This coming down from heaven cannot be meant
of His body, or of His soul, because of that which follows, The Son of man
which is in heaven, for it is proper only to the Godhe d to fill both heaven
and earth. Ier. 23.24. Therefore as God is said to have come down from heaven,
not properly, but in respect of His dwelling in the Manhood; So is the Son of
man also said to be in heaven, not properly, but in respect of the unity of His
humanity with the Godhead. According to this sense He said also, John 6.38. I
came down from heaven to do the will of Him that sent me, as you read before,
Note (g). 10. ob. 9. on Chap. 24. Another Text which may seem to make for
Valentin is 1. Cor. 15.47. The first man is of the earth, earthly: the second
man is the Lord from heaven: Yet this prooves not that the body of Christ was
not taken from His mother, but rather that as we are sta^ned with or ginall
sin by Adam; so are we washed and cleansed by the blood of Christ, for so it
follows, Verse 49. As we have borne the image of the earthly, we shall also
bear the image of the heavenly. And although it be said, The second man is the
Lord from heaven, yet prooves it not that He brought His body from heaven: but
rather because we understand nothing of heavenly things, but by bodily
likenesses: therefore is He called, the man from heaven, to signify that new
manner of being which God had with us in our nature, and to assure us that He
our Redeemer is our eternal God, able to save us; and man with us, that does
pity our miseries.

3. The Heresies of Apelles are refuted by Epi^hanius, Haer. 44. briefly, and
plainly: but this which concerns the body of our Lord mo^e fully by
Tertullian, in his Book De carne Christi. You shall have what I held fit to
gather from both, or to add thereto. The arguments of Apelles are in part all
one with those of Valentin already answered; The rest are these that follow.

1. If the Angels appeared in flesh not taken from mankind, much more might
Christ. But the first is true; therefore the later. Answer. The consequence in
the Proposition is not good: For the Angels came not to die, therefore not to
be borne, as our Lord Himself appeared to Abraham not borne of a woman,
because the time appointed that He should die was not yet. But when the
fullness of the time was come, that He by His death should take away the sins
of the world, then God sent His Son made of a woman. Besides this, they are
beside the question. For to prove their Position, that Christ took His body
of the Stars and Elements, they ought to prove that the Angels also took
such bodies. But that they cannot prove. For if the Angels made themselves
that which by nature they were not, why might they not do it by that which was
not?

2. It is said, Matthew. 12.48. Who is my mother? and who are my brethren? If
then Christ had no mother or brethren but in that spiritual kindred of them
which kept the word of God, He had no body taken of the Virgin. Answer. No man
would have told Him that His mother stood without, which did not know that she
was His mother. Therefore the circumstances and time of His speech must be
observed. He was now in the business of God His Father, for whom all earthly
parents must be denied, as He also answered, Luke 2.49.

3. But the flesh of sinful man was an unfit and unworthy dwelling for Him
that came to destroy the works of the devil. Answer. As sin, the work of
the devil, was brought into mankind by the body, and the bodily senses, as it
appears, Genesis 3.6. The woman seei^g that the fruit was good for food, and
pleasant to sight, took and did eat it: So was it necessary that sin e should
be destroyed in the body o^ that flesh wherein sin was concei^ed and wrought.
Moreo er the difference not of the matter which must be one, but of the Spirit
of sanctification wh ch was in Christ, made His body a fit sacrifice for sin
But concerning this unworthiness alleged, answer was made before, Note (a)
ob. 1. and 3. on Chap. 5.

4. But if He had flesh like ours, He should have been begotten like us.
Answer. The consequence is not good, as was showed before, Note (a). 2. on
Chap. 26.

5. If the flesh of Christ were the same with ours, the common accidents of
both should be alike, so that our flesh should forthwith rise again like His;
or His like ours be resolved to dust. Answer. When our Lord had fully
satisfied the Justice of God for the sin of mankind, it had been against
Justice that He which had done no sin should have still continued under the
power of death; and therefore imposible, Act. 2.24. But our bodies do
therefore still rest in hope because all H s enemies are not subjected unto
Him, among which the last is death, 1. Cor. 15.26.

Therefore for conc^usion of this point, over and above those reasons which you
had in the twentieth Chapter, and the authorities in the end of the three and
twentieth Chapter, and these which are here already cited, take that of Ephesians.
5.30. We are members of His body, of His flesh, and of His bones. So that if we
know or believe that we our selves have a body o^ flesh and bones, we must also
know that our Lord had a true natura l and humane body, as one of us. Which
authority is yet of so much the greater regard, because it was prophesied in
Parad ce, Genesis 2.24. That our Redeemer should be incarnate; that in the body of
His flesh, through death, He might ^re^ent us holy a d unblameable, Col. 1.22.
For seeing the chi dre are partakers of flesh and blood, He also Himself
likewise took p^rt of the same, that through gh death He might destroy him that
had the power of death, that is, the devil, Heb. 2.14. Read the Chapter, from
verse 5. unto the end, and see how many arguments you find to this purpose
only.

The fancies therefore of these Heretics, being lighter than vanity, it will
follow, that all those opinions which might seem to be raised therefrom,
Celsus, That the body of Christ was not subject to pain, and grief: Against
which, Saint Origin disputes, lib. 2. Cont. Cells. For as for that Stoicall
vnsufferance of His mind, which Clemens Alex. Strom. lib. 7. thought not to be
subject either to joy or sorrow; it was only an oversight in so learned a
Writer, and directly contrary to the Text of the Scripture, John 11.35. Matthew.
26.38. where Jesus wept, and was exceeding sorrowful, See Luke. 10.21.
Secondly, that of Saturnilus, That Christ did suffer only in show, Epiph.
Haer. 23. Thirdly, that of the neat-heard Basilides, who taught that Simon of
Cyrene was crucified in Christ's stead, Epiph. Haer. 24. Of all which, if any
thing were true; what thanks were due to Him from us, when He had suffered
nothing for our sakes? 2. How are we freed from that damnation, under which we
were brought through the sin of Adam, while the Divine Justice is yet
unsatisfied? 3. And if Christ have not suffered for us, what example has He
left unto us, that we should follow his steps? 4. We that are the Disciples,
should be above our Master, our patience more then His, our love to Him, more
then His to us, If we for His sake should willingly suffer, persecution,
shame, loss, imprisonment, death, which He Himself had not suffered for us.
And 5. It had been utterly to no end, that He should have become man. For as it
had been in vain for Him to have taken a body which should again have been
scattered into that from whence it was taken (as Apelles affirmed) so had it
been to no end to take a body, and therein to suffer the darkning of His
divine glory, if by that body, no benefit had redounded to the creature. But if
you desire more reasons hereto, they that are brought in the Chapter for His
suffering, crucifying, death, and buryall, may give you full satisfaction.

So the errors that are yet remaining about the suffering of Christ, are two;
Theopaschites, who held that the Godhead of Christ did suffer, while Aug. de.
Haer. Cap. 73. The other of the Patrispassians, such as Praxeas and Sabellius,
who because they thought, that as the Father and the Son were but one substance
so were they likewise but one Person; and therefore they affirmed that God the
Father was incarnate, and suffered, Aug. de Haer. Cap. 41. But the former of
these is sufficiently reproved by the doctrine of the 9. Cha. For if God be not
any kind of matier, nor a compound, nor a formed body, nor subject to any
accident, but that His being be most simple and pure, as was there showed, by
every one of these circumstances, it will follow necessarily, that God cannot
suffer. The later is refuted by all the reasons of the 11. and 23. Chapters:
And if you hold not your self satisfied by that which is brought in those
Chapters, and the answers to the reasons of Sabellius, Note (d) on Chap. 11.
You may do well to read Epiph. Haer. 57. and Tertullian against Praxeas: For
this very question, whether God the Father was incarnate and suffered, is the
Argument of that Book.

(b) That by His partaking of our sufferings, He might, etc.] It may here not
unfitly be demanded, for what causes Christ the Holy one of God should die for
us, and how that death becomes availeable to free us from the power of sin,
of death, and hell? For answer, We must first put that which was the first
and principal cause of our salvation, the eternal purpose of God, which He
^urposed in Jesus Christ our Lord. Ephe. 3.11. See Acts 2.23. And this, not
for any graces or works foreseen in us, But according to the good pleasure
of His own will, Ephe. 1.5. For He has saved us, and called us with an Holy
calling, not according to our works, but according to His own purpose and
grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began. 2. Tim. 1.9.
And he that puts any outward cause, or good works foreseen in us, whereby
God might be moved to choose us, takes away the chief glory of his grace, and
makes him to be less good. So then, the first cause of all the causes and
means of our salvation in Christ, is the free mercy and purpose of God the
Father, which because it is the first, it must needs also be the chief cause,
seeing all other causes work to that end to which they are ordered and guided
by the first. And because the Son does nothing of Himself, but what things
soever He sees the Father do, those also does the Son likewise: John 5.19.
Therefore secondly did the Son according to that eternal purpose of the
Father, offer Himself unto His Father for man, as a ransom and satisfaction
for their sin, as it is said, Psalm. 40.7. Lo I come (in the volume of the
Book it is written of me) to do thy will O God. Heb. 10.7. For in Him only
is God well pleased, Matthew. 12.18. And this is that Eternal Gospel of the
Lamb, slain from the foundation of the World, Apoc. 13.8. For through the
Eternal Spirit did H^ offer Himself without spot unto God. But if this offer
of our Redeemer, who offered Himself for us, had not been accepted of His
Father, then had it been of no avail for us. Therefore in the third place, it
must appear that God did accept this Sacrifice of His Son, which is manifest
first by this: That it was the disposition and purpose of God Himself, as was
showed in the first place, and as it is said, Heb. 10.10. By the will of God
are we sa ctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ, once for
all. Neither was God in this reconciliation of mankind, a willer or disposer
only, but a worker also of our Redemption. For God was in Christ, reconciling
the World unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. 2. Cor. 5.19.
If God then be for us, who can be against us? If He Justify, who can condemn
us? who ^ave the decree and will of God for our Justification, the offer and
acceptance of Christ, both God and man, for our ransom and reconciliation, and
that offer was made by the eternal Spirit, And this Spirit also bears
witness to our Spirit, that we are the sons of God, Romans 8.16. The second
cause concerns the justice of God, by which our Lord Christ died for us. And
it stood in this, that He according to the will of His Father, became our
surety, Hebr. 7.22. and bound Himself to make satisfaction for the sin of man,
which man himself could not do, as it has been manifest before, Chap. 19.
Now in this satisfaction of Christ, the infinite Justice was accorded with the
infinite Love of God to the creature. The infinite love appeared, as was said
before, first in this, that the Son was called and appointed to the
performance of this glorious work. Hebr. 5. verse 4, 5.10. Then in this, that
being performed, it was accepted in our name, and for our everlasting
happiness, as it is said, John 3.16. God so loved the world, that He gave His
only begotten Son; that whosoever believes Him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life. The infinite Justice was manifest in this, that the
satisfaction of Christ was a full and perfect satisfaction, according to the
rigor of Justice, and that both in respect of the infinite value thereof, and
of the punishment which our Mediator endured. The infinite value of the
satisfaction, was first in the Person that offered it. For as the grieuousnesse
of the injury exceeded by the worthiness of the Person of the Father, that
was offended: So the value of the satisfaction exceeded by the worthiness of
the Son, that made the amends. And because the honor which was done to God
herein, is valued according to the worthiness of the Person, which worthiness
in Christ is essential unto him, not accidental, as that of Aaron, therefore
the satisfaction also is essentially infinite, and therefore abundantly
sufficient in respect of the Person that did fulfill it. For the satisfaction
to an infinite Justice, was as fully made by the Person of the Son an
infinite being, than if the creature being finite, even all Angels and men had
suffered the torments of hell eternally. Secondly, the infinite value of the
satisfaction appears in the worthiness of the thing that was offered. For our
Mediator having no greater nor better sacrifice to offer unto God (as nothing
could be better then that which was equal to God) offered Himself God and
man, for the saving of His people, as it is said, Ier. 3.23. Truly in the Lord
our God is the salvation of Israel. Thirdly, the value was increased by the
manner of the offering, wherein was the perfection of the obedience of the
eternal Son to His Father, and the perfect submission of the humane will of
Christ, unto the will of God, that this sacrifice might by all means be
meritorious in Him for us, See Note (g) on Chap. 24.. 11. No. 4.

The second means whereby the satisfaction of Christ according to the rigor
of Justice was perfect, is the greatness of that punishment which He endured
for us, which in proportion was answerable to that death which in Justice was
due to the sin of man, having the same degrees and parts: which punishment
Christ (so far forth as it was possible for the Son of God) did endure.
First, the bodily death, with all the circumstances, as I remembered before:
Then the loss of that Joy and Comfort of His soul, wherewith the fruition of
God, and the fullness of His graces did ever replenish Him. And this Joy He
lost, not finally or fundamentally, as the damned (for that was impossible,
both in respect of His innocence, and of His union with God) but only
according to the present act and feeling. Thirdly, he was subjected to the
powers of hell, not enthralled thereto as a vassal, but yet subject for the
present vexation and temptation: so that His soul and understanding was
affrighted in sorrow and horror, knowing Himself to be made a curse for us,
which brought with it a full sense of the Justice and wrath of God against
sin. Fourthly, and although it be most true that God cannot suffer either
pain or loss, as was showed even now; yet it is as true, that God having
taken to Himself the living Tabernacle of a soul and body, offered this soul
and body of His to death for us, as it is said, Act. 20.28. That God purchased
His Church with His own blood, and not so only, but for a time left that body
under the absolute power of Death and Burial.

And thus the Justice why Christ should die for our sins, and the plenary
satisfaction which He has made unto God thereby does plainly appear. Now a
reason or two, why, and how the benefit hereof does belong unto us.

1. First, seeing the person of our Redeemer is infinite, and therefore His
merit also infinite, ^n infinite reward is due thereunto, which if God would
not give (O pardon that we s^eake in the voice of reason Thy gift in us) then
He were unjust; if He could not, then were He unable to requite. But both
these things are impossible. And seeing he that makes a recompense for any
desert, either gives to the deserver that which he has not, or forgives that
which he might require; and yet our Lord, to whom the reward of His obedience
and death is due, neither needs any thing, nor can receive any thing more then
He has, having in Himself the fullness of all perfection, and all things
which the Father has, John 17.10. Neither yet needs forgiveness, having never
offended: neither yet can so great obedience, and such an infinite merit be
all in vain, therefore does this infinite reward redound to us: so that we
which claim by His Title, may draw near unto the Throne of Grace in the full
assurance of faith, that God does not, nor will not refuse them that come unto
Him in the name of His Son, seeing unto all them that seek salvation and
eternal life by Him, all His infinite merit does assuredly belong. For that
which is infinite can no way become divisible, for so should it cease to be
infinite. So His infinite merit belongs to every one of His, according to the
infinity thereof. See the door of our hope set open wider then the walls of
heaven: See how God with Christ has given us all things: See also if the
infinite merit of Christ, can any way be compatible of any man's merit, or the
mediation of Saints.

2. Seeing our Lord Jesus being God, could not become man but by the power of
God, Chap. 25. and 26. who of the whole nature and substance of the Virgin,
made Him perfect man, both soul and body: And that He being thus also the
Son of God and man, did perfectly fulfill the law of a Son^e, to do always
those things which were pleasing to His Father, John 8.29. whereas all other
men had revolted from their obedience, and so forfeited their state of Sonship
and interest in their Fathers inheritance, by the sin of the first Father
Adam, which was created the son of God, Luke 3.38. therefore the who^e right
in that inheritance of glory and happiness, which should have come unto all
mankind is due to Christ only: So that by the right of inheritan e, no man
beside H mselfe can be capeable of heavenly Joys. But because the possession
of eternal hap^inesse is due to Him by a double right, not only that of
Sonne-ship, or inheritance, but also by pur^hase, through the infinite merit of
His most precious death; whereto, according to the will of His Father, He
became obedient for the sin of mankind; therefore by this right, has He
given an infinite right in the heavenly Inheritan^e, to all them that come unto
Him by a l^vely faith, their hearts being ^lensed from dead works, to serve
the living God. In which right, If He had not fully st^ted mankind, then had
the benefit o^ His p^rcha^e been utterly lost. So His Incarnat^on, His
sufferings, and al. His promi^es made to us, had been in vain. But all these
things are impossible.

3. Moreover, it is to be considered* that the sin of man in respect of the
si^ner, must ^eeds be sin* because a finite creature can no way do an
infinite actio^, but the in^^nitie of the sin is only in res^ect of Him
against whom the sin is, beca se of His infini^e Iu^tice that is offended
thereby. But the satisfaction and the me^it of Christ death was infinite, not
only in respect of the in^initie of H s Person who per^o^med it, but of Him
also that did so accept it, of Him that was not bound thereto in respect of any
need or debt of His ow^e, but He pe^^o^me a^^ that obe^ience which was due for
our sakes, and in our name: wherea^ the me^^t o^ all other men being finite,
could no way be satisfactorie for their sin against an infinite Justice;
neither yet can they be so accepted of God, because man's worke^, how good
soever they are, yet can they neither be more* nor better th n man is bound
unto, Luke 17.10. Neither are good works truly ours, but such as God has
done by us. 1. Cor. 15.10. But seeing all our righ^eousnesse is as filthy
rags, Esaias 46.6. let us look unto Christ Jesus, who alone of God, is made
unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redempt^on. 1. Cor. 1.30.

4. And as the ransom of our sin must of necessity be of an infinite value,
that it might be a fu l satis action to an infinite Justice, and therefore fit
that our Redeemer should be both God and man: So was it necessary that He
should become ours, that we might have that which we might give unto God for a
full satis^action; And that our obligation to God might be infinite, not only
for our creation, or being from nothing; but much more for our well-being, and
restoring from worse than nothing: Therefore that we might have an infinite
ransom to gi e unto him, did He first give unto us His only Son, John 3.16.
And yet that our claim and right might be in Him, not one y by the voluntary
gift of His Father, which in Him that had power to give, made our right and
possession su^e enough; but also by our own purchase, that we might have all
manner of right in Him, and assurance of Him, therefore at His own* rice of
five Shekels of silver Sixeteene shillings Eight pence, Hen. Ainsw. on Gene.
20.16. other 25. Shillings, Ed Brerew:) in our money, did we also redeem, or
buy him of God. See Exodus 13.13. Numb. 18.15.16. O most rich and precious
^urchase! At so easy a rate, to buy that which was more worth than all the
wo^^^! And that the benefit of this bargain might not redound to the Jews
^one, t e efore came the wise Gentiles from the East to relieve the penury of
the poor Carpenter, not only for the payment of this purchase, but also for
saving o^ that which was bought, by H^s flight into Egypt, Matthew. 2. Chapter.
And thus are we become a Royal Priesthood, while we offer unto God that
infinite sacrifice, beseeching His mercy for the merit of His Son.

Thus then, the infinite Justice being fully satisfied in our nature by that
which Christ has suffered for us, our sins are not only freely forgiven us
in the beloved; but we are also brought into the perfect favor and Love of
God, and the assurance of those benefits which depend thereon. Which love, how
great it is, Our Lord has sufficiently declared, John 17.23. where He says,
that the Father has loved us, as He has loved Him.

(c) With cramps of Iron sodered.] How Joseph buried the body of JESUS, rolling
a great stone, Matthew. 27.60. a very great stone, Mark. 16.4. to the door of
the sepulcher, the Gospels show. And although the stone were so great, that
women, more then four Luke 24.10. durst not undertake to roll it away; yet the
chief Priests and Pharisees held not that surety enough, and therefore, by the
leave of Pilate, made the grave fast, and sealed it, and set their watch to
keep it. The words (...) to seal and (...) to make fast or sure, as the word
is used. Act. 16.24. He made their feet fast in the stocks, cannot import such
sealing as is on a bag of money, or with a piece of paper which makes nothing
fast, but is only a sign of honest dealing. For if the Disciples had purposed
to steal the body of their master, no such sealing could, or should have
hindered them. And therefore that making fast and sealing here spoken of, was
such as I have said, and that for the ends expressed.

CHAP. XXVIII. He descended into Hell.
Sheol, and (...) Hades, Sheol of (...) Shaal which signifies to crave or ask,
because Hell is never full. Proverb. 30. Hades has the derivation of a and
(...), not to see, because of the darkness which is supposed to be there, or
not to be seen, because the state of death is not known, to the living, or
else (as others will have it) of the Hebrew (...) Adamah, earth, by the
authority of Sibyl lib. 1. paulo post initium.

(...)
(...).
(...)
(...), (...)
(...) (...)
(...).
Aden they call, because the first Adam
When he was dead and buried, thither came.
Therefore all men that on this earth are borne,
Into the house of Ades, are said to turn.
This interpretation may seem to have ground on that of Gene. 3.19. Dust thou
art and unto dust thou shall return. And therefore 1. The word signifies
sometimes as (...) Kever, the grave wherein they Kuver the corpse of the dead,
as in 1. Kings 2.6. Let not His hoary head go down to the grave, Hebrew
Sheol, Greek, Hades, in peace. 2. Sometime they signify the power of death,
the place or state of the dead, either wretched or happy, appointed for all
men, as it is said, Psalm. 89.48. What man is he that shall deliver his soul
from the hand of Sheol, Hebr: (...) Greek: To this place Jacob, Genes. 37.35.
to this Sheol, Job. [14.13.] desired to come, as to the rest from all their
labors, as to that place whereto all must return, as the verses cited
affirm. 3. They signify the place of torment, as Psalm. 9.17. The wicked
shall be turned to Sheol, Hebr: Greek, to Hades. In this sense also the
words, Tophet, Esaias 30.33. Gehenna, Mark. 9.43. and Tartarus, 2 Pet. 2.4. are
used. Hades also in Matthew. 16.18. by a Metonymia, signifies the devils, as,
The gates of hell shall not prevail against it; that is, All the devils which
go in and out at the gates of hell, shall not prevail against that Rock
Christ, whom thou have confessed. But in Luke 16.23. it is taken properly for
the place, as (...) and being in hell, lifting up his eyes, etc. as
contrariwise, with other Authors, it sometime signifies the place of
blessedness, as Plato uses it, in Phaed. concerning Socrates, (...) If ever
any man came to happiness, but in this sense, it belongs to Numb. 2.

4. They signify such sorrows or pains as may be supposed are suffered in
hell, as in 1 Samuel 2.6. The Lord casts down to hell, and brings up
again, and in Psalm. 18.5. The sorrows of hell compassed me: So Psalm. 86.13.
Thou have delivered my soul out of the lowest hell. In all which places,
Sheol, by the Septuagint, translated Hades (except by way of prophecy
concerning Christ) cannot signify the place of the damned, from whence there
is no returning; but only extreme dangers, grief, or hellish sorrows of
mind: or such sicknesses as brought the body in danger of the grave. To these
words especially in the three last significations, 2. Of the state of the Dead.
3 Of the Place, and 4. Pains of the damned; the words, Inferi and Infernus, in
Latin do answer. But hell with us is proper to the place of torment, and does
not signify any thing else, but by a trope, and is not of Heal (as I think)
which sometime signifies to cover, much less of Hell, the Dutch word, as much
as bright or shining; but of (...) Hell, a deep ditch, or trench, as the word
is used 2 Samuel 20.15. They cast up a bank against the City, and it stood (...)
Bahel in the trench. And he that thinks not that the Saxon, our true
language, has many things common with the Hebrew, knows neither the one nor
the other as he might.

Athanasius, Origin, Tertullian, Irenaeus and others, have so received and
declared it. And therefore that fancy of Erasmus, who suspected that Thomas
Aquinas might foy'st it in, was far below both the one and the other, seeing
it is confessed by Ruffinus, who lived within the first 400. years after Christ,
to have been in the Creed used in the Church of Aquileia, and so by him
interpreted with the rest. But although the Council at Nice in Bithinia, left
it out of their Creed, because their special business was against Arius
concerning the Deity of our Savior; and although the Arians in their Council
at Nice in Thracia, put it in their Creed; nay although Aquinas had first put
it in, were it therefore fit to leave it out, or not to count it an Article of
Faith, as some would do? I think not, seeing the holy Scripture gives
authority to it. Psalm. 16.10. referred to Christ by the exposition of Saint
Peter, Acts 2.27. seeing all the Christian Churches have received it, and
seeing that according to the true and necessary meaning thereof, there is no
Article of the Creed, which does more clearly and directly overthrow the
heresies of Arius, and the Dimaeritae, concerning the humane soul of Christ,
of which you read, Chapter 26. Note (a) 2.

1. Now concerning the different interpretations; Some according to the first
meaning of Sheol and Hades, for the Grave, think that Christ was truly
buried, and kept in the Grave three days, and that this Article had no other
meaning, but a further declaration of Dead and Buried, against the opinion of
Marcion, Valentin, and such other heretics as denied the truth of Christ's
being, and His suffering, as you heard before, Note (a) on Chap. 27.

2. Others would, that beyond the death and burial, it should impart a
disposing of His body to corruption. But if their meaning therein be this, That
the body of our Lord was laid in the grave where corruption does seize on the
bodies of other men, then this blind descent can look no further then His
burial; or if it must needs mean any thing more, then would they force us, by
this Article, to believe and confess that which by the Scripture we know to be
false. For it was impossible that the holy One of God should either see
corruption, or be brought to any degree or disposition thereunto, beyond the
death and burial of His body. See Acts 2.24, 27.

3. Some other, by this descent of Christ, will understand the uttermost degree
of His humiliation, that could come unto Him while His Soul was parted from
the Body, His honor laid in the dust, the devil and his instruments
triumphing over Him. But the Creed was not framed to teach us the triumph and
joy of His enemies, but His victory and their confusion. And concerning our
Lord Himself, this goes no further then either of the former interpretations,
except in that sense which you shall hear anon. Therefore none of these can be
the meaning of this Article. For in the abridgement or sum of our Faith,
interpretations are not fit, especially such as are more dark than that to
which they should give light. Therefore this Article He descended into hell,
cannot in any of the former meanings, be a declaration of that He was dead and
buried.

4. A fourth interpretation is, of them who think the descent of Christ means
thus much only. That His soul being departed out of His body, went unto the
souls of the faithful which were in Paradise, which they interpret heaven.
But seeing heaven being taken not metaphorically, for Joy and happiness, but
properly for a place; must in all sense signify that which is upward from the
earth: It must needs be a very awkward interpretation of He descended into
hell, to say, He ascended or went upward into heaven: yet because this
interpretation brings both reason and authority, it shall be examined by and
by.

5. A fifth interpretation is, of them who will have this descent to signify
nothing else but the endurance of those unspeakable sorrows, and torments
which He suffered in soul, being in His agony, and on the cross.

6. A sixth sense is, of them who hold that He did locally go down to hell;
so that according to the essence or being of His soul, He was truly present
there. And as the former of these deny not, but that Christ by His death did
utterly spoil the powers of darkness, and so may be said virtually, and by
the effects of His suffering, to have gone down into hell, because that by the
eternal offering of Himself a ransom for the sins of the world, and the
performance thereof in the time appointed, He did utterly free all His
believers from Hell, which was their due, and settled them in the inheritance of
eternal life: so these latter (for the most part) deny not but that all this
which is said, is agreeable to the truth of the Scripture, and the analogy of
Faith: only they cannot yield that it is the true and native meaning of this
Article. And between these two parties, all those texts of Scripture which are
brought for the local descent of Christ, are hammered so thin, that may
seem pliable every way: But let the strength of the Holy Text for ever stand
sure, and let us see the reasons a little on all sides, with their answers and
exceptions. And first of them that interpret this Article by the sufferings of
Christ's soul.

Object. 1. As the sufferings of Christ, even from the first minute of His
Incarnation, were meritorious for us; yet our ransom from the torments of
hell, was wrought especially by the suffering of His humane soul, which
torments of His soul He endured, not only by the torture or fellow-feeling
of His natural body, not by compassion only on the sins and sorrows of His
body mystical, but also He might be said even to feel the sorrows of
eternal death, when He saw Himself to be now set to suffer the wrath of God
due to the sins of the whole world. And if this be not the proper and native
sense of this Article, how are we taught by our Creed, to believe more
concerning Christ, than we confess to be true of the thieves; of whom we may
say, they suffered under Pontius Pilate, that they were crucified, dead, and
buried: Al. Hume. Rejoynd. to Doctor Hill. I answer, First the holy Scripture
is profitable for doctrine, for instruction, for reproof, etc. But the object
of our faith is only the Holy Trinity in Unity, and the satisfaction of
Christ, for our Redemption, and the benefits which we receive thereby. And
therefore although I believe and know by the Scriptures, that Samson was the
Son of Manoa, yet I neither believe in Samson, nor Manoa: And though I know
by the Scriptures that the penitent thief suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified, and dyed, yet I believe not in him. But concerning Christ, as I
believe that all His merits redound to us; so I believe that all His sufferings
were according to the Scripture, a satisfaction to the justice of God, for the
sins of the world: which they could not be, but by the suffering both of His
soul and body, as it is said, Esaias. 53. He shall see the travail of His
soul, and be satisfied. If then we know that whatsoever befell unto our
Lord, was that the Scripture might be fulfilled, Matthew. 26.54.56. and if we
believe and confess in our Creed, that He suffered according to the
Scriptures, and dyed, and rose again according to the Scriptures: and that the
Scriptures do plainly testify, that by His sufferings and death, the wrath
of God against man's sin, is fully satisfied; which (as I said) could not be,
but by His sufferings in His soul, as well as in His body: After these
sufferings under Pontius Pilate, what needs a second remembrance of His
sufferings in soul, under a title of a descent into hell? Therefore, when as I
am bound to believe and confess, that the sufferings of Christ under Pontius
Pilate were according to the Scriptures, that is, in soul and body, I am bound
to deny, that the suffering of Christ in His soul, is the native meaning of
this Article, He descended into hell.

2. Beside the doctrine of Faith, being a catechism doctrine. Heb. 6.1. and
the sum thereof being for the use of children and novices, it is not likely
that the Church would have so generally received a creed, wherein the thing to
be believed should be laid down inwords, that were tropicall and obscure, when
plain and proper terms were necessary, and at hand. But hell cannot signify
the torments of hell, but by a metonymia of the place for the adjunct of the
place: neither yet could it properly be said, That our Savior went down into
hell, when He was lifted up upon the Cross, where the especial endurance and
expression of His hellish torments were both in soul and body. 2. Neither can
it truly be said, He descended into hell, that is, He suffered in soul the
torments of hell, but by a Synecdoche of the whole man for one part. Neither
were these torments of His soul, more properly or truly, called torments of
hell, then those torments of His body, which we confess, He suffered under
Pontius Pilate.

3. Moreover, after He was dead and buried, it comes in unduly, again to make
mention of His sufferings in soul, a great part of which were endured in the
garden, before He came to the hands, either of Pilate, or of the Priests.

4. And yet beyond all these reasons, there is another argument, that the
Church did not interpret this Article by the sufferings of Christ's Soul,
because as Gerrardus Vossius puts it, De statu animae separatae Qu: 1. It was
the received opinion of the ancient Fathers, even to this our time, That the
souls of the faithful, before Christ entered not into Paradise, till Christ by
His death had set it open, and entered thereinto, according to His promise to
the thief on the Cross. And if all the souls of the faithful were in hell,
(taken in the second sense before mentioned) though in a place of rest (as
Theophilus speaks) and that by the coming of Christ thither, they were
brought to Paradise, or a place of further joy; then certainly this Article
must in their judgment, be interpreted by the descent of Christ into hell
after his death, rather then by the sorrows of His soul before it. And to
this purpose the learned Vossius brings some 20. Fathers from Tacianus the
scholar of Justin Martyr, about the year of Christ 180. before whom He might
have put His master Justin as it is plain in his Triphon. Among those Fathers
are Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, Eusebius, Athanasius, Ambrose, Ierom,
Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Augustine, Cyril, and beside them whom he reckons up, he
ads [innumerable others] and with them the sentence of the Council of Toledo
in the year 633. He descended into Hell, that He might free them which were
there detained. Aug. Ep: 99. writes thus; If the reason be asked, why our
Savior would come into hell, where those sorrows are, of which He could not
be held it was, Because He was free among the dead. Psalm. 88.5. Moreover,
concerning the first Father of mankind, almost the whole Church agrees, that He
freed him there, which may not be thought that the Church believed without
cause, although the express authority of the Canonical Scripture be not
alleged. He says, almost the whole Church, because the heretics, called
Tacians, denied that Adam was saved, De Haeres. Cap. 25. Vossius, beside all
these, brings the consent of the Africane, and of the Eastern Churches, both
of the Greeks and of the Nestorians, with diverse later writers, as Zuinglius,
P. Martyr and others.

Object. 1. But the Fathers agreed not all in one judgment. Answer. True:
Neither yet they of later times. For concerning the end of His going to hell,
some thought, that He delivered all that He found there, both good and bad
indifferently. 2. Others because they thought that the whole punishment for
man's sin could not otherwise be discharged, said that He went to hell, that
He might there suffer, for the souls of men, as on His Cross He had suffered
for their bodies. Nay, as Postel. de not. Med. relates, the Abissine Church
holds, that He went thither for His own soul. This last is heretical; the
other, against the direct authority of the Scripture. For our Lord Himself,
when He gave up the Ghost, professed, That whatsoever was necessary for His
suffering, and our redemption, was then finished. And therefore both Saint
Peter 1 Epist. 2.24. says, That He bare our sins in His body on the tree;
and Saint Paul, Colos. 1.20. That He wrought our peace, through the blood of
His Cross, And Chapter 2. 15. He spoiled the principalities and powers, and
triumphed over them openly in His Cross. Beside, His promise to the thief,
This day to be with Him in paradise, does directly cross this opinion. 3.
Others, upon that text of 1 Pet. 3.19. He went and preached unto the Spirits in
prison, which were disobedient in the days of Noah, think that He went to
hell to upbraid to them their infidelity. But this was not according to the end
of His coming, which was to seek and to save that which was lost, Luke 19.10.
Therefore others, and with them Martinus Cellarius, de operibus Dei, think
that He preached repentance unto them, and that such as believed Him to be God,
were redeemed from hell, and saved by Him. But because our Church has rejected
this opinion; compare the Synod Edw. 6. with the Synod Eliz. therefore I refuse
it. And that text of Peter may be interpreted, of the preaching of Noah, while
the Arc was preparing. 5. Some again, on better ground then the former,
think, that that descent of His into Hell, was for manifestation or investing
of Himself in that Lordship which He, as the Son of man, had over all the
creature, and consequently over the powers of hell, That at His Name every knee
should bow, both of things in Heaven, and of things in earth, and of things
under the earth. Phil. 2.10. Thus, He that lives and was dead, is alive for
evermore; and has the keys of hell and of death. Thus He that descended first
into the lower parts of the earth, did ascend far above all heavens, that He
might fulfill all things. Ephesians. 4.9, 10. That fluttering distinction, That He,
as God, dwelt in the man hood on the earth, the lower part of the world, and
then He as man ascended, will not help. For first, every globe of the Moon,
the Sun, or any star, as it has a center to which every thing thereon
inclines, for otherwise it could not hold together in one body: so is it a
center to the universe that is about it. And so is likewise the lowest, in
comparison of those globes that have different centres. Beside, He which
descended, is even the same that ascended: But God and man are not the same.
Thirdly, He descended and ascended, that He might fill all things, which God
did for ever, neither ascending, nor descending. And therefore Augustine said
well, Totus Filius suit apud Patrem, etc. The Son was whole with the Father,
whole in the Virgins womb, whole in Heaven, who^e in Earth, whole on the
Cross, whole in Hell. 6. But howsoever private opinions might fall in by the
way, yet by that which was said before, it is manifest that the ancient Church
did believe that Christ did therefore descend into hell, that the faithful by
Him might be brought into Paradise; which if it were the meaning of them that
did compose, and of them that did generally receive the Creed, then cannot that
Article of Christ's descent into hell, be interpreted according to their
meaning, which say, That it must signify no other thing, but that He suffered
the pains of hell in His soul. Concerning them that received the Creed, and
interpreted it, you have heard, 3.4. and shall further hear their meaning. The
Authors meaning you shall hear anon.

Object. 2. But the same Fathers are cited on both sides. Answ. Every man that
writes or speaks may be taken short, and h^s words wrong to a sense contrary
to his meaning. But in this question it is not much stood upon, even by
favorers of this new opinion, but that the current of the Fathers bears all
the other away, insomuch that the learned Bucanus. Instit. Theol: Loc. 25.
though he seem to allow this later exposition better; yet he professes that he
dares not condemn the judgment of the Fathers; seeing it is neither contrary
to the Scripture, nor has any inconvenience in it. So others, yielding that
the opinion of the Fathers is (for the most part) for the local descent of
Christ into hell, would yet be excused to follow it: See Synops: Pap: Contr. 9.
qu. 1. edit. 4. page 403. which demand truly may seem to be very just, that
being put which Augustine said a little before, that it is not by the express
authority of the Canonical Scriptures, which ought to be the ground and rule
of our Faith. But that clause of Augustine, concerning the want of the
authority of the Canonical Scripture, is ill referred to Christ's descent into
Hell, which belongs only to the freeing of Adam there. But if their mistaking
were indeed Augustines meaning, That the descent of Christ into hell had no
authority of the Canonical Scripture; yet remembering that it may not be
thought that the Church, yea, the whole Church believed it without cause,
seeing it has no inconvenience in it, seeing it is not contrary to the
Scripture, and that the holy Scriptures, by Anselmes judgment [cited in the
Preface] confirms all that which it does no way contradict, being lawfully
gathered from manifest reason; Let us be bold to look upon the Reasons which
may seem to have drawn the ancient Church unto this opinion.

He descended into Hell, are not spoken either of the Godhead of Christ, of
which it is confessed, that it is everywhere, nor yet of His dead body, of
which it is said in the Article before, that it was buried; but that the
enquiry is here, what became of the soul of our Savior, after it was
departed from His body. Secondly, That seeing the soul neither came to
nothing, nor was an infinite being, to be every where, it must of necessity
be in some definite ubi, some place, where while it was, it was not in another.
Thirdly, Seeing the soul of Christ was a true humane soul as one of ours, and
that it became Him in all things to be like His brethren, except their sin:
His soul also being separate from the body, went unto that place where the
souls of the faithful were before His coming. This I think none will deny;
the Doctors old and new, come all hereto. The Reverend P. Martyr, in Symb.
says thus, Descendit anima Christi ad inferos, etc. The soul of Christ
descended into hell, means no other thing, but that it did undergo the same
estate, which other souls being separate from the body, had experience of. So
Musculus in Ephesians. 4.9. Des endit ad nos in hunc mundum, etc. He descended to us
in this world, unto the grave, and unto hell. He descended to them whom He came
to redeem: and as far as they either living or dying, had descended; so
far also did He Himself descend, that He might lift them up from below, unto
those places above, from which He had descended. Irenaeus said as much long
ago. Lib 5. Cap. ult. The Lord kept the law of the dead, that He might be the
first-begotten from the dead. Hitherto it seems, all parties are agreed: But
the assumptions set them at odds again, as far as heaven and hell. For the
old Interpreters infer that the faithful before Christ, were in Abraham's
bosom, or in hell, taken in the second sense: But the new Interpreters infer
thus. But the faithful which were before Christ, were in Abraham's bosom, that
is, ascended into heaven, properly so called. For so the word Paradise does
signify, by the express authority of the Scripture, 2. Cor. 12. verse 2. and
4. where the third heaven by Saint Paul, is called Paradise. For the first
heaven is this of the Air to the Moon. The second heaven is, that of the
Planets and Stars; and the third heaven is Paradise, the place of the blessed
souls. And this is one of the Arguments of them that reject the Judgment of
the Fathers, and the ancient Church, and hold the tropicall interpretation of
hell, for hellish torments of the mind. And because I am here fallen into these
briars, I will first put fire to them, and afterward go forward to the
conclusion. Therefore I answer. The first heaven is, this of the souls of
heaven, Genesis 1.20. The second is, that of the clouds of heaven. Revel. 1.7. So
the third heaven for Paradise, is in the Moon. But this conclusion you laugh
at. Therefore you see on how weak and ungrounded principles they dispute. 2.
Beside, is there no difference between a thing really performed, and a vision,
as that of Paul, which is not by things actually being, but represented only
for instruction to the Prophet that fees it. 3. But to grant all, that the
third heaven is Paradise, and that the third heaven must signify that which is
above all the stars; is there no Paradise beside, when every place of
pleasure is a Paradise? Therefore though Saint Paul were in the third heaven,
yet the faithful souls might be in another Paradise, before they came
thither, as Adam was.

1. Obje^tion. This is contrary to the first conclusion of Vossius; That the
faithful before Christ were not in Paradise, till Christ opened it by His
coming thither with the thief.

Answer. It crosses not the opinion of the Fathers. For though they put all
the souls of the Saints in hell; whither they also sent the soul of Christ:
yet they put them there, into a place of rest and refreshing, into a higher
place; in death free from torments, and the tyranny of the devil, and that by
the authority of that historical parable in Luke 16. where Lazarus on the one
side of the gulf was in Abraham's bosom comforted; the rich man in flames on
the other side tormented. So that first place or Paradise, was that state of
quiet, where in the faithful souls rested from their labors of this life,
Job 3. from verse 13. to 20. in Joy and hope of Him that was to come. But that
Paradise which the Fathers meant, was a more free state, and the enjoying of a
fuller happiness by the presence of Christ, the work of their redemption
being accomplished they having their Redeemer with them, a sure pledge of their
e^^^rance into heaven, after their resurrection; as He should fo^thwith be
raised, and ascend to heaven; whither till that time they had no hope to come.

2. O^jection. The same Faith has the same fruits, the same effects. But the
Fathers before Christ, had the same Faith; Therefore they went to Heaven, as
they that have been since Christ.

Answer. The same faith has the same fruits, the same effects, concerning the
uttermost end of faith, which is the salvation of the soul, and the
consummation of that bliss which is to be in eternal life: but not concerning
all the degrees and circumstances between. For many Prophets and Kings desired
to see the day of Christ, yet saw it not, but as they saluted the promises
afar off, by their Faith. The bodies also of diverse Saints were raised at the
resurrection of Christ, and appeared to such as had known them alive, for
proof of all that benefit, whereof all the faithful shall be partakers.
Which blessing, neither Daniel, Dan. 12.13. nor Paul, are yet partakers of. And
this answer may serve for diverse texts of Scripture, which are unfitly brought
to this purpose, as that of John 5.24. Heb. 13.14. and such others. And
therefore though it be most certain and true, according to the Scriptures,
that the Gospel of Christ was an eternal Gospel, and that His death was
available to eternal life, to all that believed in Him since the beginning of
the world: So that their souls, after they were delivered from the burden of
the flesh, were in Joy and felicity: yet is it as true, which the truth
says, John 14.2. In my Fathers house are many Mansions. So that although the
souls of the faithful departed before Christ, were in Paradise in Abraham's
bosom, in the Kingdom of God, in Everlasting life, yet were they not in
heaven properly so called, neither could they have the presence of their
Redeemer, when He was not yet incarnate, by whom they might enjoy the vision
of God, as now they do.

Objection. By this answer, you grant then, that they suffered the penalty of
loss, as they call it though not of sense: of loss (I say) because they were
not in heaven, in full happiness, as after their ascension with Christ; which
could not be, but either the merit of Christ's sacrifice was not of force
enough, because it was not yet accomplished: or else because their faith was
not accepted. I Answer. Neither for the one reason, nor for the other, but
because of that disposition and order which God had appointed to His creature,
into the reason of which no man may presume to enquire. Then concerning the
loss which you speak of, it is denied to be a penalty, if it be not found.
Can the pint pot say, I am not full, because I cannot hold a gallon? or shall
the gallon say, I am not full, because I hold not a tun? Does not one star
differ from another star in glory? So is the resurrection, and so are the
degrees in the blessedness of the Saints. And if every man that considers the
disposition of God toward himself in this life, do look thereon with a
thankful eye, he may confess with Saint Augustine, That it has been such,
as if God had neglected His other creatures, to think in mercy on him alone.
Beside, to say nothing of the merit of our Savior, confessed to be infinite,
and all-sufficient for us; I say, That the force of this reason, stands on two
false foundations: One of the proposition: for if the same faith must have the
same effects in every quality and degree, Why are not we that have the same
faith, translated hence as Henoch was? The other, of the supposition; That in
the kingdom of glory (which we on both sides account to begin actually,
immediately after this life) there is not a progress from one degree of
happiness unto another; which as it is contrary to reason, so is it to the
holy Scripture. For is it not meet, that as there has been a going forward in
^ertue and godliness in this life, so there should be of the reward thereof in
the next* Shall not the joy of the soul he increased, when both body and soul
do joy together? which cannot be till the resurre^tion, till when, we must
endure that penalty o^ loss, as you are pleased to call it. Beside, the holy
Text is plain, 2 Cor. 3.18. That we beholding the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same image, from glory to glory. And how far, or how long
shall this be? Even till God be all in all. 1 Corin. 15.28. You may read to
this purpose. Revel. 6.1^.

Objection. Enoch was taken unto God, and Elias was carried up to heaven in a
whirlwind, 2. Reg. 12. Therefore the faithful before Christ, were in heaven.

Answer. Elias was taken up into heaven, that is the Air, and translated into
Paradise, whither Enoch had been translated that he should ^ot see death: but
into the highest heavens they came not yet, (...) it will appear by John 3.13.

Objection. But we are come to the City of God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to an
innumerable company of Angels, to the spirits of Just men, etc. Heb. 12.22,
23, 24. And the Angels are the Inhabitants of heaven, not of any terrestrial,
or infernal Paradise, Ergo.

Answer. Wherever the favorable acceptance of God, and His holy comforts are,
there is heaven: where not, hell. But to the place alleged, I say. 1. We are
come in faith, and hope to heaven, not to the actual possession thereof. 2. It
is one thing to speak of the state of the soul since Christ; For from His
ascension, it is not denied, but that the souls of the faithful go
immediately to heaven, as Cyprian, Ambrose, and some few other of the Fathers
do think, whom you shall find cited by Ioh Vossius, page 104. 105. But the
question is, of them that died before, who, if they were in heaven already,
then the prayer of our Lord, John 17.24. had been in vain; which were wicked
blasphemy for any one to say, or think. 3. It is denied, that heaven is so the
proper place of the Angels, but that they are every where, whither they are
sent. And do they not in every place pitch their tents about them that fear
God, to deliver them? Psalm. 34.7. and 91.11. Are they not all ministering
spirits, sent forth for their sakes that shall be heirs of salvation? Heb.
1.14. And this is, and shall be their employment, till God by their ministry,
have gathered all His children into one. So this text of Hebr. 12. prooves not
either that the Angels are perpetual inhabitants of Heaven; or that the
faithful souls went thither before Christ.

Object. 6. Christ dying, commended His spirit into the hands of God. Therefore
that went into Heaven; and therefore the souls of the faithful were in
Heaven. Answ. This is worse and worse. The faithful were in Heaven, ergo
Christ: Christ, ergo the faithful. o Circl^! But to the text. The hand of God
shall find out them that hate Him. Psalm. 21.8. Are they therefore in Heaven? In
His hands are all the ^orners of the earth. Psalm. 95.4. What is your
conclusion? But if the hand of God in this place must signify that fullness of
joy, which is at His right hand for ever: that does always accompany the
faithful soul, and is not tied, either to time or place: or whether it
signify the protection of God, which might seem to be most needful in the
horrors of death and passage unto that place which, as man, He knew not: it
does not follow thereupon, that the soul of Christ ascended into Heaven, much
less, that the souls of the faithful were in Heaven before.

And that the truth of this position may more plainly appear, that the
souls of the faithful, before Christ, had not ascended into Heaven, and
consequently that the soul of Christ, who was free among the dead. Psalm.
88.5. Who was made in all things like to His brethren, except their sin, did
not ascend from the Cross into Heaven, you may, if you please, examine these
Reasons.

The Lord is righteous, and His Judgments are upright. Psalm. 119. verse 137.
And all His works are done in truth and equity. Psalm. 111.8. But it might
seem a breach of an infinite justice, to give the full accomplishment of
happiness in Heaven, to the souls for whose sins the satisfaction was not
yet made. And therefore, although the Elect which were dead, were justified
from their sins, By the blood of the everlasting Covenant. Romans 6.7. were
freed from the punishment thereof, and set in assured hope and expectation of
those benefits, whereof they should be made further partakers by the death of
Christ, and so rejoiced under the hope of the glory of God that should be
revealed in them; and in the mean time were filled with all the comforts of a
present joy: yet they received not the fullness of the promised joys in
Heaven, God providing better for us, that without us they should not be
perfected. Hebr. 11.39, 40. Neither does this any way abate from the
all sufficiency of Christ's merit, no more then that we as soon as we have
received the full assuredness of faith, are not carried up to heavenly glory;
or that the Saints that are dead in Christ, are not yet raised up to
immortality. For seeing the word is to be fulfilled between us and the
reprobate Angels, that the first shall be last, and the last shall be first;
that no creature may glory in it self, it is necessary that we pass by all
the degrees of perfection, from this low estate of mortality, wherein we are,
till such time as we come to be equal with the Angels, Luke 20.36. For the
law of Grace does not take away the law of Nature: That from one extremity to
another, there is no passage but by all the means.

2. Does reason only dictate this? Does not the Scripture say also the same?
For if Christ be therefore the firstborn from the dead, 1. Cor. 15.20. that
He may be (...) firsting, or having the first place or pre-eminence in all
things, Col. 1.18. Is not the argument also good? Christ is ascended, that He
in all things may have the pre-eminence: And if the dead be therefore raised
again by the virtue of Christ's resurrection, who was therefore raised up by
the glory of the Father. Romans 6.4. John 5.21. do they not also ascend by the
virtue of His ascension? So that before the Ascension of Christ our head, there
was no ascension for any of the members. It was the word of our Lord Himself,
John 3.13. No man has ascended up to heaven.

But I hear one whisper against this, that the soul is not said to ascend
without the body, and therefore the souls might be in heaven, though they
ascend not. So the cavil is only about the word Ascend. But the reason? For
it is said, Acts 2.34. David is not ascended up into heaven. And this was
spoken by Peter, after Christ's ascension. So that although David's soul was not
in heaven before, but went with Christ at his ascension yet David is then said,
not to have ascended. Al. Hume. Rei. to Doctor Hill. But had this man well
considered the circumstances of this text, in the 25. verse, David speaks
concerning Christ, and so as it follows in the 29.30.31. he would have taken
this text from David, as S. Luke does, when he says, David is not ascended,
that is, this Scripture does not at all belong to David, concerning any
ascending or descending of his; but to Him alone of whom David speaks, Psalm.
100. The Lord said unto my Lord* sit at my right hand: The like speech to this,
is that of our Lord. Luke 22.42. Not my will, but thy will be done. And yet it
is said of Him, Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do thy will O my God. Thy law is
written in my heart. So the will of God was done as the first moving cause of
our salvation; the will of Christ was done as subordinate, not as the first
cause, See Heb. 10.9. So 1. Cor. 15.10. Not I labored, but the grace of God
which was within me. And yet who knows not the labors of Paul to have been
above all the rest of the Apostles? 2. Cor. 11.23. ad finem, yet he of his own
motion, labored not for the Church, but persecuted it. So David ascended not
as the first fruits of them that slept, but Christ ascended so; by virtue of
whose ascension, David, and all the rest of the faithful shall ascend. But not
to fight with the shadow; I take the word at the manifest meaning, that David
is not ascended: and from thence conclude against themselves; That if David had
not ascended before Christ, nor yet ascended with Him, much less were the
faithful souls in heaven before Christ; but that the soul of David dwells,
and must still dwell in Paradise with Daniel, and the rest of the faithful,
till the end be. Dan. 12.13. But if they will needs have the soul of David
in heaven, not formaliter, as all the faithful souls are, in respect of the
heavenly joys which they have in Paradise; but locally; then (I say) it must
needs have ascended. For if the soul being in one place, is not in another,
and if heaven be upward in respect of the earth: then when David's soul went
into heaven, it must needs be said to ascend, or go upward, as Luke 2.15.
speaks of the Angels; and Solomon, Eccles. 3.21. speaks of the spirit or
soul. Therefor this is but a poor shift, such as they must needs be driven
unto, that oppose the truth. Yet thus he holds it sufficient to mock at the
direct word of our Lord, which is, John 20.17. I have not yet ascended to my
Father. For if He had, then must there be two ascensions, as they believe; one
of the soul alone, and another of the body and soul together.

3. Yet it is said, John 14.2. I go to prepare a place for you; And if I go
to prepare a place, I will come again, and receive you to my self. By which
it is plain, that none could go to heaven before Christ our Lord, had gone
and prepared a place for them, which was not done before His death and
ascension.

4. Moreover, it is said, Heb. 9.8. the way into the holiest of all was not yet
open, while the first Tabernacle was yet standing. Whereto, if you take that
which is verse 24. Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands,
which are figures of the true, but into heaven it self, it will be manifest
that there was no entrance; as not into the holy of holies, so much less into
heaven, before that Christ by His death had opened it; as our Church confesses
in the hymn of Ambrose; When thou had overcome the sharpness of death,
thou did open the Kingdom of Heaven to all believers. Whereupon, it must
necessarily follow, that the souls of the faithful were not in heaven
properly so called, before the death and resurrection of Christ.

5. To this purpose you may also bring that which is, Ephe. 4.8. When He
ascended up on high, He led Captivity captive. Now what was this captivity,
or multitude of captives? Were they reprobate? You will not say it. If the
Elect, then it follows necessarily that they were not in heaven before the
ascension of Christ, except you will bring them down from thence to fetch up
Christ in triumph; but then had they not been captives; if already triumphing
in heaven, then had not the conquest of Christ over death, and him that had the
power of death, been so glorious, if he had had no captives to lead in
triumph. And therefore, Esaias. 53.12. after the suffering of Christ, describes
His conquest thus; I will divide Him a portion with the great, and He shall
divide the spoil with the strong. The faithful souls therefore being held
under the power of death, though free from His tyranny and torment, as it is
said, Sap. 3.1. The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and no
torments shall touch them, whereby Christ having bought them of God, and paid
their ransom, brought out of all power of their strong enemy, out of the
shadow of death, into the everlasting light of Paradise, in all the liberty
and joy of the understanding, to view the Wisdom of God in His most glorious
works, as you may read further a little below, Sect. 8. Numb. 3.

Sect. 7. Now having showed the different interpretations of this Article, and
(as I think) fully proved, that the soul of Christ went not to heaven,
properly so called, before His resurrection, but that it was glorious and
blessed among His Saints in happiness, and so in heaven formaliter, as they
speak: It is fit that we draw toward a conclusion; which before we can come
unto, it must first appear what Abraham's bosom, what Paradise is, and where
it was. Then, why the word of descending into hell, is here used, with the
solution of such doubts as fall in the way. The word (...) a bosom, sometime
signifies a baye of the sea, wherein harbor and safety is, from waves and
tempests, and thus the word is used, Act. 27.39. Thus Lazarus, Luke 16. might
be said to be in Abraham's bosom, that is, to have arived and cast anchor in
that safe and quiet haven of happiness, where Abraham the father of all the
faithful, because he against hope believed in hope, Romans 4.18. was now in
bliss: or else it may signify a bosom properly, as it is used in Luke 6.38.
and thus also Lazarus might be said to be (...) in cheer, and joy, in
Abraham's bosom, as Saint John: Ioh. 13.23. lay leaning in the bosom of Jesus
his uncle at supper, as the manner of that country was sometime, to eat their
meat lying on the ground.

The word Paradise, whether it be native greek of (...) and (...) because it
is supposed to be plentifully watered; or a Persian word, as good Authors
affirm, and that of (...) Pardes used in Eccles. 2.5. and Cant. 4.13.
signifies a place of pleasure enclosed, or a park, and so it is used in
Xenophon Cyrop: lib. 1. or a garden, as the Greeks translated the word (...)
Began, in Genes. Chap. 2. and 3. or an orchard, as in the texts of Solomon
before. And hither was our Lord first said to have come after His death,
because as Adam by his sin had lost his happy estate in the earthly paradise:
So Christ by His death did recover the hope of our return into the heavenly,
For the gift is not as the offense. Romans 5.15. By these two words the blessed
estate of the faithful is signified, though with some difference, not of
place, but degree of happiness, as I showed. For although the children of the
kingdom were all, and at all times, heirs of the same hopes; yet they that
were in Abraham's bosom before Christ, had not that fullness of joy which they
had, after their redemption was fully wrought; and He not now in Abraham's
bosom with them; but Abraham and all his faithful children with him in
Paradise. To the same sense concerning the state of happiness is the Kingdom
of Heaven used. Luke 13.28, 29. though that word express also the joys after
the resurrection; And because it was ever thought, even among natural men, as
the Heathen Philosophers, that the soul was immortal, and that after death it
was better to them that had lived well, then to the wicked; therefore were they
persuaded that their souls went to a place of rest and happiness, which they
called, as they pleased, (...), or the house of Pluto by the common name; and
that of pleasure, the Elysian fields; of torment a place enclosed by Acheron a
river without joy. And since the body, went down to the earth from whence it
was, and that they persuaded themselves, that every creature might be
abundantly happy in that region whereof it was an inhabitant, as being the
only region that was fit for it; therefore they thought that the place of the
souls rest, was not far from the body; and so went down into the earth. And
because the ancient Church could not teach the heathen converted to God, but by
such words and language as they understood, and differed not much in meaning,
from that which they themselves believed; therefore were they content to use
this manner of speech of descending to Hades, the house of Pluto, or hell,
which the vulgar had been taught by their guides the Philosophers and Poets. In
stead of all the rest, see Plato in Phaedone, and Virgil. Aeneidos lib. 6. yet
they meant by this descent of Christ into hell, no other thing, but that His
soul being separate from His body, went into that place where the faithful
souls were then at rest, and in assured hope of further joy; But because our
Church uses not the term descending, but teaches her own children in their
own tongue to confess that Christ went down to hell, Artic. 2. Let us not
forsake the law of our mother. Proverb. 6.20. but rather endeavor to know,
what this going down to hell may mean. And certainly it must needs be
thought a thing either of great obscurity, or of little necessity, wherein our
Church (as most other) has not held it fit to make any further declaration.
Therefore, though I take liberty to enquire what the possible or most likely
meaning of the words may be; yet I presume not to affirm any thing, but with
submission to the Churches judgment, when God shall vouchsafe further light
thereto, to determine according to the Scripture, what is the certain truth
in this, or any other question of the like doubtfulnesse.

1. To descend, to go or come down is used diversely; But that I may descend
to every understanding, I will make it of two kinds; one of place, and that is
of three kinds, The other of state or condition: 1. Of place higher, and lower,
as it is said Luke 9.37. They came down from the hill, and Act. 11.27. There
came Prophets down from Jerusalem to Antioch, or from a place of more fame, to
a meaner, as Act. 13.4. From Antioch (...) they came down to Seleucia. Now if
the earth and water made one flat surface, which stretched from one side of
heaven to the other, as the old fancy was; then could this descent of Christ,
mean no other going down, but under that surface. And although some of the
Fathers were no better Cosmographers, then to think thus; yet for the most
part they were better thewed. But because our faith suffers not to put any
untrueth in nature, therefore this going down must be refused.

2. But if this globe of the earth be hollow; then this going down may be
meant (as most of the Fathers took it) into that hollownesse of the earth.

1. And that the earth is hollow, both reason and authority show it. Authority
you have, 4. Esdr. 4.7. where to the question that might be made, How many
springs are in the beginning of the deep? the answer by the Angel is supposed
to be, I have not as yet gone down into hell; whereby you see that hell, or
the place of the dead, was below this earth on which we tread; and that they
that died from hence, did all go thither. This was the opinion of the
ancients, both Heathen and Christians, which held the local descent of Christ,
and knew the System of the world.

2. Had they not reason? For neither God, nor Nature His servant, do ought in
vain, which yet must needs be here, if from the upper face of the earth, to
the center, a distance of some 3500. miles on every side, should be only an
idle load of earth and water. Moreover, the generation of all the Mineralls,
which is only from water steamed up in vapor, and congealed by the spirits of
sulphur in the metalls; of salts in all manner of stones; or of the earth it
self, as vitriols and such like; argue both emptiness and heat; neither of
which can be in a massy lump of earth and water: See to this purpose, Novum
lumen Chemicum.

3. Beside this, the huge quantity of vapor sent out of the earth, and waters
for rain and snow in the winter time, argues not only that there is a
hollownesse of the earth; but likewise that there is some powerful principle,
for sending up such waters which naturally do flee from heat, as this
macrocosmicall Sun is for drawing of them upward. For in the Summertime, when
our Sun has most strength to exhale those vapors from the earth, and sea, we
have least rain, and that because that centrall Principle has then his
greatest declination to the South; whereas in the Winter, when his declination
is to us in the North, then is it most powerful to send out those vapors on
this side of the earth, and to cause so much rain, except some violent frost
do close up the face of the earth, that they cannot get out; which thing is
yet further manifest, by those boisterous storms of rain and wind, which
happen in those Countries that are near to that girdle of the earth, which
they call the Equinoctial line, where the influences do meet in direct
opposition.

4. If no such centrall Principle be, by whose heat and warm vapors the
earth is opened; it were impossible that any trees, or roots could continue in
life; especially in Countries that are removed above 20. degrees from the
Tropicks toward the Poles. For as those vegetables do live wit^ ^ meet temper
of cold and heat: So where the cold exceeds, there is no possibility of their
growth, as it appears in the places of our Whale-fishing, and others within
20. degrees of the Pole. Now what heat has the Sun here with us in a hard
frost, continuing 3. or 4. months (yet is not our winter so cold as the
Continent of the same Latitude) for enliving our trees, who are not 52. degrees
from the very Equinoctial; but that they are still kept in life by the warmth
and moisture which is sent to them from below.

Object. 1. But is not every heavy thing carried naturally to the center? which
if it be, then cannot that center be in a place of emptiness, as this opinion
would make it. I Answer. The center is either of magnitude, as the imagined
center of this globe of the earth: or else of weight. The center of magnitude
suffers nothing to stay in it, but drives it to the center of weight, as the
South pole of the Lodestone, drives away that end of the needle which is
touched for the North: So that if the firmament of this globe of earth and
water be 50. 100. or 200. miles thick, which seems a great deal too much,
not only because such a thickness were to no use, but rather an utter
impediment to the passage of the Suns heat for the generation of the
mineralls, winds, and vapors, as I spoke before: Yet there is left an
hollownesse, whose diameter is about 7000. miles, wherein if such a principle
of heat be, (as I showed) I see no reason why that opinion of the Poets and
Philosophers concerning their Elysium, or of the Fathers concerning their lower
Paradise, should be so slighted as it is. This then being either prooved or
supposed; that center of weight which I speak of, cannot be the same with the
center of this globe of the earth, but rather an imagined surface, in the midst
of the firmament of this globe, in proportion of the unequal and concave
surfaces, somewhat further from this unequal surface, then from that hollow
which is within.

Esdras 5.44. That the world cannot hold them at once that should be created
in it: And if this outward surface cannot, much less that hollow one which is
within, which must needs be less then it. And yet if all that die go thither,
it must contain at least 20. times as many since Christ, as are now alive in
this world. Answer. Do you think, that if any man had in him, the spirit of
lust, of wrath, of pride, and all those seven devils which were in Mary
Magdalene, that his heart would be any bigger then any other man's? or was that
man bigger then all the sons of Adam, in whom the Legion was? Mark. 5.9. For
a full Legion or regiment was 6000. Foot, and 726. Horsemen. Veg: de remil:
lib. 2. c. p. 6. Now the state of the soul separate; because it is a
spiritual being, must be such as that of Spirits is, which do not occupy a
place bodily, though they be in a place definitively. So that fear of
thronging, which is such a block in the way of those new interpreters, is like
that fear of the Satyr that winded his horn, and ran away from the sound.

Sect. 8. 3. The third way of local descent is best understood by that
supposition of Almicantrahs, and Azimuths from the Zenith. For every man in
what position of the earth or sea soever he is, supposes himself to be in the
highest part of his hemisphere, and so is. So that if circles of any sensible
distance, suppose of 60. Italian, or 55. English miles, which answer on earth
to one degree in heaven, were drawn about him; then they that are in that
circle, should be one degree or step lower then he, and so to the horizon, and
so to the Nadie or point directly opposite unto him on the other side of the
earth. But you will say; If the dead before Christ did thus descend, and our
Lord likewise to them; then must it follow, that the whole surface of the earth
is Paradise, and that there is no difference between the state of the godly,
and the wicked, which is directly against the word of Christ himself, in that
parable of Lazarus and the rich glutton, in Luke 16. I Answer. That before the
earth was cursed for man's sin, there was no cause why it might not be wholly
Paradise. The description of the four rivers of Paradise, Genes. 2. do not
obscurely show it, howsoever Beroaldus would bring them all within the compass
of See Gen 2.13, 14. Dan. 10.4.
Canaan; other, by as strange Geography, to the springs and falls of Tigris,
and Euphrates. But I hold, That that Paradise of Eden, wherein Adam was put
after his creation, was not in the Moon, nor in the Air, as some have
thought; but some special place of the earth, of plenty and pleasure above the
rest, as we see there are great differences unto this day. And though many
places are grown barren and fruitless for want of husbandry, and especially
to prove the just indignation of God against sin, and to manifest the truth
of that word, Cursed is the earth for thy sake: Yet to the soul being
separate, and so without the help of the senses and imagination, by the light
which God has given to it, able by it self to see what the possibilities of
the whole creature are, every place is a Paradise; while it considers the
infinite goodness and power of God in the creature, as well in that which is
deprived of the effects thereof, as in that wherein His goodness is still
effectual. For as there be three estates of man's being; This of the Warrior,
in this life; That after death, of the Conqueror; And the third, after the
resurrection, of the Triumpher: So likewise are there three means and degrees
of His knowledge; One in this life, wherein we know nothing but by our senses
from whence the imagination or fantasy, that Hevah the mother of all living,
carries unto reason her Adam, all the species or forms of things which she
gathers from the senses. For nothing lives in the understanding but by the
power of the fantasy, which because it is false, fickle, and will of it self
without reason be working upon every object, as the appetite is moved thereby;
therefore the reason following the fantasy, is deceived, and not constant, and
so it comes to pass, that we know few things according to the truth which is
in them. But in that second estate of man, when the body returns to the earth,
and his senses, and consequently his fantasy does utterly perish. Psalm.
146.4. Then the soul looking on the creature with its own eyes, sees the
wonderful blessing and goodness whereof man had been made partaker in the
right use of the creature, if he had not lost the knowledge thereof by his
sin, and returns to the Author thereof, that praise that is due to Him
therefore; and acknowledges that state wherein he lives out of the proper
habitation, to be the reward of sin; yet because it does evermore enjoy the
comforts of God, in a certain knowledge, and some present feeling of those
joys whereof it shall be fully partaker hereafter, in the perfection of the
whole man, and sees that this separation is but a preparation for a further
perfection in that immortal being which is to come; it has thereby, as it
were, a seizure and delivery of those heavenly joys, which it had here only
in assurance of hope, though till the third state it has not the full
possession. And although the soul of the wicked man views indeed the creature,
and knows now the loss of that blessing which it might have had in the right
use thereof; yet because it has no hope in the life to come, all that
knowledge which it has, is but to see further the wretchedness of it self,
and for a foretaste of that bitter cup of wrath which it must drink, even to
the dregs. And this foretaste is able to make all the creature hell, unto the
miserable soul; as the joys and assurance of heaven make all places Paradise
to the faithful: For the devil was not therefore happy, because he was in
heaven. Job 1.6. and 1 Kings 22.22. nor therefore miserable, because he was
thrust out. Revel. 12.9. for not the place, but the holy Spirit of comfort
only, which never leaves the faithful soul. John 14.16. gives heavenly
happiness; as that soul which is destitute thereof, has hell in it self,
and must needs be in hell, wheresoever it is.

Now as it is most certain, that there is such a mean state between this of
mortality and that of glory; so is it most reasonable to think, that this is
the employment of the soul, at least for a time, before it be raised up with
the body in glory. For seeing man was therefore set in the creature, and
therefore endued with a reasonable soul, that he might in the creature behold
the Wisdom and goodness of God, and to His praise, be happy in the right
use thereof; It was necessary that He should know the creature, and the
possibilities thereof: which knowledge, having by his sin debarred himself
of, he could not use the creature aright, and so became mortal. Yet seeing it
is impossible that the sin of man should frustrate the end of God, but that
He should be glorified by man, whom He has purposed so exceedingly to
glorify; therefore in that second estate, wherein the soul is better fitted
to know, as the Angels, by intuition, or view of the creature, only shall that
be effected. Moreover, seeing our Lord ascended not to heaven, before His soul
was joined again to the body; and that it may not reasonably be thought, that
the servant in his greatest baseness, and lowest estate, should have
preeminence before his Lord; nor yet, that the soul, that most active part of
man, should be idle: what can the soul and understanding be busied about, but
only in the inquiry of that truth and wisdom which God has manifested in
the creature? But whether this inquest shall be immediately after the souls
departure from the body, or at the time of restitution, of which Saint Peter
speaks, Act. 3.20. I cannot define. But although for the truth, and
quietness sake with them that would instantly be in heaven; I denied not an
immediate passage into heaven for the faithful since Christ, yet seeing most
of the sons of Adam must come into this middle state, I see not why any man
should withdraw himself from that task, whereby he ought to give honor unto
his Creator.

Objection. 1. But by this you put a possibility of those illusisions of the
devil, appearing as the ghosts of the dead, and justify that poetical
fiction of Hesiod, (...) lib. 1. that they of the golden-age became all Angels,
and in ayrie bodies, lived every where on the earth, seeing all the good and
ill deeds of men. I answer. All things are not therefore false, because A
Poet affirms them, but that which he speaks out of the light of nature, is
certainly true, and this (what weight soever it has) swayes on my side. But
for the upholding of those old-wives fables, of the walking of the spirits of
the dead, there is no fear. For being dead, they must keep the law of the
dead, and not live to us, that are dead to them; for when they are gone from
hence, they are no more seen, Psalm. 39.13.

Thus much it was necessary to speak concerning the means of the souls
knowledge, while it is in the state, of separation from the body. The third
manner and degree of the souls knowledge by comprehension in the morning
vision, is, when the whole man glorified, shall see the true being of all
things in Him that is the cause of all; For then shall it know as it is known,
as you may see, 1. Cor. 13.12. But this kind of knowledge belongs nothing to
the question that is in hand.

4. The other kind of descent which is in state or manner of being is, when any
thing is changed from any estate either proper thereto, or else appropriate to
an estate or condition, that is, or seems to be lower, or worse. Thus our Lord
was said to descend or come down from heaven, when He clouded His Deity in
our humanity, as I have showed heretofore. Thus also He, and all mankind may
be said to descend, to be abased, or brought low, when the soul is parted from
the body. For seeing both the parts are for the perfection of the whole; the
whole must needs be more excellent than either of the parts, so that the whole
being dissolved, both the parts do suffer hurt or loss thereby, especially
the soul which sees the loss, and finds it self in a state of being, beside
the end of the creation of it self, which was to give life unto the body; and
this is the cause why the soul would not be unclothed, but rather that this
mortality might be swallowed up of life. And this is the lowest state of
humiliation, whereto the soul of our Lord could come naturally, and by this
state, some will interpret the descent into hell, as I showed in the beginning,
Nu. 2. But if this humiliation must mean also the separation of the soul from
the body, while the body was laid in the dust; it reaches no further than to
his death: For a man is not said to be dead, till his soul be departed from
his body. But if this state of humiliation be taken in that sense, as some do
very fitly interpret it, by that phrase used often in the Scripture, of a man's
being gathered unto his people, or coming unto that congregation of the
saints, which had died in the faith of Him that was to come; then taking also
(...) or hell according to the interpretation of the word Unseen, it will
easily be admitted of all, that when our Savior was dead, His body was buried,
and his soul went unto the assembly of them that were unseene. And because
this is true, safe, and unquestionable, it may on all parts be agreed unto (as
I said before) and yet the word of descending or going down reserved to the
right meaning, by the abatement or loss of that estate which the soul had
with the body, in the being of the whole and perfect man. So also the question
about the place of hell, and Paradise, which has moved most doubt herein, by
this interpretation is avoided. But because all this will reach no further than
to be perfectly dead, and because the Latin interpretation, Descendit ad
inferos, rendered by our Church, He went down into hell, suffers us not to
stay here; and because the most voices amongst the Fathers have swayed the
meaning to a local descent, and that (as it seems) in the third sense spoken
of before, and most of all because the holy Scripture binds us thereto; let us
follow our best and surest guides, and confess with the Prophets and Apostles,
that the soul of our Lord, after His death on the Cross, went down into
hell, or the place of the dead, and there continued three days and three
nights in the heart of the earth, as it was prophesied in the sign of Jonas
the Prophet. Matthew. 12.40. And let us believe that the flesh of Christ did
therefore rest in hope, because His soul was not left in hell, nor His body
was suffered to see corruption. Psalm. 16.9, 10. Acts 2.31.

Objection. 1. They object that the soul may signify the whole man, as in
Genesis 46.27. All the souls of the house of Jacob were 70. But how does that
help to prove that this Article must be interpreted only of the torments of
Christ's soul, while He was yet alive? For it is manifest that Saint Peter
bringing that text to prove His resurrection, speaks not of Christ's soul
while it was yet in his body, when He was not subject to a state of
resurrection, but of His soul after His death. But if they will hope by that
text of Genesis or the like, to interpret it, as Al. Hume. loc. cit. Thou shall
not leave me in the grave; let them answer me, what they mean by this word
Me, whether the body, or the soul, or both together. If they say the soul,
it was not in the grave: they will be ashamed to say both together, for so
they should make Him not yet to be dead, as the word Me does truly signify
the whole Person yet alive: jf they say the body, let them see what an unfit
tautologie it will make with that which follows, Nor suffer thy Holy one,
that is, the body of Thy Holy one to see corruption. But in this place the
soul and the body are made direct disparates; so hell, and the place of
corruption, so that we may argue, the body was in the place of corruption.
Ergo, not in hell; the soul was in hell, Ergo, not in the grave, or place of
corruption.

Object. 2. The purpose of Saint Peter was to prove the resurrection of Christ,
and that belonged to the body, which had died, not to the soul, which died not.

Answer. If this be given, what will you conclude thereon? But I say, the
resurrection is of the whole man returned again to life, after the parting of
the soul, and the body. So it is neither of the body only, nor of the soul
only; but of the whole man, which Saint Peter prooves here to have been done
in Christ, because His soul was not left in hell, where it was, but was again
joined to the body, to cause it to live, that it might not see corruption. And
because all the glorious doings and sufferings of our Savior were for our
uttermost benefit, and comfort; therefore is this going down of His into hell,
also to give us assurance of our full and perfect deliverance from all the
powers of death and hell, and restoring of all His believers unto an immortal
life and glory. And because the doctrine of our Church, into which I was
baptized, binds me to believe that our Lord Jesus after His death, went down
into hell locally, and that by the authorities of the Scripture: and because I
have before showed that the soul of Christ did not ascend to heaven before His
resurrection, and have denied also that I think with them that say, that He
went down to suffer for our sin; And having (as I think) said enough to all
contrary opinions: the truth by the Holy Scripture, and the reasons grounded
thereon, must be made to appear. But first of all, it is plain, that the
meaning of our Church is such; for in the 8. Article it is said, that the Creed
of Athanasius ought thoroughly to be received, and believed, and that because it
may be prooved by most certain warrants of Holy Scripture. And in the 7.
Article, the Church of Ireland agrees hereto in these words; All and every the
Articles contained in the Nicene Creed, the Creed of Athanasius, and that which
is commonly called the Apostles Creed, ought firmly to be observed and
believed. For they may be prooved by most certain warrant of Holy Scripture.
And because it may not be supposed that our Church cites the authority of
Athanasius, but according to his own meaning, as he himself has explained
it; if it were the meaning of Athanasius, that Christ after His suffering
descended locally into the hell of the damned, it must needs be that our
Church accorded to his meaning. And what the meaning of this Article in the
Creed of Athanasius is, we need not to doubt, who have Athanasius himself to
declare it in his Epistle of the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, against
Apollinarius: where he prooves against his Heresy, that there be only two
parts of the humane nature in Christ, a body which the grave received; and a
soul, which went down into hell: the grave received that which was bodily,
hell that which was not bodily: And by his reason you may yet understand his
meaning better. When the Creator (says he) called man into question for his
disobedience, He decreed against him a double punishment; For to the body He
said, Thou art earth, and unto earth thou shall return: But to the soul He
said, Thou shall die the death: And for this cause, man being dead, is
condemned to depart to two places; And therefore it was also necessary, that
the Judge Himself that made this decree should also undergo it, that in the
estate of man condemned, showing Himself free from sin, and uncondemned, He
might reconcile man unto God, and restore him to perfect liberty. In the same
Epistle, he had said a little before, that in hell He condemned death, that
He might every way perfect the salvation of man in our image, which He had put
on; and in his fourth oration against the Arians, he says, that the powers of
hell withdrew themselves, being afraid at the sight of Christ. So the meaning
of Athanasius is plain, that the soul of Christ did locally go down to
hell: and withal the meaning of our Church. Now among these texts of
Scripture, by which this doctrine of Athanasius may be warranted that text of
the 1. Pet. 3.18.19. is most plain, especially as it stands in the Greek.
Christ suffered for our sins, that He might bring us unto God. (...). being
put to death in the flesh, but quickened in the Spirit, by which He went and
preached to the Spirits in prison. Which Scripture must be applied only to the
manly being of Christ, who Himself had set an example to His followers, to
suffer ill patiently, which could be only in His manly being. For as God He
could not suffer ill. Beside, His Godhead mooves not by any local motion, as
the word (...) does signify. And moreover, His divine spirit was no way
quickened nor could be, but He went and preached in that Spirit in which He was
quickened, which could be only in His humane spirit or soul, in which having
once suffered death, He manifested His power to the disobedient spirits, by
taking to Himself the keys or power over hell and death, to shut in and keep
out whom He will. Revel. 1.18. And although I deny not that the sense is true
and good, He was quickened by the Spirit, that holy Spirit which He received
not by measure; yet I hold that this is not the native meaning of this place,
and the best printed copies of Stephan Plantin and others, are with me: Neither
will the words naturally bear that change of In and By; Neither did the
reverend Noel, Deane of Paul's, and other like Him, accord with them. Neither is
this the only place of Scripture that prooves the local descent of Christ's
soul into hell; For that argument of Saint Peter, Act. 2.31. whereby he
prooves the resurrection of Christ out of Psalm. 16. because His soul was not
left in Hell, strangles these interpreters, harder then Achelous was strangled
in the hand of Hercules. So that which Jonah, the figure, said of himself,
being by Christ, the substance, applied to Himself, To be three days in the
heart of the earth, must be as true in the substance, as it was figuratively
true in Jonah. This is the confession of him that was holy as no man was.
Psalm. 68.2. Thou have delivered my soul from the lowest hell. verse. 13. as
the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4.9, 10. He descended first into the lower parts of
the earth, and ascended above all heavens, that He might fill all things. So
then, the Scriptures not being of any private interpretation, that is, to set
out the stories of private men. 2. Peter 1.20. must have their highest and
uttermost interpretation in Christ.

Now that this is the native interpretation of this Article, and consequently
the right meaning of the Composer or Composers of the Creed, beside the texts
of Scripture on which the Article is grounded, it will be further manifest by
the Reasons.

1. In a Catechism, the use of Tropes or borrowed speeches are not fit, for
the use of children and novices; and such is the Creed or form of the
confession of our Faith, as it is manifest, Hebr. 6.1. And the suffering of
Christ, His Death, Burial, etc. is taken properly; therefore His going down
also into hell.

Object. If Christ went to the faithful that were dead, whose souls were in
Paradise, why do you say to hell, whereby is specially meant the place of the
damned? Answer. He first went to the dead in Paradise, as His promise was,
That the Thief should there be with Him in Paradise: Then to hell, to take to
Himself all rule, all authority and power. For God had put all things in
subjection under His feet.

2. If this Article, He went down to hell, be not to be referred to the soul
of Christ, after His death, then have we no direction by the Creed, to know
what became of His soul; neither are we taught hereby, whether He had a
humane and immortal soul, or no. So we are still left in doubt, whether this
Christ be the Savior of the world. But if this Article be referred to the
state of Christ's soul after His death, then are we truly taught and informed
against these doubts. But that adulterate interpretation of His sufferings is
excluded.

3. And seeing our Lord Christ is appointed of God to be the Judge of the
world, and that as He is the Son of man, it was necessary that our Lord
should go down to hell, both in regard of the justice, and of the mercy which
ought to appear in His judgment; of His justice, that the enemies of mankind,
the devils, may not torment them according to their cruelty and hatred of man,
but only in justice afflict them, according to the sentence passed on them,
according to the measure of their sin, and not beyond, as it is said, Luke
12.47, and 48. The servant which knew his masters will and prepared not
himself, shall be beaten with many stripes, but he that knew it not, shall be
beaten with fewer.

4. And because our Lord Christ was by the Father appointed to be the Savior
of mankind, it was necessary that His compassion toward mankind, should by all
means be inflamed, and therefore that His soul should go down to hell; that
as by the bodily feeling of our miseries in this life, He was made a merciful
and faithful High Priest for us. Heb. 2.7. so by the actual and present sight
of those unsufferable torments, He might have the uttermost mercy and
compassion which can stand with justice, on those whom He should judge.

5. It is necessary for our Redeemer to pass through fire and water, that is,
to have experience of all tentations and all manner of afflictions, of death
and hell, that for us He might overcome them all. But He that was the pattern
of all Heroical and excellent virtues, that knew Himself to have come into
the world, that He should die that shameful death of the Cross, John 3.14.
and 12.33. was not so affrighted at the bodily death, but His strong crying and
tears, were, That the pit of hell should not swallow Him up, nor that deep
should shut her mouth upon Him. Psalm. 69.15. And He was heard in that which
He feared, by Him that was able to save Him from death. Heb. 5.7. But He was
not delivered from the bodily death: Therefore His prayer was, That He might be
delivered from the power of hell. Psalm. 22.20, 21. For hereupon depended the
life of the whole world, not only that He might suffer, but much more on this,
That He might overcome death, and him that had the power of death. And for this
great deliverance would He magnify the Name of God with a song, and set
forth His praise among His brethren. And because the benefit of this redounds
to us; let us also offer the sacrifice of praise, the fruit of our lips,
confessing His Name.

Sect. 9. Now having thus declared the meaning of this Article, It remains
that I show for what reasons I hold this interpretation of this Article rather
to be followed, then that of them, who say, That it signifies only those
hellish torments which Christ endured in His soul while He was yet alive:
which although it be the drift of the whole Chapter before, as you may see
particularly in. 3. Yet to make up the garland, take these flowers which have
not yet been bound up with the rest. And first I put this as granted, That as
the Articles themselves, so their interpretation must be such as must stand in
the greatest evidence and declaration of the truth; in greatest opposition to
falsehood, and heresy, and for the highest hope and comfort of the faithful.

1. Now if you follow the interpretation of the Fathers, that the soul of
Christ, after death, ascended locally or really to hell, or the place of them
that had died in the hope of the deliverer that was to come, then it follows
necessarily, that the soul of Christ had a being, separate and apart from the
body, and that it was therefore an immortal soul, that died not with the
body, being able to subsist of it self without the body. Whereby the heresy
of the Sadduces, which deny the being of spirits and souls separate, and
consequently the immortality of the soul, and thereupon the resurrection also
Mark. 12.18. Act. 23.7. is plainly refuted. And so that lie of the
Thnatopsychitae, which thought that the soul of man came to naught, as the
souls of the beasts; and no less, that opinion of Apollinarius, That Christ
took of His mother, a vegetable, but not a reasonable soul; all which you see
make the death of Christ, and our faith in Him, of none effect. But if that
interpretation be only true, That Christ being yet alive, suffered hellish
torments in His soul; are any of these falsehoods refuted thereby? does it from
thence follow against the Sadduces, ergo, the soul of Christ is immortal? he
will deny the consequence, he will yield, it might suffer in His body; but that
it died with His body, or against the Apollinarists, therefore Christ had a
perfect humane soul; he will deny it: For although he yield that the soul of
Christ suffered such torments; yet he will say, That it was only by a
vegetable or animal soul, which suffered by compassion with the body.

2. But because the heresy of Arius did trouble the Church, more then any
ancient heresy beside; Let us see what force our battery has against his
fortifications. The soul of Christ went down to hell locally, to the souls
of other men; therefore Christ had a soul like other men. They will answer
here, That His created Deity, which they falsely imagined, went down to the
places under the earth. (For so they explain it out of Job 38.17 as you may
see, Answer: to the Ies: Chal: page 282. But that answer will not serve. For
though it were a created Deity, yet being a Deity, it must have those
conditions of omnipotency in the creature, of ubiquitie, wisdom, etc.
without which it could not be a Deity. So then that created Deity of Christ
must be in hell before the death of Christ, as well as after, and those
hellish torments of the new interpreters, which say nothing of the state of
Christ's humane soul, after His death, avail nothing to the contrary of this
heresy.

3. Neither does this new interpretation only dismount our artillery against
those ancient heresies, but also dismantles our fort of that refuge and succor
which the distressed soul may have in the agonies of death. For be it put
that our Savior took our sins upon Him, and felt in Himself the fierce
wrath of God against Him, so as if He had committed the sins of all men; I
find therefore that God does not deal with me according to my sins, nor
reward me according to mine iniquities. And be it, that being dead, His body
was buried in the grave; I will therefore say unto my grave, O sweet bed of
rest, that wast so perfumed with the odours of His most precious Merits! But
when I see my soul all over leprous with original sin, and spotted like a
Panther with actual transgressions, now going to a place that it does not
know, and of which I have no assurance that He has been there, to destroy the
power thereof; then death, which was hoped to be the rest from the sorrows
and troubles of this life, becomes the beginning of fear and doubt. For though
I know my debt was paid upon His Cross; yet the Prisoner is not set at
liberty, till satisfaction be acknowledged, and the discharge entered in the
Book. But being fully persuaded that my Redeemer has broken those brazen
gates, and hewed the bars of Iron asunder, and has there set up the Trophie
of His conquest on high, then the life, cheerfulness, and vigor of faith is
strong, because I know that as hell had no power to hold Him; so has it no
power of any of His; because His promise is, that the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against his Church, and that the Prince of this World has nothing in
Him, John 14.30. He speaks not of His natural, but of His mystical body: so
that every member thereof may say with David, Psalm. 13.8. Though I make my bed
in hell, Thou art there; there shall the wings of thy protection cover me, and
I shall be safe under thy feathers. For as thou have died for me; so have thou
gone down to hell, for me, to spoil the powers thereof, that Thy Euridice may
follow thee from thence, without any fear of turning back again.

4. Moreover, if it were necessary in the Articles of our Faith, to bind us to
believe that His body was buried, is it not much more necessary to know what
became of His soul, especially seeing the redemption of our souls, and the
freedom of them from hell, does much more concern us, and has much more
comfort therein, then to be assured that our bodies shall rest in hope? Skin
for Skin, and all that a man has, will he give for his life, and ten bodies
would he forsake, that his soul might be partaker of eternal life. But when
the sum of our faith helps us to give no reckoning what became of the soul
of our Savior, more than this, that it was afflicted with hellish torments
while He was alive, we cannot say of our own souls, whether they die or
sleep, (as some have dreamed) till the resurrection; Therefore having
confessed Him to be dead, that is, His soul to have departed from His body;
His body to have been laid in the grave; let us also believe as we confess,
that His soul went down into hell, which none but an Infidel will deny.

5. For the greatest benefit and deliverance, the greatest glory and thanks
are due to God, which the creature is able to give. But the greatness of the
deliverance is not known to man, but by the danger which he has escaped.
Therefore that man may be truly humbled, and truly thankful to God
therefore; it is necessary that he do know what that vengeance and wrath of
God against sin is, and what that punishment which is due thereunto, which he
cannot do but by the true sight and knowledge of that punishment; which cannot
be possibly in this life, wherein we know nothing but by the sense. Therefore
as it is necessary; that man do know in the state after this life, what the
torments and pains of hell are, by the true sight, and perfect knowledge
thereof, that is, in his spirit and understanding, which with the
acknowledgment of hell as his due, is that actual descent unto hell, whereto
every man is bound; so for the assurance of our hope, is it always necessary
to know, that our ransom from thence was wrought and manifested by the most
certain proof and declaration that might be, which could not be by any
messenger, or tidings, but by the presence alone of Him that wrought it. For as
it had bin of no avail for our Lord to have gone to hell, before the
satisfaction for sin was made, so being made and manifested unto the powers
of hell, it was not possible, but that it should be available for all them for
whom it was made. And thus was that fulfilled, which in Hosea 13.14. O death, I
will be thy plagues, O [sheol] hell, I will be thy destruction: repentance is
hid from mine eyes.

6. As it is impossible that the end of all the sufferings of our Lord should
not follow, when all those things were performed which were for the effecting
of the end; which was the delivery of the believers from the power of death: so
was it impossible that the end should follow, till all things were performed
that were for the end. For so some of the means had bin ordained in vain. But
that is impossible, for His work is before Him, so that He leaves nothing
without the perfect accomplishment. Therefore it was necessary that as our Lord
had redeemed us by His death, so He should also go down to hell for the
delivery of His captives, Not that they were there bu^ that hell was their due.
as it was spoken of Cyrus the type, concerning the temporal captivity: but
the highest truth was verefied in our Lord concerning the eternal delivery.
He shall let go my captives, not for price nor reward, Esaias 45.13. and as it
follows more clearly in the 14. verse, compared with histories, and most
plainly by verse 15. Thou art God that hidest thy self, etc.

7. It was proved before,. 5. and 6. That the souls of the faithful before
Christ, had not ascended into heaven. From whence it follows, that they were
in some other definite place, which by the common consent of men, heathen and
Christians, and the Holy Scripture it self, is called (...) hell, as it was
showed before, 1. nu. 2. to which place the souls of all men could not come,
but by the decree of God upon all mankind. Now if the soul of our Savior had
not gone down to them, then had He not been made like to His brethren in all
things except their sinne^: Then had He not bin subject to the decree of God
upon all mankind. Then had not His love to mankind bin perfected, that having
paid their ransom, would not see them set at liberty, without which the merit
of His satisfaction had bin in vain. But all these things are impossible. And
therefore our Redeemer did really and actually go down to hell, or the place
of the believers being dead; that He might free them from the power of death,
as by the virtue of the eternal offering of Himself, He had preserved them
from the hell of the damned.

Thus according to the meaning of the Church of England (as far as I understand
it) have I faithfully declared, and proved the meaning of this Article. That
our Lord after his death, as concerning His soul, went down into hell; and
that not only, because I was baptized into this faith, as this Church does
hold and profess it: But also because I know that this Church, holy, and
beloved of her Lord, is faithful unto Him, and to Him alone: For though she
hold other Churches her sisters, called, faithful, and beloved; and esteems
of their true Pastors and Doctors as beautiful and shining lights: yet
follows she nothing of any man's, because it is his; whether Luther, or
Calvin, or any other: but Christ her Lord alone does she follow, according to
his own rule, My sheep hear my voice, a stranger will they not follow, for
they know not the voice of strangers. But therefore as I said before, so do I
still profess that if this Church upon any light from God, shall hereafter
declare the meaning of this Article otherwise than I have done; I forsake my
self to follow her, so far as she shall follow Christ. And if any faithful
man be otherwise minded concerning the meaning of this Article, then I have
showed: yet do not I therefore hold him of another Church or faith, so long as
he does hold fast the foundation; one God, and one Mediator between God and
man, the man Jesus Christ. For the Kingdom of God is not in the excellency of
knowledge; much less in wilfulness of opinion in matier of doubt: but in joy,
and peace, and comfort of the Holy Ghost, while a man does those things which
he knows in himself, he is bound to perform.

ARTICLE V. The third day He rose again from the dead.
CHAP. XXIX.
THe sufferings of Christ were fulfilled, as we have seen: now it follows
that we see the glories that should follow after, of which, the first is His
triumph over death, by His resurrection from the dead, set against that in the
Article before, He was dead and buried. And although by His death, He is said
to have triumphed over the principalities and powers of death and hell, in His
Cross. Col. 2.15. that is, by the power and virtue of His merit, as a champion
by His valor and courage in the field, overcame His enemy: yet the actual
manifestation of His triumph, was not solemnized, till by His resurrection, the
power and glory of His victory did appear. But it may here be asked, How
Christ our Lord is said to have risen again, seeing Saint Paul says, Romans
6.4. That He was raised again by the glory of the Father? To which the
answer is easily returned, that Christ our Lord by His own active power, as
He was God, raised Himself from the dead: and as man, by a passive or received
power was raised again, as He said of Himself, John 10.18. I have power to
lay down my life of my self, and I have power to take it up again. This
commandment have I received from my Father. For, for this end was it necessary
that our Mediator should be both God and man in one Person, that that which
was not fit, nor possible for the Godhead, might be endured in the humanity,
as those things which concerned. His death and su^fering: and that which was
impossible to His pure human^^^, might yet therein be perfected by His
divinity, as Saint Paul says, Romans 1.3.4. that He was made of the seed of
David according to the flesh, and declared to be the Son of God by His
resurrection from the dead. But there is a great difference between the state
or manner of His being before His death, and after His resurrection. For
although the unity of the humanit^e with the God-^ead, were alwaye^ before,
in, and after His death the same: yet was not that unity always manifested in
the same glory and excellency. For in the first state, while He bare our
infirmities, His body was subject to hunger, cold, weariness, death, and other
accidents of a natural body, His soul also, though according to the
principal, or first acts endued with the excellency of reason and knowledge;
yet according to the second acts or practice, not knowing the grave of Lazarus,
the day of Judgment, etc. In the second state also, His body was deprived of
sense and life, His soul of the proper habitation. But in His resurrection,
His body was raised immortal, spiritual, 1. Cor. 15.44.45. glorious, and as
in all the perfection of grace and compassion on us; so with the fullness of
Wisdom and Knowledge to see our miseries, and to make intercession for us,
according to the will of God. Romans 8.26, 27.

Now concerning the truth of this Article, that our Lord Jesus rose again
from the dead, though it be most powerfully witnessed, by God Himself, by
Angels, and men, as you may read: yet because the authority of the Scriptures
wherein those things are recorded, is set at naught by Jews, Turks, Infidels,
Heretics, and such God less people: let not us endeavor to lead them like
sheep that follow their shepherd, but drive them like asses with the cudgel
of reason. And as Saint Peter, Acts 2.24. takes his first argument from the
impossibility of not performing those things which are contained in the
Scripture; so our arguments shall be from the impossibilities in reason.

1. It has been prooved before, that man was created innocent, Chapter 15.
That by his sin he became subject to death, Chapter 16. That there is a
restoring to a better estate, Chapter 18. And that the restorer of mankind must
be both God and man, Chapter 20. and 21. Then, that this restorer was Jesus our
Lord, the Son of the Virgin Mary, Chapter 24. who by His sufferings and
death, made satisfaction for the sins of the world. Whence I argue thus. For
the greatest good that can be done for mankind, the greatest ill may not be
rewarded, for that were unjust with God. The greatest good that could come to
mankind, was the ransoming of man from eternal death both of the body and
soul. The greatest ill and baseness, is to be left continually in the state
of death; wherein if Christ had still continued, then had He suffered the
greatest ill, for the greatest good which could be performed. But this was
impossible: Therefore our Lord did rise again from the dead.

2. If Christ, who sinned not, should have borne the punishment of sin, that
is, to be subject to the power of death; yea, when the satisfaction was fully
ended, then should His obedience to God the Father, have been not only
without reward, but also for the satisfaction of the justice God, had He
suffered from God (I speak after the manner of men) extreme injustice, who
had neither sin of His own, for which He should suffer, and had fully
satisfied for their sins whose surety He was. But this was utterly
impossible; For he that fulfilleth the Law, shall live therein. Levit. 18.5.
ergo, It was necessary, that Christ having fulfilled the Law, John 19.30. Luke
24.44. should rise again.

3. If Christ after His suffering and death had not risen again, then had He
not prooved Himself to be the Savior of the world; seeing none would have
believed Him to be able, to give life unto others, that was not able to quicken
Himself: So His suffering had been in vain, and His satisfaction, if not
believed, should have been to no purpose: So His greatest and best work had
effected no good to us, but a perpetual ill unto Himself. But all these
things were impossible. Therefore Christ our Lord did rise again.

4. It is impossible but that where the greatest union is, there should be the
greatest love and consent. The greatest union that may be, is in our Mediator,
seeing the humane nature is sustained in the Person of the Deity. But the soul
of Christ being separate, did naturally desire to be united to the body; for
otherwise should it not have desired the perfection of it self, that is, to
give life and sense, and to be one with that body which was peculiar to it
self, as the desire of all humane souls is, and therefore depart so
unwillingly from the body. But if this were the natural desire of the soul,
no way sinful, the Deity infinite in power, and in regard of the unity
consenting thereto; it must follow of necessity that our Lord was raised again
from the dead.

5. Contrary causes must have contrary effects. The devil, by the sin which
he wrought in Adam, had caused death to prevail over life in all mankind.
Therefore Christ, who came to destroy the works of the devil, must cause life
to prevail over death. But this could not be done in the members, before it
was perfected in the head. Therefore Christ being dead, must of necessity be
the first fruits of them that are raised from the dead. And if it were
necessary that Christ should first rise; Ergo, it was impossible that He should
not rise. See Log. chap. 26.11.1.

6. If Christ our Lord had not been raised from death, (a) then had it been
impossible that any of His believers should be raised again by the power and
merit of His resurrection. 1. And so the natural desire of the soul to dwell
with the body, should be created in vain: 2. So the debt being paid, the
prisoner should ever be detained: 3. So the afflictions of the Saints, which
they have suffered in body, should be in vain, as cold, hunger, nakedness,
reproach and shame, imprisonment, stripes, yea, and death it self willingly
sustained for the love of God, should be without reward. But it were against
the justice of God, to cause the body and soul to suffer together, and not to
glorify them both together: 4. So also the death of Christ should not be
meritorious and effectual for the procuring of all that good which might and
ought to come thereby, both to Himself and all His believers; For although the
souls of the faithful, for the merit and full satisfactions sake of His
death, being separate, might enjoy an eternal, though not a full happiness
without the body, yet the body should be left eternally to the power of death,
and so the works of the devil should not be destroyed by Christ: 5. So also
the body should be created in vain, if to sorrow only, without the hope of
happiness: 6. So God should lose His right in His creature, if He were not
Lord both of the living and of the dead, both of the soul and of the body: 7.
So the one sin and disobedience of Adam, should be more powerful to condemn
mankind, then the everlasting and most perfect obedience of the Son of God
should be to save it. But all these things are impossible; And therefore Saint
Paul says, Romans 4.25. That Christ was delivered to death for our sin, and
raised again for our Justification. For if Christ be not raised again, then
are we yet in our sins. 1. Cor. 15.17. not that any addition was made by His
resurrection, to that satisfaction which He made by His death: but because the
resurrection of Christ is a sure and manifest proof of His conquest over
sin, death, hell, and all the power of the devil: and that His suffering and
death was a full and sufficient sacrifice, whereby the wrath of God, against
sin, was fully satisfied, so that we are now justified in His sight: whereas,
if in the conflict of our Redeemer with death and hell, He had been overcome,
then could we have had no faith nor hope, that our sin by His death had been
done away. But now knowing that He has overcome death and is returned to life
again, in all the troubles and sorrows of this life and in the agonies of
death, we may be secure; as the feet or toes that are lowest under the water,
may hope at last to come to land, because they know that their head being above
the water, the body cannot be drowned.

7. Now concerning that impossibility of Saint Peter, it stands thus. It is
impossible that the Scripture, being the declaration of Gods truth, made by
Himself, 2. Pet. 1.21. 2. Tim. 3.16. should fail. But it has been declared
by the Scripture, that Christ should be raised again from the dead: Therefore
it was impossible that He should still be held under the power of death. The
text cited by Saint Peter, is found Psalm. 16.10. to which you may add the
types of the old Testament, whereby the death and resurrection of our Lord was
signified, as that of Noah, Genesis 9. ver. 20. etc. When our Savior, being as it
were drunken with the love of His Church and desire of man's salvation, took
our state upon Him, and for us became subject to the death of the Cross; when
being seen by the Jews, those Chumits, in the nakedness or infirmity of our
estate, He was set at naught by them that thought that their Messiah could not
die. John 14.34. But when Noah our Rest and Comforter awaked out of His grave,
He brought on them, that destruction which was foretold, as the punishment of
their hardness of heart and unbelief. See Psalm. 41.10. Dan. 9.26. So the Ram
taken by his horns in the bush, Genesis 22. was the type of His death; and Isaac
taken alive from the Altar, the figure of His resurrection: Joseph also taken
out of the dungeon, to be ruler over all the land of Egypt. To the same purpose
was the law of the two goats, Levit. 6. the one slain for a sin offering,
the other sent alive into a land of separation, to make an atonement for all
iniquity, transgressions and sin of the people. So by the two Sparrowes,
Levit. 14. He that was like to the solitary sparrow on the house top, Psalm.
102.7. shed His blood for the cleansing of our leprosy; yet by the other that
was sent alive into the open air, His resurrection was figured. Sampson the
Nazarite asleep in Gaza, signified our Lord in the sleep of death for the
love of His Church; yet waking, and having opened the gates of death, He
carried them away, and ascended in triumph to the top of the mount. Judge. 16.3.
And because the strong gates of death are carried away, we are assured that all
they that sleep in the dust of death shall rise to give an account of their
works. Beside these types, you have also the prophecies of the old Testament,
as Psalm. 68.20. That to Him belonged the issues of death, both to pass out of
death Himself and also to bring out His from thence. Esaias also Chap. 53. after
He had declared His sufferings and death, proves His resurrection by His
dividing the spoil with the strong. Our Lord also foretold His resurrection
Himself, in Mat. 12.49. and Luke 18.33. and the (b) infidelity of Thomas made
it certain unto all. Upon all which texts, we may firmly conclude with Saint
Peter, that it was impossible that our Lord should be held in the bands of
death.

8. And why the third day was appointed for His resurrection, a reason or two
are rendered. He rose not before, that none might doubt but that He was
certainly dead: See the 27. chap. for His death and burial: Neither was it
fit to defer the resurrection longer, lest the faith and hope of His
Disciples should fail, Who trusted that it was He that should have redeemed
Israel. Luke 24.21.

9. As Christ was man, that He might suffer death Chapter 20. so was He also
God, the Lord and giver of life, Chapter 21. But it was unreasonable, that He
which is one Person with the Author of life, should be subject to death, longer
then that it might appear that He was certainly dead, and that by His own
life and power He had overcome death. Therefore our Lord rose again the third
day from the dead.

10. Although by the unseparable union of the humanity with the Person of the
Deity, the body of our Lord might have been preserved uncorrupted (for if the
devils have power to preserve man's body uncorrupted for nine days. Hom:
Iliad. O, or for a longer time, as it appears in the bodies of the Witches
that die not by the justice of the Law) much more might the body of the Lord
have been preserved; Yet because in Him, and by His death, the whole state of
nature was to be restored; the soul of Christ returned again to the body,
before corruption, in the course of nature, could seize on it.

11. The sign of Jonas did prophecy as much. Matthew. 12.40. and Hosea in
plain and direct words Chap. 6.2. After two days He will revive us, and in
the third day He will raise up, and we shall live in His sight. For in as much
as Christ our Lord does now appear in the presence of God for us, we also are
said to have risen with Him. Colos. 3.1. The word of Christ Himself is plain
to this purpose, that He would rise again. Matthew. 17.23. and 20.19. and Ioh.
2.19. and that even in the understanding of His adversaries: Matthew. 27.63.

And that it was the same Savior that had suffered for us, who rose again
from the dead, the circumstances of the place do make it evident. For
therefore was He buried in a new tomb hewn out of a rock wherein never any
one had been laid, because the hard-hearted and brazen-faced Jews might have
no pretext to say, That any other had risen in His stead.

Notes.
(a) THen had it been impossible that any of His believers, etc. Concerning
the resurrection of the dead; fitter place to speak will be in the Article
following, Chapter 38. Here it shall be sufficient to remember that the
believers only are raised up by the virtue and merit of Christ's resurrection,
as it is said, John 11.25. but that the rest that shall be raised up in the
last day, shall rise by the power of the Father, that according to the rule of
Justice and that sentence upon Adam and all his seed, In the day that thou
eatest thereof, thou shall die the death, they may re eive according as their
works shall be.

(b) The infidelity of Thomas made it certain unto all. God that brings light
out of darkness, used the unbelief of Thomas for a most evident proof of the
resurrection of Christ: so that although he would not believe the testimonies
of so many witnesses as had seen him alive; yet his own trials according to
his own manner of proof, by his finger put into the print of the nails, and
his hand thrust in his side, might make him to believe; yet was nothing of all
this of any avail to them that a^e without. For as Epiphanius, nor obscurely
signifies, Haer. 28. and Aug. De Haer. cap. 8. directly affirms, Cerinthus
that Heretic, and hi^ followers, t^ught that Christ was only man, and
consequently, that He was not yet risen from the dead. But both the
proposition, Matthew. 13.55. and the conclusion. Matthew. 28. from verse 11. to 16.
were made by the blind-hearted Jews, before our Lords ascension, and still is
it their error unto this day. But if no man could do those miracles that He
did, ex ept God were with Him, John 3.2. If God alone does know the heart, If
God alone can forgive sins, Mark. 2.7, 8. then their seared consciences were
bound by their own words to acknowledge, that He was God: Yet because they
ever resisted the Holy Ghost, Acts 7.51. that their conclusion might stand,
that He was not risen from the dead; therefore with large money hired they the
Soldiers, that had watched, known well to be takers, that they should say,
that His Disciples had stolen Him away, while they slept. But this foul lie
stinks to him that has but half a nose: 1. For if they slept indeed, how
could they say, His Disciples stole Him, rather then that He rose agai^e of
Himself? 2. Besides when the Disciples themselves did not believe, nor when
they heard it, understood, that it was poss ble that He should rise again,
Mark. 9.10. and 31. Luke 18.34. no, nor yet after it was come to pass, could
they believe them that had seen Him. Mark. 16.11. and 13. to what end should
they be the auctors of such a device? 3. Moreover all other circumstances are
against it: For if they had stolen Him away, wherefore should they offer
themselves the second time to a needless danger, as you read, John 20.4. etc.
4. Wherefore left they the fine linen wherein He was wrapped; which either
respect to the corpse, or covetousness, or haste, or fear of the soldiers,
or all together, would not have given them time to pluck off, when all places
were full of fear, the earth it self trembling and quaking, Matthew. 28.2. 5.
Beside all this, the Priests having such power of themselves, such favor from
Pilate, why did they not call the Apostles in question for the fact? That the
whole truth, (if it were as they said) might have appeared, and wou^d easily
by their wit and greatness, have been fish't out of silly fishers, if they
should have gone about to conceal it? But -- male verum examinat omnis
Corruptus Iudex -- And because they knew well eno^gh, that by their further
questioning, the truth of God, and their lie, would be manifest to all;
therefore neither then, nor at any time afterward, durst they endeavor to
disproove this truth, to which, God Himself with so great power of mira^les
and wonders, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, give witness: which Christ, who five
times in that one day, and at sundry times afterward, showing Himself alive,
did confirm: which the glorious Angels, and the holy Women did assure: to
which the Apostles, who did see and hand^e Him, 1. John 1. that it was He
Himself, and not a Spirit, which has neither flesh nor bones, with great
power gave testimony: which His very enemies the Soldiers, while they were yet
unbribed, did confess. Yea, all the circumstances of the action it self,
reproove the blindness and infidelity of the Jews. O ye fools and blind,
how long will yo^ not understand? You see not your signs and wonders any more,
there is not one Prophet more, the sig^es of your Messiah are fulfilled in
Jesus the Son of the Virgin Mary, that great Prophet, that was raised unto
you, as Moses of your brethren: is there not o^e man among you that understands
any more? Do you not hear the words of your Prophet, Hosea 1.7. I will save
them (says GOD) by IEHOVA their God, and will not save them by bow, nor by
sword, nor by battle, by horses, nor by horsemen, as you s^ill dream. But
which is the greater deliverance, that from hell and the power of sin and
eternal death, or from any temporary and wor^dly thraldom? If the greatest
deliveran^e be performed, why doat you on the less? Which cannot be, till
you forsake your infidelity, and return. Return therefore unto Jesus your
God, from whom you are fallen by your unbelief: Take with you words, and turn
to the Lord your God, and say unto Him; Take away our iniquity, and receive us
graciously: so will we render the calves of our lips.

But you will say, why did not Christ show Himself alive to all the Jews at
on e, that they might all believe? I answer, that the life to which our Lord
redeemed us, is a spiritual life, unto which we must walk by faith, and not
by sight. And if it be not sufficient proof of His resurrection, that He
beside other times, showed Himself alive to five hundred at once, 1. Cor.
15.6. neither would it have been sufficient to them that seeing, would not
see, and hearing, would not hear, who said that His great works were done by
the power of the devil, though He had conversed among five hundred thousand
of them every day.

ARTICLE VI. He ascended into heaven, etc.
CHAP. XXX.
1. THough the Justification of the Articles of our Creed be my only work:
Yet here I hear two questions demanded of me. The first, who those were
which are said, Matthew. 27.52. and 53. to have risen at the resurrection of
Christ, and to have showed themselves to many in Jerusalem? The second, where
our Lord was in that time of 40. days, between His resurrection and
ascension; seeing it is manifest that He conversed not wholely with His
Disciples, but showed Himself unto them at several times, and that especially
on the first days of the week, as on that day He had risen from the dead. To
these I answer, where I have the authority of the Scripture, boldly: where I
have not, I leave you at your liberty to think with me: First therefore in
the number of them that rose immediately after the resurrection of our Lord, I
put those high Saints which are reckoned in the Genealogy of our Lord, from
Adam unto Joseph, His nursing Father, except Henoch, and with them many of the
Saints, who had slept in the faith of Christ, to come in the memory and
knowledge of such as were yet alive in Jerusalem, as Zechary, and Elizabeth,
Simeon, Hanna, and many others, who by special grace were raised again,
showed themselves alive unto such as were appointed thereto, and to them bare
witness, not only of the resurrection of Christ, but by experience in
themselves, did also testify, that the power and virtue of His Resurrection
was of force and avail for the raising up of all them that should believe in
Him. And of these, especially, you must understand that speech of our Lord,
which is John 5. Chapter from verse 19. to 30. where He says that the hour
was coming, and was even then at hand, when the dead should hear the voice of
the Son of God, and should live. As you may remember how it was said, Note
(a) on the last Chapter, that the faithful are raised by the venue of Christ's
resurrection, but they that shall be raised up to judgment at the last day are
raised up by the power of the Father: Of these faithful that had dyed, was
that word of our Savior spoken, as it is manifest by the text. And this is
that captivity or number of Captives, which till then had been held under the
bands of death, but by the victory of Christ's resurrection, were freed from
death, and ascended with Him on high, when He gave gifts unto men. Ephesians. 4.8.
And although some will needs interpret that resurrection only of a new life,
by repentance from dead works; yet the arguments in that place, will not so
hold. All that are in the graves shall hear the voice of the Father, and shall
come forth, some to life, some to damnation, ver. 28.29. Therefore some shall
hear the voice of the Son, and live, verse 25. For the Father quickneth the
dead; so the Son, verse 21. And whatsoever the Father does, the same things
does the Son likewise. But to raise the dead, and to give Repentance, are not
the same things: So then that which is here spoken by our Lord, is no other
thing, than that which was prophesied by Hosea 6.2. The third day He will raise
us up, and we shall live in His sight: and was here fulfilled by the testimony
of the Evangelist. And if the first fruits be holy, then also the whole lump.
Romans 11.16. So that we which have the same faith, shall at last receive the end
of our hopes, and have our parts in that holy resurrection, whereof whosoever
is partaker, on Him the second death can have no power. For as that prophecy
of Joel 2.18. was fulfilled in part, after the ascension of our Savior, It
shall be in the latter days that I will power out of my Spirit upon all flesh,
etc. Act. 2.17. and for a proof or assurance of that which shall be fulfilled,
not in 120. Persons, but in all flesh, when the earth shall be filled with the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. Es: 11.9. Hab. 2.14. So
likewise was that resurrection a pledge and assurance of that holy resurrection
of the dead in Christ, which shall rise first. 1 Cor. 15.23. 1 These. 4.16. but
the rest of the dead shall not rise till the time be fulfilled that they shall
be judged according to those things that are written in the books. Revel.
20.4.5.12. Whereas of these it is said, John 5.24. That they shall not come
(...) into judgment, much less (...) into condemnation, but are passed from
death unto life. For he that judges himself, and condemns himself, and
brings no other plea unto Christ but that, for mercy, may be sure to find mercy
in the time of need. See 1 Cor. 11.31. Heb. 4.16.

Now for the second question, although it seem more curious then profitable,
to ask where our Savior was after the time of His resurrection, during His
absence from His Disciples; yet I will answer what I think, and leave you
upon better consideration to give a better answer. First therefore it is
manifest by the Scripture, that our Lord showed Himself Eleven times after His
resurrection; if oftener, yet is it not manifest by the text. Of this number
five manifestations of Himself were on the day of His resurrection. 1. To Mary
Magdalen alone, Mar. 16.9. 2. To her again, and the other Mary, Mat. 28.9. 3.
To Simon Peter, Luke 24.34. 1. Cor. 15.5. 4. To Cleopas, and his friend, Luke
24.15.35. 5. To all the Apostles, except Thomas, John 20.24. to which, if you
put that time when He ascended on the 40. day, from mount Olivet, the five
appearances remaining (for I speak not of those extraordinary manifestations
of Himself after His ascension to Steven, Acts 7.56. and to Paul, Acts 9.17.
and 1. Cor. 15.8.) will be most likely to have been on those five Sundays
(as we call them) which were between, as it may well be gathered from John
20.26. because the Lord would fully finish the ceremonial use of the Jewish
Sabbath, and sanctify the day of His resurrection, for the remembrance of
those benefits which we receive thereby. This use the Primitive Church made of
it, Just. Mart. Apol. ad Anton. and further (against our Traskits) because they
would prevent their errors, who under the profession of Christianity did still
retain their Iudaisme; whose folly to avoid, in stead of the Jewish Sabbath,
they celebrated the day of Christ's resurrection Ign: ep. ad Mag: These times of
showing himself were. 1. To the Disciples, and Thomas with them. John 20.26.
2. At the Sea of Tiberias. John 21.1.3. 3. On a mountain of Galilee appointed
to them. Mat. 28.16. 4. To above 500. brethren at once. 1 Cor. 15.6. 5. To
James. ver. 7. And for the times of His absence from them, because it is said
in the text to the Ephesians, cited above, That He did therefore descend into
the lower parts of the earth, and ascend far above all heavens, that He might
fill, or fulfill, all things which were written of Him, not only those which
were necessary for our salvation, as His Suffering, Resurrection, Ascension,
etc. but also whatsoever belonged unto man to do in that state between His
resurrection and ascension, as you may in part understand by that which has
been said, Chapter 28. N. I think that in those 33. days, He in His manly
being, did view this earth and the fullness thereof, and especially visit and
bless those places where He did purpose that His Church and truth should most
of all flourish and continue.

Sect. 2. Thus much for the questions by the way. Now turn to that which is
the maine. To every degree of the abasement of our Redeemer, there is a degree
of exaltation and glory opposed. So this of the Ascension of our Lord into
Heaven, is set against that of His descent into hell, and that by the authority
of Saint Paul, He that descended, is even the same that ascended. And although
it may very well be thought, that after His Passion finished on the Cross by
His death, His going to hell was the beginning of His victory, to take to
Himself that power whereby He, as the Son of man, is to reign over all the
powers of death and hell; Yet because His body during those three days, is by
most supposed to have been held under the power of death; and that all the
parts of His victory are to belong unto Him, as He is Lord both of the quick
and dead, that is, in His entire humanity, soul and body together; therefore
that descent is rather held by many, as the lowest estate of His humiliation,
as you might read a little before. Chap. 28. 2. N. 3. But that our Lord (after
that He had by many and infallible signs and arguments, by the space of forty
days, given abundant proof of His resurrection) did ascend into heaven, these
reasons do make it manifest.

1. Unto every body is a place due, according to the qualities and properties
of that body, as in all natures here below, it appears that the place is both
conseruative, and also generative of those things which are peculiar thereto,
as the lower parts of the earth of the mineralls; the surface of the
vegetables; the water of fishes, etc. And again it is manifest that all things
under the Moon are subject to corruption and change: no beauty, strength, or
excellency is such as is not fading: no pleasure such, but that in the very
using it grows loathsome: no bravery so costly, but in three days wearing it
waxes stale; so that by the voice and consent of all men, the Angels and
blessed souls, and all such beings as are free from corruption, and in the
state of glory, are sent into heaven. But it is manifest that our Lord by His
resurrection and conquest of death, purchased first to Himself, and then to
us, a state of glory and immortality. Romans 6.9. Ephesians. 2.6. Therefore also
that He ascended into heaven.

2. The blessedness of the creature is only in this, That it may behold the
glory of God, in whom alone is the excellency of all perfection; And this glory
is seen only in the face of Jesus Christ the Mediator, as was showed Chapter
24. 10. N. 5. unto which blessedness, only the pure and blessed inhabitants
of heaven, as the holy Angels and souls of men, are dignified. And from hence
it must follow, that our Lord is ascended into heaven, the place of Angels and
happy souls: For no man dwelling in his ruinous house of clay, is able to
behold that glory. Exodus 30.20.

3. Hell is the place of torments; the earth of troubles, changes and
calamities; therefore heaven is the place of happiness, or else no happiness
at all is to be found. But that is impossible. For so all things should be
created to wretchedness and misery only, which cannot stand with the love of
God to His creature, and His infinite goodness. And if any such place of
happiness be, and He our Savior not brought thereto, then the greatest
obedience performed to the Father for the manifestation of His glory, should be
without reward. But this were unjust with God, and therefore impossible. And
therefore it was necessary that our Lord after His resurrection, should ascend
into heaven.

4. By the consent of Christians taught of God, and of Heathens taught by
nature, heaven is the place of the greatest glory and happiness, as hell of
sorrow and wretchedness. For although the Heathen allotted a degree of eternal
bliss to the souls which they sent to Elysium, as you may read of Anchises
and others, Aeneid. 6. yet they supposed that their fa^se gods, and such as
were by them canonized, went up to heaven, as Hercules, Castor and Pollux,
Romulus, and he that was one of the chief masters of the devils
slaughter-men, Julius Caesar. From whence you may reason thus: The place of the
greatest glory is most due to Him that is both the Creator, and Restorer of all
things. But such was our Lord Jesus, as it has appeared before. Therefore He
ascended into heaven.

5. It is necessary that the blessed and damned do differ, by all those means
whereby the pains of the one, and the blessedness of the other may be
increased. The pains of the damned are increased by the horror of that place
wherein they are tormented; therefore the joys also of the blessed, are
increased by the superexcellent beauty and pleasures of that place of their
abode. And because our Lord is blessed and holy above all that are blessed and
holy, therefore it is necessary that He should ascend into heaven.

6. If Christ after His resurrection had not ascended into heaven, then could
no other creature be blessed in heaven by His merit: So the place of perfect
bliss should be without inhabitants, and therefore created in vain. So God
should want that praise which were due to Him for His mercy and goodness
showed to the creature. But these things are impossible. Therefore the holy
Angels and Saints are blessed in heaven, and Christ our Lord, their King, among
them. See John 14.2, 3. and Ephesians. 2.6.

7. If Christ our Lord had not ascended into heaven; yea, so that His ascension
might be witnessed both by men and Angels, Acts 1.10, 11. then could not we
which believe in Him, have full assurance of those heavenly joys that are laid
up in store for us. 1. So the Christian faith were all in vain, and we still
subject to the punishment of our sins. 2. So His Conception, Birth, Miracles,
Sufferings, Death and Resurrection, heretofore prooved, should have been in
vain; So His own preaching, and of His messengers. 4. So the prophecies of
the Scriptures which were before concerning Him, even since the world began,
should be without their truth. 5. So the faith and hope of them which
confess the most glo^ious things of God concerning His goodness and mercy
toward His creature; which faith they have in Him, being taught by Him out of
his word, and by the success of all things that have come to pass accordingly
should be frustrate. But all these things are impossible. And therefore God is
gone up on high in triumph, and our Lord with the sound of the trumpet, all the
holy Angels, and the spirits and souls of the faithful joying therein, all
the troops of the heavens, and the heavens of heavens attending His coming,
and submitting themselves to Him their Lord and King. Open your heads, o ye
gates, and be ye set open ye everlasting doors, that the King of glory may
come in. Who is this King of glory? The LORD of hosts mighty in battle, even
our Lord JESUS, who by the wars of His suffering and death on the Cross, and
by the conquest of His resurrection, has overcome the powers of Hell, He is
the King of Glory. Amen.

Notes.
(a) THerefore He ascended into Heaven.] This Article has been gainesayed by
the heretics diversely. Cerinthus said, That because Jesus was man only
conceived and borne as other men, He was not yet risen, but should rise at
last. Aug. de haer: cap. 8. And thus by consequence he denied that our Lord
ascended into heaven. But this Jew, both by nation and opinion, is refuted
before in all, by the proof of those Articles which he denied. And because he
brought nothing for the proof of his opinions, but only opinion, let them all
vanish at the authority of the holy Scripture, as mist before the Sun.
Carpocrates, as he had been taught by Saturnilus, said, that the soul was
only saved. Epiph: haeres: 23. So that the soul of Christ only, after it was
freed from the body, ascended to the Father. Epiph: here is: 27. Against this
heresy you may set the reasons and authorities of the Chapter before, and them
that follow in the Article of the resurrection of the body, Chap. 38. The
error of Apelles you read before, Note (a) on Chap. 26. 1. N. 3. his reasons
and their refutation you have Note (a) on Chapter 27. N. 3. The Seleucians
confess that Christ, when He ascended, took with Him His manly body, and
carried it as high as the Sun, but there He put it off, and left it there.
But Saint Paul affirms that He ascended far above all heavens, that is, all
the visible heavens, either of planets or stars: yet they brought their
reason out of the 19. Psalm. verse. 4. He has set His tabernacle in the Sun. So
the vulgar translation of the Latins has it from the Greek, and so all the
Greek copies read it, except that of Aquila, who according to the Hebrew has
it thus; In them [the heavens] He set a tabernacle for the Sun, and this
helps the Seleucians nothing. But the error which has swayed most against
this Article, and which with their sacrilege, if they could see it, has now
defaced their Church, is that of the Vbiquitaries, who because they believe
that very substance of the body and blood of Christ is received with the Bread
and Wine; they are compelled to say, That His natural body may be in many, and
consequently, in all places at once; as His Godhead is. And therefore, that
this ascension of Christ must be nothing else but a disappearance out of the
earth, or a vanishing from the sight of men. For the ground of their opinion,
they urge the word of our Lord, This is my body, This is my blood, but they
deny not the Bread and Wine to continue still: which if it be true, then the
sense of the words must be, In this, or with this Bread and Wine, is my body
and blood. But the words bear no such meaning, but prove much rather, that
transubstantiation or change of the Bread and Wine into the body and blood of
Christ, which the Papists would. But this opinion of the Papists, were to deny
Christ to have taken flesh of the Virgin- Mary, and so to have been made of
the seed of David, at least in part of His bodily being, when His hody and
blood should be made of bread and wine. I, but it is said, Matthew. 28.20. I am
with you unto the end of the world.

Answer. Not by His bodily being, but by His continual providence, and the
graces of His Holy Spirit, as Saint Augustine says, Corpus suum intulit Coelo,
majestatem non abstulit mundo. Tract. 50. in Ioh. But the Centurists cite also
the auctorities of the Fathers for their consubstantiation, as of Just. Martyr
in Tryph. of Tertullian against Marcion, but corruptly, and falsely; and of
Origin, but a forged one, Cent. 3. cap. 10. They bring also reason; for (say
they) If the Divine and hum^ne natures in Christ be united personally, then it
is necessary, that where the one nature is, there must also be the other. But
the two natures are so united. Ergo. Answer. The consequence of the
proposition is not good; where one of the natures is finite, the other
Infinite, as Saint Augustine says, God and man are one Person, and both
together are one Christ; every where as He is God, but as He is man, in heaven,
Ep'la ad Dardanum. But this question is by many handled at large; and if you
desire further satisfaction, See the Catechism of Vrsinus, a Book (I think)
common, and the question is there briefly handled. See Doctor Willet, Synopsis
Pap. Contr. 13. Part. 1. See also Bucan: Inst: Theol: loc: 48. quest. 60. etc.
But in sum against these, or any other heresies which may rise against the
truth of this Article, take the authorities of the holy Scripture. Psalm.
24.7. etc. Psalm. 47.5. and 68.18. The place and circumstances of His ascension
are remembered, Mark. 16.18. Luke 24.50. Act. 1.9. Read hereto, Ephesians. 4.8. 1 Timothy 3.16. Hebr. 4.14. and 9.24. And that the natural property of Christ's
humane body, being now glorified, is not destroyed, so that is, may be every
where, as the Godhead is; take these authorities of the holy Scripture. First
it is said of Him, after His resurrection, Matthew. Mark. Luke He is risen, He is
not here. And Act. 1.10. While they looked up steadfastly as He went, which must
not be by disappearing, but by leaving of one place and passage to another; and
again verse. 11. This JESUS which is taken from you into Heaven, therefore not
bodily with them still; as He says, John 16.7. It is expedient for you, that I
go away; for if I go not away, that Comforter will not come; but if I depart,
I will send Him to you. And therefore it is said, Act. 3.21. That the Heavens
must contain Him, until the time that all things be restored. And this is
spoken of His body; neither can it be true of His Deity: and if His body be
contained in heaven, how can it become a piece of bread, or in a piece of bread
on earth? You will say, if Christ were last of all seen of Saint Paul. 1. Cor.
15.8. how was He still contained in the heavens? for His conversion was after
the ascension. I Answer. Even as Saint Paul saw in a vision, a man, named
Ananias, coming unto Him, whom otherwise he saw not till afterward. Act. 9.12.
and yet the sight, by vision from God, is a most certain and true sight: Or if
it were so, that He were indeed in His body, taken up into the third heaven, as
he makes it questionable, 2. Cor. 12.2. so might he see as he professes of
himself, in your understanding.

CHAP. XXXI. And sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty.
THe great antiquity of this Creed, appearing to be even from the time of the
Apostles, brought some writers into an opinion that the twelve Apostles, before
their departure from Jerusalem, to preach unto the Gentiles, gave out this
form of confession of the faith, to be acknowledged of every Convert, before
they might be baptized, and appointed that all interpretation of Scripture
should be made, according to the rule of it, as they will understand that text
in Romans 12.16. And some will yet be more particular herein, that every Apostle
brought in that Article which he thought fit to be believed: Yea, and for a
need they will tell you which Article every Apostle made, and so have of
necessity limited the Articles to the number of twelve. But the Scripture
admits no other rule of Interpretation than it self. And so I confess that
the Creed, may be a rule, in as much as it has the foundation in the Holy
Scripture. As Saint Augustine says, lib. 3. de Symb. ad Catech. Chapter 1.
Deus in ecclesia regulam, etc. God would have one perpetual rule to be in the
Church, which should be simple, brief, and such as every one might easily
understand, according to which the godly might examine all doctrine, and
interpretation of the Scripture: to receive that which is agreeable thereunto,
and to refuse that which is contrary. And although for your satisfaction
therein, I have followed the fashion for the number of Articles, as you may
see; yet it cannot be denied, but that if you take every several conclusion for
an Article, there are in all 17. or 18, at least fifteen several Articles; of
which, this of our Lords sitting at the right hand of God, will be one,
although in that number of 12. it go as a part of the Article before, He
ascended into heaven. But this is not a thing of any great importance, And
therefore let us rather look to the certainty thereof, for that is necessary
for us to know and believe.

But it may be demanded, why in the Creed, such a Metaphor should be used, as
might endanger younglings and novices to think with the Anthropomorphites,
that the invisible God is like to man, with hands and bodily parts. To which
we may answer, that the Christians (I speak not of wilful heretics) were
not so ill instructed, but that they knew right well how to discern between
Christ and a Vine, John 15. between a figurative and a proper speech. And
therefore the Fathers in the Church, the Author, or Authors of this Creed,
having a jealous care of the truth of God, doubted not to propose it in the
words of God Himself. Therefore seeing this part of Christ's glory is so
prophesied to be fulfilled, Psalm. 110. cited, Heb. 1.13. The Lord said unto my
Lord, sit at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool, it is
so to be retained in the Article of our Creed. And although it be a borrowed
speech, yet seeing it is so taken into use by our Lord Himself, and by the
Penmen of the New Testament, it is by all means most fit so to hold it. For
so our Lord speaks, Matthew. 26.64. and Luke 22.69. Hereafter shall you see the
Son of man sit on the right hand of the Power of God. So Col. 3.1. Christ
sits above at the right hand of God. So Hebr. 1.3. and 10.12. and 12.2. with
many other Scriptures to the like purpose. The word To sit, signifies either to
tarry or continue, as in Luke 22.49. (...), Sit, that is, abide or stay in the
City of Jerusalem: or else it signifies to reign, as in Esaias 16.5. The Throne
shall be established, and He shall sit upon it in truth. So the right hand of
God signifies either power, as Act. 2.33. He being by the right hand (that is,
the power) of God, exalted: or else it signifies happiness, and joy eternal,
as it is said, Psalm. 16. and 11. verse: At thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore. And although some Interpreters make the meaning of this Article, that
Christ as God, has equal glory and power with the Father; yet all these
Articles, from the second to the eight, show what we are to believe of our
Mediator concerning His manhood. And as our Savior, in the state of His
humiliation, was for the greater scorn and contempt, crucified between the
two malefactors, one on the right hand, the other on the left; So in this glory
of His, opposed thereto, He is set on the right hand of the Majesty on high,
the principalities and powers being subjected unto Him. 1. Pet. 3.22. So then
the meaning of this Article is, not only that Christ in our nature ( confide
caro) sits at the right hand of God in heaven, but also as He speaks, Matthew.
28.18. that All power is given unto Him, both in Heaven and in earth. Unto Him
(I say) is all power given to reign, and to order the state of the world, not
only as the son of God, which He did, and does eternally with the Father,
and the Holy Ghost, Pro. 18.15. but as He is the Son of man, John 5.27. as
Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 15.28. He (that was raised from the dead) must reign
till He has put all His enemies under His feet. This glory of Christ is thus
declared, Ephe. 1.20. etc. God having raised Him from the dead, has set Him at
His right hand, in the heavenly places, far above all principality and
power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this
world, but also in that which is to come, and has put all things under his
feet, and has given Him to be the head over all things unto his Church. The
manifestation therefore of this glory in the humanity and the exercise of this
power is in the discharge and execution of those offices and dignities which He
has received of the Father, to be the King, the Priest and Prophet unto His
Church. He then as King, does order the affairs of the world, sometime
restraining the power of Tyrants and Persecutors of His truth; sometimes
suffering their rage to grow on high; yet arming the hearts of His servants and
subjects with courage and constancy against their fury, that it may appear,
that He reigns in the hearts of men, and turns them whithersoever He will:
Otherwhile again, giving Kings and Queens to be nursing Fathers and nursing
Mothers unto His Church, that truth may flourish in the earth, as
Righteousness has looked down from Heaven. And concerning His Priesthood,
this is the sum, that we have such an High Priest, Who is set at the right
hand of the throne of the Majesty of heaven, to appear in the sight of God
for us, to offer up our Prayers, to plead our cause before the infinite
Justice, and thereunto to present what Himself has done, and suffered in our
behalf, Heb. 8.1. and 9.24. and of these two, that is His Kingdom, and His
Priesthood, Saint Peter speaks, Acts 2.36. Let all the house of Israel know
assuredly, that God has made this Jesus, both Lord and Christ. The office of
His prophecy is in this, that as before His appearance in the flesh, He by
His Holy Spirit instructed the Prophets: so after that, when He ascended on
high, He gave gifts unto men; some to be Apostles, some Evangelists, some
Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, Ephe. 4.11.12. And hereunto
belong all those means which he has made subservient hereunto, by His Holy
Spirit, stirring up the hearts of Kings and Princes, and other noble
benefactors for the establishment and maintenance of Universities or Schools
of the Prophets. But as the great rivers are nothing else but the gathering
together of waters from many smaller fountains and gilz: so the particular
Schools, founded by charitable and well-minded men, such as the most virtuous
John Colet Deane of Paul's, and founder of that School was; are the perpetual
supplies, without which the Universities could not be furnished either with
Prophets, or with Prophets sons. And therefore for these also does our Lord,
now sitting at the right hand of the Father, by His Holy Spirit furnish men
with the gift of tongues, and their interpretation. And therefore you my (...),
knowing that an account must be made for whatsoever we have received, either
of gifts, or maintenance hereunto. And although besides our endless pains,
we endure the inconveniences of these ill and dissolute times, the idleness
and dullness of many untoward and grace-lesse children, the folly of some more
wicked and unthankful parents; though our employment be disesteemed: yet
seeing the hope of the time to come is in our pains, let us for that duty
which we owe to Christ, that love which we bear to His Church and our
Country, endeavor the faithful discharge of our trust, and remember that our
reward is laid up in heaven. Now see the reasons of the conclusion.

1. It is justice, that the lowest degree of humility and abasement, for
obedience sake unto the will of God, should be rewarded with the greatest
glory and honor that may be done unto the creature. But it has appeared
heretofore, that our Lord Christ, for His obedience sake to the will of His
Father, became subject to poverty, that we might be rich. 2. Cor. 8.9. He
endured stripes, that we might be healed. 1. Pet. 2.24. That He suffered shame
and death it self, for our offense, See hereto Chap. 27. Therefore Christ is
set at the right hand of the Majesty in heaven. This is the argument of Saint
Paul himself. Hebr. 12. verse. 2. Christ for the joy that was set before Him,
endured the Cross, despised the shame, and sat down at the right hand of the
throne of God. This is that argument whereby our Lord strengthened Himself
against death. John 13.32. If God be glorified in the Son of man, God shall
also glorify Him in Himself.

2. To the most noble and worthy person, the most noble dignities and
excellencies do belong. But the person of our Mediator, according to His
Godhead, has equal glory and honor with the Father, and the Holy Ghost.
Therefore to Him it belongs also, as man, to sit at the right hand of the
Father, (a) because of His union with the Godhead. For although in His
Godhead He could not suffer nor die: yet because His Godhead was clouded in
His humanity, the whole Person was truly said to be both humbled and exalted.
And as by that humiliation and offering of His body and blood, He made a full
satisfaction to the infinite justice, for the sin of His people: So did He
merit and purchase, both to Himself and to His chosen, all that honor and
happiness which either the one or the other can be capeable of. And therefore
in His humanity to sit at the right hand of God.

3. It is necessary that He sit at the right hand of power, that is, have the
superexcellency of all power in Himself: by whom the perfection and happiness
of the creature is to be wrought, and by whom the greatest adversary to God,
and to the happiness of the creature, must be subdued. But it is manifest that
our happiness is to be perfected only by Christ our Savior: and that the
works of the devil our adversary, are to be destroyed only by Him. 1. John
3.8. Therefore it is necessary that He sit at the right hand of the power in
heaven.

4. It is beseeming and necessary that He should have (b) some preeminence
above mankind, by whom all joy and blessedness was procured unto mankind; in
as much as that blessedness belongs properly unto Him that purcha'ste it: but
to him for whom it was purcha'ste, it belongs only by grace and participation.
But the resurrection of the body, and ascension into heaven, belong to us, as
it were in common with Christ, in as much as the faithful must rise again,
and after judgment ascend with Him into Heaven. John 17.24. and 2 These. 5.17.
Therefore to sit at the right hand of the power of God, is peculiar unto Christ
alone. And although it be said, Ephesians. 2.6. that we are made to sit together in
heavenly places in Christ; yet that is spoken only of that abundant happiness
and joy which we shall find in eternal life, as the text was cited even now,
out of Psalm. 16.11.

Notes.
(a) BEcause of His union with the Godhead. The Apostle, in the first Chap. of
the Epistle to the Hebrews, proves by many arguments that the Mediator must be
God: in the second Chapter, that He must be man. Among those reasons, whereby
He proves that Christ is God, this is one: because it was said unto Him, Sit at
my right hand. For God that gives not His glory unto another, Esaias 42.8. does
not give this glory to sit at His right hand, unto any one that is a creature
only. Therefore does not our Lord sit at the right hand of God, but as man
subsisting in the Person of the Son of God: neither yet as God, being one
with the Father in the infinity of being and power, is He said to be so
exalted, as to Sit at the right hand of God, but only as He is God manifested
in the flesh. For this exaltation and glory was given unto Christ, as the
reward of His humiliation, as it is said, Phil. 2.8.9. He humbled Himself,
and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross: Wherefore God
also has highly exalted Him, and given Him a Name which is above every name,
etc. So that the glory of sitting at the right hand of God, is due unto Christ
as the Mediator, that is both God and man in one Person.

(b) Some pre-eminence above mankind: Although the graces and perfections, and
consequently the glory of Christ's humanity in the Person of the Godhead be so
super-excellent, as all the Angels in heaven cannot comprehend: yet does not
that glory and perfection take away the proprieties of the humane nature; nor
yet His sitting at the right hand of God, take away His subjection unto God.
For He is excepted that did put all things under Him: and when all things are
subdued unto Him, then the Son also Himself shall be subject, that God may be
All in All, 1. Cor. 15.27.28. because that then the government and mediation of
the Son is perfected in the creature, when it does appear, that God has
loved the Church, even as He has loved Him. John 17.23. If then Christ our
Lord be still God and man; or else He ceases to be our Mediator: and if to take
away the properties of His humanity, as to be contained in a certain place, be
to deny Him to be man, as Saint Augustine says; Take away place and you deny
all bodily being. How can that falsehood of the everywhere being, of Christ's
body, be justified? I said enough against this error, in the Note on the
Chapter before: but they argue also from this Article thus; The right hand of
God is every where. Christ in His bodily being, sits at the right hand of God;
Ergo, His body is every where. If this be a good conclusion, then why not this?
The right hand of God is eternal. Christ in His bodily being, sits at the
right hand of God: Ergo, His body is eternal. But this against the Article, He
was borne of a Virgin. Beside, the Assumption should be, the body of Christ is
the right hand of God; but that is most false: and this is most faulty of all,
to take a tropicall speech, as if it d^d signify properly. See Log: chap. 21.
N. 5. The errors mentioned, with this, in the Note on the Chapter before, need
not to be remembered.

Another error against this Article of Christ's sitting at the right hand of
God, and ma^ing intercession for the Saints, is of them who pray to Saints and
Angels, and so deny the Al-sufficiency of His mediation, and m^ke ^oi^ that
text of the Scripture. 1. Tim. 2.5. There i^ one Mediator between God and man,
the man Christ JESUS. But they have a pretty distinction for it, if it were
ought worth, that the Saints are not Mediators of satisfaction; for to is
Christ alone; but of Intercession only: If we should be ^ontent with this, yet
all their works of Supere^og^tion are vanished, and all their saleable
treasure of their Church not worth a mite. For the merit of Christ is not
saleable, but for every one that will, to b^y without money. Esaias 55.1. And
that because it is infinite and unval^able, a^ the ransom of sin must be,
and no man's merit can be. Beside the Scripture says, That Ab^aham knows us
not, and Israel is ignorant of us. Esaias 63.1^. And therefore, as ^ Father
says, It is the most safe adventure, for a man to commit himself only to the
hands of God.

A third erro^r is of them who sacrilegiously withhold those tithes which God
has allotted for the Ministers of the Church, as you may see it prooved by
them who have writ to this argument, whatsoever any lying Legend has brought
to the contrary: you may read Sir Henry Spelman, James Sempil, and especially
the Reverend Bishop of Chichester to this argument. And so no less are they in
this heresy, who withhold, or curtaile, or inuert by any means, those
maintenances which the founders of Schools or Colleges have appointed, as
Seed-plots, for the Church. And these sacrilegious errors are the more
damnable; as an error in fact, is worse then an error in opinion. And if you
look unto the state of those Churches, where that competency of which they
prate was first established, in France, in Germany, and elsewhere: you in may
see not only the contempt and beggary wherein the Ministers live; but that
even the whole Churches, have ever since the time of this competency, lived
under persecution. And if whole Churches and Commonwealths suffer for this,
shall you sacrilegious Impropriators, you saleable Latrones, and you false
feoffees, that are unfaithful in other men's wealth, unfaithful in that which
is committed unto you only in trust, escape, though you be long forborne? He
that shall come, will come, and will not stay, to give to every man as his
works shall be, not as they are here in show, or with pretext, that I am but
one. And this is the next Article whereto ye shall be summoned. Arise ye dead,
and come to judgment.

ARTICLE VII. From thence He shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
CHAP. XXXII.
1. THe word, to Judge, has many significations, in the Holy Scripture. But in
this Article of our Creed, it is taken only for the execution of that eternal
doom upon men and Angels, when God by Christ shall raise up all that are dead,
and by the ministry of the Angels shall bring all both good and bad before
Him, that every man may receive the things done in his body, according to that
which he has done, whether it be good or ill, 2. Cor. 5.10. So the
resurrection of the body, is in order of time before this Judgment: yet is it
here set before it; because it is a part of that glory which is given unto
Christ, for that abasement and blasphemy of sinners, which He endured when He
was most shamefully and despitefully entreated before the Priests (when they
smote the Judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek, Mic. 5.1. Luke 22.64. and
after, most unjustly condemned him before Pontius Pilate) And because it is fit
that they which are to be judged should behold their judge: therefore the
Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment unto the Son, John
5.22. as it is said, Acts 17.31. That God has appointed a day, in which He
will judge the world in righteousness, by the man whom He has ordained;
whereof He has given assurance unto all men, in that He has raised Him from
the dead. So the authority or power is of the Father: the administration or
performance of the judgment, is by the Son, and that, as He is the Son of
man in the Person of the Deity. For as by the perpetual influence of the
Deity upon the soul of Christ, He is able to know the secrets of all hearts:
so being man, touched with the feeling of our infirmities, as having been
tempted in all points, like as we are, yet without sin, Hebr. 4.15. He shall
administer justice, and pronounce His sentence with that equity, that even the
damned shall confess that their condemnation is most just. But the judgment
is either particular or general. For, inasmuch as the soul being separate
from the body, is capable of joy or pain, therefore immediately after the
departure, does it go, either to happiness, or sorrow, as it is plain by the
history of Lazarus, and the rich man, Luke 16. and as our Lord said unto the
thief, Luke 23.43. This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. So Saint Paul
desired to depart and to be with Christ. Phil. 1.23. To this purpose you may
read more, 2. Cor. 5. from verse 1. to 9. For because the deeds to which
punishment is due, are voluntary: For otherwise they were not sinfully sinful:
and that the will is in the soul, not in the body: therefore the punishment
comes first upon the soul, as it is said, Ezech. 4.18. The soul that sins
shall die: and by the soul upon the body, at the resurrection. In the mean
while (as it has been said) the soul has a feeling of the wrath of God,
being shut out from His presence, and a fearful expectation of those torments
which it shall endure, when it shall be joined to the body again. So also the
souls of the Saints immediately after they are delivered from the burden of
the flesh, are in joy and felicity, having the feeling of the favor of God,
and the full and assured knowledge of the forgiveness of their sins, and
waiting for the time of that blessed Resurrection, when they shall enjoy their
bodies again, and in the mean time, this is their Paradise, this is their
heaven.

And thus the sentence being beforehand passed on every man particularly: that
general Judgment is only the publication and execution of that sentence,
when the blessed shall both in body and soul receive the full accomplishment
of all their happiness, and the damned likewise, the full measure of their
torment in hell: And therefore is that day, Romans 2.5. called the day of wrath
and revelation of the righteous Judgment of God. And if for the authorities
and reasons brought, it be evident, that the soul immediately after it is
departed, is a partaker of joy or pain: How shall we hearken to that doctrine
of the Sadduces, Act. 23.8. or to that Arabian error of the Thnetopsychitae,
that the soul does die with the body? Or to our late dreamers the
Psychopannychitae, who affirm, that the soul sleeps in the grave till it be
awaked again with the body at the general resurrection?

For He shall come as a thief in the night, 1. These. 5.2. and 2. Pet. 3.10.
or as in the days of Noah, Matthew. 24.37. to 47. For as the hour of death, or
the time of the particular Judgment is uncertain to every man, and that for
our exceeding benefit; that we should not through carelessness run into sin,
but that we should ever be mindful to watch: So likewise is that day of the
universal judgment. For seeing all mankind must stand in this general
judgment, therefore it cannot be, but at the end of the world, as it is
manifest, Matthew. 13.40. etc. to 49. Apoc. 20.21. And therefore in His power
only that made the world. And as no wisdom beside His own was in the making
of the world; so shall there be no other wisdom either in the continuance, or
putting an end thereto, beside His own. And seeing we know nothing of the
Fathers will, but by the Son; if the Son Himself knew not the time, Mark.
13.32. who may presume to know it without Him? But you will say, how could the
Son be ignorant of that day; seeing by the influence of the Deity on His
humane soul, He might know what He would know? I Answer. His coming was to
give life unto the world, and withal, the knowledge of all those things, and
them only which were profitable for His Church to know: and because the
knowledge of the time of this judgment for the avoiding of security, was no
way either necessary or convenient to be known, therefore our Mediator would
not know that which was not fit to be revealed to His Church. For He would be
like to us in all things, except our sin. And I have heretofore showed, that
some kinds of jgnorance are not sinful. And therefore that womanish fancy
that will limit the day of Judgment, to the month of February, which shall be
in the year of our Lord, 1645. is very weak, and contrary to those prophesies
of Scripture, which teach us to expect the conversion of the Jews; And with
them, the fullness of the Gentiles, and that Sabbatisme or restitution of the
creature, which is so often promised both in the old and in the new Testament,
as it may hereafter appear more at large. Yet as by the Spring we know the
approach of Summer; so has He given us certain signs, that we may lift up
our heads, and know that our redemption is nigh at hand. For as it is a
manifest sign, that the destruction of that Nation is nigh, when every man is
oppressed one by another, when the Boy shall behave Himself proudly against
the Ancient, the base against the honorable, Esaias 3.5. yea, and be upheld
therein; O times! Into what corruption of manners are we fallen? So when all
charity is put only in the maintenance of idleness and begging Gangrels, being
otherwise dead and cold, when the apostasy is fully revealed, and the man of
sin detected, which exalts Himself above all that is called God. Moreover
when by the working of the false apostles of that apostasy, there is a daily
falling from the faith, 2. These. chap. 2. When that ill servant has said in
his heart, My Lord delays his coming, and has begun, and so continues to
smite his fellow servants, Matthew. 24.28, 29. what wants, but only that the
Tribes of Israel should be gathered to the Church; that all the wicked should
be put away like dross, Psalm. 119. verse 119. For the ungodly shall not stand
in the judgment, nor the sinners in the congregation of the righteous. Other
signs you may read in the Holy Text, and consider of them: But that sign of
the Son of man, spoken of Matthew. 24.30. is doubtful. Some think it shall be a
cross; some a great light, Lactantius Lib. 7. Cap. 19. thinks it shall be a
sword which shall fall from heaven, like the ancyle, Ovid. Fast. lib. 3. But
Sibyl orac. lib. 2. says, it shall be a glorious Star in the likeness of a
Crown; except by an Enallage of number, she means a Crown of Stars, as
the word (...) sometime does signify a constellation. Her Verses are these.

(...)
(...)
(...).
A shining Star like to a Crown most sheen,
In the bright heaven of all men shall be seen
For many days. --
Next after the signs of our Lords coming to Judgment, you may read the
manner of His coming, as it is delivered in the Scripture, so far as our
understanding can conceive, to be with power and glory, Mat. 24.31. even the
glory of the Father, Mat. 16.27. and all the holy Angels with Him, Matt. 25.31.
In flaming fire rendering vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.

. 3. But that we dwell not on these things which are either beyond our
understanding, as the enquiry of the time, which is therefore hid, that it may
stint our curious search, or else so plain, that we need not doubt, let us
go forward to those questions which seem to offer some doubt unto us.

1. And first, if Christ our Lord shall judge the world in righteousness,
Psalm. 9.8. how is it said, Matthew. 19.28. That the Apostles shall sit upon
twelve Thrones, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel? And again, 1 Cor. 6.2.
Do ye not know, that the Saints shall judge the world? and verse. 3. Know ye
not, that we shall judge the Angels? To which the answer is returned, That the
Apostles, by their faith and doctrine, shall take away all excuse from the
Israelites, and so judge and condemn them. For this is their condemnation,
That they believed not in the Name of the only begotten Son of God. John
3.18. So the Saints in general shall judge the wicked by their faith and
repentance, whose example the wicked would not follow, that they might be
saved. Moreover, seeing the faithful are the members of that mystical body,
of which Christ is the head, they in Him are said to judge the world, that is,
the unbeleevers. And seeing all the enemies of Christ, are to be brought
before the Throne of Christ and His Church, in as much as Christ shall judge
the world and the wicked Angels, in truth and righteousness, all the faithful
shall subscribe to the judgment, as most holy and just; and so are rightly said
to judge the Angels. And as the holy Angels shall then rejoice with joy
unspeakeable, for that glory and mercy which God shall vouchsafe unto His
Saints; So the Saints likewise shall give glory and thanks to God, for that
increase of glory and happiness which He shall give unto the holy Angels, as
the reward of their continual watch and guard which they have held about us,
all the time of our pilgrimage upon earth, and at the hour of death, helping
the soul out of the prison of the body, and conducting it unto the place of
joy.

But it is said, John 16.11. That the Prince of this world is judged already;
how then shall we judge the Angels? Answer. The devil is judged already. 1. In
the decree of God. 2. By the word of God, he is declared to be reserved in
chains of darkness, and that hell fire is prepared for him and his angels. 3.
By his own knowledge of his own estate. 4. Because his torment is in part
begun. But in judgment there be two things; First the enquiry of the fact,
then the award of the reward. Neither the deeds of the good or bad angels shall
be enquired into at the judgment ( (a) as some have thought) but the reward
shall be assigned unto them both, and acknowledged to be most just by the
Church (as I said before) and this is our judgment of them. Neither yet shall
the senseless creatures be exempted from this judgment, in as much as The
elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works thereof shall
burn. 2. Pet. 3.10. that they may be freed from that corruption to which they
are subject for the sin of man. For when man sinned, the whole bodily
creature which was made for man, was thereby subjected to vanity, not of it
own will, or any inclination which was therein, in respect of any weakness
of state wherein it was created, For all was exceeding good. Genesis 1.31. but
that the justice of God against sin might be manifest, is it subjected to the
curse, Genesis 3.18, 19. yet under hope that when man is freed from his sin, the
creature also shall be restored unto that liberty from corruption, wherein it
was created, Romans 8.20. etc. as it is said, Rev. 21.1. and 5. Behold I create
all things new, See 1. Pet. 3.13.

2. Another doubt may be concerning the form of the sentence, whereby it may
seem that the merit of works is justified: For so is the sentence pronounced,
Come ye blessed, receive the Kingdom prepared for you, for I was hungry, and
ye gave Me meat, etc. and on the other side, Depart ye cursed, for I was
hungry, and ye gave Me no meat, etc. Mat. 25.35. to 46. Ans. It cannot
bedenied, but that the sentence of condemnation upon the reprobate, is
according to their works, as the deserving causes thereof; For not to believe
in Christ, is that great sin which is the cause of condemnation. Ioh. 3.18. and
16.9. Neither is a dead faith ought worth, but that faith only is accepted
which works by love. Galat. 5.6. without which, it is impossible to please
God. Hebr. 11.6. And if all things that are not of faith, be sin. Romans 14.23.
Then the wicked works of Infidels and Hypocrites, and much more their violent
and wilful rebellions, must needs be concurrent causes of their condemnation.
But the faithful are therefore called to possess the kingdom. 1. Because
they are blessed of the Father. 2. Because they are predestinate thereto, and
the kingdom prepared for them, from the beginning of the world. So their
works come not as causes of their happiness, but only as the fruits of their
faith. But because works only, and not faith in the heart, are manifest to
the world; therefore is the comparison made only of the works, both of the
godly and of the wicked, that the justice of God may be manifested in rewarding
the works that are manifest to man.

But you will say, if men for their ill deeds do merit hell, why should they
not by their good works merit heaven? See the answer, Chap. 19. Object. 2.
and 3.

3. A third question may arise concerning that which is said, Luke 21.32. This
generation shall not pass, till all be fulfilled: why then was not the
judgment long ago? Answer. The word (...) a generation, in the narrow
signification, does signify that multitude of men which are alive at once, and
withal, that time in which it is supposed they shall all be dead, which in
common reckoning is 100. years. And in this sense the saying of our Lord must
be referred only to that which He had spoken concerning the overthrow of
Jerusalem, which followed about forty years after, and the signs which
should go before that; As the preaching of the Gospel in all the world, See
Col. 1.6. False Christ's, See Note (g) on Chapter 24. Wars, Pestilence, etc.
But because our Lord after the answers to the three questions made by the
disciples, Matthew. 24.3. 1 Of the destruction of Jerusalem. 2. Of the sign of
His coming. 3. Of the end of the world, adds these same words, This
generation shall not pass etc. verse. 34. a generation cannot be so narrowly
taken in this place, but rather it must signify as much as (...), or Saeculum:
and so taking the infancy of the world, in the time of nature, for one
generation; that middle age under the Law for another, and then this old age of
the word, under the Gospel; there is no other generation or change of state in
the Church to be looked for; but in this very generation, all things shall be
fulfilled. And therefore Saint John says, 1 Epist. 2.18. This is the last
time. And although Saint Peter say, 1 Epist. 4.7. That the end of all things is
at hand, and that therefore we should be sober and watch unto prayer; because
we know not when our Lord shall call us to a particular account of our
stewardship, when all things of this world are ended with us: Yet Saint Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. directly affirms, in his time, that that great day of God should
not come, till the Apostasy was revealed, which could not be till he that
withheld, that is, the Imperial power that then ruled, was taken out of the
way.

4. But seeing that day of God is so terrible to the wicked, as that they put
it far from them, and again so much desired of the godly, as that they cry,
Come Lord Jesus, Come; it may seem not altogether unfit to see some reasons of
their different desires. Concerning the wicked, it is manifest, that they being
condemned already in their own consciences, have great cause to wish that
there were no day of judgment, no judge, no tormentors. But the faithful in
Christ, who have the testimony of God in their hearts, that their sins are
covered, have great reason to desire that day. First and above all, that the
glory of God, His mercy and justice may be manifest. Secondly, that the merit
of Christ's sufferings may appear to the glory of His grace, in them, that they
may have the actual possession of that happiness which they have here only
in the assurance of hope. And no less do they desire that coming, that the
body of sin may be truly abolished. For which desires sake, even death it
self, is here in life oftentimes desired, and when it comes, is most willingly
embraced; because that thereby they are justified from their sin. Romans 6.7. And
among other causes, for which they pray that the Kingdom of God may come, this
is one, that although even because they refrain from ill, therefore do they
make themselves as a prey. Esaias 59.15. yet in that day the truth of their
innocence shall be known. And although here the more innocent and harmless a
man is, the more is he subject to injuries, slanders and surmises, and that
because men have forsaken the fear of the Almighty, and having forgotten that
he that takes up, not only he that raises a slander (which every base
varlet may do) but he that believes it, and and much more he that furthereth
it, has no part in that Kingdom, Psalm. 15.3. Yet they use their tongues as if
they were their own, and remember not that they must give an account of every
idle, much more of every lying and hurtful word. And here there be some which
doubt not to say, that the godly may desire the coming of that day, that they
may see the reward of the wicked, perhaps upon that text where it is said, The
Righteous shall be glad when he sees the veng^ance, Psalm. 58.10. But I suppose
it necessary to answer with this difference; That so far forth as a wicked
man, or men are declared the enemies of God, of Christ, of His Church, a
Christian may say: Do not I hate them, o Lord, that hate thee? yea, I hate
them with perfect hatred, as if they were mine enemies. Psalm. 139. ver. 21.22.
(the hatred must be of their sins, not of their persons) but concerning those
offenses that are toward a man's own self; let the same mind be in us which
was in Christ Jesus, who suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should
follow His steps, who being reviled, reviled not again; who being mocked and
wounded, yet made intercession for the transgressors. Therefore, though thine
enemies despite thee daily without a cause; though he that eats thy bread,
lift up his heel against thee; though the drunkards make songs upon thee, yet
remember that there is a reward for the righteous, that thy innocence shall
break forth as the light, and thy patience shall shine as the noone day. And
remember that unthankefull wretches are no new thing in the world, for the
Orator said long ago, and I have often found it true, (...), etc. But if that
Punke could say, Men' moveat cimex Pantilius? Shall he that has experience of
such monsters of ingratitude, put it in the power of a son of Belial to
disquiet his peace? Therefore let the Rymer read what others judge of him.
Feltham Resolu. Cent. 2. Chapter 56. Let him write a book against me; I will bind
it as a Crown upon my head. And if for my love, and for my best deserts I find
enemies, yet will I pray for them, Psalm. 109.4. For seeing we know, that if we
suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with Him, shall we not pray for them
that seal unto us the assurance of this hope? Therefore shall this be among my
chiefest joys, That the drunkards make songs upon me.

5. It may further be objected from John. 3.17. That God sent not His Son into
the world, to condemn the world, but that the world by Him might be saved. And
if He came to save the world, how shall He judge and condemn the wicked to
Hell fire, seeing this is contrary to the end of His coming? Answer. First,
that is spoken of His first coming only. Secondly, it is manifest by the
verse before, verse 16. that the world in this place signifies only the
faithful in the world, for whose sake the world is, and continues. For to
these only, God gave His only Son, that they should not perish, but have
everlasting life. And as Christ was once offered for these, at His first
coming; so for these shall He appear the second time to salvation. Heb. 9.28.
For the last judgment being but the confirmation of the sentence of their
justification, by the death of Christ, and the putting of them in the actual
possession of those promises that depend thereon; their sins are so covered,
as that (b) there shall not be any remembrance of them in the judgment. For
the worshippers that are once purged, have no more conscience of sin to their
condemnation. Hebr. 10.2. seeing the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance. And therefore (as a countryman of ours says well. Ames Med:
Theol: Cap. 41) This judgment, in respect of the faithful, is essential unto
Christ, as He is the Mediator: but in respect of the unfaithful, it is of
power only, given Him by the Father, not essential to His mediation, but some
way belonging to the perfection thereof; because the Father has committed all
judgment to the Son. Yet let me add thus much, that although the judgment
of condemnation be not essential to Christ, as the Mediator of reconciliation;
yet He being the great Steward of the house of God, it is essential to Him as
the Son of God, to take vengeance without mercy on them that dishonor His
Father, and despite the Holy Spirit of grace, which by the light of their
consciences proclaims their sin unto them, which they will in no wise forsake.

Henoch, who threatened that Judgment. Iud. 14. above 4500. years are passed,
and yet the world continues, and that which has been, is even that which
shall be, neither is any thing new under the Sun, Eccles. 1.9. Moreover though
for your reasons against the eternity of the world, Chap. 13. it may seem the
world is not eternal, a part ante, but that it had a beginning; yet is it not
clear, but that it may be eternal, a part post, and continue for ever, in as
much as the Creator cannot repen^ Himself to be the work-master of so
glorious a frame: So not to continue it in that being which it has, and to do
good unto it, as the Psalmist confesses, Psalm. 104. verse 31. The glory of the
Lord shall endure for ever; the Lord shall rejoice in His works. And if all
the creature being made, was exceeding good, Genesis 1. the destroying of so great
a good cannot be but a very great ill, which is far from that goodness, by
which it was created. I answer. That the Text of Eccles. prooves not but that
the judgment shall fit at last, and the books of every man's conscience shall
be open, that the judgment may be acknowledged to be according to their
works. And although the time seems to us to be prolonged, that the number of
the elect may be fulfilled, that the patience and long-suffering of God
toward the wicked may be manifest, for their repentance, that the desire of
the godly, and their longing for His coming may be inflamed: Yet to Him the
time is determined, and can neither be longer nor shorter than He has
appointed: only that coming to judgment has been proclaimed so long before,
that in all ages, men remembering the judgment, might avoid those things for
which they should be condemned. So for those reasons whereby you would enforce
the continuance of the world for ever, it has been answered, that it is for
the greater good to man and the creature which was made for his use, that this
world should have an end, that the creature might be freed from that corruption
to which it is subject by reason of his sin, then that it should still
continue. Neither does that text of the 104. Psalm, prove any thing to the
contrary. For as the glory of God had endured in eternity before the world: so
shall it continue, when neither the heaven nor the earth, nor yet their places
shall be found any more, Reu. 20.11. And as for that glory of His, which is
manifest in the creature, it shall be more wonderful and excellent in that
work of His recreation, which the Cabalists call de Mercava, when the creature
in the world to come shall be brought to glory, and be able to consider the
super-excellency of His mercy and goodness, than it is in this work, de
Bereshith, or state of creation in this present world. And if the deprivation
of this present being, seem to be ill, because the being of the creature was
good in the state of creation: then the taking away of all this ill, and misery
which is since come upon the creature by reason of sin, and the restoring of
it into an estate of happiness, without comparison, better and surer than that
wherein it was created, must in both respects be a far greater good, than
either to have created it such as it was, or to continue it in the present
being. Bring hither what you find in the 18. Chapter,. 2.

But because it seems not fully proved unto you, that this race and state of
mankind, and the world with him must come to an end, take with you a reason or
two, and think on them.

1. It has already been showed, Chap. 13. that no kind of infinity, either
of continuance, of power, of number, etc. can belong unto the world, or to the
creatures therein contained, from whence the present doubt is easily assoyled.

2. Also it has been proved before, Chap. 15. that man was created innocent:
and our miserable experience shows, that we are now subject to sin, and the
punishment thereof, death. It has likewise appeared, that there is a restoring
of mankind to a better life than that in which man was created, which cannot
be but in the perfection of the whole man, both in body and soul, as it will
appear further in the 38. Chapter. But it is impossible that a finite matier,
should be sufficient for infinite bodies: yet if the race and generation of
mankind should have no end, then their bodies must needs be infinite, which
because it is impossible, therefore the generation of mankind must have an end.

3. The generation of mankind is either by chance and fortune, and so it
cannot be continual, either before, or after; or else it is natural, and so
it must needs be for some end: For every motion has an end when it is come to
that period or bound wherein it does rest; otherwise, nature should work in
vain, which cannot stand with that wisdom which gave power unto nature, and
prescribed unto it how it should work, and proposed to what end. But if the
generation of mankind be infinite, then it is impossible that ever it should
come unto that uttermost end for which it was ordained. For although these, and
the millions of men that have been, and are, shall arive unto that end for
which they were created: yet they that are to come in infinity, cannot all be
brought to that end which is finite and determined. Therefore the generation of
mankind must needs be finite.

4. If there shall not be an end of the generation of men, then there can be no
differences among them: as to be virtuous, and vicious; wise, and fools;
good, and bad, etc. But this is most false and contrary to experience: yet the
former consequence is necessary. For it being put (as the reasons before partly
show, and partly suppose) that every man shall have his own body, and his own
soul: yet if the matier whereof their bodies shall be made, be finite, it
will be impossible that infinite bodies be made thereof: If it be infinite, yet
an infinite number of bodies will be answerable thereto: So that if the number
of Wisemen be infinite, there will be no matier for the bodies of fools: if
that number of fools be infinite, there will be no matier for the bodies of
the wise; if both be infinite, yet one infinity of matier cannot be sufficient
for two infinities of bodies: if both be finite, then have we that we sought
for, and the generation of men must of necessity have an end.

5. Nothing that is infinite, can consist of parts that are finite; for these
being terms contradictory, and most opposed, cannot be the original one of
another. But every particular man in this supposed infinity of the generation
of men, is finite in his being, in his continuance, and in every other
circumstance of his being: So this infinity in every of the parts thereof,
must be finite, and measurable to a time that is finite, and so must have an
end: or if to avoid this end, we must suppose that the time must be infinite,
yet so an infinite measure must be necessary, to measure those parts that are
finite. But this is impossible, and therefore the generation of men must needs
be finite. And if the generation of mankind must have an end, then also all
this creature which was made for his sake; for after him, the continuance
thereof should be to no use; but neither the work of God, nor of Nature His
servant can be in vain. Therefore the generation of mankind is finite.



Answer. 1. If the body being the instrument of all the works of the soul,
should not partake with the soul in the reward to those works: then the
justice of God should not be perfect. Therefore for the manifestation of the
justice of God, it is necessary, first that there be a resurrection of the
body, then that there be a judgment, that as men have done either good or bad
in their bodies, so in their bodies they may receive their reward. And this
answer shall be the first argument against those mockers, that say, where is
the promise of His coming?

2. If all men must rise again with their bodies, that they may receive
according to that which they have done in their bodies; then it is necessary
that there be an examination of those works which they have done. And this
examination of every man's works, with the execution of that sentence that
follows thereon, is that which we call the general Judgment. But the first
is necessary, as it will appear in that Article of the Resurrection. Therefore
also that there be a judgment of the quick and the dead.

3. Neither can there be any severing of the godly from the wicked, nor
discerning or comparing of their different works, nor any assignement of a
reward answerable thereto, but by a judgment wherein all are assembled. But
all these things are necessary to be. First, that the sheep may find
themselves freed from the violence and injury of the goats, who in all the time
of this world have push't them on the sides, have eaten up their pasture, and
trodden the residue under their feet, Ezech. 34.18. etc. Compare herewith, 2.
Pet. 2.8.9. Secondly, that the commandments of God first written in the heart
of every man; then expressed in the tables of stone; and at last most lively
interpreted by Christ Himself, Matthew. 5. may be found to be most just, when
the doers of the Law are rewarded, and the breakers punished. Neither is it
sufficient that every man's deeds be discussed in the particular judgment at
his death; for so neither their deeds nor rewards, nor the causes of them
should be known unto all; Therefore it is necessary that there be a general
judgment.

4. If there be not a general judgment wherein the deeds of all men shall be
tried and rewarded, then the hope of all virtuous men should be utterly void,
and their obedience to the Commandments of Meekness and Patience, without
reward, See Matthew. 5.43. and Luke 6.27, 28, etc. So also the promises of Christ
should fail of their truth and performance, See Matthew. 5.10. but these things
are impossible. So also virtue should have no advantage above vice, or rather
should be no virtue at all, when there were no difference in the reward. Nay,
rather virtue should be vice, and and vice virtue, and every man the more
wicked, violent, and bold he were, should be so much the more virtuous and
blessed, in as much as by violence and cruelty, he might without fear bring
his purposes to pass, to the hurt of others, although it were only to please
himself. But all these things are impossible, and utterly against the truth
and Justice of God. Therefore there shall be a general judgment, wherein the
deeds of all men shall be tried and rewarded.

5. That which was threatened from the beginning, by God Himself, must of
necessity come to pass at the last. But the judgment was threatened to Adam,
the common father of us all, and in him, against us all, because we were all in
him originally; that upon the breach of the commandment of God, Genesis 2.17. we
should be liable to death, both of body and soul. Neither was this only
threatened at the beginning, but ever since written as it were by the finger of
God in every man's heart, their own consciences accusing or excusing them in
the day when God shall judge the secrets of all men by Jesus Christ. Romans 2.15,
16. Therefore there shall be a judgment.

6. It is necessary, that the judgments of God done in this world, do appear
to be just: For shall not the Judge of all the world do right? Genes. 18.25.
But many of His judgments are yet hid, and unknown, and of them that are
known, yet the faithful do not always see the reason thereof, and so the
praise which is due unto God for His justice therein is lost. But it is
necessary that the equity and justice of God be manifest to all, that His
works may be magnified and He acknowledged to be just in His words, and pure
in His judgments. Psalm. 51.4. Therefore it is necessary, that there be a
revelation of the righteous judgment of God in the world to come.

7. No perfect judgment can be made of any t^ing, till the full end thereof
do appear: so that although the lire of man be ended, and a particular
judgment passed upon him; yet because many things succeed in the time to come,
which depend upon those things which he has done in his life; therefore it is
necessary that there be a final judgment at the last day, when those
dependances also shall have an end. For in respect of these dependances, a man
may be said to live after his body is dead, and that in diverse respects; As in
his fame, either good or bad, which oftentimes is very false, but at the last
judgment the truth shall appear: then in his writings, as the holy Prophets
and the Apostles live in those Oracles which the Holy Ghost gave out by them.
So Arius and other Heretics live yet in those venomous opinions which they
broached, and other vain people do hold after them. So parents live by the
example of their life, to the instruction, or corruption of their children
(Maxima debetur pueris reverentia) So by their correction and precepts to them,
in the fear and nurture of the Lord, or by the neglect thereof to their
destruction. Do you not hear me, ye foolish and wicked parents? know you not
yet that you shall answer for that wickedness of your children, which they
shall do through your default? And if there be any other way whereby a man may
be said to live, as in the furthering of good laws: So a man lives in his
buildings, or in the havocke of that estate which his Ancestors disposed to the
use of his children, in new fashions daily devised worse and worse, and if
there be any other thing which remains for example, either good or bad, after
death, it is necessary that it be enquired of, and rewarded in the last
judgment.

8. If there be not a general judgment, in which the blessedness of the
faithful, both in soul and body shall be perfected, then (...) the sufferings
of Christ, and those glories that followed thereon, should be to no end, seeing
He being in Himself God blessed above all, neither suffered nor did any of all
that which was wrought in His manhood, for any increase of happiness to
Himself, for that was impossible, but that the benefit thereof might be
manifest in us. But this cannot be till the general judgment: For then shall
the wicked see that there is a reward for the righteous; Then shall they know
that there is a God that judges the earth. Psalm. 58.11. Read hereto, Wisd.
Chap. 5.

9. All the dignities of God, have heretofore been proved to be infinite,
therefore also His justice; which should be defective, if it had not given a
perfect rule, according to which, all judgments ought to be guided: and if it
did not examine all judgments, thereby to ratify or cancel them. And because
not only the administration of public justice is with judgment, but also
every particular action whereto the will does consent; therefore it is
necessary that there be an universal judgment, wherein all judgments and
actions of men shall be examined and rewarded. From this justice also it
follows, that it ought to be well with the good, and ill with the wicked. And
because for the most part, it falls out contrary in this life, therefore it is
necessary so to be in the life to come. See 2 Thessalonians. 1.5, 6, 7.

10 And because judgment is not fully executed according to justice in this
world upon many offenders, in great and grievous, and hidden sins, and that
especially on great persons, who live as they list, oppress others, and hold
themselves beyond the compass of all laws: And moreover, because in this
state of mortality, man is not able to endure that punishment which is due to
His sin; therefore is it necessary, in the justice of God, that such sins
being not repented of, should be openly and fully punished in the world to
come, as it is said, Esaias 30.33. Tophet is ordained of old: yea, for the King
it is prepared: He has made it deep and large, the pyle thereof is fire and
much wood, the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, does kindle it.
Therefore there shall be a general judgment.

11. And if you will admit of an argument inductive, it may easily be admitted,
that there shall be a general judgment at the end of the world, by that
severity which God has so often showed, and does show, against sinners, to put
men in remembrance of that great day; As the drowning of the world, for their
cruelty, in the days of Noah; The overthrow of Sodom, for their unnatural
lust; The captivity of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, for their idolatry; And at
last, the utter casting off of that nation for their unbelief; The public
calamities of Plague, Wars, Earthquakes, and overflowings of Waters, to the
overthrowing of Cities and Countries, famine and death, every hour, attending
on every man in his greatest security, are so many summons to every man to
think on that day. For as the pilgrimage of Israel in the wilderness was the
type of our pilgrimage in this world; so their punishments were types unto us.
1 Cor. 10.11. But there is no type but of some thing which is to be indeed: So
that the destruction of the people in the wilderness, were both to them, and
especially to us on whom the ends of the world are come, an assured argument of
this great judgment at the last day. And as the carcasses of them that were
disobedient, fell in the wilderness, whereas the rest enjoyed the promised
land; So all those punishments that were remembered, bring to the faithful an
assured hope that God will deliver them. For Noah and Lot were saved from
destruction. Ebedmelech and Baru^h had their lives given as a prey. Ezechiel,
Daniel, and they that were signified by the basket of good figs, Iere. 24.5.
were carried away for their good. The Christians likewise were safe at Pella,
in the destruction of Jerusalem. Eusebius: Ecclesiast: hist: lib. 3 Cap. 5. So He
delivers from the noisome pestilence. Psalm. 91.3. etc. and in the days of
famine, those that wait on Him shall have enough. Psalm. 37.19. So these things
are testimonies unto us, both that there shall be a judgment, and that the
godly shall be saved, and the wicked condemned.

12 And as if nature it self had imprinted the acknowledgment of this
judgment in every man's mind; so there was never any man (c) that confessed the
resurrection, but did withal confess this general judgment. And therefore,
though every other Article of our Creed have been impugned by some heretic or
other, yet never any gainesayd this, I mean since those errors were stilled
in the Apostles time. See 2 Thessalonians. 2.1, 2, 3. But whether it be, that every man
acknowledging the justice of God (as no man can confess him to be God, whom he
does not believe to be just, and a rewarder of them that diligently seek Him)
Hebr. 11.6. or whether it be that the testimonies of the holy Scripture are so
clear in this point as that they have stopped the mouths of all heretics;
the thing it self is most certain to be, as it may appear by the texts of
Scripture already cited, and by these also that follow, Psalm. 9. verse. 8. The
Lord has prepared His Throne for judgment: He shall judge the world in
righteousness, He shall minister judgment unto the people in uprightness; And
Psalm. 50. verse. 3, 4, 5, 6. God shall come -- A fire shall devour before Him
-- He shall call to the heavens from above and to the earth, that He may
judge His people, etc. Psalm. 96.13. The Lord comes to judge the earth, He
shall judge the world with righteousness, and the people with His truth: As
it is also Psalm. 98.9. Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice, o young man, in thy youth, etc.
but know, that for all these things God will bring thee unto judgment: And
Eccles. 12.14. God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good, or whether it be ill. Read hereto. 2 Pet. 3. Chap.
from verse. 7. to 15. and Reu. 20. Chap. from verse. 11. to the end.

Jesus must be that judge. Whereto, though I have said that which may be
sufficient, at the beginning of the Chapter; yet because it is our special
hope and comfort, that He shall be our judge, that was our Creator, that has
so dearly bought us, that has been our Mediator, that does evermore preserve
us from the power of the enemy; let us both begin and end with this, lest the
conscience of our own sins, and the remembrance of that fearful time,
should cause us not to long for that coming. For if God be very terrible in
the assembly of His Saints, Psalm. 89.7. how much more in that gloomy day, when
He comes to render vengeance with devouring fire before Him, and to repay His
adversaries to their face? and to pass on them, that fearful sentence, that
shall (d) never be reversed, and from which there is no appeal? But lift up
your heads, you that are little in your own eyes, and tremble at His words,
for that is the day of your redemption, and God Himself will come and save
you. And because He is God, He knows the secrets of your hearts, and sees your
reverence and your fear before Him, and your acknowledgment of your own
unworthiness: And because He is man, and has had experience of sorrows, and
passed under the burden of unjust and cruel judgment, and has for us endured
the Cross and shame, that we might be delivered from the wrath to come:
therefore lift up your heads, and receive the reward of your faith and
patience; and the end of your hopes, the eternal salvation of your souls and
bodies.

1. For if our Lord having suffered such things for us, and having overcome in
all His sufferings, having ascended into heaven, to be our continual
intercessor for us, should not then give unto us that everlasting life which He
has purchased for us; His sufferings and intercession should be altogether in
vain, and our faith in Him, which He has wrought in us by His holy Spirit,
should be utterly void; and those promises which He has given us in His holy
Word, should fail of their truth and performance. But all these things are
impossible. And therefore our Lord Jesus shall come to give reward unto His
servants, both small and great, Revel. 11.18. and to cast out the unbeleevers
out of His kingdom.

2. In things that are orderly disposed for an end, nothing may be omitted of
those things that are necessary for the attainement of that end. The end of our
Lords incarnation and sufferings concerns either God or man. Concerning
mankind everlasting life in all happiness and joy, is that great end for which
our Savior was incarnate, died, and rose again and shall raise us up at the
last day; And by His judgment of mercy and compassion on us, shall deliver
unto us the seizure and possession of that eternal happiness. Therefore our
Lord Jesus shall be judge of the quick and the dead. Concerning God, it is
necessary that in His love to His Father and zeal to His honor, He take
vengeance on them that have offended the infinite justice, and despised that
mercy and pardon which has been offered unto them, and still have continued
in their sin, and followed it with greediness. Therefore in this respect also,
our Lord Jesus Christ shall be the Judge of the quick and the dead.

3. And seeing our Lord Jesus has undertaken that honorable enterprise
utterly to destroy the works of the devil, it is necessary that He leave
nothing unperformed, which does belong to the accomplishment thereof. Therefore
He shall judge those Angels which are reserved in chains of darkness unto
that day, and bring upon them that destruction which they sought to bring upon
all mankind; And shall also reward those servants of His, which have continued
faithful in His service, whether they be Angels or men.

4. None is so fit to judge between two, as he that has interest in both
parties, and knows the worthiness of them both, and that not only in his
understanding, but also by his experience of them both. But mankind is to be
judged for that which he has done contrary or according to the will of God.
Therefore seeing our Lord Jesus is very God and very man (as it has been
prooved) He shall be the judge of the quick and the dead.

5. In every orderly and just judgment, both the Judge and the sentence ought
to be manifest and known to all them that are to be judged. And because man
kind is to be sentenced to joy or pain eternal, both in soul and body: And
that if either the Person of the Father, or of the Holy Ghost should judge,
otherwise than by the Son, as they are no way to be apprehended by the bodily
senses of the wicked: so neither could the judge be seen, nor the sentence
heard; Therefore it is necessary that our Lord Jesus do execute the general
judgment, as being the Mediator between God, and His creature, And that the
performance of that judgment be by Him in His manly being, as it is said,
John 5.27. 1. For seeing the exaltation and glory of Christ is the reward of
His humility, Phil. 2.8.9. it is just with God, that He that was most unjustly
judged, should be the Judge of all the world. 2. Moreover, seeing He has
received power to raise the dead, for that which He performed in His manhood,
it is fit that the judgment should be by Him in His manhood. 3. And seeing in
His manly being, He taught the way to everlasting life; it is fit that He in
His manly being, should require of us an account of the practice of His
precepts.

6. None is so fit to judge the world, as He in whom the perfection of justice,
and compassion on mankind are accorded. Our Lord Jesus because He is God, is
infinite in His justice: and because He is man, and knows man's weakness,
better than man himself; therefore can none be so merciful and compassionate
on man as He, especially, having Himself been oppressed by the most unjust
judgments of the Priests, and of Pilate. Therefore our Lord Jesus shall judge
the quick and the dead: For being pronounced innocent, and yet condemned, John
18.38. and 19.6.16. He has power to acquit them that are condemned in
themselves, and to give them His innocence, that it may be availeable to
them, which was not availeable to Himself.

7. This is that doctrine which He left unto His Church, as it is said, Acts
10.42. Jesus of Nazareth commanded us to preach unto the people, and to
testify that it is He which was ordained of God to be the judge of the quick
and the dead. So Saint Paul, Romans 14.10, 11. says from the Prophet Esaias,
45.23. we shall all stand before the judgment Seat of Christ. For it is
written, as I live says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every
tongue shall confess to God. 2. Tim. 4.1. The Lord Jesus shall judge the
quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom. And Rev. 1.7. Behold,
He comes with the clouds, and every eye shall see Him, even they that
pierced Him, and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of Him; Even so
Amen.

Notes.. 1.
(a) AS some have thought.] Diverse unnecessary questions have been moved about
this general judgment. Some concerning the signs, and circumstances that go
before it; As whether that fire which goes before the face of the judge, be it,
by which the Heaven and earth shall be purged. Some concerning the adjuncts of
the judgment, as concerning the place, whether it shall be in the valley of
Iehoshaphat; For which they bring Joel, 3. verse 2. and 12. And reason that He
shall judge there where He was judged, and despitefully entreated. For this
valley is between Jerusalem and Mount Olivet, over which our Lord was led to
Jerusalem, after He was taken in the close of Gethsemane, which valley some
suppose to be named of Iehoshaphat the King; and that because he gave thanks
there with his Army, after his spoil of the Ammonites, 2. Chron. 20. But the
circumstances of the history accord not well with this, but rather that that
valley of Barachah, where the King gave thanks, was in the Tribe of Judah,
near to the wilderness of Ieruel, as Adrichomius describes it from Ierom,
Brocard, and others. But this being put, that the Lord shall descend from
heaven to judge; wheresoever He shall judge, according to the interpretation of
the Name Iehova is Judge, there is the valley of Iehoshaphat, which the Prophet
therefore mentions, because that valley was the usual place where they buried
the Israelites that died at Jerusalem. So they move question here, what causes
and persons shall come into Judgment? And the consequents of the judgment
they enquire, what manner of fire the fire of hell is; and supposing it to be
bodily, to torment the bodies of the damned, how the devils, which they
suppose to be purely Spirits, can be tormented by a bodily fire. And hereupon
also, they move doubt about the qualities of the bodies which (according to the
opinion of the Stoics concerning the souls, Lactant. lib. 7. cap. 20. to the
damned they think, shall be base and subject to passion, to the blessed
contrary; with many such curious questions, as you may see in Tho. Aqu. in
Sent. lib. 4. Did. 44.5, 6. etc. of which, perhaps you may find some answered
here, as far as it stands with the clearing of this Article.

1. And first because the ill angels were utterly given over for their sin,
and they by their malice confirmed only in ill, their actions being ever
unanswerable, and they beforehand condemned, therefore it may seem that there
shall be no inquiry of their actions, but only the sentence of condemnation
is to pass upon them, and accordingly the execution: So the good Angels,
because they have been kept from sin, and confirmed in goodness, are
exempted from enquiry of their actions, being only good: so they shall have
the sentence of approbation.

2. Concerning Infants, there is much more question. For some will have all the
Infants of infidels to be damned: others put to them the infants of believers
also that were never baptized: And this hard sentence is passed on them,
because their original sin was never washed away in baptism: But seeing
original guiltiness in Infants is only by the stain of nature, that the
whole world may be guilty before God, and so be the subject of His mercy, Romans
3.19. may it not stand as well with the mercy of God, that the faith of their
Parents should be imputed to them for their justification unto life, although
they were not baptized, as it does stand with His justice to condemn them,
because they are tainted by their Parents? For the children of the faithful,
see the judgment of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 7.14. For the Infants of infidels, I
say only this, What have thou to do to judge another man's servant? Hierax and
his followers are accounted heretics, because they condemned the Children that
died before they had knowledge; yet brought he a show of authority for his
opinion, out of 2. Tim. 2.5. No man is crowned except he strive. But I answer,
that Christ in His agony did strive for them, and His merit apprehended by the
faith of the Parents, brings them within the compass of the Covenant made to
Abraham and to his seed, as Saint Paul argues, Romans 4.16. Gal. 3.6, 7, 8. and
1. Cor. cited before. Epiph. Haer. 67. adds hereunto auctorities which make
the case most clear, especially for the Infants of the faithful, as that in
Psalm. 145.9. His tender mercies are over all his works: and Matthew. 21.16. Out
of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings have thou perfected thy praise, Matt.
19.14. Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, and argues that although the Children
of Bethlehem had not knowledge of Him, for whom they suffered; yet can it not
be, but that they should be partakers of glory for His sake for whom they
suffered. Hereto you may take that in Matthew. 18.14. It is not the will of your
Father which is in heaven, that one of these little ones should perish.

3. But the Doctors square most about them, that lived both to know and to do
both good and ill: For some think that all such must come into judgment for
all their works, their words, and thoughts. But others say, that neither the
Infidells, because he that believes not is condemned already, John 3.18. nor
among the believers, they that are perfect shall come into judgment; because
there is nothing in them for which they should be condemned (But if the
infidells never heard, how could they believe, Romans 10.17. and is there any
among the believers that can say, his heart is clean?) Therefore the great
business in the judgment will be (as they suppose) about them that knew God,
and lived in His Religion, whose works, good and bad, being examined and
compared together, if the good be more, and overbalance the bad, the doers
shall be justified unto eternal life: but if the ill deeds exceed, they shall
be condemned to punishment. This seems to be the judgment of Lactantius lib.
7. cap. 20. to whom as syding with him, John Voss. De extr. Iud. Pte. 1 Thessalonians.
4. writes. Ierom. August. Greg. the Great, and Isidore of Sivil. But
Lactantius has many things concerning the worlds restoring, and the last
judgment, which to many of this age would seem strange, which perhaps we may
see hereafter. Ierom and Augustine are by and by brought by him into the number
of them that think that all sins indifferently shall be brought into
judgment, though not by way of inquiry or examination, yet of condemnation,
as Ierom speaks, impios and negatores non judicabit, sed arguet condemnatos.
And thus you see how the Saints already have judged the world. But let us see
how far it is fit to approve, or reprove their judgment.

Christ, because they (as I said before,. 3. number. 5.) at the hour of their
death are admitted into a degree of everlasting happiness, and are put in the
full assurance of the perfection thereof, at the resurrection of their bodies:
their sins are assuredly pardoned, and the pardon by those graces is sealed
unto them. And after their sins fully pardoned, to bring them again into
remembrance at the general judgment, seems too inconvenient. Therefore they
shall be partakers of that blessing, which is, John 5.24. never to come into
judgment. And Psalm. 32. verse 1.2. that their sins shall be forgiven, fully
covered, and no way imputed unto them; and in this respect are they equal unto
the Angels, because their sins shall be forgotten, as cast into the botome of
the Sea: but the good deeds which God has wrought in them, and by them, shall
be remembered, that they may be rewarded: and thus far we follow the Doctors.
But because their judgments are otherwise contrary to the rule which is, 1.
Cor. 4.5. Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come who will both
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
Counsels of the hearts: Let us first see what the Scripture says of the
infidells whom they so cast away, as that they hold them not fit to be judged:
then let us look on that which they speak concerning the comparison of good
and ill works together, for eternal life, or eternal punishment.

1 For the first, it is manifest by Saint Paul, that the works of the
Gentiles, whom they call infidells, shall come into judgment, where he says,
Romans 2. verse 14, 15, 16. That the Gentiles doing by nature the things
contained in the Law, show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their
conscience bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing or excusing them in
the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ. Now this
(...), this written word of the Law, is the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. And
seeing every man, whether Christian, Jew, or Gentile, has the knowledge of
sin in himself: therefore is every mouth stopped thereby, and all the world
is become guilty before God, and consequently, subject to judgment, as Saint
Jude says, verse 14. and 15. Behold the Lord comes to execute judgment upon
all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly
deeds, and of all their hard speeches.

2. Moreover seeing we do not put all sins to be equal, as the Stoics,
but do believe and know, that the Judge of all the world will do right, and
that the greater sins shall have the sorer punishment; if all the Gentiles or
infidells be not equally sinners, it is necessary that the award of their
punishment, and so the execution thereof be also different and unequal, as it
is said, That every one shall receive the things done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or ill. Upon which ground we may
safely conclude against them of the contrary opinion, that every man's deeds, of
what Nation or sect soever he be, (except before excepted) and especially the
deeds of the reprobate, shall be particularly examined, that the cause of
their condemnation may appear to be most just.

3. Thus our Lord speaks of the Queen of the South, and the men of Ninive that
shall rise in judgment and condemn that hard-hearted generation: thus of Tire
and Sidon, that should more favorably be dealt with, then those wicked Cities
where his glorious miracles being wrought had no power to turn them unto God.
But no such condemnation of the one by the other can be, but by comparison of
their works. Therefore the works of the Infidels must come into judgment.

That which they bring for proof, that the Heathen shall not be judged in His
sight, has no sure ground, as that in Psalm. 1. The wicked shall not rise
again in the judgment, as the greeks translated (...) Lo Yakyma (...) which
had been better (...), for the word (...) Kom, here signifies not only to
arise, but to stand firm and sure, as they that are risen and stand upright.
So the meaning is, They shall not stand or be established, that is, not
justified in the judgment. So they bring that in the third of John verse 18.
He that believes not, is condemned already; but that is not spoken of the
Gentiles that never heard of Christ: but of such Infidells as were in the
Church of the Jews that knew Christ to have suffered, and believed not in Him,
as it is manifest by the 14 and 15. verses: And these having the conscience of
their sin, and refusing the means of satisfaction to the justice of God, must
be condemned in themselves. Neither do they say any thing to the contrary, who
object that a long time must be needful to the examination of the wicked men's
deeds, words and purposes. For the book of every man's conscience shall be
opened, and they shall at once be made to see the whole story of their sinful
life. Neither shall words be needful, where the deeds are manifest. But what
time soever is taken thereto (as there is a time for every thing) it will
neither seem long to the blessed, nor long enough to them that are damned. And
thus I think it is plain, that the works of the Gentiles shall come into
judgment.

4. Moreover, seeing the Gentiles, though they have not the Law written, yet
are a law unto themselves; And seeing God, the just rewarder of all men,
renders to every man, whether Jew or Gentile, according to his deeds; to them
that by continuance in well-doing, seek glory and immortality, eternal life;
What brazen faced hypocrite art thou, who contrary to the commandment of God
Himself, Mat. 7.1, 2. and Romans 14.4. do presume to judge; yea, and that
being so threatened, that with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged? If
God be no accepter of persons, but that in every nation he that fears God, and
works righteousness, is accepted of Him, (for the prayers of Cornelius, Act.
10. and his alms came up for a memorial before God, before he heard the
Gospel preached by Peter) why shall we presume to judge them that are without,
the judgment of whom belongs only unto God. 1. Corinthians 15.13. How shall
any one be able to moove the sure foundation of God? or be so bold as to
break His seal? The Lord knows who are His! I say not of the heathens,
Pythagoras, Heraclitus, or the rest, as Justin Martyr Apol. ad Antonin. said of
Socrates, that he walked with God, as Abraham and Elias; yet he had this hope,
that after death it should be better to them that had lived well, then to the
wicked, Plat. in Phaed. And certain it is, that he died by the sentence of the
unjust Athenians for this, Because he taught that there was one only true God,
which I doubt these busy censurers would hardly do. But this I say, That
seeing Christ is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but
for the sins of the whole world. 1 John 2.2. Let no man enquire how this
satisfaction of Christ is made effectual unto them, seeing He is found of them
that sought Him not. Esaias 65.1. Neither let the Christian, that one sheep of
an hundred, which the good Shepherd has sought and brought home, be so
uncharitable as to give those ninety and nine left alone in the wilderness of
this world, as a pr^y devoted to the roaring lion. But shall we not follow our
Guides? and what is more usual with them then Esau the reprobate, Saul the
reprobate: So Ishmael, Pharaoh, and who they please beside? Yea, and Solomon
that glorious Type of Christ, in the Church restored, is somewhat doubted of.
It is well that he was a Prophet, and so by the word of Christ in the Kingdom
of Heaven, Luke 13.28. for the rest you may understand the teachers according
to their true meaning. Concerning Ishmael and his mother Hagar, the allegory is
expounded by Saint Paul, Gal. 3.22. etc. that he signified the Church of the
Jews, and their servitude under the Ceremonial Law, and lastly their
rejection. But yet he himself held the worship of God as his father taught
him, as it is manifest in Genesis 18.19. and 28.6, 7, 8, 9. And though Pharaoh
were a figure of the persecuters of the Church that were to come; though Saul
were cast out from the kingdom, because the eternal kingdom was to be set up
in Judah, Genes. 49.8, 11. though Esau was a type of the present apostasy, yet
does it not thereupon follow, that they were damned. And although Esau the
profane, prized not his birthright, the gift of God, as he ought, (...). --
His glorious gift ought not to be set light by: nay, though it be said of him,
Mal. 1.3. Esau have I hated, yet ought we not from thence to judge, that this
was to eternal damnation of him and his for ever: but because the promised
seed was to come of Jacob, not of Esau: because not only worldly preferments,
as that the posterity of Jacob should rule over the Edomites, but that the
giving of the Law also, and the succession of the Church was to be continued in
the posterity of Jacob, till Christ came; therefore, in comparison of Jacob,
Esau, after a sort, that is, for such degrees of preeminence, might seem to be
hated: yet held he and his the true Religion; for both Iobab, or Job, and his
three friends, Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar, are all accounted Edomites, See
Lam. 4.21. and the addition to the book of Job, in the Greek translation.
Object. But they are held accursed that say, that every man shall be saved by
that law, or sect, which he professes, seeing the Scriptures affirm, that
there is no name given under heaven, by which men may be saved, but only the
Name of Jesus Christ. Article Eccles. 8. Answer. And most justly are they to be
held accursed: For it was showed, even now, that there is no Law which brought
not with it the knowledge of sin, and therefore enforces the necessity of a
Mediator, which we according to the Scripture have manifested, in Chap. 24. to
be our Lord Jesus Christ, apprehended by a true faith, which is wrought in us
inwardly by the Spirit of God, and outwardly by His Word read and preached; And
beside this, in the visible Church, there is no means of salvation: But
because the Gentiles have not this knowledge of Christ, and yet whosoever is
saved among them, cannot be saved by any other means then by His mediation,
and satisfaction: therefore this being among those secret things which belong
unto God, Deuteronomy. 29.29. We must leave it unto Him, as to choose among them whom
He will take to Himself, So also how He will make the Savior known unto
them.

3. Now concerning that sentence which is to pass upon them that are to be
judged by the ballancing of their works, good and ill, as was showed before, I
affirm as our holy Church has taught me out of the holy Scriptures, Art. 12.
That good works can neither put away our sins, nor avail us any thing, for
satisfaction for our sins toward God; much less merit eternal life; no nor
endure the severity of Gods judgment, if He should examine our best works:
yea even our prayers are not without sin, according to the rule of His
justice. And therefore to teach that we shall be justified unto everlasting
life, if our good works shall be more, and more heavy then our ill; or if our
ill exceed, we shall be damned, is a line of heresy, contrary to the wholesome
words of the holy Scripture: as where our Lord says, Luke 17.10. When ye
shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to do. Saint Paul
also says, Romans 3.24. We are justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Read further what you find to this purpose,
to the 15. verse of Chap. 4. Moreover, seeing in many things we sin all, how
can it be thought, that the works of a finite creature, can any way be
accepted for satisfaction of sins against an infinite justice? I answer. That
it does. I, but we are commanded to work out our salvation. Answer. This
argument, with other to the like purpose, you may find with their answers, in
the end of the 19. Chapter. One text of Scripture there is, 2 Cor. 5.10. which
is directly to this Article of the last judgment. And because it troubled me
for a long time, and may perhaps trouble the minds of others that have as
little understanding as my self, I will willingly help them, as I was helped;
The words are, We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ; that
every man may receive the things done in his body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or bad. Why blessed Paul (quoth I) what new Gospel is
this? Is the merit of Christ so vanished, that we must be justified according
to our works? If so, then certainly Christ did die in vain. I imparted my
doubt, but found no satisfaction; then I remembered that this second Epistle was
as it were (...) an addition, or further explication of such things as the
Corinthians had enquired, and to which he had answered in the former, as you
read, Chap: 7.1. And so I took this text, to stand as a proposition for
further proof of the resurrection; thus, The Law of justice requires that
every man should suffer in his body, according to that which he has done, be
it good or bad. Therefore the body shall rise again. At last, conferring with
my reverend and learned friend, Master R. S. about this text, he taught me the
true understanding thereof, with more joy to me, then if he should have given
me the wealth of an Alderman, or the honor of a great Lord, to wit, That the
faithful being received into everlasting life, for the merit and satisfaction
of Christ, which is made theirs by faith, and to the penny given, Mat. 20.
their obedience also shall be crowned according to the difference of their
works. And thus the Saints in the resurrection shall differ, as one star
differs from another in glory. And as it is in the reward of the Saints, so
shall the difference be in those punishments which shall be awarded unto the
wicked, as it is said, Lu. 12 47, 48. The servant that knew His Lords will, and
prepared not himself, neither did according to His will, shall be beaten with
many stripes. But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes,
shall be beaten with few stripes. And therefore thou that art called by that
glorious name of a Christian, see that thy works be answerable to thy
profession: for it is not the bare name or profession only, that shall avail
thee any thing. Non honor est sed onus, species laesura ferentem, unless thou
do walk according to the rule of Christianity. Let every one that calls
on the Name of the Lord, depart from iniquity, otherways it will be easier for
those Pagans and Infidells, whom thou do condemn, then for thee.

(b) There shall not be any remembrance] See the Note (a) before 2.

(c) That confessed the resurrection] Some twenty sects of heretics may be
reckoned that denied the resurrection of the body, and all these are bound to
deny the general judgment, in that sense as we understand it. But John
Vossius De extr: Iud: These. 1. writes out of Philastrius, but leaves it to your
courtesy to believe it, That 4. sects of heretics did in particular deny this
Article. But Philastrius walks alone; for neither they that write of heresies
before him, as Irenaeus and Tertullian, nor Epiphanius in his own time, nor
Augustine after him, mention any such thing. Concerning the Borborites and
Florinians, whom he accuses, they held nothing to infringe this Article, either
directly, or by any consequence. But Proclus, because he denied that Christ was
come in the flesh, denied it in our meaning, but not absolutely. The Manichees
were indeed far from hence; not only because they said, that Christ redeemed
only the souls of men, but especially because they denied the resurrection of
the body. How much better thought the heathen, who though they knew not the
resurrection, nor the general judgment, as we; yet they held a particular
judgment, as it appears by Acacus, Manos and Radamanth, and so joy in
Elysium, and torments in hell, as you may read in Platoes Phaedon, in Virgil
Aeneid. lib. 6. and elsewhere.

Quam pene furvae regna Proserpinae,
Et judicantem vidimus Aeacum? etc.
(d) Never to be reversed.] Sibyl, toward the end of her second book, seems
to dispense with the rigor of this sentence, and to lean to that heathenish
fancy of purgatory, not that of the Papists; but that when the damned have in
hell paid thrice so much punishment as their sins came to, then at the
entreaty of the Saints, they shall be freed from thence into Elysium. For if
you read her verses that go before, and after, they will sound so much.

(...)
(...),
(...)
(...) --.
Another thing the Eternal God unto the Saints will grant,
When they shall humbly pray unto His sacred Majesty,
To save men from the scorching flame, and endless misery.
But can a finite creature make treble satisfaction for an offense against an
infinite justice? or if it could, can perfect justice require it? or can a man
be more merciful then God, or pity the creature more than He? or is His just
doom to be dispenst withal? or dare any Saint undertake for one condemned,
who without mercy were in the same condemnation? But it seems she speaks as
she had learned by tradition, or (which is confessed by most) that her Oracles
have been corrupted; And it seems that some men have been of this mind, as
you may see in Thom: Aquin: in Sent: lib. 4. Did: 46. q. 4. Yet if the
question were rightly stated, and examined according to reason, the affirmative
might seem more probable, than that opinion which they father upon Saint
Origin, that the devils also shall be saved at last. But because it is not fit
in this grammar of Christian Religion, to trouble the vulgar ears with
paradoxes, you may perhaps find this question handled in that book which is
entitled, Arithmetica sacra. In the mean time, he shall further me much
therein, that shall truly teach me the true and uttermost meaning of the
Iubile.

ARTICLE VIII. I believe in the Holy Ghost.
CHAP. XXXIII.
. 1. THe word Ghost in English, our true speech; is as much as athem, or
breath; in our new Latin language, a Spirit. The metaphorical use of it, as
it signifies a quality, as we say, the Spirit of meekness, of jealousy, of
pride, or that spirit of 7. devils, which troubles and overturnes the state of
the world, which God does hate above all other, Psalm. 10.3. I mean the spirit
of covetousness has no place here: nor yet the word, spirit, as it may mean
any being elementall, as we speak of the wind, or any subtle steame raised
from a moist body: nor yet as it signifies those created ethereall spirits,
which we call Angels: but only as our Lord speaks, John 4.24. God is a
Spirit, which as it is spoken of the Godhead essentially: so here we
confess that we believe in the Holy Ghost, or Spirit, that third Person in
the glorious Trinity, our God, our Sanctifier, our Comforter, eternally one
with the Father, and the Son, unto whose faith and service only we are
baptized, as our Savior commanded, Matthew. 28.19. Go teach all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. As
fast as our heavy-footed reason can follow our faith, I have in the 10, 11, and
12. Chapter, and Notes thereon, already showed the distinct substances of the
three Person in the unity of their essence, so that it seems there is nothing
in this place needful to that point, but only to bring those Scriptures which
do directly prove the Godhead of the Holy Ghost, and that He does proceed
from the Father and the Son. For the first, you may take these Texts, 1. John
5.7. There are three that bear witness in heaven, the Father, the Word, and
the Holy Spirit; and these three are one. Acts 5.3.4. Why has Satan filled
thy heart, that thou should lie unto the Holy Ghost? Thou have not lied unto
men, but unto God. Mark 3.29. He that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost,
has never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation. Therefore the
Holy Ghost is God. Take hereto texts brought, Chap. 11.. 3. number. 9. By all
which Scriptures it is manifest, that the Holy Ghost is God coessentiall with
the Father, and the Son, and therefore to be worshipped and glorified with
the same glory with them. And that He does proceed from the Father and the
Son, these texts do make it plain, John 15.26. When the Comforter is come
whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth which
proceeds from the Father, He will testify of me. And John 16.7. If I
depart, I will send the Comforter unto you. Romans 8.9. He is called the Spirit
of God, and the Spirit of Christ. Gal. 4.6. Because ye are sons; God has
sent the Spirit of His Son into your hearts, crying Abba Father. See Rev.
5.6. and John 20.22. He breathed on them and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost.
By which it is manifest, that the Holy Ghost proceeds from Him. And this is
that Holy Spirit that dwells in us, and that not only by His graces, and
gifts in us; nor only as God every where present, that works all in all; but
also as in those Temples which He has sanctified for His perpetual dwelling,
as it is said, 1. Cor. 6.19. Know ye not that your body is the temple of the
Holy Ghost, which is in you? Neither does the Holy Ghost only dwell with them
whom He has sanctified unto Himself, but together with Him, both the Father
and the Son, as it is said, John 14.16. I will pray the Father, and He shall
give you another comforter, even the Spirit of truth, that He may abide with
you for ever; And again, verse 23. If a man love me, he will keep my
words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our
abode with him. And thus is the Tabernacle of God with men, and thus does He
dwell among them. Therefore let us remember that precept. Ephesians. 4.30. Not to
grieve that Holy Spirit (by our wilful sins) whereby we are sealed to the
day of redemption: For if any man defile the Temple of God, him will God
destroy, 1. Cor. 3.17. This is the seal and pledge of our eternal hope: For
if the spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead does dwell in us, He
shall also quicken our mortal bodies by His Spirit that dwells in us, as I
showed more fully, Chap. 17.. 4. number. 2. Neither indeed were it any assurance
of hope or comfort to know and believe that God the Father created all things
by Jesus Christ, and that Christ the Son of God died for the sins of men,
(for so much the devils acknowledge) except we did also know and believe that
the fruit and effect of that redemption did belong to every believer in
particular, and that in the eternal purpose of God, we were created unto this
hope. And this faith and knowledge is wrought in us only by the Holy Ghost, as
you may read, John 16.13.14. and Ephesians. 1. from verse 17. to the end. Neither yet
could we have sure consolation in this witness of the Holy Ghost unto our
hearts, except we did certainly know that this Holy Ghost which witnesses
these things unto us, were God, who cannot lie. Whereof we have full proof by
those graces which He works in us; as first the knowledge of the truth;
then faith to believe it; then as living water, does he wash our consciences
from sin; then (as another Evangelist speaks) does He as fire, inflame our
hearts with the love of God, a hatred of sin, and a desire to walk in
newness of life: and although we be daily assaulted by the world, and the
devil, to whom we are often betrayed by our own wicked imagination; ye does
He not forsake us for ever; but when we see our selves to have no strength of
our selves, to stand in the least temptation, and so have learned not to trust
in our selves, but in the living God, and to desire His help; then does He
return and comfort us in all the troubles of our mind, and even in death it
self, makes us more than conquerors. Oh what is man, that thou should take
such tender care of Him, or the son of sinful flesh! that thou should so
visit him? Now it is impossible that any created Spirit, at one time, in all
places of the world; and that ever since God created man upon the earth, even
unto the last man that shall be borne, should work these different effects in
the hearts of all Gods children: And therefore the Holy Ghost is God. And His
witness in our hearts that we are the sons of God, is an eternal truth,
and such as has neither falsehood nor doubt, nor double meaning.

Spirit belong essentially to all the Persons of the Godhead, and that they
be all holiness it self, as it is said, Es. 6.3. Holy, Holy, Holy is the
Lord of Hosts, how is it here appropriated to the third Person? Is not the
difference of Persons taken away hereby, seeing every one is a Holy Spirit? I
answer. That in this place, as in many other texts of Holy Scripture, the
words, Holy Spirit, are taken relatively or Personally, as they mean that
third Person of the Holy Trinity, with that relation of procession which He
has from the Father and the Son, as it was showed Chap. 11. Re. 8.

2. But it is said, John 7.39. That the Holy Ghost was not yet; which takes
away His eternity, and so His Godhead.

Answer. Tropes and figures are usual in every language, though not minded by
the vulgar sort. So here is a Metonymia, or taking of the author for the gifts
of diverse tongues, miracles, prophecy, and such like, and these gifts were not
yet given, as it follows in the text, because that Jesus was not yet
glorified: that it might appear to all, that these were His gifts, who was
before crucified. Compare herewith, John 16.7. Ephe. 4.8. and 11. 1. Cor. 12.8,
etc.

3. (a) If the procession of the Holy Ghost be perfect from the Father, then
does He not proceed from the Son; or if it be necessary that He proceed
from the Son also, then must there be in Him something of composition, of
superaddition, or the like, whereby His being should not be most simple, which
were to deny Him to be God. So also the procession from the first principle
not being perfect, would argue a defect therein.

Answer. This is as if you should reason thus. If the way between Thebes and
Athens, be the ready way from Thebes to Athens, then can it not be the way from
Athens to Thebes. But I say that the procession, emanation, or out-flowing of
the Holy Ghost from the Father, is most perfect, infinite, and eternal, as
from that being from which the procession is actively, as the action of
understanding is in, and yet from the mind which does understand, as from the
active principle. But the procession, or emanation of the Holy Ghost from the
Son, is likewise infinite, and eternal, as from the passive principle, as
the understanding is from that object which is understood. And so the
procession of the Holy Ghost is perfect, infinite and eternal, both from the
Father and the Son. And because all this is in the Godhead only (for I
speak not now of those graces and mercies which are from God upon the
creature) therefore it is necessary that the Holy Ghost be God blessed above
all, infinitely and eternally, one being with the Father and the Son.

You will here ask me what the difference is between generation, whereby the
Son is from the Father, and procession, whereby the Holy Ghost is from the
Father and the Son? If I confess that I can neither speak nor conceive it,
you must hold me excused: For in those things that are not lawful, nor
possible for the creature to know, it is not fit to enquire. But you may
remember that heretofore, although we concluded according to the rule of
truth, the Holy Scripture, that all the Persons in the Holy Trinity, were in
their absolute being one; yet by the same rule, and the enforcement of reason
we were compelled to yield unto the Father, as concerning His Personal being,
the precedence of original, as being that fountain of life and glory, from
which the other Persons do proceed. And because our Lord Jesus is the
express Image of the Father, Heb. 1.3. whose procession or going forth is from
eternity, Mich. 5.2. and He by the style of the Holy Scripture, called the
Son of God, Psalm. 2.7. therefore do we attribute unto Him, as concerning
His Personal being, the word of generation, or being begotten; yet in respect
of His absolute essence, wherein He is one with the Father, He is also called
the everlasting Father, Esaias 9.6. But because all things in the Godhead are in
the infinity of perfection, and that the being of the Holy Ghost is alike both
from the Father and the Son; and that no perfect being has two Fathers,
therefore is His personal being said to be rather by procession then by
generation.



It is manifest unto all reason, that nothing can be a cause, and yet not be;
for that would bring a contradiction, which the understanding of the fool of
fools, I mean the Atheist, could not endure, that a thing that has no manner
of being, should be of such powerful being, as that it should cause, either
it self, or another thing, to be. And because we see that diverse things are,
which could not cause themselves to be, when they were not; it follows
necessarily, that there were causes of their being, and that all their causes
did work as they were ordered and moved by their first cause: which (seeing
it is the cause of all beings) must of it self not only be; but also have
power both to be of it self, and also to moove all other causes to work to
their determinate ends. And this most excellent and first being, the cause of
all other, is that which we call God, in whom (you see) the first thing which
we can understand, is, to be: but that eternally, because there is nothing
before Him which might give Him His being; and infinitely, because there was
nothing which could put any bounds to His being. The next thing that we can
understand of God, is, that He has power both to be and to work; but no work
or action can be, but in that which has both actual being, and also power to
work. And if from hence I should conclude a Trinity of Persons, in the unity
of that one powerful and active being; the whole creature would say, Amen. For
as every effect is answerable to the cause, and by that voice which it has,
shows what the cause was; so you shall find that every created being has in
it matier, or that which is proportionable thereto, which is as the simple
being thereof; then form whereby it has power to work, and lastly working
according to that property which arises from the matier and the form. For as
Saint Paul says of mankind, so is it true in every thing, That, in Him, or By
Him, we moove, that is, our action, and Live, that is the power from whence our
action arises, and Are, that is the foundation of both the other. But because
this argument would be but inductive, therefore I refer you to the 11.
Chapter before, for further proof of the Trinity of Persons in unity of the
Godhead. Return then to where you left. GOD is the first of beings, and
therefore eternal a part ante, for otherwise something should have been
before Him, which should have caused Him to be: but we consented to the
contrary before. And if He be the first of beings, then nothing made by Him,
can be greater then He, by whose power He might be brought to nothing; And
therefore He is eternal a part post, to endure for ever eternally. And if God
be the first of all beings; then it is necessary that His being be most simple
and pure, as having nothing therein of any dependence of another, unto whom
either matier, form, composition, accident, or any possibility to be either
more, lesser, greater, or other then He is, can any way belong. And if God be
eternal, it follows necessarily, that He have infinite power to continue
eternally. But an infinite power cannot be but in an infinite being, therefore
His being is infinite. And because nothing can be in His most simple being, but
that which is essentially Himself; therefore infinity must be His being, and
His being, infinity. And if God be infinite in His being, then it is
impossible that any perfection of being should be wanting to His being, for so
His being could not be infinite. And therefore, Wisdom, Goodness, Truth,
Glory, and all other excellencies of being, are in Him infinitely, perfectly,
and eternally. And because no abatement, want, or littleness can be in
infinity, therefore is it necessary that all those perfections which are in
God, be also active or working in Him, for otherwise they could cause no joy or
happiness unto Him, so should they be unto Him in want and defect, and not in
infinity. Therefore it is necessary that all those perfections that are in God,
be not only active in Him, but also as infinite in their action, as they are
in their being, lest a twofold being, one in the greatness of being, and
another in lessenesse of action should be in God, which is utterly impossible.
But because no action can be where there is no object to work upon, nor no
infinite action where there is not an infinite object; therefore it is
necessary that there be an infinite object of all that glorious action which is
in God, whereby He works infinitely and eternally. And this infinite object, is
that glorious Son of His love, the image of Himself, wherein all His
perfection is actuated and expressed: and that infinite action whereby the
Son is Characterized, Hebr. 1.3. Formed, See Esaias 43.10. or brought forth
eternally, is the Holy Ghost. And because there can be no action, where either
the agent or object is wanting, therefore is the Holy Ghost most truly said to
proceed from the Father and the Son. And because I speak only of that
incommunicable action which is in God Himself, from whence the difference of
the three Persons does arise; therefore you must understand, that as the
action, so the Persons also are in the Godhead essentially: and that not only
because the action is according to the purity and perfection of the Divine
being; but also because all the terms thereof, that is, the Agent, the object,
and the Action it self are infinite and eternal; which cannot possibly be
found, out of the Godhead.

And thus in brief you see it manifest, not only that God is; but also that
His being is infinite and eternal, with all the perfections both of being and
working, and how from the infinity of His glorious and eternal working, the
Trinity of Persons in the unity of the Godhead is concluded, and consequently
that the Holy Ghost is God, eternally proceeding from the Father and the Son.
For further understanding and proof of all which things, you may, if you will,
as cause is, read any of the 12. first Chapters at the beginning.

Notes.
(a) IF the procession of the Holy Ghost.] The heresies which have been about
this Article of our Creed, have been many and great. For the more necessary
any truth is to be known and believed, the more damnable heresies has the
devil raised thereabout. But as the heresies that were about our Lord Christ;
so these here may be brought to three heads. The first concern the person of
the Holy Ghost, 1. The second His being. 2. The third His properties. 3.

1. Concerning the person of the Holy Ghost, Simon that eldest son of Satan,
would be all in all. For he said, that he gave the Law to Moses, in mount Sina,
in the person of the Father: that in the days of Tiberius he suffered in show,
under the Person of the Son: and that after he was that Holy Ghost that came
upon the Apostles in the show of cloven tongues. Thus says Augustine Haer: 1.
But Epiphanius Haer: 21. says, that he called his Punke Helena, the
Holy Ghost; for whose dear sake he transformed himself, that he might come to
her through all the heavens, unknown of his angels. But this fellow presuming
too much on the power of his devils, while he took upon him to ascend into
heaven again, he died of the fall, and so the neck of his heresy was broken.

Manes, a Persian, the father of the Manichees, erred the same heresy with
Simon the Witch, and gave out himself for the holy Spirit: but being slayed
alive by the King of Persia, he found himself to be a body, and not a spirit.
Hierax an Egyptian Monk, affirmed that Melchizedek, of whom you read, Genesis
14. was the Holy Ghost. Some there be that write concerning Montanus the
Phrygian, that he took upon him to be the Holy Ghost. But Eusebius lib. 5.
cap. 14. and Augustine Haer: 86. affirm that this heresy was only thus much,
that he had received that Comforter which was promised John 15.26. in greater
measure then the Apostles; and in this his followers, the Cataphryges, and with
them Tertullian himself, as it appears by some of his writings, did consent
to him. But Epiphanius, in that 48. heresy, cites the words of Montanus thus;
I came, neither Angel nor Ambassador, but I am the Lord God, even the Father.
Neither have these heretics of old time, only so madded themselves; but with
us of late, Wrightman gave out himself for the Holy Ghost, as Hacket before
him would needs be Christ. But the discipline of Bedlem, or Bridewell, is
fittest to teach such senseless people, not to set their mouths against
Heaven.

1. But that which all these heretics affirm, concerning the Holy Ghost, is
utterly beyond all faith and possibility of being. Of faith, I say, because
neither Jews, nor Turks, which cannot believe a Trinity of Persons in unity
of the Deity, can never be brought to think that two of these Persons should
be incarnate, when they will not receive Him that was approved of God by so
many miracles, to be God with us. Neither can the Christians be brought to
believe that the Holy Ghost should be incarnate, when there is not one word in
the Holy Scripture whereupon they may ground any such Article of their faith.

2. Beside this, that which they affirm is utterly impossible. For nothing is
possible to be in the Trinity, which brings in any confusion or disorder. But
if the Holy Ghost should be incarnate, then should there not be one Son of
God incarnate, but two sons: but that were confusion, and no way necessary,
and therefore not possible. Compare herewith, Chap. 12. Reason 1. and the
Reasons of the Chap. 23.

3. Moreover, the works of the Holy Ghost are the works of a most pure
Spirit, whereto a humane body can no way give any furtherance, as to renew the
mind by Repentance; to give faith; to teach and comfort the soul; to make it
love that which is good, to hate that which is ill, and the like; All which,
and whatsoever else the Holy Spirit does work, it works only spiritually.
Therefore it is necessary, or meet that the Holy Ghost should take on Him the
body of man.

4. That argument which Epiphanius, Haer. 66. used against Manes in particular,
may serve in general against all the rest. If Manes, says he, were that
Holy Ghost whom the Lord promised to His disciples, then that promise had been
in vain, seeing that this heresy of Manes was not heard of till 247. after
the suffering of Christ: who also performed that gift of the Holy Ghost, within
ten days after His ascension. Neither was that heresy of Montanus heard of,
till about 140. years after Christ's ascension. And whereas the disciples were
commanded not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait there for the promise that
was to be fulfilled not many days after: This heresy of Simon was not
broached till after the disciples were scattered from Jerusalem, by reason of
the persecution that arose about Stephen, as some write in the sixth year after
the suffering of Christ. Concerning Melchizedek, it is manifest that he was a
Priest of the most high God; so was not the Holy Ghost: For He only bears
witness unto the faithful soul, of Christ's eternal Priesthood. The
madness of Mahumed, you shall find, Chap. 34. 5. N. 8.

Holy Ghost, being answered, it follows next to examine those errors that
have been about His being. Among these, the chief was that of Arius, who
taught that the Son was the first and chief creature made by the Father, of
that which was not. And that the Holy Ghost was a creature of this creature.
But because the great question with Arius was about the Son, this heresy is
imputed to Macedonius, a light fellow, fit for his trade, which they call the
Feathermakers. From that he became a Priest, and after, the Bishop of
Constantinople. Of him some write, that he held the heresy of Arius whole:
othersome, that he held the true faith, concerning the Father and the Son;
but erred concerning the Holy Ghost. For some write that he held that the
Holy Ghost was not a Person subsisting in Himself; but that the Deity of the
Father and the Son, was that which we call the Holy Ghost. Other write, that
his heresy was this; That the Holy Ghost was the minister of God in the
creature, or a certain power created of God in every creature; because it is
said in Amos 4.13. That God creates the Spirit. where, although it be manifest
by that which goes before, He has formed the mountains, that it is spoken
of the mind; Yet that adulterate Synod at Lampsacus, from thence justified that
error of Macedonius, that the Holy Ghost was a creature. For this heresy, his
followers were called (...), or fighters against the Holy Spirit. And although
others were before him in this heresy, as the Originists, the Arians, and
Semiarians; yet because he was a savage and a fierce man to them that thought
not with him; therefore this opinion became as it were his peculiar. His
arguments were only such as Arius used, and therefore answered as they that
were brought by him against the Deity of the Son, as 1. from that in John
17.3. The Father is acknowledged the only true God.

Answer 1. I have heretofore said, that by the name of Father all the Persons
of the Trinity are understood: and to this Father, that only Mediator
between God and man, the Man Jesus Christ, confesses in this place of Saint
John, See 1. Tim. 2, 3, 4, 5. and Ephesians. 4.6.

Answer 2. Moreover, Saint Paul says, Ephe. 3.14, 15. That of the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the whole family in heaven and earth is named. So our
Savior here to take away the opinion of more gods than one, acknowledges that
God His Father is that eternal Fountain, from which both the Son and the
Holy Ghost does proceed, as I have said before: but yet seeing the being of
the Father is most simple, and one; that which does proceed essentially from
that simple and pure being of His, must necessarily be all one and the same
with Him. And therefore both the Son and the Holy Ghost must needs be God.

2. Objection. All things were made by Him, John 1.3. Therefore the Holy Ghost
also was made by Christ, and so as the Arians speak, He is a creature of a
creature.

Answer. Those words, All things, are interpreted by that which follows,
without Him was not anything made which was made. For if those words, All
things, should be taken in that sense as the Heretics urge them, it should
follow, that both the Father also, and the Son Himself were made by
Himself, which are things impossible.

3. Objection. He that receives of another, is inferior to Him of whom he does
receive. But the Holy Ghost does receive of Christ, to show unto His Church.
Therefore He is inferior unto Christ, and consequently a creature.

Answer. The proposition is false: For great Princes receive Presents of their
subjects, Lords of their Tenants, Masters of their Scholars, who account it a
favor, and an honor done unto them, that their offers are accepted. Moreover,
that taking of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, spoken of in that
text of John, 16.14. is not of grace, but by nature: neither is it any other
thing than this. That as the Father from all eternity had decreed to reconcile
the world unto Himself, by the death of His Son, and that the Son
accordingly performed this in due time, by His death upon the Cross: So the
Father and the Son, by that Holy Spirit which proceeds from them both, does
sanctify the hearts of the elect, and assure them that this reconciliation,
with all the fruits and effects thereof, was for their eternal comfort and
salvation. For that peculiar manner of subsistence in the Divine nature, which
He takes from the Father and the Son, whereby it is most necessarily
concluded that He is God, is not here spoken of.

4. Objection. The Holy Ghost is no where called God in the Scripture.
Therefore He is a creature.

Answer 1. He is no where in the Scripture called a creature, or mentioned
among the creatures in Psalm. 148. or elsewhere. Therefore He is God.

Answer 2. The proposition is false, as it appeared by the texts cited out of
Acts 5.3, 4. and Matthew. 28.19. where He is equalled with the Father and the
Son, and 2. Cor. 13.14. And John 5.7. Moreover, no sin does make a man
liable to an infinite punishment, but that which is against an infinite being.
But the sin against the Holy Ghost shall not be pardoned, neither in this
world, nor yet in that which is to come, Matthew. 12.32. Therefore the Holy Ghost
is God. Take hereto, Acts 28. verse 25. and 27. with Romans 11.8. and 1. Cor.
3.16. And as these texts of Scripture are sufficient, to show the falsehood of
this last objection: So do they manifest the vanity of all the rest, and
confirm abundantly the truth of this Article, that the Holy Ghost is God.

To bring the consent of Fathers, and Counsels to these Scriptures, were as to
increase the light of the Sun by a burning candle: yet because it was so
plainly declared in the first general Council held at Nice, by 318. Fathers,
in the year of Christ, 325. you may remember it, if you will. In that
Council, this Article was thus declared in that form of confession, which was
framed by Hosius Bishop of Corduba. As the Father and the Son, so also the
Holy Ghost, subsisteth with them, of the same being, of the same power of which
they are. And a little after. We ought to confess one Godhead, one being of
the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; not teaching any confusion or
division of the Persons of the unspeakeable and blessed Trinity. But according
to the integrity of that faith and doctrine which was heretofore delivered by
the Lord Himself to His Apostles, and has been sincerely taught to us by our
holy Fathers, who kept it pure and entire, as they received it from the
Apostles: we believe and confess the undivideable Trinity, which cannot
sufficiently either be conceived in the understanding, or expressed in words;
that is, the Father eternally and truly subsisting, a true Father of a true
Son; and the Son eternally and truly subsisting, a true Son of a true
Father, and the Holy Ghost verily and eternally subsisting with them. And we
are ever ready by the power of the Holy Ghost, to prove that this is the
truth, by the manifold testimony of the holy Scripture, Histor. Gelasij Cyzic.
Act. Conc. Nic. lib. 2. cap. 12. This faith was approved of all; but because
the present business with Arius was especially about the Son: For he held
that the Son was not of the subsistence of the Father; nor yet very God. That
they might meet fully with that error, they agreed to that form wherein it is
confessed, that the Son is light of light, very God of very God, begotten,
not made, being of one substance with the Father, etc. Thus having ended the
controversy about the Godhead of the Son, they come to the question of the
Holy Ghost: against whom Phaedon a Philosopher, and patron of Arius his cause,
objected thus. It is no where written in the Scripture, that the Holy Ghost is
a Creator, and therefore He is not God. To which, the Council opposed that
which is in Job 33.4. The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the
Almighty has given me life. And that in Psalm. 33.6. By the word of the Lord
were the heavens made, and all the hosts of them, by the Spirit of His mouth.
To which they added that of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 12. verse 4, 5, 6. where the
Holy Ghost is called both Lord, and God; And so concluded that all the three
Persons, that is, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, were (...)
consubstantiall, or of the same substance, Lib. Cit. Cap. 25. Likewise, when
this heresy of Arius concerning the Holy Ghost, was again revived by
Macedonius: the second general Council held at Constantinople, in the year
381. condemned the heresies of all Arians, Apollinarists, and Macedonians,
confirmed the faith professed in the Nicene Creed, and for further explanation
of the truth in this point to that clause, We believe in the Holy Ghost, they
added, the Lord and giver of life, who proceeds from the Father -- who with
the Father and the Son, together is worshipped and glorified, etc. And this
is sufficient for the declaration of the truth in this point, by the authority
of general Counsels. All the orthodox Fathers consent hereunto. Among whom,
if you desire to be further acquainted with the arguments and objections on
both sides, you may read the writings of that most noble Champion of the
truth of the holy Trinity, Athanasius, and in special, that sermon of the
humane nature, taken by the Word, the oration against the ging of Sabellius,
and the first and second Epistle to Serapion, and his first dialogue against
Macedonius, with him Macedonianus. See also Greg. Nyss. vol. 2. page 439. edit.
Paris. 1615. you may also (if you will) take these objections, and their
answers, brought by Epiphanius, to this question, Haer. 74. and with them,
those in Thomas Aquinas, Contra gentes Liber 4. Cap. 16. and their answers,
Cap. 23.

Another error against the being of the Holy Ghost, is that which they call of
the later Greeks: and yet is not only of the Grecians themselves, but of all
those Nations and Peoples, that are of the jurisdiction of the Patriarch of
Constantinople, which if you leave out the Countries of the poor Painims in
the East, and West Indies, is far greater than the pretended universality of
the Bishop of Rome, both in Europe, and in Asia, See Brerew. Enq. Chap. 15. and
besides them, the Melchites, or Christians of Syria, the Armenians, and
Maronites hold the same heresy. All these, though they confess that the
Holy Ghost is God, the third Person in the Trinity; yet they say, that He
proceeds only from the Father, not from the Son. But although they account
this but a later error among the Greeks, perhaps because the stirs
thereabout after the Council of Florence, in the year, 1439. grew more hot
than they had been before, and that because the Greeks then present in that
Council, in hope to draw them of the West into their help against the Turks,
did seemingly yield to that truth which these Churches in the West, do hold
in that point: yet it appears, that in the time of Damascen, about the year,
750. it was their received opinion: For thus he writes, Orthod. fidei. lib. 1.
Cap. 13. He is the Spirit of the Son, not proceeding from Him, but from the
Father by Him. For the Father only is the cause. Nay, if you look yet higher,
in that explanation which the Council of Constantinople, spoken of even now,
made of that Article of the Holy Ghost in the Nicene Creed, that clause, and
from the Son, is left out; so that this error seems not new, but falsehood
is as ancient as the devils apostacy, and no antiquity can make it truth.
And if you look to the authorities of Scripture, brought before to this point,
in the Chap.. 1. and consider well the reasons in Chapter 11. you shall see how
rotten this opinion is, and how justly the clause, And from the Son, was
added by the Latin Churches, as they declare it in that Council of Florence,
spoken of before.

So that falsehood which some write to Paulus of Samosata, that the Holy Ghost
is not any divine subsistence, but only the working and grace of God in the
hearts of men: and that which they write of Servetus, that it is only a
certain vigor or strength whereby every thing created is moved naturally; at
the sight of the same authorities and reasons, will vanish as mist before the
wind. Those childish fantasies of the Elleasites, or Sampseans of which you
read in Epiphanius, Haer. 30. and Haer. 53. would trouble your hearing.

Holy Ghost. Concerning whom, some affirmed, that He was not given sufficiently
to the Apostles, and that therefore, further revelations were necessary to be
made by them that had greater measure of that gift. The Cataphryges or
disciples of Montanus, and the Manichees must needs be chief herein: For if
they had held that the gifts of the Holy Ghost had been given to the Apostles
sufficiently, their fancies of their new Comforters, to teach them more then
was needful, had never been hatched. And among these, Tertullian was most too
blame, who having once detested the Montanists, did afterward both follow their
error and defend it. But if that Holy Spirit should lead the Apostles into
all truth, yea, and show them the things to come, as the promise was, John
16.13. What further sufficiency would these Heretics require? They might say,
the Disciples were ignorant of many things after the Holy Ghost was come upon
them: for Peter accounted the Gentiles unclean, Act. 10.

Answer. But they were not ignorant of any thing that was needful for the
Church to know, as S. Paul says, Acts 20.27. That he had declared unto them
all the Counsel of God: so according to the dispensation of the times which
God had appointed, the Gentiles were taken into the fellowship of the Faith.
For though they were commanded to preach repentance and forgiveness of sins
to all Nations, yet the preaching must begin at Jerusalem, Luke 24.47. from
Esa. 2.3. Therefore they preached not to the Gentiles, till the time was come,
and then Philip was sent to preach to the Eunuch, Acts 8.26. and 29. and Peter
to Cornelius, Acts 10. and Barnabas and Paul, every where, but with this
condition, first to offer the word of reconciliation to the Jews, and after to
the Gentiles, because the Children must first be fed. See Mark 7.27. and Acts
13.46. So concerning the declaration of things to come, Agabus foretold the
famine, Acts 11.28. that the Church in time might provide for due relief: So
the prophecyes of Saint Paul, 2. These. 2. and 1. Tim. Chap. 4. of Peter. 2.
Epistle Chap. 2. and 3. and John: Rev. all, are no less lights for the
knowledge of the true Doctrine, and Church of Christ in these days, than the
prophecyes of old were for the knowledge of Christ, when He should come, and
the benefits which the faithful should receive by Him, unto the Church which
was before His manifestation in the flesh. And if the Providence of God be
upon all His creatures, His special mercy and compassion upon His chosen; so
that He never leaves them destitute of that which He knows to be fit for
them: can any but Pepuzians, and such franticks think, that God will be
careless of His Church, for whose sake He gave His only Son to die? Or can
any man be such an Infidel, as to think that the instruction of the
Holy Ghost, who is God blessed above all, is not sufficient to guide the Church
according to the rule of truth, the Holy Scripture, in the right way to
everlasting life? Therefore follow that rule, and pray for that guide, and let
the follies of these Enthousiasts for ever vanish.

The second supply; Of that inestimable gift of God, the holy Scripture, which
He by His holy Spirit has given to the Church.
CHAP. XXXIIII.
THough for Adams sin God did hide His face from man, except, when either in
justice He did punish his sin, or in mercy declare the means, and give
assurance how he should be freed therefrom, as it appears in Adam, Cain,
Abraham, Moses, and the Prophets, until the time came, that the promise of the
redemption was fulfilled: Yet by His holy Word has He so fully provided for
the direction and comfort of His Church, and every one of His children therein,
that there is nothing in the whole course of man's life, whether in things that
are to be done, or left undone, or in things that are to be believed, or not to
be believed; in whatsoever it is fit for us to expect any direction or comfort
from God immediately, wherein He has not most particularly declared His holy
will. It was a wonderful grace and favor, beyond all other men, unto Moses,
that whenever he went into the Tabernacle, he might talk with God, face to
face, as a man converses with his friend: Is not the same grace vouchsafed to
us, who not only in the Churches, but even in our private chambers, or in the
open fields, may talk with God, and receive His answer in His word? And lest
any man may pretend ignorance, or want of skill, how to present himself unto
God, all manner of forms of thanks, of of praise of prayers, are set out in
the Scripture, and all summed up in that form which our Lord has taught us.
And that we may come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, and be assured to find
help in the time of need, we shall in His Word not only receive His own
Answer, but likewise see by examples, how holy and devout men have sped in the
like cases. Thus we may speak to God, and hear His speech to us, in all
places, at all times, either alone or with others; the holy Angels joining in
our conversation, and our selves never destitute of the fruit thereof.

And because the holy Scriptures are the foundation of all our faith, therefore
it must first appear, That these Scriptures are the very Word of God
Himself.. 1. Then how necessary it was and behovefull for the Church, that God
should vouchsafe thereto the knowledge of His Word.. 2. Thirdly, to show what
these Scriptures are.. 3. Fourthly, to justify their perfection or
sufficiency.. 4. Fifthly, to show that they are come unto us in the integrity
as they were at first delivered to the Church.. 5. Then to speak of their
easiness to be understood.. 6. And lastly, of their interpretation.. 7.

Abraham, that his seed should possess Canaan after 430. years, and
accordingly in the self same day, Exodus 12.40, 41. were they brought out of
Egypt: Or the promise of Iudahs Kingdom foretold by Jacob, Genesis 49.8, 9, 10.
Of Iosia, and Cyrus, prophesied by name, the one above 300. years, the other
above 100. years before he was borne: Of the captivity of that nation, and
destruction of Jerusalem, foretold by Daniel. For seeing God alone is infinite
in His wisdom, and that all His works are foreknowne to Him alone, therefore
can He alone declare from the beginning what shall come to pass at the last,
as He says of Himself, Isa. 42.9. whereas the Angels being finite both in
their wisdom and knowledge know nothing of things to come, but either by
special revelation, as Gabriel foretold the birth of John Baptist, or by the
Prophecies of the Scripture, or by observation of natural causes in their long
and subtle experiences. And therefore it came to pass that all the devils
that mocked the heathen by their Oracles, were so uncertain in their answers,
except they were informed by some of the means spoken of: As the devil gave a
certain answer to Alexander, concerning his expedition against Darius,
because he knew what the Decree of God was, by the Prophecy of Daniel, Chap. 8.

2. Another Argument that the Scriptures were given by the Holy Ghost, is that
admirable consent of all the Doctrines contained therein, which are delivered
with that certainty of Truth and Knowledge, with that authority and power over
the soul of the faithful Reader, and that in so simple and plain a manner of
writing, as no other: whereas in men's writings, the unsetlednesse of their
judgment, their ignorance, and doubtful suppositions, especially when they
speak of their own (as seldom they do) justifies the holy Text, Romans 1.22.
(...), professing to teach, they show their folly.

3. Moreover, the Argument, or things contained in the holy Scriptures, does
manifest the Author thereof, the Writers for the most part showing their
Commission, Thus says the Lord: and, Paul an Apostle, not by man, but by Jesus
Christ, and God the Father: Then the purport, or intent of the Commission, We
are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ's stead to be reconciled unto God; And this under such conditions, as
none but God alone is able to perform: of acceptance, eternal life; or
refusal, eternal fire.

4. The glorious and mighty works which Almighty God gave, especially to the
first Writers of the Law and of the Gospel to do, and those miracles whereby
He continually justified the truth thereof, the wondrous preservation and
deliverances of the professors, as of Daniel, etc. And the balefull confusion
of the adversaries of the Truth, contained in the Scriptures in all ages,
approve that God alone is the Author thereof.

5. The hatred of the devil, and his continual endeavors, either utterly to
deface the Books of the holy Scripture, or upon pretext of obscurity and
danger of Heresy, not to read them. And again, the providence of God, in
preserving those Books, and the love and delight which He has begotten in the
hearts of His Saints to read and understand them, are no less proof, that
these Holy Scriptures are the Word of God, and the Testimony of His eternal
Truth.

6. The extraordinary calling of many of the Penmen of the holy Books, and
the enabling of them, being simple and unlettered men, to write and to preach
those high Mysteries, which none of the Princes of this world did understand;
as of Amos among the Herdmen, of Peter, James, and John, and the other of the
twelve Apostles; show that the Author of that Truth and their Books was God
alone.

7. The great 1. Antiquity of the Books of the Law preserved so long
uncorrupted: for in comparison of Moses, almost all the writings of the
heathen, all their religions, and many of their Gods, are but upstarts, and
things of yesterday. 2. The great simplicity and sincerity of the Writers, who
sought not their own praise, nor concealed their own faults and imperfections.
3. The consent of the Church, which received the Scriptures, as the word of
God. 4. The consent of foreign Histories, writing of the same things with such
uncertaintie and untruth, as time and hearesay use to bring into History; as of
Berosus, Herodotus, Strabo, Trogus, and others, are a manifest proof that the
true records of the same things are the writings which God Himself did dictate
to Moses, and the Prophets which followed after him. For none but God did
truly know the creation of the world, and none among men did certainly record
the universal flood, the Tower of Babel, the acts of Abraham, Jacob, Joseph,
Moses, Joshua, and others: So that if the devil might vaunt as he did, (...).
I did indite, and Homer did write.


In the perfection of truth might the Holy Spirit of God say as it is recorded,
2. Tim. 3.16. All Scripture is given by the inspiration of God: And, 1. Pet.
1.21. Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

6. And if we believe that the writings of Historians, and Poets, and other
profane Authors, are indeed theirs under whose names they go: shall we not
much rather believe that they are the writings of God Himself, that go under
His Name? especially seeing we know that He is a jealous God, and neither
would suffer His authority to be abused to falsehood, neither would He give
His Church to be ever seduced by liars and false prophets.



1. First, that we through patience and comfort of these Scriptures, might
have firm and sure hope in God and His promises, Romans 15.4.

2. Secondly, that nothing through man's infirmity might be forgotten, of all
that which ought to be in continual remembrance.

3. Lest by the wickedness of men, and the subtilty of the devil inciting them
thereto, the holy Doctrine of God might be corrupted from the native and true
meaning: and so new Doctrines, and new Religions brought in, in stead of that
Service which we owe only to God, and that according to His own revealed Will
and Word.

4. No man knows the thoughts of a man, but only that spirit of a man which
is within him: much less can any know the things of God, but only the holy
Spirit of God. The things of God, of which I speak, are either such as
concern Himself; or us: Himself; as that in His being, He is a Spirit
Eternal, infinite in Wisdom, etc. In essence one; in Persons three: in His
dispensation toward us, that in the fullness of time the Eternal Son should
dwell in the Tabernacle of our flesh; that in our nature, and for us, He might
make satisfaction for our sin, that we might be restored again to the favor
of God, which we had lost by our transgression, and so have hope of the full
enjoying of those benefits which come unto us thereby, as the resurrection of
our bodies, and eternal life both in body and soul. And because it was
impossible for us to understand those things, except God Himself had revealed
them unto us, therefore it was necessary that He should vouchsafe the certain
and immutable knowledge of them by His Holy Word.

5. No Kingdom can be ordered according to Justice, wherein the Laws are not
manifest, and to be known of every subject that will know them. But Christ is
that King that is to reign in Justice, Esaias 32.1. Therefore it was necessary
that the laws and ordinances of His Kingdom, which peculiarly is His Church,
should be so published, that every one, both small and great might take
knowledge of them.

6. No punishment is due but for some offense, and where no law is, there is no
transgression. Romans 4.15. So no reward is due, but either in justice for some
merit above duty, as the merit of Christ on our behalf: or else in mercy by
promise, for the careful performance of that which is due. But neither duty,
nor punishment, nor merit, nor mercy, can either appear, or be such where no
law is. Therefore it was necessary that God by His Word should both show what
duty He did require of us, and what punishment was due to the breakers of His
law, and what reward was due to the observers, as the law declares. And
moreover, because no man in this state of corruption by original sin, is
able to perform the law of God as he ought, in perfect righteousness,
Therefore it was also necessary in this impossibility on our parts, to make it
known how we might be delivered from the punishment, by the mediation of
another, as the Gospel shows.

7. And because so great a benefit as the deliverance of mankind from the
thraldom of the devil, was never to be forgotten: therefore it was
necessary, not only that the Church should be prepared unto the expectation
thereof; and daily put in mind by such lively signs as the sacrifices were,
the true meaning of which they were taught by the Prophets: but also when the
time came that the promises should be fulfilled, that the Church should be
thoroughly informed and confirmed in the truth thereof, by the powerful
doctrine, and glorious miracles which were done both by the author and
finisher of our faith; and by those who were eyewitnesses of all things which
they testified to the world. Therefore it was necessary, that both before the
coming of Christ, the Church should be catechized unto Christ, by the doctrine
of the Law, and the Prophets; and after His coming be fully instructed by the
Apostles and Evangelists, the Holy Ghost evermore working in the hearts of the
elect, that the things which were taught, should be believed.

. 3. Has it indeed been the practice of the devil by his principal agents
the persecuters of the Church, to deface the Holy Scripture, and to put out
their remembrance among men? Histories affirm it. Neither can the Father of
lies hate any thing so much as the truth: nor the enemy of mankind,
endeavor any thing so earnestly, as to deface that, by the knowledge whereof
man may find the way to eternal life: yet great was the truth, and prevailed.
Then by heretics he would corrupt it; but yet the truth prevailed. Then he
would keep it from us in an unknown tongue; but yet the truth appeared, and
every man may read in his own tongue the wonderful works of God, English
and Germans, and French, and the rest: yet the devil had one trick more in
his budget; that seeing he could neither deface, nor corrupt, nor conceal the
books of Holy Scripture in a foreign tongue, whose vulgar use is vanished
among men, he would shuffle in other books among them, that so we might not
discern the true Mother from the false. And if any question grew about the
Child; traditions which we must receive with equal affection of piety, must
decide it. Strange Divinity! Did the Church deal thus of ancient time? For
you only are wise, you only will be the people: Show the custom of the
Church: you claim to Fathers: show it from them. Saint Athanasius in Synops.
divides the books of the Old Testament (as we) into Canonical, and not
Canonical. The Canonical, he accounts all as we, save Esther: the not
Canonical, he accounts the book of Wisdom, Esther, Judith, and Tobit. The
books of the New Testament all Canonical, he numbers as we; the four
Gospels, the Acts, the seven Catholic Epistles, fourteen of Saint Paul,
among which following, Saint Peter, Second Epistle 3.15. he puts that to the
Hebrews; and the Revelation: Epiphanius also, Lib. de Men's. and pond. accounts
the Canonical books as Athanasius; but puts Esther among them: he accounts
Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus, to be apocryphal, Ierom. in Prol. Gal. accounts
the Canonical books of the Old Testament as Epiphanius, and as the manner of
the Hebrews was of old, they count the books according to the number of the
Hebrew letters, 22. as the knops, nuts, or almonds on the golden candlestick,
were 22. for the Lamentations was one book, with the prophecy of Jeremiah; and
the 12. small Prophets made but one Book, and as five of their books were
double, that is, Jude and Ruth. 2. of Samuel. 2. of Kings, and 2. of Chron.
Ezra and Nehem. in one book; so are 5. of their letters (...) which in the end
of words are thus written, (...). But in Sum, they speak of their books
altogether, the Law and the Prophets, as Luke 16.29. and 31. and 24.27. Acts
24.14. and 26.22. and 28.23. And yet somewhat more particularly, the Law, the
Prophets, and the Psalms; and this division of the books of the Holy
Scripture, our Lord also allows Luke 24.44. But in this last division, the
books are numbered 24. first of Moses 2. Four of the former Prophets, as they
call them. Joshua, Judges, Samuel, and Kings 3. Four also of the later
Prophets, Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiel, and the Book of the 12. small Prophets. 4.
The Kethubim, or holy writing, contained 11. books: the 5. Poetical, that is,
the Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Job, and the Canticles: three, which they
called Megilloth, volumes or rolls, Ruth, Lamentations, and Esther, among
which, the book of Canticles is sometimes accounted; and 2. half Chaldee,
which were last written: Daniel, Ezra, with Nehemiah and the Chronicles. And
these holy writings they divided from the other prophecies, because they were
not given either by dream, or by vision, or by hearing a voice, or in any
ecstasy, but were inspired by the Holy Ghost immediately. And according to this
order of the books of the Holy Scripture, diverse Hebrew Bibles have bin lately
printed: as one by Plantin in Oct. another by Hutterus in Folio, and others.

Now concerning the books of the New Testament, Saint Ierom ad Paulin. reckons
them as we. And are not these Aramites struck with blindness, that print the
Bible, the decree of Trent, and those prologues of Ierom before it, that it may
appear how they set the Fathers at naught? But for the full decision of this
question, let us look unto the undoubted truth of the Scripture, and by the
Scripture it self, let us learn what is Scripture, or the word of God. 1.
Therefore concerning the books of the New Testament, M. Luther accounted the
Epistle of S. James to be aridam and stramineam, dry as a Kix, and his
followers give their reasons against it; 1. the seeming opposition which is
between him and S. Paul, in the question of justification by faith, and by
works. 2. because he teaches not, but supposes only that which is the sum
of the Gospel, that is, the redemption of the world by the death of Christ, as
some men speak for Athanasius concerning the book of Esther, that none of the
names of God are mentioned therein: to which others answer that the words
(...) mimmakom acher, in Chap. 4. v. 14. is for sense in that place, equivalent
to any of the names of God, which the prophet did there forbear to remember,
because he would not that any of the names of God should be profaned among
the heathen, with whom he lived: So also Luther held, the Revelation to be the
writing of some well-meaning honest man, but not Canonical. Wherein I think
the wonderful wisdom and mercy of God appeared; to hide the meaning of that
book from him, lest he should be destroyed with pride, when he should see
himself and his ministry so alluded to therein. But let Luther and his
followers in this question think by themselves: between us and the Church of
Rome there is no difference, both parties holding all the books of the
New Testament to be canonical. The only doubt is about the books which we call
Apocryphal, of unknown and obscure Authors, or strange doctrines delivered
therein. In which question, the Canon or rule of the New Testament is for us.
For concerning all the books of the Old Testament, the reason stands thus.

1. All the oracles of God or Canonical Scripture, was received in the Church
of the Jews. But none of the Apocryphal books were received in the Church of
the Jews. Therefore none of the Apocryphal books are the Oracles of God. The
proposition is Saint Paul's, and he accounts it (as well he may) the first and
chief preeminence of the Jew, that unto them the Oracles of God were
committed, Romans 3.2. The assumption is manifest: for the Apocryphal books
were extant only in Greek, which language the Jews never used in their holy
services. And although the book of Ecclesiasticus were begun by the
grandfather in Hebrew; yet was it augmented and finished in Greek by the
grandchild. And although the first book of the Maccabees were extant in
Hebrew; yet was it not therefore Canonical, no more than the second that was
written in Greek. So the conclusion stands sure. And if neither the Church
before Christ received those Apocryphal books: nor the ancient Church since
His suffering, accounted them Canonical (for the Author of the Sophisticate
Cannons of the Apostles, we receive not) upon what ground then should the
Fathers of Trent presume to do that, which neither the Primitive Church, or
Fathers attempted before?

2. Such another argument you have from Luke 24.27. where it is said, that
Christ beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets, expounded unto them all the
Scriptures, the things that were written concerning Himself. So all the
Scriptures are understood by the Law and the Prophets (as I showed before) and
yet for further explication, it is added in verse 44. the Law, the Prophets,
and the Psalms. For of all the Cethubim, the book of Psalms was first, and
by a Synecdoche, is put for all the rest. Now to which of all these will you
bring the Apocryphal books? By the Law you understand the five Books of
Moses, which the Samaritanes, and all the sects of the Jewish Religion, except
the heretics called Nasacheans, ^id receive. The sects of the Sadduces and
Samaritanes rejected the rest; but the Church of the Jews held all the
Prophets, both former and later, with all the Kebuthim to be holy Scripture,
but the Apocrypha are reckoned with none of these.

3. A third argument from the holy Scripture against these apocryphals is from
Revel. 19.10. The testimony of Jesus, is the Spirit of prophecy. But in these
apocryphals which the Jews received not, there is no prophecy, no evident
testimony of Jesus that was to come. Therefore they are no witnesses of Him, no
word of His. And although in the fourth book of that supposed Esdras, there be
mention of Jesus Christ, Chap. 7.27, 28. yet the false narration of things
never done, and other fictions, See Master Brerew: Enq. Chap. 13. have
discredited those books so far, that the Papists themselves do not mention
them in their new Canon, and vouchsafe them a place in the end of their Bibles
only, lest they should be lost. Object. But the Fathers themselves call these
books Canonical. Answer. And our Church yields they are so, in the meaning of
the Fathers, that is, serving for rules of good life and virtue; but not of
faith, as the holy Scriptures; and that is the question between us and Trent.

See 2. Tim. 3.16, 17.

2. And if it might with due reverence unto God be supposed, that the holy
Scriptures have not sufficiently instructed us in every thing; Yet who is he,
or what is that Church that may presume to add to His word? Proverb. 30.6.
Lest if they teach things that are not to be believed, or command that which is
not to be done, our faith be found to be foolishness, and our obedience
become, if not sin, yet without reward, as the Prophet says, Esaias 1.12. Who
has required this at your hand?

3. As the man is, so is his strength, Iud: 8.21. as his wisdom is, such are
his words. And seeing it is evident by the Scripture which is given, that it
was the good will and pleasure of Almighty God, to give instructions unto His
Church; and that it has already been prooved, that the Wisdom, Chapter 5.
and the Truth of God, as all His other dignities, are infinite, Chapter 7. if
the instructions and directions of the Scriptures were not in every respect
perfect and sufficient for the Church, to that end for which they were written;
then the Wisdom or Goodness of God should be defective in that which was
necessary for His Church to know. But that is impossible. Therefore the Holy
Scripture is sufficient.

4. If God have not sufficiently and perfectly instructed us by His word what
we ought to do, and to believe; then can He not in Justice punish those
defects which shall be found in our Faith or obedience, especially seeing we
are not bound by any precept in His revealed will, to hearken to any traditions
with that reverence as to His word, but rather are every where commanded to
hearken to His word, and that without any adding thereto or taking away
therefrom, Deuteronomy. 4.1, 2. and 5.32. Esaias 8.20. sends us to the Law and to the
Testimony; and if any one shall speak not according to this Word, it is
because there is no light in them. So our Lord sends us to the Scriptures, John
5.39. Therefore the holy Scriptures are perfect and sufficient to teach all
things that belong by way of divine revelation, to faith and godliness. All
the Fathers run this way, and the most learned among the Schoolmen, and
later Papists; as you may see them cited by Master G. Langford Enquiry after
verity. 2.

Of Traditions.
Object. 1 Against this doctrine of the sufficiency and perfection of the
Scriptures, doubts are raised two ways. First from the necessity of
Traditions: Secondly, for that it is supposed that some books of the holy Writ
are lost. For the first, it is manifest, even by the reasons that are brought
for the sufficiency of the Scripture. For if it were always necessary, that
the service of God in His Church should be according to His own commandment,
and direction; it must follow necessarily, either that the Scriptures should
have been given even from the beginning of the world (for the Church of the
redeemed began in Adam) or else that the service of the Church, was only
according to tradition. The first is apparently false. For Moses was the first
inditer of any Scripture, and that after the deliverance out of Egypt, which
was after the Creation of the world 2513 years. Therefore the second follows
of necessity, that Traditions were necessary.

Answer. This is a wilful mistaking of the question, which being about the
sufficiency of the Scriptures, must needs be limited to the times since the
Scripture was given. But Moses was not the first inditer of the holy Scripture;
but God Himself, who had first written His Law in man's heart, did secondly
write it in two Tables of stone, with His own hand, in mount Sinai. And
thirdly again when the Tables of the Covenant were broken; this was the first
of all that which we call holy Scripture. After which time God taught Moses the
Original of the world, the sin, and redemption of mankind, the order of
times, and whatsoever was necessary for that people to know, and to do. And
although it be most true, that the faith and services of the Church before the
law, was only according to tradition; yet because those traditions were not
kept as God had taught them, God brought upon the world of the ungodly, the
Flood. Yet even within four hundred years after the Flood, by the craft of
the devil, and his new revelations, the best among men became Idolaters, as it
is manifest in Josh. 24.2. And therefore God gave Ordinances and Laws by Moses
in writing, to the observation of which, the whole Church of Israel was bound,
without any addition thereto, or taking away therefrom. Deuteronomy. 12.32.

Object. 2. But traditions may be necessary for the Church, as well since the
Scriptures were written, as before; as Saint Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. exhorts them
to hold the Traditions which they had been taught, whether by word or by
Epistle. So the Council at Trent, Sess. 4. Can. 1. commands them to be
received as the holy Canonical Scripture.

Answer. The word Tradition there, is doubtful. For either it may signify at
large, any thing that is delivered, either by word or by writing; and that may
be any fundamental truth, according to the holy Scripture; as Saint Paul
means in that place: as Saint Athanasius, Epist. ad Adelphium, and de Incarn.
Contr. Samos. calls it (...), an Apostolical Tradition, and (...), the faith
delivered by tradition, that God was manifest in the flesh: or else it may
signify any canon or rule, for the ordering of things indifferent in
Ecclesiastical policy, wherein all things ought to be done in order. And in
these two senses traditions are to be held: the first in obedience to God and
His truth, as we receive the Apostles Creed, and as you read in the Note on
Chap. 33. 2. N. 4. how Hosius speaks of the coessentiall Persons of the
Trinity, as a tradition from Christ to His Apostles, and from them to us; the
second for peace, and avoiding of divisions in the Church; as to kneel at the
holy Communion, rather then to sit, or to stand; though none of all these
gestures be essential to the Sacrament. In the third place, Traditions may
signify any rule thrust upon the Church, as necessary to be believed or
observed quite besides, or contrary to the word of God, for conscience sake
toward God; that Priests and Nuns may not marry: which things, though they be
brought in as Apostolical, or Ecclesiastical Traditions, yet by the rule of
Saint Paul. 1. Tim. 4.1, 2, 3. they seem rather to lean to the doctrines of
devils, believed by such as speak lies in hypocrisy, and have their
consciences seared.

No part of Holy Scripture lost.
Object. 3. ANd if Traditions might therefore seem to be necessary, because it
is yielded by some of the Fathers, that some of the Canonical Scriptures are
lost; by whose reasons, or authority, some of the later writers have strayed
after them; yet this will nothing at all support those unwritten verities. For
it is utterly denied, and that according to reason, and the word of God, that
any part of the holy Scripture is perished. 1. For can we think that it stood
with the goodness of God, to give His Word to His Church, for comfort and
instruction; and stood it not with His providence to preserve that Word, that
it should not perish, but accomplish that thing for which it was sent? Esaias
55.11.

But diverse objections are brought hereto, as you may see in the author G.
Langf. forenamed in the 4..

1. The book of the wars of JEHOVAH, is mentioned, Numb. 21.14. but not
extant. Therefore some part of the holy Scripture is perished.

Answer. It ought first to be manifest, what this book was: but in brief, the
books of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah, and of the Kings of Israel, are
often mentioned in the books of Kings, and Chronicles; yet were not those
books therefore holy Scripture, written by the Prophets, but rather by the
Recorders or Secretaries of state, appointed for that purpose; as the histories
of other kingdoms are, or ought to be written; and of this rank may that
book mentioned by Moses, seem to be. For it is not necessary that all
writings mentioned in the holy Scripture, should be holy Scripture. For the
Poets, whose writings Saint Paul mentions, were but Heathens: and Iannes and
Iambres (as profane writers call him Mambres) are no where mentioned in holy
Scripture, but only 2 Timothy 3.8.

2. A second doubt is from that which is in Joshua 10.13. and 2 Samuel 1.18.
where mention is made of the book of Iasher; whereto, though some according to
the interpretation of the word just, or upright, will have the sense of that
text of Joshua, Is it not recorded by him, whose writings are upright and true?
as it is said, John 21.24. This is the Disciple that testifies these things,
and we know that his testimony is true: yet because the book is mentioned in
times above 390. years distant, it seems to me rather to be some Liger, or
book of record, wherein such memorable things were written by the appointment
of their Synedrion; as might serve for remembrance to future ages; for that
Synedrion, or great Council of 70. Elders, instituted by God under Moses,
Numb. 11. never failed so long as their state lasted.

3. The writings of the Prophets themselves, as of Nathan, and Gad, mentioned
in 1 Chronicles. 29.29. of Ahia, and Iddo, 2 Chronicles. 9.29 of Iehu, 2 Chronicles. 20.34.
are utterly lost.

Answer. Not so: For as it is manifest, that all the things written in the 2 of
Sam. were done after his death: so likewise may we very well think, that both
the books of Judges, and Ruth, 2 of Samuel, and the two books of Kings (for
some give the Chronicles wholly to Ezra) were written by diverse Prophets, whom
God raised up in all the ages of that Church, to be inditers of His Word, and
were as Saint Luke says, (...), eyewitnesses of the things which they
recorded, and these Prophets here mentioned, with others, were the Authors of
those books.

4. But some texts are cited in the new Testament, which are 1. not found in
the old, as that in Matthew. 2.23. He shall be a Nazarite: or else are, 2. not
found in the Author cited; by which we may think, that some book of his is
lost: as that which S. Matthew cites out of Jeremy, Chap. 2.17. is not found in
all that book, 3. Moreover S. Paul remembers the word of our Lord, Acts
20.35. which is no where extant beside. 5. And the Epistle to the Laodiceans,
mentioned, Coloss. 4.16. is utterly lost. For that schedule which is found here
and there, is rejected by every one, as unworthily to be remembered by the
Apostle.

5. Jude likewise cites the prophecy of Henoch, which is not found except in
the Talmud.

Answer 1. Some refer that of Matthew. 2.23. to Esaias 11.1. The Branch that
should grow out of the root of Iesse. But it is more fully verefyed in that
which is written Iud. 13.5. Where Sampson the Figure that should begin to save
Israel, is a Nazarite unto God, and He much more which is separate from
sinners, and should perfect the deliverance of all the Israel of God, and the
text cited by the Evangelist may not only intend both these, but whatsoever
else, either the Law or the Prophets understand by the figurative snow-white
purity of the Nazarites, Lam. 4.7. and is therefore cited in the name (...) of
all the Prophets.

2. The other citation in Saint Matthew, where one Prophet is named by another,
does not prove that any book of Jeremiah is lost: neither was it of any
ignorance or forgetfulness in the Evangelist; or yet mistaking of them that
have copied out that book; but because that the seed of the Woman, so long
expected, was now to come into the world, it may be that Zachariah, by
interpretation, Remember the Lord, is now, Jeremiah, exalt the Lord, who never
ought to be remembered without his praise, especially in the performance of
that inestimable benefit for mankind.

3. Concerning that which is cited by Saint Paul, Acts 2.25. If he had that
which he cites by the suggestion of the Holy Ghost, as we may well think: or
that the saying of Christ was in fresh remembrance with them that heard it: it
is not therefore to be concluded, that S. Paul cites it out of any book now
lost, seeing he might receive it from those Disciples which had heard it.

4. And as to that Epistle to the Laodiceans, it is but a common error, that
S. Paul makes mention of any such; but he persuades the Colossians for the
better understanding of some passages in the Epistle written to them, to read
the Epistle sent from Laodicea to him, and that they of Laodicea, should read
that which he sent to the Colossians, as containing doctrine and instruction
fit for both the Churches to know and do.

5. And if Saint Jude were taught of God, that Henoch had so prophesied, though
the prophecy were never written; or if he cited it from any book which went
under the name of Henoch, if nothing in the book were Henoch's beside this
prophecy; Saint Iudes citing does not make the book Canonical Scripture, no
more than S. Paul's citing the heathen Poets: or if S. Jude had it only by
tradition that Henoch had so prophesied, how does it make for the question? For
it is not said, that all things are false which are delivered by tradition: but
that in the matiers of the faith and doctrine of the Church, those traditions
have no force or credit, which are contrary to the truth of God, revealed in
His Word.

5. But it is yielded, that though some part of Scripture be lost; yet that
which remains, is sufficient, and contains all things necessary.

Answer. Our Lord says, Luke 10.42. That one thing is necessary, which in
John 17.3. he confesses to be this, To know the Father the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom he has sent; and according to the necessity of this one
thing, the 3. Chapter of Genesis with the 53. of Esaias, and any one of the Gospels
might seem sufficient. And in this sufficiency only we dwell hither-unto.
But because S. Peter says, 1. Epistle 1.11. that the inquest of the Prophets
was not only concerning the salvation of the soul, but likewise what times,
and what manner of times they should be, wherein the sufferings of Christ
should be fulfilled, and the glories which should follow thereupon: and
because both the sufferings of Christ, and his glories are to be accomplished,
not only in Himself, but also in His Church, as they were prefigured in all
the types that were of Him, in the Church under the Law: and that God the Lord
does nothing, but He reveals His secret unto His servants the Prophets, Amos
3.7. when we shall grow past milk, and be able to digest stronger meat, when
we shall understand how the Law and the Prophets are to be fulfilled, to every
jod and title contained in them, Matthew. 5.17.18. when we shall be able to
apply every text to the proper time and meaning, according to the perfection of
the uttermost understanding thereof: then shall we see that the Law of the Lord
is a perfect Law, and His Statutes and judgments are sweeter then honey, and
the honey comb: then shall the Church see and know, that nothing in the whole
body of the Holy Scripture is either superfluous, or that any word, letter, or
prick therein might be missing.



1. For if God, who is praised for His truth, in that He has magnified His
Word above all His Name, Psalm. 138.2. has not preserved His Scripture, intyer
from the corruption of man, from the alteration, addition, or taking away that
they might make: what comfort or certain instruction can we have thereby?
What assurance of hope by those promises of which we are not sure whether they
be the promises of God, or the imaginations of men? Thus the end for which God
of His goodns gave those Scriptures should be frustrate; and man in that
incertainty nothing furthered toward eternal life. Thus the Church should
fail in the duty and faithful performance of that trust which she owes unto
God, in preserving that treasure which was committed to her charge and safe
keeping. But these things are not to be granted. And therefore the Scriptures
are come unto us in that integrity or purity in which they were at first
delivered to the Church: they of the old Testament in the Hebrew tongue; they
of the new in Greek.

2. The constant consent of all the doctrines and promises contained in the
Scriptures, the efficacy and power of that Spirit which is manifest in the
deliverie thereof, are evident proofs, that the Scripture is still in that
purity in which God gave it unto the Church. And although God in those
Scriptures have vouchsafed to apply Himself to our understanding, and as a
nurse, to lisp with her infant; yet so much is the foolishness of God wiser
than man, and the weakness of God stronger than men, 1. Cor. 1.25. as that it
is still manifest in the whole body of the holy writ, that nothing of humane
dross is mixed therewith; but that His Word is still as before, pure as
silver, that has been tried seven times in the fire.

3. This fire is that dampish smother-fire of heresies, which the devil did
kindle among his brands: among whom, though some rejected the authority of
sundry books of Holy Scripture, as Marcion and others: some corrupted the
sense thereof by Allegories, and foreign interpretations, as the Origenists,
See Augustine de Genesis ad literam: others by wresting it from the native sense,
to the supportance of their own heresies: yet the Church which continued
faithful in the doctrine of God, constantly with-stood all these attempts, and
ever maintained the sincerity, as of the doctrine, so of the Holy Scripture, on
which it was founded. And because the Scripture is either of the old, or of the
new Testament, it is fit to speak to each of them in particular.

4. And first, concerning the old Testament, it is manifest that the Church of
Israel, whose hope was set on that Messiah that was to come, had no cause to
corrupt the text of the holy writ; but according to the promises which they had
in the Law, and in the Prophets, the expositors thereof, so to hope, that He
should be such a deliverer and Savior, as was promised; by which hope they
were bound to preserve the Scripture in all integrity, that they might see the
full accomplishment thereof when He was come.

5. Beside the Priests, whose lips should preserve knowledge; and at whose
mouth they should seek the Law, Mal. 2.7. there was from Samuel unto the days
of Ezra, a perpetual succession of Prophets, who could not in any ways have
endured so great a corruption uncontrouled, as that the Word of the Lord should
be changed or depraved. And although the Scriptures before the time of Ezra had
been corrupted, yet he being a Prophet, a Priest, and a perfect scribe of the
Law of the Lord, and of the Statutes of Israel; that had prepared his heart to
teach the Law of God, and His statutes and judgments, Ezra 7. who changed the
form of their Chaldean, or Samaritane letters, for those which are now in use:
he (I say) would have taken away all such corruptions or changes, as had come
to the Holy Scripture, if it might be imagined that any could come in the time
of the Prophets that were before; as far as the diversity of Copies gave them
light.

Of the Israelites care in writing the Scriptures, and of the Masoreth.
6. MOreover that exceeding care and diligence which the Scribes were to use in
writing, is sufficient proof that the books of the old Testament are come to
us in that purity in which the Church received them: which care, how great it
ought to be, you may see by that which their Doctors have recorded. Henry
Ainsworth Advertisement, n. 3. cites out of Rambam, Sopher Torah, Chap. 7. and
10. thus much. If the book of the Law do want but one letter, or have one
letter too much; if one letter touch another; if the form of any letter be
corrupted; if the word which is full, be written defective; or that full which
is defective: if the word of the margent be written in the line, or that of the
line in the margent, the Book is not allowable to be read in the Synagogue,
neither has it the holiness of the Book of the Law at all; but is a book on
which Children may learn. To this purpose you may take that which you read in
Shickard. Prodrom. in Bechinah happerushim, Disp. 1. cited out of the book
Sopherim. Chap. 1. Halach. 1.4, 5. by which you may see with what a
superstitious care (if any care could be too much) they regarded the writing of
the Book of the Law, wherein nothing might be blotted, nothing scrap't out,
neither might they write it in any Parchment or Velam, but such as was of the
skins of clean beasts: in Parchment on the fleshie side; in Velam, on that
side which had the hair; And if this ordinance were changed, they read not in
it. And this was the manner: Because the lines being written in length,
according to the breadth of the skin, as in an Indenture, might be troublous
to find; they divide the skin into certain pages, which in Iere. 30.23. are
called (...) dlathoth, which we interpret, leaves, because they were like the
leaves of a door, and may fitly be termed pages: neither was it lawful to
write it with a coal, or with Ink wherein was either Gum or Coperas, and all
this (say they) by the Tradition of Moses on mount Sinai. Then with what
respect they used the Book, being written, you may see in Oseh Torah. Chap. 3.
Halach. 10. and in Anthony Margaritha a converted Jew, in his book of the
Jewish faith, and others. They touch it not but with washed hands; neither do
they take the roll by the midst, but by the margent, and that only with the
right hand, for which they bring Deuteronomy. 33.2. At His right hand was a fiery Law.
No man may lay it on His knees, nor lean upon it when he reads, nor read it as
other writings, etc. lest the holy Books grow into contempt; no man may sit
upon the form or bed on which it lies, nor lay it toward the beds feet, nor
lay other books upon it; and their reason, for that the whole Law is holy, and
that every letter therein, contains infinite wisdom; and that God has more
care of the Letters and Syllables of the Law, then of the stars of heaven.
And that this care was not only of the books of the Law, but likewise of all
the holy Scripture of the old Testament indifferently; you may know by that
infinite diligence of the Masorites, who to the intent, that the purity of all
the holy Text might be preserved intier, numbered in the whole Bible, the
Verses, the Words, the Letters; and of them, the common, and the final; and
what verse, what word, and letter, was the midst of every book: and among the
Letters, they noted how many times every one was found in every book; if any
one were bigger, or less then the due proportion, or higher then the rest; or
pointed extraordinarily: what holem was with vau, and what without it; what
hirick was written with jod, and what not; what space was more, what less,
between the paragraphs: when two words were to be read as one; when one as
two: when the letters in the midst of a word should be transposed, and that
which was in the end of one word, to be put to the beginning of another, with
many such observations which you may read in Shickard cited before De Masoreth
page 45. etc. So that no corruption or alteration could come into the text of
the old Testament, but by these rules of the Masoreth it might be easily
detected. Neither is this Masoreth wonderful only, for the infinite diligence
and pains that was used in the compiling thereof, but also venerable for the
Authors, which by the authorities of the Hebrews, were Ezra, and the Prophets
of his time, which were called the men of the great Synagogue, or more truly,
the great men of the Synagogue, Haggai, Zachary, Malachy, Daniel, Hananiah,
Misheel, Azariah, Nehemiah, Mardoche, Zorobabel, and of the most wise and
learned among the rest, to the number of 120. For this could not be the work
of one man, or of one age. And although the succession of the Synagogue still
continued, in some sort; yet by reason of the many wars and troubles, after
their return from Babylon, even until the last ruin of their nation by
Adrian, about the year after the death of Christ, one hundred, this work was
often at a stand, and not fully finished, till about the year five hundred and
ten, after the Incarnation. Whereupon, those Masorites are by some, unduely
thought to be the first Authors of that work.

6. Also the whole Art of the Kabalists, in high esteem among the Hebrews,
above all others; without this purity of the holy Text, were either nothing
worth, or rather in it self, nothing at all. But the argument from hence, to
prove the purity of the Scripture, among the common sort, for whom I write,
would not be easy to be understood. Therefore I refer them that are desirous
to know further hereof, to the author forenamed, page 60. etc. to John
Reuchlin, and others that have written of that Art. For by this which I have
already said, I think it is clear, to him that is not wilfully blind, how
far it was from the Church of the Jews, to offer any sacrilege to the Book
of God; who with such infinite pains and care, have walled in that holy
ground, lest beasts should break into it.

7. 1. And for further proof, that the Hebrews were the faithful
Library-keepers of that book, as Saint Augustine calls them; you may take the
testimony of Saint Paul. 1 Timothy 3.15. where he calls the Church, the pillar
and stay of Faith: not that in an implicit and ignorant faith, we should hold
it sufficient to believe as the Church believes; but because the Church had
evermore, truly and faithfully, preserved and followed the truth of God,
revealed in His Word, as it had received it from Him at the first. And if this
be true of the Church in general, it must needs be most true of that most
ancient and public Church, first chosen from all nations, by whom the Name of
the Lord should be called upon, from whom the word of the Lord was to proceed
to other nations, Esaias 2.3. whereas the Church of the Gentiles was then so
lately called, as that it could give no proof of it self, to be worthy of
such honorable titles. 2. Moreover, in the second Epistle to Tim. 3.15. he
says, That the Scriptures are able to make a man wise unto salvation, through
the faith which is in Christ; But how shall we be assured of this, if we be not
first persuaded, that they are free from corruption? 3. And why should our Lord
send us to search the Scriptures, which were then only the Old Testament,
there to find eternal life, if in stead of the truth of God, we should there
find the falsehood of men? See Luke 16.29, 31. and John 5.39. 4. And that which
is above all proof, is, that testimony which our Lord Himself gave to the
teachers of that people, who are accused of such treason against God. For He
reprooving their faults, and showing how the Law did bind the thoughts and
intents of the heart, as you may read Mat. 5. Lu. 6.27. and elsewhere: yet does
neither He, nor any of His Apostles, at any time, lay this sin to their
charge, that they had corrupted the Word of God, otherwise then by their
traditions, or by their perverse interpretation thereof: but rather commands
His hearers, to follow that which they taught sitting in the Chair of Moses;
that is, teaching according to the Law as Moses delivered it: which they could
not do, if it were corrupted from that purity which it had at the first. And
they that are acquitted by such a Judge, ought certainly to be held free, by
all them that reverence His judgment. 5. Now among these were many who did
believe, besides many thousands of other Jews which were obedient to the
faith, as it is manifest Act. 6.7. and 21.20. And moreover, the Christians of
the Gentiles, having with that glorious gift of the Holy Ghost, received the
gift of tongues, as you may read Ast. 10.45. and 19.6. and 1 Cor. 1.7. were
able both to understand the Scriptures in their native language, the Hebrew
tongue, and also able to judge if any falsifying of the Text had been made: by
all which it is manifest, that neither the believing Jews would have offered,
nor the Gentiles have received any man's forgery, for the truth of God: and so
it is manifest, that the Jews were the faithful keepers of those holy
Treasures.

Objections, against the purity of the Old Testament; of Keri and Cethib; and
by the way, of Mishna and Talmud.
Object. 1. But it is plain, by Galatinus, lib. 1. cap. 8. that many
corruptions, which they call ticcun Sopherim, or corrections of the Scribes,
have crept into the Hebrew Text.

Answer. The Sopherim named of (...), Saphar, which signifies, to tell, or
number, does especially mean, those Masorites of which I spoke even now, for
their exceeding diligence in numbering the Letters, as I spoke. And this
objection is brought in by two or three of those later Jews which they call
Talmudijm. For there be three sects of them; that the greatest, who, beside the
Scriptures, hold the doctrine of the Talmud, to be authentical. The second is
of them, who hold all the Scriptures of the Old Testament only, to be of full
authority; The third, who hold only the five books of Moses to be held and
believed, as I spoke before of the Samaritans. What this degenerate brood of
the Talmudists hold of the Scripture, you may perceive by their homely
comparison, cited by Shickard, page 6. The Text of the Bible is like water; the
Mishna, as wine; the Talmud, as condite: and again, see the like blasphemy.
The Law is like salt; the Mishna like pepper, and the Talmud like spices, and
blessed is he that spends his time in the Talmud, so that he do not utterly
forget the Bible, nor the Mishna. And of these worthies are they that make the
objection; who as they hate our holy Faith, and inly envy that knowledge which
the Christians have whereby to uphold it against their impudency; so would they
shake the foundation thereof, by making the Scripture to be full of
uncertainety.

Object. 2. I, but some learned among the Christians, side with them.

Answer. It Is true, that to make the vulgar translation only authentical, and
that subject to the Popes correction, that he might be Lord of our faith, and
bring in a new gospel more profitable for him, as he endeavored by the
Franciscans, See Ia. Usher de success. Eccles. cap. 9. Galatinus Lindanus, and
some other Papists, sway with the degenerate Apellits; but others, more learned
then they, in the Roman Church, hold with us, the integrity and purity of the
holy Scriptures, in those languages wherein they were writ, as you may read in
G. Langford, 5. But wherein is this corruption? Galatinus loco citato, brings
it to three heads. The first is the changing one letter for another; The second
in changing the pricks, or vowells; The third in their Keries, or marginall
readings, for the Cethib, or word written in the line. And these changes they
make (say they) not out of any ill meaning to corrupt the Text, but to clear
the meaning thereof to their understanding. But can any meaning be worse, then
to adulterate the truth of God? you may see what he means in the rest, by the
first example, which he brings in Mal. 1. verse. 13. (...) hippachtem otho; ye
snuffed at it, that is, you grudged to offer that which was good for a
sacrifice: where some, for otho, at it, would have (...) othi, at Me, says
the Lord, because God Himself was grudged at, when for the good, they offered
that which was naught. But cursed be the deceiver, which has that which is
good, and offers that which is naught to God. And thrice cursed be the ravenous
impropriator, that takes away all, and leaves nothing for God. Of the change of
words, by reason of the vowels, he brings only two examples; one out of 2 Samuel
16.12. (...) beeini, which Pagnin translates, ad afflictionem meam, or mine
affliction, as Hutterus makes it of (...) anah, to afflict; but Montanus, of
(...) ain, an eye, and turns it, in oculum meum, upon mine eye, as the Targum
translates it, the tears of mine eye, and this is the Keri, or reading in the
margent, for that in the line, (...) beeuni: but nothing of this will serve
Galatinus, but he from his Talmudists, will have it (...) beeino, The Lord will
look on his affliction, quite contrary to David's meaning, when Shimei vaunted
over him. But both this, and the other example which he brings, are of those
Keries, or marginall words, which are read in stead of the words in the text:
so his division should have had but two parts.

Of these Keries (as Elias Levita says, he told them more then once or twice)
there be in all the Old Testament 848. of which, many belong only to the first
grammar of that language: as if in English you should write, When you be come
together, and in the margent, write, Ye are. 2. Some words are for clearing
the sense, and are as short commentaries upon the Text. 3. Some for avoiding of
words harsh to the ear; as when the Prophet in indignation, or mockage, or
tied to relate another speech uses such terms as seem needful to be
sweetened by other more usual words. You may take an example of both these, 2.
Kings 18.27. where the Prophet as a faithful Historian repeating the words of
Rabshakeh, has that which he spoke, (...) le ecol eth choraiha^, ulishtoth
eth Sheyenayehem immacem: which our English translates, that they may eat
their own dung, and drink their own piss with you: the word choraiham,
their dung, has the derivation of (...) Chor, that hole from which it comes
out: and the word Sheyenaiyehem, their changes, of (...) Shanah, to change,
means, their urine which they should drink, and piss out, and then drink in
again; whereby the railing Rab-scab, would be as bitter as he could. But for
the first of these, the margent has a more mannerly word, (...) dzoatham, that
which comes from them, and for the second, by way of exposition, (...) meimei
raghleihem, the water at their feet, and these are read for the words in the
line. Translators have little or nothing to do with the Keries of the first
kind; in them of the last, they usually take the word in the margent: In the
second kind, they take the word in the line, or that in the margent
indifferently; because the Keries or marginall words are both of the ancient
Jews, and learned Christians, held to be of divine authority, as they in the
text; as you may see it made m^nifest by Henry Ainsworth's Advertisement, n. 7.
where by sundry examples he shows, that the word which in one Prophet is put
in the margent, is by another put in the text. Moreover the most ancient
translators, even from the 70. which were almost 300. years before Christ (if
that which is now extant be any remnant of it) and that Chaldee of Jonathan,
who is said to have been the disciple of Hillel, which lived, as some write,
100. years before Christ, and all that have followed after these, have
translated sometime after the margent; sometime after the line, and oftentimes
have noted both, as you may see in many instances in the place cited.

And that which is above all, the Penmen of the new Testament use in some
places, the word of the margent for that in the line. So that Galatinus with
his late Rabbis, may still sleep upon the pillow of their own dream. For
nothing of the Talmud was gathered together till about the year of Christ,
150. when one Rabbi Judas compiled into one volume, the expositions on the law
and the Prophets, which other Doctors had written, some before, some after
Christ, which Book he called Mishna, a copy, or second reading, and divided
it into Six Sedarim or orders. Some 200. years or more after him, Rabbi
Iohanan, or John, gathered the Talmud, or Doctrinall of Jerusalem, out of the
writings of such Rabbis, as wrote after the other: and this Talmud is but a
commentary on the former Mishna. After him likewise, about the year of Christ,
500. Rabbi Ass made a further collection of the Babylonian Talmud; of special
use among the Jews. Both these Talmuds are full of fables and idle fictions,
to the depravation of the truth of God: But about the year, 1200. Rabbi Moses
ben Maimon, thence called RaMBaM, and Maimoni, gathered out that which was
good, and any way availeable for understanding the rites and ceremonies of the
Law, and left out those fooleries of which the Talmuds were full, and therefore
Postellus said rightly of him, that he is Instar omnium. For further knowledge
of which things, you may read Galatinus, H. Ainsworth, Shickard, P. Ricius, and
others. Now if neither the Talmud, nor the Mishna were extant of so long time
after Christ, how could the writings there cited, being in private hands, bring
in any public corruption into the text of the Scripture, which long time
before that, had been delivered safe and entire into the hands of the Church
of the Gentiles? But although it be yielded unto, that either the Masorites, or
the Talmudists, or the Cabalists by any private notes of theirs, or their
expositions, have corrupted either the text, or native meaning thereof; yet
does it not therefore follow that the Nation of the Jews have accepted these
corruptions, much less that they hold them of divine authority, as they do
the marginall Keries; and yet much less can it be made to appear, that the
Translators of the Christians have at any time accepted of any such notes, no
more then we heretofore accounted the notes on the Geneva Bibles to be
Canonical Scripture.

But you will ask, when those Keries, or marginall readings (for they are
always read for the Cethib, or word written in the text) came to the Holy
Scripture?

Answer. The most voices are for Ezra, that he having care of the
Ecclesiastical policy, and especially of the integrity of the Holy
Scripture, in conferring the copies, and the differences among them, noted such
as he thought fittest: and that the Copies might not differ any more, began
that Masoreth, of which I spoke. But Galatinus, Lib. 1. Cap. 8. says, that
this is a lewd lie of the later Jews; for then they should not have been
called corrections of the Scribes, but of Ezra; yet he confesses that they
were long before the time of Christ, seeing Jonathan the Author of the Chaldean
translation, does oftentimes translate, according to the margin; yet will he
not have Ezra the Author of them, for then he durst not (I think) so saucily
refuse them, or for them the Cethib, as errors and corruptions of the text, as
he does. But Shikkard, as he cites the common consent of the ancient Hebrews,
puts it constantly upon Ezra. That with much care and diligence he got diverse
copies of the Scripture, compared them with those that were authentical, and
noted them as you heard.

1. But if there were any copies that were authentical, what needed this
superfluous diligence? 2. Beside, what could 70. years of the captivity do
to corrupt so many copies, when they had in the captivity so many Prophets? As
Daniel, Ezechiel, Ezra; beside so many worthies as you read of in Daniel and
Ezra: and Jeremiah among them that were left at home? Especially seeing a copy
may continue many seventy of years, as you read in Rambam of one of 700.
years, in his time, and Cunaeus cites the Chronicle called Iuchasin, concerning
a Bible written by Hillel, between whose times were 900. years; and yet more,
the learned Patrick Young, assures us of a beautiful Copy of the whole
Scripture, written by Tecla, in the time of the first Council of Nice, at this
time extant in his Majesty's Library, Praef. in epist. Clementis ad Corinthios.
3. And that which is most of all, to prove that Ezra was no Author of the
Keries, in the Books of the Scripture, written before his time, is this. That
as almost none of the Scripture written before him; so none of the Books after
the captivity, except perhaps Malachi, are without them: Did not Ezra, Daniel,
Zachary, Haggai, know their own meaning? Were they not able to express it?
Yes. You will say then, what needed those Keries in their Books of the
Chronicles, and those that bear their own names, written by themselves? I
speak not this to uphold that fancy of Galatinus, that these corruptions of
the Scripture (as he the admirer of himself, ignorantly terms them) were made
by the Jews after Ezra, and before the time of our Lord: for could such
treason be wrought against God and His truth, as to pervert His straight
ways, and His words, and would not His Son, who ever honored the Father,
and did that which was pleasing in His sight, so much as reprove it, not once
say, sin no more? Nor do I say it to contradict them who could find no
Critic of the books of the Bible before Ezra: but to justify the truth: That
the Prophets by the revelation of that Spirit by which they wrote, were every
one of them the authors of those Keries or notes in their own books, as the
Doctors, in Talmud Babeli in Nedarim, or treaties of vows, Chap. 4. fol. 37.
b. affirm. The word read, and not written, (that is the Keries which are read
from the margin, and not written in the text) and written and not read, are
the tradition of Moses from mount Sinai, and they explain it so: Moses
received in Sinai, and so delivered it to Israel. An example or two by the way
will guide us well. It is said, Gal. 3.19. That the Law was ordained by Angels:
as ministering Spirits (by the divine appointment) to Moses the Mediator of the
old Covenant. He received it by voice, and although the ear does judge of
words, as the mouth does taste the meat; yet where the meaning of the words
was doubtful, there it was necessary for him so to write, as in Exodus 21.8.
the word (...) lo not, and (...) lo, to himself, have no difference at all in
sound, but only in sense. Our last translation follows the margin, If she
please not her master, who has betrothed her unto himself: others thus; If
she be ill in the eyes of her master, that he does not betroth her, etc. The
sense is every way excellent, and the Law most just: and who shall presume to
understand the Law better than Gods own Secretary that writ it, or to alter
that he has written? So (...) Ieish in Genesis 36.5. and 14. is in the margin,
(...) Ieush, and is so written in the line, verse 18. In verse 40. Duke Aluah
is in 1. Chron. 1.51. Duke Aljah, and Aluah in the margin. I brought before
the reasons which are alleged for the marginall readings, and now you call for
a reason of the difference in the text. For if (say you) the text be not
faulty, what needs the words in the margin? If the margin be right, then
mend the text.

Answer. Neither the one, nor the other is faulty, but both of God: and if
matier of knowledge, or instruction, or comfort, be in one, which is not
manifest in the other; why should God want of His praise? Or the Church be
deprived of that benefit which it might receive by both, when God shall
vouchsafe to make the meaning of both to be fully known? Moreover the letters
of the Hebrew tongue are all numerall letters, and He that in His infinite
wisdom made all things in number, weight, and measure, does also govern all
things in number, weight, and measure, to bring forth every thing in their
appointed times and places. And seeing He does nothing which he does not
reveile to His servants the Prophets, and that it is necessary that the
Scripture be fulfilled in every perfection, as of the things to be done; so of
the numbers of times, and persons whom they do concern: Therefore although
we cannot yet see how these things should be, yet when the time is come that
every secret shall be known, Matthew. 10.26. Then shall the Church glorify God
in this behalf. The number of the word (...) is 390 of (...) 386. So the words
with their consignificant numbers are taken into their places, as they fit the
prophecies there intended. And for this cause as Menahem declares it, it is not
lawful to write the books of the Law, which are for the use of the Synagogue,
which with so great solemnity are shown to all the people on expiation-day,
with the vowels or pricks, because all possibility of understanding and
interpretation may be conceived by the substantial letters of the words,
which by the vowels might be tied to one only meaning. If you see this
explained by the Scripture it self, you will both believe and understand it
better. Take then that word of Ps. 16.10. Thou shall not give thine Holy one to
see corruption: which text in Act. 2.27. and elsewhere is brought to prove the
resurrection of Christ, before His body should be corrupted in the grave; and
is applied unto Him peculiarly, as to the Prince of our peace, and the Author
of our full redemption from sin and death, and therefore is the word with the
vowels only of the singular number. Yet because therein (as Plantin and the
best printed copies express it) is a jod which without the vowels may be read
as a plural (...) Chasideica, thy holy ones, for (...) Chasideca, thy holy
one: thereby is secretly a hope given to the faithful, that they shall not for
ever dwell under corruption, but that by the virtue of His resurrection they
shall rise again, as Saint Paul says, Ephesians. 2.5, 6. That God has quickened
us together with Christ, and has raised us up together, and made us sit
together in heavenly places, in Christ Jesus. And again, 1 These. 4.14. If we
believe that Jesus died, and rose again, even so them also which sleep in
Jesus, will God bring with Him: For the dead in Christ shall rise first, verse.
16. but the rest of the dead, in Saint John's vision, Revel. 20.5. lived not,
till the 1000. years were finished. And this I think is sufficient to show,
that the Scriptures of the Old Testament are come unto us as they were at first
delivered to the Church in the Hebrew tongue.

8. Concerning the integrity of the New Testament, less question will be, if
we shall first put that which must needs be yielded unto, that through the
diversity of copies, and carelessenesse of the writers, diverse differences are
found: But although in that book, set out in folio by Robert Stephan 1550. the
differences (I think) are not fewer, then the diverse readings in the Old
Testament, yet are they not such as make any change of the sense at all, except
such as all will confess to be the fault of the writer, as (...) for (...)
Romans 12.11. and these are very seldom found. Then concerning that which some
others bring, for the vulgar edition of the Latin to be authentical: if upon
better view, they will be content, where it is faulty or doubtful, to examine
and correct it by the Greek copy, we shall not need to spend any time about
it. So the only opposition is from Mahumed, who although he speaks more then
can be looked for from an adversary, concerning Christ, and commends His
disciples, and other penne-men of the New Testament, as men, Holy, True, and
Faithful followers of their Master: yet he says, that the Christians which
were after them, corrupted their writings. And that it may appear what spirit
set this mutinous soldier a work, he denies that which is the ground and
foundation of our redemption, saying, That Christ was neither the Son of God,
nor yet that He was crucified for us. See Cusa Cribr. Alchoran lib. 1. cap. 3.
I have already prooved, that our Mediator must be God, Chap. 21. And likewise
that our Savior was crucified for us. Chap. 27. N. 2. And if the reasons there
delivered, be of force to prove the conclusions, then do they sufficiently
refute this falsehood of Mahumed: and if this Forger had wit to understand it,
we say no other thing of Christ, when according to the Scriptures we call Him
the Son of God, then Mahumed himself says, when according to the self same
Scriptures, he calls Him the Word of God: For though Son in the Scripture, be
of large signification; As sons of the quiver, for arrows, Lam. 3.13. Sons
of Sion, that is, citizens there, Psalm. 149.2. Sons of the wedding- (...)
chamber, that is, the bridegroomes friends, Matthew. 9.15. and many such like, in
which the word may seem to be used metaphorically: yet is the word properly
and truly spoken of every effect that is homogeneous, although there be no
generation between a male and a female, as the branches are the daughters of
the Vine, Genesis 49.22. and the sparks are truly called the sons of the cole,
Job, 5.7. So in that which the mind or understanding of man does view, the name
thereof, the word, the (...), the ratio under which it is conceived, and the
expression thereof is likewise the Son of the understanding; and much more in
that eternal and infinite understanding of God, in the view of His own being,
shall the character, or actual expression of that infinite being, be truly
called the Word, or Son of God. 1. But it cannot be true which Mahumed says,
concerning the writings of the Apostles, that they are corrupted. For (as in
all other) so in the particulars, the Testaments do both agree; and it has
been prooved before, that the books of the Old Testament do still remain in
their integrity. 2. Neither can the truth in these two points, concerning
Christ, which had been professed 600 years almost, before Mahumed was borne;
which so many Christians, in all their persecutions, had so constantly sealed
unto, with so many thousands of their bloods, shed in every corner of the
world, be defaced by a new devised forgery of Mahumed. 3. Moreover, what can be
more absurd, and witless, then to say, or think, that the Christians would
falsify the Scriptures in these two points, for which above all other things
their Religion was hated by the Infidels, and themselves so deadly persecuted,
because they held Him to be God, that had died as a man? and affirmed that He
had risen again, whom they confessed to have died on the Cross?

Neither does he accuse the Christians in these two things only, but also that
they had defaced his name and memory out of that promise which our Lord made to
His disciples concerning the Holy Ghost. For Mahumed would be he by whom they
should be led into all truth. Mars. Fic. de Christ. Rel. cap. 36. and out of
him, Hugo Grocius de Rel: Christ. lib. 6. But Mahound, you never declared what
things should come, as the promise of the Holy Ghost does stand; For as you
disclaim miracles, so where you speak beside the text of the Scripture, you
utter only your own errors. 2. Moreover this promise was made to the
Apostles, and to be fulfilled in them, especially by whose ministry the word
was to proceed from Sion among the Gentiles; which was never promised to be
preached by Mahumed, or his thieves of Arabia. 3. Beside that glorious gift of
the Holy Ghost, the manifestation whereof, by speaking with tongues, and
working miracles, had ceased in the Church long before Mahumed was borne,
insomuch that Aug. 200 years before him, had professed that he that would not
then believe without a miracle, Magnum ipse miraculum est. And therefore that
trick of the whispering Dove, the lie of the Camel that spoke to him in the
night; and that piece of the Moon that dropped into his sleeve; as they came too
late, as they were to no end, and without witnesses; so are they against his
own profession, that he came not with miracles. 4. And again, if our Lord had
made any such promise as might concern him; the Christians, who ever
reverenced His word, were bound by that promise to reverence the memory of
Mahumed, and to expect what further light or manifestation of the truth he
would bring to the Church. But his doctrine brings in again those weak and
beggarly rudiments of the law; circumcision, and the difference of meats,
directly contrary to Christ, and the doctrine of His Apostles, who teach the
fulfilling, and utter abrogating of all these ceremonies by Christ. And yet in
those ceremonies of meats and drinks, there is such a dissension about Wine,
as that his followers cannot agree unto this day. His doctrine of many wives,
though tolerated for a time by Moses, in in that hard-hearted people of the
Jews; yet is contrary to the doctrine of the Prophets, Mal. 2.14, 15. and of
Christ, and His Apostles. By all which things it may appear, that Mahumed ran
when he was not sent: which he himself (if his senseless followers could see
it) does confess, in that he does utterly forbid them to question any thing in
his Alchoran, or to dispute about his religion, but to follow it in blind
obedience. And whether the wares be counterfeit, which you must buy unseene,
every man may judge. And these reasons against Mahumed in particular, with the
rest that are against Simon Magus, and his competitors, in the Note on Chap.
23. 1. are sufficient to prove, that our Lord made no such promise of Mahumed
to come, as he did dream, and therefore that the Scriptures of the Apostles
are not corrupted, either to forestall his doctrine, or to deface his memory.

9. And yet more particularly, to free the writings of the Apostles from this
Mahumetan slander, take that word of God Himself, which is in John 17.20.
Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me,
through their word. This word of the Apostles, cannot be understood only of
that word which they spoke unto the people; but much more of all the Scriptures
of the New Testament, which should be left in writing to the Church; by which,
in all ages of the Church, since their time, children were to be begotten unto
God through a lively faith, by which they should apprehend the satisfaction of
Christ, and so have an entrance unto God by Him. And seeing that in all ages
since the Apostles, we find the effect of our Mediators prayer, that their
writings have been that Word by which the faithful have believed on Him; and
so has done, and still does, that work for which it was sent: thereby are we
sure that it is their word, their own word, as they delivered it, not
corrupted, or sophisticate by any device of man, for any purpose or intent, as
that false prophet does pretend. And that you may see how great the truth is,
and how it prevails, take out of Ficinus, in the said 36. cap. what this
Mahumed confesses of himself: whereby you may see, how between his
arrogance, and his ignorance, the truth does show it self. He confesses that
he neither had done any miracle, nor none could do. That he was pure man, and
no more. That he could give no pardon for sin: That he would not be called
upon, or worshipped: And although in his madness, he pretended himself to be
a messenger sent from God, and inspired by Him, and that he was the Holy Ghost;
yet when his raving fit was off, he confessed that he was ignorant of many
things, and that there were somethings in his books, of the truth of which
there might be doubt, and whosoever shall worship one God, and live honestly,
whether he be Jew, Christian, or Sarazen, shall have mercy from God. What is
then the preferment of his Alchoran before the holy Scriptures? or why shall
we forsake our most holy guide, whom he confesses to be the breath and word
of God, and to have the next place unto God in heaven; that we may become
circumcised, and abstain from Swines-flesh and wine, and enjoy fleshly
pleasure with many wives, if nothing of all this give us any furtherance to
eternal life?

10. To end this question, I will bring this only argument, which for substance
is indifferent to both the Testaments, the circumstances only differing. If the
writings of the holy Scriptures be corrupted, either those corruptions must
come in by little and little into the copies of the Scripture, while they were
dispersed by writing: or else all at once. If they came in by little and
little, then the books that had been written without those faults, might be
patterns to correct the faulty by, and so the text might be still preserved
pure, as we find it was done when Printing flourished under the managing of
learned men; in those copies of the Greek Testament, printed at Compludo, and
at Paris. To suppose they came in all at once, is against all reason and
possibility of experience. I have showed that till the time of Christ and his
Apostles, the Old Testament was pure: and can it be supposed that all the
Churches of the Jews in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithinia, 1.
Pet. 1. nay, all the twelve tribes in the Cities of the Medes, in places so
distant, should conspire to such an act for which they were persuaded they
should go down irrecoverably to hell? Can the imputation of a base Jew or
two in a thing of so great importance, to the disgrace of their own Nation,
without any proof of the thing, naming of the place, time or Persons, against
all possibility of truth, stick so fast, as that no nitre can be able to
wash it off? To say that the Christians of the Gentiles, ever endeavored to
corrupt the Hebrew text, has yet more impossibilities. For during the time of
the gift of tongues, no such crime might touch them; and after that, none among
them, no not the Fathers themselves, except perhaps Origin, or Hierom, had so
much skill in Hebrew, as to be able to corrupt it. Beside, the whole nation of
the Jews would have opposed it; and as they detest our religion and faith, so
had they had just cause to brand us with infamy, for that endeavor; and to
proclaim our folly, which should corrupt that, in the sincerity of which
alone, is the assurance of our hope. So the Hebrew text remains intier.

And concerning the New Testament written in Greek, it was so suddenly
dispersed among the converts of the Gentiles, and that while some of the
Apostles were yet living, that there could be no possibility of any corruption
to come unto the text by any common consent. And because that our Lord was to
be made a light unto the Gentiles, and a salvation unto the ends of the earth,
Acts 13.47. Therefore were the books of the New Testament also Translated
into many languages, even in the birth and infancy of the Church of the
Gentiles, as you may read in Aug. de Doctr. Chr. lib. 2. Cap. 5. in Chrysostom. hom.
1. in John: who also translated the Scriptures for the Armenians, as Hierom for
the Dalmatians his contrymen. I said many languages, because they name the
Indian, Ethiopian, Persian, Syrian, Egyptian, Sarmatian, Scythian; but
Theodoret De Graec. affect. cur. lib. 5. says, into all languages which were
in use. And if it might be put that the Greek copies were corrupted; yet these
Translations being out of them while they were entire, would detect the
corruption. But all these Translations among the Christians, though differing
in some points one from another, as the Nestorians, Euticheans, etc. do still
agree in the substance of the meaning, and show the purity of that fountain
from whence they flowed. And there is none of these translations, or Fathers
here named, but were before Mahumed of a Christian became a renegado at least
200. years. All which things being put together, it will be manifest that
neither the falsehood of the Jews, nor the forgery of Mahumed have any show of
truth, but that the Holy Scriptures both of the old and new Testament are
still in their purity, as the Church received them.

Of the Scriptures easiness to be understood.. 6.
THat comparison of the Prophet, Psalm 36. that the judgments of God are like
a great deep, was by a Father fitly and wittily applied to the Scripture, to
be as a sea, in which the Elephant may swim, but yet with Shallowes, in which
the Lamb may wade. And although David prayed that God would teach him the
wonderful things of His Law; yet he honors it for this, that it is perfect,
that it has power to convert the soul, that it is sure, that it makes the
simple wise, Psalm. 19.7. And therefore are they not the messengers of Christ,
but rather the ministers of Satan, who under any pretext of falling into
heresy, of hardness to be understood, or the like, withold the laytie from
the reading of the Scriptures. It is not denied, but that many things therein
are hard to be understood; yet that one thing which is needful, Luke 10.42.
That mystery of the knowledge of Christ, which was kept secret since the world
began, is now made manifest by the Scriptures of the Prophets, to all Nations,
for the obedience of faith, Romans 16.25.26.

1. For seeing the instruction of God must be of all such things as are above
our knowledge; and yet of such things as are most necessary for us to know: if
nothing be more necessary for us to know, than the means of our delivery from
sin and death, by the merit of Christ, it is necessary that one needful
thing be made manifest unto us by the Scriptures of God, that every one may
know and come freely to the fountain of living Waters. But what helps a
fountain that is sealed up? Therefore it is necessary that our redemption by
Christ be clearly, plainly, and for every man's understanding taught in the
holy Scriptures.

2. Most of the arguments of. 2. are easily brought to prove that the
Scriptures are easy to be understood. 1. For what comfort or hope could we
have by them, if we understood them not? 2. How is our memory helped, by that
we know not? 3. How are we confirmed in our most holy faith and religion, by
that we understand not? 4. How should we understand those high mysteries, so
far beyond our apprehension, as the Trinity of Persons in Unity of the
Deity, etc. but that the Holy Scriptures have made them easy unto us? 5. How
should we know the danger and punishment of our sin, or the reward of our
obedience, if the Scripture did not fully instruct us therein? 6. You may also
bring hither the reasons in. 4. I need not repeat them, nor teach a child how
from the sufficiency of the Scripture, he may prove their easiness to be
understood. See there.

Object. 1. But does not Saint Peter, 2. Epistle, 3.16. say, that in Saint
Paul's Epistles, as in the other Scriptures, there are some things hard to be
understood?

Answer. Though some things be hard; yet the fundamental points of our
Religion, as the articles of our faith, and the rules of a Christian life, are
plain and easy to be understood therein: and these are the things, by the
knowledge and performance of which, we may hope to have everlasting life.

Object. 2. But it is not the word of the Scripture, that the unlearned and
unstable, wrest the things which they understand not to their own destruction?
Nay, did not the Heretics, though many of them learned, pervert the Scripture
to the supportance of their damnable Heresies? And were it not better that they
had never read the Scriptures, than that they should read them with so great
danger, both to themselves and to others, as it has appeared by the heresies
that have been sown in the Church?

Answer. If I seem to give you a sullen answer, yet reprove it not if it
stand with the truth. It is said, 1. Pet. 2.9. That Christ is a stone of
stumbling, and a rock of offense to the disobedient; but to them that obey the
truth, elect, and precious. But should Christ therefore not have come to
redeem His Elect, because some showed themselves unworthy of eternal life?
Therefore, if the Gospel be uneasy, or hid, it is hid to them that are
without, whose eyes the God of this world has blinded, that they should not
perceive the truth. Therefore as Christ redeemed the elect, prays for the
elect, not for the world, but for them whom God had given him out of the world,
John 17.9. So the benefits which are peculiar to the Church, of which the true
understanding of the Scripture is one, belongs to them, who with an honest and
pure heart, receive the word, and bring forth fruit with patience. But it is
true, that even to those many things are yet unknown, and some things
doubtful, and this by the dispe sation of God. 1. To avoid weariness in the
reader. 2. To stir up our diligence, and further inquest. 3. That we may
ask wisdom of God, and not trust to our own understanding. 4. That in the
high and great mysteries of God, we should hold our selves contented with that
knowledge of them which God has vouchsafed to give us in His word, and such
conclusions as do necessarily follow thereupon.

But if the Scriptures be able indeed to give wisdom to the simple, to make
Children wise to salvation through faith in Christ, if they give instruction in
righteousness, and make the man of God perfect, and thoroughly furnished to
every good work, 2. Tim. 3.16.17. then doubtless are they for every man's
reading: for the perfect, and him that is thoroughly furnished; for children,
and for the simple for all ages of men and women. Ho, every one that thirsts
come to the waters; Come, buy Wine, and Milk without money or price, Es. 55.
verse 1.

Of the Scriptures Jnterpretation. 7.
ANd if the Scripture be for every ones reading, then certainly for every ones
interpretation, privately to his own understanding, according to the measure
of his capacity. For the interpretation of any word, or writing, is nothing
else but the declaration of the native and true meaning thereof; whether it be
literal; and that either simple or figurative: or mystical, and that either
allegorical, moral, or anagogicall. But that ought not to be taken for the
true meaning of the Scripture, which every one according to his private
fantasy, is able to wring out: but that only is the true and lawful
interpretation thereof, which does offer it self according to the meaning of
the words, with due consideration of the argument or purpose of the text: which
is gathered by that which goes before, and that which follows after. And this
interpretation is especially to be hoped from them, who having knowledge of the
Hebrew and Greek, wherein the Scriptures were originally written, have made it
all their study and delight truly to understand them for their own souls
health, and the instruction of others. But that we be not overswayed by any
opinion which we may have of their learning, or mightiness in the Scriptures,
let nothing be taken for a true interpretation of the Scripture, which is
dishonorable to God, contrary to any Article of the faith, or any of the ten
Commandments, or the petitions of the Lord prayer, or any received doctrine,
which is plainly taught by other places of Scripture. Secondly, nothing which
is contrary to common reason and understanding, or repugnant to civil custom,
and good manners.

3. No man knows the things of God, but only the Spirit of God; therefore,
in the interpretation of doubtful places of Scripture, the Spirit of God,
whereby it was written, must give also the true understanding, or
interpretation, thereof: and this Spirit, and the meaning thereof, is most
easily found in the holy Scripture. Therefore the surest, and best
interpretation of Scripture, is by Scripture it self.

4. The Scribes and Pharisees were to be heard, sitting in the Chair of Moses;
that is, teaching the Law, according to the true meaning of Moses. Therefore
the interpreters of the New Testament also, are to be heard, speaking the voice
of Christ. But His sheep will not hear a stranger, for they know not the
voice of strangers, John 10. Therefore the interpretation of the Scripture is
chiefly by the Scriptures. And by the Scriptures only, every question of
faith and doctrine to be decided, not by the Church, or any humane voice,
except they speak according to the word of the Scripture. 1. For seeing the
Holy Ghost is the chief judge in all controversies, on whose infallible
sentence we may safely rely, and that the Scriptures are His immediate word,
therefore from thence are we to expect His immediate answer; whereas the
Church speaks not from God immediately, but as a mean, conueighs unto us the
voice of the Scripture. 2. Beside this, the Church may err, the Scripture
cannot err. 3. The Scriptures shine by their own light: the Church by the
light and Doctrine of the Scriptures. 4. The Scriptures are always at hand to
be resorted unto, the Church never all assembled, nor a Council scarce once in
an age, and they that vaunt most of the name, for the most part have least of
the true Church. And therefore the Prophets send us to the Law, and to the
Testimonies, and our Lord, to search the Scriptures. See 2. Peter 1.19.

Object. 2. By this means, making it lawful for every one to read, and
interpret the Scriptures, you set open a door, to all manner of heresies to
enter into the Church, and make every private spirit, a judge, and an
interpreter of the sense of Scripture.

Answer. Though every one may, and ought to read the Scripture for comfort and
instruction; yet the interpretation of the harder places, belongs especially to
the Pastors and Doctors appointed by the Church thereto: and if any private
man do interpret according to the former rules, yet cannot that interpretation
be said to proceed from a private spirit, although the man be private. For the
holy Spirit is the common author of all light and understanding. And the means
whereby He uses to teach, is, the holy Word, the common light of all the
faithful.

And this may seem sufficient to have spoken of the Author, and use of the
holy Scriptures, and what they are: then of their sufficiency, purity,
easiness, and interpretation. And blessed is that man that meditates in them
day and night, that he may find by them, the full assurance of his hopes, and
live in obedience and thankefullnesse to the Author and finisher of his faith.

ARTICLE IX. I believe in the holy Catholike-Church.
CHAP. XXXV.
A Certain Jew, famed for his riches, was once asked by a great lord of the
Turks, how it came to pass, that the Turks, the Christians, and the Jews,
did so peremptorily hold every one their own faith, that they could not be
withdrawn therefrom? The Jew suspecting his wealth to be aimed at, answered,
as their manner is, by a witty parable. A rich man (quoth he) had three sons
that observed him with great respect, because of his wealth: he, to hold them
all in their obedience, oftentimes professed among them, that he should be the
heir of all his estate, to whom at his death he should bequeath a ring which
he used to wear: But in secret he caused Mammurius the Goldsmith, to make for
him, two other rings, so like it, as Numaes ancylia were not one more like
another. At his death he called each of his sons apart, and gave to every one
of them, one of these rings, and withal, the possession of all his goods: so
every one holds his claim (quoth he) and it is not yet known how the
controversy will be ended. This is the present state of the Church; not only
among these three sects, named, but likewise among all the sects of
Christianity; yea, of all religions whatsoever. For there is none among the
Pagans, but he has this hope, that his soul shall be happy, if he serve his
god as he ought. And having determined those questions which concern God, and
our Mediator, it follows, that in this second part of the Creed, we consider
those benefits and privileges which belong unto the Church, by that which our
Savior has done and suffered for it. But that we mistake not, we shall best
be guided by the holy Scripture, both for the use of the word, and for the
knowledge of the thing. The word Ecclesia, as it signifies in the original,
the house of religious exercises, or a tumultuous assembly; as in Act. 19.32.
or a combination of wicked men, as in Psalm. 26.5. has no use here; but more
properly it signifies an assembly, or multitude of people, professing the true
worship of God, such as were the Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, and others
planted by the Apostles, and Apostolical men in a City or Kingdom, as we
think that Joseph of Arimathea planted the faith in this Island, and so
established a Church here. Every faithful family is likewise a Church, Romans
16.5. and the Church representative, as the Synedrion among the Jews, is also
so styled, in Matthew. 18.17. But because among all these Churches, there may be
hypocrites, unholy, and carnally minded men, which we cannot count within our
Creed, and believe that they are the holy Church, therefore the Church may be
taken, not only for the visible, but also they, whose Mediator our Lord Christ
is, unto eternal life, as he says, John 17.9. I pray for them, I pray not for
the world, but for them which thou have given me. From whence it will easily
appear, what this holy Catholic or universal Church is, which here we do
believe, to wit, that number of holy men which God out of all nations of the
world, has predestined unto eternal life. If we clear the sense of the
words, and answer such doubts as arise thereabout, we shall afterward easily
approove the Article. And first concerning the title of holiness given to the
Church.

Object. 1. It may be objected, that seeing it is said, Psalm. 14. that among
all the Children of men, there is none that does good, no not one; how can any
Church among men be called Holy?

Answer. Not by any inbred holiness in themselves; but because the
righteousness of Christ their Savior is imputed unto them for their
justification before God; as it is said, 1. John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses us from all sin: then because the Spirit of sanctification dwells in
them, and makes them zealous of good works, that they also may be holy, even
as He which has called them is Holy, and that according to the Law, or rule
of a sanctified life, according to which they ought to live, and count it their
present misery, that they are still subject unto sin, and so in their spirit
they serve the Law of God, though in their flesh the law of sin: See Romans
1.25. But so many of this Church as are already freed from this bondage of
corruption, in the assurance of eternal bliss, wait in hope for the
redemption of their bodies, so that both in body and soul they may serve the
living God.

Object. 2. But why do you call them holy men? Can neither Women nor Children
be heirs of eternal life?

Answer. As the word Homo in Latin signifies any of the race of mankind, as
homo nata est, She was borne man, Serve. Sulp. ad Cic. So is man often used in
English; and therefore by the title of the most worthy, the whole race of man
kind is here understood: So that not only they which are within the virge of
the visible Churches, and have the ordinary means of faith, that is, the word
and sacraments, are comprehended hereby, but also such as have not those
means, as they that live in the Countries of Panims, and Gentiles; yea, and of
the Pagans themselves, all such as the Lord our God shall call. Neither may we
presume to forbid them to come unto God, who seem denied of the outward means
of knowledge, as the deaf the blind, the Idiots, in as much as God, the God of
the spirits of all flesh, Numb. 16.22. can by His Spirit guide the will, and
inform the understanding as it pleases him, Prove. 21.1. See further hereto,
Note (a). 2. n. 4. on Chap. 32. And thus you understand what is meant by men,
and withal, why the Church is called Catho ike or Universal, namely because
it holds the number of Gods chosen, which have been or shall be called out
from the rest of all the men of the world, from Adam unto the last man that
shall be borne, as this Church confesses unto Christ, Rev. 5.9. Thou had
redeemed us unto God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and
Nation, and people.

The last circumstance is concerning the predestination of them that are in
this Church: for seeing none can be glorified, but they that are justified in
Christ: neither can any one be justified but such as are called and
predestinate, Romans 8.30. and seeing that to the infinite wisdom of God, all
his works are known and determined, Act. 15.18. it is impossible that any one
can be a member of this Church, but only such as God out of His eternal love
has predestinate thereunto.

Object. But there is one God and Creator of all, whose mercy is over all His
works and He hates nothing that He has made: And therefore it may seem that
all are equally predestinate unto eternal life, if all do equally lay hold
thereon.

Answer. As the creature could not cause it self to be: So neither being
corrupted by original sin, can it change that being wherein it is, See Art.
Eccl. 10. and seeing God alone does work in us, both to will, and to do of
his own good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. it is not in any man of Himself to lay
hold on eternal life, nor to end^auour any thing thereto; no not so much as to
will or desire it, without the special wo^ke of God in him, who works all
things according to the counsel of His own will. Ephe. 1.11. So man, though
made upright, yet being originally corrupted, and left to the hand of his own
will, cannot cease to sin. And although God permit him to follow his own
ways; yet that permission is no cause of any man's sin, nor puts it any thing
in the reprobate, why he should sin. But in the predestinate it is not so;
For he renews them in the spirit of their mind, unto sanctification, converting
their will, and making them ready unto every good work.

Object. If then predestination be not of all men unto eternal life, and yet
that all men are in one and the same state of nature corrupted, by the sin of
Adam; It may seem that God did predestinate and choose out of the mass of
mankind, those only, whom He did foresee that they would be excellent for
their good works, and so for their future merits sake, adopted them to be
heirs of eternal life.

Answer. God is debtor to no man, and where be that gives is no way bound,
the gift can no way be accounted, but only of his free will that gives: so
Predestination has no other original but only the mere free will of the
Almighty God. But if our works foreseen, were any cause of our
predestination. 1. How then could it be of His mercy only, Romans 9.16? 2. How
could it be according to the good pleasure of His will? Ephe. 1.5. 3. How were
it to the glory of His grace; if the worthiness of our works foreseen, had
any right therein, Ephe. 16? 4. How were our boasting excluded, Romans 3.27. if
they were the cause of our happiness? 5. And if our works foreseen be the
cause of our predestination, then also of all the consequents thereof, as of
our election, calling, justification, and glorification. But this is most
false, See 2. Tim. 1.9. Therefore also the former. 6. Moreover, what good
works can be in man, which God Himself does not work in us, as the Prophet
says, Esaias. 26.12. O Lord thou have wrought all our works in us. 7. If God
have created good works, that we should walk in them, and good works
acceptable to God be found only in them that are predestinate, and chosen to
life, it follows that good works are foreseen in us, not as the cause, but
as the fruits and effects of predestination. For if they can be no other than
the effects of Gods grace in us, they cannot be foreseen as a cause of His
grace toward us. This objection is laid to them of the Roman Church; but as
far as I have any acquaintance with them, I find no such thing by them. Tho.
Aqu. contr. Gent. lib. 3. Can. 163. teaches the contrary, and gives his
reasons. The grace of God (says he) is an effect of predestination, and goes
before all humane merit. 2. The Divine will and Providence, are the cause of
all other things: For of Him, in Him, and for Him are all things Neither can it
be accounted the doctrine of their Church: for in the 7. Can. Sess. 6. Core.
Trid. where all the causes of the justification of man in the state of Nature,
are reckoned up, efficient, final, formal, isntrumental: the meritorions
cause is put only, the suffering of our Lord, who thereby made full
satisfaction to God, and merited justification for us. And if we be justified
only by the merit of Christ, and not by any merit foreseen in us, then are
we called chosen, and predestinate only in Him through the mercy of God, who
gratuito, of his own free will does wash, sanctify, and seal us by the Holy
Spirit of promise, who is to us the pledge of our eternal inhoritance: this is
the effect of the Canon.

Object. 3. But how is this Church Catholic or Universal, if any man be shut
out of it? Or how is it said by S. Paul. 1. Tim. 2.4. That God would have all
men to be saved, if there be few that shall enter in at the straight gate?

Answer. The common answer to that text of Timothy is; that it is spoken not
de singulis generum, but de generibus singulorum, that is, that some of every
Nation and degree amongst men shall be saved; not every man of every degree.
But I suppose that it is rather spoken in respect of the ordinary means, which
in the Church is the Word read and preached, and the Sacraments, by which all
men are called to repentance, and faith in Christ: which if they refuse, their
condemnation is just. Also out of the visible Church, nature calls in a softer
voice, upon all nations and people of the world; and upon every one in
particular to fear God, and to give Him glory which made the heaven and the
earth, and all therein. And moreover, the light of every man's conscience
accusing, or excusing him, for those things which he does contrary, or
according thereto, is the witness of God in every man's heart, to excuse or
condemn him. And in respect of these means, God may be said to will, that all
men should be saved, in that he does offer his mercy to all, and call upon them
to turn unto Him, that they might be saved; if they want not grace to accept
it.

Object. 4. The want of that, is not imputed to any man, which is only in the
power of another to give; and seeing that without repentance, faith, hope, and
perseverance in virtue, no man can attain to happiness; which virtues of
repentance, etc. are only in God to give, as the Prophet says, Lam. 3.21.
Turn Thou us unto thee o Lord, and so shall we be turned: it may seem, that
the want of these things, ought not to be imputed to any man.

Answer. If any man refuse a good thing when it is offered, the want of that
shall be imputed to himself, as to the wicked, that says to God, Depart from
us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job, 21.14. and these are
they whom God is said to harden; because they have hardened their own hearts
through the custom of sin, that they cannot repent. Therefore, though the
predestinate, that the mercy of God may appear, are converted by the inward
and effectual calling; their hearts being renewed by repentance, to follow him
that calls; yet that the order of Justice may be observed, they that forsake
their own mercy, are still left to the punishment of their sin, both
original, and actual, because they neglect the outward calling, and wilfully
shut their eyes against the light of their natural knowledge and conscience,
See Romans 9.21. etc. And according to this sense, is it, that in Scripture the
hardening of man in sin, and the preserving man from sin, seems to be
attributed to God both ways; as where he is said to harden Pharaohs heart; and
to Abimelech, (a) Genesis 20.6. I have kept thee from sinning against me.



1 If there were not a number of holy people, which God has chosen unto
eternal life; then the end of Christ's sufferings for us, were all in vain,
and the whole race of mankind should have been created only to destruction:
So the mercy of God toward His creature, that had sinned, should be without
effect: Neither should His glory be magnified, in saving that which was lost.
So the devil, the enemy of mankind, might magnify himself against God, in
that he had destroyed His creature irrecoverably. But all these things are
impossible. Therefore there is a holy Church, chosen of God unto eternal life.
And if this holy Church, in the parts or members thereof, had not continued in
all ages, since God made His promise of a Savior to Adam, then faith had failed
from among men, and the promises of God, being either not believed, or
forgotten, the sons of God, begotten by the immortal seed, had failed. So the
throne of Christ, when there was no faithful heart wherein He reigned, should
not have been established for ever, contrary to the promise, Psalm. 89. ver.
4, 29, 36. and Luke 1. ver. 33. So the seed of the enemy only had flourished
in the earth, contrary to the disposition of that wise husbandman, Matthew 13.30.
Let both grow together until the harvest. But these things are impossible.
Therefore the holy Church is also Catholic, or continuing from the beginning,
to the end of the world. For your better understanding, you may take these
arguments apart.

2. If the goodness of God, being essentially one with His infinity, were not
diffusive, or spreading it self upon the creature, for the succor and aid
thereof, in the greatest misery, then should it be exceeded by the malice and
wickedness of the devil, which though it be the greatest that may be; yet must
it needs be finite, as having the original from a finite creature. But it is
impossible that God should be exceeded by the malice of the devil, therefore
there is a restoring of man, to that blessedness and glory, from which he fell
by his si^ne, as you have seen it prooved before, in the 18. Chapter, and from
all the reasons there brought, to that conclusion, you may bring reasons for
the proof of this Article.

3. If man were created according to the will of God, innocent, and without
sin; then that present estate of sin, and death the punishment thereof,
wherein he now is, must needs have been brought upon him, since his creation,
contrary to the revealed will of God: wherein, though for the declaration of
the justice of God against sin, some be suffered to continue; yet because
sin is contrary to the will of God, and death contrary to the end of His
creation of mankind; it is necessary that there be a redemption, or freeing of
some appointed thereunto, from the thraldom, both of sin and death. But it
has been prooved, Chap. 15. that man was created innocent. Therefore there is
a Church, or a number known unto God, of them that are so redeemed.

4. There is a God who has made His promises of everlasting life. There is
faith, hope, and repentance, and other virtues both Christian and moral,
whereby the promises of God are apprehended, and obedience performed to His
Commandments. Therefore there is a holy Catholic Church. For it is
impossible, either that the promises of God should fail of their performance;
or that says and other virtues should be without their reward. For so the
Spirit of grace, which wrought these virtues in man, should work in vain. But
this is impossible.

5. This holy Catholic Church is declared in sundry places of the holy
Scripture; and in special, according to all the causes thereof, in the Epistle
to the Ephesians. 4. chap. 1. from verse. 2. to 15. And although Saint Paul, in that
place write to a particular Church; yet is the Catholic Church no other than
such as is there described: no more then the British or Spanish Seas are
different from the great Ocean, either in substance or qualities. For there is
but one body, and one Spirit, one Lord, one faith, one hope, one baptism, one
God, and Father of all. Ephe. 4.4, 5, 6. And as there is but one God; so is
there but one Mediator between God and man, the Man Jesus Christ, 1. Tim. 2.5,
6. And this one Mediator is that one only mystical head of His mystical
body. For there is no name given under heaven, whereby we must be saved, but
only the name of Jesus Christ, Act. 4.12. And as there is but one head; so is
there one only body, as it is said, Cant. 6.9. My Dove, my undefiled is but
one, and John 10.16. There shall be one fold, and one shepherd: by which texts
of the Holy Writ, it is manifest that there is one holy Catholic hurch, as we
do believe.

. 3. And by this which has been said, it may easily appear what those
differences are, between this Catholic Church, and other particular
congregations, whether in private houses, or in Cities, Countries, Kingdoms,
or Peoples, which in Cant. 6. cited even now, are signified by the Queens,
Concubines, and the innumerable Virgins, which consent to the same points of
faith and doctrine.

1. The first, and most common is this, that in the Visible Churches,
Hypocrites and Atheists are found among the chosen; and these are the tares
among the wheat, the bad fish among the good, Matthew. 13.48. But in this holy
Catholic Church, no vile or profane person can be, as it is said Rev. 21.8.
and 22.15. That without the holy City, shall be dogs, the fearful, and
abominable, the unbeleeving, murderers, whoremongers, sorcerers, idolaters, and
every one that loves and makes the lie.

2. A second difference is in this, that every particular Church is visible, so
that every member thereof, may be fully informed of all things whatsoever is
taught therein for truth; either concerning doctrine or discipline: but the
Catholic Church, in the sense we here take it, neither is, nor ever was, nor
can be visible, but to the eye of faith alone, as here we confess in our
Creed; for faith is the proof, or argument, of things not seen. Hebr. 11.1.
If then the Catholic Church be a thing to be seen, then is it not to be
believed; if it be to be believed, then must it needs be invisible. 2. Beside
this, the universal, or Catholic Church, as Saint Paul describes it, Ephesians.
13.15. is of the Saints in heaven, as well as of them that are in earth; yea,
and of them that are not yet borne, as of either of these. And although all the
members of this Church, during the time of their pilgrimage upon earth, be
visible, or in a visible Church; yet, while they are here on earth, we do not
believe them to be of that Catholic Church, with that assurance of knowledge,
which a saving faith requires; such a faith I mean, as is due to an Article of
our Creed, but only with that hope, or credulity, which Christian charity, and
their holy conversation does bind us to have of them. 3. For as God only
knows the heart, so He only knows who are His; and if He only know, then
cannot we; and though we see them in a true particular Church, yet do we not
thereby know that they are true members of the Catholic Church.

Object. 1. If the true Church be not always visible; why does our Lord send
us to the Church, Mat. 18.17.

Answer. That commandment of Christ shows what is to be done in particular
visible Churches, not in the invisible Catholic Church; and this is to be
observed in such texts as are like to this, which the Papists bring, to prove
the perpetual visibility of the Catholic Church. For if they could make that
good, they would hope thereby, to prove the Church of Rome to be the Catholic
Church. But if the first were given, the second would not follow. For was there
no Catholic Church before Romulus murdered his brother? or, where was the
Catholic Church, when Rome was yet the mother of all the abominations and
filthiness of the earth? First in their worship of devils; and after, when
their lives were answerable to their Religion, as you read in Saint Paul, Romans
1. and in their own prophets, Iuvenal, Arbiter, etc. and again, since they
have forsaken their faith once praised, Romans 1.8. and borne the former reward
of their idolatry? And if that Church be the Catholic Church, out of which
none can be saved (as they say) what shall become of all those Christians in
the whole world, which detest the Church of Rome, and all their idolatries and
false doctrines; as the Greeks, and all that follow them, the Nestorians,
Iacobites, Ethiopians, the reformed Churches in the West, etc. which for the
number may seem to be, at the least, five to one to the Papists,
notwithstanding their false pretended universality?

To the former differences between the Catholic Church and particular
congregations you may add a third, that any particular Church may err wholly,
both in manners and doctrine, as I showed in the Chap. before 7. N. 2. but the
Catholic Church cannot err. 4. Any particular Church may fail, or cease to
be; but of the kingdom of Christ there shall be no end. Therefore the
Catholic Church cannot fail; from whence it follows; 5. That the Catholic
Church is of the greatest antiquity, as having the beginning thereof in Adam
and Eve, (for I enquire only of the Church of the redeemed, not of the Angels)
but particular Churches had their b^ginning afterward, some at one time, some
at another; as that of the Jews, in Abraham and his family; that of the
Ethiopians in the Eunuch, etc. 6. Concerning the succession of the Catholic
Church, there is none such ^s they account, of Kings, or Bishops in this or
that See: but beca^se Christ's kingdom cannot fail, therefore there is this
succ^ss ^. That before these Saints that now live shall die, others shall be
borne, that are the true members of the Church; and thus is there still but one
Catholic Church, which unity contains all and every member thereof, in one
mystical body, whereof our Lord Christ is the Head.

Notes.
(a) I Withheld thee from sinning against Me.] Against this, and many such
texts of Scripture, the Heretic Pelagius taught, that man of himself,
without any special gra^e of God, might fulfill the divine Commandments: and
if ^he grace of God were at all needful, it was only, that a man might more
e^sily through grace, do those things which he was commanded to do of his
own free will. But this grace (said he) is only in our free will, which our
nature has received of God, without any See what Pelag^us meant by this, in
answ. to the Jesuits challe^ in Ireland. ^ag. 478. 179. 480, and 481. etc.
merit of ours fore oing. In this only God does help us, that by the law and
the doctrine, we may know what we ought both to do and to hope for, Aug.
Haer. Cap. 88. By occasion of whi h heresy, diverse unnecessary questions have
been moved, about free will, universal gr ce, perseverance, and the like,
which are no way availeable to the increase of godliness, or the comfort of
the conscience, but rather have overthrown the faith of ^ome, and been the
feuell of Factions, both in the Church and Commonwealth. But as among the
Corinthians, when schisms and discontents arose, concerning their (...), or
Love Feasts, before the holy Communion, the Apostle brings them to the
simplicity of the first institution thereof, 1 Cor. 11.21. So by the same
Spirit of wisdom, has his Majest^e, our gracious Sovereign, with the advice
of our reverend Fathers, the god y and learned Bishops, cut off these curious
questions, with all inconvenience and s^andall as might grow thereby, See his
Majesty's declaration, before the Art^ of 62. Read also the Art. 9.10.11.17. So
that now through the mercy of God, by the piety and constant care of his
Majesty, and by the providence and zeal of our faithful shepherds, there is
assured hope, that these tares, which so lately tro^bled our neighbor
Churches, and by the servants of the envious man, were attempted to be sown in
our be^uteous fields, shall never spread any root of bitterness among us. And
although these questions thrust in themselves here in this place to be
discussed, seeing predestination is the eternal foundation of the holy
C^tholike Church* out of which there is ^o sal^at^on; and into which none can
come but he that is holy: It may seem that t ought to be enquired, what
holiness we have of our selves, or what strength, to come to that holiness
which we ought to have; and what strength to co^^i^ue therein. But because
obedience is better the sacrifi e and be use reason ranging beyond these
bounds which God has set ^s accounted by Saint Paul, Romans 9.20. a replying
against God; let us leave these quest ons a^ Saint Paul left that of
predestination, to the mere mercy and will of God, and that absolute Lordship
which he has over His creature, as the tempe^er of the clay has power over
the same lump, to m^ke one vessel to honor* and another to dishonor. And
seeing man's understanding searching into the things of God so far above his
reach, as the infinite wisdom of God and His se^ret will are, must needs fall
into error; let us be contented to keep our selves within those limits which
God H^mselfe has set. Deuteronomy. 29.29. The secret things belong unto the Lord our
God, but the things that are revealed, belong to us and to our children, that
we may do them. To this purpose Saint Paul writes concerning this sealed
secret, 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal,
The Lord knows them that are His; and let every one that names the Name of
Christ, depart from iniquity. Therefore lest any man should run beside his
own hopes, whilst be enquires too busily into the hopes of other men, let us
remember that wise and faithful counsel which is in 4. Esdr. 8.55. Ask thou
no questions concerning them that perish. The reason went before verse 47. for
thou come far short, that thou should be able to love the creature more
then He that made it.

ARTICLE X. The Communion of Saints.
CHAP. XXXVI.
THey that make this clause to be only an appendix for explication of the
former, as if they would say, I believe the holy Catholic Church to be the
Communion or fellowship of Saints: come short of the uttermost meaning thereof.
For beside the two properties of the Church, to be Holy and Catholic; it is
necessary to know what the Privileges or prerogatives are, which belong to
that holy congregation, that they may know that their service is not without
reward. These prerogatives are 4. 1. This Communion of the Saints, which is the
ground and assurance of the rest. For from hence it follows, that we may
assuredly believe that our sins are forgiven, and therefore that our bodies
shall rise again, and that to everlasting life. But this Communion of the
Saints is twofold; 1. Among themselves: Secondly, in the participation of
those benefits which are purchased for them by the merit of Christ. Yet this
Communion among themselves, is rather a third property, than a privilege of
the holy Church, and arises from that Communion which we have with Christ, For
he that loves Him that begets, loves him also that is begotten of Him, 1.
Ioh. 5.1, 2. And because all the faithful are governed by one Holy Spirit,
therefore are they ever ready and willing to impart what gifts soever they have
received, to the common good of all that may be partakers thereof. And this not
only in the supply of outward helps, as it appeared, Act. 4.32. but much more
in like affection one toward another, in prayer one for another, in supporting
each the infirmity of other, as one member of the body is ever helpful to
another, in comforting, in exhorting, and in the Spirit of Meekenes admonishing
one another, and every one in himself, giving an example of a virtuous, and
honest life, according to that commandment, Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which
is in heaven. And these things proceed from that inward and spiritual
Communion which we have with God the Father, and with His Son Jesus Christ, as
it is said, 1. John. 1.3. For seeing w^ know, That God so loved the world, as
that He gave His Son to die for the life of the world, we ought also to love
the brethren. So likewise the spiritual Communion, or participation of those
benefits whereof we are partakers by the merit of Christ, stands altogether in
this, that He our Mediator, God and Man, having given Himself a ransom for
u^: God does not now look on us as we are in our selves, corrupted in our
sins, but as we are washed, but as we are sanctified, but as we are
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, as we
are one body with His Son, and He our head, is become our righteousness, our
sanctification and redemption: So that through Him, we have not only these
privileges here mentioned; of the forgiveness of our sins, resurrection,
and life; but also having in Christ the adoption of sons, we have by Him an
entrance unto God the Father, a right and interest in the eternal inheritance
of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever may be availeable to our eternal
happiness, for the gift was not as the offense, as you might see, Chap. 18..
2. For as we know that Christ our Lord, the eternal Son, was partaker of our
nature, and are likewise assured, that the greatest actions of God in His
creature, are for the greatest good that can come near the creature: So ought
we to be persuaded, that we also shall be made the sons of God, by that
Spirit of God that dwells in us, as it is said, 1. Cor. 6.17. He that is
joined to the Lord, is one Spirit. And these are the exceeding great and
precious promises, that God has made unto us in Christ, that by Him we shall
be made partakers of the divine nature. 2. Peter 1.4. this is that union, and
Communion for which our Lord prays that it may be made perfect in us, John
17.21, 22, 23.

1. For seeing the soul of man is a thing whose excellency does so far
exceed all things of this world: it may not be thought that the happiness and
perfection of the soul can stand in things that are inferior to it self: as
in riches, honor, worldly pleasure, or the like: But seeing it knows that
there is one only infinite goodness, which because it is infinite, must needs
be eternal, and able to satisfy all the desire of the creature that can be
partaker thereof: therefore does it aspire thereunto, because in the enjoying
of that alone, it can be made perfect. And if this desire of the soul should
be in vain, then the Holy Spirit of God which wrought this desire in the
soul, should have wrought in vain: then the infinite goodness, which might
satisfy the desire of the creature, should be defective toward the creature,
and consequently not infinite: then the promises of God made in His word should
fail, and the prayer of our Mediator, cited even now from John 17. without
effect. But all these things are impossible. Therefore there is a Communion of
the Saints with God, and with one another, as we confess in the article.

2. If the merit of Christ be infinite, and that not for Himself, but for His
body, which is the Church, then it is necessary that an infinite reward be
given thereto. But the merit of Christ is infinite, both actively and
passively. Therefore an infinite reward is due to us thereby: So that by the
Spirit of Christ which is in us, we have communion both with the Father, and
the Son, 1. John 1.3.

3. All the dignities of God are infinite, and they are all to be manifested
in the creature, so far forth as the creature can be made capable thereof.
Ergo. Now the foundation and original of communion is in this, that for as
much as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, He also Himself took
part of the same, that through death He might destroy him that had the power of
death, Hebr. 2.14. and that to this end, that we might be partakers of His
immortality, and from that union of the divine and humane nature, whereby our
Lord, of the seed of Abraham, became one with all mankind, arises that
spiritual and mystical union of us with Him, that howsoever we are absent in
body, yet being renewed by the Spirit of our mind, we live unto Him, and have
Him evermore abiding in us, as we evermore abide in him, and daily more and
more grow up with Him into one mystical body, as if we were flesh of His flesh,
and bone of His bones, Ephesians. 5.30. and from this mystical union, we have the
assurance of that glorious union which shall be in heaven, when we shall be
joined to our head inseparably: and this is that union or communion which all
the faithful hope for, whereof we have the assurance of His promises in His
Holy word, the signs and pledges of the Holy supper, and the witness of the
holy Spirit of God in our hearts. And thus is Christ ours, with His graces, and
His merits, and thus according to the exceeding great and precious promises,
are we made partakers of the divine nature: not that we participate of the
incommunicable essence of the deity; but that by the renewing of the
Holy Ghost, we put off our corrupt desires, and are transformed in our minds
according as His Divine power does give us all things that belong to life and
godliness.

ARTICLE XI. The forgiveness of sins.
CHAP. XXXVII.
BEing is of God alone, whose being, because it is infinite, therefore must it
hold in it self, all the excreamities of being; so that nothing that is, can
possible be, but by Him: therefore, seeing the soul, the body, and the
abilities thereof, are from God alone; the devil can claim no interest in
man, in respect of any of these: for none of these had their original from
him. But because he was a murderer from the beginning, and inspired his inbred
poison into man, even from the beginning: the root of mankind being thereby
poisoned, the venom spreads throughout all his race, to corrupt both his
understanding and his will; that so his actions being corrupted by the ill,
which he wilfully commits, his being also may become abominable. But as the
Physicians make a difference between the body and the disease; so He, our
gracious healer, discernes between the being, His own work, and the
corruption thereof, the tares, (I mean) which the envious man sowed thereupon,
to save his own work, and to cast the venom, and the effects thereof, on the
face of the enemy, to the increase of his eternal damnation: and first heales
the understanding, that it may see the sin; then the will, that he may detest
and avoid it. And thus, by the renewing of the mind, are we transformed from
the image of the devil, and that stamp which his sin did set upon us; So
that the satisfaction being made to the infinite justice, both for our
original and actual sin, the workmanship of God, even our whole being may
be glorified with that glory for which it was created, which also it had in the
eternal decree before this world was. And because our great weakness, caused
of our inbred infection, and our many sins ensuing thereupon, does every
moment stand up, as a wall of separation, between our God and us; therefore
has God given unto us, such assured hopes of His mercy, that although we fall,
we shall not be cast away, because the Lord puts under His hand, Psalm.
37.21. and sustaineth us with this confidence, That although our sins be as red
as scarlet, yet they shall be made more white then snow, Esaias 1.18. And because
this hope and confidence, ought always to be before our eyes, as being the
sure stay and anchor of our souls; therefore is nothing more fully assured
unto us, then this, among all those things which we do believe. Stay thou
trembling and fearful soul, and though the ugly visage of thy monstrous
sins make thee afraid, which indeed are so much the more hideous and
deformed, because they are not only against the Law of God, but against the
law of reason, rightly judging, and against thine own conscience: yet stay and
see what hope there is for thee; and though that messenger of hell, Despair,
with all that wretched train of all thy sin, which he brings with him, does
hunt thee so close, that thou dare not stay, though thou would be any
thing, save that thou art; and most of all, nothing at all: yet see if a door
of hope, as wide as the valley of A^hor, Hos. 2.15. be not set open for thee,
only if thou will be entreated to go in, and be saved.

1. Thou objectest the wrath of God, from which there is no avoidance. But are
not all men borne under one state of corruption? and who can s^y his heart is
clean? if God then should be extreme, to mark what is done amiss, who can
abide it? and if every sin, in as much as it is against an infinite justice,
deserves eternal punishment, can no man be saved? So all mankind should have
been created only to punishment: but this is against the infinity of His
goodness, who is full of compassion, slow to anger, and great in mercy, good
to all, and His tender mercies are above all His works, Exodus 34.6. Psalm.
144.8, 9. Therefore there is forgiveness of sins.

2. Therefore is the sin of the wicked angels unpardonable, because it was
wilful in them, because they cannot repent them of it, and because they have
no mediator to make satisfaction for their sin. All which (through the mercy
of God) to us are found contrary in the sin of man: for neither was his sin
wilful, or of himself alone, but from the devil which tempted him thereto;
neither is it without repentance, in all that belong to God; neither is it
without a Mediator that is able to make satisfaction fully for all our sins.
But when all sufficient means are orderly disposed for an end, it is
impossible but that the end should follow. Therefore there is a forgiveness of
sins, as we are taught to pray.

3. Glory and happiness is not given, till sins be first forgiven; So that
if there be not a forgiveness of sins, the greatest and most excellent
virtues must for ever remain without reward. For we see that in this life,
virtue is so far from reward, or esteem, that it is rather persecuted with
hatred and contempt, as the Proverb has it, Virtutis ^omes inuidia. And if
virtue can find no reward, neither in this life, nor in that which is to come;
then the goodness and justice of God should be defective. But this is
impossible; therefore there is forgiveness of sins.

4. Change the terms of the first reasons in the 18. Chapter, and they are
easily brought to this conclusion. So from the reasons for the Catholic
Church, and from many other, this Article is easily concluded, as you may see
by the reason following.

5. Christ took not on Him the nature of Angels, but He took on Him the seed
of Abraham. H br. 2.16. For it behooved Him in all things, to be made like unto
His brethren, that He might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, in
things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people:
therefore was He made a little less then the Angels, that He might suffer
death for our sins; and this, that He might abolish his power, that had the
power of death, Hebr. 2.14, 15, 16, 17. but nothing of all this for any benefit
to Himself: but for us was He borne, for us He died, and rose again, and
sits at the right hand of God, making intercession for us. And these are the
glorious works which were given unto Him of the Father to do for us, and
cannot possibly be in vain. Therefore seeing He Himself became our surety
(for the things of heaven are not known, but by the Registers of heaven) See
Hebr. 10.7. and 7.22. Genesis 3.15. Esaias 53.4.5.6.8.11.12. and has in His own
body borne the punishment of our sins upon the tree. 1. Pet. 2.24. it cannot
stand with the justice of God, to exact that debt of us which our surety has
satisfied. And therefore it follows that our sins are forgiven us.

6. And that I may at once decide this question, both by reason and authority
also of holy Writ, and give full comfort and hope to thee (poor soul) that
art pressed down, even to the gates of hell, under the burden of thy sins:
stay and see if thy comforts be not greater then thou had thought. First it
is a clear case, that no man's life is justly called in question, but by the
plain and manifest letter of the Law. Thou will say, that is thy desperate
case, For it is written, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed is he, that confirms not all
the words of this Law, to do them: so is the Letter (I confess) but that is
now cancelled, and that by the interpretation of the Law it self, builded upon
one and the same justice with the former; as where it is said, Hab. 2.4. The
just shall live by faith; then not by doing the works of the Law, although it
be most just, that he that does the works of the Law, should live therein,
Levit. 18.5. as Saint Paul argues, Galat. 3.12. for Laws are made for the
preservation of humane society in general, so for the safety and defense of
every innocent in particular, that doing well they may be without fear, Romans
13.3. But Christ our Savior, though He were separate from sinners, though no
deceit were found in His mouth, lived not in His innocence, by the patronage of
the Law. And if the Law had not power to give life to the innocent; neither in
justice can it have power to condemn the guilty; and if no flesh shall be
justified by the works of the Law, Galat. 2.16. but that all men thereby stand
guilty before God; what madness is it, to seek life by that which brings the
sentence of condemnation, and that upon all men indifferently? And if Christ
Jesus be of God made unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. what shall we need to fear the condemnation of the
Law, which through the infirmity of our flesh was unable to give life, or seek
any other righteousness, then that which by faith we have in him? And if He be
our righteousness, how can the Law condemn us, when He has fulfilled it for
us? Romans 8.3, 4. therefore comfort thy self in God. Blessed is the man whose
hope is in the Lord his God, and though thy hopes be weak, nay, though thou
walk in darkness, and have no light; yet trust in the Name of the Lord, and
stay upon thy God, Esaias 50.10. And though thy conscience condemn thee, yet God
is greater then thy conscience, and knows all things 1 John 3.20.

Objection 1. It is not long ago, that certain men from the mint of their
own brain, sought to give out a coin under their own stamp. That we are
not justified by the active righteousness of Christ, but by that which was
passive only: and another like this. That we are not bound to the observation
of the Law delivered by Moses, either Judicial, Ceremonial, or Moral. But
because this coin had not the public stamp, it was accounted false; and
therefore this last argument of yours, which draws so near to their last
position, may seem to be fallacious. The Law defended not the innocent, ergo
it cannot condemn the guilty. Who knows not that the just Law was most
unjustly wrested against our Savior, that He ought to die, because He said,
He was the Son of God; when as in the case of treason against Caesar, upon
His own interpretation, He was acquitted by the Roman deputy.

Answer. So He was pronounced innocent against all their other objections, and
yet His innocence saved Him not. Yet His case was a reserved case, in as much
as He was no private man: but even the Head of His Church, who had set Himself
to answer for all His members, and therefore when the Law protected not Him,
who was innocent above all men, and for all men, it condemned it self as
unable to give life: and therefore the conclusion is good, that it is not of
any power to condemn any of them who were condemned in Him that was innocent.
But that I may answer more particularly: I say that I am far from these men,
in both their opinions.

For although the things which our Lord did, so far forth as we can imitate
them, are examples for us, yet not only for example, but also for our
justification, that the law of perfect righteousness being fulfilled for us,
we might be freed from the curse of the Law. Moreover by that active
righteousness which our Savior performed, He was able to save all that come
unto God by Him* whereas if it might be supposed, that God and man in one
person could sin (as the devil tempted Him) then His suffering had been
only sufficient for Himself, whereas now, His death was meritorious for all.
For as that supposed sin had been infinite both in respect of the person
against whom, and the person by whom it had been done, being an infinite
Person, so must it have had an infinite satisfaction; So all that Christ had
merited by His death, had been available only for Himself: but now being
offered a Lamb without spot, His sacrifice is sufficient for all that come
unto God by Him. Then for that other opinion, that we are not bound to the
fulfilling of the Law, it is most false. For though the Judicial were peculiar
to Isreal's common wealth, and the ceremonial Law served only till the
substance was exhibited; yet the moral Law, in regard of the eternal Justice
and equity thereof, as the law of nature, may not be broken without sin:
nay, so much more straightly are we bound to the performance thereof, as the
thoughts are more unruly than the actions, otherwise what meant those
interpretations of the Law, Matthew. 5. and elsewhere, fetched from the innermost
meaning of Justice, which binds the very thoughts: It has been said to them
of old, etc. But I say unto you, Love your enemies: and whosoever lusts, has
committed adultery in his heart, etc. Is not our Lord a sufficient Lawgiver
for His Church? Do they take away sin out of the world, and so make void the
death of Christ? For where no Law is, there is no sin imputed. Romans 5.13. I
confess that the Law has no power over them that are in Christ, to eternal
death, because it was insufficient to protect His innocent life, although the
keeping of the Law, if it were exact, might claim to eternal life. But the
works of the Law, and faith in Christ, are by Saint Paul set in direct
opposition in this argument of justification, See Romans 3. from verse 20. etc.
And Galatians, Chapter 3. But yet though obedience cannot bring life eternal
to the doer of the Law, because the Law is perfect, our obedience imperfect;
yet sin brings deserved death upon the sinner, whereby their vanity
appears, which ho^d the keeping of the law not necessary: and likewise the
truth of the former conclusion, that seeing the keeping of the law gave not
life to our Lord that fulfilled it, neither can the breach of the Law bring
condemnation to them that are in Him, to whom there is no condemnation. Romans
8.1.

Object. 2. But seeing the merit of Christ is infinite, and He being both God
and m^n, of infinite wo^thinesse above the creature; and for this purpose
appearing, that He might take away the sins of the world: how comes it to
pass, that after the sacrifice for sin is offered, yet both sin, and death
the punishment thereof, do still remain?

Answer. It was an easy thing for God utterly to have abolished death, after
that by sin, it had entered into the world; so that neither the body should
have died the natural death, nor the soul the spiritual death of ignorance,
and pleasure in sin, nor both together the death eternal. But yet God would
let both sin and death remain, and that for four reasons especially. First,
that the justice of His most righteous sentence might stand. In the day that
thou eatest of that tree of the knowledge of good and ill, thou shall die the
death. 2. That the infinity of His wisdom and goodness might appear; that
as death by sin had entered into the world, so by death he might destroy
sin: that whereas the devil which had the power of death, sought to deprive
man of life and glory, He might take the weapon out of the hand of that
Egyptian, and as Benajah, kill him with his own spear, and by death bring man
to everlasting glory. 3. That man might see the greatness of the benefit, and
willingly conform himself to follow Christ through the pains of death, and
honor of the grave, seeing God has called and predestined us to be like the
image of His Son. 4. The devils fell by pride, and least man should grow
proud, therefore is sin and death left with him, to humble him thereby: So
that to the faithful, the condition of death only is changed. For whereas
justice would that man should die, because the sentence of death had proceeded
against him; And mercy would not the death of a sinner, Wisdom decided it,
that death should be made the way to everlasting life, and so both Justice and
mercy might have what they desired.

Obj^ct. 3. But how is sin said to be forgiven, when both sin, and the
punishment do still remain?

Answer. The meaning and purpose of this Article of our faith, is, that we
steadfastly believe the forgiveness of our sins, so that they shall not rise
up in judgment against us to our eternal condemnation. But concerning the
tempo^ary punishment in this world, we must remember that which is, Hebr. 12.6.
Whom the Lord ^^^eth He chastizeth, and scourges every one whom He receives.
And this appears most plainly in D^vid, 2. Sam. 12. whose sin though God
had put away, that he should not die; yet was it afterward punished to every
circumstance, as you may read. And though all chastisement for the present be
grievous: yet are not affli^tions brought upon men, but only for their
humility, and exercise of their faith and patience; or to turn them from
their sin that they may repent, and be made partakers of His holiness, and
so the eternal remission of their sins, made sure unto them according to His
promise, Esaias 43.25. I, even I am He that puts out thine iniquities, for
Min^ own sake, and will not remember thy sins. And again, Esaias 44.22. I
will put away thy transgressions as a Cloud, and the sins as a mist: Turn
thee unto me, for I have redeemed th^e: Read further, Esaias. 53. from verse. 4.
to the end, Mi^. 7.18.19. He retains not wrath for ever, because mercy pl
aseth Him: He will turn aga^ne and have compassion upon us; He will subdue
our iniquities* and ^a^ all our sins into the bottom of the Sea. Col. 1.13.
God has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us into
the Kingdom of His dear Son, in whom we have redemption through His blood,
that is, the fo^givenesse of our sins, Hebr. 1.3. Christ by Himself has
purged our sins. See the text cited out of Jeremiah, Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. and
Hebr. 9.26. and 28. 1. Pet. 2.24. Who His own self, bare our sins in His
body, on the t^ee, that by His stripes we might be h^aled, 1. John. 1.^. The
Blood of Jesus Christ purges us from all our si^nes, Reve. 1.5. He has loved
us, and washed us from all our sins in His blood. Rev. 5.9. Thou art worthy
to take the book, and to open the seals thereof. For Thou wast killed, and
have redeemed us unto God by Thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and Nation.

ARTICLE XII. The resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting.
CHAP. XXXVIII.
1. IT may seem that the Christian man's hopes are more glorious then all other
hopes, because he is so well content, with patience to expect the promises, and
to defer his hopes to be enjoyed in a better life then this; yea, for those
hopes sake, to deny himself many pleasures and contents in this present life;
an argument doubtless, as of a constant hope, so of an invincible courage;
that for this hopes sake, because he judges Him faithful that has promised,
he bears patiently all oppositions, persecutions, and all things else
whatsoever may seem to stand against this hope of happiness in the life to
come: which constancy is so much the more to be praised, because it is of a
hope above hope, seeing all reason and causes in nature are against it;
insomuch as with them that believed it not, it was scoffed at, as you read
Act. 17.32. or else accounted madness, as Act. 26.24. yea, and where the great
teacher of the Gentiles takes upon him to ascertaine this doctrine of the
resurrection, as 1 Cor. 15. he brings his maine proof especially to this
purpose; That it is to be held a Gospel, which we are to receive as a matter of
faith, which of it self is the substance and proof of things hoped for. We
shall consider the validity of Saint Paul's ar^uments in their due place, in the
mean time what hope we may have from them who undertake to give proof of this
Article by natural reason, you may see by that which Thomas Aquinas has
brought, contra Gentiles lib. 4. cap. 79. The soul (quoth he) is immortal,
and naturally united to the body, as the form thereof. Therefore it is against
the nature of the soul, to be out of the body; and nothing that is contrary to
nature, can be perpetual. Therefore it is necessary that it be again united
to the body, that the body may rise again. To this reason it may be replied,
nothing is, or can be put in nature, whereby the soul being once departed, is
again reunited to the body: but that is a thing transcending nature and only
in the will and power of God. For although the resurre^tion be indeed a
natural thing, in respect of the terms, that is, the body and the soul,
because neither the body, nor yet the soul, is any perfect speci^s in nature,
seeing they are made one for the other, and the souls desire of being with the
body is never satisfied but in the body; yet in respect of the principle or
cause which should join them together, being separated, the resurrection is
above nature, and therefore cannot be enforced by any natural reason. For the
soul, by any disease or other cause contrary to nature, being driven out of
the body; there is no natural cause left* either in the one, or in the other,
which is able to reunite them: for if so, then that cause would have been of
force to have retained the soul still in the body, that it should not have
departed therefrom: And therefore that axiom, That nothing which is against
nature can be perpetual, has no force to infer the resurrection, which
depends only on the will, the mercy and justice of Almighty God, and not on
any thing that is in nature. The second reason is this.

2. That which is imperfect in the being thereof, cannot be capable of perfect
happiness. The soul separate from the body, is in the being thereof
imperfect; in as much as being a part of man, it is not perfect, but in the
whole man soul and body together; Therefore it is necessary that the soul be
again united to the body, that both may be perfectly happy together.

Answer. The perfect happiness of the soul and body together, is a promise of
grace, and utterly beyond the state of nature, and so no natural argument of
the resurrection. But the perfection of being is either natural, or
connaturall: The perfection, which I call natural, shall be only in the state
of glory, when the natural parts of man, soul and body, shall be joined
together according to the perfection of their several being after the
resurrection. The connaturall perfection of the reasonable soul, is that which
is in knowledge and contemplation of things that are divine. The soul being
separate, because it is freed from that variable and frail companion of the
fantasy, which follows the appetite, and dies with the body, Psalm. 146.4.
is better fitted to that perfection which is in contemplation, then while it
dwelt with the body, and because it sees that there is no possibility in
nature, of any return to the body, it is with all patience and joy, content to
expect till Gods appointment be, that it shall return, as it was said to the
souls o^ the Saints, That they should rest for a little season, until their
fellow Martyrs time were fulfilled, Revel. 6.11. So that although for the
perfect happiness of both, the soul is to be joined to the body, yet that
joining follows not for the desires sake of the soul, but for His will^ sake
who has promised such happiness unto both soul and body.

Thus you see that the glorious hopes which the holy Christian faith brings
with it, are above all the reasons and possibilities of nature. Therefore let
us not seek natural proofs for the resurrection, but from the light of
grace, and the virtues of the divine dignities which the holy Scriptures have
made us to know; let us see what arguments we can find of more strength and
solidity. And because the reasons that are to be brought for proof of this
Article will fol ow easily enough, if it be made manifest that the will and
decree of God upon all mankind is, that there shall be a resurrection both of
the just and unjust, Act. 24.17. I will first bring the holy Oracles thereto;
then the reasons that accord with them; and lastly answer such objections as
Atheists are wont to bring to the contrary.

That which is in Genesis 3.15. The seed of the woman shall break the head of the
serpent, in John ^.8. is interpreted, shall destroy the works of the devil,
that is, sin, and the punishment thereof, death; which cannot be, except the
dead be raised again, Job 19.25. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that He
shall ^tand at the later day upon the earth; and though, after my s^inne,
worms d^stroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God: whom I shall see for
my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reins ^e
consumed within me. Which text, though it be as plain and dir^ct for the
resurrection, as any other in the Scripture, yet John Mercerus rejects that
sense, because the Hebrew Commentators do not so expound it. Esaias 26.19, 21.
Thy dead men shall live together, with My dead body shall they rise: awake and
^ing ^e that dwell in the dust, for the earth shall cast out her dead. For b
hold, the Lord comes out of His place to punish the inhabitants of the earth
for their iniquity: the earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more
hide her slain. Read to this purpose, Ezech. 37. all. And if you say, that
the calling of the Israelites is there prophesied, in that Metaphor; yet
remember that no Metaphor is taken from things that are not. Dan. 12.2. Of them
that sleep in the dust many shall awake to everlasting life; some to shame and
everlasting contempt. Hosea 13.14. I will ransom them from the power of the
grave, I will redeem them from death: o death! I will be thy plagues; o
grave! I will be thy destruction: repentance is hid from mine eyes. John 5.28,
29. The hour is coming, in which all that are in the graves shall hear His
voice, and shall come forth: they that have done good, to the resurrection of
life; and they that have done ill, to the resurrection of damnation. 2 Cor.
5.10. We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one
may receive the things done in his body according to that which He has done,
whether it be good or ill. So by these texts, among many other, it being
manifest that God has decreed a resurrection for the bodies of men, both good
and bad: it being also manifest, that nothing is impossible unto Him, but that
He does whatsoever it pleases Him, in the heaven, and earth, in the seas, and
all deep places, Psalm. 135.6. it must follow of necessity, that there shall be
a resurrection; which, that ye may the better apprehend, we will add some
reasons that accord hereto.

1. And first of all, that argument which our Lord Jesus brings to this
purpose: Matthew. 22.32. I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob, but God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Therefore
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, though they be now dead, yet must they rise again,
for all men live to Him, that is, are in His power to be brought again unto
life when He will. To know the strength of this argument, you must look to
that which is, Genesis 17. I will establish My Covenant with thee, and with thy
s^ed for an everlasting Covenant. But no covenant can be everlasting, if
either of the parties die. Therefore Abraham and his seed, that is, the
faithful cannot perish, but evermore live unto God, as it is said in Luke
20.38. For to this end Christ both died, and revived, and rose again, that He
might be Lord both of the dead and living: the dead He says, that they may
live again. For if our Lord Jesus died to purchase eternal life for us, it is
impossible that we should not live eternally.

2. The arguments of Saint Paul, in 1. Cor. 15. fall as thick as hail, and
that first argument, in the first place, stands thus. 1. It is a Gospel which
he received, and preached unto them according to the Scriptures; And seeing the
doctrine of God, for His own authority, being the God of Truth, is to be
received, for our reverence only which we owe to him, we ought to believe it.
Hitherunto tend those words. v. 3. and 4. For I delivered unto you that which I
received, that Christ died for our sins, according to the Scriptures, and that
He was buried, and that He rose again the third day according to the
Scriptures. 2. And from this ground of faith, he does conclude, verse. 12. that
there is a resurrection, to wit, for them that die in the faith of Christ; For
Christ died not for Himself, but for our sins, and rose again for our
justification, Romans 4.25. 3. Since by man came death, by man also came the
resurrection of the dead. verse. 21, 22. For the well-being of the body cannot
be but by the head. 4. verse. 25. He must reign until He have put all His
enemies under His feet, Psalm. 110.1. Therefore death also shall be subdued.
Ergo. The bodies of men kept under His power, shall rise again. 5. If the
bodies of men rise not again, these absurdities and inconveniences must
follow. That they that are dead in Christ, are perished, and while they lived
here, were of all men most miserable. Our preaching, and your faith is vain.
We are false witnesses of God, ye are yet in your sin. They that are baptized
over the dead, are baptized in vain: we are need lesly in danger every hour
for the preaching, and belief of this doctrine. My contention at Ephesus
hereabout, was to no purpose. The Epicure that lives to eat and drink, is the
only happy man. But these things are impossible, and amongst Christians
accounted incredible. Therefore there is a resurrection, His doctrine in other
Epistles, is to the same purpose, as Romans 8.11. 6. If the Spirit of Him that
raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, He that raised up Christ from the
dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by His spirit that dwells in
you. This argument from the community of the Spirit, you may understand by
Chap. 17.. 4. n. 2. Phil. 3.21. 7. He shall change our vile body, that it may
be fashioned like to His glorious body, according to the working, whereby He
is able even to subdue all things to Himself. 8. The hope of the resurrection,
as it is a comfort against all the trouble and afflictions of this life, so
especially against sorrow for them that depart from hence, as you read, 1.
These. Chap. 4. verse. 13, 14. etc. 9.2. Cor. 5.10. All must appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, therefore the dead shall rise again. 10. For none of
us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself; For whether we live or
die, we are the Lords. Romans 14.7, 8, 9. Therefore the dead shall rise again.

3. If there be a resurrection of the dead, then the love of God may extend it
self eternally toward man, according to that excellency of compassion and
love, than which, none can be greater: So that not only our sins be forgiven
eternally, but also those mercies vouchsafed which we can neither deserve, nor
think of, because His love has not whither it may extend it self any
further: and likewise the will and understanding of man, may know and love God
in that excellency and perfection of love, which is possible to man, in his
perfection to perform. But if there be no resurrection, neither of these
things can be. Therefore it is expedient that there be a resurrection.

4. An infinite goodness is sufficient, and able to fulfill all the good
desires of the creature; both of the soul with knowledge, with joy, with love,
and all other virtues which it can hope or desire: of the body also in giving
of it health, strength, activitie: for heavy and elementall, to make it
spiritual; for earthly, to make it heavenly; to be serviceable in every
respect to the desires of the mind; to pass from place to place, to dilate or
contract it self; to appear, or disappeare, etc. Which if the infinite
goodness never should, nor would perform to the creature, then had He put
into the creature a hope, and expectation of happiness, above that which He
meant to perform: So the imagination of goodness should be greater than the
real goodness, and our apprehensions more large, and an infinite goodness
should not be able to answer the finite desires of the creature. But all these
things are impossible. Ergo. It is necessary that there be a resurrection of
the body, and life everlasting, whereby the expectation of man shall be
fulfilled.

5. The Law of God is the pattern of perfect justice; And His infinite justice
requires, that reward be given to every one accordingly, as he has broken or
observed it, and that according to the measure of His infinite justice, so
far forth as a finite creature can be capeable. Therefore there shall be a
resurrection of the flesh, especially by the lusts, whereof the divine love and
justice have especially been broken.

6. If there shall be a resurrection of the body unto eternal life, then God
may use His creature man to His glory, as it pleases Him: if not, then the
power of God shall be destitute of a subject, framed of body and soul, which
He may use to His glory. But this is impossible, that His power should be
destitute of such a Creature to whom He has promised immortal glory,
therefore there shall be a resurrection unto everlasting life.

7. By how much any efficient is greater in power, by so much the more
effectually does it work, that the effect be brought to the best end, whereof
it may be capable, and that especially if the glory of the efficient be joined
therewith. The desire and uttermost hope of every man is to live ever in body
and soul, not parted asunder, 2. Cor. 5.4. and to this end and hope, God
Himself has created us, verse. 5. and of this thing, every man is capable, and
the great glory of the Creator shall be most excelling in this, that He free
His creature man from the baseness of mortality and corruption, to an estate
of Glory, and immortality: Therefore it is requisite that there be ^
resurrection, and life everlasting: For He fulfilleth the desire of them that
fear Him, Psalm. 145.19. Therefore they shall rise to ^ife everlasting.

8. The will of man is created of God, that he may aspire and come to that end
whereunto the goodness and will of God have created him which end (...) cannot
attain unto, if there be no resurrection and eternal life For if there be no
resurrection, then is he created only to the en^oying of happiness, short and
fading in this life, so should he have the understanding and desire of
exceeding great felicity, and the enjoying of little. But this is impossible,
for so the eff ct, that is, the short happiness, should not be answerable to
the cause, that is, the will of God, which has put this will and desire of
eternal happiness in man. But if the natural appetites of eating, drinking,
procreation of the like, etc. cannot be in vain, much less, the spiritual
desires of knowing, of loving God, and pleasing of Him. But the first are not
in vain, therefore not the latter, though that be not first which is
spiritual, but that which is natural, and then that which is spiritual.

9. Man as he is a creature of God, is good, Genesis 1.31. and his goodness is
greater in respect of the end of his creation, which was to know, love, and
honor God, which in this life he cannot do, because of sin, the work of
the devil in him. But it is impossible, that either the sin of man, or the
malice of the devil should frustrate the end of God in His creation. Therefore
there is a resurrection, and eternal life, wherein God shall have His due from
man, and man his eternal joy in God.

10. No word or commandment of God can be in vain, as that, Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and Him only shall thou serve; or that;
Thou shall be perfect with the Lord thy God. For man doing thus, the soul
shall be happy, and approach to that end, for which it was created. For
therefore God loved man, that he might love and honor God again; which
because it is not done in this life, because of our infirmity, and our sin,
therefore there shall be a resurrection, and life everlasting, wherein our love
shall be perfected, least the divine love should suffer eternal injustice, and
eternal punishment be brought upon the creature, so exceedingly beloved, and
not returning that love again.

11. Man is the end of all bodily being, either in that he is the combination
of all bodily beings, whether they be elementall, vegetable, and sensitive; and
likewise of things that have imagination and reason, See hereto, Chap. 17.. 4.
n. 5. or else because all bodily beings shall have their rest and perfection in
him, and with him: or at least because he uses these things to such works as
are acceptable to God: But if there be no resurrection, then after the end of
this world, man in whom, and with whom, all these things are to receive their
perfection, not being at all, all these things have no end of their being, and
so either not being at all, or else being for no end, their creation (as
concerning their uttermost and true end which is the eternal glory of God)
should be in vain, and that expectation or groaning of the creature to be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, of which Saint Paul speaks, Romans 8.
should also be in vain, and the promise of making all things new, Rev. 21.5.
Es. 65.17. 2. Pet. 3.13. should also be of none effect. But all these things
are impossible. Ergo. It is necessary that there be a resurrection of the body,
and eternal life.

12. Neither is the body, nor yet the soul for it self, but both the one and
the other, that both together may make one perfect man: So the perfection and
blessedness of the whole man is more than that which can come only to one
part. But if there be not a resurrection of the body, this greater
blessedness is utterly lost, so that although the soul be happy for ever;
yet the greater blessedness of the soul and body together, suffers eternal
privation. So the whole should be only, that one part may be happy: so the
hope, even of the faithful should be in vain, and their eternal happiness
only in imperfection; and so the punishment of the wicked. But these things
stand neither with the justice of God, nor the truth of His promises.
Therefore the body shall rise again.

13. And because this is our last hope and uttermost comfort in all our
calamities, and a special bridle to restrain from sin, it is fit that upon
all occasions you should exercise your self to make this conclusion on
whatsoever you think, or whatsoever you hear out of the holy Scriptures. For
every promise, and every threatening therein, brings you to this; that a
reckoning must be given for all that which you have done in the body: For if
the body, with the senses, the servants of the soul, either for sin, or
righteousness, should not live again, then the divine justice, in reward, and
punishment, should be defective, but this is impossible. The texts that are
plain you will understand by your self, as that of Moses, in Psalm. 90.3. Thou
turnest man to destruction, and say, Returneye children of men. Some are a
little further off, which yet you may easily bring hither, as Esaias 38.18, 19.
The grave cannot praise thee; They that go down into the pit cannot hope for
thy truth. The living, the living, he shall Praise thee, as I do this day.
Therefore the dead shall rise again. For seeing man was made to glorify God
in his body, and in his soul and that his end cannot be frustrate; man must
live again, that his mercy and justice may be praised, both by the good, and
the bad. Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, 2. Tim. 3.8. Therefore Moses,
Iannes, and Iambres must come to judgment. For it is a just thing with God to
reward you, and to punish them that trouble you, 2. These. 1.6.7.

And if for your further satisfaction, you will read that which the Fathers
have written; you may take that which goes under the name of Iustine the
Martyr, in his questions of the Greeks: the oration of Athenagoras, concerning
the resurrection of the dead. Irenaus lib. 5. cap. 4. etc. his arguments for
the most part taken from Athenagoras. Theophilus lib. 1. ad Autolycum. Origin
(...), lib. 2. cap. 10. Read also that excellent book of Tertullian, of this
argument, where you may see what his judgment is concerning the qualities of
the bodies being raised, and some objections to the contrary answered. This
Article, the Jews, both Cabalists and Talmudists, hold so firmly against that
heresy of the Sadduces, that they say, That he can have no part in the world
to come, which denies the resurrection. Lib. Sanhedrin Cap. Halec. Neither is
there any man that lives, and sees the continual course of nature, in the
digestion of the food, that can deny that (...) of the body, of which
Pythagoras, and after him, Plato speaks in Phaed. and most of all Saint Paul.
1 Cor. 15.39.

3. Yet so fearful is the judgment which follows after the resurrection,
unto the Atheist, that he searches all corners of cavills against it, you shall
take some of them with their answers, as I find them in Tertullian, and Thomas
Aquinas, contr. gent. lib. 4. cap. 80, and 81.

Object. 1. And first it is said, 1 Cor. 15.50. That flesh and blood cannot
inherit the kingdom of God.

Answer. Till by grace it is made spiritual: So not the substance of the flesh
is there understood, but the present estate thereof, with the lusts and wicked
desires; which if a man do mortify by the Spirit, he shall live, Romans 8.13.
So in John 6.63. The flesh profits nothing, understand the fleshly-minded
man, which of himself knows not the things of God, and those things which
belong to sanctification and eternal life. But concerning the being or
substance of the flesh, or body of man, seeing it was tempered by Gods own
hand, fashioned according to His jmage, made the seat of the soul so excellent
a being, by which and with which the soul works whatsoever it does; seeing in
the holy Baptism, the flesh is washed, that the soul may be clean; seeing in
the holy Supper, the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ is received by
the mouth, that the soul may be strengthened in God; seeing our bodies are the
members of Christ, the temples of the Holy Ghost, and He dwells in them; seeing
our bodies are not our own, but Gods, 1 Cor. 6. seeing they are the
instruments of holiness, in all the works of mercy, in prayers, in wholesome
counsel, alms deeds, in indurance of sorrows, in fasting, in imprisonment,
in martyrdom in death; it is impossible that God should leave forlorn the
workmanship of His own hands, the closet of His own breath, the masterpiece
of His cunning, the heir of His riches, and the Priest of His religion and
service, to dwell in eternal death; that He should not heal the wounds, and
restore those dead to life, which have been wounded and slain for His sake.
And though the flesh in it self be weak, and through sin utterly lost; yet
seeing our Lord came to seek and to save that which was lost, and that He
Himself has borne our sins; it is impossible that either the merit of
Christ for us, or the mercy and goodness of God should be in vain. Therefore
the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together,
Esaias 40.5. and from one Sabbath to another shall all flesh come, and shall
worship before me, says the Lord, Esaias 66.23. And I will power out of my
Spirit upon all flesh. Joel. 2.28. And seeing the flesh has these holy
promises, therefore the flesh shall rise again, that as both the flesh and the
soul have sorrowed, so they may both rejoice together.

Object. 2. But the Prophets speak of the resurrection darkely, and in
figurative speeches only.

Answer. Not only, but oftentimes so, as they cannot be otherwise meant. And
though they use figurative speeches; yet no figure is taken but from somewhat
that is properly and truly such. Moreover, the words are often such as admit
no other meaning, as in John 5.28, 29. The hour is coming in which all that
are in the graves shall come forth; they that have done good, to the
resurrection of life; and they that have done ill, unto the resurrection of
condemnation.

Object. 3. If the same body shall rise again, of the same shape and
lineaments; some shall be whole men, some maimed, some halting, blind, etc.

Answer. The qualities of the bodies shall be changed, the substance shall not
be lost. For as it is against the justice of God, that one substance should do
that which is pleasing to Him, and another be rewarded therefore: So if all
tears shall be wiped away, then also all cause of tears; all hurts, wants,
and deformity both of body and soul. So that as the same body shall be
returned to the same soul; so shall it return entire and whole. Object. But
if the use of the members cease, why are the members needful? Ans. Though the
natural body shall be made spiritual, and thereby be delivered from the
necessities of those things to the use of which we are now tied, as of food,
clothes, etc. and so the members freed from their offices; yet are they not
therefore unnecessary; For the tribunal of Christ requires a perfect man, that
he may receive in his body, according to that which he has done in his body.
Moreover, for the perfection of beauty and glory, the body must be entire, the
integrity of which stands not in the offices of the members, but in their
substance. Neither yet shall all the offices of every member cease, for the
instruments of the voice shall still serve for praise to God, as this Father
thinks.

The objections which Thomas Aquinas brings from natural doubts, are of no
force against the reasons which we have brought from the light of grace, and
knowledge of the Scriptures: For it is yielded, that the resurrection of the
body is beyond all the power of natural causes to effect, but that it is only
of the will and power of God, as to make man at the first, so to restore him
again out of his former principles, into which he was resolved. But that you
may see how weak natural reason is, compared with the truth of God, and on
what wretched hopes the Atheist depends, which trusts that his sins shall
never be brought to judgment; I will propose the reasons and answers as they
stand.

Object. 4. That which is corrupted, cannot be made the same again; as a
natural habit of the body, or mind, being deprived, cannot be restored.

Answer. The impossibilities of nature, cannot limit that power which created
nature, especially in the resurrection of the body, wherein the Author of
nature has professed that He can, and has promised that He will raise it up
again, as you read before.

Object. 5. But the essential principles being lost, it is impossible that the
same thing in number should be restored.

Answer. The essential principles in man, are soul and body, which being
restored each to other in the perfection of them both, nothing which is
concomitant, whether it be property, or necessary accident can be wanting, and
that both these remain in the state of being, and consequently in the
possibility of being brought together again, you may see Chap. 17. 4. N. 5.

Object. 6. Corruption is a change from being, unto not being. Therefore it is
impossible that the being of man being corrupted, the same being in number,
should be restored.

Answer. This is in effect one with the former. And it is true, that the total
is destroyed in man by the separation of the parts. But neither of the parts
do come to nothing, but are in the hand of that power to be conjoined again,
by which they were conjoined at first.

Object. 7. If whatsoever has been essential to the body of man, must in the
resurrection be restored unto him, then this bodily proportion shall be very
uncomely; in as much as the hair, the nails, and whatsoever else is wasted
away by the force of natural heat, were once as essentially of the body as
that was, which he carried with him to the grave. See the first supply to
Logic, question 66.

Answer. As it was said before, that whatsoever was wanting in the body should
be made up: So understand on the contrary, that superfluities, and deformities
shall be taken away: and that every one shall rise again in that perfection
which is peculiar to mankind.

Object. 8. That which is common to all, of any kind, seems natural to the
species. But there is not any common virtue, of any natural agent, to work
this: Therefore it seems that all men shall not rise again.

Answer. The resurrection of the dead is not by any natural cause, but it
depends only on the power of God, to whose justice every man must give an
account of his own works.

Object. 9. Death is the effect of sin, from both which we are f^eed only
by the death of Christ. Therefore it seems that all shall not rise again, but
they only that are partakers of the merit of His death.

Answer. It is true, that such only shall rise to eternal life, the rest for
justice unto judgment. And because death is the wrack of nature in all men,
and the work of the devil; and that our Lord came to repair nature, and
utterly to destroy the works of the devil: Therefore, that it may appear
that He has perfectly finished that for which He came, all men must rise
again.

Object. 10. The last objection seems a mighty one above the rest. That if all
men must rise again perfect, what shall become of the Canibals, who have eaten
one another? nay, if any of these Canibals eat only man's flesh, and beget
children, seeing their seed (as their wisdom affirms) is only the
superfluity of the nourishment, before it be converted into the substance of
the fathers body; here is the knot of Gordius, who has most right to this
seed, whether the son whose body was made of it; or the father, or he from
whose body it was devoured, by the father? But this Philosophy of the
superfluity of the seed, has been hist out in the 17. Chapter. The maine doubt
is answered by Saint Paul. 1 Cor. 15.44. Thy body is sown a natural body, but
it is raised a spiritual body. So then, though Bears, or dogs, or Canibals,
or worms devour the flesh; yet seeing only flesh is nourished thereby, a
material body with a material, a natural body with a natural; the
spiritual body is free from any natural change. For even now the soul dwells
not in the body, but by those mean spirits which are raised from the bodily
parts (as I showed before.) Therefore though this material, individual body
shall be raised up; yet because it is raised up a in spiritual estate, it will
be free from natural corruption, because it is fitted to be an eternal
habitation for the soul, being wholly spiritual; and then there will be no
want of any member or part, when the soul shall be able to fit it self of a
clothing, for all uses, out of a spiritual body; neither shall it need to
seek any supply out of a foreign body: For as in justice the same soul must
return to the same body, that both may suffer, or be glorified together; So
shall both be perfected together, according to the perfection of every
individual, in their proper parts: And though they be scattered in ashes or
dust, as far as from East to West, yet shall every atome be gathered into
that body in which it first received the impression of an humane soul, to
become a part of a reasonable man. The Poet gives you an example of a Gardener,
wehling his seeds being mingled together.

Namque ut quondam olitor, qui forte minuta sub uno
Diversi generis confusa videbat aceruo
Semina; mox secum, dum singula seligit, hoc est
Ozymon, hoc apium, lapathum istud, and oxalis illud,
Daucus, and andrachne, ammi, apiastrum, urtica, melanthum;
Sic tua, sed melior sapientia, novit acuto
Permistos hominum cineres discernere visu.
I will give you an experiment for your easier understanding. Take a knife, a
punch, or other tool of steel well hardened, and touched with a lodestone,
mingle a quantity of the fylings of iron, or steel, with so much common dust
as that the fylings appear not; yet with the knife or punch made clean, you
may separate the fylings, according to the first quantity, out of the dust. And
if this be possible to metal, by reason of the common spirit; how much more to
the soul, when it is commanded to gather together, that dust, which once it
had enlived by it self?

. 4. Among the heresies against the doctrine of our holy religion, that which
denies the resurrection, was one of the first. For beside the Sadduces which
denied it, as you read, Mat. 22. and thought that the soul died with the body,
all the sects of the Samaritanes, (except perhaps the Dositheans) held that
error with them. And although it be not known to me, which of them fell
first into the ditch: yet seeing both sorts held the books, and authority of
Moses (and none of the Prophets beside) authentical; and that the Sadduces
interpreted Moses according to the letter of the Law, and thought that the
blessings and cursings therein contained, did belong only to this present life
(which was the original of this error) with me they shall be accounted, the
blind guides of the blind.

Among the Christians, some twenty sects of Heretics have been, which denied
this Article, some upon one ground, some upon another. The first fountain of
this poisoned doctrine among the Chri tians, was Simon the Samaritane, whose
Scholars held it successively unto Marcus, about a 100. years after Simon.
This Marcus also upheld the same heresy: but after him it was by turns ca l'd
up from hell again. Car^ocrates out of Platoes Scho e, brought in the change
of souls, from body to body: but much worse than he. For Plato thought that
the souls of men were sent into the bodies of beasts, or of crazed and old
men, for the punishment of their form^r sins: but Carpocrates taught that
they were brought thither for the fulfilling of those lusts which they had not
done in their former bodies. For being here subject to the power of the enemy,
man (said he) cannot escape the wrath of these adversaries; but by the
filthiness of life, and doing such things as please them. And therefore the
souls that live here most virtuously, and tempe^ately, are oftenest sent into
other bodies. Though this doctrine of the devils Chaplain, upheld the
immortality of the so^le, yet no resurrection of the body.

Valentine, and after him the Manichees, taught that the souls of men only
were redeemed by Christ, but not their bodies, and therefore they should rise
no more. Neither yet should all souls be saved. For there be (said he)
three sorts of men: spiritual, animal, and carnal. Spiritual, which by
nature have a most excellent faith, and these shall be saved without good
works, as Seth: Animal, which have but a little faith, but may be saved by a
supply of their works, as Abel. But the carnal as Cain, can by no means be
saved.

Marcion, concerning the resurrection of the body, sided with Valentine, And so
did Apelles. For, (said he) Christ Himself went to Heaven without any body.
For that body which He had taken from Heaven, and the elements; at the
resurrection He delivered again to their proper principles, from whence He
took it.

The Seleucians also, that affirm that Christ left His body in the Sun (as
you read before) are bound to deny to us any ascent into the heavens above:
for it cannot be better with us the members, than it is with our Head.

Origens error against the resurrection, is at large refuted by Epiphanius,
Haer. 64. and if you mind the objections and answers before, you have the sum
of that which Origin brought against it, and the other answered.

Hierax denied a resurrection of the body, but is disproved by the arguments
here brought, as all the other Heretics which are here mentioned. A
resurrection of the soul he yielded unto, except of the Infants, which died
before they had knowledge; because none is crowned, except he that strives
lawfully, as you read before, in the 28. Chapter, where his reason is answered
out of Epiphanius, Haer. 67.

And although you see such monsters of opinions, as I have said, and if you
have leisure, may read the refutation in particular, in the Author aforesaid;
Yet if you take good heed to that which has been spoken for, and against the
truth; you may confess that the truth is great, and shall prevail.

CHAP. XXXIX. And life everlasting.
1.
WHile there was no sin in the world, it stood not with the justice of God,
that any punishment for sin should be inflicted: therefore death, and all
diseases, as his forerunners, with hunger, thirst, and all the enemies of
life, were far from man. But after that sin had brought in death, it was a
mercy that all those enemies of life, which accompanied death, should show
themselves, that man mi^ht dai^y be put in mind of his mortality, and return
unto H m whom he had offended. Now if you shall ask from whence this change of
estates, from immortality, to mortality, did succeed in man* I think even from
hence, that the pure soul, the image of God, dwelling in the body, which was
framed of the bodily creature, which was yet pure, and not subjected to the
curse, had power to sustain the body in that perfect estate wherein it was
created, and s^ should have preserved it for ever, if it had held that dignity
which it had, and hearkened only to the ordinance of God, and had reigned over
the bodily affections and desires, as it ought, and had power to do. But when
the soul would forsake God the guide thereof, and that dignity which it had
naturally over the body and follow the lusts and appetites thereof, and for
that treason against God, lost the power and strength which it had to support
the body: and moreover must seek sustenance for the body out of the creature,
now accursed and deprived of her first strength: it was impossible but that
according to the curse, corruption, diseases, and death should follow
thereupon. Yet seeing the merit of Chri t is so full of satisfaction to the
justice of God, and He so powerful to restore all the decay of nature; and to
destroy all the wrack and mischief which the devil has brought thereinto:
we may firmly believe as we profess in this Article, that we shall at last
be brought to the e^^oying of everlasting life, better than that to which we
were at first created.

1. For although by the craft of the devil, sin entered into the world, and
death by sin passed over all mankind: yet seeing man was made immortal, and
that neither the end which God purposed, nor yet the infinite merit of the
death of Christ can be in vain: it is impossible but that mankind at last
should be brought to eternal life.

2. The infinite goodness of God, is the reason and the cause that he is good
to all, and that His mercy is over all His works, Psalm. 145.9. Therefore there
is an eternal life reserved for man the most excellent of the visible
creature, and the will of man above all other things, desires an eternal life
in glory and happiness, according to His promises. But if no such eternal
life shall be, then the action of God toward His creature, shall be in
litlenesse and defect; neither shall he fulfill the desire of them that fear
Him. So also the will of man should more desire the accomplishment of the
divine goodness upon the creature, than the will of God should desire the
accomplishment of it self. But these things are impossible: therefore there
shall be an eternal life in glory and happiness.

3. Virtue, and the ready service of man unto God, is that thing wherewith God
in man is most delighted, and which He has commanded, as it is said, Be ye
holy, for I am holy, Lev. 11.44. and the desire of this holiness is found in
them especially, that hunger and thirst after righteousness, and hate their
sins, whereby they displease Him. But this service of man to God, has not
hitherto been duly performed by any living among the sons of men, neither
can be performed, both in body and soul, by the dead. Therefore it shall be
performed in the life that is to come, wherein both Gods will, and the desires
of His shall be fulfilled. See Matthew. 5.6.

4. If there shall be an eternal life for man, then man shall receive of the
divine goodness and power a power whereby he may both be, and do those
things whereto the divine goodness and wisdom has appointed him. But if
there be no life eternal, then the end of man's creation should be only to
privation, and not being. But it were better never to have been, than after
all the miseries of this life, in the end to return to an everlasting not
being. For so the effect, that is, mankind, should no way be answerable to the
cause, nor yet be any proof or manifestation, o^ that goodness, infinity,
eternity, and power by which it was made. But this is impossible, and against
the conditions both of the prime cause, and the infinity of the dignities
thereof.

Object. But you will say, that this reason does no m^re prove that there is an
eternal life for man, than for beasts, and other of the creatures, which also
ought to continue for the proof of that wisdom, and almightynesse of their
cause.

Answer. There is a difference between the end, and those things which are
for the end. Man is the end of all the visible creature, and therefore it
follows, that all those things are to be in man as in the end, so far forth
as they can be, work, or be glorified in Him. And from hence also it
follows, that man must be for ever, lest all these things which were for
him, should return to nothing with him; and the image of that infinite
goodness, and wisdom by which they were made, should come to nothing
eternally. Therefore though they shall be in man as the idea of them all, yet
not in their several or distinct beings beside man.

5. No natural desire of the creature, which is implanted in every
individual, of every kind, can be in vain, because it is implanted therein
by a superior power, which cannot be frustrate. But it is implanted in all
men naturally, both to desire, and to hope for eternal life. Therefore there
shall be an eternal life. For if after the resurrection, man should not live for
ever, then there should be in God a will to raise him to life; contrary to his
will, that he should live for ever: So His being should not be simple, and
one: but this is impossible, as it was proved, Chap. 9.. 6.

6. The more powerful that any cause is, the more manifestly does the
likeness thereof appear in the effect. And since God is the first and chief
cause of all, and that the likeness of man, His work shall be greater in his
perpetual wel^-being, than in not being at all: therefore there shall be an
eternal life, wherein the greatest likeness of the effect to the cause shall
be perfected, that man may live in eternal Righteousness, Wisdom, and
Glory. Otherwise the infinite justice might seem defective, in reward and
punishment, if both good and bad should perish alike. Moreover, the word
whereby the punishment was inflicted, was neither so general, nor so without
exception, but that there was grace reserved. And now, lest he take of the tree
of life, and live for ever [in his sin] therefore the Lord God sent him forth
of the garden of Eden, the type of eternal happiness, till he had tasted of
death, the punishment of his sin, then should he live for ever in joy.

7. And these reasons for the assurance of everlasting life, you may add to
them that are in the Chapter before. And above all reason, the holy promises of
God which cannot fail; as John 3.16. God so loved the world, that He gave His
only begotten Son, that whoso^ver believes in Him, should not perish, but
have everlasting life. Titus 3.7. We are made heirs according to the hope of
everlasting life. Matthew. 19.29. ^v ry one that has forsaken houses, etc. or
lands for (...), shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting
life. P^al. 37.18. The Lord knows the days of the upright, that their
in^^r^tan^e shall be for ever. Psalm. 23. I shall dwell in the house of the
L^^d for ever. And that the joys of heaven are eternal, it may appear by the
torments of the wicked that are in hell: of both which see Matthew. 25. from
verse. 31. to 46. And therefore the Apostle concludes, Romans 8.18. That the
afflictions which are of this present life, are not worthy to be compared with
the glory that shall be reveal^d. For those things which God has prepared for
them that love Him, are such as neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard,
neither have th^^ entered into the heart of man to conceive, 1 Cor. 2.9. And
concerning the assurance of this joy, let the same mind be in us which was in
Saint Paul, Romans 8.38, 39. I am persuaded, that neither death ^or life, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. For it is just with God, to
give unto His Son, having fully satisfied His justice for the sin of man;
to give to His Son, I say, according to the merit of His desert, that glory,
and honor, and immortal joy, which is due to Him therefore: which joy, for
the infinite merit of His Person, being both God and man, must likewise be
infinite. And because Himself is God blessed for evermore, and has eternal
glory and happiness, and a Name which is above every name that is named in
this world, or in the world to come; therefore has He not any need of this
purchased glory which is due for His sufferings; but that glory is reserved for
them that are called of His grace, to be partakers thereof. And because a
finite creature cannot be capable of infinite glory at once, inten^ive, that
is, according to the infinite measure thereof; therefore is it bestowed,
extensive, that is, in the externity or continuance thereof, wherein man is
carried from glory to glory, by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. Neither is
it for any man to think, that this glory which Christ has purchased by His
obedience, should be settled on that humane nature which He assumed in the
Incarnation. For that hereditary, or native glory, which He had, as being one
with the Father, was abundantly sufficient to glorify that tabernacle
wheresoever He was pleased to dwell, as He says, Ioh. 17.5. And now, o Father,
glorify thou Me with thine own self, with that glory which I had with thee
before this world was. So it appearing, both by reason and authority of the
holy Scripture, that this happiness which we do believe in eternal life, is
to be eternal as the life is; that first doubt which was first In the (...)
Chapter^.
proposed in the entrance, is fully satisfied. The other two questions,
concerning the soul, you shall hear by and by.

2. The heresies that have been concerning this Article, though they be diverse,
yet two especially are needful to be examined: One of the Chiliasts, which
thought, that after the resurrection, the kingdom of Christ was to flourish
1000. years in this world: taking that Scripture which is in Revel. 20. for
proof thereof. The other is that which they lay to St. Origin. That all the
reasonable creature, even the most wicked among men; yea, the very devils
themselves, after their sins, by long torments, have been purged out, shall be
restored to joy and happiness in the kingdom of heaven; and again after a long
time, shall fall to their former sins again, and so return to their ancient
punishment: and this, say they, shall be the revolution of all the reasonable
creature, both good and bad, for ever. 1. But this is contrary to the truth of
the holy Scripture. For no creature, either man or Angel, can approach to God,
or come to heavenly happiness, but only such as God does love, and whom He
loves, He loves unto the end: John 13.1. because in Him is neither
variableness, nor shadow of change. Iam. 1.17. 2. Moreover, as none can be
partaker of heavenly joys, but such as are interested therein by Christ;
seeing no man comes to the Father, but by Him. Ioh. 14.6. if there should be
any falling from joy, it would seem to argue an insufficiency of the merit of
Christ, which cannot stand with the infinity thereof. 3. Besides, if God willed
this eternal revolution of the creature, from extreme joy to pain, and from
pain to joy; then were we not taken into the state of sons and heirs of
glory, yea, coheirs with Jesus Christ; To. 8.17. but to the state of bond men,
which should have so much happiness, as we were able to purchase by our
indurance of afflictions and torments. 4. So the justice of God should not be
infinite, if it might be satisfied by a finite creature. 5. And if any
satisfaction to God could have bin made, beside that which was by the death of
Christ, then that of Christ had been needless and in vain. But all these
things are impossibilities. Therefore there is no such revolution from one
state to another, as this opinion, fained to Origin after his death, when he
could not answer for himself, would bring in. But though Origin were a Saint,
yet was he a man, and so might have his errors.

CHAP. XL. Amen. The third supply; Concerning the questions incident.
1. Whether the soul of man be immortal? 1. 2. Whether there be one common
soul of all men? 2. 3. That the holy Religion of the Christians is only true,
and none other beside it. 3. 4. How faith is said to justify? 4.
Whether the soul of man be immortal. 1.
IT is not the doubt that any Christian can make, whether the soul of man be
immortal, or no. For when God has come down from heaven, and has taken upon
Himself, the being of man; when He has been borne, and died to make
satisfaction for the sin of man; can any one that believes this, make a doubt
whether he have an immortal soul? or whether immortal life do belong to
him both in soul and body? Therefore is not this question proposed for the
Christians sake, but by way of defiance against the Atheist, and such godless
people as say in their hearts; There is no God, no soul, no life to come. And
although by all the arguments of the two last Chapters, and many before, the
question may receive an easy solution; yet to give full satisfaction, is this
which follows in particular. But to brand both the questions, and the mo^ers
thereof, with their due infamy, it must ever be remembered, that the error of
the mortality of the soul, does take away the foundation of all religion, and
common honesty: For how can he make due reckoning of honesty, that cares only
for himself, to shift and sharke for a present maintenance in worldly plenty,
and supposed ^oy, and thinks that all is ended with him in this life? Or what
reverence can he have of God, or His service, who is not persuaded that there
is a God? or if that must needs be put, yet is he persuaded, that with this
life ended, his soul also comes to nothing. And if there be no reward o^ any
virtue, or of any religion, is it not better to follow the pleasures of sin
with greediness?

1. But, Atheist, I answer, That if God should so neglect them that honor
Him, as that He would not reward them; neither in this life, nor yet in that
which is to come, then were He unjust: if He knew not their devotion, then were
He not wise. But these things are impossible for thee to suppose, that God
should be either unjust, or unwise. For perfect justice, such as the infinite
justice of God is, does ever bring forth a judgment; in which it must appear
that in Him that is infinitely just, there was neither ignorance of the service
done unto him, nor any disability to reward it: which because it appears not
in this life, certainly it must be manifested hereafter. Therefore the soul
is immortal.

2. Seeing all the world cannot afford that which may give a full content unto
the soul that judges rightly of every thing: Seeing we are taught, 1 John
2.15. not to love this world, neither the things of this world; it is manifest,
that the true happiness of the soul ought not to be sought here among those
things that are inferior, and below the dignity and state of the soul, which
can be blessed only in the sight of God, as our Lord has taught us, Mat. 5.8.
Therefore the elect of God, which according to His counsel and command, seek
true happiness in another life, shall in another life be sure to find it. 1
John 2.17.

3. The working of the soul cannot be hindered by the body: not only the
spiritual actions of the understanding, and motion of the will; but even the
actions of the soul upon the body, (as I have somewhere given instance, in the
beating of the pulse) and whatsoever has motion of it own nature, cannot be
hindered to attain that end whereto nature drives it, and the thing it self
desires to come (as the continuance and perfection of it self) because nature
does not work in vain, and the soul does naturally desire true happiness;
that is, spiritual, eternal, and beseeming the nature of it self. Therefore
the soul is immortal.

4. No substance which is intellectual, is corruptible. For corruption in
substances, comes only by the separation of the matier, and essential form:
And because beings intellectual, that is, such as have power of an active
understanding, do not consist of matier, but are of themselves pure forms,
therefore they are not subject to corruption, and death, properly so called.
And although the soul, beside the power of understanding, have also the power
of growth, and senses, as the natural faculties thereof, by which it does
enlive man's body to move, to digest, to see, hear, feel, etc. and that when
it goes away from the body, these faculties of the soul forsake the body, yet
they die not in the soul, but shall enlive the body in the resurrection, as
they did before: so that the soul is no way mortal.

5. Common consent of all Nations, both Christians and Barbarians hold, and
ever have held the immortality of the soul, and the soul it self bears
witness thereunto, which at the sight of grievous sins committed, finds such
terrors and affrightings in it self, as are sometimes more fearful than
death. But if the souls of men did not live after the body, what cause had
guilty minded men, either to fear death, or any torments that could follow
after it?

6. The excellent endowments of the soul, the engines, and curious arts that
are invented, the search of the heavens motions, and the invention of truth in
things removed from our senses, yea, even concerning the truth of God, are
arguments sufficient of the souls immortality.

7. And beside these reasons, the infallible authority of the Holy Scriptures
ought to wring this confession even from the very Atheist. For the soul being
breathed into man by an immortal principle, by the breath of God Himself, may
not be supposed to be corruptible: for so how could a thing mortal or
corruptible be the image of the immortal God? Genesis 1.26, 27. yet say I not as
the Gnostics, or Priscillianists, that the soul is of the same being, or
substance with God, but that being so created by Him, and His image, it cannot
be mortal, Mat. 10.28. Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to
kill the soul, but rather fear Him which is able to destroy both soul and
body in hell. The parable of the rich glutton, and Lazarus, in Luke 16. show,
the immortality, and state of the soul, both of the good and bad. Read also 1.
Pet. 3.18, 19.20. Phil. 1.23. Revel. 6.9.

That there is not one common Soul of all men.. 2.
1. BY some of the reasons before, and by all the authorities brought out of
the holy Writ, it is manifest, that this fantasy of one common soul in all
Men, was but a dream of Averroes. For if the humane soul be the proper form
of the body, and the specific difference of every subject, be by the form
thereof: If there be one common soul of all men, then the essential difference
of men is taken away: so that they be not now this man, and that man, but all
men must be one man, as concerning their internal forms, the difference of men
must be in their heccieties, or numerall diversity of their bodies only. 2.
But so the understanding and knowledge of all men should be one and the same,
and one man should not be wise, and another foolish, but all men wise, or
foolish alike, if there were only one soul or understanding of all men. 3. So
also the vice of one man should multiply it self over all men. 4. And all men
should have equal joy in the end or happiness of any one man. But these things
are not so. And as these inconveniences prove the differences of souls, while
they are in the bodies of men: So likewise do they withstand that confusion
which would be of the souls of men, being departed out of their bodies, which
are not supposed to fall into the Chaos of life, and there to be confused as a
drop of water falling into a River. For the souls being separate from the
bodies, have their several degrees of perfections, whereby they are
distinguished, as 2. from 3. so as they cannot be the same, as 2. cannot be 3.
5. Moreover, both that unity, and this confusion of souls, would utterly take
away all justice in reward and punishment of their deeds, which they have done
well or ill, in this life.

6. The uttermost happiness of man, is the adequation of all his faculties in
that which is the perfection of goodness, that is, that he love that which he
understands, and that he have power to perform it: for otherwise, his
understanding would be the original of pain and sorrow unto him, if he
should know that which were good to be done, and should not have power to
effect it. But if there were a confusion of all souls, or their
understandings, when they are separate from the body, that universal unity,
or confusion of souls, would cause a lesnesse, or abatement in the glory, and
end of the understanding, and consequently, an abatement of man's love to the
Creator, seeing the greatest understanding could not advance the mean and low
understanding of fools and ignorants; but contrariwise in that confusion,
should by them be abased. But this is contrary to the nature of the
understanding, of the will, of perfect love, etc. Therefore impossible to be.

7. The excellency, or greatness of every thing has the greatest concordance
with being, as the littleness, or meannes of being, inclines to not being, and
has some agreement therewith. From whence it will follow of necessity,
first, that if there be one common or universal soul or understanding, which
is divideable into very man, this division takes away that universal unity.
For how can it be one in number, if it be divisible, and yet not material, or
bodily? but that excellency which is in the common soul, by that infinite
division among so many millions of men, is brought almost to not being.
Secondly, there must be different understandings of all men, both living and
dead, that the excellency of all truth may find some understandings, by which
it may be apprehended. 3. Seeing nothing is truly beloved, which is not first
known or understood; the love, and that understanding which man has of God by
this division, suffers such detriment as cannot be made up again. For the
soul being parted among all men alike, one cannot love nor understand more
than another: So neither the excellency of one man can be more than another,
nor the glory or happiness of one man more than another.

8. Common experience, and the difference which is in men, shows the position
to be false and foolish, and so let it go branded. You may see what Cusa brings
to this question, Idiotae. lib. 3. cap. 12. And Tho. Aquin. contra gent. lib.
2. cap. 73. and the decree of the Lateran Council. Sess. 8.

Object. But you will say, If the souls of all men be only of one kind, and
that their difference is only in number; then this difference of the souls
must arise only from the bodies, to which they are allied; from whence these
inconveniences must follow necessarily. First, that the souls of men are
material forms; for the particular being of every thing depends upon that
from whence it receives the individuation: So that the soul of man, depending
on the body, and having the original of the particular being from the body,
either it dies with the body, as the soul of the beast: or if it remain after
the body, yet seeing it receives the particular being from the body, when it is
parted from the body, it must run into the common Chaos of life: seeing that
whereby the distinction was made (that is, the particular bodies) are now taken
away.

Answer. The suppositions of this objection, that the difference of men's
souls is only in number, or depending upon the particular individuation of
their bodies, are false. For the particular endowments of every soul, make
such differences as is fit to be in souls, as I gave instance before in
numbers: to every one of which, an unity added, or taken away, makes the number
so different, as that it cannot be any other number than that it is; Although
numbers are not truly said to be different Species, but only to be
distinct, or diverse individuals. For in Spiritual substances, as the soul of
man is, whereof we know so little as we do, we must be content to hold the
general trueths, when we cannot know the particular or precise differences.

That the holy Religion and Faith of the Christians is only true, and none
other beside it. 3.
ALl true Religion must have the beginning from the true God. So neither the
service of the false gods of the Painims, nor the will worship either of the
Jews, or of the Christians, can come into any account of true Religion. And
because the true God only knows what service is acceptable unto Himself, and
therefore has from time to time taught his people what He requires of them;
therefore this question which is now to be decided, is only between the
Christians, and the people of the Jews or Israelites, seeing these only have
received the laws, and words of God, how they ought to serve Him. For
whatsoever the Turks may pretend for their religion, which their false Prophet
Mahomed taught them; yet they have no authority from heaven; neither by their
law may they question any thing which they have been taught. But concerning
the Jews, though it must be yielded unto them, that they were the true
Church, first called and separated from the world, to be a peculiar people unto
God; who first received the covenant of Circumcision, and after under Moses,
the other ceremonies, even until the time of reformation came by Jesus Christ:
yet because they did not look unto the end of the law, nor see how all the law
was finished in Him, in whom all the Nations of the earth were to be blessed:
therefore they dwell still in their old and beggarly rudiments, being still
seduced by their Rabbis, teaching them that their law is an eternal law, as
it is yielded unto them, concerning the inward meaning or substance, that is
Christ, and His eternal Redemption: But concerning the outward obseruances,
the Law is not eternal, as diverse of their own, both by Nation, and sometimes
by opinion have manifested unto them. I name unto you only Paulus Ricius, who
has made it plain, both by the Scriptures of the Prophets, and and by the
Talmudists their expositors in his second book de coelesti agricultura. That
the roots (as they call them) or Articles of the Jewish faith, are not a
sufficient direction to bring them to heaven: but that the Christians by their
faith may be made partakers of the ^oyes to come. For first he prooves that
the doctrine of the Trinity of Persons, in the unity of the deity, is
agreeable to the holy oracles of God, and the exposition of their Talmudists.
Then 2. That the mystery of the incarnation, and the deity of the Savior of
the world is according to the Scripture. 3. That His birth ought to be of a
Virgin, and therefore His conception by the Holy Ghost. 4. That the mystery of
His passion, and 5. resurrection are likewise manifest by the Scriptures. And
6. that the first coming of the Messiah is already past, as you might see all
these Articles confirmed before. And because these things are necessary to be
known and believed to everlasting salvation, and that the Jews do not
believe them, neither can be brought to believe them, till the Redeemer appear
the second time to judgment, that he may turn away the iniquity from Jacob,
that all Israel may be saved, as the promise is: Let us rejoice in our most
holy faith, and pray that their return to the true faith, with the fullness of
the Gentiles, may be speedy, according to the promises, Es. 59.20. Romans
11.26. and verse 15.

How Faith is said to justify.. 4.
SO precious is the redemption of souls, that that must be let alone to God
for ever. And therefore no works, or merit of our own, nor of all the Saints
of Heaven, can be of any avail for us, that we should be accounted just
before God, but only by our Lord Jesus, and His righteousness, both
original, and actual, apprehended by a true faith, are we accepted
righteous. For because God does not accept of any righteousness which is not
most perfect, according to the perfection of his most just law: And seeing the
fountain of all our actions is corrupted by our original sin: therefore is
the original righteousness of Christ, most necessary to be imputed unto us,
to take away our original sin, and His actual righteousness also wholly
necessary, that by His obedience and His sufferings, we may be justified:
Understand by the original righteousness of Christ, not that righteousness
which is in Him as God (as some have done) but that righteousness which was in
Him, as man, from the first minute of His incarnation by the Holy Ghost, which
is His original, or habitual righteousness: And this righteousness of His,
though it be not in us; yet it is imputed unto us, even as our original and
actual sins, were imputed unto Him, that we might be justified by Him. And
although it be necessary for us to know and to believe, that as we are made
originally sinful by Adam, not only because the offense of him that was the
father of us all, is imputed unto us, or is reckoned ours, because we were all
in him originally; but also in respect of that stain of sin and corruption,
which we draw originally from him, so is this righteousness of Christ
accounted ours, in as much as He has set Himself to answer for us, as it is
said, Matthew. 20.28. That He gave His life a ransom for many, that as by the
disobedience of one Adam, many are made sinners, so by the obedience of One,
that is Christ, many are justified, Romans 5.19. Therefore faith alone is not
said to justify us, but faith with the object thereof, that is, Christ with
all His merits. So God the Father, for the merit of Christ, is said to justify
the ungodly, Romans 4.5. And the holy Spirit also is said to seal the promise of
God unto us, Ephesians. 1.13. and to justify us in the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ. 1. Cor. 6.11. Neither is faith any meritorious cause for which we are
justified: neither does faith, precisely considered, include charity or other
virtues, thereby justify us; but as an instrument, or hand, is it given to us
of God, whereby we take hold on Christ, and His righteousness preached unto us
in the word of reconciliation. Therefore as the hand which receives the
treasure, does not make a man rich, but the treasure it self: So neither the
habit, nor the action of faith, no not as it is the work of God in us, does
make us just before Him; but only correlatively, that is, as it brings to us
the merit of Christ, and makes it ours. See what you find hereto in the Note
(b) on the 27. Chapter.

The Conclusion.
BEcause I had both read and heard, that diverse men o^ fame in learning had
undertaken this task which I have now p^rformed (as you see) I waited with
great patience and hope the accomplishm^nt of their promise^. But when they
were dead, and no fruits app^ared, worthy of such hopes as they had given,
having now past the seventieth year of my life, I utterly despaired of that I
had so long hoped for. For though I had oftentimes thought of what argument,
and for mine o^ne use had gathered diverse Notes and Argument^ thereunto: ^^t
when I considered, that in that age the vigor of wit does often languish, whi h
in younger years is more pr^gnant, though not always with that sta^dnes of
judgment, which ought to go therewith; and es^ecially, that for my
prof^ssions sake, I was compelled to poets and their fables; and among
children, to speak to their understanding; yet when that great and grievous
pestilence, which befell in the year 1625. had made a stop that daily to^le, I
knew it was foolish and altogether vain, to fly from the hand of God; and
that ^o thoughts could befit a Christian better, in the continual hearing of
doleful knells, and sight of corpses carried to the grace, then such as ^old
the mind fast to God, and those blessed hopes, that He ^ath given to Christian
men. And therefore having brought my household to a few, and them no gadders
abroad, but such as were easily commanded to stay within; I took the comforts
which Almighty God vouchs^fed me, and found my self safe under His
protection; and so cheerfully undertook that task, which I had long tho^ght
on, because my expectation of others had quite faile^ me. Therefore I praise
and magnify that glorious and holy Name, not only for that whole and perfect
deliverance, which He vouchsafed unto me at that time, but much more also,
that He has been pleased to effect by me, s mean, that which other virtuous
and learned men held fit to be done for the benefit of the Church, and yet
affected it not. And if this labor of mine may prove any way availeable to the
comfort of others, or the strengthening of their faith, or establishing of them
therein; that they fall not into those heresies, into which other perverse
minded men have been plunged: For this also shall His praise be ever in my
mouth, according to that exampl. of the holy Angels, (...).

FINIS.
A TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY OF PERSONS IN UNITY OF THE DEITY.

Written by ALEXANDER GIL, to Thomas Mannering an Anabaptist, Who denied that
JESUS is very GOD of very GOD: but man only; yet endued with the infinite
power of GOD.

The second Edition.

Imprinted at London. 1635.

TO MY VERY LOVING FRIEND, Master THOMAS WHITE, a Citizen of BRISTOVV.
WHile I was at Norwich, in the year 1597, I writ this Treatise upon such
occasion as appears therein, and delivered it unto that Heretic, that by
himself, if God would, he might consider and be persuaded. Since which time I
have kept it by me: and though some of my private friends desired copies; yet
allowing that wisdom of Solon, who would make no law against Patricide, lest
the mention of the fact might give occasion to commit it: and withal
considering that it is too simple and poor for the public view, I refused to
make it common. Yet after perceiving a present necessity, because that some
began to wander in this labyrinth: and withal remembering, that if any weakling
shall hereafter entertain this opinion, he may, before he be wholly possessed
therewith, find the absurdity of it and be reformed; that many a novice in
Christianity, who therefore doubts of the trueness of his Religion, because he
finds no familiar reason to persuade, but only the rack of authorities to
constrain him to acknowledge it; may perhaps be hereby satisfied and find
comfort: and that they who are already strong, may by this overplus, triumph in
the goodness of God, who requires them to believe no more, then they may by
that understanding, which he has given them, be persuaded of: I have for
their sakes who may reap benefit thereby, neglected all froward Censurers, not
guilty unto my self of any offense which I can commit in making it public.
Such as it is, accept (kind Sir) as a parcel of that assertion, which may
hereafter follow, of every Article of our Christian faith; if God shall
vouchsafe me understanding, leisure, and maintenance thereto. I therefore offer
it unto you, both because I know you are diligent in reading of books of good
argument; and because I have none other means, whereby to show my self
thankful for your manifold kindnesses and your love.

Your loving and assured friend, A. G.
London, this 20. of April 1601.
THE TREATISE.
THough many things discouraged me to write unto you of this Argument in such
sort as I intend; considering that neither your daily reading of the Scripture,
neither the persuasion of learned Divines can moove you to accord unto the
truth; though by manifest testimony of Scripture they convince your heresy:
and most of all, that God has left you to believe that lying spirit of
Antichrist, who denies that Jesus is that Christ: Yet nevertheless, having
some hope that God of His goodness will at last pull you as a brand out of the
fire, and quench you with the dew of His grace, that you may grow in the
knowledge of His Son; I will as briefly as I can, lay down some few reasons
of that faith, which every one that will be saved, must hold. Whereby if I
persuade you nothing, yet shall I obtain thus much, that you, who neither
believed His word, nor yet opened your eyes to see the light of reasonable
understanding, shall at last confess, that His word and judgments are holy and
true. But before I come to the point, let me first persuade you, that although
the knowledge of the holy Trinity be one of the most high mysteries which can
be known or believed, and that it is the only work of the Holy Ghost to work
this faith and knowledge in the heart of man; yet nevertheless, God has not
left us destitute of means, whereby to come to this faith and knowledge, but
has also with His word, given us a reasonable soul and understanding, whereby
to grow in the knowledge of Himself and His will. For when Adam was created,
he had given unto him all perfect knowledge meet for him. Now God, who created
the world for no other purpose, then the manifestation of His own glory, might
not leave that creature without understanding of the Godhead, who being by
nature and creation the most excellent in this visible world, was made for that
purpose especially above all other, to set forth His praise, and to call on
Him. Now how could he do this, if he knew Him not? But (I think that) seeing
it is said, that man was created in the jmage of God, you will not deny that
man before his fall, had much more perfect understanding of the Godhead, then
it is possible for him to have, till he come to know even as he is known, but
that by sin (you may say) this knowledge was lost: not lost, but corrupted
only, even as man's will. For then it should follow that we were inferior to
bruit beasts, who have in them a sensible knowledge meet for that end whereto
they were created. Furthermore, it is not possible that man's sin should
frustrate the end, which God intended in His creation; but it is manifest, that
man was created to know and honor the Creator. Again, seeing in Christ all
things consist, he being ordained of the Father before all worlds, in whom the
world should be both created and restored; It is plain that this light of our
understanding both proceeds from Him, and is restored in Him, as it is said,
John 1. He is that light that lightneth every man that comes into the world,
not only His chosen with knowledge of His saving truth, but even generally
every man with reasonable understanding, whereby we may know whatsoever is to
be known of God: and how? even by the works of God, as it is plainly
concluded Romans 1, 19, 20. Therefore are they not to be heard, who hold any
thing without the compass of Faith, which is without the compass of
Knowledge. For Faith ought so to be grounded on Knowledge, as Hope is grounded
upon Faith. So that as Faith, Hebr. 11.1. is said to be (...) an eviction or
proof of things hoped for, though they be not seen: so may I say, that
Knowledge is the proof of things, which are believed. For Faith is nothing
else but the Conclusion of a particular Syllogism, drawn from the Conclusion
of an universal, which the knowledge of God had concluded, as it is manifest,
Iam. 2.19. and Hebr. 11.3. By conference of which two places it appears, that
this knowledge, of which I speak, this Historical Faith, as to believe that
there is one God, which made all things of naught, is only such a knowledge,
as the devils, and wicked men have: but to believe, and have confidence in this
God, is that particular conclusion, and that faith which causes us to have
hope in His promises. Therefore said Christ, Have Faith in God: that is, strive
to know God, that knowing, you may have faith, and believe in Him. And we see
that in these things, where a bare faith without knowledge might seem to be
most required, because (as a man would think) there were no reason to be given
of them, namely, concerning the maintenance of this life, and the resurrection
to the life to come; both Christ and His Apostles use no other reasons, but
such as every reasonable man may easily be persuaded by, though authorities of
Scripture were not wanting to both purposes, as it is manifest, Matthew. 6. and
1. Cor. 15. Yea, Paul at Athens, or wheresoever he persuaded the worship of
the true God among the Gentiles, he persuaded not by authority of Scripture,
which amongst them had been very weak; but by such arguments as they knew to
be sufficient even in themselves. If these things were not so; how then could
the Gentiles, which knew not the Scriptures, be without excuse for their
ignorance of God? Therefore I conclude, that there is nothing which is
believed, but it may also be known. Now knowledge (we know) is ingendered by
such principles as have truth in them, the which is evident of it self. So
that by plain and reasonable understanding, a man may know whatsoever he
believes. You will say, To what purpose then serve the Scriptures? I answer:
That God, infinite in goodness, has together with this understanding and
light of Nature, given us withal His Word, as a greater light, whereby our
lesser lights might become more shining: That He has given unto us not only
an inward Word, to wit, our natural understanding; but also an outward word,
as a most illustrious Commentary, both of declaration and amplification of that
text, whereby we may the better understand, whatsoever we ought to understand
without it. But how then comes it to pass, that all men have not Faith? And
how is Faith said to be the gift of God? The first is answered, Romans 1.21. and
Ephe. 4.18. For hardness of their heart, who when they knew God, did not
glorify him as they ought: therefore their imaginations became vain, and
their foolish heart was full of darkness. And for this cause is Faith also
said to be the gift of God. First, in respect of that knowledge whence it does
proceed, which knowledge is His gift. Secondly, because it is the only work
of God, to make that knowledge to become fruitful, by laying it so unto man's
heart, that the hardness thereof may be removed, that when we know God to be
good and just, we also believe and worship Him as we ought. Thirdly, and most
especially, because that God oftentimes pardoning the ignorance, which men have
of Himself and the creature, does so enlighten the heart with His Holy Spirit,
that it is suddenly framed without any previant knowledge, to faith and
obedience. The truth whereof nevertheless does not any whit impugn that
which I say; That God has given unto every man so much understanding, as to
know what he ought to believe, and to be satisfied for the reasons of his
Faith, if he could open his eyes to see in the midst of what wondrous light
he were placed. This point is manifest both by many Scripture-authorities, and
by many reasons, which I omit. But taking this as either granted, or
sufficiently prooved, that God has given us light of understanding, whereby to
yield a reason of the Hope that is in us; a reason, I say, even of every
Article of our Faith: let us with holy reverence come unto the thing in
question, and see what reason we have for our defense. I will therefore a
while forbear to use the authority of holy Scripture; not that I esteem the
weight or evidence of any reason comparable thereto: but only perceiving by
that talk I had with you, that you had read the Scripture, as one of those,
whom Peter notes, 2. Epist. 3.16. Not intending to wrangle about your wrested
interpretations, I will first propose the evidence of reasonable proof: and
afterward bring in the assent of holy Scripture, that you may perceive in what
wondrous clear light you strive to be blind. And because I know not what
your opinion is concerning God, (for he that denies the Godhead of Christ,
may as well deny the Godhead absolutely:) that being one step toward the
question, I will proceed orderly, and give you also a reason of our faith,
concerning that matier: taking this only as granted, which is rise in every
man's knowledge, that both the terms of Contradiction cannot be affirmed of
the same subject: that is, that one and the same thing cannot be both affirmed
and denied, of the same subject, at one time, and in the same respect.

But first, by the name of God, know that I mean an Eternal Being, infinite
in goodness, in power, in wisdom, in glory, in virtue, and only worthy of
endless love and honor. My reason is thus. If there be not a Being, which had
no beginning; then of necessity, that which was first existent or begun, must
be a beginning unto it self, by causing of it self to be, when it was not.
But this is impossible, that any thing should be a cause, and not be: for so
should it both be, and not be; therefore there is an eternal Being, which is
the beginning, middle, and end of all things, and Himself without beginning,
and this eternal Being, we call God. My reason is plain to be understood;
and remember what I have said, that I may go on.

Whatsoever is without beginning, is also without ending; because it has no
Superior, which might bring it to nothing: therefore God is eternal. Again,
whatsoever comes to nothing, is corrupted by his contrary; but nothing can be
opposite to God, therefore He is Eternal. Or else I might thus reason.

2. Being, and Not-being are such contraries, as one of them cannot spring out
of another: for every thing, for the preservations sake of it self, does
repress and corrupt the contrary. Seeing then that there is Being, which
could not possibly raise it self out of Not-Being; it follows that Being had
a primacy or priority before Not-Being; and therefore of necessity must be
eternal: for otherwise there was a time, wherein it might be said, that Being
is not Being, and so Not-Being should have been first, and contradictories
might have stood together: but both these are impossible; therefore there is an
eternal Being; and this eternal Being, we call God. Furthermore we know,
that the greatest excellency or perfection of every thing, is in the
nearenesse, or likeness thereof unto the first cause. But every thing is more
excellent in the Being thereof, then in the Not-Being: Therefore Being was
before Not-Being; and for that cause, Eternal. Now Eternity is an infinite
Continuance: Therefore whatsoever is Eternal, must of necessity be Infinite:
and this Infinite being, we call God. Moreover, whatsoever has Infinite
continuance, has Infinite Power to continue infinitely; and this omnipotent or
endless power, we call God.

I might reason likewise of His Goodness, of His Wisdom, Truth, Glory, etc.
But one shall serve in stead of the rest, and I will take His Wisdom for my
example, and prove unto you, that likewise to be Infinite, and that not only
in existence, but in action also. And first that he is wise; God is most
worthy to be such as He is: but if He were not wise, He were not worthy to be
God: Ergo he is wise. Now mark how these depend one on another. In God is
Wisdom, which by reason of His Infinity, is also Infin^te: and (...) His
Eternity, is also Eternal: so that there is no time, wherein it may be said,
that this infinite Wisdom is not infinitely exercised* for then were it not
eternally infinite. Therefore His wisdom is infinite, not in exist^nce only,
but also in action.

A^aine* the Wisdom of God is such, as b^th no defect or imbecil^itie
ther^in. But if it were not infinite both in a^tion and in existence, ^ man
mi^ht find defect th^rein, and ^m^^ine a more In^^te wisedom^ then that is,
but this is impo^si^le. So ^i^^t I conclude of all the other di^^iti^^ of (...)
But I haste to the purpose and I think that you will not ^nwillingly grant
what I have said, but u^dersta^d the rest. All the Dignities of God being
actuated or brought into working, require of necessity an Infinite Object,
(...) they work, b^^ause they themselves are infinite: but nothi^^ can be
Infinite, but God alone; therefore it follows that (...) Di^^ities are
objected, or ex^rcised in God alone. And this is that Et^rnall Son, begotten
before the worlds, in whom the F^th r r (...): or as the Prophet speaks, His
beloved ^n whom His (...); which cannot be applied to any creature, without
which, ^od is happy in Himself: Therefore says the Apo^^^e that in Him
d^^lleth the Godhead bodily. How is that? Not in His m^nly ^ody eternally; for
His humane body took beginning of the flesh of the Virgin, when the fullness
of time came, but yet bodily, that is, as essentially, or substantially, as the
body of a man is substantial to the man. For every dignity of God being
infinite in action (as wa^ pro^ed) must of necessity produce such as it self
is. As for example; the Wisdom of God, or His Infinite Understanding, must
have an Infinite intelligible, or unde^standable object, which is produced
thereby, by an infinite understanding. So that ye must know of necessity, and
mark three Terms, as I will a while call them: the Term from whence: the
T^rme whereto* or wherein: and the middle Term between them. I will for your
capacity, which I know not to be much exercised in these matie^s, make a
com^arison meet for your understanding.

When the mind or understanding of a man conceives any understandable object,
there is (you know) first the power of understan^ing in the mind it self;
secondly the object understood* and thirdly the discourse or action of the
understanding, whereby that object is apprehended.

Now give me leave to tell you, what differences you must ma^e between the
understanding of God, and the understanding of man in this comparison.

First, the mind of man being finite, the understanding is notable to view all
that, which can be understood thereby at one time, or with one action of
understanding; but must conceive of one thing after another: whereas the
Understanding and Wisdom of God is such, as at one sight sees himself, and
every thing else, past, present, and to come; and this not once only, but even
continually, because it is eternally infinite.

Secondly, the intendment of man works nothing in the thing conceived, to
make it either to be, if it be a mere conceit; or to be other then it is, if
it be existent: but the understanding of God, is by reason of His power so
active, as that it causes that, wherein it is exercised, both to be, and that
according to his manner of apprehension, or understanding of it: which
understanding is by His Infinity so infinite, and by His Eternity so
continual, as that of necessity there must be a subsistence, or a Person,
wherein it is exercised, which must also be Infinite and Eternal. And this is
that glorious Son of God, who is thus begotten or produced eternally, both
before the world was, even as he is now, and shall not cease to be produced,
after the world shall cease, eternally.

Thus you see two of the terms spoken of: From whence, and Wherein: now you
must know the middle term between them. The term Whence, is the Wisdom
intelligent, God the Father. The term Wherein, is the Wisdom intelligible,
God the Son. The middle term is, ipsum intelligere, which in my Comparison I
called, The discourse it self, which also in this must needs be Infinite. For
an Infinite intelligible, cannot be conceived of an Infinite intelligent, but
by an Infinite action of the understanding: and this is that Holy Ghost, which
as you may easily understand, must of necessity proceed from both the Father,
and the Son, and be also infinite and eternal, and therefore God. Now
because they are all Infinite, and of Infinites essentially, there can be but
one: therefore are these three in Essence or Being, one, but in Subsistence, or
clear distinction of Persons, three.

Understand my comparison, which I made: I will yet clear the matier further
for your conceiving.

If you take in a mirror, the light of the Sun, and reflect it directly
thereon again, in the Sun it is one, in the glass another, and yet the
reflection of the beams, is also a third, but for all this, there is but one
nature and Word of light, which comprehends all three: so is it in this
Tri-Vnitie of which I speak. My leisure serves me not to dilate these things,
but I hope you are able to understand what I say, therefore I will proceed. It
is said, that Powers are known by their actions, and actions are limited by
their objects. I know the meaning of it, and it is not unfit in this place. But
to my reason: The Power of God is infinite, and by His infinite Wisdom He
knows it to be infinite: but God could not know that His Power were infinite,
unless He were able thereby to bring forth an infinite action; and every
infinite action must of necessity be exercised in an infinite subject. (For
whatsoever is received, is received according to the capacity of the
receiver:) therefore there is an infinite subject, wherein the power of God is
exercised: that is, the Son, of whom I speak. And here again, behold the
Tri-Vnitie; an infinite power, the Father; an infinite action* the Holy Ghost;
an infinite subject, the glorious Son; all three one infinite Being. Return
to your comparison.

As the understanding of man could no way know his own power, but by his
actions, neither can there be any actions of understanding, where there is
nothing to be understood, no more is it possible to be in the Deity. Now
understand that, as I have reasoned from the Wisdom and Power of God; so
might I reason from all His other Dignities* so that for one reason which I
have brought, I might have brought you fifty. But I show you the way, if you
be guided by the Spirit of Truth, how you may strengthen your self in the way
of Truth: therefore I will go on, and show you yet more plainly by more
familiar reasons.

An infinite power is not more weak then a finite: but every finite creature,
which we can cast our eyes unto, does by nature produce his like, as much as in
it is; as a man begets a man; trees bring forth seed, whereof their like in
nature may spring, and in like wise every other thing. Therefore the infinite
Power of God begets His like also, which is the Son, the image of the
invisible God, the first begotten of every creature, Col. 1.15. But none can be
like unto God in His Being, who is not very God: therefore Christ the only
begotten of the Father, is also very God.

Maruail not, that I make this argument from the creature, to the Creator; for
in this very point of the Power and Godhead, the Holy Ghost Himself teaches
me to reason of the invisible things of God, by the things visible, Romans 1.20.
And hereby also learn to help your ignorance, and put away your wonder, how
God should be one, and yet three. See you not how the understanding; the
Sun-light also, is one in nature, and yet three in evident and clear
distinction? though in so base and imperfect order, as that which is in all
perfection, is possible to be above it.

And further, see you not in every thing a body, a spirit, and a life, which
is the knot between them?

Or rather, see you not how the very bodily composition is both one, and three?
one body, which is united of three bodies? that is, earth, water, and air, or
oil, which yet again in the root of their nature are but one. For oil is
but a due mixture of water and earth, meanly fixed, and meanly volatile; and
earth is but fixed water; so that water, which is but one, is the root of the
three: as it is manifest, Gene. 1. and 2. Pet. 3.5. They which understand the
rules of Pyronomie, know what I say; and if you understood me^ well, you would
confess, that not only this instance which I have brought, of earth, water,
and air; but even the whole frame of Nature did proclaim the Trinity in the
Unity. If I should here tell you, how the Heaven, the Earth, and the Deep,
Gene. 1. might be understood mystically, and the Analogy between the Creator
and the creature therein: and then tell you, what Let the earth bring forth
living soul, might mean, and compare it with that place, That which was made
in Him was life; and then particularly for man, The Lord God also made the man
of the dust of the earth, and tell you, that it was so necessary, because that
Christ is Terra viventium: and enforce an argument to prove the Tri-Vnitie, by
that treeble repetition of the man made in the image of God; comparing it with
that place, 1. Cor. 11.3. and 7. If I should then tell you, that it was
necessary that the Son of God must become flesh, as well that the infinite
justice of God might be actuated in Him, which could not be actuated in Him,
being only God: as for many other reasons, Both from the Justice, and Mercy,
and Wisdom of God, though to a well-sighted understanding, I might seem to
have laid a precious foundation of Philosophy, divine, and natural: yet to
you I might rather seem perhaps to have proposed Cabalisticall dreams, then
any sound argument to the thing in question.

Yet this will I tell you, and hold it for good Divinity: that the main drift
and scope of the whole Scripture is to show the creation of all things in
Christ, through Him, and for Him: and the restoring of the whole creature in
man by Him: That in all things He might have the preeminence, Coloss. 1.
Neither does this any whit derogate from the honor of the Father.

For first, It has pleased the Father, that in Him should all fullness dwell:
and besides, it is an honor above all honors unto the Father, to be the
Father of so glorious a Son.

Therefore is this world, and all the things therein, created to the Image of
Christ, to express His glory, even as He is the expressed Image and glory of
the Father. And here is the worlds Eternity, which had in Christ an eternal
Being; according to that His Name, Esaias 9, 6. The Father of Eternity.

Here are those separate Ideas, about which Plato and Aristotle could never
agree, and which neither both of them, nor many of their followers did
perfectly understand: not that they might not by the frame of nature, and the
wisdom which God had given to man, be understood.

For is not this world as a book wherein we may read and understand by the
created truths, what is the Truth, which is increated? but all true knowledge
is the gift of God.

Therefore wrest not that place, Coloss. 2.8. against the Christian search
after the knowledge of nature, whereby above all other humane knowledges a man
is brought to know God, and to honor Him as he ought: but rather be sorry,
that your knowledge of Nature is no more. For this will I tell you, to teach
you to know your self, that there is nothing in the creature, which may be
known, (and all may be known that is in the creature) but man ought to know
it, and to glorify the Creator thereby. And this great labor has God given
to men, that knowing how short they are of that they ought to be, they might be
humbled thereby, Psalm. 1.11. Eccles. 1.13. And why ought this to seem strange?
does not God require that perfection at man's hand, wherein He did create Him?
and was he not created with perfect discourse to know the creature, that he
might therein behold the Creator, and so glorify His wondrous power and
goodness? But this question would draw me from the question in hand: and
therefore I will briefly add one reason more: and because my leisure is little,
I will be as short as I can: but I pray you lend me your ear; for it is hard
in English, an inartificiall language, to express my mind: but because you
told me, you could a little Latin, I will be bold here and there, to use a
word: my reason is thus. The whole and perfect nature of a Principle or
Beginning is in God, who is alone the beginner of all things. Now a Principle
is of three sorts, whereof every one is so clearly distinct from another, as
that one cannot possibly be that other: therefore in the Unity of the Deity
there is also such clear distinction into a Trinity, as that one distinct
cannot possible be that other, from which He is distinguished; yet in the
Unity of essence they are all one. The differences of a beginning stand thus;
It is either Principium principians, non principiatum; that is, a Beginning,
which is a Beginner unto another; yet has not His beginning from another, lest
there should be a process into Infinity a part ante: this is God the Father,
to whom it is peculiar to beget the Son, yet is Himself neither made, nor
created, nor begotten of any other.

Secondly, there is Principium principiatum principians; to wit, a Beginning
which has his beginning of another, and is also a beginning to another, lest
there should be any defect or imbecillitie in the Beginning: and this is the
Everlasting Son, very God of very God, begotten of the substance of His
Father alone before the worlds, neither made, nor created.

Thirdly, there is Principium principiatum non principians; that is, a
Beginning, which is also begun, but is not a beginner unto another: lest there
should be a process into Infinity a part post: and this is the Holy Ghost,
who proceeds from the very substance and Being of the Father and the Son,
and is with them one GOD coeternall and coequall. But you will say, Is not the
Holy Ghost a Beginner unto any other? how is He then the Author of our
consolation? and how is He said to lead us into all truth, etc? Understand what
I mean: He is not a beginner unto any other of the same Infinite Essence, or
Being with Himself. For the beginnings, which I spoke of before, are in the
Essence of God alone. Now our spiritual consolation, whereof the Holy Ghost is
said to be the Beginner, is but an emanation or effluence from that Being,
which he himself is; as the light of the Sun does illuminate every bright body
exposed to His light, and yet imparteth not His being thereto. You will again
object, that Eternity has no beginning, nor ending: how then can Christ be
both eternal, and begun? and how again can He be equal to the Father,
whereas He being begotten of the Father, the Father has a prioritie before
Him? I answer, that this beginning is that production or begetting, which I
before declared, to have been heretofore no other, then it is now, and shall
be eternally: as the Sun has brought forth light since His creation, and shall
still bring forth light till the worlds dissolution. For this action of God,
whereby He begets His Son, is not a transient action, to cause a passion
in the subject, and a repassion in the agent, for in such, the subject of
necessity should have been existent before the action; but this action is
immanent, and therefore of necessity of the same nature with the same agent;
which agent because it is eternal, therefore the production is also eternal,
and consequently the product, and so of necessity very God. But you must ever
remember what difference I made between the action of God infinite in power,
and therefore able to actuate the object; and the immanent actions of our
mind. Now for the Prioritie, or Posterioritie, you may object. I grant there
is Prioritie among the Persons of the Godhead; but of what kind? not of Being;
for their Essence is one, and therein is none before or after another, neither
is any one of the Trinity more or less God then another: not of time; for
they are all one Eternity: not of dignity, for they are all one Infinity,
and the Son Himself being very God, thinks it no robbery to be equal
with God.

But yet there is Prioritie, and that of order only, for the Father is in
order before the Son, because the Son is begotten of the Father: and the
Son likewise is before the Holy Ghost, because the Holy Ghost is the mutual
love between the Father and the Son: and so proceeding from them both.

I will make a comparison unmeet for the matier of which I speak; for to whom
shall we liken the Highest? but yet meet to help your understanding. When a
man does dream, and imagine things which are not, there is, you know, the
fantasy, the phantasme, or thing imagined or dreamed, and the phansying or
working of the fantasy about that object. Now these three are all of one
nature, and are one after another only in order, and not in time.

For the particular fantasy of such an object, is before the object, and
makes it to have an intentionall being; then the object being the discourse of
the fantasy, follows in order, which nevertheless was in time as soon as
it, observing ever the cautions that are to be observed.

Thus have I very briefly showen not many reasons, but rather how many reasons
may be showen for this Christian assertion: yet have I showen enough to
persuade any reasonable man, to yield meekely unto the truth of that doctrine,
which is so evident, both in the Book of God, and in every faithful and true
Christian man's confession, and according to that discourse, which is evident to
every man's understanding. Now give me leave to speak a little to those
arguments which have thrown the most learned of the Jews headlong to the
feet of Christ, to make them acknowledge that the Messiah must be both God and
man. I will not herein do any thing contrary to that, which in the beginning I
protested, that is, not to compel you by authority of Scripture, but to
entreat you by reasonable persuasion, to incline your ear to the truth. But
because I may not without injury to the cause, leave altogether out such
manifest proof, and without injury also to your self, who might think that
I went about to sophisticate a true seeming untruth, which would not abide the
touch: I will only intend my finger to some very few, of many thousands of
axioms of the Scripture for this purpose, and leave you to make the conclusion
by your self, hoping that the Jews example may provoke you to follow them, so
far forth as they have followed the truth. Exo. 13.21. it is said, The Lord
went before them, etc. Chap. 14.19. The Angel of God, which went before them,
removed: where Christ the Angel of the Covenant is called, The Lord Jehovah.
Again, Exo. 15.3. The Lord is a man of war, His name is Jehovah: therefore
Christ is God and man: who by this conflict upon the Cross, triumphed over
Death and Hell, as it is written in the Gospel, The book of the wars of the
Lord. Again, Esaias 9.6. Unto us a child is borne, there is His Manhood: and
unto us a Son is given, and they shall call His Name, The mighty God. And
Esaias 35. v. 4. Your God will come and save you. Iere. 23.5. etc. I will raise
up unto David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign, and this is the Name
whereby they shall call Him, The Lord our righteousness. And Ier. 33. v. 16.
Judah shall be saved, and H^ that shall save her, is the Lord our
Righteousness. Where the Name used, is that great Name (...) Jehovah, which is
never given to any creature. Zac. 9.9. proves Him God and man. What shall I
cite unto you that of the 2. Psalm? Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee: which place, with many more, is brought in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, to this purpose, which is your question.

These authorities the Thalmudists, who stick only to the killing letter ^^d
ap ^^ant sense of the law, hold sufficient to put this mat^^^ (...) of doubt.

Now, if leaving this outward sense of the Scripture, we should des^^e to know
what is the quickening spirit thereof, and should ransack* the treasuries of
the Cabalists, remembering that place of our Savior, Mat. 5.18. One jod, or
tittle of the Law shall not pass, till all be fulfilled; and should examine
the question by the letters and pricks of the Scripture, we should more easily
find an entrance then an end thereto. Yet for a taste take only the first
three words of the Law, (...) bereshith, bara, ^elohim: which may not unfitly
be thus turned: In the beginning, they the mighty God created. And of that
again, take the first (...) bereshith, and see what it may signify by that
part of the Cabala which they call Notariacon, b. the first letter of b^n,
signifies the Son: r. the first of ruach, signifies the Hol^ Gho^t: a. the
beginning of av. is the Father: ^. the (...) of Sabbath, imports rest: i. the
beginning of the in^ffable Name of God (...) and not there only, but even of
it self it im^orts the Deity. For we consider of things not obuious to o^r
s^nces and understanding, as if they were not: and therefore thi^ (...) of all
the letters, nearest unto nothing, does signify God. ^ ^. the first of Ta. or
Thom. is construed a Closet or a D^pth. Which construction if you put together,
according to the rules of that excellent Grammar of Divinity, with reference
to that which follows, may import thus much. The Word, the Spirit, and the
Father, resting eternally in the Closet, or unconceiveable ^bysse, or (as Paul
calls it) the inaccessible light of the infinite Deity, manifested their
almighty power in creating the heaven, and the earth. Neither is it without a
great mystery, that the Son is here put in the first place: for In the
beginning was the Word: because the chief honor both of the Creation, and
restoration of the world is given unto Christ, as the Apostle, does comment
upon this text, Coloss. 1. And in another place, In Him is all the treasure,
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God. As Psalm. 104. v. 24. In Wisdom
have thou made them all. For in Christ were all things together one infinite
wisdom, till in the Creation he made them several, according to their
distinct Idea's. Therefore says the Apostle, He sustaineth every thing by His
powerful Word: that is, the Son: and elsewhere, In Him (Christ) we live and
move (after the Creation) and have our Being (before the Creation.) And for
this cause does John begin the law of mercy and grace, in the very same words,
wherewith Moses began the law of Justice and condemnation; In the beginning.
For we know nothing of God, neither of Justice, nor of Mercy, etc. but only
by Christ; as he says, No man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom
the Son will reveile Him. And in another place, No man comes to the Father,
but by me. Now the Holy Ghost is put in the second place, because He is the
mutual love of the Father and the Son, and as I may say, the instrument of
their actions, both immanent, and transient.

Go forward now, if you will, to the next word, (...) bara; you see, it
affords the same argument for the Tri-Vnitie, by the three letters before
explained, and the number which is the singular.

Think not this a fancy, neither reproach the divine Cabala, as the ignorant
Sophisters use to do, not knowing how above all other knowledges, it does
advance a man's meditation on high.

And to the present purpose, they which know any thing in the holy language,
know that this sentence can no way agree in Grammatical construction, unless
the singular verb (...) bara, be thus made plural, that it may have concordance
with the plural (...) Elohim. And that these three persons are, in the unity of
their Being, one, may appear by that, which is Chap. 2. v. 4. where the name
of their essence Jehovah is joined to Elohim; as if you would say, the Gods
Jehovah made the earth and the heavens.

You will ask, why these letters, (...) b.r.a. are twice put, seeing in this
preciseness, no such superfluity should have needed?

I tell you, that it is not done, but to intimate unto us a most high mystery.

For in the first place it imports that Eternal and Infinite Being of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, which they had before the worlds in their
endless glory and felicity, in that silence of the Deity, in that
super-supreame Entity, which is unto the Godhead, perfect above perfection,
without any respect unto the creature. It imports that Infinity, that Eternity,
that Power, that Wisdom, which is above all things, and gives unto it self,
to be such as it is: that Nothing (as the divine Areopagite seems to speak)
which is before and above all things, that may be spoken or thought, without
any respect of any emanation, or effluence whatsoever. And therefore follows
that letter of rest, that of unity, and that of perfection. Now in the second
place, it signifies the Deity, as exercised in the creature: and therefore
follows that Epithete Elohim which shows that emanation of Power or Strength;
and is sometimes given unto the creatures, Angels, and men. It were an endless
thing to speak that of these mysteries, which may be spoken, neither can I;
For the Law of the Lord is perfect, and man is full of weakness. I have said so
much as I think meet concerning the Tri-unitie.

Now a word to that point, that Christ is God: which although it appear
sufficiently in the Tri-unity before prooved, by this anagogical doctrine: yet
to that second person in particular, is that which follows Esaias 7.14. it is
said of Christ, that His Name should be called Immanuel; but in the history of
the Gospel, in Matthew and Luke, both before His Conception, and at His
Circumcision, He is called Jesus. It is therefore meet that you know, how
Jesus is Immanuel or God with us. The writing of the Name of JESUS is thus
(...) Ihsuh, though according to the rules of the pronunciation of that tongue,
Jesus, and according to the ancient abbreviation following the Hebrew
orthography IHS. In which Name you see are all the letters of the greatest
ineffable Name of God, (...) Jehovah; with the interposition of that letter of
rest s. for then was God reconciled to the world; then was everlasting
righteousness brought in, when the Word became flesh.

This is that glorious Name, of which God spoke by the Prophet, Behold, I will
make my Name new in the earth. For you see how of (...) is made (...) that is,
JESUS.

This is that Name, which is meet for the Son of God alone, and cannot be
given to any creature, because it is a Name of the Deity, as it is Heb. 1. It
is that Name which is above all names: in which the Angels and the righteous
souls triumph; at which the powers of Hell are aghast and tremble, to which the
whole creature yields meek obedience.

This is that Name of which our Lord spoke, Father, I have manifested thy Name
unto men, the Father (...), the Son (...).

For so long as the mystery of the Incarnation of God was hid, so long that
Name remained unsoundable: but when the Word became flesh, and dwelt amongst
men, so that the mystery was reveiled; then the Name, which was before not to
be pronounced, was lawfully pronounceable. That as the Word of life was to be
seen with eyes, and handled with hands; so that glorious Name might also be
beaten between our lips, and teeth; and this by the interposition of that
letter of rest. The Jews knowing this reason of this great mystery, and moved
with the reverence thereof, durst never pronounce that Name (...), but in stead
thereof, Adonai or Elohim.

Let it not trouble you, that Judah the son of Jacob was called by such a name,
as had these four letters therein, with the addition of d, thus (...) Iehudah:
but rather wonder and learn, how by these sacraments the children of God before
the Incarnation, exercised their faith, saluted the promises afar off, and
saw that our Lord should enter into our earthly tabernacle, by the door of
Iudahs flesh; for so much the letter Daleth imports. To which mystery the
heavenly Poet alluding, triumphed with that double joy, Psalm. 24. Lift up your
heads ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, etc. foreseeing the
descension of God the Son, by the gate of our flesh, and the ascension of our
flesh by Christ, into the heavenly places: both which He celebrated by that
repetition. Compare with this place, Genesis 39.35. and 49.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and
Revel. 5.5. and other places, as you shall read, and understand them: and
withal consider, how the ancient have prided themselves with the several
letters of this Name, to keep in remembrance by their own names, a thing
never to be forgotten, The Incarnation of our Lord: As Abram assumed h., and
was called Abraham; Oshea took i., and was called Joshua, as you know. Neither
again let it trouble you, that some do write this name thus (...) ISV,
because (say they) the letter. s. turned upward ^ is as much as the double he
(...) omitted. I know no reason for this, but many authorities against it, as
you may know by that which is, and shall be said, though I let pass a very great
number. Now consider the Name in every letter, and see what clouds of
witnesses there are, that Christ is God and man: and learn by the Name it
self, how Christ is the Character or engraved Image of the person or
subsistence of the Father. Hebr. 1.13.

. i. Is the Crown or Diadem of the ineffable Name of God, and signifies the
Godhead.

. u. Pretends the tree of life: for it is a thing much noted among the learned
of the Hebrew tongue, that this letter is never put radically in any natural
Hebrew word, either in the beginning or end thereof, but is as the tree of
life, in the midst of the Paradise of God.

The double letter h.. signifies, that Christ, concerning His Deity, is
essentially united to the Humanity; and concerning His Humanity, united also
essentially to the Deity; and that by the Holy Ghost. For h. is a spirit or
breath: therefore is Christ in Himself, or in respect of His Deity, the
superior Wisdom of the Father, and the Son of God, not made, but begotten,
Pro. 8.22. In the creature, or with respect of His Humanity, the inferior
wisdom of God; not begotten, but made, and created, Ecclus. 24.11, 12.

Now the letter. s. has many things therein to be considered.

For you may not think, that it was taken by chance into this Name; but for
the Notory, and for the Geometry.

For the Notory I have observed, that the Theologians, both of the Old and New
Testament, have celebrated thereby; first, the rest, or dwelling of the Godhead
in Him, as Esa. 42. ver. 1. and Ioh. 1. ver. 33. Then the rest, or Ideall being
of the world in Christ before the creation: and the restoring of the world by
His suffering: wherein the justice of God rested, or came to a period, as Esaias
53.11. He shall see the travel of His soul, and be satisfied. Lastly, that
great Iubile or Sabbath of Sabbaths in the world to come, when all the creature
shall rest from corruption. Secondly, they learned thereby the everlasting
Anointing of Christ to be our King, our Priest, and our Prophet. For is the
head of (...) which is to anoint. Hitherto belongs that of the 45. Psalm. Thou
art anointed with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. And in particular;
I have found David (or my beloved) servant, with my holy oil have I anointed
Him: that for His Kingdom. Dan. 9.24. speaks of His Priesthood: To finish
the wickedness, to seal up the sins, etc. and to anoint the most Holy.
Esaias. 61. of of his Prophecy; Therefore has the Lord anointed me, He has
sent me to preach, etc. For this cause was there no Anointing in the old
Testament, but typical, as a shadow of the good things, that were to come; so
that when He came, all these anointings ceased; both of the Leviticall
Priesthood, for Thou art a Priest for ever. Hebr. 7: and of the Kingdom; for
He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever: Luke 1.33. And for his
Prophecy He says, Whatsoever I have heard of my Father, I have made known
unto you. The whole scope of the new Testament is to this effect.

Now the Geometry has also many mysteries first, it is one semicircle with
three branches; the mystery of the Trinity in the Unity: all whose dignities
of Virtue and Power, etc. are coequall in all, and in every person, entirely,
and indivisibly; and therefore in our Lord also: according to that saying of
the Angel, The Holy Ghost shall come upon Thee, and the Power of the most High
shall overshadow thee; therefore also that holy thing which shall be borne of
thee, shall be called, The SON of GOD.

Shall I tell you what Lectures the Divines have made upon the text of this
letter? Zach. 11.13. did read herein that goodly price, at which the wicked
Jews did value Him. For i. in the Hebrew Arithmeticke is ten; so the three
tennes in the triple Crown of this letter, are the thirty pieces of silver,
which the traitor took to betray the precious blood, which was too dear a
ransom for the whole world.

And one in another place said; They have sold the Just for silver.

Consider the letter, and every part thereof,. This inferior semicircle is the
creature, the earthly Paradise, in the midst of which is the tree of life.
And that thus the letter vau is one part, and signifies in that tongue, a
nail, if you will, that nail, that pierced His hands, and His beauteous feet,
to which, if you add the iod reversed, ^ you may well perceive the figure of
the whole Cross, that Tree of life, which bare that heavenly fruit; that
spiritual food, whereof Adam and his faithful children, which overcome, may
eat, and live for ever. Revel. 2.7.

Thus you may see, how the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us. You may see
that riddle of the Angel to Esdras, 2. Book, chap. 5. v. 37. expounded: The
image of that Word, from which, and whereto, the Books of both the Testaments
do sound.

You may see what confidence we may have in that promise of Christ, who in the
days of His flesh said, Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my Name, He
will give it you, Ioh. 16.23. But after His Ascension, the miracles, that are
to be done in that Name, are more wonderful Mark. 16.17. And again, He that
believes in me, greater works then these shall He do, for I go to the
Father. Behold the mystery of it, cause it to ascend, and describe that
circle, whose center is every where, whose circumference is no where. Now are
the superior and inferior conduit-pipes soudered together, (as the Hebrews
speak) now the higher influences, the Spirit and Graces of God are not given
by measure: and the refluences so great, as that Whosoever believes, out of
His belly shall arise fountains of living water, springing up unto eternal
life. O glorious Name! O sacred Mystery! by which you may well perceive, that
there is greater Unity between the Deity and the Humanity, then by any
words of Contiguitie, or Continuitie may be expressed. You may well perceive,
how according to that place of the 89. Psalm. He the first borne; or, as Ioh.
says, Chap. 1. The only begotten of the Father is made higher then the Kings
of the earth. Here is our righteousness, our sanctification, and redemption
complete: here is our adoption and reward: our consolation, our life, and
religion: our reverence, and our fear: yet our joy and boldness* all in all:
The presence of God. I am not able to give due honor thereunto. My thoughts
are swallowed up, when I consider the other great mysteries, which this one
letter does import: the mystery of the triple world; the mystery of mercy and
of Justice, of Election, and Reprobation; of that great Iubile, or Sabbath of
Sabbaths, when that which is above, shall again descend to restore the
creature from corruption and change, into that nimietie or excess of Goodness,
wherein it was created. But these things are therefore here to be omitted,
because the discourse thereof were long, and because they are rather
consequents, then premises to the question. To tell you at once, and to make an
end of this argument: The whole Nation of the learned Jews confess, that the
Messiah should be called by this great Name: (...). To which purpose, there
are, besides these which have been brought, many places of Scripture, which in
the Hebrew verity are most direct, though by our translations they might seem
somewhat harsh. They hold, I say, that He must be both God and Man: and in a
word, there is nothing, which we Christians do affirm concerning our Lord,
but the evidence of Scripture does compel them to confess it. Only they
differ in this, from us; whether This Jesus be that Christ, that should come
into the world; though this also be a thing not questionable, as you may learn
of Daniel 9. verse. 24, 25, 26. and 2. Esd. 7. verse 28.29.

Although the common error and expectation of the Jews, was of a terrestrial
Monarchy; yet the best learned of them agree, that the Kingdom of Christ is
not of this world. For they remember that place in the Testament of Jacob: The
Scepter shall not depart from Judah, till Shiloh come. By which it follows,
that when Messiah shall come, there should be no more show of an earthly
kingdom. That of Zach. 9.9. is as direct, Jerusalem, behold, thy King comes
unto thee poor. They remember also that in the 21. Ps. I am a worm and noman,
a shame of men and the contempt of the people. And that also of Esaias 53. He
has neither form nor beauty; when we see Him, there shall be no form that we
should desire Him, He is despised and rejected of men, etc. Read the whole
Chapter and the Psalm, compare them with the histories of His Passion, and
behold Him on the Cross, in the horror of His anguish, and extreme perplexity.

But you will say, what is this Iudaisme in the letters of His Name, for
argument to prove that He is God? Is it more, then if we should write the Name
of Christ with the last letter thereof capital, ChrisT; because it may
represent the Cross? or else the two last letters so interlaced, that they may
have reference to the Serpent in the wilderness, because that was also a
figure of CHRI^? Though I had here to answer for the Cabala of every of the
72. languages of the Confusion, yet I say only thus: If after all this that I
have said, you will still be contentious; I have no such custom, but I am well
content, that either thus, or by any other means, a ChrisTian man should hold
that in perpetual memory, which is his Joy, his Victory, his Crown, his
happiness in this world, and in the world to come.

Were it to any purpose to make you know, what the ancient Philosophers, who
knew not the Scriptures, have thought of this matier? all speaking this one
thing, which the light that God has given to mankind, did make them know,
although they concealed their intendement by diverse names. Yet Hermes called
Him plainly the Son of God. Zoroaster, the Understanding of His Father.
Pythagoras, Wisdom; as Paul and Solomon, every where, and particularly, Prou.
8. and in the book of that title.

Parmenides named him The Sphere of Understanding. Orpheus termed him Pallas,
to the same effect as the other, if you know the fable: and yet he speaks
more plainly to the Trinity, in his Hymns of the Night, of the Heaven, and
of the Air. Platoes separate Idea's mean nothing else: and in sum, as many
of the Philosophers, as were worth any thing, were not ignorant of this thing.
But I fear, these authorities are with you of little worth: yet have I brought
them, that you may see how we are furnished with all kind of proofs, and how
you do contemn all manner of testimony.

If this which I have said, persuade you to look better to the foundation of
your faith, it is sufficient: if it persuade you nothing, then have I done
contrary to the Commandment, which forbids to cast pearls before swine.
But yet I hope, that God will not suffer you to be led any longer by that
spirit of Antichrist, against which S. John does so often warn us. For I do
you to wit, that this your heresy is no now thing, but even as ancient as the
Apostles time. For, the reason of John's writing of his Gospel, was, to prove
the Godhead of Christ, against the Heretics that denied it in His own time.
And truly, I marvel that you, who have received this heresy from the rotten
bones of Arius, should not provide for your safety as he did. He denied the
authority of S. John's writings to be authentical. And why? because this
earth-bred Giant, which would pull Christ out of the throne of His Deity,
should with his lightning be suddenly burnt. Believe you the Scripture? Is
John's authority sufficient? then the case is plain. We are in Him that is
true, in His Son Jesus Christ, who is very God, and eternal life. 1. Ioh.
5.20. Can you now confer this Scripture with that place, I have said ye are
Gods, and not be ashamed? I and the Father are one. The Jews understood that
He herein professed Himself to be very God: and are you His enemy more then
they? Read Ioh. 10. ver. 30. and 33. and 34. and you may understand the
meaning of both places. The devils acknowledged Him to be God of Infinite
power: I know Thee who Thou art, even that Holy One of God: And will not you
confess as much as the devils? But this is more then I thought to say, only
you may see hereby, that we speak no other thing then Christ Himself, even in
His enemies understanding, said. Now if you could see a little the folly of
your own opinion; that were enough to cause you to put on a better mind. I will
touch it as lightening does touch the ground: for if you be willing to be
reformed, there is no doubt, but you may propound it to the learned Divines,
and be fully satisfied. You say Christ is only man, but yet endued with the
infinite Power of God. Here first you do injury to the Highest, to make the
Power of God to be accidental unto Him: whereas he is purus actus, absolute
perfection, and without shadow of change: His Being is most simple and pure,
not capeable of accidents. Then His Being is such, as no addition can be made
thereto, to make it more then it is: therefore it is necessary, that He be ever
actually whatsoever he may be. Besides, His Being is Infinitely distant from
Not-Being; therefore His Power is inseparable. Again, if there come any thing
to God as an accident, it must come unto Him from Himself; or else from
another: not from another, for He is impassible, or such as cannot suffer
violence: not from Himself; for all such accidents do proceed a potentia,
that is, from the imbecility, or imperfection of the subject: but His Being is
most simple, and infinitely perfect. Again, all accidents do rise from the
matier, form or composition of the subject. In Him is neither matier, form,
nor composition. Now al things we see in this world, do consist, ex actu and
potentia, of perfection from God, and imperfection from themselves: for of
themselves they are non entia, absolutely nothing. Yea, even the very Angels,
and the soul it self, are partakers of this composition: (for nothing is
purus actus, but God alone) therefore are they subject to accidents; yet they
which come nearest to perfection, are most free from accidents; as that which
is mere perfection, has no accidents at all. Know then, that all the
dignities of God are in him essentially one God. For the Goodness of God, His
Power, His Wisdom, His Glory, etc. Being all infinite, do of necessity
concur in the nature of Infinity. Whence it follows, that whatsoever is in
Him, is essentially Himself: therefore the power of God is not accidental, or
such as may be imp^rted to a man. The learned Hebrews according to this do
hold, that Ensoph or Infinity, is not to be numbered among the other attributes
of God: because it is that abstract Unity, whereinto they all essentially
concur, and from which they all essentially proceed* and hence by the way
take another strong argument to the former question: for if God be essentially
a Father, then the term correlative, a Son, must be in the Godhead also, and
that essentially. But now again see another folly in your supposition. The
work of our Redemption is a work of infinite goodness, mercy, power, wisdom
and glory; therefore it follows, that Christ the worker, had infinite mercy,
power, wisdom, etc.

Now I demand; had Christ this infinite goodness and power, so given to Him of
God, that the Father Himself had in the mean time none? This you dare not
say, for that were to say, that God did cease to be God; which cannot stand
with His Eternity.

Now if God the Father had, notwithstanding this absolute infinite power of
Christ, of which He spoke, All power is given unto Me, both in heaven and in
earth: then it follows that either there were two infinities of power; or
else that these two which had this infinite Power, were all one Infinite. The
first is against the nature of Infinity: for that is absolutely infinite,
which so comprehends all things, as that it leaves nothing without it self,
and yet is not comprehended of any other. Besides, if you would say, that the
Father and the Son had each of them several indivisible infinite Powers; it
must follow, that neither of their Powers were absolutely infinite: because
each of them had not the infinite Power of the other: And besides, that both
these infinite Powers must be conjoined with infinite weakness, because they
must be mutually subjected to the infinite Power one of the other. But both
these things are impossible. So you see that two Infinities can by no means
stand together: therefore it follows, that these two, to wit, the Father and
the Son, are in Being one, and that of infinite Power; and this is that which I
strive for: which, as you see, I have concluded by your own assertion.

The time would fail me, to lay before your eyes the manifold untruths, which
would ensue of your position, which favors neither of wit, judgment, nor
learning: And therefore I see, how they which have once departed from the
truth, must of necessiity run into infinite absurdities. Therefore look back,
and be ashamed of such newfangled toys, as you do daily imagine, which in
truth do argue the great inconstancy and vanity of your mind, and withal, such
palpable blindness of understanding, as the darkness of Egypt. For tell me without
selfe-liking, what sound judgment does this argue, to be driven about with
every wind of doctrine? a Protestant, a Brownist, an Anabaptist, an Antichrist.
What bringing up? what gift of learning and knowledge have you, that you should
presume to oppose your sentence, against the faith and doctrine of all the
Christian Churches in the world? Blush, and learn with meeknes the truth of
that Word, which is able to save your soul. You may see by your own miserable
experience, what it is to forsake the Unity of Faith, and the Communion of the
Saints, who embrace the truth of Gods word, and have manifest tokens that they
are the true Church, to wit, The word of God truly taught, and the Sacraments
duly administered. What if there want perfection? The Church militant must ever
confess; I am lovely, yet black: For it is impossible that any church should
be without imperfection, so long as the world stands: but at the end it shall
be presented without spot or wrinkle. Therefore remember from whence you are
fallen, and repent, and do the works of righteousness, lest Christ, whom you
so despite, come against you shortly. The work of Christianity is not in
foolish questions, and disputing about needles subtilties, but in doing the
works of truth and righteousness. Pray, and endeavor your self thereto. And
till such time as God for His Christ's sake, vouchsafe to have mercy on you, the
enemy of His Son, and give you grace to repent of this great wickedness, I am
neither your friend, nor yet your foe.

ALEX. GIL.

FINIS.

