A SHORT TREATISE against the Donatists of England, whom we call Brownists.

Wherein, by the Answers unto certain Writings of theyrs, diverse of their
heresies are noted, with sundry fantastical opinions.

By George Giffard, Minister of Gods holy Word in Maldon.

NON SOLO PANE VIVET HOMO: Luke 4

Verbum Dei manet in aeternum:



AT LONDON Printed for Toby Cook, dwelling at the Tigers head in Paul's
Churchyard. 1590.

To the right Honorable, Sir William Cecill, Knight of the Garter, Baron of
Burghley, Lord high Treasurer of England, and Chancellor of the University of
Cambridge, Grace and peace.
I Am (right Honorable) to excuse my self in two things: the one, that I
take upon me to write against the Brownists, seeing there be so many great
learned me^ in our land, which do refrain: the other, that I do offer so
slender a piece of work unto your Honor. Touching the former, the truth is,
I have been unawares drawn unto it, not purposing any such matter. For more
then two years past, there were brought unto me certain articles which the
Brownists do call, A brief sum of their profession, with diverse arguments
against read prayer. They were brought unto me by a Scholemaister in Essex, who
of a godly mind* did desire me to write my judgment of the same, which when
I refused, he urged me with this, that diverse of the people about them were
troubled, and did hang in suspense, and for their sakes he did require it, I
did grant his request, and when they had my writings, they were carried to the
chief men of that sect. Not long after, I received large replies, where I
perceived that which before I did not so much as dream of, namely, that they
had made challenge, and looked to be encountered by the learnedest in the land.
They take it grievously, and reprehend me, as having intercepted this
business, and taken it from the hands of the learned. Heerevpon I stayed long,
purposing to give them but short answer to their chief matters. But when I
saw that advantage was taken, as if I had received matters unanswerable, and
that Brownisme did begin to spread in many places of the land: I thought it not
amiss, seeing the burden thus to have light upon me, though I be not able to
deal so sufficiently as such a matter requires: yet to publish to the world
some of their heresies, and frantike opinions, which are to be gathered from
their writings. I have not set down the whole discourse of words, which has
passed between them and me, for it would be somewhat tedious. But if any shall
think I have passed any reasons of theirs unanswered, or wrested their words
from the true sense, to gather heresies: let them show any particular, and I
will be able to clear my self. And let men consider, whether the Brownisme can
be supported by any pillars, but those heresies which I have noted. I meddle
not with the controversies of our Church, but deal by way of admission. I
never received the names of any subscribed to the writings I received, and for
that cause I do name none. And now for the other point, why I presume to offer
it unto your honor. God has given your honor to be an ancient grave
Counselor, and which many years have borne, and still do bear, a great part
of the weight of this our commonwealth, under her right excellent Majesty:
and for that cause I judge it meet your Honor should see such things as any
way touch the general estate. I trust therefore, that although it be not for
the slenderness worthy to be offered to so honorable a person, yet it shall be
accepted in some sort. And touching your Honor, as I do not doubt of it but it
shall be, so I wish and pray to God, that you may be one of those of whom it is
written, Psalm. 92. The righteous shall flourish like a palm tree, and shall
grow like a Cedar in Lebanon. Being planted in the house of the Lord, they
shall flourish in the Courts of our God, they shall still bring forth fruit
in their age: they shall be fat and flourishing: to declare that the Lord my
rock is righteous, and that there is none iniquity in him.

Your Honors in all duty to command, George Gyffard.

The Preface to the gentle Reader.
IT is a thing of great wonder, to behold how God preserves his Church from
drowning and destruction in these grievous times. The Devil is so full of
wrath, knowing his time is but short, Revel. 12. v. 12. that he raises up such
tempests and whi^le winds, with such lightning and thunders, with such
outrageous surges and waves, as if heaven and earth should be mixed together.
His chief Vassals, the tyrants and Heretics, do wonderfully bestirre them,
to effect his curssed desires. By the one sort he does breath out terror, and
as it were spit fire. By the other he spueth up deadlye poison, and casts his
poisoned darts. He is so subtle, that he transformeth himself into the
likeness of an Angel of light, and his Ministers come in fair cloakes* For
behold all sorts of Heretics and Schismatikes, and ye shall see few of them
come in the Devils liuerie. The Papists shrowde themselves under the name and
title of the Catholic Church. These cry out, the fathers, the fathers, the
ancient Fathers. These proclaim us and all Churches, which have forsaken
their fellowship, and embraced the Gospel, to be Schismatikes and Heretics.
These affirm, that we have no word of God, no Sacraments, nor Ministry,
because we be cut off from them. These prevail mightelie among the blind
superstitious people, who greedely drink up all the poison and abominations,
which the Devil has spued up into that fair golden cup in which they offer
them, Revel. 17. which is, that they be Catholics. There is risen up among us
a blind sect, opposite to these, which is so furious, that it comes like a
raging tempest from a contrary coast, so that our ship is tossed between
contrary waves. For these cry alowd, that our assemblies be Romish, idolatrous;
antichristian Synagogs. That we worship the beast, receive his mark, and stand
under his yoke. And finally, that we have no Ministry, no word of God nor
Sacraments. These pretend such feruencie of zeal against all false worship,
superstition, and Idolatry, and such love to the discipline of Christ, and
cry so loud, that a man would think he heard the voice of Elias, of Haggeus,
and of that third Angel, Reu. 14. Down with the Preests of Baal, come out from
among them, worship not the beast, arise, arise, and build the Temple and altar
of the Lord. With this counterfeit voice the Devil seduceth many, and troubles
all such as are weak, and yet have zeal against false worship, trembling for
fear of pollution: with this sect only have I now to deal. First therefore
touching their name, we term them Brownists, as being the Disciples and
Scholars of Brown. There be indeed new masters sprung up, which seek to
carry away the name, and I have heard diverse say, they go beyond Brown. But
whosoever shall read his books and peruse all their writings, shall well see,
that he deserves to have the honor, if any be, and to be called the Captain
and master of them all. They have all their furniture from him: they do but
open his pack, and displaye his wares. They have not a sharp arrowe, which is
not drawn out of his quiver.

Then next, touching the question between them and me, let the reader
consider, it is not about the controversy in our Church, as whether there be
imperfections, corruptions, and faults, in our worship, ministry, and church
government, nor how many, great or small. But whether there be such heinous
enormities, as destroy the very life and being of a true Church, and make an
utter divorce from Christ. I will lay it open more plain by a comparison which
the Scripture uses. The Church is like a man, in whom there be many parts and
members. Romans 12. If all the parts or members of the body have their just
proportion, be whole and sound, and set in their due order, the soul and life
departed, he is no longer a man, to speak properly, but the dead carcass of a
man. But now if he be sick and diseased, so that all parts are feeble, or if
he be deformed with sores and maimes, wanting hand, foot, eye, nose, or such
like, yet is he still a man, so long as the soul and life remain in him. All
men do know this to be true, yea even the simplest make no doubt or
controversy about it. Let us see therefore whether it be a fit comparison
with the Church, and whether it be so in it of necessity, and as manifest by
the doctrine of the holy scriptures, as this other is unto our bodily senses.

To find this, we must first consider, whether there be no true Church of GOD,
but that which is perfect in this world? We know that there are none but
Heretics, yea rank abominable heretics, which obstinately deny this clear
doctrine of the holy Scriptures, namely, that even the most faithful, and the
most godly, are not perfect while they live upon the earth. We know but in
part. 1. Cor. 13. In many things we sin all. Iam. 3. v. 2. And who
understands his errors, or who can tell how often he offends? Psalm 19. The
perfectest members of the Church do err, do sin, are maimed, are weak,
are spotted and deformed many ways. Now, whereas all the members be in this
case, needs must the whole body which is composed of them be in the same
estate. Then we may not look for a Church in this world, which is not spotted,
deformed, maimed, and weak, in some respects.

But the question must be, how far it may be deformed and maimed, and yet
remain alive, and so a true Church of God. Let all the parts be joined
together: let there be all sorts of officers and offices, yet if the life, and
as it were the soul of the Church be wanting, it is but a dead carcass.
Contrariwise, let there be some members wanting, some maimed, all parts
deformed and weak, yet is it a true Church of God, so long as the soul and
life does remain in it. And what is the soul and life of the Church? Jesus
Christ apprehended by faith. I live now, says Saint Paul, but not any longer
I, but Christ lives in me, Galath. 2. ver. 20. All the members of the Church
are incorporate, and graffed into Christ by faith, and do grow in him, and
through the operation of his spirit receive the juice and sap of life from
him, John. 15. Whosoever believes in the Son of God, shall be saved, though
he be full of errors, full of infirmities, and deformities, both in body and
soul, laboring to be purged.

But if a man, or an assembly do hold that which overthrows the faith in
Christ, they are gone, there is no life remaining. As the Papacy holds many
things aright touching Christ; but it holds sundry things contrary, which
overthrow the very foundation of the faith, and so the Papacy it self is not
Gods true Church.

Thus have I laid open the question, between me and the Brownists: wherein
then are the Masters and Capitaines of Brownisme deceived? And what is it, in
which they seek victory and glory? They know there is no sin, no error, no
corruption, nor no abuse, but that if all the learnedest in the world would
take upon them to clear and to defend the same, they shall not be able. Then
they are desirous of victory, of triumph and glory* over all both wise and
learned. Here therefore they entrench themselves, they make their Bulwarks,
plant their ordinance, set themselves in arraye, and sound the Trumpet of
defiance against all. They presume, none shall ever be able to drive them out
of their hold. And indeed, he that condemns an error, and goes no further,
can never be vanquished. But herein they are deceived, that out of this Forte
they will batter down the Church. For their ordinance is over weak for that:
they stop in powder in great plenty, for they lay on tongue enough, and so
make terrible thundering crakes. But the Bullets which come forth, and which
should do the deed, are nothing but heretical, erroneous, and fantastical
opinions, and so all vanishes into smoke. They must therefore at the last,
leave their hold, and take them to their heels, for Gods Church will not be
battered down by any assaults of Schismatikes.

Some will think hardly, that I term them Schismatikes, seeing they be men
that are accounted zealous* and stand for good things. But the truth is, they
be not only a Schism, yea a vile Schism, rending themselves from the Church
of England, and condemning by their assertions, the whole visible Church in the
world, even as the Donatists did of old time: but also they maintain
heresies, and some that touch the very foundation of faith and Christian
religion: they be utter violaters of ecclesiastical discipline, they abridge
the power of the civil Magistrate, beside sundry fantastical opinions. For
when as the life of the church consists in the apprehensson of Christ through
faith, it must needs be an heresy, to conclude as they do, a nullitie, and a
quite overthrow of the same, from errors and faults which are not fundamental.
Faith and regeneration being imperfect, in all that live upon the earth, it is
heriticall, to say, that is no Church of God, which holding the sound
doctrine, has sins and great abuses in it.

The stablenesse of Gods covenant toward the Church, being founded only upon
his free grace, it is detestable impiety, to hang it upon the works of men, as
the Brownists do, when they affirm, that where there is any open sins
suffered in an assembly, the covenant is disanulled with them all. And if men
consider well, they shall find that the whole Brownisme rests upon the
heresy of perfection and Anabaptisticall freedom. For from hence, that it is
written, Jerusalem from above is the mother of us all, and is free with her
children. They boast of such freedom, as that touching outward orders, the
Prince and Church has no power to impose any thing by Laws and Constitutions.
Which is one thing wherein they do not only abridge the power of the Christian
Magistrates, denying them the authority to reform the Church, and to compel
their subjects to the true worship, spoiling the Church of that comfortable
aid: but also condemn all reformed Churches which have orders and prescript
forms of prayers imposed, which these Brownists term Idolatry, a tradition
bringing Christian liberty into bondage, and therefore a thing most
detestable. Moreover, they hold such a perfect freedom from all spiritual
bondage of sin, that they affirm S. Paul never consented to wicked thoughts
after he was regenerate. But in an other place they affirm, that all men be
Idolaters, and can keep no one Commandment: where they are both contrary to
themselves, uttering that which overthrows the whole Brownisme* and also
speak grosely. For albeit there is no man perfect in any Commandment, yet
the holy Scriptures do not call them Idolaters nor adulterers. They boldly
gain say the holy Ghost, by affirming that the Psalms were not to be sung
unto God. And touching the discipline, which is the thing they most glory of,
as if they suffered for it: let all men know for certainty, that they be not
only ignorant what it is, but also do in their practice break and overthrow
the very pith and substance thereof in the chief rules. For they take upon
them to abandon and cast forth whole assemblyes which profess the Gospel,
and have their estimation and dignity among all godly Churches, without
observing the rule given by our Savior Christ, Math. 18. They intrude
themselves without calling, being mere private men, to the erecting and
establishing of a public government, forgetting that which is written, I have
not sent them, and yet they run. They cut off also the power of the Church in
a great part of the discipline, as namely, in ordeyning constitutions in things
that are variable. Finally touching this point, I may say boldly, the Devil
can no way almost more disgrace Ecclesiastical government then he does by
them, for it is the Stern of Christ's Ship, and requires men of the greatest
wisdom, learning, experience, and sobriety that may be, for to guide it. Now
when the common Artificer, the Apprentise and the Bruer intrude themselves, and
they will guide the same, being ignorant, rash, and headie, what worldly wise
man will not take it, that discipline her self is but a bedlem? Who will
adventure himself in that Ship, where presumptuous ignorance, and bold frenzy
does sit at the Helm? Shall that Ship escape the rocks? If it would please
God to give Brown the grace to repent, and to speak the truth, he could best
declare this thing. For when he had with certain other, drawn some both men
and women over the Seas, and there spread his Sails, how soon did his silly
Boat dash upon the rock, and was cloven in two or three pieces? Let not men
be deceived with every vain show, for undoubtedly, he that observes shall
find, that the end of Brownisme, is infinite Schisms, Heresies, Atheism, and
Barbarism. For what other fruits can follow of the disgracing and condemning
the liberal Arts, of bringing the ministry of Gods Word, by which the
religion and godliness that is in men, has been ^rought into utter contempt?
What can follow from immoderate outrageous rash fury, wrath, and bitter
zeal, and vainglorious contention, which are earthly, sensual, and devilish?
If men could stay themselves but a while, and see whether the same things
spring not forth, which came from the Donatists and Anabaptists, it were well.
For it is to be wondered at, that any which profess the Gospel, should be
seduced and called away not only from the Ministers of the Church of England
that have taught them, but from all the most worthy men and Churches under
heaven, and that by the voice of the Devil in such furious blind
Schismatikes. In deed there be two special causes of it: the one, that sundry
men receive not the holy Word of God in humility, with fear and trembling,
with conscience to practice, but are puffed up, and swell with opinion of their
knowledge, as soon as they can utter a few words: and grow unto vain
iangling, yea, unto bitter zeal, and contention, in stead of being quiet (as
S. Paul wills) and meddling with their own business, 1. These. 3. and also in
stead of following after righteousness, faith and love, 2. Timoth. 3.

He that seems most zealous in religion, and refraineth not his tongue, has
but bitterness in steed of heavenly zeal. For whereas, in steed of
gentleness, meekness, patience, mercy, and love, ye find wrath,
fierceness, intemperat rage, uncharitable condemning and slaundering, know for
certainty, that the true zeal is not there. The other cause of men's seducing,
is that in this corrupt age there be many stumbling blocks, and grievous
offenses: where indeed, it is the part and duty of every true Christian man,
beside the taking heed to his own ways, most instantly to offer up prayers
and supplications to God, to entreat him to show mercy and compassion upon
us, by increasing all heavenly graces and gifts of his holy spirit in our most
noble Queen, and in all Governors, both civil and ecclesiastical, that
there may be fervent zeal to purge the house of God, and to take away the
causes of contention, that we may not always seek to devour one an other,
but that unity and concord may flourish, holding this withal, that it is also
every man's duty that will fear God, to give him hearty thanks for the
inestimable treasures and blessings which he has bestowed upon us, by means
of the happy reign of our gracious Sovereign: and to take heed of that
malignant spirit of Brownisme, which would carry us to this wicked opinion,
that she bearing the Sword of God, has done no more for us then an Heathen
Prince might do. For if we have no word of God, no ministry, no Sacraments
nor visible Church, but all idolatrous and antichristian, what has she done,
what honor can she have for defense of the Gospel? This is no small dishonor
and injury to a Christian Prince, thus to diminish the love of the subjects.
The Lord give them repentance, and grace, to cease from such impiety; and let
all men with modesty, reverence, and subjection, and not with reproach and
contempt, seek the redress of abuses at their hands which be in Authority:
and not adventure like Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, to intrude themselves without
calling and warrant from God. They cried out, are not all the Lords people
holy? and therefore Moses and Aaron ye take too much upon ye. The Brownist
proclaymeth, that all the Lords people are free, and therefore freely to deal,
and not to have any thing imposed by any. Be not deceived, but know for
certainty, that they be full and rank Donatists and Anabaptists in part. I
know it is complained of, that there be so many and so diverse Sects and
Heresies daily springing up where the Gospel is preached, for it seems a
foul disgrace both to the Gospel it self, and to the Preachers. There are,
say some, at the least fifty several sects. Behold, say others, how the
people are lead without ground, and have no stay but are carried without end
from one thing to another. What is the cause? is not the preaching? is there
any thing delivered which is certain? are not the fruits of their Sermons,
factions, and Schisms? These speeches do so abash and trouble some, that they
are driven back, and retire into flat Popery, as into a safe haven, which yet
in truth is the gulf of all Schisms and abominable heresies Others are so
much displeased, that they become Atheists, and care not much for any Religion,
though of both they do rather favor the Popery. A third sort there be which
did run, and now stand still and wonder: they know not whether they were
best to go back or forward. Their love and zeal is decayed, and ready
utterly to be quenched. It is wonderful that there should be such blindness in
men, and want of wisdom to consider rightly of all causes and effects. The
Scriptures are clear that light is come into the world, and men love darkness
more then light, because their works be evil. And what follows heerevpon,
because they receive not the love of the truth, that they might be saved: God
does send them strong delusion to believe lies, that they may be damned, 2 Thessalonians. 2. It is the heavy judgment of God upon the wicked world, that Satan
is let loose to seduce and lead into error. Men are worthy of such a plague,
and it does come upon them to the full: for they be not able now to discern
the truth, but do reproach and blaspheme it, seeking the disgrace of such as do
bring it. Moreover, the Scriptures do show, that God has an other purpose in
sending strong delusion, and the efficacy of error, and that is touching his
elect, for they be clogged with the flesh, slow and dull to search out the
truth: they be ready to lean to their own wisdom, and seek not unto God.
When Schisms and Heresies arise, it does awaken them, causes them to search
more diligently, yea, to seek unto God, and to depend wholly upon him for
light and instruction. It causes them to fear and tremble in humility, and
to make precious account of the truth when they have once found it: seeing the
Devil labors so mightily to deprive them of it by quenching the light. I
hear (says S. Paul) that there be Schisms among ye, and I do in part
believe it: for there must be Heresies, that such as are approved, may be made
manifest, 1. Cor. 11. When we see it come to pass, that through the malice and
craft of the Devil and his instruments such confusion does ouerspread all, let
us not love the Gospel the worse, let us not blaspheme it, but know it
stands us upon to be more careful. The blessed Apostles themselves had to
encounter with Heretics and false Apostles, and full cunningly did Satan wind
in himself in their days. When they were taken away, what troops of Heretics
did he send forth? what blasphemies and detestable furies did he utter and
spread by them? how were all the ancient Doctors and holy Fathers in the
Churches set on work to confute them, and to defend the true Christian people
from infection? Why then should we now be daunted? or why should it be any
reproach to the holy Doctrine now more then of old, that the Devil, where any
light is showed, does follow it by and by at the heels, to work disgrace?
Let the ministers of Gods Word look diligently to their flocks, and teach
them the wholesome pure Doctrine, and the way of Sanctification. Let true zeal
spring afresh, which now suffers great contempt, because there is a mad
bedlem risen up, which names her self by her name. There be diverse which cry
out against zeal very naughtely, when it is most certain no man can have
overmuch godly zeal, especially in these days, wherein, who almost has any
hot love for the glory of God, and the salvation of his people? If Christ
should speak, what other sentence can we look for, but that which he uttered
of the Church of Laodicea, Revel. 3. Thou art neither hot nor cold. But let us
come to the matter in hand.

A brief sum of the profession of the Brownists.
_1 WE seek above all things the peace and protection of the most high, and
the kingdom of Christ Jesus our Lord.

2 We seek and fully purpose to worship God aright, as he has commanded in
his holy word.

3 We seek the fellowship and communion of his faithful and obedient
servants, and together with them to enter covenant with the Lord. And by the
direction of his holy spirit to proceed to a godly, free, and right choice of
ministers and other officers by him ordained to the service of his Church.

4 We seek to establish and obey the ordinances and laws of our Savior
Christ, left by his last will and testament to the governing and guiding of his
Church, without altering, changing, innouating, wresting, or leaving out any of
them, that the Lord shall giuevs sight of.

5 We purpose by the assistance of the Holyghost in this faith and order to
lead our lives. And for this faith and order to leave our lives, if such be
the good will and pleasure of our heavenly Father: to whom be all glory and
praise for ever. Amen.

6 And now that our forsaking and utter abandoning these disordered assemblies,
as they generally stand in England, may not seem strange or offensive to any
man, that will judge, or be judged by the word of God: we allege and affirm
them hainouslye faulty, and wilfullye obstinate in these four principal
transgressions.

1 They worship the true God after a false manner, their worship being made of
the invention of man, even of that man of sin, erroneous, and imposed upon
them. 2 Then for that the profane ungodly multitude without the exception of
any one person, are with them received into, and retained in the bosom and
body of their Church, etc. 3 Then for that they have a false and Antichristian
ministry imposed upon them, retained with them, and maintained by them. 4 Then
for that their Churches are ruled by, and remain in subjection unto an
Antichristian and ungodly government, clean contrary to the institution of our
Savior Christ.
G. G. 1 IN my former answer unto these your articles which ye call A brief
sum of your profession, I kept the same order in which they stand. But now I
begin first with your heavy accusation of the four heinous transgressions for
which ye condemn and abandon all the assemblies as they generally stand in
England: and come after unto those former articles, which contain your
association, wherein ye conioyne your selves, and enter into covenant with God
(as ye say) to set up all the ordinances of Christ, for I take this to be the
fittest order. Your syxt article which now must be first, being expressed in
these words. And now that our forsaking and utter abandoning these disordered
assemblies, as they generally stand in England, may not seem strange or
offensive to any man, that will judge or be judged by the word of God: we
allege and affirm them heinouslie faulty, and wilfully obstinate in these
four principal transgressions. To this I answered: That Elias did see outward
idolatry practiced, and saw none which did mislike, and therefore complained
of all. It was an error, but whereas Gods word is embraced, and multitudes
abhor Idolatry, and labor with sorrowful tears to be purged from their
sins, it is an intolerable pride and presumption of men, to set themselves
in Gods judgment seat, and to condemn all of wilful obstinacy. Let it be
showed where ever any, led by Gods spirit have dealt in this sort, and
especially in charging them most falsely, as shall appear.

The Brownists.
HEre you very vehemently charge us with intolerable pride, presumption, and
intrusion into Gods judgment seat, to be void of Gods spirit, to charge and
condemn you most falsely, as you say shall appear. How justly you charge us
with these crimes, or discharge your self, and your assemblies of these
present transgessions upon the scanne of your answers shall appear* etc.

G. G. All such as take upon them to judge and condemn whole assemblies, that
profess the Gospel, and that with slanderous accusations, as* you do, may
right well be charged with intolerable pride, presumption, and intrusion into
Gods judgment seat, seeing the Scriptures do clearly warrant it. For he that
judges one man to be no true Christian, which holds the place of a brother,
and labors to please God, professing the faith soundly in all fundamental
points, either for some errors in judgment, or frailties committed in life,
proudlye aduanceth himself into Gods office, who alone searches the heart,
and tries the raines of the children of men. What shall we say then of those
which condemn whole multitudes, amongst whom there be many unspotted with
gross errors and offenses? But the ground of your doing is from hence, that
such as commit principal transgressions, and be wilfullye obstinate in the
same, the word of God does condemn them. And then ye say, that the
assemblies in England be heinously faulty, and wilfully obstinate in four
principal transgressions. Ye boldly allege and affirm, but ye make proof
neither of the transgressions, nor of the wilful obstinacy. Touching the
transgressions, what mean ye by principal? If ye understand great faults and
gross errors, and hold withal that there is no faith nor regeneration among
those which err grosely, and commit great faults, ye maintain heresy, which
is convinced by infinite places and examples of the Scriptures. The best that
ever were, did know but in part. 1. Cor. 13. The godliest were regenerate but
in part. Romans 7. Of the strongest it was said, who can tell his errors, Psalm.
19. and in many things we sin all, Iam. 3. If Noah, Abraham, Lot, David,
Solomon, Samson* and other holy men, greatly replenished with the holy Ghost
and with faith, did sometime fall into great sins: how many will be the
errors, the divisions, the frailties, and offenses among the multitude in the
church, where, with the stronger, and such as have the greater knowledge and
godliness, there are heaped up together multitudes of weak, and such as be
carnal, and but babes in Christ, besides hipocrites, and countersait brethren?
If by principal transgressions, ye mean only such as be fundamental, then
ye do most falsely accuse the Church of England, which holds not any heresy
or blasphemy against any one ground or principle of the holy Christian faith.
Ye must then either maintain this heresy, which is, that where the true
faith is, there can break forth no great faults, errors, and abuses: or this
absurd manner of speech which afterward ye use, that all errors and
deformities in religion, be heresies, blasphemies, and abominations, or else
confess that with intolerable pride presumption, and intrusion into Gods
judgment seat, ye have taken upon ye to judge and condemn whole
assemblies, which profess the faith of Christ sincerely in all fundamental
points, among whom there be many particular persons which study earnestly to
please God, mourning for their own sins, and are like just Lot, 2. Pet. ^.
vexed and tormented to behold the wickedness of others? And now touching
wilful obstinacy, how will ye prove that to be in all the assemblies, and
in all members of the assemblies of England? If ye say there be apparent
transgressions in which they continue, and therefore they be wilfully
obstinate, and so to be utterly abandoned. I answer, that your conclusion does
not follow, because the continuance in all sorts of errors and offenses, in
such as profess the faith, does not warrant men utterly to cast them out as
Heathen: but where after admonition and conviction, the censure of the Church
is despised. The rule of discipline given by our Savior Christ, makes this
very clear. If thy brother sin against thee, tell him of it between him
and thee alone* If he hear thee, thou have wunne thy brother: if he hear thee
not, take one or two with thee, that by the mouth of two or three witnesses,
every word may be confirmed: If he hear not them, tell it to the Church: if he
hear not the Church, let him be as an Heathen or as a Publican. Math. 18. We
see that private members may not utterly abandon and cast forth any one
brother, that is one which professes the true faith, and for his profession
has the place and dignity of a Christian: nor judge him so wilfully
obstinate, that he must be accounted as an Heathen, until the Church have so
judged and cast him forth. The same orderly course and rule of discipline is
to be observed, in admonishing, accusing, conuincing, condemning, and utter
abandoning any particular assembly, which has the dignity of a Christian
church, and does offend so grievously, and show such obstinacy, that it
deserves so heavy a censure. In a particular Church there be errors and
sins, I will not say in many, but in all, in as much as every one has his
blindness and corruption, erreth and sins continuallye one way or other.
From hence it comes, that of necessity there be always in the Church
diversities of opinions, discord, division, and dissension, with many
corruptions and abuses. For if it be most manifest, that the learnedest and
godliest that lives, does carry with him his errors, defects, and
corruptions: what shall we look for where the multitude is of learned,
unlearned, strong and weak, altogether, how innumerable will the frailties and
corruptions now among all be: whereupon it follows, that the universal
Church cannot rightly cut off and utterly abandon any particular assemblies,
unless it be for errors and abuses which overthrow the faith, and destroy true
Christianity. The precept of S. Paul, in that whereunto we are come, let us
proceed by one rule, to be like minded, Phi. 3. is here to take place. I will
now proceed more particularly. The church of England, even as it generally
stands in the public assemblies, among al godly Churches which know the
faith which she does openly profess and maintain, has the place and dignity
of a sister: They all give unto her the right hand of fellowship, acknowledging
her for a mother in Israel, in as much as she has not been barren, but has
brought forth many dear children to God, and not a few of them crowned with
martyrdom. Behold then the inordinate dealing, and arrogant presumption of you
Brownists. Yea behold even the top of your pride, against God and man, which
professing to set up discipline, and glorying that you suffer for it, do break
and utterly abolish the rules thereof given by Christ, by your utter forsaking
and abandoning all the assemblies in England: for let it be confessed, that
the errors, the sins, the imperfections, the spots, and deformities of our
Church be many, so that she is not in her general estate, so fair as the
fairest of her sisters: yet has she heretofore had, and now has, many noble
children, richlye adorned with heavenly jewels, and precious gifts of learning
knowledge, faith, and godliness. And howsoever the Papists one way, and the
Brownists another way, do aggrauate her crimes with pestilent slanders, yet
shall they never prove, that either in doctrine or manners she is guilty of
any fundamental crime, which separateth from Christ, and destroys the life
and being of a true Church: yet you Brownists, not observing the rule given by
Christ, do utterly abandon and cast forth from their dignity, all our
assemblies in England. For ye have condemned al of wilful obstinacy, eue^ to
particular members: and who has given you this authority to thrust them out
of Gods family, which the whole universal Church cannot rightly do? Who
could ever imagine, that under the pretense of setting up discipline, the
devil should breath such pride into rotten flesh, as utterly to overthrow the
whole substance of it: for whereas all the Churches of Christ in these parts of
the world, do know the estate of our Church, and be able to discern the
greeuousnesse of our errors: yet do they all acknowledge and reverence our
assemblies as holy sisters. And you Brownists, men void of knowledge and
discretion, without authority, without any calling or warrant, even upon a
frantike bravery, and without observing any rule given by Christ Jesus, take
upon ye most presumptuously contrary to the judgment of the Churches, to cast
forth and utterly to abandon the same. What Pope has dealt more proudly in
violating the discipline? If there were but this one thing against you, it were
sufficient to declare your cursed dealing, but your furies are many, first in
your slanderous accusations, which now we come unto.

The first principal crime objected by the Brownists.
The Brownists. THey worship the true God after a false manner: their worship
being made of the invention of man, even of the man of sin, erroneous, and
imposed upon them.

To this I did answer, that our worship is the embracing of the holy Bible: by
the doctrine thereof, we seek to believe in God, to call upon him, and to do
all good works, etc.

The Brow. The first transgression we charge your assemblies with, is that you
worship God after a false manner, your worship being made of the invention of
man, even of the man of sin, erroneous, and imposed upon you. You answer,
your worship is the embracing of the holy Bible. Thus begging the question, you
neither prove your worship by the Bible, nor answer one of the four apparent
reasons, which we bring in our article, where it is false and contrary to the
Bible, etc.

G. G. To the intent that mine answer and your accusation may stand the cleerer
to be seen into, and the better to be judged of, I draw your words into a
syllogism thus.

Whatsoever assemblies worship the true God after a false manner, their worship
being made of the invention of man, even of the man of sin, etc. the same are
not the true Churches of God. But the assemblies as they generally stand in
England, do worship the true God after a false manner, their worship being
made of the invention of man, etc. Therefore the assemblies in England be not
the true churches of God.
I did not, nor do not deny the first part of this argument, the proposition,
so that we understand by false manner of worship, and the same made of the
invention of man, such a false manner as does overthrow the very ground and
foundation of faith, and make an utter separation from the Lord Jesus Christ.
Such as the worship is in popery, where they teach and do many things contrary
to the principles of faith, placing holiness and the worship of God in their
own inventions, and seeking remission of sins, and the merit of eternal
life, in every beggarly supersticious observation and ceremony. But if by false
manner of worship, ye understand every error, fault and corruption, in matters
of religion, which though they be evil and to be condemned, yet overthrow not
the faith nor the very essence of Gods true worship, but be in circumstances,
or in parts that may be maimed, and yet the life remain: then I deny the
proposition as most erroneous, false, and heretical For king David with the
princes, the Preests, the Levites, and people, erred, and that grossly, contrary
to the express law of God, Numb. 7. verse. 9. when they carried the Arc upon a
Cart: yet were they even then the true Church of God. It was a great offense,
that in the days of some good Kings of Judah, the people sacrificed in the high
places, but only to the Lord* 2. Kings. 11. and. 14. 15. They should by Gods
appointment have done it at Jerusalem only: yet were they nevertheless Gods
people. The Passover was a principal part of Gods worship, but they kept it
not so precisely according to the law, of a long time, as they did in the 18.
year of Josias. 2. King. 23. 2. Chron. 35. The Preachers at Corinth did very
evil in building Timber, Straw, and Hay, upon the foundation: and so did the
people which sorted themselves as it were by several companies to follow them.
But yet because they held Christ the foundation in the true doctrine, S. Paul
says, their works should burn, they should suffer loss, nevertheless they
themselves should be saved as it were by fire. 1. Cor. 3.

Now to come unto the second part of your argument, the assumption, which is,
that the Church of England does worship the true God after a false manner,
their worship being made of, etc. I did deny that, by affirming that the
worship of our Church, is the embracing the holy Bible, by the doctrine
thereof, etc* Ye say, I beg the question, and prove not our worship by the
Bible. And I say (if ye call it begging) you beg the question, and would have
that granted unto ye as true, which is most false. For excepting
imperfections, wants, spots, blemishes, and faults, which destroy not the true
worship of God, our Church does worship the Lord aright, without heresy,
blasphemy, or idolatry. The doctrine of our Church is published: if ye can
take exception against any point, to be heresy or blasphemy, bring it forth
that it may be tried by the Bible. Then next ye complain further, that I do
not answer one of those 4. apparent reasons which ye bring, why it is false
and contrary to the Bible. Well then they may now be considered. Thus ye have
noted them with figures over the head, our worship being made of the 1
invention of man, even of the 2 man of sin, 3 erroneous, and 4 imposed upon
us. I know not for what cause they should be called apparent, unless by a
far fetched trope of Metonymie, because they manifest and make apparent your
vanity, and Anabaptisticall error. For the first three be no more but one bare
affirmation of that principal transgression which ye charge us withal. For
all false worship is man's invention, whether it be the invention of the man of
sin, or of any other man, it is all one before God, who respects not
persons, but the wickedness of the sin. Also to be man's invention in Gods
worship, and to be erroneous is all one. For whatsoever man inuenteth in Gods
worship, is erroneous: and whatsoever in the same is erroneous, has been
invented by man. So that the three first are all one bare affirmation, and the
very same with your article. Your Anabaptisticall error is in the fourth: for
ye challenge such a freedom to the Church, as that nothing may be imposed
upon the flocks, no not any thing that the Church governors shall decree by
the word, which does overthrow the discipline in a great part. Then ye
proceed and say, for further manifestation of our worship in particular, let
the book of Common prayer be examined by the word of God: which ye term a
great pregnant idol full of errors, blasphemies, and abominations. If the
book stand to be tried by Gods word, there is no doubt, but as all things done
by men, even the best, it shall be found imperfect. He that will have it to be
no true worship of God, in which there be errors and spots, holds the heresy
of perfection, which is very foul and detestable: for it is as far beyond
our power, to be perfect in Gods worship, as to perform perfect obedience in
the second table of the law. And touching the book of Common prayer, let the
reader consider, it is not the question between us, whether there be faults in
it, great faults, or how many: but whether it be a great pregnant idol, full of
heresies, blasphemies, and abominations? I confess that all men ought with
utter detestation, to shun our worship, if it be such as you accuse it. But
indeed your accusation is false, your slanders are foul and impudent. This
shall appear by following your words as they be set down, where ye name
those blasphemous abominations, which ye charge the book withal, in their
several ranks* Ye ask us where we find in the new Testament our Romish
fasts, our Ember days, Saints eeues, and Lent. I am indeed out of all doubt,
and most assured, that if a man read over, not only the new Testament, but
also both old and new, from the very beginning to the end, he shall never find
any allowance of Romish fasts. I say likewise of the Book of Common prayer,
that there be no Romish fasts in it: and that ye do most injuriously slander
and belie us in matching our Church in this point with the blasphemous synagog
of Rome. For that Antichristian Church, de rogating in all things from the
Cross of Christ, has upon certain days, and at certain times, times,
appointed an abstinence from meats, placing therein the worship of God,
remission of sins, and the merit of eternal life. The Church of England
does utterly condemn this as the doctrine of Devils, 1. Timoth. 4 pronouncing
them enemies to the cross of Christ, which maintain meritorious fasting. We
teach that the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Romans 14. And that there is no holiness in
eating or not eating, but an abstinence whereby we may humble our selves, and
be more fervent in prayer. The politic laws of this land, which appoint that
upon certain days men shall not eat flesh, do it in respect of the
commonwealth, as to maintain Navigations so much the better, by encouraging
men to fish, and for the spare of the breed of young cattle: appointing
moreover a penalty for such as shall take the days to be observed as
meritorious Romish fasts. Therefore let all men here at the first consider,
how sophistically ye do argue: that the Church of England does abstain from
flesh upon ember days, Saints Eues, and in Lent: therefore the Church of
England does maintain and observe Romish fasts. Thus does one crack of your
great ordinance, vanish only into smoke. Then ye say, your idol feasts, your
Alhallowes, Candlemas, several Lady days, Saints days, and dedicating
Churches unto Saints. Here also ye thunder out terror, as if the Church of
England did worship idols, and celebrate feasts in the honor of false gods:
and yet all is but a stark lie, and a wicked slander. And I would wish all men
to observe the boldness and eloquence which ye have in this vain. For
whereas the synagog of Antichrist, denying the only mediation of our blessed
Lord Jesus, did set up the Saints as mediators, did pray unto them, worship
them, celebrate holy days in their honor, and dedicate churches unto them:
the Church of England for these and such like abominations, has separate her
self from them, teaching by the holy Scriptures, that there is one God, and
one mediator between 1. Timoth.
God and man, the man Jesus Christ. That the same only true God is to be
worshipped alone, and called upon through the only mediation of his beloved
Son, in whom (...)ath. 4. (...)al. 51. (...)ath. 3.
he is well pleased. That Saints are not to be worshipped, neither the blessed
Virgin, nor any other, nor no days to be celebrated in their honor, nor
Churches dedicated unto the^: how bitterly then do you sclaunder? Ye will
reply, that the Saints days be kept in our Church: yea but ye must show that
they be kept in their honor, which ye shall not be able to do, seeing the
contrary is manifest, the Statute expressing that our Church does call the^
Holidays, not for the Saints sakes, but for the holy exercises used upon them
in public assemblyes. Diverse Churches also among us are called by the names of
those Saints which they were dedicated unto, but to say that we do therefore
dedicate Churches unto them, is very ridiculous. In the City Athens there was a
place of Judgment which bare the name of Mars, S. Luke calls (...)s. 17.
it by the same name, does he therefore dedicate it also unto that heathen God
of battle? When we call S. Peter's Church, or Paul's Churchyard, it is but to
distinguish them by the names by which they are commonly known and called.
Then follow our Comminations, Rogations, Purifications. Touching Comminations,
they be a part of the Canonical Scripture which is to be read in the Church.
Rogations, I take to be the compassing in of the limits and bounds of Parishes,
which is commanded only to avoid contention and strife that might grow, and
there is nothing in the book of Common Prayer touching these, that ever I
could find. Purifications are annexed, only to make up your riming figure: for
neither the book, nor the doctrine of the Church of England, does speak of
any Purification, but only in the blood of the Lamb. There is a Thanksgiving
prescribed for Women after Childbirth, but neither for Jewish Purification, or
Popish Superstition, and therefore not in such sort to be condemned. After
comes in our Tithes* Offerings, Mortuaries. For the Tithes and Mortuaries, I do
not find them once named in the book, the Offerings in deed are. But ye will
say that is no great matter, seeing they be in our Church. That is true, but
yet they are but for maintenance of the Ministry, and not as a matter tied of
necessity unto a Priesthood, as in the time of the Law: and if they were,
the error could not be fundamental. In the next place are brought in, our
manner of visiting the sick, and howsling them with the Sacrament, our
Absolution, blasphemous Dirges, and Funeral Sermons over and for the dead.
There is prescribed a manner of visiting the sick, and so is there in the
leiturgies of some other Churches that profess the Gospel, but where have ye
seen it practiced, or the practice urged by those that have the government of
our Church, at their hands which are able and diligent Pastors? Whereby your
injurious dealing may appear, in charging all the assemblies as they generally
stand in England with matters which the greater part do not practice, nor yet
are required. For if the sick man be by the Minister of the word instructed,
exhorted, comforted, and strengthened in faith and repentance, yea every way
prepared to depart joyfully in the Lord, it is that which the book aims at,
neither is there any more required, although he use no prescript form set
down. By your phrase of howsling with the Sacrament, ye would make the simple
believe, that the Popish Howsling is retained among us. This is but a false
kind of packing, seeing our Church utterly condemns all the wicked
blasphemous corrupt doctrine of the Papists touching the Lords Supper: and also
denies that a man is of necessity to receive this Sacrament at his death. If
yes reply, that howsoever we teach, yet the book implies a necessity, which
appears by that it does appoint a private Communion. I answer, that even the
book does deny it to be a matter of necessity, and does appoint it but to
relieve the trouble which might arise in weak consciences through the want
thereof, for these be the words of the book: The Curates shall diligently from
time to time, but specially in the Plague time, exhort their Parishioners to
the often receiving in the Church, of the holy Communion of the body and blood
of our Savior Christ, which if they do they shall have no cause in their
sudden visitation, to be disquieted for lack of the same. And if any sick
person that would receive this Sacrament, has any impediment that he can not,
the Book wills the Minister to instruct him, that if he do truly repent him
of his sins, and steadfastly believe that Jesus Christ has suffered death
upon the Cross for him, and shead his blood for his redemption, earnestly
remembering the benefits he has thereby, and giving him hearty thanks
therefore, he does eat and drink the Body and Blood of our Savior Christ
profitably to his souls health, although he do not receive the Sacrament with
his mouth. How maliciously then do you charge the assemblies in England with
howsling the sick with the Sacrament, when all the learned, faithful,
diligent Pastors do, as the book requires, exhort those that be of their
flocks to the often receiving of this holy Sacrament in the public assembly,
as the due place for public seals, and the people by instruction being grown
so strong, that they do not in their sickness require it, and so in the most
Congregations which are well taught, the thing is not practise^? The Sinagog of
Antichrist devised a purgatory which is blasphemous against the blood of
Christ. They had indeed their Dirges, even blasphemous prayers for the dead.
That Purgatory do we utterly deny as a wicked invention, we condemn prayer
for the dead, and therefore, where ye term those prayers which are read at
burials blasphemous Dirges over and for the dead, ye are more then impudent in
lying. Funeral Sermons I find not enjoined by the book, nor commanded by
any Law. Ye add further, our corrupt manner of administering the Sacraments,
the Font, the Cross in Baptism, Baptism by women, Gossippings, the
blasphemous Collects that we use unto this Sacrament, Byshopings, with all the
heretical Collects of the Book, which, as ye say, is a wearines unto ye to
repeat, though not to us both to tolerate and defend. When ye show some
reason, why the Font is an abomination, I shall know what to say. Touching
the Cross, it must needs be confessed that it was blasphemously and horribly
abused in Popery, they ascribing unto it power to drive out and expel Devils,
and worshipping it with divine honor. In my judgment also, the holy Church of
God, within short time after the blessed Apostles, and the reverend godly
Pastors, did offend, in taking overmuch liberty to ordeine Ceremonies
Symbolicall, as that and such like, yet no doubt very reverend godly learned
men, led by the example of those holy Fathers of old, have judged it lawful
for the Church to ordeine such Ceremonies. Touching the Baptism by women, it
is condemned both by the chief governors in our Church* and others, and is
not practiced unless it be among the popish and supersticious ignorant sort.
By Gossyppings, I suppose ye mean the witnesses at baptism, a thing used in
the best reformed churches, and thought to be expedient: so that ye do not
herein condemn the Church of England, but all Churches* Bishoping of children
is little practiced, for unless the people require it by offering their
children few Bishops do urge them thereunto, only this excepted, that they be
taught and instructed in the Catechism. The blasphemous collects which we use
in the Sacrament, and all the heretical collects of the book, do trouble ye
very sore, and weary ye to repeat. But if it pleased God, I would ye were as
weary of lying and slaundering, as ye should be in seeking in all the collects
of the book, if ye were bound to seek and to find, I will not say some
faults, seeing all things framed by the best men, may have imperfections and
faults: but some blasphemies or heresies. If ye have any regard at all what ye
say, gather your wits together, consider what is blasphemy, and what is
heresy, and then note the collect where it is, and what it is* There shall
never any man be able to prove, that the Church of England does tolerate,
much less defend, either blasphemy or heresy. Yet you, as if your words were
true as the Gospel, clap your wings, and crow, saying, but this candle may
not be lighted, least the people should see into the abhominabl^ ingredients,
which you their Antichristian ministers do give them, or rather sell them, in
the whore of Babilons cup. All this is but your foul tongue, which is no way
so eloquent, as in rolling out slanderous accusation of blasphemies, heresies,
and abominations, with such like. Moreover, whereas the case stands thus in
the church of England: that there is controversy about the Book: and that one
part does approve all things in the same as good and alowable, or at least as
tolerable, the other condemn certain things as corruptions, and such as
need reformation. I would know how ye could abandon all the assemblyes? to
this ye make a double answer, first, that using a part, they do homage to the
whole. This is a foolish answer, void of all reason, for can we not praise the
good things in a man, but we shall allow his faults and imperfections? Your
second answer is this: Neither can the cunningest of ye all make the best part
of it other then a piece of Swines flesh, an abomination to the Lord. Who
could imagine that such a frenzy might take hold of any, that in mad fury they
should not spare after a sort to strike at God, and to blaspheme that which is
most holy? for ye know right well* that there is in the book of Common
Prayer, much of the sacred Canonical Scripture, there is the Lords prayer, the
ten Commandments, with many other parts and sentences, there be the
articles of the Christian faith, are all these become Swines flesh an
abomination to the Lord? Let not simple men wonder that ye are bold to
proclaim all the Ministers of the Gospel within this land, to be the marked
servants of Antichrist, when ye dare presume to set your stinking brand of
pitch upon the most holy things of God. Ye will here cry out of injury, and
say that ye esteem all those parcels of the sacred Canonical Scriptures, in
themselves to be holy and pure. What is it then which turns them into Swines
flesh, and makes them an abomination to the Lord? is it because they be bound
together, and make one book with the heretical Collects? then take you heed,
least being in prison, and fettred with heretics, ye be turned also into
Heretics. If ye say, it is our abuse which turns so holy things into Swines
flesh, I answer, that the abuse of holy things is abominable, but the things
themselves remain undefiled: and ye must remember that we deal touching the
parts of the book, but abuse is no part thereof. When ye say the best part
thereof is no other then a piece of Swines flesh, it can not be transferred
from the parts unto the abuses. If it were granted unto ye, which yet is to
be denied as most fantastical, that all read prayer offered up unto God as a
sacrifice, is Idolatry: nevertheless your saying is wicked and blasphemous,
seeing that the reading is not any part of the book, neither does it pervert
or defile the things themselves which are read. Thus your first accusation,
that we worship the true God after a false manner, is with false sclaunder, and
furious outrage of speech, crying out of Idolatry, blasphemies, and
abominations, when as ye can show no one ground of the holy Religion and
worship of God, which is not holden sound and entire among us, only ye rippe up
corruptions and spots in Ceremonies, orders, and circumstances, which touch not
the foundation, but are such as men may err in, and yet be Gods dear
children, and true woorshippers.

The Brow* John. 4. 23. 24. God is a Spirit, and must be worshipped in spirit
and truth.



The reasons why we disalow of read prayer, in stead of spiritual prayers,
that though they may be read for meditation, as any other men's writs, yet is it
Idolatry to offer up to God such manner of sacrifices either privately, or in
public assemblyes.

1 No apocripha must be brought into the public assemblyes, for there only
the lively voice of Gods own graces, of the word, and the spirit, must be
heard in the public assemblyes. And more lawful is it to use Homelyes, then
read prayers unto God.

2 To do any thing in the worship of God without the testimony of his word, is
sin: but there is no ground in the Scripture for such manner of praying, as
having no witness of the word, whether God be pleased with them, or no.

3 Admit that it were a thing indifferent, as we call it, for the form of
prayer, which is but a mockery, to call reading in stead of spiritual calling
on God, to be but altering the form, or changing the manner, whereas in deed
it is changing the work of the Spirit into an Image, or Idol. Yet is it a
bondage, and breaking of that liberty, which Christ has purchased for us, and
therefore most detestable.

4 Because true prayer must be of faith and knowledge uttered with the heart,
and lively voice unto God, I am persuaded it is presumptuous ignorance to bring
a book to speak for us such things, as we could not otherwise utter in Gods
sight.

5 To worship the true God after another manner then he has taught, is
Idolatry: but he has commanded us to come unto him being heavy laden, with
contrite hearts, yea to cry out unto him in the grief of our soul, yea and as
S. Paul says, The Spirit helps our infirmities with groaning and sighing
that can not be expressed, and how dare we then being a dead tree unto God, to
stand reading of the same in stead of faithful petitions, quenching the Spirit.

6 We must strive in prayer with continuing, with feruency, without wavering,
which we can not do upon a book.

7 We must call upon God in prayer at all times, as the necessities of the
time requires, not making a babbling of many things, whereof we have not any
present necessity: but stinted service cannot be so applied, so it is but a
babbling of vain repetitions.

8 All the devises of Antichrist, though it were otherwise lawful, not being
necessary, ought to be abhorred of true Christians, especially such relics as
maintain superstition, but to read other men's books to God in stead of true
prayers, and stinted service, were devised by Antichrist, and maintain
superstition, and an Idol Ministry: therefore ought to be disallowed.

The prayers and worship of such Ministers and people as stand under a false
government, are not acceptable, nor have any promise in Gods sight, not only
because they ask amiss, but because they keep not his commandments.

G. G. Read prayer is one chief thing for which ye condemn our worship as
Idolatrous and most detestable, and for that cause to be annexed unto this
first accusation.

God is a Spirit, and must be worshipped in spirit and in truth.

The Brow. THE Scripture does most briefly and pithily sever all fantastical
devises of man, from the pure and sincere worship of God, prescribed in his
Word. For seeing all flesh is grass, and the wisdom thereof foolishnes with
God, it must needs follow, that me^ earthly minded should please themselves in
such pretended religion, as agrees nothing with the divine nature of God. It
is needful then in the worship of God, that we thus always consider with our
selves, we have to do with God himself, and not with men, who is so far
differing from us, that those things which are most easy, and pleasing unto us,
is a wearisomnes and abominable sacrifice in his sight: and although God
dwells in the heavens in his divinity incomprehensible, yet have we a
perfect rule, whereby we know what is agreeing to his will, namely, his written
word, for that we may be here taught 1. That all hipocrisy in such things as
he has commanded, be carefully avoided. 2. That we attempt not to do any
thing in his worship, whereof we have not special warrant from his word, of
which sort we take all manner of stinted prayers offered up as a worshipping of
God, disagreeing from the nature of God (which sees in secret) and so agrees
with our fleshly nature, that we can not pray as we ought, and so we seek to
help our selves with such a broken staff, wearying our selves with our own
devises, without any promise to receive blessing thereby. And therefore where
you affirm, that a man may pray in spirit and truth, with sighs, and groans,
proceeding from faith, when prayer is read, that is not true, for if their
sighs came from faith, it would minister matter and prayer without a book,
yea no doubt, a troubled mind is the pen of a ready writer; and to worship
God in spirit, is, when the inward faith of the heart brings forth true
invocation, and it is then in truth, when simply it agrees with Gods word. But
you would teach men in stead of pouring forth their hearts, to help themselves
upon a book, yea, to fetch their cause of sorrowing and sighing from an other
man's writing, even in the time of their begging at Gods hand. We grant, that
prayers conceived without faith, are not acceptable, yet may the same be called
spiritual, because it is the gift of the Spirit, though not sanctified in him
that so hipocritically mocketh with God. But what makes this to our question
of stinted read prayers in Gods worship? But say you, to make read prayers only
to serve for meditation, is false doctrine, wherein, me think you offer great
injury, for we affyrmed that it had such use as other of men's writings have.
But it seems you make little conscience to slander us, and here you fall
into an error your self, affirming, and going about to prove, that reading of
prayers is not for meditation at all: the proof you bring, is, that Christ
said not to his disciples, when ye meditate, say thus, Our Father, but when you
pray, say thus* etc. Where, beside that you make no difference between your
own Liturgies, and the holy word of God, which is not of any private
interpretation: Besides this I say you seem to prove, that the Lords prayer,
and all other prayers in the Canonical Scripture serve not at all for
meditation. Well, you have hereby made the matter apparent, that read prayers
upon a book are as acceptable, as faithful prayers conceived by the spirit,
and uttered with understanding. You say that prayers read or conceived, being
void of faith, is but vain babbling: we say the same, but what of this
forsooth? you cannot see by what censure it can be called Idolatry. If false
worship cannot be called Idolatry, let the first and second Commandments be
witnesses, so that it is not our pens, but the pen of Gods own finger that
has judged all devises of man, and hipocriticall worship of Idolatry. And
although all the breaches of the first Table were not Idolatry, yet you know
that to worship our own devises, is Idolatry. Is not prayer a special part of
the first Commandment, and our Savior Christ comprehends all the four
first Commandments in this, that we love God above all: the transferring of
any part whereof from God, must needs be idolatry. But say you, if we do thus
and hold withal, that no idolator can be saved, the^ surely are all lost, etc.
This is country divinity, if the Salt have lost his savor, what should be
sesoned therewith, we hold that no idolator ca^ be saved without true
repentance, and renouncing their sin so far as God shall show it the^, yea
and crave with David for pardon for their hidden and secret sins. And do you
think any man living is void of idolatry, either inwardly or outwardly, so
long as we live, or that we can keep any one commandment in perfection? The
Lord therefore give us repentance: for in some things we sin all. Methinks this
should not be, M. Giffords language to be so ignorant in the principles of
religion, and if you have waighed our arguments no better then your preface, it
shall be grievous to me to make any answer.

To condemn and overthrow read prayer, ye bring, as the ground or foundation
of all your matter, this sentence* God is a spirit, and to be worshipped in
spirit. John. 5. This scripture indeed is clear and strong, to cut down all
carnal worship as disagreeing from the nature of God. And if any do
maintain, that the very bodily action of reading prayer, is the worship of
God, it may fitly be alleged against them. But to apply it in that manner
which you do against red prayer, is frivolous, unless (as I say) ye could
prove, that a man cannot pray by the spirit of God, with sighs and groans
proceeding from faith, when the prayer is read upon the book, or uttered after
a prescript form. To this you reply with diverse arguments. The first is, that
if the sighs and groans were of faith, it would minister matter of prayer
without a book. This reason by a connection is drawn from, and depends
wholly upon the force and effect of faith, to minister matter of prayer. It is
to be framed thus. If the prayer with sighs and groans were of faith, it would
minister matter without a book: but the matter of their prayer, with sighs
and groans, is not ministered without a book, therefore it is not of faith. to
make this argument strong and sufficient from the connection of faith, and the
lively efficacy thereof to utter prayer, ye must add two things, the one,
that faith is perfect unto this efficacy, to minister matter of prayer, and
needs no help. The other, that the effect and power of faith, to minister
matter of prayer, cannot stand nor be joined with any outward helps. Unless I
say ye add these two, with the cupling together faith and the effect, which
are both of them heretical, there can be no necessary consequence. To make it
yet more manifest, let it be drawn into an other form of syllogysme* thus.
That which has power and efficacy of it self to minister matter of prayer*
need not any outward help, nor cannot touching the utterance of matter in
prayer, stand with any outward help: But faith has force and efficacy in it
self to minister matter of prayer: Therefore faith needs not the help of a
book, nor cannot stand with any outward help, touching the utterance of
matter in prayer: And so consequently, the sighs and groans in prayer red,
cannot be of faith. This consequence shall never be brought in, unless ye
frame your argument after that sort. So that both these fantastical errors be
included in your speech, the one, that faith touching the efficacy to minister
matter of prayer is so absolutely perfect, that it needs no outward help,
the other, that it cannot touching prayer stand with any outward help. I do
acknowledge that there be no sighs nor groans, nor any prayers that can be
regarded of God, but such as come from faith. I do also hold, that faith is
not in any, without some efficacy and power to utter some matter of prayer.
But now we must consider the degrees thereof: for doubtless if there were in
men a perfection of knowledge, of faith, and of quickness, there should need
no outward help: but the best come far short of that. Such as approach
nearest there unto, need so much the less any outward help. But the most are
ignorant, weak, short of memory, dull and slow, and need all helps to stir
them up, and to direct them, even as children, that are to be stayed up and led
by the hand. Prayer indeed is a spiritual work, proceeding from faith, which
is a spiritual gift, but yet it does stand with outward means and helps. The
Holy Ghost alone does work faith in man, but yet it comes by hearing, Romans
10, Faith brings forth prayer, but we must consider, that as the same faith
comes by hearing, and is grounded upon the word, so is it cherished,
supported, increased, continued, and quickened in efficacy, and made more
forcible unto every good work by those helps of outward means. For further
confirmation ye add, yea no doubt, a troubled mind is the pen of a ready
writer. Let it stand in form of syllogism thus. That which is the pen of a
ready writer, needs not the help of a book. But a troubled mind is the pen
of a ready writer: therefore it needs not the help of a Book. The
proposition is true, if by the pen of a ready writer ye understand an absolute
perfection of knowledge, cheerfulness, direction, memory and utterance. But
that was not in Moses, Daniel, Paul, or any other. Therefore here again ye
run upon the rock of an heretical opinion of perfection. Your assumption,
where ye say: no doubt, a troubled mind is the pen of a ready writer, is
utterly false, and your bold affirmation without scripture is not enough,
seeing there be many so perplexed and confused in the trouble of their mind,
and oppressed with ignorance, that they cannot pray, nor know not what to
utter: which, when they have instruction and consolation ministered unto them by
some godly man, or if that chief help fail, by reading upon a book, pour
forth tears and supplications.

Your next reason is in many words, which yet I will repeat. To worship God (
say you) in spirit, is when the inward faith of the heart brings forth true
invocation: and it is then in truth, when it simply agrees with Gods word. But
you would teach men in steed of pouring forth their hearts, to help
themselves upon a book, yea to fetch the cause of their sighing and sorrowing
from an other man's writing, even in the time of their begging at Gods hand. I
will also draw it into a syllogism, to the end it may the better be judged
of. None worship God in spirit, but they which from the inward faith of the
heart bring forth true invocation, that is, such as simply agrees with the
word of God. But all such as read upon the book the prayer which they pray,
fetch the cause of their sorrowing from an other man's writing in the time that
they pray, and do not from the inward faith of the heart, bring forth true
invocation. Therefore none that read their prayer upon the book, do worship
God in spirit. The proposition I assent unto as sound and good: for it is no
true invocation except it agree with Gods word. It is not to worship in spirit,
unless it proceed from faith out of the heart. But your assumption, which is,
that all that read the prayer which they pray, do not from the inward faith
of the heart, bring forth true invocation, I cannot allow, seeing ye bring
nothing for proof thereof, but that which is most frivolous. For whereas ye
say in the first part of your confirmation, that we would have men in steed of
pouring forth their hearts, to help themselves upon a book, ye speak
untruly and foolishly. For we wish men to use the help of a book that they
may the better pour forth their hearts to God. Being such as are not otherwise
thoroughly able.

The next part of your confirmation, is even to as great purpose, when ye say,
We would have men fetch the cause of their sighing and sorrowing, from an other
man's writing, even in the time of their begging at Gods hand. For how fondly
do ye make that to be the cause, which does but manifest the cause? for the
cause of all sighing and sorrowing, is the sin and misery which is within
us: which we may the better behold and express by instruction. I have grievous
sin, and wrath belonging thereunto, which I do partlye know, and can make
some moan therein, and pray: I come into the public assembly, where I hear
the minister preach the word, which does more fully lay open and display my
sin and misery: I am hereby driven into deeper sighing and sorrowing, with
vehement prayer in my heart unto God: shall it be said, that I do now fetch
the cause of my sorrowing from an other man's speech in the time of my begging
at Gods hands? If not, then why should I be said to fetch the cause from the
book, which also does instruct me? the like may be said, when the
congregation does pray with their pastor: they fetch not the cause of their
sighing from him: but are stirred up by him. Your next words stand thus. The
reasons why we disalow of read prayers, in steed of spiritual prayers, that
though they may be read for meditation, as any other men's writs* yet is it
Idolatry, to offer up to God such manner of sacrifices, either privately, or
in the public assemblies. Ye are very angry, that I termed your reasons, by
which ye oppose read prayer unto spiritual prayer, spiritual fantasies. But
take you heed that they grow not to be worse. Ye are also grieved, that I call
them your stuff, but how good stuff it is, let the pure word try. I said it
is false doctrine to make read prayer serve only for meditation. My proof was
this, that Christ says not, when ye meditate, but when ye pray, say thus, Our
Father which art in heaven: and here ye fling about as if ye had Beez. For
first ye exclaim that I make small conscience to sclaunder ye, because I said
ye make read prayer serve only for meditation, which is false doctrine.
Meditation (as I take it) comprehends all that is done in studying and musing
when one reads, the praying is another. If ye can show a third use when one
reads prayer, I will confess an error, otherwise, though ye have not
expressed the word only, yet ye have in effect uttered so much, when ye say
read prayer is not to be prayed. Secondly, ye charge me to deny that read
prayer serves for meditation at all, which is in deed false doctrine: because
I said Christ says not when ye meditate, but when ye pray say thus, Our Father
which art etc. Do I not say truly that Christ says not when ye meditate, but
when ye pray, say thus, Our Father which art etc. How can you then but like
Spiders suck that poison from thence? Thirdly, ye accuse me, that I make no
difference between our own Leiturgies and the Canonical Scripture, which is
a most frivolous cavil, seeing our question is about reading of prayer,
whether it be Canonical Scripture, or framed from thence according to the
rules of godly prayer. Thus have ye answered nothing at all unto that
commandment which I alleged given by our Savior, to use that prescript
form of prayer, but only by shift and cavil. Then ye go about to prove that
every sin against the first Table of the Law is Idolatry, but with no show
of reason. And here ye scoff because I said, if every sin that is against
the first Table be Idolatry, who shall be saved? and ye demand who is free
from Idolatry? an absurd speech: for the Scripture does not call the godly
either murderers, thieves, idolaters, or such like. I thought we had not
reasoned about the relics of sin which remain in the best so long as they
live here, but of such gross idolatry as a Church is to be condemned and
forsaken which is defiled therewith. But seeing ye confess that all men be
idolaters, that is, touching the remnants of sin, it must needs follow that
there is no Church free from all spots, for if all the parts and members be
defiled, the whole can not be clean. This does overthrow all the arguments
which ye bring to condemn the Church of England, which have no force unless
ye will maintain a perfection: for if a Church and every member in it can not
but of necessity be spotted and defiled with some remnants of idolatry, even
by your own confession: then can ye not reason thus, this is a fault, it is
idolatry, therefore this or that assembly which is spotted is no true Church,
but to be forsaken. But ye must stand to prove that the idolatry is so
gross, that it destroys the faith, overthrows Gods true worship, and so
destroys the very life and being of a Church. Thus much about your preface,
now follow your arguments.

No apocrypha is to be brought into the public assemblyes. ^^gum. 1.
All read prayer is apocrypha. Therefore no read prayer is to be brought into
the public assemblyes. In my first answer I did deal only with the
assumption or second part of this Argument, affirming that I could not see how
it can be proved, and showing sundry absurdities that would follow; as namely,
that a prayer of the Canonical Scripture being read when one prays, should
become apocrypha, etc. But you replied that those absurdities grow from my
mistaking your words, and I saw it was so, for our question being about the
reading of prayer, and not about the matter it self, I took it, that although
ye hold the Lords prayer, and other prayers in the holy Scripture to be
Canonical in themselves, yet being read to become apocrypha, because ye say
all read prayer is apocrypha, and did not express it with this restraint, all
read prayer framed by men, is apocrypha. I must now take the Argument as you
say your meaning is, and deal with both the parts thereof. First then touching
the proposition, no apocrypha is to be brought into the public assemblies,
what can be more false? Apocrypha is opposed unto Canonical, if nothing may be
brought into the Church but the Canonical Scriptures, then the Sermons and
prayers of the pastors and teachers are to be banished. I know your meaning is
not at all to exclude these, although your words (taking apocrypha as it is in
use among us) do in deed shut them forth, and not only them, but any
paraphrase upon the Scripture, as the Psalms in Meter* Now to your assumption,
which says, all read prayer is apocrypha: first, it is false touching the
Psalms and the Lords prayer, which be Canonical when they be prayed. Then
further, I see no fitness in applying the name apocrypha unto our speech to
God, though it be used for that which is not his undoubted word to us. For by
what name opposite to apocrypha, will ye call those prayers which ye do allow?
ye will not call them Canonical, this Argument therefore is false and frivolous.

To this I answer at the first, that it is great audacitie to affirm, that
there is no warrant of the word for read prayer, when there be sundry
testimonies to warrant the same, unless ye will make a difference between
that which a man reads upon the book, and that which he has learned out of
the book. Further I said, I do not remember that ever I have read in the holy
Scriptures, that God commands the prayer shall be read upon the book: for he
commends this diligence in all his people, that they should thoroughly learn
to understand, not only the matters, but also the sentences and phrases, which
his spirit taught his holy Prophets and servants to utter in their prayers, and
that this is the reason why there be so many prayers prescribed in the book of
the Psalms, and in other books of the Scriptures: that whatsoever thing
befall a man, wherein he is in the fervent affection of his heart to pray unto
the Lord, if he have in memory the speeches which holy men in such distress
uttered, it is a great help unto him, if not, he may help his memory with a
book. To this you reply, that touching the use of sentences and phrases of
scripture, you could easily consent, but that ye perceive I would not agree
with ye in certain points, the first, that this is required only at the hands
of Gods children, with promise to be heard and accepted. I wonder with what
eyes ye can see that I would not agree with ye in this thing, I put ye out of
doubt, I hold assuredly, that none have promise to be heard and accepted but
Gods children, though they use never so much the sentences of Scripture in
their prayers. The first hinderance of your consent is removed. The second is,
that ye see I would not agree with ye, that the same spirit does now teach Gods
children to pray, which taught the Prophets and holy men in other ages. I
profess unto ye, that I hold it a wicked opinion, to deny that the same spirit
does now teach Gods children to pray, which taught the Prophets, etc. and so
the second let is removed. In deed here you and I dissent, that I hold, that
as our faith is wrought by the word of God, so is it nourished and quickened
unto prayer, and every good work by the same, and that the holy Ghost has not
only taught matters by the Prophets and Apostles, but also speeches and phrases
sit for to utter ye same. And you hold that because the same spirit now
teaches to pray, which taught the Prophets and Apostles that either we may
not, or we need not use their* speeches. The third stop remains, which is,
that I take it, God should be delighted with words and sentences. You greatly
mistake it and do but cavil: for I showed my mind, not that God would regard
words and sentences, but we should be helped and comforted by them. Thus the
third and last hinderance is also removed, and now you may consent that in our
prayers we may use the prescript forms, sentences, and phrases of the word of
God. To my next words, where I said, the reason why there be so many prayers
prescribed in the book of the Psalms, is: that whatsoever distress befall a
man, etc. you reply: ye think I halt greatly, that our question being about
Idolatrous leiturgies, I seek to shroud my self under the use of Canonical
scripture. Indeed this would be a learned question, whether idolatrous
leiturgies be idolatry? or whether it be not idolatry to pray an idolatrous
prayer? who would look for so childish a shift? you know our question is about
the reading of a prayer when one prays? And if it be not idolatry to use the
prayers of the scriptures, even in their prescript form, then all read prayer
offered to God as a sacrifice, is not idolatry. I reason thus: it is not
idolatry to pray the Lords prayer, or any other prescript form delivered in
the Canonical scriptures: therefore it is no idolatry to use a prescript form
of prayer, which is framed after the rules of true prayer: as to ask of God
alone, through the only mediation of his son, and for no matters, but such
as he has promised to give: Ye say it is not true doctrine, that those
Psalms and Scriptures were written that we should use in our prayers the words
there set down. Your reason is because there be other uses. I do confess
there be other uses, but that might yet be a special reason, why there be so
many prayers prescribed. Then ye say ye do not disalow the speaking,
according to the word of God, but that we might not affect so much the phrases
of speech, as the true feeling of our wants, He that has not the feeling of
his wants in prayer, but affects phrases, is but an hypocrite. But ye are in
a vain opinion, if ye think the use of the phrases and sentences of
scripture, being fitly applied, is any hinderance either to the feeling or
opening our wants, because where skill or memory fails I would have them use
the help of a book. I am, you fear, papistically affected unto words and
sentences. I have already showed, that this is not to affect the words and
sentences, but the instruction, the support and quickening which our faith
receives by those words and sentences. And this doctrine is not as you charge
it, disagreeing from the counsel of the Holy ghost, which wills us to
continue in prayer, to strive in prayer, nor contrary to David, which said, O
my soul, etc* nor to Paul, who teaches that the spirit helps our
infirmities, and makes request for us. But your doctrine, which says, we must
continue in prayer, therefore we may not use such helps: the spirit does help
our infirmities, and makes request for us, therefore we may not be helped by
the prayers, or by the words of the holy scripture, is fantastical, for the
Holy ghost does help our infirmities, and teach us to pray, by the written
word. You think it were hypocritical worshipping of God, to take help by a
book, when we know not what to ask. If a man know not what to ask, he shall
be able to understand little by the book. But a man may know what he should
ask, and yet not so well able to express the same without help, both for
memory and feruencie. Stinted prayers (ye say) are as Cushions for idle
papists, hypocrites, and Atheists. I grant that such people do abuse all the
best things, shall the godly therefore be debarred from the use? I do teach,
that whether a man of himself pray without a book, or upon a book, if he
pray not in spirit with faith, he does but offer the sacrifice of fools, his
prayer is abominable. Therefore it is but your lavish speech, when ye say I
give liberty to the lame sacrifices: on the contrary, if a man pray in faith
upon a book, or without a book, it is true prayer, and such as God hears.
God will have no strange fire put upon his Altar, say you. I grant it is so:
but prayers framed by the rules of scripture, and offered up in faith, are not
strange fire. Ye wish all men to take heed of this crafty doctrine, and I
wish all men not to be to hasty in receiving new fantastical opinions* Your
answer unto those two Psalms, which I noted, were given as a prescript form
of prayer to be used of the Church, and the form of blessing prescribed to the
Preests to bless the people withal, Number. 6* is more then frivolous. For
touching the first, which is 92* appointed for the Sabbath, ye grant it was
at their meeting to magnify the praises of God, and many other Psalms. But
ye demand, what this makes for stinted leiturgies, papisticall and
erroneous, imposed, etc. I say, it makes nothing at all for that which is
papisticall and erroneous. But it proves that all read prayer is not
idolatry, and that it is no stinting of the spirit, to use a prescript form
of prayer. These fantasies of yours are first confuted thereby. Then next I
argue thus. If I may use a whole prayer of the scripture, and no idolatry,
then a prayer that is composed by the rules of the scriptures may be used, and
no idolatry. You deny, that the argument drawn from the use of the Psalms
does follow, because prayers composed by men, are not equal to the Canonical
scripture: and so shut out all prayers, if ye mark well what ye say, that
are framed by the Preacher, For let them be holy and good, yet ye may not set
them as equal with the Canonical scriptures. Again ye deny the argument, by
affirming, that singing of Psalms was no part of prayer, but only for
instruction and meditation: ye take upon ye to prove this a little after, and
when I come to that, ye shall have answer. The Psalm. 102. ye say was not a
prayer of the Church, because it is said, O Lord hear my prayer, and not, O
Lord hear our prayer: a poor shift, when usually the church speaks of her
self in the singular number. Touching the blessing: ye say, that form of
words was not to tie them to use those words, but after that manner, which is
manifestly false.

Touching the orders of singers appointed by David, I alleged it to no such
end, as you seem to draw it unto. But that in singing the Psalms, they did
read them upon the book. Here now ye do not only deny, that singing of
psalms was any part of prayer, but also ye will prove it by the testimony of
S. Paul to the Ephesians, and to the Collofs. where he exhorts the^ to speak
unto themselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs. It is a foul
audacitie, contrary to the manifest word of truth, to affirm that the Psalms
were not sunge to God, seeing that not only the speeches be directed in a
multitude of places unto him: but also the Holy Ghost does call upon men in
this wise. Sing unto God, sing a new song unto him, sing praises unto the
Lord. But beside this you go further, for in both places by you cited, ye
leave out the latter part of the sentence, which is, that they should sing unto
the Lord with grace in their hearts. Let the reader peruse the places, and
judge what kind of trick this is. It is most clear, that they did read the
Psalms upon the book when they did sing them. It is also out of controversy,
that they did sing them to the Lord, unless we will deny the flat word of the
Holy Ghost, and also affirm, that albeit the speech be directed to God, yet
they did not in singing speak unto him. It cannot be denied, but that many of
the Psalms be full of petitions. Also praise is a part of prayer, and a
spiritual sacrifice: this was offered up to God, in reading upon the book,
for it is said. Sing praises to the Lord: therefore I conclude, that read
prayer has warrant by the word, and the reading does not make it idolatry,
or contrary to spiritual prayer. Here ye complain again* that this
argument does not follow, because prayers composed by men, are not to be
matched with the Canonical scriptures. I have answered this poor stale shift
already* that the prayers composed by men are no further lawful, then they be
framed by the rules of Gods word for prayer.

Thus have I not, as you charge me, laid aside the question to make new
questions: but have disprooued that your old question, by showing, that
reading the prayer which is godly, does not make it contrary unto spiritual
prayer, nor idolatry.

To the assumption of this argument, I answered at the first which I
particularly rehearsed, how can ye then with any show of truth, say my words
import a denial of the Antecedents, assumption and all. My words are these:
The third argument says, that the form of prayer is a bondage and breaking
our liberty with, etc. The proves which I bring do only overthrow the
assumption, for I did and do acknowledge the proposition, which you say my
words import a denial of. I would wish ye to use more simplicity, I say it
is ungodly and near unto blasphemy, to affirm that prescript form of
prayer, is a tradition, bringing our liberty into bondage, and a changing the
work of the spirit into an idol. My reason was and is, that the Lord by
Moses prescribed a form of blessing which the Preests should use Nomb. 6. The
Prophets, as in the Psalms, prescribed many forms of praises and prayers, to
be used of the Church. Our Savior Jesus Christ prescribed a form, and said,
when ye pray say Our Father, etc. If the very reading, or using the prescript
form commanded, were a bondage, breaking Christian liberty, or a changing
the work of the Spirit into an idol, then the Lord God, Moses, the Prophets,
and our Savior Christ, are charged with a great fault. Your reply is with some
roughness of speech, which I omit, because it is but your fashion. But for
proof, that read prayer is man's invention, and thrust upon the Church by
constraint, ye say England knows by woeful experience. There has been I
grant in the Church of England variance about some matters to be read, which
are commanded in the Leiturgie, but not about the commanding a prescript
form of prayer to be used: for therein our Church does agree with all godly
Churches, that a prescript form of public prayers is convenient, yea, the
reformed Churches have and do practice the same.

Here therefore I would wish the Reader to observe, that you Brownists, do
not only condemn the Church of England, but all the reformed Churches
whatsoever, and can be none other but mere Donatists. For here in this your
third argument ye affirm, that prescript form of prayer commanded, is the
changing the work of the spirit into an idol, a tradition breaking Christian
liberty, and therefore most detestable. In your fifth Argument, ye say, it is a
dead letter which does quench the spirit. But all reformed Churches do by
commandment receive and use prescript form of prayers. Consider then what
sentence ye have given against all the visible Churches of our time, and of
former ages, for it will come to pass, that as the Donatists took themselves
to be the only true Church in earth, so must you Brownists of necessity, if
your speeches be weighed, seeing all Churches have and do things which you
affirm to be most detestable idolatry: but let the matter come into question
to be debated among the Churches, and you will be found Anabaptists for
imagining such a Christian liberty and freedom in the Church, that nothing is
to be received which is imposed by commandment. Then ye say, that it breaks
our liberty, S. Paul proves most plainly to the Galathians and Colossians. I
pray ye then that we may see such plain proof, which as yet none but your
selves can espy: note the sentences that will prove the matter. You take it,
there is no warrant to set forth any prescript form of prayer, because Christ
has prescribed a form. Ye think I might more safely reason thus, Christ has
prescribed a form of prayer, therefore neither Pope, Bishop, or Prelate, ought
to impose any other upon Gods children, until they can show some warrant from
Gods word so to do. I am fully of your mind, that none ought to impose any
other form, until they can show warrant from Gods word. But now mark how
the Argument will follow: Moses, the Prophets, and our Lord Jesus gave
prescript forms of prayer and praising God, to be used by the Church:
therefore the reading of a prescript form of prayer when one prays or
offreth up the sacrifice of praise to God, does not change the work of the
Spirit into an idol, nor is not a breaking Christian liberty, nor idolatry,
for the holy Scripture is far from appointing any idolatrous thing. Then I
reason further, that if the Prophets and our Savior gave prescript forms to
be used, the Church may take order to see them used. And from hence it does
follow, that the Church may impose prescript form of godly prayers, which
are framed aright.

If any think this a strange consequence, let them consider that the Lords
prayer in general conteyneth in it matter touching the substance and sum of
all prayers which have been made, or are to be made aright. The Psalms, and
other prayers in the Scriptures, do express particulars, with sundry
sentences, and phrases, most fit to express the same.

Now the Church has power and authority, not only to expound these prayers,
but also to apply them unto every several use and necessitye. This I add
withal, that the Church has no authority to bring in any one thing in
prayer, which is not contained in those prayers of Gods word: but when the
prayers be composed and framed of nothing but the doctrine of the Scriptures,
and after the rules of true prayer, nothing is brought in which God has not
commanded. Lay aside therefore all your shifts touching Apocrypha, men's
writings, and inequality with Canonical Scriptures, and bring your Arguments
against the prescript form and the reading, to prove that they make a prayer
holy in it self, to become abominable, and contrary unto spiritual prayer.

That ye say, our Savior never used the words of the Lords prayer, when he
prayed, neither commanded his Disciples to say over these words, neither do
we read that the Apostles did ever use, or enforced others to use certain
words, etc. ye speak untruly, for the Disciples desired him to teach them to
pray as John taught his disciples to pray, and he commands, when ye pray,
say thus: Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name etc. Luke 11.
and S. Matthew an Apostle, with S. Luke the Evangelist, has delivered the same
to the whole Church, if we read not any where that they did use the Lords
prayer, or commanded others to use it? Will ye reason thus, we do not read
that the Apostles, or the Church in their time, did baptize Infants, therefore
Infants were not baptized? or will ye reason thus, we never read that the
Apostles did pray either before or after they preached, therefore they did not?
your argument is the very same with these two former, yet from hence ye will
needs conclude, yt we will impose upon whole Churches certain words, even our
own words, stinting the spirit of God.

I have already showed, that the Church has not authority to bring any form
of prayer into the assemblies, but such as is agreeable to the rules appointed
for prayer by the word of God. And where ye call it a stinting of the Spirit, I
answer, that the Spirit of God is not stinted, but some men are furthered by
prescript forms, their infirmities requiring such an eye, as I have showed
before.

To worship the true God after an other manner then he has taught, is
Idolatry.

But he has commanded us to come unto him heavy laden with contrite hearts,
etc.

How dare we then bring a dead letter unto God, to stand reading of the same in
stead of faithful petitions, quenching the spirit?

We must strive in prayer with continuance, etc. therefore not upon a book.
These three I joined together as having no weight. Ye say I answer by plain
contradiction, without Scripture, or proof. In deed you quote Scripture to
prove those things which are not doubted of, as, that true prayer must be of
faith, uttered with heart: that to worship God after an other manner then he
has taught, is idolatry: that we must strive in prayer with continuance. But
what scripture do ye bring to prove that it is presumptuous ignorance to use
the help of a book, that those which read upon a book come not with faith
and contrite hearts, etc. but stand reading a dead letter which quenches the
Spirit, and that a book is no help for continuance in prayer, what Scripture
I say, bring ye to prove any of these? is not my bare denial as good as your
bare affirmation, and in this far better that I have before proved the use of
reading by ye word of God. David (say you) would praise the Lord with heart and
doyce, therefore not upon a book. S. Paul would pray with the spirit, and
with understanding, therefore not upon a book. David and Paul had not so much
need of the book as other men. But when they will other to sing praises to
God, as in Psalms, and Himnes, and spiritual songs, did they not send them to
the book, or to the prescript forms, wherein others might praise God together
with them, although they bind not men always to the book. Then ye add a
reason, why prayer read, cannot be true prayer: which is, that in reading we
fetch the matter from the book which moves the heart. In true prayer we
fetch the matter from the heart, which causes the mouth to speak: as, I
believed, and therefore I spoke. This is a most ridiculous vanity, for tell me
this, when we bring forth in true prayer, matter from the heart which causes
the mouth to speak, has not the heart been first moved with the word of
faith? why may not the heart be moved again with hearing or reading the word,
and so utter true prayer? the heart is moved when one hears the prayer of
the minister, and presently sends forth prayers together with him. Do ye
imagine that the heart cannot both be moved and pray at the same instant? Is
it not possible for one to pray in singing a Psalm?

We must pray as necessity requires. But stinted prayers cannot be as
necessity requires. Therefore stinted prayers, etc. To this I answered,
approouing the proposition, and in the assumption I did distinguish of matters
to be prayed for, as that there be things necessary to be prayed for at all
times, and of all men: of these a prescript form may be used at all meetings
of the Church. There be matters not at all times needful to be prayed for:
touching these, there can be no prescript form to be used continually, yea
some things fall out so rare, that it were hard: for, as it is a fault to omit
that which needs continually and of all men to be prayed for: so is it a
gross babbling to pray for things whereof there is no need. And if ye observe
the prescript prayers of all Churches, ye shall find the regard of these two
things, that nothing necessary be omitted, yt no prayer be for such things as
fall out sildome, but they are limited to the time. And further, that which
falls out beside the prescript forms, the ministers of the word are to
supply. And in the Church of England, the Preachers are not limited touching
the matters of their prayers. But if I mean by the things which be necessary
to be prayed for at all times, the Sacraments or any such things as Christ
has set forth in his word, we should think our Savior Christ, you say, to
have forgotten himself, that when he did command them to preach and baptize,
that he did not prescribe some form of words for their prayers, before their
doctrine and Sacraments.

To this I answer, I do not hold that for the administration of the word
and Sacraments, it is of necessity there should be a form of prayer
prescribed: for the Minister may conceive the prayers at the administration of
the Sacraments, as well as at the preaching of the word. But prescript form,
is for conueniencie. Neither am I of the mind, that one precise form is of
necessity. Therefore ye reason very fondlye, in saying we might think our
Savior forgot himself, that he did not prescribe a form of words for their
prayers, before their doctrine and Sacraments. Your next words, that then I
must further say, that all things necessary in the worship of GOD, are not
contained in the Canonical Scriptures, and so every way uphold the Papists,
are even as far wide. For all things necessary and convenient in Gods
worship be contained in the Canonical Scriptures. But are you ignorant of
this, that there be many things contained in the Scriptures, which are not in
particular expressed, but to be gathered from the general grounds and rules
of doctrine. What if one should object unto ye, there is no commandment nor
example of the Apostles in the scriptures, for any prayer to be made at the
Preaching of the word, and administration of Sacraments. Therefore it is not
contained in the Scriptures, that there should be any, and so a thing not
necessary. Would ye not fly to this, that although it be not expressed by
any commandment, that there should be such prayers, yet is it to be
gathered out of the doctrine contained in the Scriptures? How gross are ye
then, in saying that this does uphold the Papists?

But ye say, it were well I set down what it is, that may be fit at all
times, and for all persons to crave? I marvel any should be so babbling, as
to propound such a matter, making doubt. For can ye be ignorant, that going
through the whole Lords prayer, and opening the particulars* there is no one
petition, but almost all branches of it are necessary to be craved at all
public meetings and of all persons.

When will there be a time, and an assembly, in which it shall not be fit
for all to make supplication, that the name of the Lord may be sanctified:
that they may receive the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost, to embrace the
true light of the Gospel, to increase in knowledge, faith, and repentance: to
pray for Princes, for the whole Church, and for the overthrow of Christ's
enemies? to have grace to obey, and to walk worthy of the Gospel. To crave
all benefits for our necessary sustentation, and the pardon of our sins,
with deliverance from the devil. They be all contained in the Lords prayer,
but we as children need to have them particularly expressed, in that manner
which may best help and guide us.

And touching prayers at the Sacraments, they may very well be the same,
seeing the things do ever remain the same which we are then to crave.
Unless ye will maintain, that there be things in administration of
Sacraments, at sometime to be prayed for, and not at other. Then so far as
prescript form of prayer does fullye and fitlye express our need, it is no
babbling, and so this your argument does not condemn it.

Read prayers were devised by Antichrist, and maintain superstition and an
idol ministry. Therefore read prayers are not tolerable, etc. Antichrist
devised many blasphemous wicked prayers. But to say that the reading or
following a prescript form of prayer was his device, is most false: for there
were leiturgies in the Church of old, before Antichrist was set in his throne.
And moreover, the prescript forms delivered in the scriptures to be used, and
which were used and practiced by the Church, show that the thing is allowed by
God. Ye say, I have confessed, that I never read in the scriptures any warrant
to read prayers unto God: and then it must needs follow that it is
antichristian. I say, you know that ye do falsify my speech. For I said and
have proved, that it is great audacitie to affirm, that there is no warrant
in Gods word for prescript form of prayer. But I do not remember that ever I
read in the scriptures, that God does command a man to read the prayer upon
the book. My reason is rendered, that God does commend such diligence in all
his servants, as to have in memory, etc. Will ye gather thus, it is not
expressly commanded, therefore there is no warrant? it is not expressly
commanded that ever I read, that the Minister shall make prayer before and
after his sermon. Will ye charge me heerevpon, that I say there is no warrant
for it in the word? There would sundry inconveniences grow for want of
prescript form of public prayers. I did only mention this, that every
frantike spirit, of which sort there may be some in the Ministry, will not
only be unlike themselves, but vary from others. You reply, that the Papists
have not so weak reasons for their idolatrous leiturgies, rubrikes, and
Canons. It appears by all your arguments, how meet men ye are to judge of
the weight and sufficiency of reasons, alleged by the Papists or others. Ye
say, if it be but in phrases of speech, that they differ, it is no sufficient
cause to ordain leiturgies. I grant that is true: then ye say, if it be in
doctrine or conversation, the censures of the Church are to help that. I
confess that the censures of the Church are to redress such things. But your
reason yet has two defaults. The one, that ye divide differing in
administration of Sacraments and public prayers, but into two members,
difference of phrases, and difference of doctrine. When as there be sundry
other differences, as in order and ceremonies, which the Church is to have
regard of, and not to leave arbitrary. Your experience in these matters, is not
so great as your boldness. The other fault is, that because the censures of
the church should redress defaultes, therefore there needs no prescribed
order. It is a world to see, how many men talk of the Censures and government
of the Church, which know not what it means.

The Church has this power, to ordeine according to the word of God, and to
appoint such Orders in matters of circumstance about public prayer, preaching
of the word, and administering of the Sacraments, as shall most fitly serve for
edification. And then these Orders being established by public Authority,
the Discipline and Censures of the Church are to drive men to the observation
of the same. Who is able to imagine the innumerable divisions and offenses which
would arise in the practice of your Anabaptisticall freedom, in which, ye
deny the Church to have power to ordeyne and to impose any orders? I would the
Ministry of England were better then it is. If by tearming it a frantic
Ministry, you meant but to speak against unlearned and ungodly men, you
should have leave for me: but you comprehend all the learnedest and godly,
which you could not be bold to do, unless ye were taken with a frenzy,
seeing there be many whom ye are never like in any measure of gifts and
graces, either for knowledge, or Godliness, to approach near unto. Well, now
ye fall to your sober reasoning again. Paul commanded the Colossians to
admonish Archippus, you would have a Leiturgie for your Ministers, not only
to tell them what they should do to men, but also to God himself: this is
your last reason, and having before spent your strength, it is as a weak
child of your old age. If ye had no better, I would never have set this
last. For I marvel, unless ye did it to mock, to what end ye should
bring it in. Archippus was to be admonished by the Colossians, the Pastors are
to be admonished by their flocks, therefore there ought to be no prescript
form of public prayer. Or is your meaning, that the Leiturgies go too far
in telling the Ministers what they shall say, not only to men, but to God
himself. Then I answer, that the Colossians were to admonish Archippus, to
look to his whole duty. Set Archippus aside, for he does not strengthen, but
weaken your argument, and take these words only, which seem to carry a great
absurdity, namely, that the Minister should be told by a Leiturgie what he is
to speak both to God and men. I answer, that the Leiturgie is not to teach
Ministers, which otherwise can not tell what to say: it is not to maintain an
idol Ministry. But to avoid those inconveniences which I have before
mentioned, and such like, you may see in the reformed Churches, they have
Leiturgies, and yet all their Ministers are able, and know what to speak,
both to God and men. I propounded this question, that if read prayers, and
imposed Leiturgies be Idolatry, where shall we find a visible Church? You
answer, that in this point they might err of ignorance, and yet be the true
Church. This is some favor yet: the Church came now unto ye in a lucky
hour, but ye may continue thus gracious, least the poor Churches of England
crave the like at your hand. Have ye not set down, that to read a prayer
upon the book, is to woorship him with a woorship disagreeing from his
nature? have ye not said, it is the devise of Antichrist, a dead letter,
quenching the Spirit, stinting the Spirit, not of Faith, Idolatry, a changing
the work of the Spirit, into an Idol, a tradition and bondage, breaking our
liberty which Christ has purchased for us, and therefore a thing most
detestable? Do ye not deny that to be the Church of Christ which has any
thing imposed? and yet ye say touching Leiturgies imposed upon all Churches,
they might err in this point, of ignorance, and yet be a true Church. Your
speeches do condemn all the visible Churches in the world, wherein, ye be
rank Donatists. But you would hide this, and make show as though ye
condemned only the Churches of England. But if read prayers and imposed
Leiturgies be such as you affirm in those speeches which I have mentioned,
how could ignorance excuse them? And why may not the Church of England be
excused by ignorance? let the Reader here observe the pride of ignorant blind
Scismatikes, which imagine they know more, then all the Churches of God in the
earth. You take it that I use the Popish Argument of universality and
Antiquity, and so wonder what I will say against the Papists traditions,
seeing I fight with their weapons against the truth. Nay, if ye could see your
own blindness, it would make ye marvel in deed.

I reason thus: It is manifest by the word of God, that there should be a true
visible Church in earth: but if imposed Leiturgies be such as you make them,
that could not be so, there could be no true Church, in as much as all
Churches that are and that have been for many hundred years, have had imposed
Leiturgies.

The Papists do draw their Arguments of Antiquity and Universality not from
the Scriptures, as you may see this reason that I allege is, but against the
Scriptures. And now how truly ye conclude touching this question of read
Prayer, and prescript form of Leiturgies, let the Reader judge: and whether
the Scriptures that I have brought, do not overthrow your fantastical and
Anabaptisticall errors.

There were joined with these Arguments against read Prayer, two other: the
first is this. The Prayers of such Ministers and people as stand under a false
Government, are not acceptable, not only because they ask amiss, but because
they break Gods commandment. The other is, The Prayers of such as be
subject to Antichrist, are abominable. Those Ministers which have no power
with their people to receive in, and to cast out, having come in by the
window, are Antichristian, and subject to Antichrist, therefore the prayers of
etc.

These do concern the third and fourth accusation, and therefore the Answer
is included in the Answer to them. Yet I took exception against the first,
that the Church may be holden by force from executing Gods commandment
touching external Government, and yet be the true Church of God. And for
example, I alleged the Church that was held captive in Babylon.

You according to your usual manner, extend this to a wilful violating of
Gods commandment. And further, you deal in that which ye demand, as if all
your accusations against the Church of England were true, touching Idolatrous
worship. You should answer directly, whether they be not the Church of God
which are by force, being willing, kept back from executing Church Government?
You take your selves to be the true Church, and yet ye are restrained from
setting up those Orders which ye profess ye would. I would know whether this
be not some bondage. If ye say yet this is not to be subject to any false
government. To prove that the Church may of ignorance and frailty be in some
bondage of a false government, and yet be the true Church, I endeavored to
show, that Jerusalem from above is not in this world so fully possessed of
her freedom, but that she, and every one of her children, be in some
spiritual bondage. For proof, I alleged that Saint Paul says, He saw in
his members a law, rebelling against the law of his mind, and leading him
captive to the law of sin Romans 7.

You cry out and say, ye will think me a carnal Libertine, if I recant not
this doctrine. What Atheist (say you) would thus have defended his gross
sin? I do not marvel that ye are moved so sore at this doctrine, for if
it be proved that the true Church, and every member of the same, is tied in
some spiritual bondage in this world, it breaks the main pillar of
Brownisme, which they erect out of this sentence, Jerusalem from above is free
with her children, and so their whole frame comes down: this makes you so
hastily to thrust under a rotten proppe, even as it came to hand. Ye say, that
Saint Paul never continued captive unto sin after regeneration, neither gave
place unto evil thoughts: no more do any of you. S. Paul says, that the law
in his members did lead him captive to the law of sin. He says I do the
evil which I hate. I my self in my mind serve the law of God, and in my flesh
the law of sin. Was not David regenerate, and yet gave place to evil
thoughts, so far as to commit adultrie and murder. If the regeneration and
freedom of Brownists from all spiritual bondage be such, that they give not
place unto evil thoughts, they shall never have any great company, unless it
be of rank hypocrites, of such indeed there may be stoare. Ye look that I
should recant. But I say, either you or S. Paul must recant: for that which you
say, is flat contrary and opposite to that which he says. Look well to it,
for I tell ye, he is too constant to recant. If it please God to bestow his
grace, you may. Ye say, what Atheist would thus have defended his gross sin?
And I say, what Heretic could more bouldly speak flat contrary to the blessed
Apostle, and to the manifest doctrine of the Scriptures delivered every where,
then you do? it may be ye stand cheefely upon the words of our Savior, which
ye allege: that no man can serve two masters. If the regenerate be held
captive in any part unto sin, they serve two masters. This needs to be
opened.

We are most sure that Saint Paul in that he says, does not differ from our
Savior Christ, and yet in show he seems to speak quite contrary. For
where the one says: No man can serve two Masters. The other says: I my self
in my mind serve the law of God, and in my flesh the law of sin. How shall
this be reconciled? is there no way but to fall upon the rocks of Brownisme,
and to imagine that the regenerate are so freed, that they be in no captivity
unto sin, nor give place unto evil thoughts? Yes verelye: The regenerate
do fall into sin, not only in thoughts but in deeds: not only of
ignorance, but even against their knowledge, as David, Peter, and many other
in the holy Scriptures.

And therefore they may be said to serve sin in the flesh, that is in the
corruption yet remaining in them, not extinguished by the law of the mind,
that is the grace and work of regeneration* Yet the doubt remains, for all
is but one man, so far as he is regenerate, and so far as he is corrupt:
and therefore when in the flesh he does serve the law of sin, the whole man
may be said to serve the law of sin. S. Paul does deny that, and says: I
do the evil that I hate, I consent to the law of God that it is good, I
delight in the law of God concerning the inner man, it is no longer I that
sin, but the sin that dwells in me. We see then the same man sins, and
in some respect is said to be in captivity, and to serve sin, and in an
other respect he is accounted with God, not to serve sin, seeing he is by
tyrannous forcing drawn to do that which he hates. How stands the freedom
then of Jerusalem, and her Children? I say, her perfect freedom with all her
children is in the remission of sins. Touching that she has in this world,
it may thus be compared. As if a man lie bound in chains, so that he cannot
stir any member, and after his chains be loosed he can rise and walk: but
yet his chains hang upon him, and are a burden, he cannot cast them off. For
by nature we are so fast chained, that we have no moving at all in us, being
dead in sin. But through the work of regeneration we are borne, we are
raised, our bands and chains are loosed and broken: we can rise, we can stand,
we can walk, though faintlye, our chains, even a lump of corruption in the
flesh, pressing us down so sore. Then I conclude, that seeing the Church in
this life is in some bondage to sin, and yet the true Church. And seeing
there may be the true visible Church under some yoke of outward bondage: let
the Church of England have that favor which other churches have had, and not
be so rigorouslye condemned. Thus much touching the first accusation* together
with your arguments against read prayer.

The second transgression.
The Brow. 2 THat the profane multitudes without exception of any one person,
etc.

The second fault is, that all the profane multitudes, without exception of
any one person, are admitted and retained in the bosom of the Church. Many
Churches in England want godly Pastors, and there all are admitted. It may be,
he that admits is the worst in the company. But there be many greater and
smaller congregations, where the Pastor does keep back some for ignorance,
etc.

Here you confess, that very many Churches in England want godly Pastors,
and that there all are admitted, and that he that admits them is the worste
of the company. Thus you make the most Chuches in England in a very bad estate,
and so far forth you affirm your article. But yet you know some Churches,
etc.

I did confess, and do still with grief, that in very many G. G.
assemblies in England, all are admitted to the Table of the Lord, which offer
themselves, even the most profane and gross sinners. I showed also, the
reason of this grievous offense, namely that the ministers which should repel
such open offenders, are many times the worst, or at least negligent in that
behalf. And moreover, that the Church of England does neither approve such
admission of profane men to the Sacrament, nor yet suffer it in practice
wholly. For touching practice, there be many congregations in the land, where
sundry for ignorance, and open wickedness, are by the ministers kept back,
and not suffered to communicate, until they show repentance. And for not
approouing such admission, I said, the book of Common prayer does prescribe
and command the repelling of notorious wicked offenders: and also that some
are excommunicated justly, and not admitted to public prayer. This was the
first part of mine answer: wherein I prove your accusation false. The other
is, that the godly are not polluted by the company of the wicked, which are
suffered to communicate with them in Gods worship, and the thing not in their
power to redress. And for example I alleged the Church of the Jews. By which
I prove, that if your accusation were true, yet it destroys not the Church.
Now let us examine how you overthrow this by your replye. Ye ask whether
there were no more profane in the parish besides those twenty or thirty which
are repelled? And whether those other profane were not admitted? I answer, If
there were, yet the repelling of twenty or thirty in a flock, does show that
you accuse falsely, when ye say, all the profane, without exception of any
one person, are retained in the body and bosom of our Church: But to prove
your article at once, as ye say, by a more direct course, ye bring an
argument. And ye demand if I know any in all the realm of England
unbaptized. Is not Baptism (say you) a Sacrament belonging to the Church, by
which all the faithful and their seed do enter into it? Whereupon ye argue
thus? All being baptized, it follows that all are received into the body of
your Church. Now being once received in, they can no way be cast out but by
excommunication. And it is manifest, that the Parson and all his parish, has
not the power which Christ has left unto his Church, to excommunicate any
offender, be he never so obstinate or notorious, etc. This being the only
reason by which ye stand to prove the truth of your accusation, I must bestow
the more pains about it. Thus it must be set in form. Where all are received
in by Baptism, and no power to cast forth any by excommunication, there all
the profane multitudes are without exception of any one person, received into,
and retained in the bosom and body of the Church: But in the Church of England
all are received in by Baptism, and there is no power to cast forth any by
excommunication: Therefore in England, all the profane multitudes, without
exception of any one person, are received into, and retained in the bosom and
body of the Church. In your proposition there are to be excepted such as are
repelled from the Sacrament, who are in some sort, for the time, removed out
of the bosom of the Church. And also such Papists, Heretics, and Scismatikes,
as depart out of themselves. It is further also to be considered in it, that
all the baptized, continuing outwardly obedient, they cannot be justly called
the profane multitudes. Your presumption, in which ye charge the Church of
England with a principal transgression, for receiving in all by Baptism, and
having no power to cast forth any by Excommunication, is with foul error and
falsehood.

Touching the Baptism of Infants, this appears to be your judgment, that
the children of profane men which remain in the Church, and profess the
faith of Christ, belong not to the covenant, and therefore ought not to be
Baptized. No doubt the Church does offend, when open notorious sinners are not
Excommunicate, and brought to repentance, or at the least to such a show of
repentance, as that men can not further judge them but as Brethren. It is also
an offense, where such not being cast forth, their children are received unto
Baptism, and that without care to see them brought up and instructed in the
Christian Religion, and to lead a Godly life agreeable to the same. But to
say, that the children of profane men, taking profane men as you do, which
profess Christianity, and remain in the Church, are not to be Baptized, is a
very wicked injury to Gods people, and contrary to the manifest doctrine of
the holy Scriptures, and can not without Heresy be mayntayned.

First, touching profane people, it is certain that all Heathen Heretics,
all Scismatikes, open contemners of the holy Religion, and all obstinate
wicked men which despise the censure of the Church, that has passed upon
them, may be called profane. But you Brownists go further, and condemn them
all as Infidels and profane, which profess the faith of Christ, because
notwithstanding they do it in some weakness and infirmities: which is a wicked
presumption, and intrusion into Gods seat, and in which (as I have showed
before) ye break the rule of discipline given by our Savior Christ, by
which, no brother, that is, none which professes the true faith, is for his
sins and impenitencie to be judged as heathen, until he have despised the
admonition of the Church, and so be cast forth. You take upon ye to pluck
up all the Darnell: ye are commanded the contrary* least ye pluck up the
Wheat Math. 13. You dare, and that in most savage and desperate manner, rend
and tear up the weak plants: ye do it unto whole assemblyes, in which there
be many that unfeignedly sorrow and mourn for their sins, and study to
please God: all that fear the Lord, may tremble at this your intolerable
wickedness. But now to proceed. Ye will not allow the children of profane men
the Sacrament of Baptism. And what is your reason? they be not the seed of
the faithful. In deed in this ye say true, that none are in their infancy
to be admitted to this Sacrament, but the seed of the faithful: but when ye
take it that the children whose next parents are hypocrites, or wicked and
profane persons, which yet remain in the Church, and profess Christ, be not
the seed of the faithful at all, and in any respect, and so within the
covenant, and to be baptized, ye are far wide: for let it be that their next
parents before have been hypocrites and unfaithful, yet may they be the
seed of the faithful: for their interest in Gods covenant does (as being the
seed of the faithful) not depend upon their next parents, but upon the
ancient Christians their forefathers: for when he says, I will be thy God,
and the God of thy seed, the promise is made to a thousand generations, Exodus
20. It is said, that Leuy paid Tithes unto Melchisedech because he was in the
loins of Abraham, when he met Melchisedech, and gave Tithes, Hebrews 7. ver.
9. 10. Abraham begat Isaake, Isaake begat Iaakob, and Iaakob begat Levy, and
yet of Levy it is said, that he was in the loins of Abraham: yea, it must
needs be confessed, that all the whole Nation of the Jews were in the loins
of Abraham. Our Savior Christ according to the flesh, was in the loins of
Abraham. For this cause, Saint Peter calls all the Jews the children of the
Prophets, and of the covenant Acts. 3. ver. 25. So does S. Paul Romans 9. and in
that respect, they be all called holy, Romans 11. If the first fruits be holy,
so is the lump: if the root be holy, so are the boughs. Abraham, Isaak, and
Iaakob, are the first fruits, and the root: all the Israelites the lump, and
the boughs: but were they all faithful, no nor yet the greater part? for
Esayas cries, that if the number of the children of Israel were as the sand
of the sea, yet but a remnant should be saved, Esaias. 10. How often does the
Lord complain every where of the grievous infidelity and rebellion in the
greatest part of that Nation? Why then are they called holy, and the holy
people, being many of them reprobates? Is it not because they be Abraham's
seed, and were in the Church by outward profession, adding this withal, that
the elect of God, even the right holy seed, were in their loins: for Gods
chosen did not spring only from the sanctified, but also from other, who
touching the outward profession, and touching the holy seed which was in their
loins, were esteemed as members in the Church, and were all of them, even the
whole nation, called the holy people. It is not disalowed, that in the times of
idolatry openly maintained, their children were circumcised. Nay further, the
Lord calls the children of those wicked idolaters, his children, Thou have
(says he by Ezechiel) taken thy sons and thy daughters which thou broughtest
forth unto me, and sacrificed unto them, to be consumed. Thou have slain my
sons, and given them, by causing them to pass through to them, Ezech. 16.
ver. 21. These Idolaters did offer their children to Devils, even to the Idols
of Canaan, and shead innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and
daughters, when they caused them to pass through the fire, Psalm. 106. If the
promise to Abraham and his seed had not been so effectual, as that the holy
chosen seed was in the loins of these Idolaters, how could they be said to
bring forth Sons and Daughters to the Lord? How could it be said, thou have
slain my sons? or how could they rightly have been circumcised? If ye say,
these Idolaters should not have remained in the Church, but if not by the
Civil power put to death, yet by the censure of the Church cast forth. Yea,
but there was so general a declining, that neither of these was performed: and
so they remained still in the Church, and brought forth children unto God,
even such as the covenant made with Abraham did belong unto, they were in his
loins, they were his seed, and not cut off by the wickedness of their next
parents. If ye object that the Jews now at this day are the seed of
Abraham, and by that reason should be still the visible Church* I answer,
that although there be Gods elect among them, whom either he takes away in
their infancy, or else calls them to know Christ when they come to man's
estate: yet the Jews can not now be called the visible Church, nor the Church,
in as much as they have rejected him in whom the Covenant was ratifyed, even
the Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore he said unto them, the Vineyard shall be
taken from those Husbandmen, and let forth unto other. And then expounding
himself, he says, the Kingdom of God shall be taken from ye, and given to a
nation, that will bring forth the fruit thereof. The Vineyard was not taken
from those naughty Husbandmen that killed the servants of the Lord of the
Vineyard which came for fruits, even the Prophets, until they had killed the
son and heir himself. Now the natural branches are broken off, and the
wild olives, even the Gentiles, are graffed in, Romans 11. They are now the
children of Abraham, and heirs of the promise, as it is said, I have made thee
a father of many Nations. And in thy seed all Nations of the earth shall be
blessed. Our forefathers, many of them declyned in the Apostasy, and
worshipped Idols: but as the Idolatrous Jews, so they remained still in the
Church, and brought forth children to God, that is, such as were within the
Covenant, to be accounted the holy seed, and so of right were to have the
seal of the covenant set upon them, even Baptism. We can not say therefore
that the Covenant was disanulled, and that the Church utterly failed, no not
even in the most horrible confusion of popery, but Antichrist did sit in the
temple of God, 2. These. 2 Those idolaters were in the Church, and the heirs of
promise in their loins, for we and all the Churches are sprung out of them,
sealed with the sign of the Covenant, as of right belonging unto us from our
holy ancestors. But you Brownists as Catabaptists, deny that we have the
sign of the Covenant: for ye say we have no Sacraments. If we be not within
the Covenant from our ancestors, what are you? who has been sent from God to
call ye unto a Covenant, which ye were not within before? Who has given ye
the sign of the Covenant? or have ye received a covenant without a sign? How
will you endure this terrible voice of Almighty God: ye have rooted up and
cast forth my sons and my daughters? For if it were said to idolators, ye
have slain my sons? how much more unto you, which in a most proud fury,
with intolerable boldness and cruelty, root up and cast forth the infants
of whole assemblies, which have renounced idolatry, and profess the Gospel,
because ye do account them profane? Let it be, they are many of them nothing
such as they ought to be, but sinners, and such as should by the Censures of
the Church be brought into better order, yet professing Christ, and remaining
in the Church, their infants are not by their ungodliness cast forth of the
Covenant. I conclude therefore, that the Church of England, or at the least
many of the teachers and guides do offend, in not executing the discipline
upon ungodly men, to bring them to repentance* but in receiving their children
to be baptized, they do not offend, so they see them taught in the faith, and
to live a godly life, as our Church has established, yea in refusing them the
infants should receive great injury.

But to make this matter yet more clear, the question is to be answered,
whether the Church of Rome be the Church of Christ. For the Brownists do hold,
that our ancestors were not the Church of Christ in the time of popery, and
that we now are confused multitudes, not rightlye entered into covenant with
God, to become a Church, seeing we were not of Gods true Church before,
neither orderly entered into covenant. Indeed if we were not within the
covenant before from our ancestors, nor entered orderly to become a Church,
the matter would seem strong against us. Let it therefore be examined. I know
this is the usual speech of the learnedest Deuines, the church of God is in
the Papacy, but the Papacy is not the church. And it may be, the sense will
differ little or nothing, but I take it a fitter speech to say, the Papacy is
in the church, then to say, the church is in the papacy. For Antichrist does
sit in the Temple of God: his laws, his worship, and all his abominations,
were brought into the church. All the men which received his mark, and
worshipped him, were in the church, yea even the whole Apostasy was in the
church. The church was before, and that comes after, and enters into or
arises in it. Then to the question, if by the church of Rome we understand the
Pope, his laws, his worship which has been devised by himself, his
adherents, and all that worship him or receive his Mark. I answer, that this
is that which may properly be called the church of Rome, which is, the papacy,
the apostasy, and seduced to damnation, and not the church of Christ,
otherwise then thus, that the Pope, the Cardinals, and all that worship the
Beast, be false Christians by profession, bred in the Church, and continuing in
it, their seed not excluded from the covenant. But if by the Church of Rome,
we understand all those companies of people, over whom the tyranny of the
Pope has heretofore extended it self, or does at this day: or those things
which were given by Christ, which remain in the same. I say, this is not the
church of Rome, but the Church of God. First, if we respect the holy doctrine
of God, in all those points which were and are kept sound among them, and the
holy Sacrament of Baptism. Then secondly, if we consider the kingdoms and
people themselves, all did not fall from Christ, but many held the foundation,
the most of them lying scattered and hid in the desolations and ruins.
Thirdly, if we regard that the infants not only of these faithful, but even of
the wicked Apostates which worshipped the beast, were still within the covenant
as the holy seed: we shall see that the papacy was, and is, in the Church,
which is the Temple of God, and not the synagog of Rome. The Church of Rome
then is not the true Church of God: but the Church of Rome is the Apostasy in
the church. Let us come then more particularly. The church of England in the
time of popery was a member of the universal church, and had not the being of
a church of Christ from Rome, nor took not her beginning of being a Church, by
seperating her self from that Romish synagog: but having her spirits revived,
and her eyes opened by the light of the heavenly word, did cast forth that
tyranny of Antichrist, with his abominable idolatry, heresies, and false
worship: and sought to bring all her children unto the right faith, and true
service of God: And so is a purer and more faithful church then before.
Idolatry was openly set up in the church of Israel, at sundry times. It did
not, as I have showed, disanull the covenant of God with them, nor debar
their children from the holy sign of circumcision, but all the Jews are
called the children of the covenant. Then let the Brownist show some reason,
why it should be otherwise in this case with our churches, then it was with
the church of Israel.

Thus much for the one part of your assumption, wherein ye blame the church of
England, for receiving in all by baptism. Now touching the other part of it,
in which ye affirm that there is no power to cast forth any by
excommunication, ye speak very falsely. For the church of England has some
power to excommunicate. But you reason thus: the person and all his parish has
not the power to excommunicate any one offender, therefore the church of
England has not power to excommunicate. Is it possible, if a man would study
to reason absurdlie, that he should excel ye? Will ye argue thus: every
several part by it self has not power to excommunicate: therefore the whole
together has not the power? It is not meet indeed, that the Parson and his
parish should have the power to excommunicate, unless it be such a Parish as
has the Consistory of Pastors, Teachers, and Governors. It seems ye have
great skill in the discipline of Christ.

The several flocks about Geneua without the City have every one a Pastor,
and two Elders: but yet they have not the power to excommunicate, but that is
referred to the Consisiorie which is within the City, Master Beza, Epist. 20.
Will ye say those several flocks cannot be the Churches of Christ, unless
their pastors and they together have power to excommunicate? They are members
of that church which has power to excommunicate. But ye will say, that the
excommunication of the Commissarie is no excommunication, and therefore our
parishes be no members of a church, which has power to excommunicate.

The like ye will say of the excommunication by the Bishop himself, and by
the Archdeacon. I answer, that if it should be granted ye, that their
excommunication does not bind in heaven, yet it is of force to remove, and
does remove from the societye of our assemblies, which proves your
accusation false, because we reason about this outward remoouing. But what if
the Bishop, together with sundry other Ministers of the Gospel, do
excommunicate duly an obstinate wicked man, is he not excommunicate before
God? If there be an heretic convinced, and found obstinate, and the Bishops
and Ministers of the Church of England assembled, or some competent number of
them, as in the convocation, or such synod do duly excommunicate him, is it no
excommunication? Will ye reason after this sort, that because every Minister
with his flock severally, has not the power to excommunicate, therefore the
Ministers of the Church of England are utterly without this power? You confess
that it is the Church of Christ which has this power, though it fault much by
negligence in executing the same. I would all Brownists could consider, what it
is to excommunicate, or to cut, not only particular persons, but whole
assemblies from Christ, it would abate their horrible presumption.

Then for the suspension from the Sacrament, by which the unworthy, either for
ignorance, or open wicked life, are separated from the near fellowship of the
Church, I said ye might demand by what right the minister does it? Ye say,
that indeed would be known, adding moreover, that if it be in the nature of
Excommunication, it were no small presumption in the Minister to arrogate such
absolute authority to himself. I hold it somewhat in the nature of
Excommunication, in such, as have been before admitted, but yet not to be
compared as any thing near so great as Excommunication: and nevertheless, I
deem it no presumption for the Minister, to repel the unworthy from the
Sacrament. He is to take heed to himself, that he give not holy things to
dogs. He is to beware of that which may give public offense, and bring the
holy mysteries into contempt. It is in deed no small matter to debar from
the Sacrament. The Minister therefore may easily offend in this case diverse
ways: as namely, if he be carried with evil will for private respects toward
any, and so aggrauate their offenses, and make that heinous which is not: or if
he do not make the matter apparent so much as he can, that the flock may see
there is just cause to repel them, and no injury offered, the crimes for
which they are removed being notorious.

Now because I said, the book of common Prayer does warrant this, here ye
set up your bristles, and first it may not be let pass, but noted, that even
the best of our Churches stand under this Idol by our own confession. This is
a special note, and well marked. Why, did ye not know that we use the book
in public prayer, and administration of Sacraments? Then ye ask if the book
be Christ's new Testament, that we must fetch our warrant and direction from
that Idol? I might ask you a question, whether ye be in your wits? for do we
dispute here, whether a Minister is warranted in conscience before God to
repel any from the Sacrament? I thought that you Brownists which take upon
ye to judge, and utterly to abandon and cast forth whole assemblyes which
profess the Gospel, and which are esteemed of the godly Churches as Sisters,
had made no doubt, but that by Gods word the Minister is warranted to repel a
notorious wicked man from the Sacrament. But I supposed ye would object, that
by the established order and government of our Church, all power to keep the
Sacraments from wicked profanation, is taken away from the Ministers, and for
this I alleged the book. Let the Reader now judge, how fitly ye clap your
wings and crow, saying: In deed it is a fit Portesse for such Priests, and
the suspension ye vaunt of, a fit tool for such workmen, even the instruments
of that foolish Shepherd. If the judgment of God (you say) were not upon our
right eye, we might see how our Lords the Bishops do dress us, and perceive
how this weapon that they allow us, wants both edge and point etc.

You speak, as if the Bishops did take upon them, and we submit our selves
unto them, as Lords over our faith and consciences, and as though we were at
their allotting, when as in deed they be but ministers to see those orders
kept which be already established, and have not authority to take from any
Minister that power which the book does give him: much less can one word of
master Commissaries mouth heal the greatest wound (as you say) we can make
with it. Ye say, not one in the Parish sets a fly by it. Ye speak so
confidentlie, and with such show of honesty, that I should believe ye in
these things, if I had not for sundry years tried and seen your words false
by experience. I said, such as be justly Excommunicate, as some are, be not
admitted to the public prayer. Here ye bid see how God insnareth me in mine
own words, and how hard a bad cause is to defend. What is the snare which I am
here caught in? Forsooth I do here openly justify Excommunication by the
Commissarie, because we have no other power or means, and our Church wardens
do stand sworn to that Court. But how shall I get out of your snare? I must
be feign to break it, if it be not loose of it self. What if when I say some
are Excommunicate justly, I have respect, not to those which Excommunicate, but
to the desert of them that be Excommunicated. Again, it is untrue that ye say,
our Church has no power, but the Commissaries Court (as I have already
showed.) Touching your next speech, wherein ye charge us, that we think to
heal, or at the least, to cover enormities with these two dry withered fig
leaves, the one, that we can not remedy the matter, the other, that private
men are not to reform: the answer shall be more fit, when we come to
show what private men may do.

Now let us come to the other part of mine Answer which denied the consequence,
though your accusation were true, which is this: Wicked profane men are
received in, and retained in the bosom and body of their Church, therefore
the Covenant is disanulled with them, and they are no longer Gods people, but a
false Antichristian synagog. To disprooue this, I did allege, that there were
but a few true worshippers that frequented the Temple among multitudes of
profane and ungodly men. To which ye reply, that comparing our Church to the
Temple of God, and still begging the question, I frame my Arguments as though
our people were faithful, and our prayers holy. I pray ye what is the
question which I beg? This say you, is the question, whether the assemblyes
in England be the true Church of God? and then ye would bear the Reader in
hand, that I reason in such sort as I would first have this granted, that it
is a true Church of faithful people, and holy worship. You should have done
well to have showed how I frame my Arguments from the Question granted. But
the truth is, ye can show no color here of any such thing.

Now may I charge you, and that justly, which I will also make apparent to all
which will not shut their eyes, that in stead of answering, ye do not only
cavil, but most sottishly with a blind shift. For our question here is this,
the Church of England does receive in and retain in her bosom the profane
multitude, therefore the Church of England is not the true Church. To disprove
this, I reason thus, the Church of Israel retained the multitude of wicked ones
in her bosom, for there were but few true worshippers frequented the Temple
among multitudes of profane ungodly men. Therefore this fault does not destroy
the being of a true Church, neither is the worship and prayers of the
faithful polluted by the company of the wicked which worship together with
them, especially when they can not remedy the matter. To overthrow this
Argument, you must of necessity prove one of these two things, either that
the Church of Israel did not retain the profane multitude in her bosom, and
so the good and the bad worshipped together: or else that they were not Gods
Church when this was suffered, but all that came so together fell from God. You
shift from this, and speak of Idolatrous times, in which it is most certain
that the godly did not mix themselves with the wicked in idolatrous worship.
We do not argue whether the godly did join with the wicked in idolatrous
worship, for it is most clear they might not, nor did not. But whether the
wicked were suffered, and did join with the godly in the true worship? and
whether they were polluted by communicating with them, and that so grievously,
as to disanull the Covenant? let the Scriptures be judge in both these. If I
should stand to recite all the testimonies, and all the complaints which are
made by the Prophets against the multitudes of wicked which worshipped together
with the godly at sundry times, it would be long, some few may suffice in a
matter so evident. He that reads the books of Moses touching the state of
the Church for the space of forty years in the wilderness, what shall he
find in the most but multitudes of profane rebels, against whom, the Lord
swear, that they should not see his rest, whose carcasses also he ouerthrewe in
the desert, and yet they were not cast out of the assembly, nor separated from
the rest so long as they lived, nor their seed rejected? If ye will see an
epitome of their rebellions for that space, and for the time of the Judges,
look upon the 106. Psalm.

Afterward, when the Kings of Judah reigned even until the captivity, what
grievous complaints are made against them? A great part which came to worship
in the Temple, were as Sodom and Gomorrah, Iesay. 1. and 3. Being the Lords
Vineyard, they brought forth stinking grapes. Iesa. 5. Having committed
thefts, adulteries, periuries, and other abominable sins, they came together
with the godly to worship in the Temple, in so much that the Lord demands,
if they took his house to be a Den of thieves, Ierem. 7. The Preests
themselves were not free from this horrible pollution, for it is written, they
are all dumb Dogs that cannot bark, they love to sleep, they are greedy,
and given to Wine, Iesay. 56. The Prophets prophecy lies, the Preests exercise
dominion by their hand, the people love to have it so. Ierem. 5. ver. 31. The
Preests conspire together, they are like a roaring Lion, they divide the pray,
they do violence to the law, profane the holy things, and put not difference
between the holy and profane. Ezech. 22.

What horrible things are these, by which the wrath of the Lord was kindled?
But were they not still the daughter of Sion? Read for this the Lamentations
of Jeremy. After they were returned from the captivity, the print of the rod
being yet in their skrinne, they were not freed from such pollution* for
Malachi accuses both Preests and people, and that heinously. They mixed
themselves by Marriage with the Heathen, and profaned the Sabbath by keeping
market upon it. Esra. 9. Nehe. 13. From the time that God raised them up no mo
Prophets, until the coming of our Savior Christ, their state grew worse and
worse, not only by Sects, but also, that the Preests profaned the Temple,
John. 2. Math. 21. The Teachers which sat in Moses chair, did expound the law
corruptly in sundry points, they mixed their leven, they were hypocrites,
blind guides, covetous, and ambitious. Matthew. 5. and 15. and 16. and. 23.
These resisted Christ, and would excommunicate those that should confess him.
John. 9. And yet the godly did not only worship together with them in the
Temple, but also our Savior does will they should hear them teach. Math. 23.
If they had been polluted by worshipping together with them, he would have
commanded to separate themselves. This were enough to show the gross heresy
of the Brownists in this point: but yet I will add somewhat of the Churches
founded by the Apostles. In the Church of Corinth, Saint Paul reprooueth many
things. There were factions and schisms among them. The Preachers did set
forth the Gospel with humane wisdom. The Pastors and Governors did not
execute the discipline, but suffered the incestuous person. They straue one
with an other in the law before Heathen Judges. They feasted in the idol
Temples, at the feasts which were kept in honor of the idols, and so were
partakers of the cup of Devils. They profaned the holy Supper of the Lord,
they abused spiritual gifts. There were among them which denied the
resurrection of the dead.

A Brownist will here replye, that this Church did repent being reprehended by
Saint Paul, as he witnesses of them, 2. Cor. 7. I answer that they were Gods
true Church before they repented, 1. Cor. 1. and also that they did not all
show repentance, as that second Epistle which he wrote unto them does declare,
and especially, these words: I fear, least when I come, I shall not find ye
such as I would, and I shall be found such as you would not: least there be
strife, emulations, wrath, contentions, backbitings, whisperings, rumors,
tumults: least when I come again, my God abase me among ye, and I shall
bewail many of those which have sinned before, and not repented for their
uncleanness, fornication, and wantonness which they have committed, 2. Corin.
12* verse. 20. 21.

The seven Churches of Asia, Revel. 1. were not in every respect commended:
for in some of them the Nicholaitans were suffered, and they that taught the
doctrine of Balaam, and a wicked woman, which made her self a Prophetisse, was
suffered to teach and to seduce the servants of God. One Church neither hot
nor cold. Another had but a few in it which had not polluted themselves,
Revel. 2. and 3. Yet are these named the Churches. I conclude therefore, that
the not seperating of some wicked ones out of the Church, although it be
evil, yet is not such an evil as destroys the Church, and that the godly
are not polluted by the wicked, which come together with them unto the public
exercises of the holy religion.

Thus have I proved your article, or your accusation, partly heretical, and
partly false. I have also made manifest, that if ye did accuse rightly, yet
the consequence is to be disalowed as heretical, in as much as we see, that
very often it has come to pass, that heaps of ungodly men have worshipped
together with the godly, and they not polluted by them. It may be some will
think hardly that I account it heretical, that the Brownist concludes after
this sort, they have open sinners, and men profane in life, which do worship
together with them, as members of their Church, therefore the covenant is
disanulled with them all. I will therefore prove that I have said by strong
arguments: the first shall be this. Whosoever maintains, that where any
gross sins break forth and appear, there is not any true faith in the
parties which offend, he does contrary to the express word of God, maintain
flat heresy: for we are taught every where, that regeneration which consists
in putting of the old man, and putting on the new, is by degrees wrought in
Gods elect. Whereupon the holy Ghost compares the spiritual birth with the
natural. A man is borne a poor weak babe, not able to go alone, or yet to
stand upright: he is nourished and fed with milk, and so in continuance,
does grow up by degrees unto man's estate. We are borne again, not of mortal
but of immortal seed, even the word of God which indureth forever, 1. Pet. 1.
wherefore he wills, that laying aside all maliciousnes, deceit, hypocrisy,
and such like, we covet the sincere milk of the word, that we may grow
thereby, 1. Pet. 2. ver. 1. and 2. The regenerate are in many places exhorted
to put off, and to mortify evil and unclean lusts, and to forsake their
wicked sins, Romans 12. Ephesians. 4. Colos. 3. Iam. 1. And if in many things we
sin all, Iam. 4. Yea eue^ such as are grown up in Christ to man's estate. How
many, shall we then suppose, are the falls of poor newborn Babes? if David,
Solomon, Samson, and many other, replenished with great grace, did fall
grievously, how shall we look that other shall be free? Let the Church of
Corinth be for an example in this point, even the teachers and people together,
unto whom S. Paul writes thus: I could not speak unto ye brethren, as unto
spiritual men, but as unto carnal men, as unto babes in Christ. I gave ye
milk to drink and not meat, for ye could not bear it, neither can ye now:
for ye are yet carnal: for when as there are among ye emulation, contention,
and discords, are ye not carnal and walk as men? when one says, I am of
Paul, an other I am of Apollo, are ye not carnal? 1. Cor. 3. ver. 1. 2. 3. 4.
Is not the matter as clear as the Sun, that he calls them carnal,
burdened with the flesh, and in that respect profane, as their open sins
did declare, and yet babes in Christ, regenerate through faith, and the dear
children of God? It is said of our Savior, He will not break the bruised
reed, nor quench the smoking Flax Math. 12. ver. 20. Saint Paul following the
steps of his Master, in care, in love, in mercy, and compassion, toward the
poor weak babes in Christ, behaved himself in the Churches, as a nursse unto
her little infants. 1 Thessalonians. 2. ver. 8. But the fierce Brownists do maintain
contrary to this manifest doctrine of the Scriptures: that where corrupt
manners break forth in those that profess the Gospel, they be not only
utterly void of faith which offend, but also, that all they which worship
together with them, though never so much grieved at their sins, are fallen
from the covenant most cruelly by this means, thrusting down all the weak,
and casting forth all poor babes. I may say the strong together with them:
therefore the Brownists do maintain heresye. Every faithful man is to follow
the example of blessed Paul, in that which he does testify of himself, how
he forgot the things which were behind, and pressed forward toward the things
which were before, even toward perfection, Phil. 3. ver. 14. But yet it
follows in the same place, nevertheless, in that unto which we are come, let
us proceed by one rule, to be like affected. Shall the strong, when all are to
take the journey together, run away, and leave the babes and the feeble
behind them? nay, rather let them lead them by the hand, carry them in their
arms, and upon their shoulders. Let the Brownists alone, who, as if they were
ayrie spirits, disburthened of all lump of the flesh, mount up aloft, and
leave poor heavy laden sinners crawling upon the earth. The other argument
by which I prove them to maintain Heresy in this their second accusation, is
this, Whosoever makes the stablenesse of Gods covenant toward his people, and
with his Church, to depend upon the works of men, he mayntayneth flat Heresy:
for albeit the words of the Covenant be these, I will be your God, and you
shall be my people, which implies a true sanctification required to glorify
God, and to be thankful, yet the Covenant is wholly and altogether of mercy,
yea even of the riches of his free grace, who has promised and sworn unto us
to declare the stablenesse of his counsel, that we might have strong
consolation, Hebrews 6. verse. 17. We are saved by grace, and not by works,
Tit. 3. As the Covenant was made unto David in some particular, so was it to
Abraham and his seed in general. Then thus it is written: I will make him my
first borne, higher then the Kings of the earth. I will keep my mercy for him
for ever, and my covenant with him shall be stable. I will set his seed for
ever, and his throne as the days of heaven. If his children shall forsake my
law, and not walk in my judgments. If they shall profane my Statutes, and
not observe my commandments: I will visit their defection with the rod, and
their iniquity with plagues. But I will not disanull my mercy toward him, nor
falsify my faith. I will not profane my covenant, nor alter the thing which is
gone out of my lips. I have once sworn by my holiness, I will not lie unto
David, Psalm. 89. v. 28. If the covenant made with Abraham and his seed, did
not stand after the same sort stablished upon the free promise of grace, and
upon the oath of God, how could it be said after all the defections and
rebellions of the Church of Israel reckoned up, and after he had chastised
them, that he remembered his covenant with them, and he repented through the
multitude of his compassions, if it be said, they repented, and so returned
again into covenant with him, and obtained mercy. I answer, they repent not
but by his mercy and grace which he bestowed upon them, because they were
within his covenant. Now the Brownists in affirming that by open gross sin
committed by any, if they remain still in the Church, the covenant is not only
disanulled to them, but unto all that do communicate with them, and so make
the stablenesse of Gods covenant, not to depend upon mercy and free grace
promised and bound with an oath, but upon our works, yea, and in a more tickle
estate, even upon the works of other whom we must judge. Therefore the
Brownists maintain very wicked heresy, when they cry out, that those
assemblyes where any open sinners are not cast forth, they be no longer the
true Church of God, but the Covenant is disanulled with them all that do join
together in that society. I might here make an end touching this second
principal transgression, but that there be certain particular reasons, by
which they stand to maintain their opinion. First, to this effect many do
speak. If there be wicked men suffered to come to the Table of the Lord, the
Minister and Ecclesiastical Governors do commit so grievous a sin, that
they can not but be utterly void of the true fear of God. Then, he which is a
wicked man, can not be a Minister of Christ, and being no Minister of Christ,
there is no Sacrament of Christ delivered, how then shall a man communicate
with that assembly? I have showed before, that there be great sins and great
neglect of duty oftentimes where there is the true faith in weakness, and so
they sin damnablie, which take upon them to judge them no Christians. The
faithful in Corinth were blinded in their own faults, and very securely did
the Pastors and Governors suffer the incestuous person to continue among them.
And whereas they say, that if the Minister be ungodly, he can be no Minister of
Christ, it is false: for the man touching his own person may be a reprobate,
and yet touching his ministry, a Minister of Christ. Judas was a Minister of
Christ, and baptized, John. 4. ver. 2. they were as truly and effectually
baptized by him, as by Peter, and yet in himself a Devil, John. 6. verse. 70.
The two Sons of Ely were horrible wicked men, 1. Sam. 2. ver. 12. 22. and yet
they are called not only Priests, but Priests of the Lord, 1. Sam. 1. verse. 3.
Ely himself did offend, and was sharply punished, that being not only their
Father, but also high Priest and Judge, he did not put them from the dignity
of the Office, but did honor them with the same, not regarding Gods honor, 1.
Sam. 2. verse. 29. The Scribes and Pharisees who were not all of the Sons of
Leuy, for Saint Paul was a Pharisie, and the Son of a Pharisie, but yet of
the Tribe of Benjamin, were Ministers of the Church, for Christ says, They
sat in Moses Chair, and willed men to hear them, notwithstanding, they were
blind guides, hypocrites, proud, covetous, ambitious, and very reprobates,
Matthew. 23. Then, next they allege, that a little leaven does leaven the whole
lump, 1. Cor. 5. Therefore where one open notorious Sinner is admitted to be a
member of the Church, all are leauened and polluted, all do fall from God. I
answer, that Saint Paul rebukes the Corinthes, that they were puffed up,
and did glory when they should have sorrowed: for as many as had the power of
the Discipline in their hands, and did neglect, were partakers of his sin,
and not only they, but of private members, all that did not mourn and lament
to see such a foul matter wincked at. As the Lord himself does clear all
those which mourned for the abominations of Jerusalem, Ezechiel. 9. so were
they free and not leauened, which did mourn at Corinth for such abuses.
Moreover, it is very false to say, that whole Church was leauened, or polluted
with the sin of that wicked man, therefore they were not the Church of God.
For being guilty not only in that fault, but in many other, he gives them
the honor of Gods Church, writing to the Church of God which is at Corinth, 1. Corinthians. 1. Then are objected the words and commandment of the Lord by Saint
Paul: If any that is called a brother be a fornicator, or couetouse, or an
Idolater, or a rayler, or a drunckard, or an extortioner, with such see that
ye eat not, 1. Cor. 5. Some hold, that this commandment is given only
against the eating with an open sinner at the Lords Table, seeing we may eat
common bread with such as be very wicked. Others do argue thus: If it be not
lawful to eat common bread with a wicked man, how much more unlawful shall
it be to eat with him that holy bread of the Lords Table? as the Anabaptists
lighting upon these words of our Savior Christ, but I say unto ye, Swear not
at all, Matthew. 5. do gather, that it is utterly unlawful in any respect or at
any time to take an oath, and err, in not considering the circumstances
whereby the words uttered in general, are to be restrained unto the particular
abuse, and rash swearing. Even so the Brownists, taking the words as they
stand, and not waying the circumstances, do maintain absurdities. They draw
their Argument of comparison from things in which the sin or pollution is
not: for the sin is not in the eating of the common bread, neither in eating
the bread of the Lord with the wicked, but in circumstances. For I may eat
bread with open sinners, and offend thereby, and I may eat bread with
notorious wicked men, and not offend therein, yea, I may grievously sin, in
refusing to eat with them. I will express how. If there be open gross
offenders, and my familiarity with them, or my eating with them, can not be,
but I shall either be partaker of their sin, or countenance and harden them
in the same, I offend, if I do not shun their company. If any brother in
the Church be convict of foul sin, found obstinate* and so Excommunicate*
every member of the Church even by the commandment of God, is to have no
fellowship with him, that he may be ashamed, 2. These. 3. v. 14. But yet we are
willed in the same place, not to account him as an enemy, but to admonish him
as a Brother. For if men should now in familiarity, receive him to their
table, or go to his table, it would harden him in his obstinacy, and bring the
censure and power of the Church into contempt. This is that S. Paul deals
about. The wife of this man, his children, and servants may eat with him, or
any other, where it cannot be eschewed, for then it does not countenance him.
Now if I be in a ship upon the sea, among a company of vild wicked men, or in a
prison, or in an army, and can have no meat, unless I eat with them, if I
refuse, I famish my self to death, and so offend greeuouslie. We see then it
is not the very eating with them that does defile, but the circumstances. Even
so is it at the Lords table, where wicked men be admitted. For such as do
admit them, having power to repel, do offend in eating there with them,
because they countenance them in their sin. But now a private member which
is grieved at this, and does what lies in him to have it redressed, does not
offend, nor is not polluted by eating with them. But as he, that among the
wicked in the ship, in the prison, or in the Camp, does offend in refusing his
bodily sustenance: so shall he, if he refuse that heavenly food of his soul,
for all the wicked cannot corrupt the same unto him.

This man has no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness. This man
does obey the Commandment, come out from among them, separate your selves,
and touch no unclean thing, etc. For he touches not their sin, but the holy
things of God: for the separation from the wicked, cannot be always in body.
Where there is idolatry practiced, and the faith and true worship overthrown,
we must depart both in mind and body: but from wicked men in the Church, we
cannot depart in body, unless we will also depart from Christ.

If it were otherwise, how should the faithful, without pollution, worship as
they did in the Temple, among so many profane men? and how should those few at
Sardi, Revel. 3 have kept their garments unpolluted, among that heap of
ungodly men? Now let the reader judge, whether I have in a frantike manner, as
you accuse me, blasphemed the name of Christ, by comparing ye unto
Anabaptists, and Donatists, in this your condemning and forsaking the Church
for the evil men which be in it. I would to God both you and others could
consider that which is written of King Saul, when as the holy Ghost says, he
was zealous for the Children of Israel and Judah, 2 Samuel. 21. and would root
out the Gybeonites. Did not the Lord declare by the three years famine, and
by causing some of the house of Saul to be hanged, how curssed his cruel zeal
was, which yet he had some color of from the law, which willed them to root
out the Heathen? The cruel zeal of Brownists, which seems to be for the
Church, is more without excuse, when they will needs root up the natural
plants, as now they may be called, yea even the whole assemblies, both old and
young.

The third accusation.
The Brow. FOr that they have a false Antichristian Ministry imposed upon
them, etc.

The third fault is an Antichristian ministry imposed and G. G.
maintained. Here is no reason rendered, why it is a false and Antichristian
ministry which is imposed. If ye be Prophets raised up of God, then we must
believe that which you say: but they did not lie in any matter, but every man
may see that you have in the former article lied, we may not therefore give,
etc.

The Brow. Here you say is no reason rendered by us, why it is a false and
Antichristian ministry which is imposed. But if you had better weighed these
two former transgressions, wherewith we charge you, or duly considered of this,
or of your own answer, before you had put pen to paper, you might have
gained this labor you have taken, and shame you are like to suffer by these
your frivolous and indirect answers, etc.

What reasons ye have brought in your two former accusations, G. G.
or in this third, to prove the Ministry of England Antichristian, let all
wise men judge. Indeed if we will admit false accusations, and heretical
opinions, for reasons, then have ye said somewhat, for in them ye are prompt
and plentiful. The shame ye speak of, that I am like to sustain by mine
aunswers, I do not fear at all. It appears plainly by your words, it does
not please ye, that ye are not encountered in disputation by some famous
learned men, so desirous ye are of that glory. But is it meet, or is there
any reason, that presumptuous, bold, and rash ignorance, should not be
incountred but with great learning: Sophisters, nay poor artificers and
Husbandmen, are the euenest matches to dispute with ye? If I had counseled
with my learned brethren, ye say, they would have counseled me not to write.
You have put on the Lions skin, and so imagine, that all the learned do
tremble at ye, and the truth is, they have espied your long ears: (But rather
to have used my discretion in the Pulpit, as they do, where we may say what
we lust without controulement, for they consider an evil matter is to be
raked in,) etc. If I did not know the contrary, ye are so confident in your
speeches, that I should almost believe ye. But now that I know, as sure as
any thing may be known, that you do impudently slander and belie the
learned, who though they disdain to deal with mad frenzy, yet they like
well, in respect of the poor people which are ready to be seduced, that your
matters should be answered, how will ye persuade me, or others, that ye are
not without care what ye speak? And if there be any spark of modesty leaft
in ye, I will not say, make some due proof, but even a colorable show, that
the learned of this land, if I had conferred with them, would have given that
counsel unto me* which you affirm, and for that cause which you mention. Now
come your reasons, you are persuaded by the word of God, that a true minister
of Christ, cannot be a minister of idolatrous and false worship. Ye are
rightly persuaded, and I am fully of your mind in this point. But where ye
say ye have proved our worship to be such, therein ye fail, for ye have
falsely accused, but not proved. Then ye were also persuaded by the word of
God, that a true Pastor cannot stand an heard to the Lords Goats and Swine,
blessing them with the blessing of the faithful, and delivering to them the
holy things of God, as the Sacraments, etc. I have showed also in that your
second accusation, how presumptuously and heretically ye have dealt, in
judging Christian men to be Heathen and Swine. In this third accusation, your
reason is in the word imposed. That ministry which is imposed upon the
flocks, is Antichristian, because they be not freely chosen by the Lords
faithful people, etc. But the Ministry of the Church of England is imposed,
etc. I take exception against both the proposition and assumption of this
argument. For the proposition, albeit the imposing of a minister upon the
flock, may carry an injury to the Church deprived of her privilege and
right: yet it does not follow, that the same minister or his ministry is
Antichristian. Our Savior in the place ye allege, John. 10. speaks only of
Heretics and false Prophets, which clime over into the sheepefold, he speaks
not of any which lead the sheep to the door, that is to Christ, whether their
calling to the office have been such in all respects, or not as it ought to
be. Secondly, if by free choice of the faithful, you mean that in the
choosing of a Pastor, the people or private members of the flock are to give
their voices, or else the minister is imposed and Antichristian: then do ye
condemn all the Ministers of France, of Geneua, and other Churches. For they
are not chosen by the voices of the people, neither do they hold that way the
most convenient, for the people to declare their consent, but rather their
silence, as ye may see in diverse Epistles of Master Beza, and namely in the
last. But when a flock is destitute of a Pastor, their choice is after this
sort: The Prebyterie or Senate of Pastors and Teachers, do examine and make
trial, and choose him whom they shall find every way qualified for so worthy
a function. The matter being made known to as many as may be, and especially
to that flock over which he is to be set, that if any can allege just cause
why he is unworthy of such an office, they be heard, otherwise after a due kind
he is ordained and put into possession of his Ministry. Then touching your
assumption, the Ministers of the Church of England (as ye say) be imposed: If
ye understand by imposed, that they be all thrust upon the flocks against
their will and liking, or that the flocks have no power to take exception, ye
speak untruly. For there be many flocks in England, which have those Pastors
and Ministers of the Gospel whom they have desired to have, and made choice
of, I mean by suite, both to the Patrones, and to the parties whom they
desire to have: and if any of the people can show just cause against the party
which is to be ordained, the Bishop may not admit him. There follow now many
boasting words, with which ye march in triumph, it is pity to put them out of
their array. You require one reason at the least to confirm our Ministry: I
confess it is a reasonable request, but first, I must answer that which ye
bring for to overthrow it. To prove our Ministry not to be of Christ, but to
have his negative: Ye say, ye find not in his Testament the names we carry,
the offices we bear, the manner of our entrance and administration, our
support and maintenance. Touching our names, we are called Ministers of the
Gospel, Pastors, and Teachers, which be the Tytles given in Gods word. The
names of Parsons and Vicars, are not to make any distinction of the Ministry,
but of the state of maintenance annexed unto the same. The Offices we bear,
are to teach and instruct our flocks by the wholesome word of God, to
administer the Sacraments, and to make public prayers. And I am sure, these
are prescribed in Christ's Testament, and if your eye were not malignant, ye
might espy them there. Our entrance is not by intrusion, but by calling, and
that in many, by the desire of the flocks, as I have showed before: and for
the manner of our administration, it has been dealt in at large in the first
accusation. Our support by Tithes and such like, is not mayntayned as a matter
of necessity, but as the most convenient. The word of God has given the
general rule, that the Minister of the word is to be liberally mayntayned: the
manner touching circumstances, is to be ordered for most conueniencie by the
Church, and power of the Christian Magistrate. For many things are lawful, and
in the power of the Church to ordeyne, which are not particularly named in Gods
word, but contained in general rules. Your next words are far sharper, and
cut more deeply, yea, even so deeply, that woe be unto us all, if you have
not the venomous tongue of liers and false accusers. Ye use a gradation to set
forth our pedigree, for we are (ye say) the children of the Bishops: The
Bishops are the creatures of the Pope: The Pope is the eldest son of Satan,
and his vicar general in earth. Now, as ye have set us here under a very
honorable parentage, so do ye show us great kindness, in setting us forth
not to be degenerate, but to bear the image, the mark, the power and life of
the Pope: and together with him, to grow, live, reign, stand, and fall, as
the branches with the tree. Here is the very bottom of your gall, here is
your poisoned sting thrust as deep as is possible. But let your words be
examined: and by the stepps that you ascend, I will descend. The highest is the
Devil, the father of lies: Next unto him, the Pope his eldest son, and vicar
general in earth. In deed I am resolutely persuaded, that the Pope is the
Beast, unto whom the Dragon gave his power, his Throne, and great authority,
Revel. 13. of whom it is said in the same place, that all the world wondered
and followed the Beast. They worshipped the Dragon which gave power to the
Beast, and they woorshipped the Beast, saying: Who is like to the Beast, who is
able to war with him? This no doubt is that man of sin, who has exalted
himself above all that is called God, or that has imperial majesty, sitting
in the Temple of God, and boasting himself as God: whose coming should be by
the effectual working of Satan, with all lying signs and wonders, 2 Thessalonians.
2. He has set up the very worship of Devils, with all abominable Idolatry,
and blasphemous heresies and lies. He has not only usurped and challenged a
civil power and Lordship over Kings, but also a spiritual Dominion over the
consciences and faith of man, to make Laws at his pleasure contrary to Gods
word, to bind the same: this is the vicar general of the Devil. Then to come
to the next step, where there is no question nor doubt neither to be made,
but that all Popish Bishops be the creatures and children of the Pope, in as
much as they have their calling, and consecration, and power derived from him;
in as much as they swear obedience unto him, to maintain his dignity, his
tyranny, his doctrine, and his laws: and in as much as they challenge
together with him a Lordship and tyranny over the conscience. But the Bishops
of the Church of England have not their calling, consecration, or power from
the Pope, but from our Church, which has forsaken the Church of Rome, as the
Sinagog of Satan. The Bishops of England acknowledge no subjection to the Pope,
but by an oath renounce his usurped power and tyranny. The Bishops of Engl. are
not ordained to maintain or defend ye religion and laws of Antichrist, but
quite contrary, they promise and profess to advance the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, and by the lively word, to cut down all idolatry, heresies, and
popish abominations. Finally, the Bishops of Engl. do not vsurp a Lordship
over the faith and consciences of men; for the power which they have peculiar
in the Church, is only in the administration of external government. It is
therefore with manifest and wicked sclander, that ye term the Bish. of Engl.
Antichristian, the creatures of the Pope, and such as have his power and life
in the^, yea such, as whosoever is ordained by the^, has his ministry from
Antichrist, and from the Devil. There is controversy about the state and
government by Bishops, whether ye Church of Engl. has not erred in committing
into their hands the execution of discipline, which is the matter to be handled
in your fourth accusation: but to gather from hence a pedigree from the Pope,
is very foolish. Let us come then to the lowest step, which is in the
ministers. We have labored in study of holy things, to be fit for the
Ministry, and so furnished and instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven, as to be
like Householders that bring out of their Treasures things new and old. We
desire to call men that wander in ignorance and sin, unto the light, and so
to build the Church of Christ. We know, no man is to be Judge of his own
sufficiency, nor to intrude himself into public office, but to be tried and
ordained by the Church which has that power committed into her hands from
Christ. The supreme Magistrate, and Church of England have committed this trust
unto the Bishops, judging it the quietest and safest way. We are presented unto
them to be examined and tried, to be ordained and put into possession of our
Ministry by them, and from them to receive the power to execute the same, not
as theirs, but the Churches, which has put it into their hands. It is the
ordinance of God, and not the device of Antichrist, that Pastors and Teachers
shall be tried and ordained by Elders, Pastors, and Governors, and set over
his people. We receive only this Ordinance, and such as have any understanding
may see, that the question can not be whether the power it self be from
Antichrist, but whether there be not error and defects in administering the
same, to the hurt and damage of the Church? Now further, having received this
authority, we Preach the holy Gospel of Jesus Christ, and by the pure
doctrine of the same, we convince and overthrow Idolatry, superstition, and
Heresies. We correct and reprove all manner of vices, inform and exhort unto
true Godliness. In performing these things, we draw men out of Popery, by
letting them understand, that the worship of Popery, is the very worship of
Devils, and that the Pope is Antichrist.

This Roman Antichrist and his adherents do feel, that the ministry of the
Gospel in England does destroy his kingdom, and therefore stirred up by the
Devil they rage, and by all devilish means, seek to destroy our noble Queen
and Country. Except therefore you Brownists had even let loose all the raynes
of your tongue, and after a shameless manner to lie and slander, how could ye
pronounce, that the ministry of England is Antichristian, and of the Devil?
or that it is in the life and power of the beast, to live, to reign, to stand,
to fall together with him, as the branches with the tree? In the next place,
ye have whet and filed your cankered tongue, to utter very vile reproach,
against the nurseries of all good learning and holy religion within this land,
the two Universities. I know not how idly, and in what heathen vanity ye
spent your time there your selves: but this I dare avow, and make the
challenge, and let trial be made, I will bear the shame for ever if it be not
found true: that there be many in the Universities, and not above the degree of
Bachelour of Arts, unto whom the principal Masters of Brownisme are
inferior: if we respect either the Liberal Arts, or the knowledge of toongs,
as of Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, or a sound judgment in Divinity. If this
can be attained in few years, with more then Moonkish idleness, the
Brownists may in some thing be believed. Some do abuse the liberal Arts: but
to condemn Logike, Rhethorike, and the rest as vain and curious, as you do,
is a very beastly error. Saint Luke, from whom ye draw your phrase of speech,
Act. 19. does not speak of these, but of Magical science. I do not
marvel, that blind Schismatikes do so bitterly iuueigh against learning,
seeing it is their bane. For they seek victory, triumph, and glory over all
the learnedest, and if there were no learning to discover and to lay open their
nakedness and shame, they would much prevail, and be had in greater
reputation. Thus do the Brownists labor to bring in savage barbarism. But yet
here, up goes your sail again, and ye have wind at will, and never so
much sea room, as when with bitter slanders and reproaches ye roll away. Ye
wrappe up altogether for the offenses of some. Ye reckon up certain things of
circumstance, and in themselves indifferent and yet upon your credit we must
take them to be odious enormities. Ye are up with perfidi, tyranny, and the
statutes of Omry. Your frenzy is great, I did advise, that men would suspend
their judgment, and enquire of the Churches touching the Ministry of
England. Against this ye cry out, and ask, if it be the best counsel I can
give them? I answer, it is the best, being that which God has ordained. Have
ye not read, that the Preests lips shall keep knowledge, men shall enquire
at his mouth, for he is the Angel of the Lord of Hosts? By this it is clear,
that whenever Heretics and Schismatikes do raise doubts, it is Gods will
that the people shall enquire for resolution out of the word, at their mouths
whom he has raised up, and set as the greatest lights in his Church. Yet see
how sottishly you cavil against this. Ye take it I would have them do things
which they doubt off, and my words are but to have them suspend their
judgment, until they enquire, and not to be too rash in following the call of
blind, presumptuous, and heretical schismatikes. Then ye say, I send them
over the sea we wotte not whether, etc. They make doubt of us, we are the men
whose Ministry is in question, we send them therefore unto those of whom they
can have no doubt, and that is to the worthy instruments and servants of God,
the Pastors of other Churches. I do no not send them over the Seas, for there
be diverse godly Churches of strangers within the land, as the French, the
Dutch, the Italian: there be the churches of Scotland, and no sea to pass, nor
diversity of language so great as to hinder: we have also the writings of all
the worthiest. Ye say I send them unto the word of man: which is false, for I
do send them unto the learned pastors, to be resolved by the word of God.
These have the calling unto this office from God, and his blessing upon those
which seek it with humility and reverence. It is not to use old popish worn
arguments, but yours is the course of all arrogant proud heretics and
schismatikes, which covet to draw the people to depend upon them, that they may
have fame, and to forsake their Pastors, which take it grievously, that they
should seek resolution any where but at their hand. Whether shall we judge the
godly learned ministers of the Churches above named, which have their calling
from God, or the unlearned and rash Brownists, intruding themselves without
calling, and run before they be sent, fittest to enquire at for resolution? It
were a pretty thing, to hear the Harlots in the stews, even in good earnest
to boast and glory of their chastity. Who is more fierce and outrageous, more
uncharitable in condemning, then ye Brownists? And yet ye brag of such
patience and charity, as cannot be overcome. Then ye turn your selves to
those poor souls as ye term the^, whom we, like miserable Physicians seek
to cure: and your Counsel you give them. I do allow it, for it is the same in
effect, if you could see, that I gave them before. I would to God the people
did follow it: we should not then have one Brownist, The Devil counterfaiting
Christ's voice, in heretical schismatikes, should not be able to allure and
call away the sheep from their sheepeheards. Now remains the last point
only, that I show some reason to prove our Ministry to be of Christ.

The ministry of the Gospel, which brings the word of faith and
reconciliation between God and the world, is the true ministry of Christ,
for the Devil and Antichrist ordeine no such ministry. Now the ministry of
the Church of England, does bring no word nor doctrine, but the sacred
scriptures. It preaches faith in God through Christ, and the doctrine of
repentance, delivering the holy sacraments, as seals to confirm the same. Let
all the schismatikes in the world bark against it, and say we have no word nor
Sacraments: yet this is the holy word: God so loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have life everlasting. It may be said, that many ministers in England, do
not, nor cannot preach the Gospel, how then is their ministry the ministry
of reconciliation? Here note, that as we must distinguish between the
ministry and the man himself which is the minister: for the man may be of the
Devil, and yet his ministry of God: so must we also distinguish between the
function it self, and the execution of the same. For when one is called to be
a minister of the Gospel, which is able, and does not preach, the defect is
not in the function, but in his negligence about the execution. Likewise when
the office or function is laid upon him that cannot preach, the function it
self is entyre, the defect is in the execution thereof, through his
disabilitie. I say therefore, that the Ministry of England is the Ministry
of the Gospel, though some do not, and some cannot Preach. Then further, such
as have the calling and ordination of the Church, have the Ministry of
Christ: for it is given to the Church, to have power to call and ordeine
Ministers. Now if the Church do falt and break, either by error or
negligence, in some rules which are to be observed about this calling and
ordinatio^, yet the power is not disanulled, nor the function destroyed,
unless we will hold, that where there is transgression either of ignorance, or
otherwise, the whole is overthrown: and so conclude, that there is no prayer
nor worship of God, nor any true service done unto him under heaven, because
all is with errors and faults.

In England the Ministers have their calling and ordination by the Church of
God. For that people which has forsaken heresies, and false worship, and
embraced the doctrine of the Gospel, has in it the true Church, which has
the power. And the Ministers intrude not themselves, but have the power given
them by the hands of the Bishops, who do it not by their own authority, nor
by any authority from Antichrist, but as committed to their trust by public
authority. Moreover, that is the Ministry of God, which is to bring men to
the faith, and to build up the body of Christ. The Ministry of England is to
none other end. For the whole drift, the whole scope, and burden laid upon
them, is to feed with wholesome doctrine, and to guide in the way of
godliness, the sheep of Christ, walking before them in godly conversation.
The Brownist will not take himself here convinced, but will say, these causes
are but pretended, and are not in truth. I will therefore now reason from the
effect, together with that which is properly adjoined to the Ministry of
Christ. That Ministry, with the execution whereof there is joined the
effectual grace, power, blessing, and operation of the Holy Ghost, to the true
conversion of men's souls, is not a Ministry of the Devil, nor of
Antichtist, nor comes not in the life and power of the beast, but is indeed
the true Ministry of Christ. I think the Brownists will not be so beastly as
to affirm that the grace and operation of the holy Ghost to the conversion of
men's souls, is joined to that, and works by that which is of the Devil, and
comes in the life and power of Antichrist. Then it remains only, to show
that there has been and is this grace and work in the execution of our
function. If the Brownists will deny that ever they felt that majesty and
power in the preaching, which can not be in the words of man, but only in that
word which is sharper then any two edged sword, and pierces so deep, as to be
a discerner of the thoughts and secret intents. Or if they will deny that ever
they have been driven by it unto hatred, sorrow, and remorse for sin, and
raised up with comfort and hope of forgiveness, and with the promises of
eternal glory: Yet unto many other which by it are converted unto the Lord in
deed, which unto fear and trembling do feel the power and sweetness of the
lively word, it may be said, as S. Paul speaks to the Corinths: for when his
adversaries did deny him to be an Apostle, the Corinths by his Ministry were
begotten in Christ: whereupon he says, If I be not an Apostle unto others, yet
am I unto you, for you are the seal of mine Apostleship in the Lord* 1. Cor.
9. ver. 2. Even so, if the Ministry of England, be not the Ministry of Christ
unto others, yet you can not doubt of it: your faith, your repentance, your joy
in the Lord, are the seal of it. You can not but see and know, that they be
vile blasphemous wretches, which bear ye in hand, that it is not the word of
God, nor the grace of his spirit which works in ye, but the power of the
Devil, and the spirit of Antichrist. You know it is the direct way which the
Devil takes by his ministers to bring in flat Atheism, to disgrace and
throw down the credit of the ministry. But does it not make against the
Ministry of England, that many of the Brownists confess they have been
greatly moved at sometimes with the power of the preaching, and at the
administration of the Sacraments? for may it not be said heerevpon, that it is
but a deceyuable show of grace and power, for if it had been in truth, it
would have continued? I answer, it is sufficient to prove the Ministry, and
that the power of the holy Ghost goes with it, when men have bin so moved,
although they do not continue, seeing the reprobate do feel the power, and
taste the sweetness of the word for a time, Hebr. 6. He that has therefore felt
the power of God in his soul by the preaching of the word, and now does not,
the falt is in himself. If the Brow. do further reply, that they be not true
Christians which yet are moved by the preaching, the motions are deceiptfull.
Then I will from that which they confess, show that such people are truly
faithful. For they confess, that they were blessed and holy Martyrs that
suffered in the days of Queen Mary: and I say they were converted by the same
ministry which we have now. They had but the same motions at the preaching of
Latimer, Howper, Tailor, Bradford, and others, which our people have now. If
the people at this day then feel the same effect in their souls at the
preaching and Sacraments, touching faith, repentance, and resolution to dye
with joy for the testimony of the Lord if he shall require it, let the
Brownists, and all other wicked Scismatikes bark that we have no Ministry,
we have no Word, we have no Sacraments, nor true Church, yet the godly wise
shall be able to discern the voice of Christ from the voice of the Devil, and
perceive that the power of our Ministry is not of the Devil, but of the holy
Ghost, whom they have most wickedly reproched.

The fourth transgression.
The Brow. THen, for that their Churches are ruled by and remain in
subjection, etc.

The fourth fault is, in the subjection to an Antichristian G. G.
government. If it were admitted that there is some yoke of Antichristian
government, under which, the poor Church may groan, as it is her lot to be
oppressed with outward bondage, to be made to keep the Vineyard which is not
her own, to be beaten of the watchmen, to have her veil taken from her: is
she therefore no longer the Spouse of Christ?

The Brow. But oh how far are you from this? which wincke with your eyes,
stop your ears, and harden your hearts, which can not endure so much as to
hear of your fearful estate, which you see not, no nor suffer your sores
which you see to be touched, but seek rather to cloak and hyde them both
from God and man, yea, to mitigate, tolerate, and iustifye them. Seek you not
here to mitigate that heavy apparent Antichristian yoke your Churches stand
under (whereof heretofore you have complained in Parliaments) tearming it some
yoke, being now peradventure through long custom grown lighter unto you and
more easy, then Christ's yoke, at the least, then Christ's cross, etc.

To this fourth accusation, my answer was very short: G. G.
for I did only propound this question, whether it be no longer the Spouse of
Christ which is oppressed, and does groan under some yoke of Antichristian
government? and showed my judgment, that it is the lot of the Church to be
oppressed with outward bondage, alleging for proof some what out of the Song
of Solomon. At this ye are stricken with such wonderment, that as men carried
almost beside your selves, you begin with a vehement exclamation: and three
things there are in my speech which have cast ye into this agony: the first,
that (as you say) our Churches stand under an apparent heavy yoke of
Antichrist, and I speak of the true Church oppressed with some yoke of
Antichristian government: the second, that I say it is the lot of the Church to
be oppressed with outward bondage. This ye term a blasphemous error, because
as ye say, bondage is the badge of Antichrist, the mark of the Beast, whereby
his soldiers are discerned from the soldiers of Christ, etc. The third, that
I falsify and pervert the places of Scripture which I allege to prove that
Gods Church may be oppressed with some outward bondage: where you will redeem
the places from such violence and corruption, and give such a glimse, that
simple men of understanding shall discover and search out the false dealing of
such watchmen, and the greatest clarke of us all shall be taught hereafter how
to abuse the scripture for a cloak to cover our sins. O what valiant
fellows you be, who shall be able to stand in your hands? the greatest clarks
in this land are but babes to such mighty giants: how shall I do then? I must
now defend my self in these particulars above named. I will let the question
about the heavy apparent yoke of Antichrist alone, unto the last place, under
which ye falsely charge our Church to stand, and deal with that first which I
set down. Where the first question is, whether the true spouse of Christ may
be under some yoke of Antichristian government. The second, whether it be her
lot to be oppressed with outward bondage. The third, whether those places by me
alleged be rightly applied to prove the same. I will not deal severally in
these, but in all together, because they be all but one in effect. Now to
speak precisely and strictly, the yoke of Antichrist is only spiritual and
inward, where the faith and conscience are burdened, and be in subjection, to
receive his laws and worship. This can not be borne, without falling from the
freedom we have in Christ. But in a longer sense, we call it Antichristian,
when the pastors of the Church, or any of them, do vsurp more then they ought,
in external government, or tyrannously abuse the power committed into their
hands. This is that which I called some Antichristian yoke. Now the very point
of the question is, whether the true spouse of Christ has ever been oppressed
in this by any of her governors, as her lot in some outward bondage? I hold
that she has, and for proof, I alleged those sayings out of the Song,
against which you take exception, as places wrested, which shall be considered,
after other testimonies showed. Then I demand of ye first, whether it was not
the spouse of Christ, whom the Lord calls Israel, his sheep and his flock?
The pastors of Israel did not only scatter these, but ruled over them, and
exercised dominion by violence and tyranny, Ezech. 34. v. 4. What say ye to
this, the Prophets prophecy lies, the Priests exercise dominion by their hand,
and my people love to have it so, Ier. 5. v. 31. Was there no true Church under
this ruling of ye priests? Pashur a chief priest in the temple, stroke Jeremy
the Prophet, and put him in the stocks, Ierem. 20. ver. 1. will ye affirm
that there was no true Church then? Come to the time in which our Savior lived
upon the earth: for as yet the kingdom of God was not taken away from them,
which is threatened, Matthew. 22: but the high Priest, with the other Preests,
with the Pharisees and Elders of the people, had the Ecclesiastical power,
which they tyrannously abused, and by it oppressed the faithful, as appears
in diverse places of the Gospel, and namely in John. 7. ver. 13. and John. 9.
ver. 22. Diotrephes ambitiously abused the power of government, when he
withstood S. John, as he testifies in his third Epistle written unto Gaius. I
wrote (says he) unto the Church, but Diotrephes, who loves to have
pre-eminence among them, receives us not. Therefore if I come, I will declare
his deeds, railing at us with malitions words: and not content therewith,
neither he himself receives not the brethren, and them that would he
forbids, and casts them out of the church. ver. 9. 10. Does S. John tell
the Christians, that this tyrannous oppression by Diotrephes, did make them to
be no longer Christ's Church, which remained under him? Did he will them to
separate themselves, and not to obey him any longer in any thing? Our Savior
says, the time will come, that they shall excommunicate ye. John. 16. ver. 2.
Antichrist himself sitting in the Temple of God, seduced the reprobate, but
could not destroy the Church, which yet he did grievously oppress, and keep
in some bondage. Whereby it appears, that Solomon speaks of that which
should fall out often, and be even as it were the lot of the Church, to be
iniuried, oppressed, and kept in some outward bondage, even by those, at whose
hands she should find most comfort, holding the places of Pastors and
Governors: as we have seen in the Church of Israel before our Savior came,
at the time he lived, and also in the Church under the Gospel.

You bring in diverse scriptures, which prove, as you imagine, that an outward
oppression of the Church in external government, does make an utter deuorse
betwixt her and Christ: but he that considers those things which I have
before noted, and the sundry oppressions of the Church, by her Pastors, shall
easily perceive that Anabaptisticall freedom which ye glory of. For howsoever
the Church with her Children are free with God, and receive no yoke upon their
faith and conscience: yet in outward things they may be oppressed. You could
abide well enough that phrase of speech oppressed, but to say, the Church of
Christ may be in any bondage, ye term a blasphemous error. Because bondage
ye say, is the badge of Antichrist, the mark of the Beast, etc. Take heed of
the saying that is written, 2. Pet. 2. ver. 19. That the seducers promise
liberty, and are themselves the bend servants of corruption. For you imagine
and glory of such a full and perfect liberty, as that ye account it a
blasphemous error, to say the Church may be oppressed with outward bondage. It
is strange that there should be such a bold spirit in rotten flesh, as flatly
to contrary the spirit of God. For the Lord said to Abraham: Thy seed shall
be in bondage, and they shall oppress them. But the nation whom they shall
serve, will I Judge, Genes. 15. He says, he brought them out of the house of
bondage, or of bond men, Exodus 20. Will ye affirm that the Church was not
oppressed with outward bondage in Egypt? will ye deny that they were led
captive, and held in outward bondage in Babylon? cannot this word bondage,
which the holy Ghost uses, be allowed of ye? must bondage of necessity be the
badge and mark of Antichrist? when the Lord threatens by his Prophets, that
his people should go into captivity, and that there should be a yoke of
bondage laid upon them, does he give them over to wear the badge of
Antichrist? or so to be servants unto men, that they could not also be his
servants? Indeed the Anabaptists do hold, that we cannot be servants unto men
in any outward bondage, and yet be the servants of Christ, grounding their
heresy upon the places which you allege. If all manner of bondage be the mark
of the beast, and the badge of Antichrist, and a loosing of Christian liberty,
as you and the Anabaptists would have it: then how could S. Paul say, Art thou
a bond man, care not: thou art the Lords free man, 1. Cor. 7? Let no man
suppose that I charge ye over hardly, with this gross point of Anabaptistrie,
because our question is about Church government, and I speak of civil
bondage: for ye speak generally of outward bondage, and deny that it can be
the lot of the Church, or of any member thereof. The word bondage, though it*
be outward, cannot in any sense be allowed by you, to agree with your freedom.
Now for the places in the song, My mothers sons were angrye with me, they set
me to keep the Vines, mine own Vine I have not kept. In this place the Church
wills: first yt they should not look scornefully upon her, because she is
somewhat black. Then she shows, that it is not her native color, but she is
sun burnt: the sun (says she) has looked upon me. There follows the
occasion, that her mothers sons were angrye with her, set her to keep the
Vines. Who these be whom she calls her mothers sons, is the greatest
difficulty to find. Tremellius (whose interpretation in that point ye follow)
does expound it of original sin, and the lusts which she has from the
womb: other take it, and more fitly, of false brethren, which boast themselves
to be true worshipers, and children of the church, which she calls her
mothers sons, because they descended from the ancient mother church, and were
the degenerate children of holy forefathers, for I take it somewhat hard to call
sins or concupiscences her mothers sons. But take it whether way ye will, either
of original sin and concupiscences, or of degenerate children, among whom there
were many, even of the Pastors and governors, yet ye cannot avoid, but yt there
is a violence, an oppression* and some bondage: for she says, they set her to
keep the vineyards. Howsoever you would slily insinuate, that it were but
negligence, and that when she repents, she is so cleared, that she is in no
bondage unto sin at all. But when ye have cauilled what ye can, it stands
clear by the scriptures, yt the Church in her perfectest repentance, even with
all her children, is held in some spiritual bondage unto sin, but yet she is
not obstinat I grant, for she hates the evil she does, and labors against
it. I do not gather from this, that the Church either did or may, keep
Antichrists Vine, as you demand, what a bold falsifiyng of the place this is?
But I say: what a bold impudency is this in you, so to falsify my words?
For I allege it, to prove, that the Church is subject to be oppressed
(...)babble so much of Antichrist and his yoke. Then let him prove that every
error, abuse, and great fault in discipline, does ouerturne it, and make it
become Antichristian, yea, Antichrists yoke, so far as to make it no Church
which is subject to such oppression. It is most clear that a Church may err
in sundry points of Doctrine, and not be Antichristian, but the true Spouse of
Christ. And an error in Doctrine, if it be foul, does approach nearer toward
the overthrow of faith, then an error or an abuse in external government.

Moreover, if the execution of discipline by Bishops be the yoke of
Antichrist, and if all the Churches which do stand under the same, do
worship the Beast and be no Christians, it must needs follow, that such as
did ever execute this power, were Antichrists, and no children of God at that
time, or before they repented. But this is false even by your own confession,
which acknowledge, that those worthy servants of God which sometime executed
that power, and after suffered death for the Gospel in the days of Queen
Mary, were blessed Martyrs. I conclude therefore, that the Brownists can not
but with heresies, and most heinous injury, and inordinate dealing, condemn a
Church as quite divorced and separated from Christ, for such imperfections and
corruptions in Gods worship, as be not fundamental, nor destroy the substance:
for that wicked men come with the godly to the public exercises of religion:
for some wants in calling, and ordeyning Ministers, and in Ecclesiastical
discipline.

Article 1.
The Brow. We seek above all things the peace and protection of the most high,
and the kingdom of Christ our Lord.

G. G. The first Article is that which all true Christians do seek indeed.
But the kingdom of Christ, or the kingdom of God (as Christ says) is within
men: it consists in righteousness and peace and joy of the holy Ghost. For
the preservation of this, Christ has ordained a Church government. They sin
against God, which do not covet, and according to their calling, labor to
have so great a help. But to transport the name of Christ's kingdom, which is
chiefly Spiritual in the heart, unto this, which is but a part, and as though
the kingdom of God could not be in any, unless they have this (so they do
not wilfully despise it) I say is false, and the contrary to be proved by the
Scriptures.

The Brow. Our Article being by you confessed to be the bounden duty of all
true Christians, we see not with what equity you can in this manner cavil at
our words, or with what conscience you can misconstrue and constrayne them as
you do, seeking thereby to retract by sleight, what you can not gaynesay in
truth, and taking occasion to contend about words, namely, the kingdom of
Christ, you make it only inward, and use Christ like one of the Physicians
Planetarie Signs, assigning to him in hypocrisy your heart and soul to rule,
whilst in the mean while you yield your bodies and whole assemblyes to the
obedience and rule of Antichrist, making no conscience to obey his laws
openly, and to transgress Christ's, thinking belike Christ's kingdom so inward
and spiritual, as that he requires no bodily nor outward obedience, or
because it consists in righteousness and peace and joy of the holy Ghost, that
there may be peace without righteousness, or joy without peace or inward
righteousness, where is such outward disobedience, and wilful transgression,
etc.

G. G. I did confess, and do still acknowledge, that this first Article is
that which all true Christians should seek. I hold, that Christ's Kingdom is
chiefly inward and Spiritual, and that the discipline is but a part thereof:
your selves have repeated my words, and yet charge me, that I make Christ's
Kingdom only inward, assigning the Soul to him, and the body to Antichrist
to be ruled. I can not but wonder at your boldness in lying. You say, that to
discuss how far every Christians calling and duty extends herein, were to
dismiss all mine answers, and to pluck away the mantle of shame wherewith we
cover our nakedness, negligence, and abominations. I marvel why ye do not
then discuss it: for we hold, that no man is to labor beyond his calling to
reform any thing amiss in the Church: and when it shall be declared unto what
bounds and limits the calling of private men is restrained, I am sure there
will be no mantle nor ragge to cover the presumptuous dealing of Brownists,
which intrude themselves without calling. Ye let this thing pass therefore,
and will only ask two questions. The first is, whether any which have their
calling of Antichrist, be his marked Ministers and waged servants, can truly
and uprightly covet and labor for Christ's sincere government; which is his
whippe wherewith he scourges out all thieves, intruders, and idle bellies out
of his house? The other question is, whether to remain wittingly and seruilely
in the bondage and yoke of Antichrist xxix. years, be to labor for the
government of Christ faithfully in our callings? Ye must grant me some time to
answer to these two questions, and that shall be when you answer these two which
I propound. The first is, whether ignorant, heretical, and rash Scismatikes be
meet and competent Judges to condemn all the learned Ministers in a Kingdom?
The other is, whether false and lying accusations be to stand for due proof?
Ye seem to grant, that the Kingdom of God may be in the scattered faithful
which yet have not the discipline: I did not charge ye with the contrary, but
only showed how I did allow the Article. Yet remember what ye do hold in this
place.

Article 2.
The Brow. We seek and purpose to worship God aright according as he has
commanded in his word.

G. G. This second Article ought all men that will please God to approve.

The Brow. This article say you, ought all that will please God to approve.
How then seek you to please God? which continue in idolatry, and are a
minister thereof, which prophecy in Baal, and plead for Baal? or how approve
you it, when ye condemn us of schism and heresy, because we forsake your
false and Antichristian worship, and seek to worship Christ according to his
word?

G. G. When ye have proved that our worship is Idolatry, and that we
prophecy in Baal and for Baal, let men take ye to be no schismatikes nor
heretics. But such as boast that they seek to worship God according to his
word, and yet arrogantlye break sundry special rules thereof, cannot but in
their vain bosting be liers, as S. James says, against the truth.

Article 3.
The Brow. We seek the fellowship and communion of his faithful and obedient
servants. And together with them, to enter covenant with the Lord, and by
direction of his spirit to proceed to a godly free right choice of Ministers,
etc.

G. G. The third Article, if it be taken in this sense, that ye do set up a
society separated from all other within this land, which make public
profession: then I see not, when ye have gone by your selves, and set up your
officers, how you will clear your selves from Donatisme. If theirs were a
damnable fact which God did accursse, then take heed to yours. For if it can be
showed, that their heresies are not holden by you, I will change my mind.

The Brow. The words of our article being, that we seek the fellowship and
communion of Christ's faithful and obedient servants, etc. clear us of all
schism and heresy, so far forth: so that if you would convince us of these
crimes, it had been expedient you had first proved your assemblies as they
generally stand, by the evidence of Gods word, to be true churches of Christ,
rightly entered and keeping covenant with the Lord, continuing in the order
and obedience of his word, etc. and that we preposterously departed from ye,
and uncharitably have forsaken your fellowship. But as soon as you shall show us
such a church amongsts you, by the grace of God we will show, how free we are
from schism. As likewise when ye shall lay open our error unto us, how far
we will be from heresy. In the mean time we will not cease to pray unto God
for ye, that he will not lay these sins unto your charge, which in your
ignorant zeal you commit, but in mercy show ye, the fearful estate ye stand
in, and give ye a heart, unfeignedly to repent, and speedely to turn unto him.

C. G. Your own bare words, whatsoever ye profess by them, cannot be
sufficient to clear ye from schism and heresy. I have showed, that our
Churches are from ancient descent within the covenant, and that by such
evidence of Gods word, as no heretic or schismatike shall be able to
overthrow. I have also showed, that the stablenesse of Gods covenant with the
Church, is founded upon the free promise of his mercy, which though we have
sinned with our fathers, and done wickedly, so that there has been great
apostasy in the Church, yet he remembers his covenant toward us. I have also
showed how preposterously ye have departed, arrogating that power to Judge
whole assemblies, which does belong to the Churches of Christ, and without any
orderly proceeding, according to the rule of the Gospel. And moreover, that
ye have most uncharitably and falsely accused our Churches. We cannot show ye
a church, nor any one member of a church so perfect, but that there be many
defects and faults. A true church being showed among us, though ye repent, yet
can ye not be free from schism, which is already committed. And touching your
heretical opinions, and gross errors, time will declare how well ye will
perform this promise, not to become heretics. I know I am in the right way,
albeit I am so far from running, that I do scarce creep, I desire the
prayers of all the faithful, that I may proceed in it. But the prayer which
you promise to make for me, is much fitter for your selves.

Article 4.
The Brow. We seek to establish and obey the ordinances and laws of Christ,
left by his last will and testament, to the governing of his Church, etc.

G. G. The fourth article, ought all godly men to practice, so far forth as
the limits of their calling do extend. But let it be showed, that ever
private men did take upon them to reform when things were amiss in the
Church, or that any of the Prophets did will them to take the matter in hand,
or show your warrant that ye be not private men.

The Brow. This Article you first allow, and after restrain it, to we wot
not what limits of calling. But if ye grant it to be the duty of every true
Christian, to seek to establish and obey the ordinances and laws of Christ,
left in his Testament, to the governing of his Church, without any altering,
etc. It is as much as we endeavor or purpose. Otherwise we allow not that
which the law of God condemns, either intrusion without lawful calling,
either transgression in calling, or presumption above calling. Our purpose is
not to meddle with the reformation of the state, otherwise then by our prayers
unto God, and by refraining from all things that be contrary to Gods laws,
etc.

G. G. You say that I first allow this article, and then after restrain it to
ye wot not what limits of calling. How is this true, when I make the restraint
even in the first sentence? for I allow it no further then the limits of
every man's calling do extend. It is no marvel that ye say, ye wot not to
what limits of calling I restrain it. For if ye did regard to keep within
the bounds of calling, ye would not thrust forward private men, to do that
which GOD has not called them unto. But ye plead for your selves, that ye do
not endeavor or purpose any thing, beyond the limits of private calling. Ye
allow not, as ye say, that which the law of God condemns, which ye express
in these words: either intrusion without lawful calling, either transgression
in calling, or presumption above calling. If ye could see it, you do here,
as it were, put the halter about your own necks, and about the necks of all
Brownists: for ye stand to this, that the law of God condemns intrusion,
without lawful calling, and presumption above calling, and I wish no sharper
weapon to fight against ye withal. But you think ye are well enough yet for
all this, for ye do not purpose to meddle with reformation of the state, but by
prayer to God, and refraining from every thing that is contrary to Gods law:
And this is commanded all men that will save their souls: All are willed to
come out of Babylon. Here is a poor shift: have ye no other way to pluck of
the halter, which ye put about your own neck then this? I grant it is the
duty of all men, as well private as other, to obey Gods voice, which calls
them out of Babylon, and to separate themselves from false worship I add
further, that even in the true Church, it is the duty of every private man, in
all humble and peaceable manner, to keep himself unpolluted, from those
corruptions and abuses that creep in. But do you proceed no further then thus?
Have ye not professed in the third article, that ye will proceed unto a godly
free choice of Ministers and other officers? Do ye not in this profess, that
ye seek to establish the laws of Christ, to the governing of his Church? Is
this no more, but to obey the voice of God, calling us out of Babylon? Ye go
beyond the common saying, Give some an inch, and they will take an ell. For God
has not called nor sent ye to perform such a work. I have before laid open
your foul slanders, wherewith ye accuse us, that our worship is idolatrous,
and Antichristian. But admit the Church of England were Babylon, and the
synagog of Antichrist, and that ye have but obeyed the voice of God, in
separating your selves, which is a work of private men: Yet who has given ye
the power and authority to choose and ordeine Ministers, to set up and
establish public government? I would know this of ye, whether it be a less
work to repair a decayed place of a building, or to build the whole frame?
whether it be less to sweep the house, or to set it up? It is the less to
repair, and the less to sweep, all men will grant. Then I reason thus,
private men have not authority, nor ought not to take upon them so much as to
cleanse Gods house from abuses, or to repair the ruynes thereof: how much
less ought they to take upon them to set up the whole frame? You mean not to
meddle with reformation of the state, but ye will erect a state and government:
for is not the power of the Church both public and great? Ye will not daube
the walls of Antichrist, nor build Jericho: no in deed ye are ouerprowd to be
dawbers or to repair: ye will erect the Altar, and build the Temple in
Jerusalem, such worthy men must have a new building of their own. Thus may all
men see, that ye confess, the law of God condemns intrusion without lawful
calling, and presumption above calling, and yet ye take upon ye being private,
and thrust forward other private men unto the chief public work under the
heavens: but more of this in the next Article.

Article 5.
The Brow. We purpose by the assistance of the holy Ghost, in this faith and
order to lead our lives: and for this faith and order to leave our lives, if
such be the good will of our heavenly Father, etc.

G. G. If men have the truth, it is good to stand unto it to the death, rather
then to deny it, as our Church in the same estate it is now in, yielded many
blessed constant Martyrs. But if a man have not the truth, it is great
obstinacy to die for it, as sundry Anabaptists, and other Heretics have
showed by their dying. Every true Christian will rather die, then deny the
discipline which Christ has left: but you must show that God commands
private men to set it up.

The Brow. The word of God and your own mouth having approved our desires in
these Articles, we can not be moved with Satan's old temptation, to doubt of the
Lords undoubted truth, or call his commandments into question, with if it be
the truth, etc. Neither can we be removed with that old Popish reason ye bring
of certain blessed Martyrs that dyed in this estate your Church is now in.
This is not to approve the state of your Church by Christ's Testament: which
until you do, though all the men in the world should both dye in it and for it,
yet could they not justify that God condemns, etc.

G. G. How the word of God and my mouth approoueth your most wicked intrusion
without calling, let every wise man judge.

Ye call it an old Popish reason that I bring of certain blessed Martyrs
which dyed in the state our Church is now in. If you had no more frenzy in
ye then my reason has Popery, it were much better for ye. Let us see how
you or any Brownist is able to answer it. That Church which is of the Devil,
and has not the truth, but is Antichristian, can not bring forth and nourish
up children to God: But the Church of England in the estate it is now in,
brought forth and nourished up children to God, seeing it yielded many blessed
and constant Martyrs: Therefore the Church of England in the estate it is in,
has the truth, and is not a false and Antichristian Church. When you have
showed that a false Church can bring forth and nourish up true children to
God, ye may well say that this is not to prove our Church by Christ's
Testament. If ye can not prove that, cease to cavil. Ye deny them not to
be blessed Martyrs, but ye say, that they dyed not in our Church, nor for our
Church. Ye speak confidentlie: but in the confirmation of your speech, ye
show your selves most foolish. For ye say, they dyed not in our Church,
being through Gods great mercy deprived and disgraded by their enemies. All
the Martyrs were deprived by their enemies of their lives, they could not
deprive them of their faith, nor of the truth which they had learned before
from the mouths of Gods Ministers in our Church. What were they all disgraded
of? do ye take it they were all members of the Synagog of Antichrist, or
stood for any dignities or privileges in that fellowship, until their
enemies thrust them forth? Then ye say, they dyed not for it, but for the
truth of Christ. How will you separate things as contrary, which do stand
well together? they dyed both for the truth of Christ, and for our Church: they
constantly gave testimony to the truth, and were content to endure any
torments to confyrme their Breethren in the same, and therein may be said to
dye for the Church. I do not mean that every thing which they allowed, must
needs be good, for they had their errors and imperfections. Neither do I
reason after this sort, as though the Martyrs should dye for every order and
observation of our Church, they dyed for the substance of that faith and
woorship which our Church mayntayneth. And (as I said before) you must prove
they were not begotten to God by our Church, or else confess our Church to be
the Spouse of Christ. Doubtless, if our Church did not bring them forth, and
nursse them up to God, they were deceived, and departed out of the world such
babes, that they took a wrong woman for their Mother, for they took our
Church to be their Mother. But you have another Answer, and that is, that
those Martyrs never resisted the truth being showed them, nor never yielded
unto any yoke or corruption which God gave them sight of, contrary to their
consciences, as ye say we do in these days. Then the difference will fall
out between them and us, that they offended of ignorance, and stood under
Antichrists yoke, yea, some of them must be Antichrist himself, in as much
as they were Bishops, and yet Gods true Church. For, ye say, they were
faithful in that little light, and we offend of knowledge, and therefore can
not be the true Church.

Your confessing them faithful in that little light, and so Gods Church under
the same government we be, which ye term Antichrists yoke, does quite
overthrow all Brownisme, make what difference ye can between them and us in
truth, yet shall it appear, that of necessity grant them to be the Church,
ye must confess ours. If ignorance excused them, ignorance should excuse many
among us, seeing there be multitudes in the land professing the Gospel that
are persuaded we have the truth, and be in the right way both in doctrine and
government. And again, ye are much deceived, if ye suppose that every
Christian man now has so great understanding, as the chief of them had that
suffered death in the days of Queen Mary. Would ye have men believe, that
Brown himself, and those Brownists, which take themselves his equals, have
greater light then either Ridley, Cranmer, Howper, Bradford, Philpot, Tailor,
and other had? when the learnedest in these days are not ashamed of those
worthy men, but acknowledge them as excellent Divines? How absurd a thing is
it, that ignorant blind Schismatikes, full of fantastical and heretical
opinions, should boast of their great light in comparison of theirs? Now we
come to the last point of all, and one of the greatest. I said, ye must show
that God commands private men to set up discipline. As it stands ye
greatly upon, so ye do apply all your force hereunto: and in very deed
look to it, for if ye be weak in this, and can not show good warrant, all
men will see that your presump ion against the holy ordinance of God, is most
vile and damnable: let us see then how this question will be concluded. First,
ye say, God in his law commands every one to seek the place where he
puts his name. Christ in the Gospel commands to seek the kingdom of
God, and to take his yoke upon them, etc. I answer, that if a man from
these places should conclude, therefore private men are commanded to preach
the word, and to administer the Sacraments, it were ridiculous: and yet ye may,
as well as to say, that therefore they are to reform, to establishe, or to set
up the discipline. Your next reason is drawn from the nature of discipline, in
that it is perpetual. Indeed the substance, and essential form of discipline
are perpetual: and there be circumstances in it which are variable. And thus a
man may reason: there is a discipline given by Christ, which is not variable:
therefore the authority neglecting it does offend, and the Church has wrong,
where it is not established: but to say, that therefore mere private men are
to establish it, is without any good warrant. For when any thing is done that
ought not, or any thing let pass, which ought to be done in the Church and
commonwealth, and so a perpetual commandment of God broken: it is no
warrant for private men to take the matter in hand, and to redress. But you
say, the Church cannot be governed by any other laws or government. I am of
this mind, that there can be no visible established Churches, but where there
are some rules of Christ's discipline observed. As if there be no Pastors or
Teachers, no flocks, no calling nor order for Preaching the word, and
administering the Sacraments. But to say there is defect or want in some parts
of discipline, or it is in some things corrupted, therefore it is no Church
that is governed thereby, is very heretical. Seeing the Gospel preached, and
embraced with true and lively faith, gives the being to a church. Yea but true
faith, says the Brownist, cannot be without obedience. I grant it cannot be
the Church of God, if it be wholly disobedient, or in matters which concern the
grounds of faith and holy doctrine. I say moreover, that one part of this
obedience is, that private men keep themselves within the limits of their
calling, and do nothing but that which Gods word does warrant them to deal
in. Neither ought the Church to be without this discipline, say you. I assent,
that so far as it is perpetual, the Church cannot want any part, or have it
corrupted, but with injury and damage.

But your meaning extends further, as appears by your words. For God (say
you) holds them all in the state of enemies, which have not his son to
reign over them* And your marginall note is. If they have not his Scepter of
grace, they shall have his Iron mace. Indeed, if a man could not have Christ to
reign over him, nor be in the state of grace, unless the discipline be
erected, that he may be governed thereby, all private men should be warranted
by necessity, to set it up and to establish it, if they could no where find
it already erected, where to join themselves: but have ye not before against
this heresy confessed the truth in your reply upon the first article, by
affirming Christ's kingdom to extend unto all such as by true faith apprehend
and confess him, howsoever they be scattered, or wheresoever dispersed, upon
the face of the earth? If ye had not confessed, ye must needs be driven
thereto. For ye take it, that Brownists are Gods Church, And yet ye have not
established the Discipline. If ye replye, that ye endeavor, and are let by
force, which does excuse ye before God. I answer, that the fetters and
chains, can no faster bind the hands and feet of Brownists, then the hands
of private men are bound with the bands of conscience, and the fear of God,
from presuming to take upon them public authority.

And let us see where that commandment ye speak of is given unto private
men, as namely, that they are willed to come together, with promise of
direction and protection, and authority, not only to establish Christ's laws
and ordinances among them, but faithfully to govern his house: ye do boldly
and presumptuously affirm, and can show no one place of Scripture for it. Ye
say, this assembly, before they be planted and established in this order,
consists hitherto but of particular private persons, none as yet being called
to office or function? Who then has called them together? Or being all
private, does their coming together make them not to be private? or is not
the action of many private men assembled, as private as of one seuerallye by
himself? Did the assembly of Corah and his companions any thing help the
matter? Ye will choose Pastors and Elders? who shall ordeine them? Do ye
ever read of any ordained, but by Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors,
Teachers, and Governors? Was not the power derived at the first, from the
extraordinary Ministers to the Ordinary? If all the Brownists in the land
should come together, and choose a Minister, and ordeine him, should it make
him any more a Minister indeed before God, then if all the Apprentises in
London taking upon them to choose a Lord Mayor of the City, and to minister
an oath unto him should make him a Lord Mayor? The Queens Majesty has granted
no such authority in the Commonwealth, to the Apprentises: no more has the
Lord God in the Church, unto the Brownists. And as it is in the higher matter,
so is their wicked presumption more detestable. But ye proceed and say:
therefore we may well conclude, that God commands his faithful Servants,
being as yet private men, together to build his Church, etc. Ye may even as
well conclude, as in the rest of all your heretical conclusions. Is it not
woeful, that men should be drawn into most damnable ways, by such blind
seducers, which bring not so much as a show or color of warrant out of Gods
word, to set them a work in that whereof they cheefely glory, as namely that
they will establish Christ's laws and ordinances, without altering, changing,
etc? But ye allege the examples of the Primitive Churches (for your patterns,
and warrant) which sued not to the Courts and parlements, nor waited upon
Princes pleasures, etc. What can be spoken more grossly? The holy Apostles
were sent by our Savior into all the world, furnished with authority and
commission to set up his kingdom. The Pastors and Governors ordained by them,
receive the power, not only for themselves, but also to convey over unto
others, What makes this for private men? Doubtless ye have no pattern in the
Scriptures which you follow, but of Corah, Dathan, and Abyram with their
company, who cried; Are not all the Lords people holy: even as you Brownists,
with the Anabaptists cry out: Are not all the Lords people free? Ye hane no
commission from GOD, it is the Devil that has thrust ye forward, and will
ye in such vile and wretched manner, pretend the examples of the Primitive
Churches? But your reason depends much upon this, that the Primitive Churches
stayed not the pleasures of Princes. If this were granted, that princes are not
to be stayed for, yet does it not follow there upon, that private men are to
establish Church government: but there must be some to do it, which are
called and furnished with authority from God.

Yet the question does remain touching Princes, whether they be to be stayed
for? Brown makes many arguments to prove, that they are not to be stayed
for, nor yet have to do by public power to establish religion? which opinion
of his, is with such abridging the sacred power of Princes, and with such
horrible injury to the Church, contrary to the manifest word of God: that if
there were nothing else, it is enough to make him an odious and detestable
heretic, until he show repentance. You follow him here, and allege some
reasons which are to be considered. But first the question which is general,
must be restrained unto the special. We must distinguish: for there be Heathen
and Idolatrous Kings, and there be Christian Princes. Those are against Christ,
and these are for Christ.

When the holy Apostles were sent forth to Preach the Gospel in the whole
world, the Kings were all Heathen, and bent their power against them. To what
end should they, having commission from Christ, to establish discipline, sue
unto the Courts and Parliaments of such Princes, or attend their pleasure? The
case is all one, where the kings profess Christ in name, and be idolaters. As
in France, the Ministers whom God has raised up, and sent to publish the
Gospel in former years, attended not the pleasure of those their idolatrous
Kings, for the setting up of discipline: for they might as well, at their
inhibition, have ceased from preaching. But where there is a Christian Prince,
the sacred power of the sword is with Christ and for his Church, and here the
case is clean changed. For this Magistrate, King, or Queen, sitting upon the
royal Throne, and holding the Scepter, is the chiefs and principal member of
the Church. This Magistrate being Gods minister, and bearing the Sword to take
vengeance upon all evil dooers, Romans 13. and to maintain peace with all
godliness and honesty, Timoth. 2. has the charge and burden not only to
provide for the bodies of the Subjects, and their outward civil estate, but
also by good civil Laws, to procure the establishing of Gods true Religion
and worship among them, for the comfort of their Souls: for how shall he
punish all evil, and maintain all Godliness by the Sword, but by
establishing Christ's holy Religion? Therefore this Magistrate is to assemble
all the learned, the wise, the grave and experienced, that he may conveniently,
and to have it discussed by the Word of God, which is the true and pure
Doctrine, and which be the rules and orders that Christ has given for the
government and preservation of his Church. Then are Laws to be made (for
Kings can not rule but by Laws) to destroy and abolish all false Religion,
Superstition, Idolatry, and Heresies; and to compel all states and degrees of
persons within the Kingdom, to receive the holy doctrine and rules of Christ,
and to walk in the same. This did the Kings of Judah, as the holy Scriptures
do plainly declare.

Now if this Christian Prince do err in some matters of Doctrine, or
touching the rules of discipline, yet holding and mayntayning all the
fundamental points of the Christian faith, so that there be abuses and
corruptions in the Church, every private godly man is to keep a good
conscience, not breaking the unity and peace of the faithful, but not to take
public authority to reform. Then ye demand, If they should tarry Princes
leysures, where were the persecution we speak of? Here ye utter a most
beastly speech. Saint Paul wills to make earnest prayers and supplications
for Princes, that we may live in peace with all godliness, 1. Timoth. 2.
Whereby it appears, that the defense of the Christian Magistrate is a
singular blessing unto the Church. And you take it, the Cross of Christ is
abolished, unless the Magistrate be provoked, and do persecute. The faithful
do bear the Cross of reproaches and afflictions under the most Godly Kings,
who yet in duty are upon knowledge to redress it. Do ye think the Godly
did not bear the Cross under King David, who was not free himself? Or would
ye have no peace by Christian Kings? If your meaning be not such, why do ye
utter so wicked speech?

Then ye say, we make Christ attend upon Princes.

I answer, that Christ has ordinary Ministers, if these be slack, when he
will have his work done, he can and has raised up extraordinary workmen.
If his Kingdom lie wait, does that warrant private men to step forth, and
to reform or establishe? Or shall Christ be brought to stoop unto Princes,
if every Schismatike intrude not himself to run when GOD has not sent him?

There be certain Answers which go under the name of Henry Barowe, where
being demanded whether the Queen may make Laws for the Church which are not
contrary to the Word of God? The Answer is this, I think no Prince, neither
the whole world, nor the Church it self, can make any Laws for the Church,
other then Christ has left in his Word.

This seems unto simple men a very sound Answer, drawn from two firm
principles, the one, that there is but one Lawgiver, which is God: the other,
that he has by Jesus Christ given full and perfect Laws for his Church. The
deceypt lies hid in this, that men do not consider there be general laws or
rules given by Christ for matters of circumstance, that be indifferent and
variable in the particulars, and so to be altered and abolished, as the peace
and edification of the Church shall require. And therefore, that Princes with
the Church are to ordeine and to establish such orders by those general rules,
as may afterward for just cause be altered. Wherefore it is manifest, that the
answer of Barow, does cut off a great part of the Discipline, and shorten the
power of the Prince. And moreover, it is not considered, that the Prince, being
to punish all evil by the doctrine of Saint Paul, and to maintain all
godliness, cannot do it but by laws, and so is to establishe by laws the
whole Christian religion.

Where, upon this Anabaptisticall answer of Barow (I think it the duty of
every Christian, and principally of the Prince, to enquire out, and to reuew
the laws of GOD, and stir up all the Subjects, unto more diligent and
careful keeping of the same) goes also very current among many. Whereas
indeed, it denies a great part of that power which GOD has given to Princes.

For shall not the Christian Magistrate, drive the negligent to hear the word
Preached? shall he not punish the wicked despisers, blasphemers, Heretics,
Schismatikes, Idolators, and such like? And how can this be done, but by
laws made and established? Yet Brown the root of this heresy, who has by
his writings seduced the rest, does make very great show in this matter.

The kingdom of Christ is spiritual, and not set up by the arm of flesh and
blood, but by the Holy Ghost. The Subjects of Christ come willinglye of their
own accord, and not by compulsion. None of all the godly Kings, durst
compel any to the worship of God. And that all the Kings of Judah, which did
reform religion, did it by a spiritual power, as being figures of Christ.
Indeed the kingdom of God is spiritual: all the power of Kings in the world,
cannot convert one soul unto Christ: that is done by the Holy-ghoste,
through the liuelye word of faith. Nevertheless, the civil power is an
outward mean to drive men to hear the Gospel preached, and to obey the
discipline. Christ's subjects are frank and willing, so far as his holy
spirit and word have wrought, and have power in them to subdue, and bring
under every high thing, which exalts it self against God: but before men be
converted, compulsion, even with penalties, is a mean to bring them to that,
whereby this regeneration is wrought: and after conversion to God, there
remains still a great lump of corruption, which is to be kept in and bridled
with some force. I will make the matter clear, by the chastisment which the
Scripture wills Parents to use to their children. A father has a son which
is dissolute and proud, whom he cannot reclaim by any instruction or
exhortation. He corrects him with stripes, and forces him to hear the word
of God diligently being preached. It pleases God so to bless this endeavor
of the Father, that his Son is converted, and does become a right godly
man. Shall we say he is none of Christ's subjects, because at the first he
came not willingly? The King is the Father of all his Subjects, and by fatherly
correction labors to bring them to goodness.

And where Brown says, that none of the Kings of Judah, durst compel their
Subjects to the worship of God: it is most false. For beside the punishment of
death, mentioned in the days of Asa. It is said statlye, that Josias compelled
them to worship the Lord God of their Fathers, 2. Chron. 34. The Hebrew word
is Iagnabed, which is, he bound them, or made them serve. And finallye, where
Brown faith, the Kings of Judah did reform religion by a spiritual power, as
figures of Christ, it is absurd and false. First seeing they did that which
Christ himself did not: for he never reformed the state of religion.

Had they a spiritual power, to reform and to establish religion, because
they were figures, and so did break down and root out false worship: and
Christ himself, who then should have had all the power, did not meddle that
way? Was not the high Priest as worthy to be deposed, as he whom Solomon did
depose? Were there not horrible abuses* among the Priests, the Scribes and
Pharisees, which he did but Preach against? Again, will Brown be so foolish
as to imagine, that the kings of Judah set bodily penalties by a spiritual
power? It is as clear as may be, that they reformed by that civil Kinglye
power, which God gave them.

Cyrus the King of Persia, who made the Decree for the building of the Temple
in Jerusalem, Ezra. 1. was no figure of Christ.

Iehu King of Israel, who destroyed the Temple, the Idols, and the Priests of
Baal, 2. Kings. 10. was no figure of Christ. I conclude therefore, that the
wickedness of Brown, and of Brownists, is great in this point, when they in
this manner abridge the power of Princes, spoil the Church of her comfortable
aid and protection, and thrust forward private men, to take upon them that
which God has not called them unto.

And I do entreat all Godly Christians, and warn them in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that they look to these holy rules of Gods Word. First,
with all humility, modesty, subjection, and lowliness of mind, to keep
themselves within the bounds and limits of their calling, studying to be
quiet, and to do their own business, 1 Thessalonians. 4. verse. 11.

Then, that they turn not the holy Religion of GOD, or the profession
thereof, into questions, bitter disputations, wrath, contentions, and
vayne-glorious boasting: but that in practice they follow after
Righteousness, Faith, Love, and Peace, with those that call upon the Lord out
of a pure heart, 2. Timoth. 2. verse. 22. Finally, not in rigor and presumption
to judge, to condemn, and to treaddowne. But with mercy, with pittye, and
compassion, to supporte the weak, Gal. 6. This is the plain, straight paued,
and holy way of GOD: and whosoever makes account of salvation, let them take
heed they be not drawn out of it into crooked by ways, and into myrie
flows, by presumptuous Heretics, and Schismatikes.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 18. line 16. for being a dead tree, read bring a dead letter. Page 25.
line 13. for Beez, read Breez. Page 72. line 35. for prebyterie, read
presbytery. Page 75. line 5. for man, read men. Page 86. line 11. for bend,
read bond.
AT LONDON Printed by John VVindet, for Toby Cook, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Tigers head. 1590.


