The xliiii. Sermon of M. Gialio of Milane, touching the Lords supper.

Dedicated to the worshypfull mystres Anne Carowe.



The.xliiii. Sermon of Master Giulio of Milane, touching the Lords Supper.
Satan in all times has devised, how he might by subtlety defyle and deface
with all kind of superstition the Lords supper. In the time of Saint Paul God
did smite and sharply punish the Church of the Corinthians, because they did
evil use this Sacrament. In our times (because we will not recou^t the errors
of all worlds) be brought in, sundry kinds of supersticious hipocrisies,
about the usage of this Supper. All which I will not now name in particular,
for spending of time. I will only entreat of that which is of most force,
that we may learn after what sort we ought to present our selves to this holy
table. Some writers moved by these words of S. Paul: He that cateth
unworthily of this bread and this wine, cateth his own judgment: they have
taken in hand to declare how a man may worthily use this Sacrament. And after
much debating, they have thus resolved them selves: that a man has than
worthily eaten this bread, when he is in the state of grace. And passing on a
little further, they have expounded and said, that a man is than in state of
grace, when he is purged and cleansed of all mortal and venial sins. In this
sort they resolve them selves, because their study is to understand after
what sort sins be purged, and how a man may come into the state of grace.
The writers of these days be of diverse judgments touching this matter. Some
say that through contricion, confession, and satisfaction of works, a man is
purged from all sin, and does deserve the state of grace. But when a man does
diligently search what is this meritorious work of this great goodness, they do
very ill agree upon the matter. For some say that this satisfactorye work is
fasting, accompanied with tears and prayer. Other add this and say that our
prayers must be done with sackcloth and other chastisementes of the flesh.
Others do say, that not only these works be necessary to deserve the state
of grace: but also there must be almose, the which does cleanse a man from
sin.

The further we be separated from the pure time of the Apostles, so much greater
is the number of satisfactions, and the thing is so augmented, that men's
consciences be brought into fear, error, and desperation, and in them selves
so confounded, that they know not where to find the beginning. Wherefore a man
is never certain to do these satisfactory works so perfectlye that he may
deserve to be in the state of grace: No more there is no conscience of any
living man, be he never so holy, that ca^ assure himself to be without sin,
if he shall behold his merit, and the dignity of his own works. Let us then
leave of such encomberaunce of conscience: and for the eating of the Lords
supper, let us follow the facion that was used by the Apostles. Paul does not
bring our minds to this desperation and doubtfulnesse, when he does exhort
the Church of the Corinthians to use worthelye this Supper: But this he says,
that than do we worthily use this sacrament, when we do acknowledge our selves
to be unworthy, and lay open our sins before Jesus Christ, that he through
his mercy would make us worthy. That we should also despair of our selves,
and all our works: for that we might receive comfort in him, that we should
humble our selves, that in Christ we might be exalted: that we should
acknowledge our selves sinners, that in Christ Jesus we might be justified:
therefore we may not think to come to this Sacrament boyde of sin, nether
that we be worthy to deserve so great a benefit. But let us thus think, that
we being poor, do go to a liberal geuer: that being sick, we go to a gentle
physician: And being sinners, do run to our savior. Thus the dignity
whereof Paul speaks that is in this Supper, is performed by faith, at those
times when we believe that all the merits of Christ be ours: And that we
behave our selves in love toward our neygbours as this day shall be declared.

This error that I have now spoken of, is one of the most notable errors yt
is in the church conserning ye usage of the lords Supper. The second error is
this, the which has been and is continuallye preached, that under bread and
wine is contained the body and blood of Christ Jesus. These preachers and
scoolemasters of men's consciences, do only occupy them selves to persuade two
things to the people.

The first, that in this sacrament is the body and blood of Christ. The other,
that all Christians ought with great desire to receive this Sacrament, because
they do receive the body and blood of Jesus Christ. And these reverend fathers
say, that men may search no further, because that all matters of faith ought to
be believed simplye. But to what end a man ought to use this Sacrament, and
what commodity a Christian gets by it: these our reuere^de fathers have not
so much as touched one word, to comfort such consciences as be in trouble.
These fathers do not consider that this their faith may be in the devil, and in
all his members. It is no hard thing to persuade this their article to the
people. For if they believe that Jesus Christ is risen from death, that by a
miracle he entered, the gate being shut, into the house where the Apostles were
gathered together, without any hurt to his body: also if they believe many
other miracles that was done of the Lord while he lived here upon earth: By the
same reason it is an easy matter to persuade the Christian people, yt in bread
and wine there is the body and blood of Jesus Christ. This this were a small
matter whereupon to stay: but we must search something further. These spiritual
masters think to have done their office, whenever they have persuaded this
to the people: that in the sacrament is the body of Jesus Christ, and that
they be bound to receive it.

We be come now to this pass: let a man ask a Christian if he will
communicate, he wyli^ answer yea. And if you ask him wherefore he will do so,
he answers, because the Church has so ordained. But if we should consider
the matter somthyng more deepelye, and search for what purpose and to what
end this was ordained: he will answer, to receive the body and blood of Christ
Jesus. And they think to know enough, when they can after this sort give
account of their conscience. But as I have already said, if this thing be no
otherwise considered, this faith is nothing: because every naughtye person can
have this faith. And he that can give no better account of his faith, then is
commenly done now a days, let him take heed to receive this sacrament. To
admit unto the supper those persons thus evil enstructed: is as a man should
admit a brute beast to an holy banquet, to the great ignominy of Jesus Christ,
and confusion of the church, It is then erpedient that the Christian be
otherways instructed, and that he know what thing this Sacrament is, and for
what end the Lord has ordained it, for what cause also the church does use
it: what profit the faithful do receive by it: and many other things which
be necessary to understand, as this day is made manifest. I say the minister
ought to use in this Sacrament the self same means, as is used in baptism,
when a child is baptized, or yet any other person grown in years. The which
party when he goes to be baptized, it is not sufficient to desire to be
united to the church and that he believes suerlye that this washyng is
baptism, and that this sacrament is ordained of God: No nor it is no
sufficient cause that the party does desire to be baptized, because this
belief may be both in good and evil. But the principal point that the
minister does desire to know of him that is baptized, is this: Whether he does
forsake the devil with all his works, and that he that is baptized do confess
so to do openly. That done, the minister does ask if he believe in the father,
in the son, and in the holy ghost. In which demand the mynyster does
search out the faith of him that receaueth the Sacrament: of which faith, the
Church must be assured. Therefore it is nedeful that every one that is
baptized, should know to give account of their faith in the face of the
congregation. How much more then ought this to be done in the Sacrament of
the Lords supper, the which is only ministered to such as be of sufficient
years, and that be able to understand the word preached.

Therefore when any man shall first communicate, it is erpedient to hear his
confession upon this article. For by that confession the Church may judge if
such a person be a fit vessel to receive such a Sacrament: that by this
means there may be a difference of Judas and other brutysshe creatures.
There is then to be wysshed some other faith, much dyfferynge from this of the
Hypocrytes, the which think they have done enough, when they have performed
that work, because it is so ordained. Were it not a great folly if one of ripe
years should be baptized, and if he were asked wherefore art thou baptized could
make no other answer but that he is baptized because it is so ordained. And
having no other stay whereunto the Christian faith should stay upon: should
not such one be almost judged and taken for a dissimuled Christian? Seeing than
ye Sacraments be witnesses of our faith: it is needful that they which will
present them selves to this table, be well instructed to give accomptes of
their faith. Therefore it is conuement that such should be eramined of the
minister of the Church.

First the minister does ask the Christian what is this sacrament? The
faithful does answer, that this sacrament is an assurance and gage, left of
Jesus Christ in his church, for that none should doubt, but that his body is
dead for us, and that his blood is shed for the remission of our sins. Then
the minister shall ask him what he intends to do, when he does present him
self to this supper. The faithful does answer, I do believe to receive all the merits of Jesus Christ, and to receive them in such sort, that they be
no more Christ's, but that they be mine, in no less force then if I with my
own proper body had merited the kingdom of heaven. Then the minister does
this ask and say: what assurance have thou to assure thy self after this
sort of the works of thy Lord? The faithful does answer, I do this assure
my self upon the words that Jesus Christ spoke in his last supper, when he
said, take and eat, this is my body, this is the cup of the new Testamente
in my blood, the which shall be shed for you. Again the minister does ask,
after what manner do thou think to eat this body, and drink this blood?
The faithful does answer: I do believe to eat it spiritually, in such sort
as the gospel under the signs of bread and wine does offer, and my faith does
receive. The minister does ask, wherefore do thou not think to eat the
carnal body of Christ? The faithful does answer, because it is the spirit
that gives me life, and the flesh profits nothing. For this cause says
the Christian, am I come hither unto the company of the faithful for to
receive this sacrament, because I believe that the body of my Lord is dead for
me, and that his blood is shed for my redemption: therefore my faith is
confirmed and comforted by this sacrament. The minister does demand, what
profit and commodity receueth thy soul of this holy supper? The faithful does
answer, the commodity that I receive thereby, is ye I am made a membre of
Christ, who is the head of the Church: And I do transfourme my self into my
neighbor, so ye I become one soul, one heart, and one will with him. With these
and other like instructions, ought the Christian people to be instructed, when
they do first present them selves to this holy supper. This Sacrament is a
witness of our faith, and also an open confession of the same: For when we do
frequent it, we do declare the death of the Lord. The minister of the churh
ought to admyt none to this supper, who were not very well instructed, and also
openly had made confession of these things: And when this faith is not, all
things be decayed and of no force. Let us now then consider what difference is
betwixt the first faith and this second. Thou beleuest by thy first faith,
that in this sacrament is the body and blood of Jesus Christ.

What profit have thou by this belief? The devil and any wicked person may
have this faith, and yet for all that shall not be saved. Thou beleuest that to
use this sacrament, is a good work. The devil believes also and knows that
it is a good work: so ye this common faith makes man no better then the
devil, or any other naughty person: Therefore it is requisite to have some
other faith. But so sone as the true and lively faith springs in our hearts,
and speaks to our conscience, it says: Ah from henceforth be merry, saying
Christ is wholly thine in all respects, because that in this supper thou do
receive all his merits, he has supped up in his blood all thy sins.
Confess therefore from henceforth openly in this Sacrament, the death of thy
Lord, because he is present in all thy doings.

This second faith far passes the first, the which makes thee no better
then the Devil, no nor than any hipocrite. But this second christian faith,
does give unto thee, all that treasure enclosed, and promised in these words of
Jesus Christ: Take and eat this is my body. Therefore it is needful that the
minister of the Church be well advised in geuinge this sacrament to any body, if
he have not before understand his faith. And by that confession which the
Christian has made in ye church, to judge that he is worthy to eat this
supper, and to be made one bodi with Jesus Christ. This confession is to be had
of necessity, because that sacraments be ordained for this end, that they
may be witnesses, and also an open confession of our faith. It is expedient
that we live after such sort in this mortal life, yt we help our neighbor,
and that we should show our faith, the which is hid in our hearts, openly by
some outward token to the Church. That is by baptism, and with the supper of
the lord. The gospel must be confessed openly with our mouth, and for this
cause also is this sacrament ordained, that all the world may know that we be
Christians: he that uses not the sacrament of this sort, does grievously offend
his lord. What shall profit thee this first faith of the hipocrites, when in
passing over of this world, the deuilles shall tempt thee? if thou shall say I
believe that I have received the body of Christ, because it is so ordained: In
like sort will the devil say. And I believe also that thou haste received it.
This faith will nothing profit thee, nor yet ease thee of thy troubles. But if
thou be instructed in the true faith: thou shall answer the devil and say.
Ah Satan thou tyrant, what power haste thou in me? I am armed in this
sacrament with the merits of Jesus Christ, who is made mine and I am become
his: what can thou do against me? I do not esteem thee, use thy force, I do
not fear it: my lord is greater then thou. With this faith ought every one to
be armed, not only to pass over this life, but also in all parylles whiles we
shall here live. After this sort it becomes a Christian to be instructed, if
this sacrament should profit him. For if thou have not this faith, although
thou hadest all the Priests of the world about thee with the Sacrament in
their hands, it should profit thee nothing. We read in the book of the
Kings, that the people of Israel fyghting with the Philistines, were
overthrown, put to flight, and dispersed. After this overthrow, the Elders of
the people of Israel, gathered them selves together and said to them: for
this cause are the Philistines lords and conquerours in this war, because
the arc of the couenaunte is not 1. Reg. 11
with us. It was then ordained that the arc should be brought into the army,
of which when it came, all the people were glad. The Jews cried with great
joy, thinkinge thereby to have made affrayde the Philistines, triumphinge of
victoritie, not yet gotten. The people of Israel being proud for the presence
of the ark of the Lord, they began battle a fresh with the Philistines,
but with great loss and more shame, they were put to flight and overthrown.
How came this to pass, that ye Jews were thus subdued and evil handeled?
The ark of the lord was present, in which they had such confidence, that they
thought God to be present, and that he had there a peculier habitation. Of
this they had no less confidence, then has the hipocrites of this sacrament.
Why did not God help the Jews: because the Hebrews were void of faith,
thought by the presence of the arc, to have god to be favorable. The very
self same thing does come to pass in our times, to such as trust in the
outward work of this sacrament, and be not instructed with ye true faith where
with a christian ought to be endued. Therefore the devil has more power of
such, after they have received ye sacrament, then ever he had before. Let us
then leave of this illusion, and believe, that that Christian which is partaker
of Jesus Christ by faith, does become of the self same substance with his
lord. This is that conjunction of the church with Christ, whereof Paul spoke
saying: that we should increase Ephe. 11
by all means in Christ, who is the head, whereunto the body fastened and
joined by every kind of coniuction, according to ye power and mesure of every
part, causes the body to increase in edifiyng it self by charity. Our bodies
be me^bres of Jesus christ, and the habitation of the holy ghost. These
benifites be given unto us, because our lord is joined unto us both in spirit
and in bodi. This conjunction that we have with Jesus Christ, can not be declared,
with greater praise then Paul did, when he said, that our flesh is the flesh of
Christ, and Ephe. v.
our bones the bones of him. In no less force the^ was the bones and flesh of
Eua formed of Adam.

Saying we have now made manyfeste the instruction that ought to be kept when
a Christian will use this sacrament or supper: It is now needful to declare
what fruit and commodity we have of this supper. I say this supper does
bring forth two fruits to a Christian. The first is, that we become after a
sort the brethren of Jesus Christ, and that we be the self same substance with
him. The second fruit is, that we be tra^sfourmed after a sort with our
neighbor, that we become one heart, and one soul with him. And after this
sort all the whole Church is united with Jesus Christ and in it self. These two
fruits be described of Saynct Paul who says: The cup of blessing which
we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we
break, is it not the communion of the bodi of Christ? Because that many be one
bread and one body, therefore all we be partakers of one bread, whenever we
do eat of this bread, that witnesses that this meat is common to all
beleuers. And seeing that in this sacrament al things be common: let us receive
together that, the which Christ has wrought for us. This is that commodity
of which I have so often spoken. If the christian have faith, and believe that
the body and blood of the lord be his, he has then Jesus Christ in him with
all his benifites. Thenceforth the heart is meri, reioyseth and triumphs,
trustyng to be saved, not by his own goodness, but by the innocent blood of
Jesus Christ. This is to be tra^sfourmed into christ, and to be his body and
blood: for that he takes upon him al our miseries, all our unhappiness, and al
our mishappes. These two things be joined together, and agree in one, that is
the goodness of Christ and our sin, that we should be of the same health and
strength, if we be one soul with Jesus Christ: what thing should we desire more
then that. These and such other like things, ought to be preached and taught
the people, when they fall a reasonynge of this sacrament, for that end, that
the christians may understand to give account to the Church of their says.
But ypocrisie has now such power and force, that the Christians be only
given to ceremonies, the which be more supersticious then godly. They use this
sacrament only because it is so ordained: because they think to receive the
body of Jesus Christ: there they stay. And leauyng the true use of this
sacrament, they have framed of their own heads, many other commodities
without the warantise of the word of god. The first commodity is this, if a
man hear mass, all day he can have no harm: If thou haste lost any thing,
or if thou be robbed, cause mass to be said, and thou shalt find thy
things, and that shall be restored that was robbed. If thou will find grace in
marriage, or be healed of any disease, or if thou wouldeste have a prosperous
journey, or delivered from any peril, cause mass to be said of such or such
a Saint, unto whom the wisdom of man has graven their peculyer office.
These be not the commodities of this supper. For it is not entitled that a man should thereby obtain prosperity, honor, riches, and other worldly
goods: but it is principally ordained for a remembrance of the lords death,
that we should be united to him, never to be separated. There is also an other
cause, wherefore this sacrament is ordained, and that is: that it should be instead of an erhortation to stir us up to love and unity with our neighbor.
For this cause does the Lord participate his body to us, that he may be wholly
united to us, and we joined together with him. And being al joined in one
mystical body, we should be the members one of another. This societe which
we ought to have together, is figured by the bread and wine which be offered
in this supper. The bread is made of many corns, the which be after a sort
made one and mingled together, so that the one can not be separated from the
other. Even so we Chrystians ought to be united together with ^^ch charity, that
one could not be separated from another. This unity was described of Saint
Paul as I have said before: who said that all those which were partakers of
this holy bread, be one body. The Christian than shall reap a great profit
by this Sacrament, if he shall be transfourmed into his neighbor, and does
prefer the wealth, honor, and profit of his neighbor before his own. Out
of this great charity spryngeth these good thoughts in us, which can not
offend, which can not despise, nor by any means torment our neighbor. And by
that means is not Jesus Christ offended, neither torn, nor yet rent in
pieces. Therefore we can not be separated from our neighbor, but we be also
separated from Jesus Christ: we can not love our brother, if we love him not in
Jesus Christ. We ought to have the self same care of our neighbor, as we have
of our selves. We be one the membre of another, and we be altogether the body
of Jesus Christ, who is the head. Like as there is no one part in our carnal
body that is hurt, but that all the rest of the members feel smart by the
same: Even so ought we to have compassion one upon another, when he is in
trouble, and suffers any sorrow: and our neighbors business ought no less to
be ours, then our own. This is to be merry with them that be merry, and to
sorrow with them that sorrow, and to be disposed with the self same mind one
toward another. These two fruits be at large set forth of S. Augustine, who
said: The faithful do now know this to be the bodi of Christ, not to despise
to be ye body of Christ. They become the body of Christ if they will live by
the spirit of Christ: of the spirit of Christ lives nothing but the body of
Christ. Understand this brethren that I have spoken. Thou art a man and have a
spirit and a body: thy spirit is invisible, thy body visible. Tell me what
lives? lives the spirit by the body, or the body through the spirit? The
body to conclude lives by the spirit. Wylt thou ti(...) by the spirit of
Christ, become Christ's body. Tell me, lives my body by the virtue of thy
spirit? my body lives by his own spirit, and thy body by the virtue of thy
own spirit. The body of Christ can not live but by the spirit of Christ.
Therefore Saint Paul making manifest this bread, said: we be one bread and
one body. O Sacrament of Godliness, O sign of unity, O knot of charity.
What oration either of Demosthenes, or yet of Marcus Cicero, or of any other
famous writer, could stir up or move more vehementlye to the love of our
neighbor, than this sacrament moves? What provocation can be more lively and
sensible then this? Let all the Oratoures of the world come forth and persuade
us to the love of our neighbor with their polyshed Orations: Let them use
all the colors of Khethoricke and all their connyng, they shall never bring
such a persuasion as this sacrament does preach.

The wise men of the world persuade us to love our neighbor, because we be of
the self same substaunc^ tha^ we should live together ciuilly and without
disorder: But this Sacrament does erhorte us unto charity, because that Jesus
Christ is transfourmed in us, that we should live by his spirit, and being
thus joined together to our headde Jesus Christ, one should be the members of
another. Out of this fountain spryngeth all these erhortations of Paul, which
do erhort, that we should love together in such sort as Christ has loved
us, who has given his life in a sweet sacrifice for our salvation. This is to
be clothed with Christ, to be inflamed with the love of thy neighbor, to be
continually charged Ephe. v Roma. ^ Gala. v.
with charity, ever desierous to serve thy brother. O how much has the
Christian profyted in this sacrament, if he be moved and stirred with a will to
serve his neighbor. Not without cause than did S. Augustine name this Supper a
Sacrament of Godliness, a sign of unity, and the bond of charity. For as
this Sacrament is a spiritual meat, and sweet to those that be incorporate
with Jesus Christ, and with their neighbor: Even so of the contrary, it is a
mortal poyso^ to the^ which put not their whole trust in Jesus Christ, and be
separated from their neighbor. The natural meat when in finds a body full
of naughtye humors, turns to poison, corrupts and hurts: Even so does
the spiritual meat if it find the soul unfaithful, it dryueth it to utter
overthrows, because that to an unfaithful manne, euerythyng is unfaithful
and damnable.

Therefore says Paul: he that 1. Cor. xi.
eats and drynketh unworthily, is worthy blame, and is also a betrayer of
the Lord: such one as this does eat and drynk his own judgment, not iudgeyng
the body of the Lord. By which place I understand that it is all one, not to
judge the body of the Lord- and to eat it unworthily. Wherefore they which
lack faith, and be void of charity, without all religion, and like hogs
cast in them selves to this Supper: such as these make no difference of the
Lords Supper. Therefore seeing they believe not, that that body is their life,
whenever they do present them selves in the Church to receive this Sacrament:
they do blaspheme, and do great iniurye to the body of Christ, they spoil it
of all dignity, and receauyng it after this sort, they be false betrayers of
their Lord. Even so these that be in discord with their neighbors, the which
do so hate them that they can not abide the sight of them, when they do come
together in company to celebrate the holy supper, and to show that they be
knytte together with their brother in the band of charity: such do blaspheme
God, divide the mistical bodi of Jesus Christ, and tear in sunder the holy
Church by piece and piece, Therefore worthily are they to be blamed, and be
betrayers of the body of Christ. I say not only that they be betrayers of the
Church, which is the mistical body of Christ: But I say they be betraiers
of their Lord, no less then Judas and the Jews which crucified him. Eating
after this sort, unworthily, they do receive their own damynation, for using
this Sacrament without faith as the hypocrites do, they do confess that with
their mouth, which they believe not in their heart. And to be present at this
table, is no other thing but an abiuration which is done in every false
religion. It is a confession that we believe to be saved only by the death of
Jesus Christ. The hypocrite then does condemn him self, does pronounce
sentence in his own condemnation, and provoke the anger of GOD upon his
own head. When a man does not put his whole confydence in Christ, he can not
love his neighbor with that Christian love wherewith this Sacrament does bind
him. Then a wicked person is cut of from his neighbors, and so he has no
part at all in the Church, nor yet may use this Sacrament, but faynedly. For
when he outwardelye shows him self at this holy Table, he confesses to be
transfourmed into his neighbor, nevertheless in his heart, he is replenyshed
with hatred. For this cause 1. Cor. x1.
Paul willed that a man should (...) xi.
make trial of himself, before he did eat of this bread, and drink of this
cup. The which words I do understand after this sort: that every one
ought it their proper conscience, and with steadfast faith, believe that Jesus
Christ only is their redemer, and the satisfier for all their sins. Also
they ought to declare the death of Christ, that is, with tongue openly to
confess that, the which he believes in his heart. This is to confess Christ
alone to be our Savior in dangers, troubles and all persecutions of
Antichrist. When a Christian has tasted of this faith and confession, it is
necessary before he receive this Sacrament, that he consider in his own
conscience, whether he be ready to give him self wholly to the service and
benefyt of his neighbor as Christ has done, who is made the servant of the
whole Church: whether he be also desirous to help to defend and to govern
his neighbor, because he is of the flesh of his own body. This is that
preparation the which he ought to have, that myndeth to eat the supper of the
Lord. This is that examination whereof Paul speaks that he ought to make that
will eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. He that has not this faith
and this charity, let him not goo to this supper of the Lord: because if
that any such who is void of faith and charity, does present him self to
this table, he is worthi of more blame, and becomes a betrayer of the body of
Christ. Let us now consider what difference there is bet wixt this first and
common faith of the hypocrites, and of this second Christian faith. This first
faith wylleth that we should eat this supper, because it is so ordained, and
because the body of Christ is received. But because the wicked and reprobate,
and the Dyuell may have this faith: therefore the hipocrite does not eat
worthily the supper of the Lord. Let us then leave of this ^^^^on hypocrisy,
and being ^rmed with faith and charity* ^et us eat this bread, and drink
this cup together with the other faithful, chaunginge our selves into our
neighbors by charity, being replenished with all humility, of which we
have at this present a rare example of our master Christ, which is written by
S. John after this sort. Before John. xiii
the feast dai of the passover, Jesus understanding that his hour was come
that he must depart out of this life to his father: having loved his that
were in the world, for ever and ever he loved the^. When supper was done and
the devil had moved ye heart of Judas of Simon Iscarioth which betrayed him:
Jesus knowing that his father had given into his hands all things, and that
he came from GOD, and that he must go to God: he rise from supper, put of his
garments, took a towell, girde himself: after that, put water into a basen,
and began to wash the feet of his Disciples, and to wype them with the to
well where with he was gyrt. The Euangelyst dott describe the cause wherefore
the father sent Jesus Christ into the world, that by the means o^ the cross,
he must return to his father. Our merits then nor our good works, be not
o^ such pleasantness that the^ have caused the son of god to descend into
the earth. But the great earnest love that he bar^ has moved the heavenly
father to give (...) his benifites in his beloved C^^^d.

In this is made manifest the i. Ioh. iiii.
love of God toward us: In tha^ he sen^ (...) only begotten son i^ (...)
^^rlde, that we should ly^^ (...) him. In this does ap^^ ^ys love, not that we
lo^^ (...), but that he loved us* and sent his son a propiciation for our
sins. The son has followed the love of the father: therefore such as were
at the first beloved, they were dear and favored for ever and ever. Our Lord
fails not in his love, albeit his Disciples ran away and denied him. For all
this he departed not from one jot of his good will, ye all men might know that
God is true, and man is but a liar. It is a small mention Roma. i^
that John makes of this supper, because it was already throughli described of
the other Evangelists. Now had the devil moved the heart of Judas Iscarioth
that betrayed him. And Jesus understanding ye his father had laid this burden
upon his shoulders, te l^ue al beleuers by the means of the cross: he
therefore gave into his hands the everlasting good things, that is, life,
righteousness, remission of sins, he alth, redemption, judgment, and
resurrection. All these good things were given into the hands of Christ,
because he has purchased them, and has gotten the by the cross. This is the
will of my father that has sent me, that I should not lose one of those that
he has given me: that every one that sees the son, and believes in him,
may have life everlasting. When Christ should be exalted above the heavens,
he would first humble him self in washyng his disciples feet, giving this for
an example, that first in this mortal life we ought to be humble, if in the
other life we will be glorious with Jesus Christ. I pray and beseech you
brethren, that every one of you consider with deep consideration, this fact of
humility of our Lord, to the end that we should know that he came to this
extreme baseness to eralt us. What manner of persons were they (O master) whose
feet thou washed? it was theyrs who betrayed thee, denied thee, forsook thee
in thy danger, fled away when thou stodest in most need of them.

Wherefore we ought to consider in this washing of feet, the marvelous
humility of our master, and the fervent love he bare toward his enemies. It
was the manner in those days, to wash strangers feet when they were bydden
to any man's house: therefore the Lord rebuked the Pharisey which washed not his
feet. Paul would not receive a wydow to the service of the Church, if first
she were not known to be humble and of a godly life. And the Apostle myndyng
to declare this humility, said: It is erpedient that ^imo. v.
a wydowe should have w^^^ed the feet of Saints. For if any do humble them
selves after this sort, as to be content with so mean an office as to wash
the feet of Saints, and to serve such as have sores and infirmities: this is
an euidente sign of a love that is unfeigned. He came unto Peter, and Peter
said: Lord shall thou wash my feet, Jesus answered and said: What I do thou
knoweste not, but thou shall know hereafter. The words of Peter being
considered as they be in apparent, do declare great modesty, which in the
world is worthy of praise. Yt is a sign of civility not to suffer without
great need to be served of a man's better. But Christ in this that he did, had
occasion, wherefore he willed that Peter should bear that service, although it
were base. Therefore said Christ, thou shalt know hereafter Peter why I do
this. At this answer ought Peter to have submitted him self, and suffered
his feet to be washed, and to have declared a civil wisdom. Therefore it may
be said, that in Peter does appear the superstitious hypocrisy of our carnal
nature. Peter made a conscience, and feared to declare so small reverence to his
master, to suffer him to wash his feet. But after forgettyng all religion,
treadyng vnderfeet both the love and reverence to his dear master, with an
oath forsook him when he ought to have confessed him. Christ has said: he
that will not confess me before men I will not confess him in ath. 10.
the presence of my father. Peter made small account of the commandment of
God, denied his master, making little conscience to swear falsely, with ^^^te
shame and ignominy to Jesus Christ: yet he after made a conscience, and thought
it sin to suffer his master to wasshe his feet. Thus does our natural
hypocrisy: it reuerenceth Christ and will honor him where is no need: And
against his commandment he will after make small account of that true
religion, wherewith god will be served and worshipped. Our reason knows not the
cause of Gods works, nor yet can not know them if the spirit of the Lord do
not make manifest these secrets. Therefore Peter not knowing but as man, strove
with his master, and said, thou shall never wasshe my feet. Peter does not
only declare him self co^^^^tious, but if we consider the ^nswere, we shall
find Peter a great blasphemer. The master had said before to his disciples,
that it was not without cause that he washed their feet. Therefore Peter being
obstinate, and resisting that he should not wash his feet at all, showed him
self to be wiser then his master. And the answer of Peter has this
understanding. Albeit thou art my master, yet for all that thou shalt pardon
me: for in this doing thou declareu thy self to have small experience touching
wordly things. I know by experience it is not decent the servant would be
served of his master: so that thy fact master does gaynesaye the polytyke order
of the world. And this that I do is done politikely. In Peter is declared a
zele of the honor of God: but this devotion was not grounded in the word of
God. Let us see what answer the wisdom of God does make to Peter. If I
shall not wasshe thy feet, thou shall have no part with me.

Christ contendeth not with Peter, for that he should not be wilful and wise in
his own conceit. What shall we say to the answer of our Lord? ah is it so
great a matter to wash feet? was not Judas feet washed? yet he had no part
with Christ: it is very true his feet were washed, but not after that sort
as Christ does hear declare in this Gospel.

The answer of Christ is this. Peter has not well understand my office, nor
yet understands not home nedeful my service is to all the whole world. O
thou fantastical man, why do thou believe yt I am a Messiah, a carnal king,
a monarche of all the world, to whom all nations should be subject, thou
think to serve this Messiah, but Peter thou art deceived. For if I do not
first serve thee, thou shalt never serve me: if I do not first save thee, thou
shall never come to be saved, if I do not first shed my blood for thee, if I do
not first wash thy sins, thou shall never be saved, nor yet have any portion
with me. These words of Jesus Christ, if I wash not thy fete, thou shall have
no portion with me: Albeit they be few, and appear simply, yet for all that,
if we consider them depely, we shall find that they destroy all false and
cloked religion. Although there be many amongst the Jews, which live
honestly, yet for all that they be not saved in the blood of christ, nor yet
have they no part with him. The Turks albeit they say they serve god above,
and glory that they have the true religion, and show with outward ceremonies,
a cloked holiness: yet they obtain not remission of their sins, because they
be not washed in ye blood of Christ. Our hipocrites although they do many
good works, yet because they think to be washed in their own merits, and
not in the blood of Christ: Therefore such hipocrites have no portion with
Christ at al. But let us return to Peter who said: O lord not only my fete,
but my hands and head also. At the first Peter was very obstinate, and would
not suffer his master to wash his fete, but now he would have him to do more
then was first commanded. The self same thing we se now to be done in many,
who when they perceive the severity of the law, and the bond which we are
bound in, they do as Peter did, they will not only observe the commandment
of god, but they find of their own works besides the word of God. Therefore
they think to merit remission of sin nes. partly by the merit of Jesus
Christ, and partly by the merit of their own work. Such be like Peter, for
they will not only do that that god commands, but they will of their own
heads find out other merits, whereby to deserve life everlasting. Peter not
walkyng in the kings high way, Jesus said un to him: he that is washed, has
no need to wash any part, but his fete, and than he is al clean. Our master
reproved the vnskil fulness of Peter by the common custom of these days. For
such as be washed in a bathe, when they go forth, they set their feet upon the
ground: And need not after to wash any thing but their feet. When any was
bydden to feast to the Jews, it was only nedeful to wash the fete, because
they used to eat upon beds: As now amongst us, when any is bidde^ to
feast, it is only nedeful to wash their hands, for all else is clean. But
Christ by this matter will in^^r a matter of more importan^ce, and not only
^epr^hend the inciuilitie of Peter. All they which by faith be made clean and
pure, all such be al wholly cleansed in Jesus Christ, because ye faith has
assured the^ of the pureness and holiness of Jesus Christ. There is no damnation
to those that be engraffed in Jesus Christ: with all this therefore is justified
the sinner, and yet has he his feet myered, the which continually have need
to be cleansed.

The feet be the carnal desires and the remanentes of the old man, the which
ought continually to be chastened and mortified. The Christian in Christ is
wholly clean: but in him self he his filthy, foul, and full of carnal desires.
And although he is not therefore condemned, yet he has sins, the which were
nedeful to be washed away: whylest therefore we live in this myery life, we
have need to have our feet washed. That is, to walk in the spirit, and not
in the flesh, because a Christian ought to serve with his mind the law of
god, therefore ought he to take good head not to serve the law of sin. When
our master had washed his Disciples feet, he took again his garments, sat
him down, and said unto them: you call me master and lord, so say you well,
for so I am. If I then being lord and master have washed your fete, you ought
also to wash one another feet, because I have given you an example, that as
I have done eue^ so do ye. The lord has now declared ye cause that moved him
to take in hand so mean an enterprise in the world. The Apostles did think
that Jesus christ ought to be the worldly messiah that was looked for of ye
Jews, that should be a king and monarche of the whole world. Our Lord had
often preached unto them, that his kingdom was spiritual and not
terrestrial, and that they should not set their felicity beneth in the earth.
For to confirm therefore the truth of this his prechyng, he did this base and
mean office to wash his disciples feet. And our lord deferred this fact
until his last supper, for that his doctrine should be more fresh in memory
in our minds, being done at a time most worthy of remembrance, I have given
you an example that you should do as you have seen me to do: you think that
I am come into this world to enjoy an earthly kingdom, you receive your
selves. Therefore cast of from you al felicity that the world can promise
you, take example by me that am made your servant. Thus follow my pathe and
fotesteppes, be servants of all men, but be faithful. This only says
Paul is required in the ministers of the gospel, that they be faithful in
their doctrine: none then shall glory in man, we shall only glory in Jesus
Christ who is ye true fode of our souls. To whom be honor, power and glory
for ever and ever.

Amen
Imprinted at London by Richard Judge, Printer to the Queues Majesty.


