A NEASTE OF VVASPES LATELY FOUND out and discovered in the Lawcountreys,
yealding as sweet honey as some of our English bees.



AT DORT* Printed in the Low-countreyes. 1615.

TO THE Reader.
GIve room hoe; give room to my active penn
Oh give her room; she will lay about her then.
Mistake her not; she plays noe fencers part,
She plays the Popes; she will make the whole world smarte.
Will. Goddard.

THE COMMISSION.
A Broad my Waspes, in to the world go fly
make known your natures to all men you spy
Search every creek; go fly you round about
let noe wretch rest until you have found him out,
And having found him, styng him: None forbear
but stinge em all, for all grown wicked are,
My Love except, at which, if some repine
say things you must not touch that are devine
AN EPIGRAM TO my Epigrams.
1
Music strike-vp, some livelie quick Iigg play
Hang tunes that run on malencollie kaie.
Skippe now my verse: light Epigrams come skipp.
Like do on lawne, come light and nimbly tripp
Like Catt with mouse come sport you swiftly fast
But see like catt you pinche and nipp at last.
2
My senses stands amazed, my hands do tremble
To think to what I should my love resemble,
Compare her to the rose; her cryimson die
Is far more pure; her white excells the Ivorie,
Unto her skynn rug'd is the smoothest Iett
The softest down to it is counterfett
With in her faces circute there are placed,
Two heaunlie sonns, by whom the world is graced,
Whose golden beams from-of her lips exhales,
That hunnye dew which Poets Nectar calls
So fair is she, so sweet, smooth, soft, so clear
As on this Earth naught like her may appear,
Oh what a Matchles Mistress have I caught
That justly cann compare her unto naught
3
Some men Ill censures Had-land; calls him Ass
Idle Goose. Upon him most men pass
But not so much for selling of his towns
As vainelie spending and consuming's crowns
For that a fool he is held. Now I Am of mind,
A wiser man a man shall hardly find
Who has a crown; I but one crown enioies
Must have a thousand cares. Cares Crowns annoies
Then Hadland's wise, the other Coxcombes are,
For whoo'd keep crowns since one Crowns full of care.
4
For making, speed, pace, and fiery spright
The brave proud Couser should the court delight
His gentle gesture, milde-sterne-statelie grace
May get him love (I grant) in eury place
That he is respected I nere wonder why
It is at The Ass; at Asses wonder I
Noe worthe's in th'asse, yet daubd' he is in gold
And trickt-vp trymmer then proud Iennetts bold
At which I musd and wondered, until when
I found the Ass dear and near to most great men.
5
Had I command at Court I would casseere
Both all the porters and doore-keepers there
They let too many beggars in. It Is seen
Even in the presence there some beggars been
Amend it Porters; it is noe seemlie thing
To have to many beggars nere the King.
6
At Court a Beggar to a Porter came
Open door quoth he, I am one cripled lame
The porter annsweres sirrah get you gone
This is the Court, of Beggars here coms none
Then let me in quoth he and make noe doubt
Twill scarce a court be shut your beggars out.
7
A chattring Ape met with a gruntling hogg
Hogg quoth the Ape beware the may stife dog
Oh Ape quoth th'hogg, hard, oh hards my case
For I do meet with Dogs in eurye place
Do so replies the Ape? What will thou give
And I will teach thee how shall feareles live
Forsake thy stie and to the lions Court
From thy base contrye house do thou resort
Noe Dog so hardy is as once to dare
Presume to make his bold appearaunce there
For the brave lions nature will not brook
Upon a churlish surly Curr to look
Beasts of my nature like his nature best
His frowns we turn to smiles with some slight jest
To see us leap, skipp, make an antik face*
first wonn us apes in to the lions grace
And therefore hogg I do wish thee take my shape
the lion favors well the toying ape*
8
Clownus would court it, now his country seat
He half does loathe, in clothes he grows neat
Dust here me Clown for that life thart unfit
Thy want's a brain; whose there must want noe wit
He that would court-it, in the Court would thrive
Must sympathize in nature with these five
In youth he must be Ape and Monkey both
The Ape to Imytate what others does
And like the Monkey he in lust must burn:
Must stand ready; prick-on at eurye turn
The Foxes nature he in age must have:
Must plott. None rises like your deepe-sculd knave
Like more beasts yet he must be: do you hear?
He must turn Ass; great men's great loads must bear
must be an OX: must hugg who gives the horn
It Is noe disgrace for favors no we their worn
Clown, be still a Clown, whood change maulie shape
To be an ox, fox, monkey, Ass or Ape?
9
A Fool t'a wiseman came, Wiseman quoth he
Ive been with Fortune who has blessed me
My son said Fortune, thus I bless thy birthe
Thou shall euioye the happy'st life on earth
Thou shall have Wealth ease, mirth: thou shall live free
Live where thou will shall never envied be
Nor shall Mistrust attend thee. Cross the seas:
for sake the Court; I do child what you please
Yet it shall like: it shall give noe distaste
Thy deeds thy mother Fortune will have graste
with that about she turned her, groping-out
To find her wheel; which found, she turned about
Allotting me all pleasures on the earth
You, life envide: Mistruste poysning your mirth
Come Wiseman then; come marched in rank with me
The dangers less, yet honored more you see
10
A godly Father of the romish sect
A privy and ahogstie would erect
Workman said he look on this logg of wood
For those two purposes me thinks it is good
The workman seeing tw'ould not serve the turn
Cried sir* this is not good enoughe to burn
How not to burn the zealous father cries?
Noe not to burn the Carpenter replies:
It is such rotten stuff t'wil not bewrought
It is so knottie ruf it is good for naught
Come come the papiste cries thou want wit
I Will have a god made ant; I Will kneel to it
To it I Will pray: foe will I guild-it ore
As all that see it shal't for a god adore.
What will not make a privy, gods will make
For that use, of the rottenst things we take
Therefore to make my privy find some good
And I Will wake gods of this my rotten wood.
11
Before his Holiness three suitors came
The first was one given all to whore and game
The second unto drink was givn-ore so
As sober to his bed he'ed never go
The third a murthrer was given all toth stabb
These coming to that babalonian drabb
(after great revrence to his sacred knee)
They humblye crave that they might pardond be
Your sins are great his holiness does cry
We do confess it father they reply
But as our sins are great our means is great
Father quoth they with anngells we have met
Which anngells told us that you loved em so
As any thing for their sweet sakes youd do
Therefore, for what w'aue done, we mercy crave
For those good Anngells sakes letts perdon have
Pleades Angels for you quoth the Pope? naie then
I must for give. Anngells have power over men.
12
I Would have a play could I but to my mind
Good actors get; but thats'not now to find
For (oh) their dead; this age afordeth none,
Good actors all long since are dead and gone
For beggars part a Courtyer I would have
A Courtyers part your scoller act-would brave
You souldyer should your scoller act. But yet
To play the king lie part he is more fit
Now for the fool I have an exlent one
Oh for that part give me your merchancts son
To act the whore; tutt that's a common part
Each girl of twelve years old can do'ot with art
But oh the Devil! I am graueld now
To find a Devil out I know not how
And with out one my play shall nere comeforth
For with out Devils, plays are nothing worth
Mas I have thought of one for gold heel come
An exlent actor is the Pope of Room,
13
Friar quoth the Divelles thou standst my friend
Im'e cast away; my days are at an end
Now god defend the friar says; for then
We friars should be left fatherles poor men
As for my frendshipp, doubt me of noe evil
Faithful friars nere falfe-are to the devil
Therefore make known your case; be bold, reveal
Our order can your secretts best conceal
Then know it friar, in love, in love I am
To thee for counsel in that case I came
A Nunn I love, without I haue'a Nunn
Tell all the world the Devil is undone
Love you a Nunn? a Nunn is it you desire
Take my shape on you; Nunns deneys noe friar.
14
At hells wide gates a souldyer once did stand
His reason was to veiwe the infernal band
But as he lea'nd to see each troop pass by
He taken-was and doubted for some spy
What makst thou here? what art the devil cries?
A Martialliste; a souldyer he replies
The multitude of Monks and friars there
At name of souldyer, thus cry'de-out with fear
Oh devil, if thou do love us convaie
That souldyer hence: withs pass pack him away
In quiet else we nothing here shall do
Theil use our gods, our holy sisters too
And therefore out with him, it is foul abuse
If any but oue selves do those things use
This is the Cloister we allotted are
Therefore from us all souldyers out debarr
Children the Devil cried if it be so
That he is a souldyer: has naught with me to do
Nor I with him. God did ordain their birth
Not hell to trouble, but to vex the earth
My charge lies here: their'es on the earth: both has
A charge to show men our great Masters wrath
Souldyers, men's bodies are to fall upon
I, on the soul, to see sharp tortures done
Who for their pains in heaun above must dwell
And I for mine, below in this dark hell
And therefore out he shall, too's heaun I Will send him
Which if he likes not else where let himmend him
So out from hell the souldyer straight was thrown
Since when in hell a souldyer nere was known.
15
I pray tell me my fortune sir: I am
A Beggar wench; to you for that I came
A beggar wench the Fortune Tellers cries?
Indeed' I am the beggar-wench replies
Then know it wench quoth he thy Fortunes good
And these three babes shall spring from thy base blood
Two bratts one beggar shall begett of thee
Both of them Kinghts and both shall Courtyers be
Naie yet an other son thou shall emoye
A Iugler shall begett of thee a boie
This shall a lawyer be, and shall in time
With His Iugliug tricks up to high turretts clime
Thou hearst thy Fortune wench: be gone quoth he
It Ioies me much, I thank you for it quoth she
Yet ere I do depart pray let me crave
If these be all the sonns I Am like to have
For truly sir my mind does give me yet
I shall have one son more; who shall in wirt
And valor the rest as far surpass
As steedes in couradge do the silly Ass
My mind does give me sir I shall bring forth
A sprightfull souldyer one of matchles worth
A souldyer whore quothe he? out baggadg base
A souldyer cannot spring from beggars race.
16
Plorus your wise let tenn -- in one night
One of those tenn you knows the Parsons right
Why pay't him then; thou know a barlie straw
Will make a parish parson go to law
Pay him his -- oh pry thee let him ha'te
Less things then -- will stir them to debate,
17
It Is said that Idelnes does mischief breed
And so it does; that sayings true indeed
Then Parish parsons you are now a days
The only men that do deserve best praise
For lawyers would grow Idle, did not you
Stir your parish to set them taskes to do
A blessed work; a deed well worthy noate
A thing befitting best, men of your coat
I do applande the deed; and lawyers shall
Stand bare to you, shall you their masters call.
18
Benefio, benefis, benefit
I Would conster thus if I should English it
I do well; so's englisht benefio
Benefis, a benefize to buy ho
For though I Have neither learning nor goodwitt
Yet buy a benefice I Will benefitt.
19
Oh Deate thou art wronged! abused in our land
Thy office Death is wrested out thy hand
Unto thy office Death it does belong
T'vnloose that sacred knott god tied so strong
God did ordain thee Death, and only thee
T'vnloose that knot, bu't now more Deaths there be.
20
A Judge t'a surgeon came, surgeon quoth he
My arm is sore, what is it so payneth me?
The surgeon looking on it, sir he cries
Oh much corruption in your arm there lies
A poor man by, cries surgeou understand
It Is not in's arm, corrupted is his hand.
21
A Bedrid man before a Judge was brought
The Judge biddes stand-vp sirrah as you ought
Oh sir, nor go, nor sit, nor stand can I
I am your friend pray give me leave to lie
Art thou my friend quoth he? then lie thy fill
a Judge gives all his freindes leave to lie still.
22
Were I to choose a Captain, I would than
Not choose your courtyer or a youth full man
Noel would choose a Judge; one grym and grave
To make a Captain such a man Id'e have
Give me that man whose frowning browe is death
I such a one as cann kill men with breathe.
23
Young Lawyers Cubs (spruse students termd by some)
To you as humble suitor I do come
My suit is this you will send me from your Inns
Some of you old slye-pated foxes skynns
Weel make drumms heads of them: in doing so
I know by the ears our foes and we shall go
Pray send us some; we all will thank you then;
I know their skynns to braules will stirr-vp men.
24
Clarke quoth the Coun sellor I must ride down
What shall I do, ther'es not one horse in town?
Why sir replies the Clarke, that is noe lack
In steed of horse bestride some Clyentes back
Although an Ass un seemly is in show
Yet he treades sure, and whipp him on, heel go
Bestride a Clyent sir, he shall not tire
I Will spurr him on, unto your own desire.
25
A Woman to a Lawyer came, sir quoth she
Beseech your do a favor unto me
What would thou have the man a law replies?
O sir your helping hand the good wife cries
For god sake sir quoth she let me entreat
You Will make my husbands small thing very great
The say of nothing lawyers can great matters make
Therefore I pray sir this thing undertake.
26
A Chauncery Clyent having spent his sums
Unto a vsring broker sneaking comes
Broker said he it is told me by a friend
That you upon a suit good gold will lend
I have a suit, fair, strong, but very dear
One that I Have worn almost this twenty year
Which yet is fresh as when I first did weare-it
It Will weare-out me'till I Have noe strengh to bear it.
A suit so lasting strong the other replies?
I Will deal for it: where is it sir he cries?
Why in the Chauncrye replies the clown
There carelely my suits thrown up and down
And therefore pray sir ridd me often: The say
Men of your trade soon ridd men's suits away
The Broker scornfullie from him goes forth
And tells him those old suits are little worth.
27
An old bald-pated grave graie-bearded sire
Stole to a wench to quench his lusts desire
she asked him what profession he might be
I am a Civell lawyer girl quoth he
A Civell lawyer sir? you make me muse
Your talks too broad for cyvell men to use
If Civell lawyers are such bawdy men
Oh what (quoth she) are other lawyers then?
28
Take leases ho. You that have hansome wives
Good husbands play, take leases for their lives
For If your wives but fair and hansom be
Physicians will warrant em for ye
If they but feel their pulse, then doubt noe lives
I Will warrant you they will warrannt then your wives
By art to women they cann put in life
He'es sure to get that letts them warrants' wife.
29
Three sorts of Folks there are which have a trick
Gold out of men and women's tails to pick
Your Panda'rs one, the second of these three
Is one which nightlie scoures things priuylee
I Would name the third and last sort of these men
But all Physicians I should anger then.
30
Lie thus (the Fencer cries,) thus must you guard
Thus must you slipp, thus point, thus pass, thus ward
And if youd kill him sir, this trick learn then
With this same trick you may kill many men
A Doctor standing by, cries Fencing Fool
Both you and he, to me, may come to school
Thou dost' but prate: my deeds shall show my skill
Where thou hurtst one, a hundred I do kill.
31
If wars should cease and time of peace should grow
I would Physician turn: that course Id'e go
So might I keep my hands in ure; and still
Some one or other eu'rye day might kill
Oh I Would grow subtle, I would learn the trick
To make a sick man sound, a sound man sick.
32
Are you returned my waspes? I cannot see
How many men so soon should stinged be
This world is spacious wide: it is roundly large
So soon then how could you my charge discharge
Therefore abroad again; about go seek
I love to see men arie, t'heare women shreeke*
33
It Is said of roringe boys ther'es many thieves
(He Is in the truth I think which so believes)
Yet I do think more witches are of them
Then are of any other sorts of men
My reason's this (I fear I shall be bangd)
Cause always ther'es as many burnd as hanged*
34
He that has wealth it is fit that he should have
A lock on's trunck, his gold and wealth to save
But he in whose pate there remains noe wit
Me thinks a lock on his pate is unfit
Then Rorers why do you wear such huge locks*
Your heads are poor. Of with them with a pox.
35
Has he in question been for pursing crimes?
Scap te sargants hands, the hangmans twenty times
Has he on whores consumd his lands and stock?
Been brought to bed, deliv'red of the pock?
Lost'es hair from's head? lost th'ead of you know what?
If he those scapes have had, and has lost that
Oh pray then let him pass: let him enjoy
This famous title; yon's a Roringe boie.
36
Would thou turn Rorer boy? would grow in fashon
Learn this garb then, shall gain fair reputation
Tobacco take; run in each mercers score
Visit plays, be seen to court thy whore
Laughe at learning; call preachers sheepishe men
scholars asses: stick not now and then
To censure deeds of Kings. Naie against gods deytie
Be bold to belche forth broadest blasphemy
Must keep a cattalogue: must have the name
Of eurye merchannts wife which is of fame
Must slannder all; the fairest dames must stain
Must say with conntesses, with queens thast lain
Must be noe coward: thy self must proudly carye
Must mouthe-it stoutelie in each ordynarye
Where, if but of thy losses thy tongue walk
Must of noe less a loss then hundreds talk
Must learn to lie; must learn thy lie to face
And lastelie how to swear God dam the: with a grace
Learn these young boie, great man thou shall be then.
Who do these Ill things well must needs be men.
37
Furious Hott-spurr, a reason pry thee yield
Why thou so fighst; why thou ghost so in field
Ist' after blood thy dry soul so does thriste?
Remember Cayn how god that murthrer curste
But tell me Hott-spurr, wherein doste thou gain
When thou in feilde thy euemye haste slain?
Thy venter's much: Ift' be but to get blood
Then tell me (being got) wherefore is it good?
Thou can not can? I tell thee thou vain goose
Thou hazardst body how thy soul to loose
This blood once spilte does not like bodies die
But that reviues and up to th'eauns does fllie
Where to the lord it points out that black deed
Crying-out for vengeanc, vengeance lord with speed
Fool sheathe thy sword; avoid fond private braules
Our blades should sleep until our country calls.
38
Gooden-dagh Butter-boxe: I understand
Thou do in-habitt in the Netherland
I pry thee Smeere-chopps does not he which buys
A thing called wife there, pay for her excise?
Who buys an ox, a cow, or such like beast
Paies for her horns, hide, flleshe, excise at least
He knows not when she is bought: beside the Boore
He must betall the gelt to twenty more
I pry thee Butter-boxe make me so wise
As know, if men may wiue, not pay excise.
39
Dutchmen should pay (if they did pay their due)
A tax for eu'rye chymney old and new
Then honest Dutchmen, pray now let me axe
Why for your women's tails you pay noe tax?
If those are chymneys where folks fyers make?
Then your wives tails for chymneys I do take
For there are Fires, Fyers there they daily keep:
And therefore pay your dues; those chymneys sweep.
40
Demand you why over stoues Dutch-women sitts?
Oh strange! pray why do you putt meat on spitts?
Ist' not to roste the same? nere wonder then:
For so they sit to roste meat for their men
Although their men all day on hodgepodge eat
Yet in the night they cloye them with roaste meat.
41
Water they say will not wild-fyer quench
Then wildfire in thy stoue thou bearst dutch-wench
For if by water it would quenched be
Then out il would; so waterd it is by thee
But why it will not out, I now do know
Thy bellows wench; they always puff and blow.
42
In Holland, Zealand, all the Netherlandes
Young men with maids (allnight) walk hands in hands
In darkest night, to walk, they most delight
For doing which, some do applaude their sight
They need not do it; they see as other men
For when it is dark they go by feeling then.
43
A Huntsman and his Dog did lately come
To the low countries from their English home
Oh Dog quoth he (I speakt' with grief of heart)
We one from the other shall be for'cd to part
I shall not able-bee to give thee meat
Now bones and paringes I my self must eat
Why sir (replies the Dog?) I hope not so
I cann and will your masters pleasure show
Pleasure quoth he? If thou will them delight
Thou must show proffit Dog, or learn to fight.
44
A messenger from the'auns was lately sent
T'envite poor tradesmen unto merryment
Bruers, Tailors, and cooks (amongst the rest)
Envited' were unto that solenm feast
But they being very busy annswerd thus
Oh messenger said they excuse thou us
Our leisure will not serve us there to go
The Devil here on earth employes us so
My Country'es French the Tailor cries: and I
Must live there-in else Frenchmen straight will die
As th'ynglishe nation do their bellies cramm
So we our backs: To them a nurse I am
I Am English quoth the Cook: my Nation looks
For naught but meat, good stomachs and good cooks
Therefore should I to heaun; my Country men
Could not devise how they should surfett then
I Am Dutch the Bruer cries, and should I clyme
Above the clouds before prefixed time
Our nations souls beneathe hells pit would sincke
For dead their hearts grow when they want good drink
Therefore tell God the Devil stays us here
To keep our nations from ascending there.
45
When Foxe-furr walks, he treades the formalst pace
When Foxe-furr talks, he talks with grauest grace
He licks not's lips, nor pickes his fingers ends
But to formality each motion tendes
In all things Foxe-furs formal; I, his nose
At all times with formallitie he blows
At meat (at mouth) he formallie breaks wind
From meat as formallie he breaks behind
Oh since grave Foxe-furr cann say I and noe
(...) a sheere-towne Mayor may pass I trow.
46
Ask Craft the Merchante whether he does walk;
Why to th'exchaunge quoth he t'exchaunge some talk
Askes' ietting wife; his lisping pretty bride
To what green banck that golden snake does slide
She lispes-out, to my garden truly sir:
But wott you what it is thither draws her?
Oh sir, that's her exchange: she walks there
Tex'change her body, in the open air
Her prentize there, his masters factor proves
And choppes such wares as merchantes wives best loves;
47
You Sailors, if you will wealthy-growe, and thrive,
Steer such a course as you may fairelie wiue
Get you but bewtious wives, and you shall see
Against your coming home thei'le loaded be
I, costom-free your merchanntes load em will
And with best wares your wives ware-howsen fill.
48
While Seahorse gallopps over gulfes and sands
Entending to discover unknown lands
At home he leaves his marchannt with his wife
Who sails with her yet nere adventers life
Now on a ruff waves back his friggot daunceth
Anon t'a vaultie hollow down it channceth
Now is she toste; anon turned over and over:
Under now; a non she manly does recover
and thus on land strannge straightes he seeks to find
Running his course so long as good's his wind
In her he rows; but all is discou'ries (...)
(...)
49
Ther'es three things makes me think that city wives
Are least infected with these papiste lives
The first is this; they keep noe hollidaies
For then they are most occupyde men says
The second is, to see them croste it is rare
For Townsmens wives but sisdom crossed are
The third is this (this often has been tryde)
Fasting, and prayers they cannot well abide
Ill Nunns they would make, for who of late did see
A London girll that did vow chastetee?
50
A souldyer, Lawyer, and a Cytizen
In thicke-wide Forreste (once these wandering men)
Had lost them selves, but Fortune did provide
For each of these a beast to be his guide
Unto the souldyer (with a mild-maiestick grace)
A princely Lion gentlye bent his pace
Unto the Lawyer did the subtle Fox
Two to the Townsman went, the Ass the Ox
Each telling in their languadge, how that they
Would t'eache of them a guider be in's way
The first the Lion thanks; the other the ox
The Townsman thanks and follows th'Asse and thoxe
But most in grateful he (in humane borne)
Robbes the mild ass ofs' wit, and th'oxe ofs' horn.
51
Is It not a brave life hoe to serve a Lord?
Its naught but trusse his points and wait ats'borde
A man shall be assu'rd enoughe to eat
If he catch bones which has enough of meat
The life has ease; a man need ueuer stir
Less whens Lord -- t'aske, do you call me sir.
52
Had I a thousand girls noe care I Would take
For those my girls, portions to scrape or rake.
I Would make em chamber maids; or else they should
Be waiting gentlewomen If I could
Were they not then card'-for? then if they will
Under their lords they may be getting still.
53
Is It not strange that Townsmen daielie eats
Fatt uenison as often as other meats?
Noe, it is not strange; for their sweet wives may have
As many warrants as thei'le ever crave
Pure souls! if they but lispe-out pray my Lord
Give me a warrant; tha'ue it at first word
Lords are kind to give; and a City dame
To beg a warrant never holds it shame
54
Now good sir John (the beggar cries) I pray
Bestow your worshipps alms on me to day
Relieve my wantes quoth he; I am your brother
We borne-are one to help and aid an other
My brother quoth Sr. John? poor wretched wight!
Why thou mistakest me, I am a knight
I know it quoth he; but hark you kind sir John
Ther'es many a knight kinn to the beggar man.
55
Late did I take a knight on Beggar wench
He was on fire; it was she the flame must quench
The Beggar-wenche I asked if she did like
Better with knights, then with poor beggars strike
Faith sir quoth she if I shall speak but right
I find as one, the Beggar and the knight.
56
Now god be with old Chuff; avouch't I cann
That graie side-coated swadd dyed a good man
Yet daily heed' be drunck: naie this is more
The rich old churl for each day kept a whore
Yet not-withstanding I do tell noe lie
In saying Chuff did a right goodman die
Pray speak; may not the knight his son be glad,
In that for father he a good man had.
57
Pray wrong not Late-coynd; give the man his right
He Is made a gentleman although noe knight
Has he not bought a kinghts old clothes? why than
Late-coynd I hope is made gentleman
For now it is clothes the gentleman does make
Men from gaie clothes their pedigrees do take
But wott you what is the arms to such men's house
Why this, hands chasinge of a rampant Lowse.
58
What shall we think now of the Iack-dawes state?
Is not that Foul become a Potentate?
The Eagles house of sticks and strawes are built
Free from vain pomp; not burnist ore with guilt
But Dawes have built em howses wondrous fair
With proud pyramides t'out-braue the air
Blame not the Dawe to leave base, strawes to peck:
You sec whose' now the Iacke-dawes archyrect.
59
Why laughe you at Iack-dawes? I cannot see
But that Iacke-dawe's both wise and honest be
Honest in this: howskeeping they uphold;
They keep good howses as in days of old.
And herein wise: Great men great howses make
But Iackdawes straight possession of them take
Their wise and honest, and to outward show
They are devoute; to Church they daily go
Long may they live. For Iack-dawes I will pray;
Were Iackdawes dead, howskeeping would decaie.
60
Do hear me Iacke-dawe? thou doste saucie grow:
Get better manners; learn thy self to know,
How dare thou Iett-it to the Eagles court?
Thou art too bold; why there does none resort
But birds of noblest parts. There does fall
The soring Faulcon which so prays on all
The Peacock with his rich embrodred plumes
Spreades there his tail; high place he there asumes
The Nitingall singes there, and now and than
There falls a turtle Dove, a milke-white Swan
A way thou foolish dawe, seek not t'aspire
Keep thou thy country house; perke-vp noe hire
Or if thou needs must change, seeke-out the Gull
Cuckoe; woodcock; each City of them's full
Exchange with them: City Cuckoes love
To fly a bread: each summer they remove.
61
England, of Oxen, sheep, horse, thou haste thy part
Likewise, with hearts, hindes, buckes; enritcht thou art
Plenty of these thou haste: but I do muse
Noe more wild-bores with in thy bounds do use
If Bores of hogs do come, thou should have store
Noe land of truer hogs had ever more
Search court, or country; woods or Fenny boggs
Alls' one, all places now yeildes gruntling hoggs.
62
Sir quoth a Clown, your father (as we say)
Was a good man; yet never went so gaie
His clothes were such as howsewiues fingers spinn
I never saw him strutt it in sattyn
He deed good deeds. It Was seld seen from his door
A man came vnreleivd' that lived but poor
The Chymneys of his house were always swept
They allwaies smoakt: that she'wd what house he kept
What talkst thou of his acts (young Make-waste cries?)
Now good deeds with the good deed-doer dies
Talk of my acts; I can orethrowe the oak
And make my nostrylls like his chymneys smoke.
63
Prate-well has courted me; has wood my wit
Told me for plays it was exceeding fit
Would have me beat my brains t'instruct and teach
Parrottes and Mag-pies how on stage to preach
Go Epigram go annswere thas fond woer'
Tell him I will not: bidd him sue noe more
So tell him I will teach noe cranes to stalk
Nor clipp these Mag-pies tongues to make em talk
I am noe beareward; for do what I can
I cannot make an ape to Imitate a man.
64
Go to your plaie-howse you shall actors have
Your baude, your gull, your whore, your pandar knave
Go to your bawdie house, you have actors too
As bawdes, and whores, and gulls: pandars also.
Besides, in either house (if you enquire)
A place there is for men themselves to tire
Since the are so like, to choose ther'es not a pinn
Whether bawdye-howse or plaie-howse you go in.
65
But speak I pray, who is it would gess or skann
Fantasmus to be borne a English man?
He Is hatted spanyard-like and bearded to
Ruft Itallyon-like; pae'd like them also
His hose and doubletts' French; his boots and shoes
Are fashond pole in heels, but French in toes
Oh he is complete! what shall I descant an?
A complete Fool: noe complete English man.
66
Were I a captain and might choose my men
Flattrers and Parrasits I would choose then
Valyant they be; they never fear the shot
Tha're forwardst still when service is most hott
They fear noe shot. Yet such men Flattrers be
As still if any scapes, they escape shott-free
Mistake me not; misconster not this shot
The are shott-free, when, service in Tavern's hott.
67
A honest Baker lately did epsy
A Scivner preachinge on the pillorie
Scrivner he said, bequeathe thy ears to me
Though I can hear, yet I want ears quoth he
Take them the serivner cries to do thee good
Often Bakers ears over serivners heads have stood.
68
Were I a gallant and could maintain men
Id'e have bald-pated laddes to attend me then
For men whose pates are bare and bald at topps
Are exlent fit to keep Tobacco shoppes
Two things upon a bald crown on may do
That Is cut Tobacco, and well drye-it too
Their brains are hott: theere sculls as thinn as shell
Lay't on the bald-place it will dry it well.
69
Souldyer (quoth a Iugler) wilt learn of me?
Ile' teach thee tricks; such, thou did never see
The souldyer sighs, shakes head, and annsweres thus
A Las, too many tricks are shown to us
Tricks on poor souldyers eu'rye Captain putts:
Slyghts to draw gold from-out our shrunck-vp gutts
It Is they have tricks, and therefore Iugling Fool
If thou't learn tricks, to them go thou to school.
70
Captain (a Seargant cries), a souldyers dead
What shall be done? shall he be buried?
How buried man? thou do thy office trymm
First let me make the most I can of him
Alive I made the most of that poor man
I Will now as much make of him as I can
If his hair, flesh, skynn is nothing worth
Then rypp-out's heart; his very heart pull forth
Sell it in Spain: Folks of those foreign parts
Will giv'es good gold for our poor souldyers hearts.
71
A Scotche and Englishe-man made their request
Unto the gods that they in heaun might rest
We will admytt you both the Godds did cry:
But Scotchman, unto thee conditionally.
Th'agreement's this; if here we thee estate
Thou must not be to bold, nor full of prate
Naie, more conditions yet; Thou must not lie
Nor sooth us up. We Gods hate flattery.
72
Why how now Waspes, are you returned again?
I know vnstung remains a world of men
And therefore once more out; make the other flight
Where if you find noe men, on women light
Turn tail to them; but mark you what I tell
Sting them not much, too much their flesh will swell.
73
My mistress is not light, yet shynes she light
Her bewties beams appears in darkest night
If in the dark she is light, you must confess
A Dyamond she is, or little less
Oh she is a Diamond; in Dark she is light
A tutchstone too, and tries if things are right.
74
To gild the heauns, in day, the golden sunn
Through the clear sky his course does proudly runn
The silv'rye Moon (with thowsands spanglie lights)
Does likewise brnish-ore the gloomie nights
But The Earth (our sullen damm) to set her forth
Noe taper had until my mistress birth
But since her birth the Earth may with th'eauns compare
For to her Lightness they but darkness are.
75
Away with sicklye wenches (whitelye faced)
And those whose heads with amber locks are graced
Those puling creatures are unfit for men
They cry tha're sick when we have need of them
Would chuse-out one unto a man most true?
Choose then out one of clear deepe-sanguy'nd hue
With black-browne hair: in whose sweet face is set
Two sparkling lamps; yet black as blackest iett
With dympled chynn, with lips pure rubby-redd
This wench a live shall find with in thy bed
I, active, nimble: hah; her stirring spright
Hates sluggishe sleep. Loves motion all the night
Choose such a one; I choose so for my part
Such, men should love; such love men with their heart.
66
Oh What a body has my lady there?
She Is straungelie strong! what burdens she does bear!
Late did a dunghill Carr upon her fall
Under which she lay; never hurt at all
Oh who but she could live, being so brusht?
It Is wondrous strannge her honors noe more crushed.
67
Some Ladies in noe coatch or croatche will ride
Unless tha're dawbd with gold, such shows their pride*
Welfare my Lady Constance* heaunlie starr!
She leaves her coatch-of to ride with a Carr
I with a dunghill Carr now does she ride
Oh would all Ladies were so free from pride.
78
Poetus with fine sonnets painteth forth
This and that foul ladies, bewties worth
He shows small wit thereby; and for his pains
(By my consent) he never shall reap gains
Why what need Poetts painte them? oh sweet elues!
Why ladies painte their bewties best themselves.
79
When I to Court did come, I musd* to see
The Lords so brave. It half amazed me
I did expect the most had mourners been
All widowers I thought I should have seen
I did in deed: This reason fort had I
Cause eurye day their Ladies there do die.
80
My Ladies teeth are always extreme white
Yet few knows how they come in that fair plight
She rubbes em not with rank tobacco ashes
Nor with pure water, white her fanges she washes
Nor is it with water as is stild from rose
Noe hirs distild is from her own sweet nose.
For as the tubb receaues each dropp from spout
So does her mouth from her still-dropping snoute.
81
When Maddam Minsitt at her table sitts
She seems to strain to swallowe down small bitts
If she but cram a larkes thighe down her belly
She Streakes, cries she is so full, she burst-shall wellie
Pray ask her Fool (she being out a sight)
What great bitts then must serve her appetite
Bitts then indeed, Indeed then in her belly
Bitts of a pound her fool does putt-in wellie.
82
Maid quoth my Lady (as in bed she lies)
Make me a Caudle' against such time I rise
Die Doctor says it will do me noe harm
To put some thing into my belly warm
The maid lowe-cursey makes, and cries, forsooth
It shall be done; so ambling forth she gooth
But she scarce gone, her back not turned wellie
But th'vsher putts warm caudles in her belly.
83
Boy, bring my horse quoth Shift; but do not tarry
This meal I mean to save an ordynarie
To day my lady Shift-of I Will go see
Who will I hope to dynner envite me:
I Will bring your horse his boy replies; But sir
You Will loose your labor if you visitt her
Her Cook for dynner nothing ready makes
Till dinners paste she always physic takes
She Will not be seen; her chamber she keeps then
To eat, and feed, and feed, and eat again.
84
Why should Lady my wedd? this maradg knott
Is knitt too fast: till death it loses not
And what are husbands good for? faith do you hear
For nothing after first or second year
Therefore my ladies wise: with out control
(To please her body) she may damm her soul*
An usher she may have now to her mind
Now unto what her Ladishipps enclind
she now may have; her page to come at call
A wanton monkey else to sport with all
Him may she stroke, lay in her lapp, make fatt
Do any thing with him; yet what a that
Now may she ride, walk, dance, kiss, laughe, lie down
What may she not do now? noe threatring frown
Noe austeere look, noe angry bended browe
Apales her cheeks. She Is free, lives fearles now
My Ladies wise; there is noe mary'd wife
Such pleasure takes as she in single life.
85*
My ladies verdingall is wondrous wide
But what a that? she wear'st not so for pride
Indeed she does not sir. yet if you would know
Why'boute her bumm so hudge a hoope does go
I Will tell it you. Pray sweet sir understand
She for a maid does go, as yet un mand
By virtue of her vardingall, she (wellye)
Does make poor men believe she has noe belly
A rare trick it is: Great wastes twill make seem small
And bellies barrell-bigg, seem naught at all.
86
My lady learnes her little page to skipp
I lie Infaith for it is my Ladies whipp
But why think you my Lady takes such pains
To borrowe from Nedds britch such crimson stains
Oh Nedd did see lie at my Ladies back
My Ladies Friend, of which did Edward clack
Who can excuse the boie? waggs sworn toth smock
should from their tongues such secrett secretts lock.
87
A Cannon-shaken souldyer lame-lie legd'
Late of a brave Court lady boldly begd
Madam (the souldyer cried) pray give releife
Unto a man dismembered full of grief
Wantst members knave quoth she? oh hang thee then
We ladies nere releive dismembered men.
88
If you were wise then would you nere ask why
My Ladies woman's tail so often does cry
Alas her vardingales' a door so wide
As it letts more wind in then t'can abide
And that's the cause (Indeed I do not lie)
Which makes my Ladies woman's tail so cry.
89
Page (quoth my Lady) go shitt the door. The wind
Whispers to loud: a Tyrant it is I find
And therefore shitt boy shit; shitt-too the door
It Is good let badd guests out, but in noe more.
T'vnhappie wagg (fraught with a knauish wit)
Cries, Maddam, it is not my office doors to shitt
Pray bidd your gentlewoman do it: her face
Does look as if she would shit eurie place.
90
By wans wise policy it has been found
That beasts (though nere so strong) are always bound
The hudge great Elaphaunt, the Maystiff Curr
By men are bound; both made they dare not sturr
The princely lion by man's special wit
Is forcd with mildnes in his denn to sit
But women's nere chained tongues (beasts small to the eye)
Man's most engenious wit could never tie
Oh men I nere shall hold you truly wise
Until to hold them engynns you devise.
91
Things that are bitter, bittr'er then gall
Physicians holds to be physical
Then women's tongues me thinks to powder beaten
Must needs be so, if as a potion eaten
Nothing more bittir is. Therefore I muse
Why they in physic women's tongues nere use
Faith prove them Doctors: use them in a pill:
Things often help sick men which do sound men kill.
92
A Revr'end Judge sitting to rite men's wrongs
Co^maundme^t gave that all should hold their tongues
At which as dumb a while the Audyence satt
Until a woman with her tail gann chatt
Why who talks there (the reverend father cries?)
All hold their tongues (grave Judge) the men replies
Only a woman troubled here with wind
Unto her self (we think) does break her mind
Indeed quoth he to much it is to do
T'make women hold their tails and their tongues too.
93
Naie truly husband, pray now husband cease
Persuasions cannot move and therefore peace
Have not I said I will not? showing why
A leadging this strong reason too, For I
Me thinks such reasons might' persuade a man
When we say Will not, rocks moves sooner than.
94
In Bed a young man with his old wife lay
Oh wife quoth he Iv'e let a thing to day
By which I fear I am a looser much
His wife replies, youths bargains still are such
So turning from him (angry at her heart)
She vn-awares letts-out a thundering --
Oh wife quoth he noe looser I am now
A marles great sauer I am made by you
Young men that old wives have need never sell
Because old wives (quoth he) letts things so well,
95
A proper man which late had lost that Iointe
Which men ymprysons with a cod piece point
Unto a widow came; widow quoth he
My wealth is great; speak, will thou marry me?
About my house, fair goodly pastures have I
My feildes are large; by which much money save I
Cowes have I store; and though men should not prize
Their own true worthes; yet all men hold me wise
Nor wit nor wealth I want your love to merritt
I am noe way defective but in spirit
Is It spright you want? want you a spright quoth she?
Know It* were you lord of the Earth you get and me.
96
Would learn to woe? a Fawkner learn to be
Wild hawks by watching are made tame you see:
So must thou watch thy wench; what though she'es wild?
Yet watch her well shall rule her as a child
I, cast her of; yet hold thou up thy lure
Then stoop she will: I, down she will be sure.
97
Lisba has manly parts; you shall not find
A wenche on th'Earthe that bears a manliere mind
A wrasler she'es; she'el try a fall with any
A Fencer she'es; shath channgd a thrust with many
An Archer she'es; she laies-well to a mark
Draws home a shaft; nockt right too in the dark
S'hath yet more parts; in part a souldyers she
she will fight, whore, drink, until she cannot see.
98
When rich men's wives are dead (to cover them)
They use to have marble stones laid over them
Since it is an anncyent custom I much muse
Why Harts-head thou do not that custom use
Thy wife was tall, fair, witty: such a one
As in her life would not have lackt a stone
Therefore Hartes-head, t'eternize her good name
Lay ore her one, write this upon the same
Here lies one dead under this marble stone
Which when she lived lay under more then one.
Upon her stone write this: yet do thou hear
At name of stone she will rise again I fear.
99
Smale-witt loves a woman* oh wonder strange!
But wherefore think you? world it is time you channge
It Is time; it is high time that you were renewd
When men think women virtuoustie endewd
Ask him why he loves her, up go'es eyes
For virtue, For her virtue sir he cries
It is her virtue only (sir says he)
That has so sence-charmd and so ravished me
Women virtuous? oh strange unheard of Jest*
World World; thy latter age it seems proves best
Fond' Small wit now gives not his love hot chase
As others do, only for flesh and case
But for her virtue; it is for her virtues sake
That makes young Smale-witt that chase undertake
Now god be'es speed; pray god the youth may wynn her
But's chance is rare if he finds virtue in her.
Conclusion.
100
Clere-eyd bright Titan allwaies blusheth redd
When he beetakes him to his Thetis bed
The youth full livelie god in glowing flame
Sitts and lies down as if surprisd with shame
But man, oh shameless man! it is cause he spies
In's daie-runn course, thy daie-done villainies.
101
My Epigrams make their increase as men
As Fathers gets sonns, so sonns getts sonns again

