CERTAIN SERMONS, UPON DIVERSE TEXTES OF HOLY SCRIPTVRE. Whereof some have
been severally before published, and other some for the greater benefit of the
godly reader are here now added. By M. George Giffard, Preacher of the word
of, God at Mauldon in Essex.

LONDON. Printed by the Widow Orwin, for Thomas Man. 1597.

A brief Summarie of such Sermons as are contained in this book.
A Sermon on the Parable of the Sower, taken out of the 13. of Matthew, verse.
1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9. Two Sermons upon the 1. Pet. 5. verse. 8. and 9. wherein is
showed that the devil is to be resisted only by a steadfast faith, howsoever he
comes either against soul or body: and that whosoever has once attained the
true and lively faith, it can never be utterly lost, but he is sure to get the
victory. Four Sermons upon the seven chief virtues or principal effects of
faith, and the doctrine of election: wherein every man may learn, whether he
be Gods child or no. Taken out of the first chap. of the second epistle of
Saint Peter, verse. 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11. A godly, zealous, and profitable
Sermon, upon the second chapter of Saint James, verse. 14.15
16.17.18.19.20.21.22.23.24.25.26. A Sermon upon James chap. 3. verse.
1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12. A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross the thirty day
of May. 1591. upon Psalm. 33. A Treatise of true Fortitude.
TO THE RIGHT Worshipful M. John Hutton Esquier, George Gifford wishes health
and increase of worship.
IT is more then half a year (Right Worshipful) since I handled this Parable
of the Sower, in a Sermon at London. Being instantly urged by a friend which
heard me, to put it in writing, although I was very unwilling, for sundry
considerations, yet I made some promise if leisure should serve. Afterward when
I would very gladly have been released at her hands whom I promised, I could by
no means obtain it. I have therefore at the last so nigh as I could, set
down in writing, that which I then uttered in speaking: I know that I have
omitted some things in the particular applications, and exhortations which I
made: and also I have added somewhat which either then came not to mind, or
else time did not serve to handle. I ambold to present and dedicate this my
poor travel unto your worship, moved thereto with diverse respects, at thinking
my self in duty bound, not only with this common and general bond that ye are
one which long time have professed the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ: but
with diverse more special, which are so well known unto you, that it were
needless for me to recite the^: only thus much, seeing I was borne and
brought up under you, my parents receiving benefits daily from you, I think I
ought, when as I am not able to make any recompense, at least to show some
token of a grateful mind. But especially I am moved hereunto, with
consideration of the greatest blessing which all my kindred have enjoyed by you
now so long, in providing and procuring their spiritual instruction. I pray
you accept of my good will, and account of me as one that prays to the Lord
for you, that he will multiply and increase his good gifts still in you, to
the glory of his holy name, the benefit of his Church, and your endless
comfort in Jesus Christ. Amen.

Yours for ever to command in the Lord, George Gifford.

A SERMON UPON THE PArable of the Sower.
Matthew. 13. 1 IN that day Jesus went out of the house and sat by the sea side.

2 And there was gathered unto him a multitude, so that he entered into a ship,
and sat down, and the whole multitude stood on the shore.

3 And he spoke many things unto them by parables, saying: Behold a Sower went
forth to sow.

4 And as he sowed, some seeds fell by the way side: and the fowls came and
eat them up.

5 Other fell upon stony ground, where they had not much earth, and by and by
they sprang up, because they had not depth of earth.

6 And when the sun rose they were parched, and because they had no root they
withered.

7 Other fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked it.

8 Other fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit, one seed an hundred
fold, another sixty, another thirty.

9 He that has ears to hear, let him hear.


ALthough the Jews, at such time as our Savior Christ came into the world,
had the word of God among them: and had also the Temple and Synagogues where
they heard the same read and expounded: yet their state was very miserable, for
Christ says, they were as sheep without a shepherd: because their teachers,
the Scribes and Pharisees, being choked with covetousness, and puffed up with
vain glory, were become stark naught, corrupt in manners, and corrupting the
word with their fond gloses: their teaching also was so cold, and with so
little power even in that which they taught truly, that the people had no great
list to hear them. But when John Baptist the forerunner of Christ, was raised
up to publish the beginning of the Gospel, and to prepare the way for the
Lord, he like a sounding and shrill Trumpet, with the power of his word shook
their hearts, and rowsed their drowsinesse, so that from his time the kingdom
of heaven suffered violence. When Christ Jesus himself uttered his voice in
preaching, and his divine power in working woonders, there appeared such a
wonderful majesty in his person, as did amaze the hearers: whereupon his fame
was noysed far and near, so that they came running out of al quarters of the
land by heaps, for to see and hear him: they seemed to forget themselves and
their state, in leaving all worldly affairs, as the husbandmen their plough,
the Artificers their crafts and sciences, following him into the wilderness
with their wives and their children laggering at their heels, so great was
their zeal. So that, as before almost all did perish in the miserable state
they were in: now it seemed that the greatest part, or at least an innumerable
multitude did with such care embrace the heavenly doctrine, as that they should
be most happy and come to eternal life: but this was otherwise, for our Savior
Christ shows here, that of this great heap and rablement of people, that
were so zealous, and traveled so far to hear him, there were three parts
which did not profit by his doctrine, but continued still damned and forlorn
creatures, only one part of four, are true scholars. And because we be rank
hypocrites, prone and ready to deceive our selves, Christ Jesus lays open the
matter so plainly, and in so familiar a kind of teaching, that unless we
wilfully blind our selves we can not but see how the case stands in every of
us, each man in himself: for he takes a similitude from a Sower of corn, which
going and casting his seed abroad, it lights upon sundry kinds of ground,
some falls by the way side, where the path is tra^pled and beaten smooth and
hard by men's feet, and is made like a pauement, and there it lies above the
ground altogether uncovered, the Fouls come by and by and pick it up. Some
falls into stony ground or rocky, or as S. Luke says, upon a rock: where
there is a little thin crust of earth in the top, and some moisture in which the
seed is a little covered: and because the earth which does cover it is but
shallow, it springs up quickly and brancheth, and is fresh and green, and
being so good, seems to be forward corn, and such as would yield to the
husbandmen a plentiful harvest: but because the root cannot spread it self
deep enough, to suck juice out of the ground for the nourishment of the blade,
when the parching heat of the Sun lights upon it, then it is dried up, and
scorched, and dies, and never brings forth fruit. Some other does fall among
thorns: there is depth of earth for the feed to grow, so that it springs up,
and not only a blade, but also a stalk, and comes so far as to have the
ear: but the thorns grow up with it, ouershadow and choke it, in so much that
the corn in the ear, cannot have the benefit of the Sun to make it ripe:
therefore the fruit that it seems to bring forth comes to naught. Some
other seeds fall into good ground, and grow up, and bring forth seasonable
fruit, one kernel an hundredth, another sixty, another thirty. This is the
Parable. Now for the meaning of it, we are not to seek far, neither to go by
conjectures, for Christ himself does expound and interpret every part of it a
little after in this chapter: I need not but to lay open his exposition.

The seed is the word of God: the sower of it is the Preacher and publisher of
the same: for as the Sower does fill his hand and so casts it abroad upon the
ground, not setting it seed by seed, or choosing a place for every seed, but
where it lights: even so the preacher does cast forth the word among the
people, and look how the ground is into which it falls, so does it prosper;
for your hearts are the ground upon which it is cast: you that are the hearers
and among whom the seed is sown, have every one a heart which is one of these
four sorts of ground, upon which the seed falls: and because the seed has
been and is still daily sown among ye, I think this parcel of scripture
is vey fit and agreeable, even as a touchstone for every one to try him self
withal, whether he have rightly embraced the Gospel, and to his salvation:
for what a sottishnes were this, when we have so just and plain a rule, not to
measure our selves with it? But going on, on, nothing consider whether we be
not one of those three evil sorts of ground, which receive the seed, but bring
forth no fruit, thinking we be well if we profess the Gospel or hear it,
after any sort. Let us go forward: those which receive the seed by the way
side, are they which hear the word and do not understand it, then comes
the evil one, or as S. Luke says, the Devil, and takes it away from their
heart. In these first kind of hearers, we have to observe, how that their
hearts being hard and smooth like a path that is trampled and beaten with men's
feet, the word has no entrance, but lies above uncovered: for like as when a
man casts an handful of corn upon a very hard and smooth path, it is all
one as if it were cast upon a pauement: so also through the custom and
deceitfulness of sinning, the Devil has made the hearts of these unmeet to
receive the heavenly seed of the word: and look how ye see Crows and other
Fowls follow the heels of the Sower, to pick up and devour such kernels as
do lie uncovered; in like manner do the devils come like greedy fowls into the
assemblies, where the word of God is preached, to take it away from the hearts
of the people, that it may not grow there. This peradventure will seem
strange to some, that Satan should have any entrance into the Church among
Gods people, especially when they be about the best and most holy exercises of
hearing the word and of prayer. How strange soever it may seem, and how many
soever have been, or be of that fond and doltish opinion, to think that the
devil has nothing to do with them, or comes not near them, when they be
about these holy things: we are to believe Christ who tells us the contrary:
and we are wisely to consider, that when we are nighest that which should do
our souls good, then is this enemy readiest at hand, and does most busily
bestirre him. If this were not uttered by our Savior Christ himself, we might
wonder, and for mine own part I would not cease wondering to see many hearers
which carry away almost nothing, which is to any purpose: let a man tell a long
story in a worldly matter, they have wit enough to recite it in order again,
and to keep it in remembrance a long time after: but let ye preacher speak
never so plain, although they sit and look him in yt face, yet if ye enquire of
the^ so soon as they be out at the church doors, ye shall easily perceive that
(as the common saying is) it went in at the one ear, and out at the other.
They will say peradventure, after this manner, it was a good sermon, I would we
could follow it, he said very well: he is a perfect ready man in the pulpit. But
ask, what doctrine did he handle. Then are they at a pause, and set at a dead
lift. They will make this answer: we are not able to carry away so much as
other can; nevertheless we hope that we be as good toward God, as they that
carry away most. They will also confess that the word of God is good, and
that we should be ruled by it. Let us therefore dearly beloved (if we desire
not to be of the number of these) mark well the subtle sleights and policy
of the devil, how he handles and conueyeth the matter with this kind of
people. There is no doubt of this, but that if he can he will draw away the
mind from coming to the Sermon, one pelting let or other must come in the
way: if there be no worldly business to be done, then a pair of cards, or
tables, or some honest recreation, it should be now no good ciuility to part
company when friends are met together, this is the surest way if it may be
obtained: but what if he fail heerin? They come to the place where the seed
shall be sown, sit down, and mind to hear: then the next way is to come with
them, and to attend at their elbowe, seeking how to deprive them of the word.
Now his best way is to bring them asleep because they were then as good be
absent: or into a slumber, that they may hear only a sound and a confused
humming, without any perseverance of the things uttered: or else when they hear
any perfect sentence, or a few sentences, they know not why they be uttered,
because they heard not that which went before. Such as are not so drowsy
headed, being wakefull, he seeks still to convey some thoughts into their
minds, whereabouts they may be occupied, and their understanding drawn away:
the mind of a man being light and inconstant, if he can put in but one motion,
it oftentimes draws with it so many linkes as make up a whole chain, in the
mean time the Preacher goes on, and he understands not what was said, and
so when his mind returns he can have no sound knowledge of the things
uttered, but a confused opinion: into these by thoughts men are oftentimes
brought, even by occasion of some word or sentence which they heard uttered,
and are carried so far, that they cannot of long time recover their mind to
bring it again to the matter. Seeing this great danger, we ought when we come
to hear Gods word taught, to make account that we go about a very hard
work, that we go to encounter with Satan hand to hand, who seeks then most
busily to steal away our heart, that he may make that word fruitless in us,
and cause us to sin grievously against God. There is no one man which makes
conscience of hearing the word rightly, which setting these things together,
the reverence we owe unto it, the stedinesse of our mind, which should be upon
it, and the care to keep it, but will easily grant that it is as hard and
painful a travel to do this, as for the man that works in the sorest
bodily labor. Here is therefore a lesson for every man to apply to himself when
he is going to hear the word, to think I am now going about a great work I
shall be too weak if the Lord God do not mightily assist me: for I am not to
sit down there at ease, but to wrestle and struggle with the Devil, and with
all the corruptions of mine own flesh, and hardness of my heart: that my mind
may be kept steadfast upon the word, that I may receive it with all reverence
and fear, as the word of the great and glorious God: not to judge of it at
mine own pleasure, but to crave wisdom from the Lord: not to hear it and to
let it go, but to keep it as a most precious jewel locked up in my heart,
that I may guide my self thereby. And we shall be a great deal the rather
moved to this diligence, if we consider what a companion we carry about with
us, and what a guest we lodge withal, when we be such as hear the word, and
do not keep it. For Christ tells us that it is the Devil which does this:
which as a greedy Foul deuoureth the seed which was sown in our heart: if any
make none account to have him possessing their mind, and hardening their hearts
against the word: then let them continue in their sloth to hear with drowsy
minds, to hear and not to understand: to regard the holy word, but as the word
of a man: to make little account to keep it. But if he think it a most
miserable thing, to have so filthy a beast, and so soul a spirit to lodge in
his breast: if he think it to be a most vile slavery, to be vanquished and
overcome of so horrible an enemy, to be led captive and kept thrall under
such a tyrant: then let him think also how miserable a thing it is to be such
a kind of ground as does receive the seed by the way side. For undoubtedly,
how soever men seem to defy the devil, and curse him, as though he should
not come nigh them, yet seeing it is no mortal man, but the Lord Jesus Christ
himself, who tells us here that the devil is not only nigh but in these
kind of hearers, even hardening their hearts, and blinding their eyes, we
ought most constantly to believe it. He that shall deeply weigh the estate of
our Church at this day, will soon be brought to confess, that there be many
of this first sort of hearers, they shall perceive it right will by this, that
they are not able in any wise to judge or put difference between sound and
sincere preaching and vain prattling: they know not when the preacher does
minister unto them wholesome food, and when there is nothing but chafe and
wind: ye shall hear them highly commend some Sermon, as a matter worthy to be
written in letters of gold, when as in deed it deserves not so much as to be
noted with a coal. I speak not of those silly wretches, which were never as
yet acquainted with preaching, for it is no great marvel, though they be not
able to discern chalk from cheese: or being blind for to judge of colors,
but to such as of long time have been hearers, and yet never the wiser, because
they are not able to judge when sound and necessary conclusions are drawn out
of the word; but all is one with them, whether the reason that is made be good
or bad, strong or weak: yea, further ye shall perceive that eue^ a little show
of a reason although never so doltish, being against true godliness, does more
prevail with the^, then a multitude of infallible proofs although they be
never so sure: and that which is so gross and absurd that a child may laugh
at, seems to them a very strong pillar to lean to. There needs no more
when a man preaches unto them, but a glorious show of learning, a sweet
ringing voice, and matters so strange and strangely handeled, that they may be
brought into a woonderme^t of that they know not. And Satan has many
chaplains fit for this turn, to serve the vain humor of such people, and to
set forth themselves after a pompous sort: more seeking their own vain
glory, then the glory of the Gospel, in the conversion of the people. The
second kind of ground are they which receive the seed upon the hard rock,
where there is some entrance, and the word has a shallow root in them, for as
it were the top of their heart is soft after a sort, and there it is covered a
little, and it grows up quickly, and springs fresh, they seem to be stout
and excellent professors, they brag of great zeal: a man would take them to
be sincere, and so they take themselves: but when the Sun arises that is, the
fiery trial or parching heat of persecution, they stumble and fall away and
because the word had no deep root in them, it withers and brings forth no
fruit: these also are not profited by the word of grace, but are still
castawayes and damned creatures. In this kind of ground, or in these hearers,
if we note well, we shall see that which is strange and wonderful: when
Christ says and testifies of them, that they receive the word with joy: these
be not blasphemers or persecutors of the word: they be not contemners which
regard not at all to hear it: they come not under a show or pretense as to a
thing which otherwise they have no care nor feeling of, or which they delight
not for to hear, but how? They receive it with joy, and take such pleasure
therein, that returning they can say, surely this was a very notable piece of
work, and well handeled, I am glad that I heard it, it does me even as much
good as my meat, I would go a mile to hear the like again. Is not this then
marvelous and fearful, that a man may go thus far and yet be a castaway, and
a forlorn wretch? It is not a thing to be woondered at, when the holy
scriptures give sentence against those traitorous villains, which set
themselves against God, and tread down his laws; but when God utters this
sharp sentence against this zealous kind of me^, if it cause us not to wonder,
yet it may make us to tremble, when we see that a man may proceed thus far in
religion and yet be damned. When we understand that a man may be zealous, and
ready to hear preaching, understands, carries away, lets it grow in his
heart, has some joy in it, and yet never the better, abiding still under the
curse. But there be some which will object against me and say, this is no good
manner of teaching, for the use of true teaching, is to build up and edify
the faith: but this seems to take away the certainty of faith from all, so
that no man can tell whether he shall be saved: For by what means can a man
make a better trial and proof of his faith then this, that he gives ear to
Gods word, understands it, carries it away, and ioyeth in it? If such a man
may be damned, who may not despair? I answer with S. Paul, 1. Cor. 10.12. He
that thinks he stands, let him take heed he do not fall. If the admonition
were necessary to the Corinthes, it is necessary for us all. One of the
principal ends and uses of preaching, is to give men warning that they do not
deceive themselves with every kind of faith or joy in the word: but to look
for good and sound trial in themselves: which is not the way to bring men to
despair, but to bring them to true godliness: to cause them to shake off
security and loosnesse in the service of God: to beware least their hearts
be hard still within: it causes men to try themselves least they should be
deceived by a vain shadow of a dead and fruitless faith: for Christ says,
that these believe (for so it is expressed by S. Luke the 8.13.) and joy in the
word, and yet are damned. Then let us come to the particular applying of this
point: to see how we are to deal with our selves, when ye receive the word
take heed that ye give it depth of earth enough, look that your heart be not
soft and pliable enough a little above, and a hard rock of stone within, but
see that it be dug and softened to the bottom, that the word may take
deep root enough. Alas, what a miserable thing is it, when Christ has given
us warning here so plainly, for a man to be a zealous gospeller, not only
willing to hear, but has an earnest desire, and trauelleth to hear, takes
pleasure and delight when he hears, yet nevertheless, because he takes no
heed thereto, his heart within is so stony, that he hears but to his
further increase of damnation. Many think it goes well with them when as they
receive this testimony from men: he is a sound Protestant he favors and
delights in the truth, these indeed be great tokens of the fear of God, but
yet we are not to rest in the^: our chief dealing is between God and our heart,
and that in this thing whether our heart be not hard and rockie. Those are a
thousand times happy, which feel melting hearts and soft affections, so that
Gods word does pearce into them, and causes them to tremble at the majesty and
power of the fame: their tender heart does sigh and mourn for their iniquity.
As on the contrary part, they which make no conscience of sin, but are hardened
in their affections, although they seem to be in good case, yet are they cursed
and miserable. Let every man therefore that goes from the sermon, carry this
with him: I hear by Christ's own words, that there is a stony ground where
the seed falls, where it grows, but not deep enough, it springs up, but
does not bring forth fruit, this is a woeful case, if I should be in the number
of these, for then al my labor is lost which I bestow in freque^ting Sermons,
yea it were much better that I had never heard: I feel that I joy in it, I
would not for any thing but I had heard it: but Christ says that the reprobate
some of them do hear the word with joy, so that if I look not narrowly to
mine own heart, I may for all this be damned: therefore I must not satisfy my
self with this, but see that I cover the word deep enough, that my heart be
softened in such sort, that I feel the root goes deep, yea so deep, that
it can never be rooted out: And therefore let him continually cry unto God
and say: O Lord make soft my hard and stony heart, let it be a melting heart,
that thy holy word may grow in it for ever. I would to God this doctrine of
our Savior Christ might make every of us to tremble and shake (as indeed if
it were well weighed, it is so fearful, that it might cause the hair of our
heads to stand up,) for then would we not so loosely and securely walk in the
hardness of our hearts, there would not be so many backsliders in time of
persecution: there would not be so many brave boasters and praters of Religion,
who are ready to pull in their horns, and to hide their heads, so soon as
there is any fear of danger, or likelihood of persecution: neither would men
bear themselves in hand, that they be jolly professors when they have but a
little tasted of the word, and are no more but empty barrelles, which give a
great sound. Here then we be set a work with great toil, to have this same
hard stony ground made soft, and fit to receive this heavenly seed. And he
which is not careful in this point, to take pains, ye shall see him wax so
hard, that even as a continual rain dropping upon a rock of stone makes it
never the softer, so nothing can make his heart to relent. This may teach us
then to cease marueiling, when we see so many which willingly give
themselves to be taught, and have still little remorse of sin. The Lord for
his mercy sake make us wise and sharp sighted to judge of our selves: not to
be lead on forward in a carnal profession, but to give credit to our heavenly
teacher, who has here opened his holy mouth to instruct us so plainly, and
before hand to warn us of the great danger: that we may stir up ourselves, and
be quickened in our dull spirits, with all humble submission, and bowing down
our necks, to receive the doctrine of our Lord, and to open our hearts in such
sort, that he may dig in them, and thrust in his spade to the bottom: for
otherwise, it cannot go well with us. If this were practiced among us, we
should not have so many old rusty Protestants: which if a man talk with them
from morning to night, they are able to continue speech in reciting stories and
places of Scripture, and will utter matter against the doctrine of the Pope:
but let a man urge them with the doctrine of regeneration, and stand upon the
necessity of sincere repentance, showing them that they must be truly humbled
under the burden of their sins, that they must mortify and subdue their
carnal lusts: this is too hard a crust for their old teeth. This matter does
mar all: this does rob them of their glory: and therefore they can not
wilinglie abide to hear of it. Let us come now to the third kind of ground,
which receives the seed among the thorns: here is depth enough of earth: so
that as the second sort of hearers seemed to go far beyond the first, so these
seem to go far beyond them, and to come nigher to eternal life, for here
the word does grow and has root so deep, that it springs forth so far
that Christ faith, it grows up, and the thorns grow up with it, the stalk
does shoot forth the ear, and lacks but riping. For this may be proved by
Saint Luke, who says that they be not (Telesphorountes) that is, such as
bear ripe and timely fruit: for these professors do many good works, and
seem to bring forth the fruits of the Gospel, and that in such wise that men
cannot always discern them, but think their deeds to be notable: but Christ
Jesus does show that their works before God, (who only cannot be deceived)
are as corn which lacks riping, which being ouershadowed with bushes,
withers in the ear and comes to naught: this is a dangerous case if we
look not to it: That a man may hear the Gospel preached, carry it away, be
moved thereby to do many good works, and yet be damned. He is a thousand
fold mad therefore, which does not look to himself in this point: to try
what soundness there is in the fruits of his faith, and how sincerely he
does embrace Gods word. As before I said, that some would object and say,
this will destroy the faith, so am I sure that here it will be said much more:
because this seems to take away the surest trial of faith: if a man may not
by and by say, I have good works, therefore I have the true and lively faith: I
answer, that whosoever has any good work in him, the same has the true
faith, which has brought forth that good work, because it is impossible
without faith to do any good thing, or to have any good motion or intent: but
withal I say, that it is one thing to seem good before men: and another thing
for to be good indeed before God. In outward appearance, there is little
difference between the good deeds of the^ which fear god sincerely, and the
untimely fruit of worldlings: but God whose eye does not look upon the outward
show but the inward affection, sees which proceeds of faith, and which does
proceed of vain glory, or some other sinister respect, and puts as great
difference between the^, as he did between the sacrifices of Caine and Abel.
We must take heed then, that the fruits of our faith be ripe and timely,
otherwise they be good but in show. We must come then to see first what these
thorns are: in S. Matt. they are called, the cares of this world, and the
deceitfulnes of riches: in S. Luke the cares of riches, and pleasures of this
life. And in very deed these thorns do grow together. For were it not for the
pleasures of this life, there would be no cares of riches: he which does seek
greedily for wealth, it is either because he would be able to have wherwithal to
fill the lusts of the flesh, and to pamper his body delicately: or else to
setforth himself in pride, and to climb ambitiously unto honor. For so long as
a man does take pleasure in any of these, so long he is covetous, and raketh
together so much, that as the common saiing is, he raketh up the devil and all.
What must we do then? Our hearts are as a ground that is rank, and brings
forth many weeds: we are set a work as God speaks by his prophet Jeremy, chap
4.4. Plow up your fallow, and sow not among the thorns: we must put al
diligence and care that our hearts may be rid of such noisome weeds as will choke
the word of God, and make that it shall not bring forth fruit in us. So long
as we suffer any of these in us, either to love dainty and delicate feeding of
our flesh, and to fill our selves with the lusts thereof, or to be gallant in the
eyes of me^, and hautily to lift up our selves in our vain glorious minds, and
for the maintenance of these delights bend our care to the world: so long
shall we be unprofitable scholars in the school of christ Alas poor men which
would fain come to God, and yet are glued to the world they offer one hand to
Christ, and the other to the devil: they can talk of the spirit, and yet are
led by the flesh: the gospel is in their mouth, and covetousness lodges in
their hearts: their works glister and are green before men and are withered
before God: they seem to be faithful and are faithless: to be heirs of glory,
and yet are the children of confusion: there are great plenty of these hearers,
and specially in such places, where there is wealth and honors: how many fall
away choked with the world? and yet we are not afraid of ourselves to take
heed that we stand fast. A great mercy of God it is that we have not only the
doctrine laid before us, but also fearful examples: so that we may buy our
wit with other men's cost. For when we see the world with delights and
pleasures, with covetousness and ambition, to carry away those which profess
the Gospel, is not our own matter in hand, are not we made of the same
metal they are, does not the world assault us as it does them? Yes, and we
shall be overcome also, if the Lord have not mercy upon us. The hardness of
this work, ought not to discourage or make us slack, but hearing what Christ
says, whom we ought to believe, the more hard, the more we are to stir up
our selves, unless we make small reckoning of the salvation of our souls. He
that shall yield and give over the digging up of these thorns, because he
perceives they grow deep in his heart, and spring as fast as he can cut them:
is not worthy to enter into life: he which will not continually till and weed
this ground, may well have the Gospel in some sort for to grow in him, but
not to save him Dearly beloved we must be surely persuaded of this, that as
there be many godly men, so they have attained it with great labor and toil,
yea, they are still set a work and cannot come to an end, because these
thorns cannot be utterly rooted out.

Those are greatly ouerseene which think it to be an easy thing to profess
Christ unto salvation: and make no further account but to be Gospellers, at
ease: if they can vanquish in disputation, to think they have won the
field: no, no, they have a heart, which is hard to overcome: they have
thorns which will not easily be destroyed: here lies the victory and getting
of the spurs: this man shall be crowned because he has willingly given up
himself to the power of Gods grace to purge his heart, and to make room for
the holy word, that it may grow there alone, and not be ouershadowed and
choked.

Now let us mark well that which is said here, both of the stony and also of
the thornie ground; how far they proceed in professing Christ, and
embracing his Gospel: and we shall plainly see, how greatly those carnal
Gospellers which will not have Faith to be tried by the fruits, are deceived:
Faith, faith, (say they) is that which does justify, it is true indeed, but
not a fruitless faith: whosoever believes shall be saved: it is even so, but
not after every kind of belief: for then why should not these two sorts of
hearers be saved? It is marueilons when the Scripture is so evident, and our
Savior Christ speaks so plainly, that this gross and doltish error should
possess the minds of so many. But indeed it is a sweet doctrine, when a man
may let loose the raines to all the lusts of the flesh, at the least thus
far, not to vex and torment himself in subduing them, and yet by faith to
be saved. When Heaven and Hell meet together, and God and the devil be
reconciled, then shall these flesh lie Epicures, and vain proud men come to
their happiness. When Christ shall deny that which he has here uttered,
then shall these be true believers.

Let men therefore take heed that they be not deceived, nor made slack in
looking to the fruits of their faith and mortification of vain fleshly lusts,
through the profane prattling of such worldly belly Gods: believe not the^, but
believe Jesus Christ, who tells you that it is not enough to hear the word,
and to receive it with joy, and to let it grow in us, unless it bring forth
reasonable and timely fruit in us.

Again, let us mark how strong and invincible an Argument may be gathered out
of this text against all contemners and despisers of the word, such as care not
for hearing: these three sorts of hearers are before them, and nearer to
Christianity then they, and yet come short: therefore it must needs follow,
that such ignorant Atheistes, as neither know, nor desire to know any thing
above this world, are very far from God, although they would seem with their
mouth and lips to draw near unto him. For if this matter were well observed,
men would not regard nor have those men in estimation to be good and honest,
who are very dogs or swine, not regarding the precious pearl of the Gospel,
but ready to bark and bite at those which bring it. Let a man inquire thus,
not of a few, but of the greatest part of men, how say ye to such a man, what
think ye of him? he is (say they) a very good man, a good natured man, a
gentle person, trusty to his friend, sure of his word, and does keep as good
an house as any man of his calling in all this shire. But how is he affected
unto Gods word: is he zealous in religion? Nay surely, I did never hear that
he did deal that way, he is a very quiet man, no medler at all. O notable
honest man, as devout in the laws of God as the horse which he rides upon,
as careful to have Gods glory advanced, as the swine in the stie, a great
deal behind these unprofitable hearers, which are castawaies: and yet
forsooth being very bruit beasts before God (in the state they be in yet,
unless the Lord call them to be zealous of his glory) they must be reputed
for the best men. Our fields are full of such cattle as these, and if the
Lord do not put to his helping hand, our case is very miserable. If any of
those which were so zealous to hear, that they would to their hinderance in
worldly matters leave on their business, and follow preaching, as these which
flocked to hear Christ, were yet nevertheless rejected, because they did not
sincerely as they should: what shall we say of those which will not step out at
their doors, even when they have nothing to do, unless it be to sit at cards
or tables? If such a man may be damned, as is moved with some delight, when he
hears the word preached: what shall we judge of those wooden blocks and
sottish men, who feel no more joy in it then a post, when it is uttered unto
them? If there be some go to destruction, which conform themselves and have a
show of fruit by the word: where shall those wretches appear, whom the holy
word of God cannot move one whit, to reform their disordered and beastly
behauiours. Ineede not stand to inueigh out of this place against those hellish
helhounds, which dare open their mouths to reproach and slander the setting
forth of the Gospel. The Lord diminish the number of them.

The last kind of ground, are the good hearers, which do not only receive the
seed, but also bring forth the fruits thereof. Although not every one alike
or in the same measure, for some bring forth an hundredth fold, some sixty
fold, some thirty fold, according to the measure of Gods graces in them.

Although here be great ods in bringing forth the fruits yet they be all
accepted and accounted for good ground, true Christians, and sincere professors
of Godliness: now as we be taught here that it is required of all to be
doers, as Saint James says, and not hearers only, chap. 1. ver. 22. so are we
also taught, not to despise or rashly to condemn those, which do not bring
forth so great a measure of fruit as others do: True it is, as Christ says,
herein is my Father glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit. Ioh. 15.8. But
it is also as true which he says in the second verse of the same chapter,
Every branch that brings forth fruit, he purges, that it may bring forth
more fruit. Then to bring forth most, is most of all to be desired, that God
may have the greatest glory: to bring forth the least is not to be contemned,
because the Lord in time does purge them, and make them more fruitful. I need
not to stand here for to handle many things, or to make large exposition, the
matter is exceeding plain, there is no more but this, that all our care in
hearing and professing the Gospel, be to receive it into good ground, and to
bring forth the fruits thereof. What should I stand to rip up the shameful
abuse in the contrary, to utter how many evil fruits there be in many which
are Gospellers. This should be but as it were to light a candle in the clear
Sunshine, for all men do see them. I do not speak this, as though it should
not be good to cry out against them: but because the former things which I
have now uttered, do fully disclose them. And therefore I will here end,
desiring the Lord to write these things in our hearts, which we have heard
with our outward ears, and to make us good ground, to receive the heavenly
seed, and to bring forth fruits of the same, that glorifying him in this world,
we may be glorified of him in the world to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen.

FINIS.
TWO SERMONS UPON THE 1. Peter 5. verse. 8. and 9. Wherein is showed that the
devil is to be resisted only by astedfast faith, how soever he comes either,
against soul or body and that whosoever has once attained the true and
lively faith, it can never be utterly lost, but he is sure to get the
victerie.
The first Sermon.
Be sober and watch: for your adversary the devil, as aroaring Lion walks
about, seeking who^ he may devour: whom resist steadfast in the faith. 1. Pet.
5. verse. 8.9.
BLessed Peter an Apostle of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.1
wrote this Epistle to the Christian Jews which dwelt as strangers dispersed
here and there in sundry countries, as in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia,
and Bithynia. For the ten tribes were scattered of old time, and had dwelt long
among the Gentiles in many kingdoms, being carried away by Shalmaneser king of
Ashur, out of their own land, as we read 2. King. 17. And of somewhat later
times many of the tribe of Judah and Benjamin were also dispersed among the
heathen: so that S. James wrothis epistle in like manner to the twelve tribes
which were in the dispersion, James 1. ver. 1. These dispersed Jews came up
out of all lands at certain solemn feasts, unto Jerusalem for to worship
there according to the law of Moses, and there had they heard the Apostles
preach Christ, as ye may see by that which is written Act. 2. and believed in
him: and unto them that so believed S. James and S. Peter directed their
Epistles. Touching the matters handled in this Epistle of Peter, we are to note
that the holy Apostle deals principally about the duties of christian life:
as namely, the times being then full of troubles and terror of persecutions,
he labors to make them bold, patient, constant and cheerful in all
afflictions and sufferinges, which they were to pass through to come to the
partaking of the heavenly glory with Christ. Also he uses many grave and
forcible reasons to move them unto true holiness, even to walk in the
virtues of the spirit of grace, and to bring forth fruits worthy of so high
a calling. But first of all he opens as it were the fountain and beginning
of all good actions in man, that is, how God of his great mercy had chosen
them, and begotten them in Christ to be his children and heirs of glory.
Among these persuasions, admonitions, and exhortations of the Apostle, this is
one which I have read unto you, and which I am now to handle. It may be
divided into three parts: Of which the first is an admonition, or an
exhortation, whereby he stirs up all the faithful unto sobriety and
watchfulnes, in these words, Be sober and watch. The second part shows what
cause there is to move all men unto this sobriety and watchfulnes, or how much
it stands them every way upon, seeing they have so terrible and so cruel an
adversary, who continually seeks their eternal woe and destruction: which
is in these words: For your adversary the devil, as a roaring Lion walks
about, seeking whom he may devour. The third and last part does teach how
we shall withstand him, overcome him, and put him to flight, that so we may
escape from his cruel tyranny: which is in these words, Whom resist steadfast
in the faith. All men may easily see, that the matter which we have here to
deal in, is of the greatest moment. If a man have lands or goods, and
perceive that he has an adversary which lies in wait, and seeks to deprive
him of the same, it will move him to take heed, and it will set him on work,
to seek all the ways and means he can to learn how he may defend and hold
his right. If a man do know that his enemy does continually seek all
opportunity and all occasions how he may set upon him unawares, and with the
greatest advantages be can, to take away his life: will he not watch and take
heed? yea will he not be glad to learn how he may so arm and strengthen
himself that he may withstand his said cruel enemy when he comes? Here
is a far greater matter, not the loss of goods or lands, or of this frail
life, but the destruction of both body and soul in eternal damnation, which
is sought by a very mighty, subtle and cruel enemy. I know therefore that
so many as have any spark of true wisdom, will be very attentive to hearken to
this exhortation of the Apostle, and willing to learn how they may be kept
safe from so great a danger. For how foolish a thing is it, that we should be
so careful to beware of men, that they may not harm us, which is but in
lighter matters, and in the mean time have no regard how to beware of devils,
which seek our eternal woe and misery? Hearken therefore (beloved) unto this
wholesome instruction: for now will I come to handle every member by it self.

Be sober and watch. Watching to this end that we may keep our selves out of
danger, is the chief and principal matter of this exhortation: and because no
man can be fit to watch unless he be sober, he joins them both together,
and says unto us, Be sober and watch. It is in vain to call upon drunken men
to watch, for sleep will soon oppress them: he that is sober, he may watch:
Be sober therefore (says the Apostle) and watch. For our further instruction
in this point, we are to remember, that there be two kinds of drunkenness,
two kinds of soberness, two sorts of sleeping, and two sorts of watching,
the one of the boby, the other of the mind. He that with excess and ryote
powers in wine and strong drink until he be drunken, his senses are then
oppressed, drowsinesse comes upon him, and he falls into a sound sleep, his
adversary may come upon him and do unto him what he will: this we all know to
be true. He that keeps himself in sobriety, and is not overcome with wine
or strong drink, but uses them moderately, he can, if need be, watch for to
eschew and withstand perilles and dangers. Now as the body is made drunken
with wine, or strong drink, so is the mind oppressed and made drunken with
earthly cares, with carnal pleasures, with evil lusts and vain delights,
which bring a drowsinesse upon it and a dead sleep, so that the spiritual
enemy may come unto it at pleasure to do what he will. On the contrary part
he that keeps his mind sober touching those cares and pleasures, so that he
is not oppressed nor drowned in them, he can watch, to avoid the spiritual
dangers. This then is the thing which Saint Peter does exhort unto, that we
cast out cares and vain pleasures out of our mind, that they make it not
drunken, and cast it into a sleep, and so into extreme peril, but that it
may continue sober and fit to watch against all spiritual dangers. Our Savior
Christ does teach that the heavenly seed is choked with cares and pleasures of
this life; Luke 8 verse 14. And if any shall now demand, Does S. Peter exhort
here only unto that sobriety of the mind? or is it his purpose to exhort unto
sobriety in drinking also, together with that other? I answer that he
requires both: in as much as a man cannot have a sober and watchful mind
which does follow the drunkenness of the body. For such as be given to
gluttony and drunkenness, or to take pleasure in pampering the flesh, their
mind is drowned in all lusts and carnal pleasures, and then cares do also
enter, how they may provide for the filling of those insatiable lusts: and so
their mind is also drunken and in a dead sleep, so that they cannot watch for
to eschew any spiritual danger. This is the extreme misery of such as do
flow in vain delights, that they be drunken and asleep, the devil may put
into them almost what he list. And therefore our Savior Christ warning his
disciples to watch for his coming to judgment, wills them first to beware
least at any time their hearts should be oppressed with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and with the cares of this life, and so that day should come
suddenly upon them, Luke 21. verse. 34.36. Where we see plainly that our
Savior joins both the bodily drunkenness, and the drunkenness of the mind
together, as making men utterly unfit to watch. Then beloved, let us give good
heed, and follow this wholesome counsel which the holy Ghost does here give
unto us by this Apostle. If we watch not, we are utterly undone, we are utterly
cast away, as it shall appear by the next words. We cannot watch unless we
keep our minds from the drunkenness of cares and carnal pleasures, and our
bodies from excess of wine and strong drink, and continue them sober. And thus
much touching the first part.

Now to the second: For your adversary the devil, etc. If we be not
senseless, and void of all care, yea even as stones almost or blocks, if we
be not like mad men, this may move us unto all sobriety and watchsulnesse of
mind, here is so fearful and so horrible a danger set before us, if we do not
watch, namely, that our cruel enemy the devil seeks about continually,
and lies in wait greedily to devour our souls, yea even to swallow us up
unto eternal damnation in hell. Is it a light matter (beloved) to be devoured
of the devil? Is it nothing to go to hell? we are sure to fall into his
hands, we are sure to be devoured and swallowed up into the woeful gulf of
hell, if we do not learn to be sober and to watch, and so to avoid him: for
if we be drunken and so asleep in mind, he comes upon us, and there is no
help nor any way to escape him. Behold here, what the cares and pleasures of
the flesh do bring men unto, that is to say, they cannot watch, but their mind
is drowned and cast into a deep sleep, so that the devil comes upon them,
and takes them as a pray, swalloweth them up unto eternal captivity. But
there is great force in every word to express unto us this danger, and
therefore I will handle them particularly. Your adversary. Saint Peter
propounds unto us an adversary: and what do men look for at the hands of
a deadly adversary, but all the harm and mischief that he can work them,
and therefore each man has an cie to his adversary, to beware of him, that
he catch him not at any advantage. Now this adversary which is here
propounded does so burn in extreme hatred and malice against God, and against
all mankind, that it is given unto him as a proper name: for in the Hebrew
tongue he is called Satan, which is as much as to say, an adversary. For he is
the adversary, as I may say; of addersaries, or the chief of all other. There
is no way of reconciliation to be sought with him, there is no truce to be
made, nor yet any mitigation of his cruel fury to be looked for, but we may
be sure of all the mischief and harm that he can any way do unto us make
full account of that. There is no pity of mercy with him, neither is he any
way to be trusted, for he is alyar, he is a deceiuer, he is a Devil. Your
adversary the devil. As he is called Satan in the Hebrew tongue, so is he in
the Greek tongue called Diabolos, which we call Devil, it is as much as to
say, one that does accuse, one that with cauillation does deprave and lay
crime. Look what is best done, that does displease him most: he is nothing but
falsehood and lies: as I said, here is no trusting, here is no way or hope of
mitigation of his cruel rage. But it may be objected, seeing the multitudes
of nations and people upon the earthare so many, how can one Devil put all in
danger? for Saint Peter speaks as it were but of one Devil. While he is in
one country, he cannot be in another, and while he is dealing with one man,
another then goes free. For answer unto this, we are to understand, that S.
Peter speaks as of one devil, not because he is but one: for the holy
scriptures do teach that there be multitudes, and as it were Armies of Devils
which do compass us about, seeking our utter destruction; we read in the
Gospel of a legion of Diuelles which did possess one man; as it is said, they
were many: But S. Peter here speaks as of one, because there is but one
kingdom of Satan, and one prince of darkness, that kingdom is not divided,
Satan is not divided against Satan, as our Savior teaches, Mat. 12. They do
all deal in one business, one does not envy another, one does not hinder or let
another, but further what they can: and so they join all together, as if they
were all but one Devil. The bond which does tie them together in this consent,
is that cruel malice and hatred wherewith they burn both against God and man.
So God may be dishonored and blasphemed it pleases them by whomsoever it be
done: so men may be brought to damnation, they care not which of them prevail
most. If one of them do as it were half prevail to cast down a man to
perdition, and another do finish it up, they contend not who has done most.
There needs no praise or commendation in that kingdom to prick any forward;
neither any threatening to the negligent: all are carried with a vehement heat to
do their uttermost. There is no manfree then from the assaults and temptations
of Devils: they seek to devour every soul. Let no man imagine that he can
be drunken in mind, and so lie asleep; and yet be free from danger: He that
will escape must be sober, and watch, for a multitude of Diuelles compass us
about. It is said further, As a roaring Lion. We are very fast asleep if this
roaring cannot awake us, and cause us to be sober and watch, especially if we
consider why he is said to roar. It is written Psalm. 104. verse. 21. The Lions
roaring after their pray, do seek their meat at God. Whereby it does appear
that the Lions being very hungry and greedy, they roar after their pray: and
therefore to express how greedily Satan does hunt after the souls of men, how
hungry he is for to devour them, he is likened unto a roaring Lion which
seeks his pray. This comparison shows that he is very terrible, for a
Lion is a mighty beast, and being so hungry and greedy that he roareth for
the pray, it much increases the terror. The devil then is here set forth unto
us to be mighty, in as much as he is likened to a Lion, and very hungry and
greedy in devouring the souls of men, in that he is likened to a roaring Lion.
Who then that is wise will make himself dru^ken in mind with cares and
pleasures, and lie sleeping when such a terrible enemy seeks to devour him?
And now it may be demanded, what is the cause that the holy Ghost does set him
forth unto us to be so mighty and so terrible? the cause is manifest, we are
secure, we are negligent, we are ready to sleep, our minds are overwhelmed and
drowned in all lusts and carnal pleasures, as if there were no danger at all:
such is our extreme madness. And that is the cause why the Scripture in other
places also describes the devil to be so horrible. Saint Paul calls the
Devils Empires and powers, the rulers of the darkness of this world, and
spiritual wickedness in the high places. And shows that the Diuelles have
their fiery darts with which they seek to pearce through and slay the fouls
of men. Ephe. 6. ver. 12.16. What a dreadful monster is he set forth to be
Reu. 12. He is not only likened to a dragon, but also a most huge great one,
yea so monstrous great, that he casts forth a flood of waters out of his
mouth, and his tail casts down the third part of the stars of heaven. He is
not only a most monstrous great Dragon, but also fiery red, burning with
hatred, with cruelty, and blood. Full of deep subtilties, for he has seven
heads. Very mighty, as having ten homes. One that has as a victorious Prince
often conquered the nations of the world, for he has seven crowns. What a
terror is set forth in all these, a hungry roaring Lion, mighty powers with
fiery darts, a most monstrous fierce Dragon, full of subtlety, cruelty, and
power? Is here any place to be drunken and to sleep? does it not stand us upon
to be sober and to watch? unless we account it a small matter to fall as a
pray into the paws of this roaring Lion, to have our souls pierced through
and wounded to death with his fiery darts, and to be swallowed up into the
belly of this Dragon, and with him to be cast into the lake of fire, which is
the second death. Revel. 20. ver. 14. O beloved, let us not be so dull hearted,
when the Lord does warn us of such an adversary, as to make no reckoning, but
be as careless, as if we had no enemy at all that sought our woe. Men in
deed do naturally fear and tremble at any signs of the presence of devils;
if he show himself in any ugly form, they be terrified: and yet nevertheless
most carelessly make their own minds drunken with cares and carnal pleasures
falling into a dead sleep, so that he utterly spoyleth them, and wounds them
to death, and they feel it not. This is even the course almost of the whole
world. O lamentable and wretched estate! who can bewail it sufficiently?
How many thousand thousands have drunk themselnes stark drunken with the
delights of this world, and as merry as they be, are by this roaring I on
devoured as a pray, and swallowed up by the Dragon? Drunken persons,
especially when they be fallen into a deep sleep, have no perseverance of
their miseries: Be they in debt, or condemned to death, they feel it not, but
can laugh: and so plays the drunken world. O how necessary a thing is it
then that we be sober and watch, to the end that we may escape such dangers?
But it is added further that this adversary goes about seeking whom he may
devour. This does much yet further increase the peril, and ought so much the
rather to move us unto a most careful sobriety and watchfulness: this
adversary does continually seek all occasions, and lies in wait to epsy
all advantages, how he may devour us as his pray. If a man have a strong
adversary, and one that hates him so deadly, that if he could catch him he
would take away his life: and the same his adversary be a far off in another
country, and does not lie in wait for him, he may be the more secure, he
may sleep quietly. But if he be always at hand, and do in all places
dog him, to epsy his fit opportunity to do him mischief, does it not
stand him upon, if he make any account of his own life, to keep himself
sober and watchful? shall he drink himself drunken and lie down to sleep?
The Devil our adversary goes about, he is ever at hand, he seeks all
occasions how he may devour us, is it now safe for us to sleep? Men when they
seek about and travel, do wax weary, and must have times to eat, and to
take their rest: it is not so with the Devil, he is very swift, he is never
weary, he needs no food, nor yet any sleep, he cease not day nor night
for to work our destruction. When we travel on the day he observes us,
when we lie upon our beds in the night he deals with us, there is no time
that we can be free from him. If he cannot prevail at one time, he wayteth
for another: if he cannot overcome a man in one sin, he tries him in
another: and most carefully he watches his fit occasions, and then he
tempts strongly.

To bring a man unto drunkenness, riot, and excess and to spend his time in
vain exercises, he has his instruments, even riotous persons, which are wholly
given that way, for to draw and to persuade. Woe be to that man which lights
into the familiarity of such sinners that will so allure and intise him. What a
wonderful force there is in company for to draw men unto evil, cannot
almost be expressed: and therefore when Satan has found such instruments for
to set upon a man, he has gotten great advantage. When a man is in place
where he may secretly commit some foul sin, as theft or adultery, and the
occasions offered, then Satan lays in hard. And so is it in other sins. What
should I enter into particulars, seeing he has a thousand ways, a thousand
occasions, yea ten thousand sleightes and crafty means for to wind in
himself. Alas what shall we do? Our Savior says, Watch and pray least ye
enter into temptation. Mat, 26. verse. 41. And as he said to Peter, Simon,
Simon, behold, Satan has desired to sift you as wheat, Luke 22.31. so let us
al be assured, that he has many ways to sift us, and to make trial what is
in us. We are taught to pray, Lead us not into temptation: and this place does
show how necessary a prayer it is: for if the Lord give scope to this enemy
and leave us to our selves, he will find a thousand means utterly to spoil
us: he will even devour us as his pray, and we shall not perceive it, for
there in lies the greatest danger, that he blinds the eyes of the mind,
and hardens the heart, when men feel not his working, nor imagine any
suchthing. He that is sober and does watch, feels when he sets upon him,
and what harm he does unto him: where as on the other side, he may do what he
will unto those that are drunken and asleep, and they know it not. Thus much
touching the second part: now let us come to the third and last part.

Whom resist steadfast in the faith. If a man's adversary be too strong for him
by many degrees, what is he the better that he watches, if he can not avoid
but that he will find him and come upon him? will he not kill him for all his
watching? The like objection may here be made, namely, that the power of
Devils far exceeds all power of man: as we see they be described to be
mighty and terrible: and there is no way for a man to hide himself from them,
but they find him out, and come upon him: what is he then the better that he
does watch? Saint Peter does answer unto this: that although in our own
strength we are nothing to this mighty roaring Lion, yet there is a power in
which we shall resist him, put him to flight, and overcome him, and be armed
against al harms: and that is the power offaith: Whom resist (says he)
steadfast in the faith. Let it not seem strange unto any, that this power
should resist him, and keep us in safety, for it is the power of God. The
Devil is strong and mighty, but what is he unto God? God is above all, his
power is infinite, there is no power that can stand against it. He that is
steadfast in the faith, he is armed and stands in the power of God: for faith
apprehends the power of God and armeth us with it. He that stands in the
faith, stands as it were in God, compassed about and covered with his power.
And as it is impossible that Satan should prevail against the power of God,
so is it impossible that he should overthrow that man which stands steadfast
in the faith: for so long as God cannot be overcome, faith cannot be overcome.
Is not here a most singular comfort and consolation unto us in this battle?
Let the Devil be never so mighty, never so subtle, fierce and raging, we
have a rock of defense, a safe tower to fly unto eue^ the invincible power of
almighty God, which we stand armed withal throghfaith. This is it which S.
Paul teaches where he speaks of the battle which we have with the devil:
My brethren (says he) be strong in the Lord, and in his mighty power. Put on
the whole armor of God, that you may stand against the assaults of the Devil.
For we wrestle not against blood and flesh, but against rulers, against powers,
etc. Therefore take unto you the whole armor of God that ye may be able to
resist in the evil day, and haning finished all things, stand. Ephesians. 6. verse.
10.11.12.13. Now it is faith that puts upon us the whole armor of God, and
makes us strong in his mighty power. It is faith, as he shows in the same
place, by which we shall quench all the fiery darts of the devil. Likewise S.
John sets forth this matter, saying, Whosoever is borne of God overcomes
the world: and this is the victory that overcomes the world, even our
faith, Who is it that overcomes the worlds, but he that believes that Jesus
is the son of God? 1. Ioh. 5. ver. 4.5.6. By the world he means the whole
corruption of sin, or whatsoever is against the commandementes of God, and so
the Devil the Prince of the world is included. He that overcomes the world,
overcomes the prince of the world: for all the power of Satan's kingdom is in
darkness and in sin. Then when Saint John says that faith is our victory,
and that by it we overcome the world, he teaches that it is faith by which we
are armed with the power of God, in which we stand safe, and overcome the
Devil.

Heerby it is manifest what a wonderful precious thing faith is. There is no
force that can overcome it, he that has obtained it cannot be poor, he cannot
be unhappy or wretched: all the devils in hell cannot preuail against him. They
thatt rust in the Lord are as mount the Sion, which cannot be moved, but
stands fast for ever. Psalm. 125. verse. 1 If it be then the most excellent
thing that is, to stand steadfast in the faith: then are we above all other
things to seek after it For wisdom teaches to seek most for the best
things. Gold, pearl, and precious stones do excel in price, and therefore
they be greatly sought after: and men do much rejoice when they find them.
They be more then dross being compared with faith, by which we put devils to
flight, and obtain eternal glory. Shall we not then seek for faith? Shall
we not make account that if we find it we have found all for what can a man
have more then God? And if we miss of it we have lost all: seeing without it
nothing can defend us from the assaults of the Devil.

But when we are willed to resist the Devil steadfast in the faith, is it so
that we have faith in our own power, or when we will? Can we of our selves
be steadfast in faith? Or is it a matter so easy to obtain a strong faith?
Saint Peter has no such meaning. For goodly things are hard to be attained
unto: and faith is the most precious and excellent of all other, and most hard
to be come by. It is not in man's will or power to believe and to believe
steadfastly at his pleasure. But Saint Peter's meaning is, to move all men to
feeke it where it is to be found, and by such means as be ordained for to come
unto it by. For there is no man almost but will acknowledge that a strong faith
is a most rich jewel: but when it comes to the matter they deprive
themselves for the most part, either deeming that they have it or can have it
in their own power resting in a vain shadow, not knowing at all the nature
of the true, lively, and powerful faith: or if they do acknowledge it to be
the gift of God; yet they never seek it by those means which he has ordained
to work it in men, and to nourish it up in them. When we are therefore willed
to resist the Devil steadfast in the faith, it is as much as to say, give all
diligence, and use all the ways and means that may be to increase and
strengthen your faith, that you may overcome the Devil. If you be diligent
that way, happy are you, and if you take not that course, then are you utterly
undone: for what way can you then escape the power and tyranny of the roaring
Lion?

But it will be said, S. Peter does not here show how men shall come to this
steadfast faith. No, for his whole doctrine tends to that point, in all this
Epistle, and therefore he needed not to put them in mind particularly: yet it
shall not be amiss for me to note somewhat.

He that will attain to the true, lively, and justifying faith, which armeth
a man with the power of God, must first of all know for certainty, that he has
not so much as any spark thereof of himself: we are all of us by nature shut
up under unbelief, and in miserable blindness: which while many do not know,
they rest and content themselves in a certain dead image of faith, and are
utterly seduced, for that faith has no power. He that knows this indeed,
beholding the depth of the calamities which he is in, will look up to God who
is the giver of faith. He is desirous to know what the promises of God are
which he is to believe, and what the way is in which he must walk to
perform the duties of a Christian life: for the true faith works by charity
(as Paul says) and cannot be without good works. He searches the Scriptures
(as Christ wills, Ioh. 5.) he does with all diligence bend his ear to
hear the holy Gospel of Jesus Christ preached, feeling therein the power of
God to work faith. He does cry and call unto God day and night for to teach
him, to lighten him, to give him understanding, and to increase his faith: He
finds ye blessing of God in these means, and therefore applies them. But
now on the contrary part, he that rests in this, God gives faith, and if it
be his will. I shall have it, and so despises all means, not considering how
God gives faith, is utterly awrie, and out of the right way. From hence it is
that there be so many commendations of the word of God, and of the lively
power that it has to save our souls. From hence it is that we are often
called upon to give ear to the voice of God, to hearken to his counsels.

Thus shall we obtain the holy faith. And he that has faith, and feels the
power of God in him, if he will have it increase, is to consider the abundant
kindness of God who has bestowed so great a gift upon him, he is from the
bottom of his heart to give all praise and thanks and honor unto him for so
great kindness and mercy showed. Moreover, he is to take heed that will be
steadfast in the faith to resist the devil, that he be rich in good works, and
that he abstain from committing those vices which nature does lead unto. For
in the time of trial, in the hour of temptation, or when Satan does assault,
it will greatly shake the mind, if a man when he does look for the arguments
of a true faith, and finds that he has been fruitless: but if his
conscience do accuse him not only of a slacknesse in good works, but also of
foul sins committed, then will he cry out that all his former profession of
the faith was but in show or in hypocrisy.

This Apostle in the first chapter of his second Epistle teaches, that if we
join virtue with our faith, and with virtue knowledge, and with knowledge
temperance, and with temperance patience, and with patience godliness, and
with godliness brotherly kindness, and with brotherly kindness love: we shall
make our calling and election sure, we shall if we do these things (as he
says) never fall. 2. Pet 1. verse. 5.6.10. We shall perceive assuredly if these
things be in us, that God has called us effectually, and that he has chosen
us. And therein does consist the stedfastnes of faith, even when we are sure
that God has chosen us in his son unto life eternal. If this assurance of
Gods love and favor toward us were not to be attained unto, how could he say,
Whom resist steadfast in the faith? Can there be any steadfast faith without
that? I beseech ye let us think well of these things: let us use all care and
diligence, yea all the holy means that God has appointed to increase our
faith, that being armed thereby, we may resist and overcome our enemy the
devil.

But here it may be demanded, whether the devil be to be resisted only by
faith, or some other things to be used? I answer, that Saint Peter does set
down the only way by which we are to resist the devil: we have nothing
whereby to withstand him but faith: and that is sufficient alone to withstand
him, whatsoever way he seeks to hurt us. I suppose that the reason heerof is
evident unto all men. The power of God alone is sufficient (every man will
confess) to shield us from the Devil, and no power indeed but the power of
God. Faith only armeth us with that power of God, and makes it as it were
ours. He that stands and lives (as the the Scripture speaks) by faith,
stands and lives not in himself, but in the power of God. If we think it
lawful to seek help to resist him, and to put him to flight any where but in
God, then may we use some other way to resist him besides faith. We are to
resist him by prayer, will some say. That is true, for prayer is a special
fruit of faith: the lively faith does bring forth true prayer. And if the
prayer be not of faith, it cannot help to deliver us from the tyranny of
Satan. Faith sends up prayer, yea with fasting strong prayer, which draws
down the power of God upon us, which shieldeth and defends us from the rage
of the fiende. All other means that have been devised to put devils to
flight, are vain and frivolous, yea mere illusions of Satan's own devising,
which wickedlie deface the power of God. For when men cannot resist by faith,
then do they fly unto those other means as more sure. Woeful is the state of
the world in this thing: that when men will not learn of God to resist the
devil: they learn at the devil himself. But that this thing may be more
evident, we are to see how many ways the devil seeks to devour us. I do
not mean that we should in particulars see those ways by which the Devil
deuoureth the souls of men: for who is able so to express them? surely not
any mortal man. For he has manifold sleightes, subtilties and crafts: yea
even ten thousand devises of all sorts to snare, and to entrap the souls
withal: He has also his forces and fiery darts of terror to wound
withal. It is no dealing in particulars: but to be armed strongly to resist
him howsoever he comes. My purpose therefore is but to touch certain
general heads which contain the rest. So that this cruel adversary, this
roaring Lion the Devil may catch the pray and devour it, he cares not which
way it be, for that is the end of all, if he may carry souls to hell. And
therefore according to the several states and conditions that men be in, he
frames himself to set upon them.

There is no man (I suppose) which will make any doubt that the devil coueteth
to plunge al men as deep as he can into all evil: but according as men are apt
and incliued, he is feign to deal as he may, with some one way, with some
another. Such as be ignorant, and in darkness, with them he deals that he
may keep the pure, clear and heavenly light of the Gospel out of their
hearts, and so hold them still under the power and in the kingdom of
darkness. Touching these Saint Paul says, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid
to those that perish: in whom the God of this world has blinded the minds
even of the infidels, least the light of the Gospel of the glory of Christ,
should shine unto them: which is the image of God. 2. Cor. 4. verse. 3.4. To
bring this to pass this enemy uses special means, by which he may diffame
the Gospel and the profession of it, as a doctrine not to be suffered,
breeding and drawing with it so many evils. As namely, he sows errors,
heresies, and wicked opinions. He is the father of al such things. He raises
up the heretics and Schismatickes, and then suggesteth to the hearts of men,
which be his chief servants, that the Gospel has bred them, and they
proclaim it with open mouth. Behold and see (say they) what a doctrine is
this, yea this new learning, that has brought forth so many foul heresies
and divisions. The devil (say they) the devil goes with it. How can it be of
God? how can it be good doctrine which brings forth such fruit?

Satan did practice this while the holy Apostles were alive upon the earth: as
we read how the false Apostles did seek almost every where to pull down that
which S Paul had built. S. John in the Revelation mentions the
Nicholaitanes, and a woman which said she was a Prophetess, that taught and
seduced the servants of the Lord, that they might commit fornication, and eat
of things offered unto Idols. And the same Apostle says, that in his time there
were many Antichrists (for so he calls the heretics which then were) 1. Ioh.
2. S. Paul said to the Elders of Ephesus. I know this that after my departure
there shall enter in among you grievous Wolves, not sparing the flock, and
there shall rise up of your selves that shall speak perverse things to draw
Disciples after them. Act. 20. When all the Apostles were taken out of this
life, then was this prophecy fully accomplished, for then did the devil send
forth even routs of wicked heretics which did seduce many, and greatly
trouble all Churches. Then had he those which cried out: Behold what a
Gospel, is this which has brought forth so foul and monstrous opinions?
Thus cunningly did Satan work to keep many still in their former blindness.
And in like manner in these days, when the light of the gospel again brake
forth, he raised up horrible heresies and sects, and then sets his
servants a work to cry out. See what fruits this new Gospel brings forth?
This has made many so much offended at it, that they will not hear it: and so
the Devil holds them still in their former blindness, and deuoureth them as
a pray. Also he raises up lies and slanders to diffame both the doctrine
and all that profess it. This has been his ancient practice. Christ was said
to have a devil, to be a raiser of sedition, and an enemy to Caesar. His
Apostles were deemed to be raisers of faction and disturbers of the common
peace, enemies to the state of princes, and the Christians ever were accused to
be men whichsecretly among themselves did commit most foul and abominable
sins. True it is, that in all times he had many which were hypocrites that
professed the truth for a time and then falling into notorious offenses, all
the professors were said to be such. Thus has he in all times held many in
darkness, by making them out of love with the doctrine of salvation. And as
when Christ was risen from the dead, Satan did raise and spread a lie, namely
that while the watchmen were asleep, the disciples of Christ did steal him
away, and then said he was risen, and this lie was believed (though it were
most absurd and had no show of liklihood) so look what lies and slanders he
raises up now, many do believe them. For as S. Paul says 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Because men receive not the love of the truth, God sends them strong delusion
to believe lies. Now for a man to resist the devil in these practices, that
he be not seduced and held in blindness, it is necessary to have knowledge of
the truth and a lively faith. For if he come once to that, he shall find that
the Gospel is the pure and heavenly light, even the power of God to salvation,
as S. Paul says, to every one that believes. Romans 1. And that these sects
and heresies and troubles that follow it, are raised up by the devil himself,
even of purpose to diffame the truth, that so men may abhor to hear it
preached. Such as have received the knowledge of the truth and are lightened,
in them he seeks how he may quench the light, or take the power of it out of
their hearts, and so devour them as his pray.

He has diverse ways and means to effect this. To such as be the weaker in
knowledge, even as babes in understanding of the heuae^ly mysteries, he lays
stumbling blocks and offenses, that he may cause them to stumble and fall, or
to turn aside out of the way into which they have entered. He raises up
terrors, troubles, and perilles to abash them. He tempts and leads into
despair, shooting his fiery darts. To avoid these perils, there is no way,
but that as S. Paul prays for the faithful at Colossa, that we be filled
with the knowledge of the will of God in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding: that we may walk worthy of the Lord in all pleasing being
fruitful in all good works, and increasing in the knowledge of God:
strengthened in all might through his glorious power, unto all patience and
long suffering with ioyfulnesse, Coloss. 1. verse. 9.10.11. Some others that
have received more knowledge he seeks to cast down through pride and
presumption, he tempts them to be puffed up, and to swell, and so leads
them into sects, errors, and heresies, as his fit occasion serves, one part
into one, another into another.

Here is need of sound knowledge of heavenly things, and of that sincere
faith which purges the heart, and emptieth it of pride and human
presumption, leading men to rest only upon God with fear and trembling, even
with true humility. Also as he perceives men's inclination, he tempts and
leads them into grievous and abominable sins, and such as God is highly
displeased withal, some into one, and some into another, and so casts them
down. And in this he is wonderful subtle, and can find what sin a man
may most easily be brought into. If he be inclined to vain mirth and
jesting, he seeks to fit him with companions for that: that when he has
received the touch of heavenly motions, that vain mirth may put it out. If
he be inclined to unclean lusts of fornication, he will find the means (if
it be possible) to set as it were the bait before him, where he may be
intised. And so is it in all other vices: so that men had need watch and pray
least they enter into temptation. They need to be armed with a steadfast faith
to reliste, that by their faith, all the fiery darts of this horrible enemy
may be quenched. His subtilties to keep men in blindness, his lies and
slanders to drive men from the Gospel, his assaults to lead into despair,
his stumbling blocks and terrors to turn men out of the way, his temptation
to lead into heresies and sects, or into any foul sin, or whatsoever
darts he shoots, there is no way to resist him, and to be kept safe, but by
a true, a lively, and a steadfast faith. Therefore (beloved) seeing this enemy
is so vigilant, and does so cruelly seek our destruction night and day, even
to swallow us up into the gulf of hell: and seeing he has so many sleightes,
so many trappes, so many baytes and allurementtes, so many fiery darts to
wound unto death: and seeing we are so ready to be seduced, having no power
of our selves; let us seek to be strongly armed with the power of God, that
so we may get the victory. There is no way for us to be armed with the power
of God, but by faith; so that the end of all is this, that men labor for the
increase and strengthening of their faith: use all good means and that
continually for the furtherance of the same. If upon such a danger we will not
be admonished by this wholesome admonition of the Apostle, we are more then
foolish or mad.

It may be some man will say that the devil is to be resisted only by faith
when he comes to hutte the soul: but is it not another case when he comes
to hurt the body, the cattle, or the goods of a man? Is he then also to be
resisted only by faith? Or is it all one when he comes to do those things
of himself, and when he is sent to do them by witches and sorcerers? Is there
now no means to resist him but by faith? To answer to this question, first it
is to be granted that the devils do indeed delight to torment and to hurt
man any way. And withal we see it plainly taught in the scriptures that he
has had powwer and leave sometimes granted unto him so for to hurt: As it was
granted unto him to destroy Jobs goods, some by fire, and some taken away by
robbers: to kill his children, and then to plague him in his body with most
grievous sores. We read of many in the Gospel whose bodies were possessed
with diuelles, and whom he did torment in very grievous manner.

And we must know withal that when he does hurt in the body or in the goods,
his chief drift and practice is thereby to destroy both body and soul, and so
he may make it a mean to win the soul, he will cease for to hurt the body,
seeming as if he were expelled. We read in the Gospel of two possessed with
devils, and Jesus casting forth the Devils, they besought him to give them
leave to enter into an heard of swine, he gave them leave, they entered, and
carried the whole heard of swine headlong from a steep place into the sea, and
drowned them, Math. 8. What was the purpose of those Diuelles, what was their
desire? Was it no more then for to destroy the poor dumb beasts? Yes verily
they had a further reach, and a deeper practice. This it was, they sought to
bring Christ into hatred with the men of that region among whom he was now
come: and why? but even that they might not hear him bringing the word of
life. They knew that those men were worldly minded, and that the loss of
their hogs would grieve them sore, and that they had rather be without
Christ, then that he should bring them such loss. And so it came to pass,
for the men of that city came forth and entreated him to depart out of their
coasts. Here was a crafty conueyance, and so Satan, whenever he obtayneth
power to hurt the body of man, his cattle or goods, it is not without some
great subtlety of a further and a greater mischief which he seeks to work.
Then further we may be sure that it is all one whether he come of himself, or
be sent by a witch. For I take it, none will be so simple as to imagine that if
he have power to hurt, that he will lie still and not hurt unless he be sent
by some man or woman. And if he have not leave granted him from God, no mortal
creature can give him power to touch the body or cattle of a man. Howsoever he
comes, we must know it is the Lord GOD of heaven that has sent him, even
as he gave him leave to deal with Job.

Then it must needs follow, that there is no power for to resist him withal,
but the power of God: and there is no way to be armed with that power, but
only by faith. If there be no way to withstand Satan but by the power of God
(as it is most wicked to deny) and through faith only man is armed with that
power, what other way or means can there be to resist him? There was a child
possessed with a Devil: the father brought him to the Disciples of Christ,
that they might cast him out; but they could not; Jesus cast him out. Then the
Disciples did ask him why they could not cast him out? He said unto them,
because of your unbelief. This kind (says he) goes not out but by prayer and
fasting, Math. 17. Where we see that the devil torme^ting the body, is to be
cast out by faith, yea by a strong faith, which is to be assisted with fasting
and prayer. But what if the devil (say some) afflicting the body, or
destroying the goods cannot be removed by faith or withstood, shall not men
then seek to remove him, or to withstand him some other ways? As we are
taught by experience, that the devil possessing the body of some man, woman
or child, and tormenting the same, prayer has been used, and that very often,
and yet no remedy has been found, but by other means he has been expelled.
Yea, some have been of that mind that God having given Satan power to touch
their bodies, their children, or their goods, they would seek no further but
to God, saying, that as he had given him power, so when it should please him
he would restrain him, and thereupon they would rest: but in the end they
have been glad to use other means. God has appointed means, and they tempt
God that refuse them. If a man be fallen into a ditch, and lie still praying,
God help me, Lord help me, and does not stir to clime out, he may he long
enough. If there be means by which the devil is driven out, why should not
men use them, seeing we may suppose that God has appointed those means? To
answer unto these things, we may first consider, that the Lord God for the
trial of their faith and patience, does give leave to Satan to afflict his
children. This is for their good. What should I use any proof for this, but
the exemple of sob? He was thoroughly tried. Now seeing it was the will of God
that he should so be tried, both for his own good, and for the instruction of
many others, though his faith were a right strong faith, yet in this thing it
did not repel Satan, but he had power given him to touch his goods, children
and body. And so we may hold it undoubtedly, that if God will give power or
leave unto Satan to touch the body, the children, or the goods of any
faithful man, for such a purpose as this was in Job, faith does not remove
him from so afflicting: but faith in those so for a time afflicted does resist
him, so that he does not nor cannot prevail against the soul. That is enough
for us. Such a man is to submit himself to the chastisement of God for his
trial. If Satan cannot be removed from hurting him in those outward things
which are of less value, let him hold fast that he resist him by faith, so
that he win not his soul and he is well: the Lord God will in his good time
deliver him from that other calamity. Let him know it is for his good that he
is so chastised.

The woman of Canaan, Math. 15. was a woman of a wonderful faith, for Christ
says, I have not found so great faith in Israel, and yet the Devil did
torment her daughter. She did not seek any other means, but sought out
Christ, and obtained of him to have the Devil cast out, which did so
grievously torment her child. This was for her trial, and she did for the time
endure it, resisting the devil so mightily by faith that he could not
prevail against her soul.

Moreover, the devil has power given unto him to afflict some, and to plague
them in their bodies or in their goods, because of their sins. They have
despised the laws of God, they be careless to know the way of salvation.
When this scourge is upon them, they are to weigh and to consider how
grieuouslie they have offended, and how much they have provoked the Lord to
wrath, who has therefore given leave to this wicked enemy so to plague them.
They should now seek unto the Lord and entreat him to have mercy upon
them. They should lament and bewail their sins, and turn from their wicked
ways unto the way of righteousness: and then should this their calamity be a
mean to bring the^ nearer to God, to the salvation of their souls. They are
to entreat the Lord upon their repentance to remove the plague from them. And
if it be not removed, they are still more and more to be humbled, they ought
to fast and pray, yea they are to use all good means to come to the true
knowledge of God, and to a sound faith, that they may escape from being
devoured by this enemy unto eternal damnation. If the Lord do not deliver
them by and by, but that they be tormented in their own bodies, or in their
children or goods, let them know it is because they do not so thoroughly
repent, nor so thoroughly seek the Lord as they ought to do. Let them
therefore yet humble themselves further, and seek more earnestly to know the
way of God, and to be armed with true and lively faith.

There was a woman which had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and was
bowed together and was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up her self:
Jesus healed her, and said, that Satan had bound her eighteen years. Luke 13.
ver. 11.13.15. If the Lord shall give Satan power so long to afflict, let us
not fall from God: let us not seek to resist him any way but by faith. Ye say
it is known by experience, that where the devil has tormented some, prayer
and all holy means have been used, and yet no help at all, until other
means have been sought. Then belike there be means which are stronger against
the devil then faith and prayer. And there is some power mightier against him
the^ the power of god: for those means which some men fly unto, when as they
cannot prevail by faith, are such as they which are afflicted have learned
either by a prescriptio^ from the devil himself, saying, let such or such a
thing be don, and there shall be remedy; or else they have them prescribed by
some wise man, or wise woman, who have them from the devil. These be very
paltrie things (as there be a number, I need not to repeat them, they be too
well known, and too much practiced) and yet they be more sought unto then
faith is, which armeth us with the power of God. What a dishonor is this to the
high Majesty of the Almighty? What an infidelity is it? Shall men run to the
devil for help? Is he fitter to teach them or of more power then God?

But ye say, we see the thing is wrought by those means which could not
otherwise be obtained, Satan is expelled, and ease has followed. Has Satan
expelled Satan? or has he taught how he might be expelled indeed? Is the
devil become so simple? Will he hinder his own kingdom? Are men so foolish as
to believe that he is by such things in very deed driven out? A man tormented
sore in his body, he fears that it is some witch that has done it. He is
advised by his neighbors to send unto some cunning man. Word is sent back,
that indeed he has bad neighbors: let him do such or such a thing, and he
shall have ease. Well, he does it and has ease. What shall we think that the
devil is driven out? A woeful driving out. He does cease from tormenting the
body for a time, that he may enter deeper into the soul. He wins by this
driving out. The like may be said where he has power given unto him to destroy
men's cattle. They be taught many things how to resist him: among other to
offer some burnt offering unto him, they must burn somewhat alive. Well he
comes no more: there is a power above faith that has put him to flight. And
where as you say that some have been of the mind that they would not seek any
way or means, but only to God, and would rest until he should restrain the
devil: but have been glad in the end to use other means. It is a lamentable
hearing, that the says of any should so farfaile: that in steed of approaching
nearer to God by strong repentance, they have turned to the counsel of the
devil. If they could not find help by prayer, they might be assured that the
Lord would yet afflict them further, and that with all humblenes they ought to
submit themselves under his mighty hand: yea they ought to have considered the
weakness of their faith, and the grieuousnes of their sins, and so have
sought by all means possible to get a steadfast faith, and unfeigned repentance.
This their affliction by Satan should have been a warning unto them, to make
the^ cleave more firmlie to God, and to look better to themselves, and see how
it has driven them to run back from God to the devil. But you say God has
appointed means, and he that refuses the means tempts God. As for
example, shall a man cry, Lord help, and not stir? Indeed if you could prove
that God had appointed such means to drive away devils where faith cannot,
your saying were true. But where can you prove in all the whole word of God
that any such means are appointed to put devils to flight? If those means be
not in the holy Scriptures, they be not ordained of God, they be not of faith,
it is not the power of God that expels Satan, but it is his own slight
that seems to be repelled and vanquished, when he is not; they be means of
his own devising, which he has taught by those that have familiarity with him.

The holy Scriptures do condemn it as a most wicked thing, that men should
have any dealing with devils to be taught at their hands. We are to be taught
of God, Christ Jesus is our only Doctor: shall we then learn at the mouth of
Devils? A man is taken lame, he suspecteth that he is bewitched, he sends to
the cunning man: He demands whom they suspect, and then shows the image
of the party in a glass. When this is done he shows and prescribes what
the lame man shall do for to get remedy: how he shall cause the old witch
to come unto him, and how he shall use her. Here all is done by the direction
of the devil: are these means then appointed by God? Also there is one whom
Satan does as it were possess and does torment the body: there is seeking
unto god, but not like the Cananitish woman that came to Christ to have the
devil driven out of her daughter, who with the strength of her faith would not
be denied, Math. 15. but like to king Saul, who receiving no answer from God,
gate him by and by unto a Witch: for not finding help by faith and prayer, or
by those ways that God has appointed, they then begin to hearken to the
devil, and he tells them that if they shall do such a thing, such a devil
shall depart. Here be the means, which some do hold to be appointed by God.

But is not this a wonderful blindness that Satan can set up himself to be a
teacher, and men learning of him, shall think that they learn of God? Well
say some, we are glad to have ease, we find that the devil is expelled, we
may think that God does allow it. Shall a man be glad for to buy ease so dear?
May we call that ease, when the devil cease to vex the body for a time, to
the end that he may torment soul and body in hell for ever? If a man be sick
of a burning ague, and take that to cool the heat, and to give ease for the
time, which will afterward cause it to be more burning, is that a good
remedy? Is that a good remedy, which for a little while does seem to
mitigate, but afterward does increase the disease? Even so the blind people do
imagine that Satan is expelled by those means, by which indeed he enters more
deep into them. For tell me but this, wherein does the kingdom of the Devil
consist? Is he not called the prince of this world, and the prince of
darkness? This his kingdom does consist in infidelity, in darkness and in
sin. He that is under the power of sin, so that sin has dominion over
him, he is under the power and working of Satan. Sin is his kingdom, there
is his throne, ye cannot separate them, he cannot be cast forth, and sin
still remain in force. If pride, envy, covetousness, hatred, malice,
self-love, fornication, or any other such sin do reign and rule in the
heart of man, there rules the devil: for these be the works of the devil.
Hereupon our Savior said to the Jews, Ye are of your father the devil: ye
do the works of your father. Ioh. 8. He that will then cast forth the
devil, he must cast out those works. For he that commits sin is of the
devil, as Saint John says in his first Epistle chap. 3. He that still
commits sin, and therefore is of the devil, is the devil expelled or
driven from him? I suppose that there is no man so void of reason, that he will
imagine, that the devil is driven away from that man in whose heart he has
his throne and power. A man is ignorant of the word and ways of God: with his
ignorance of necessity goes unbelief: with unbelief there go the
unfruitful works of darkness. There is much vanity of mind, there is much
profaneness, there be foul errors and abominable vices.

This man has some of his cattle destroyed by the devil: he would have the
devil expelled, he has not faith which armeth men with the power of God: he
has not the faith which overcomes the world, 1. Ioh. 5. or which purges the
heart. Act. 15. or which quenches all the fiery darts of the devil. Ephesians 6.
or (as Saint Peter says here) resists him: And seeks some other helps to
resist him, yea, to be delivered from him, and never does consider that he is
first to have him removed out of his heart. He should consider that the devil
(as Saint Paul says) works in the children of disobedience. Ephesians. 2. verse.
2. And therefore so long as he is disobedient to God, Satan cannot be cast
forth of his heart. If those things can resist Satan which men do learn and
practice here in the world, as there be a thousand devises, by which he
persuades the world that he is resisted: then it skilleth not whether a man
be godly or ungodly, faithful or unfaithful, touching the resisting and
putting diuelles to flight. If when a man's cattle are plagued and destroyed by
the devil, it will deliver the rest if he burn one alive: this way may the
lew, or the Turk, or the heathen east him out as well as the Christian. And so
it may be said in all other their wicked means. They tend wholly therefore to
this end, that men may be held in infidelity, in blindness, and hardness of
heart, even void of repentance for their sins, that is the craftiness of
Satan. For if devils can be put to flight and overcome by such means, men
will never seek to be armed with faith, they never care for true repentance:
they be persuaded that the devil has nothing to do with them. And therein
lies one of the greatest subtilties of Satan that he may devour men when they
dream of no peril, and therefore seek not to God, to be armed with his
mighty power through faith. For when men do know that there is no way to
escape but by faith (as Saint Peter says here, whom resist steadfast in the
faith) if they be not mad, they will have a care to attain to that true faith.

In the Popery there were many things devised to drive away devils. Men were
persuaded that the sign of the Cross did put him to flight. They had their
coniured holiwater to sprinkle upon the men, and in their houses, and thither
the Devil might not come. Likewise if a man had a piece of holy bread in his
purse, or any where about him, he was armed he might go safe in the darkest
night that was. There were hallowed candles, and within the light of them the
wicked Prince of darkness could not approach. But there was yet a stronger
thing and a more terrible unto the Devils, then all the rest, even to hunt them
out of the country.

The Lord sends lightening and thunder, and mighty winds: he does thereby
declare his majesty. When these tempests do arise, the devil would gladly
make men believe that he has raised them: he would be as a God of power: and
therefore he coueteth to show himself in those tempests, and so does come with
terror. To meet with this mischief and to repel him, the Papists had their
hallowed belles, their Saints belles, and those they did ring out when any
terrible tempest did approach, trusting that the sound of them would repel him,
and put him to flight. O how the Devil was skared with these things! S. Peter
forgate himself that he did not tell of these, and not speak of resisting him
by nothing but by faith. Such ready helps for to defend men, and so easy,
and not one of the Apostles would tell of them: but speak only of faith to be
our victory. Well (beloved) know for certainty that all these are but
sleights of the Devil: which were used in the popery, and which many at this
day do use when they suppose that they are bewitched. Leave all such ungodly
ways which the Devil teaches, and hearken to the holy Ghost, which wills
you to resist the Devil steadfast in the faith. Let all your study, and
industry, and care be, to be armed with a strong and lively faith. That
shall cover you, and compass you about with the almighty power of God. Ye
shall be as the mount Sion (faith the Prophet in the Psalm) that cannot be
removed. All the infernal powers (or as Christ says, the gates of hell)
shall not prevail against it. If you have that faith, the roaring Lion shall
not devour you: but all his fiery darts shall be quenched. He will do what
he can to hold you in blindness, to lead you into sin, and into heresies,
he will tempt you to despair, but your faith shall prevail. He will seek to
hurt your bodies and goods, resist him by faith. Blessed be our Lord that has
given us such a tower of refuge. Amen.

FINIS.
THE SECOND SERmon upon 1. Peter, chap. 5. verse. 8. and 9.
Whom resist steadfast in the faith. We have heard the exhortation or warning
which Saint Peter gives unto all men to be sober and watch. We have also in
the second place seen the cause why it behooves us to be watchful. There is
an adversary that does seek to devour us both souls and bodies unto eternal
destruction. Your adversary the devil (says he) like a roaring Lion walks
about, seeking whom he may devour. In the third place we have been taught how
to withstand him and to get the victory over him. Whom resist steadfast in the
faith. Where it has been showed, that faith armeth a man with the power of
God. The power of God is invincible and cannot be brought under, but gets
the victory over all the terrible might of Devils: so that it is not possible
that he should be overcome which has faith. It conquereth all the infernal
powers, and triumphs at all times most gloriously over them. Whereby it is
manifest what a wonderful rich and precious jewel faith is. It preserves us
safe from diuelles, and therefore is to be coueted and sought for above all
treasures. It is to be sought for at the hands of God, he is the giver of it,
and it is not a thing which is in man's own power. Moreover, seeing God does
give it, and nourish it by means, he that will be steadfast in the faith, must
use those means that be ordained. Also it has been declared, that faith is
the only thing by which we are to resist the Devil: in as much as faith
alone armeth us with the glorious power of God. Satan has many ways whereby
he seeks to devour and to swallow up into hell the souls and bodies of men:
as to hold some in blindness and ignorance, to lead others into sects,
errors and heresies, to draw men into vices and abominable sins, to plague
the bodies and the cattle of men: but which way soever he comes, faith does
quench all his fiery darts arming the soul of man, covering and compassing it
round about with the mighty power of God. Al those vain, yea those most wicked
means by which men seek to repel Satan, are to be renounced as mere
illusions. Men are to be taught of God, and not to learn of diuelles: but
Diuelles have devised those means, and by such as have familiarity with them
have delivered the same to be put in practice. As there be such devises among
the Sorcerers which Satan has craftily conueighed in: so also in the Popery
they did not seek as Saint Peter wills to resist him by faith, but invented
other ways. Thus far we proceeded in handling this Scripture: And now it
remains as a principal question to be handeled, whether this faith, by which
the devil is to be resisted, can be overcome in any? that is, to speak more
plainly, whether any man that has the true and lively faith, by which the
devil is resisted, can utterly loose it, and fall from God finally? whether
his faith may utterly fail and be vanquished, and so having resisted Satan for
a time steadfast in the faith, yet in the end he may be overcome and devoured by
him?

Touching this question, the Papists do hold that a man may have the true and
lively faith, and so fall from it, as that it be utterly and wholly quenched in
him, yea finally. And so by their doctrine such as do stand in this faith
which Saint Peter requires, and with the same do resist the devil, may by the
devil have that same their sound and true faith overcome, and so perish
eternally. Others there be, who will seem to differ somewhat from the Popish
sort about this matter, and they do hold that the very reprobate (some of them
at the least) are partakers for a time of the true, lively, and justifying
faith, which is afterward wholly and finally extinguished in them. Moreover,
they do hold, that the same true and lively faith may be wholly extinguished in
the elect, but not finally, because it is impossible that the elect should
perish, and therein they differ indeed from the Papists, which make election
conditional. If this doctrine of theirs be true, then is there no man that
can be certain of his salvation. There is no man that is sure he shall stand
to the end, no man can resist steadfast in the faith. For he that to day does
get the victory over the devil by a true and lively faith, to morrow may
utterly loose his faith, and be overcome by the devil. If it be so, then has
not Saint Peter here taught how we shall have undoubted victory: if he will us
to resist by such a weapon as may be broken or destroyed, or plucked away from
us, we are then but in a very weak case.

It may be they will say, there is undoubted victory so long as a man does
resist steadfast in the faith: and that Saint Peter has no further intent. That
is the thing which we are to enquire of. And this shall be made manifest, that
whosoever has the true and lively faith, shall undoubtedly get the victory
over Satan: that it is impossible that his faith should be wholly extinguished,
it is impossible that he should perish.

This is it which we affirm, that whosoever does attain unto a steadfast faith
(which is the thing which Saint Peter here requires) that faith can never be
overcome: for if it be overcome, it is not steadfast. It is the purpose of
Saint Peter, not to teach that so long as a man is steadfast in the faith, so
long he shall resist the Devil, and get the victory, taking this, so long, as
if it were uncertain that he which is once steadfast, shall continue to the
end: but this is his full meaning, that so many as attain to be steadfast in
the faith, shall undoubtedly vanquish Satan, and never be vanquished by him.
Hitherto then tends his doctrine, even to show, that as we are compassed
about and beset with devils, who like most greedy devouring Lions do seek
continually for to swallowe us up: so if we seek so far as to be armed with a
steadfast faith, we attain to that estate out of which we can never be cast.
It is as much as if he should say, the Devil can never overcome a steadfast
faith: obtain that and you are sure to stand to the end.

Beloved, we are not then to labor only for faith, but if we will be sure
to overcome the devil, and to stand to the end, we must labor to obtain a
steadfast faith. But how can we be sure that this is the mind of the Apostle,
to warrant men, that they shall get the victory over the devil, even to the
end, if they attain unto a steadfast faith? I answer, that he agrees with
himself, teaching here the same thing which he exhorts unto in the first
chapte rof his second Epistle: Hereunto (says he) give all diligence, in your
faith minister virtue, in virtue knowledge, in knowledge temperance, in
temperance patience, in patience godliness, in godliness brotherly kindness,
in brother lie kindness love. For if these things be among you, and abound,
they will make that you neither shall be idle nor unfruitful in the knowledging
of our lord Jesus Christ. For he that has not these things is blind, and
cannot see a far off, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old
sins. Wherefore brethren give rather diligence to make your calling and
election sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall. For by this
means an entering shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting
king dome of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. Pet. 1.5.6.7.8.9.10.11. In this place S.
Peter does most plainly affirm that they which have such a faith as goes
with those fruits, they come to an assurance that they be called of god, and
chosen unto life and glory: and he does assure and warrant them that they shall
never fall. He adds as a reason that they have an entrance into the kingdom
of Christ, which is everlasting. If the true lively faith may fail and be
wholly lost, what assurance can any man have that he is called of God and
chosen to life eternal? Or how could the holy Apostle say, If ye do these
things ye shall never fall? Do not they fall which loose the faith, or in
whom it is wholly quenched? Christ reigns in all those which have the lively
faith, and if his kingdom may be broken down again where it once takes
place, how can it be said in every respect to be eternal?

Now to join these two places together, that man has the steadfast faith
whereby he does resist the devil, which does those things which S. Peter
mentions, and thereby is sure he is called and chosen, and that he shall
never fall. He is firm and steadfast in the faith which comes unto this: and
such as have proceeded no further in the power of a fruitful faith, but that
they be still uncertain whether they shall stand to the end, how can they be
said to resist the devil steadfast in the faith? When S. Paul tells us that
the shield of faith does quench all the fiery darts of the Devil, it is to
give courage and comfort, that such as have once gotten that shield, shall
never be overcome: for if the faith be overcome, then it does not quench them
all. The like courage and comfort Saint Peter does here minister, by showing
that being steadfast in the faith Satan is resisted. Where a man is sure to get
the victory how valiantly he does fight, what assaults he will endure, and
with what comfort and consolation of mind. But if the battle be made
doubtful, that although he have so lively a faith which woorketh by charity,
yet he may loose it, he may be overcome, it daunteth and discourageth, it
takes away the comfort and consolation. And this is to overthrow that which
the Lord of special purpose has allotted to his children, namely, that in all
the trials, and afflictions, and temptations which they pass through, they may
have strong consolation. For it is written, Wherein God willing more
abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the stablenesse of his counsel
confirmed by an oath, that by two immutable things in which it was impossible
for God to ly, we might have strong consolation. Heb. 6. ver. 17.18. If God
has confirmed his promise by an oath, that all they which believe in his son
shall have eternal life, why is it, or to what end is it, but that we should
come to the assurance of salvation, without which assurance there can be no
strong consolation? If men be condemned for high treason, and then some hope
of pardon follows, it somewhat comfort that they may suppose it may be
they shall escape the torments of death, and not be executed; but so long as
there is doubt they have no strong consolation: but when they know assuredly,
and have it confirmed unto them that they are set free by pardon, then is their
consolation strong indeed. We are all of us for high treason against God
condemned to hell to endure eternal torments: A covenant and promise is made,
that so many as do believe in the son of God shall have free pardon, and so
not only escape from those endless miseries, but also be lifted up into
eternal glory. So many as do wisely and sensibly consider this woeful and
miserable estate, in which all are in by nature, cannot but be touched with
great horror and fear. For is it a light matter to be cast with the devil and
his Angels into eternal fire? Is he not more then mad which can be merry so
long as he is subject unto so horrible damnation? Well, there is hope of pardon,
that so he shall escape, in as much as God has not only given his son to
be a redeemer, but has promised and bound that his promise with an oath,
that every one which believes shall be saved. He feels that he has a
faith, and it does comfort him: but until he feel that the same his faith is
the true and lively faith which gets the victory over Satan, and which can
never be vanquished, he cannot have strong consolation. Eternal woe with the
diuelles in hell is a most grienous thing, and impossible it is that any man
should have strong consolation, unless he be sure that he shall be delivered
from it: Whereupon it follows, that seeing the blessed Lord God has ordained
that his children shall here in the midst of the battle against Satan have
strong consolation, that he does also give unto them assurance of faith, yea
such a faith as they do know can never be overcome. Take away the one and
take away the other. Whereby we see that they which do hold that the true and
lively faith may be wholly lost, overthrow the stablenesse of Gods covenant. If
they will object that many have great gladness and consolation which have not
any true faith, I answer, that the blind world is drowned in a carnal
consolation, they do not soundly believe, nor sensibly consider what estate
they be in. They be but as drunken men, who through exceeding drunkenness
passing toward horrible torments, do not perceive it nor regard it, but are
merry and laugh and sport themselves: For they which are so merry and do sport
themselves so much in sin and in carnal pleasures, if they did know or
advisedly consider whither they be going and what remains for the^, it would
dampe all their mirth. It is not the strong consolation which the holy Ghost
speaks of, that they have. Theirs is but a drunken madness. Such only as by
a lively faith do feel the power of Christ in them mortifying and slaying
sin, and quickening them unto righteousness and true holiness even to walk
in the light, and to bring forth the fruits and virtues of the spirit, have
the strong consolation. They be assured that they be delivered from hell, and
made heirs of eternal glory: in as much as they know that God does sanctify
none but those whom he does glorify. But they do allege sundry testimonies
of the holy Scriptures, by which they undertake to prove that the very
reprobate have the true, lively and justifying faith, which they do utterly
loose: and likewise, that the elect do so fall, that the same true and lively
faith for a time is utterly quenched in them. If it be so, then all assurance
is gone, and with it there vanishes away all strong consolation For if the
true faith be in the reprobate, then cannot any man thus argue, I have the
true, lively and sanctifying faith, therefore I am chosen of God and sure to
be saved. Neither can he say thus, If I fall, I shall rise again: for what is
it that can assure him that he shall rise again, if some that have the same
true faith which he has, do fall and never rise again? Let us therefore
consider what their proofs be, or testimonies upon which they stand, to
prove that the true faith may be utterly lost. In the old Testament it is
thus written, But when the righteous does turn away from his righteousness,
and commit iniquity, and does according to all the abominations which the
wicked does, should he live? all his righteous dee des which he has done shall
not be remembered: for his transgression in which he transgresses, and for his
sin in which he sins, for these he shall die. Ezech. 18.24. The Lord
Jesus says, that there be some which do believe for a time, and in time of
temptation go away. Luke 8.13. Thou stand (says S. Paul) by faith: be not
high minded, but fear, Romans 11. ver. 20. Also the same Apostle speaks of
some that made shipwreck of the faith. 1. Tim. 1. verse. 19. He that thinks
he stands, let him take heed least he fall. 1. Cor. 10. ver. 12. Christ
says to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus. Thou have left thy first love,
Reave. 2. ver. 4. Take heed least any man fall away from the grace of God,
Heb. 12. verse. 15. And S. Peter does speak of such as are like the dog that
returns to his vomit. 2. Pet. 2. There be other places of scripture which
they do also allege to prove that men that have the true and lively faith,
may wholly loose it, I will not stand to answer every one particularly, but in
general, and thus, that whatsoever the word of God speaks of falling from
grace, of turning from the way of righteousness, or loosing the faith, it is not
to be understood of the grace of sanctification or of the true lively
justifying faith, but of that other faith which the holy scriptures do speak
of, which the wicked may have, and of those graces which they also are after a
sort made partakers of. For this is sufficient for me to show, that whosoever
is once partaker of the lively faith, he can never loose that faith, he can
never perish: for that being proved it must needs be confessed that all the
scriptures which they allege are to be understood not of that lively faith,
or of those that be sanctified. I am (says Christ) the true vine, and my
father is an husbandman. Every branch in me that bears not fruit he takes
away, and every branch in me that bears fruit he purges that it may bear
more fruit. Ioh. 15. verse. 1.2. Christ is the vine, and they which profess his
name be the branches. These branches be of two sorts: the one sort bears no
fruit, the other sort bears fruit. Now let it be demanded what are they
which bear fruit? It must needs be answered, they be such as have the true and
lively faith they be ingrafted into Christ and do receive as it were the sap
or juice of life from him. Their faith is that, which Saint Paul says,
works by charity, and therefore every one that has that faith bears fruit.
Then who be those branches that bear not fruit? They be Christians in name
and in profession; otherwise he would not say, Every branch in me that bears
not fruit. They be after a sort grafted also into Christ in as much as they
have been baptized, and do profess to believe in him: but their faith is but
a dead faith; otherwise it could not be said, that they bear no fruit. By
this we see it is evident that there is a difference of faith, there is a
fruitless or a dead faith, and there is a faith which is lively, and cannot
but work. Then see how we are to argue out of this place. Every branch that
bears fruit, that is, every one that has the true and lively faith, shall be
purged, that it may bear more fruit: therefore not any one of the reprobate
have the lively faith. This consequence is clear, if we consider that he
says, Every branch that bears fruit he purges, not to take it afterward
away, but that it may bear more fruit. For will they be so bold as to say thus,
Some branches that bear fruit shall be taken out of the vine, as well as the
branches that bear no fruit? Or thus, Some branches that bear fruit shall
be purged that they may bear more fruit: but yet in the end they shall also
be taken out of the vine, were not that a strange speech? What difference, or
what a vain difference were that which Christ makes of the branches, touching
perseverance in the vine if the fruitful branches, or any of them could be
separated from it, as well as the unfruitful? how do they make Christ to
speak? It may be they will say, that the holy scripture speaks sometimes
universally, when as yet exceptions in particulars are for to be admitted: and
so his saying does stand true although some branches that have born fruit, be
taken out of the vine and do perish. I answer, that this cavil is of no force
here, because our Savior does so speak universally, that he also speaks
singularly. He says not all the branches that in me bear fruit, but every
branch in me that bears fruit, he purges that it may bear more fruit. So
that we may conclude, that there are none of the reprobate that have the true
and lively faith: for if they had, they should bring forth fruit and so remain
for ever in the vine. Again, whosoever knows that he brings forth
fruit, he may be assured that he shall continue in the vine for ever, he
shall never perish. Also Christ says, I am the bread of life, he that
comes to me shall not hunger in any wise, and he that believes in me shall
never thirst. This is the will of him that sent me, that every one that sees
the son and believes in him may have everlasting life: and I will raise him
up at the last day. I am that bread of life, your fathers did eat Manna in the
wilderness and are dead. This is that bread that came down from heaven, that
if any man eat thereof, he should not die. I am the living bread which came
down from heaven, if any man eat of this bread he shall hue for ever. He that
eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life: This is that bread
which came down from heaven, not as your fathers did eat Manna, and are dead:
he that eats of this bread shall live for ever. Ioh. 6. ver.
35.40.48.49.50.51.54.58. From these Scriptures we may draw most firm
conclusions, that not any one of the reprobate ever have or can have the true
and lively faith: but that whosoever believes he is assured of life eternal:
Christ teaches that he is the bread of life, and that whosoever eats of
that bread he shall live for ever. It is not possible that any man should eat
of that bread, and yet not live for ever. Every one that believes in him (I
speak of that lively faith which as the hand apprehends Christ, and by which
we receive him and his benefits) does eat his flesh, and drink his blood. He
that believes in me (says he) shall never thirst: for let any man show a
reason why some that believe in Christ do eat his flesh and drink his blood,
and other some, having the same lively faith, do not. What will they say that
the reprobate and damned, so many of them as euercome to have the true and
lively faith (according as they imagine) do indeed eat the flesh of Christ and
drink his blood, and so for a time be made lively members of Christ, even
flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones, as the Apostle speaks Ephesians. 5.
ver. 31? If they do not eat his flesh and drink his blood, then have they not
the faith: remove that effect, and the cause is removed. If they will not
abhor so wicked a speech, but affirm indeed that the reprobate do eat the
flesh of Christ, so many of them as have the lively faith: then let the^ see
how they overthrow also the whole force of the argument of Christ, by which he
proves that the Manna was not the bread of life; but that he himself is the
bread of life. Your fathers (says he) did eat Ma^na in the wilderness and are
dead. If any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever. How stands his
argument, consider of it I pray you. Your fathers did eat Manna in the
wilderness, and yet are dead in their sins they are dead in the spiritual
and eternal death (for of that death he speaks, seeing they also which eat
the flesh of Christ do die the natural death) therefore Manna was not the
bread of life that comes down from heaven. For that which some did eat of,
and yet did die eternally, is not by any means the bread of life. And how
does he prove that he himself is the bread of life? I am the bread which
came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever.
Thus stands his reason. Whosoever eats the flesh of Christ, he shall live
for ever: therefore the flesh of Christ is the bread of life. If they shall now
say, some of the fathers in the wilderness did eat the Manna, and yet died in
their sins: it cannot be denied: and thereupon Christ does affirm that Manna
was not the bread of life that comes down from heaven: and then add their
own saying, which is this, some do eat the flesh of Christ, and yet do die
in their sins: what will then follow? if this reason do stand in force; Your
fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness and are dead: therefore Manna was not
the bread of life. Then shall not this also follow, Many do eat the flesh of
Christ, and yet are damned: therefore the flesh of Christ is not the bread of
life. Thus it is evident that such as do affirm that any of the reprobate have
the lively faith, do gainsay Christ, and overthrow the force of his argument.

To proceed, what can be more firm to prove that the reprobate cannot have
the true, lively and justifying faith, then that which Saint Paul has written?
Where this ground is first to be laid, that whosoever he is that has the
true justifying faith, he has the spirit of sanctification, the spirit of
adoption: for thus the Apostle conioyneth them: wherein also after that ye
believed, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest
of our inheritance, unto the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the
praise of his glory: Ephesians. 1. ver. 13.14. Is there any so absurd as to hold
that a man is a lively member of Jesus Christ (as every one is that has the
lively justifying faith) and yet has not that holy spirit of promise, that
spirit of adoption, that seal, and that pledge? If they will say that the
faith which the reprobate do attain unto is without this spirit of adoption,
or without this seal or pledge: then do we hold with them, and then does it
follow, that the faith of the reprobate is not the true justifying and
sanctifying says which purges the heart, Act. 15. But if they shall say that
the reprobate are for a time partakers of the spirit of sanctification, even of
that spirit of adoption: then will there diverse right wicked consequences
follow, which are to be banished far from christian religion. For first
touching the spirit of adoption, see what the Apostle says; As many as are
led by the spirit of god, they are the sons of God. For ye have not received
the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the spirit of
Adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father. That same spirit bears witness unto
our spirit that we are the sons of God. Romans 8.14, 15, 16. If any of the
reprobate be led by the spirit of God, or be at any time sanctified, then has
not S. Paul here said true, that as many as are led by the Spirit of God,
they are the sons of God. Some of the reprobate indeed do taste of the
heavenly power, but they are not led with the spirit of God: they be not
sanctified, they walk not after the spirit. Moreover, the spirit of adoption,
the sanctifying spirit which is in all that have the true, lively and justifying
faith, bears witness with and to the spirit of the believers, that they be the
children of God. This is the lively faith when a man believes that the Lord
God is his father, and that he is the son of God. And this faith is not
separated from the spirit of adoption, for it is upon his testimony that they
do believe, and by him they cry Abba, Father. Is not this spirit a true
spirit? and is not his witness most firm and true? If it be as those men say,
that the reprobate are partakers of the spirit of adoption, then is not his
testimony firm and true. For then that spirit of adoption teaches some man
to call God Father, and witnesses to his spirit that he is the son of God,
when as he is the child of the devil: for having that faith, and that
testimony of the spirit in him to day, to morrow he does by their saying,
utterly and finally lose that faith and that spirit. What an opinion is this to
say that a man has the true faith, that is to say, believes by the testimony
of the holy Ghost, that God is his father, and yet he is indeed the child of
the devil? And moreover, does not the Apostle say, that after they believed
they were sealed with the holy spirit of promise? This is more then the bare
testimony of the spirit, if I may so speak, that he seals. Can this seal
be disanulled or broken, or made frustrate? Is this seal untrue? If it be
ever set upon the reprobate, it is deceivable. If their opinion be true: no
man can then say thus, God has sealed me with his spirit, therefore I do
belong to God: For a reprobate has that seal, and it fails him: then who
can say that it is a seal, which is true and infallible? Saint John showing
upon what testimonies faith in Christ is grounded: says, There be three that
bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Spirit, and these
three are one. And there be three that bear record in earth, the spirit, and
water and blood, and these three agree in one. If we receive the testimony of
men, the testimony of God is greater: For this is the witness which he
testifies of his son, He that believes in the son of God, has the
witness in himself. 1. Ioh. 5. verse. 7.8.9.10. Why are all these witnesses
but to give asrance of faith? And if these witnesses do testify unto a man
that he is the child of God and shall be saved (for every one that has the
true and lively faith, has it upon the testimony of all these witnesses) and
yet he is a reprobate: then is not the witness of God greater then the
witness of men. Then also to what end should he mention all these foresaid
witnesses? They give an absolute testimony that every one that believes has
life everlasting.

By these places it is manifest that the reprobate cannot be partakers of the
sanctifying faith, they be not led at any time by the spirit of adoption, they
be not sealed up with the holy spirit of promise, they have not the witness of
God within them: whosoever therefore has these things, let him be assured he
shall never perish; but if he be sanctified, he is justified, he shall be
glorified. Romans 8. ver. 32. And this is it which the holy Scripture in many
places proclameth, that whosoever believes in the son of God, he shall never
be confounded.

But what if the reprobate never have the true faith, nor the spirit of
adoption? yet do not the elect so fall and sin sometimes, that there is no
spark of true faith left in them for the time? This is the great cunning of
the devil to root up as it were the stablenesse and foundation of the truth.
But the word of God meets with it, and teaches, that whosoever is regenerate
and borne of God in the new and spiritual birth, as every one is that has the
lively faith, seeing whosoever is in Christ, he is a new creature: the same man
cannot so fall that this new birth should be extinguished in him. For this we
have the testimony uttered by Saint John, in these words, Whosoever is born of
god sins not, for his seed remains in him, neither can he sin, because
he is borne of God. 1. Ioh. 3. ver. 9. Also, we know that whosoever is borne
of God sins not, but he that is begotten of God keeps himself, and that
wicked one does not touch him. chap. 5. verse. 18. In the former of these two
sayings, there be two members, and unto either of them, there is annexed a
reason to confirm the same. As whosoever is borne of God sins not: for his
seed (this is the reason) remains in him. And then the second member,
Neither can he sin: the reason, because he is borne of God. Now see if they
do not directly gainsay the holy Ghost, which hold that a man regenerate
may loose the faith, and be utterly void of the spirit of sanctification. For
first, whereas S. John says, that whosoever is born of God, he sins not.
They say, a man has his faith utterly quenched, and is wholly deprived of the
spirit of adoption. What sin then is it that he sins not? He that falls in
such sort as that he becomes void of the true faith, and of the sanctifying
grace of God, what is he other but as an infidel for the time, and what sin
is it that he commits not? Shall it be said of such a man, he sins not?
It may be this poor cavil will be used, He that is borne of God sins not
so long as he continues in that estate, so long as he continues borne of God.
A vain and most foolish speech, for if a man that is unregenerate and borne of
GOD through a true and lively faith, do so fall, it is sin that casts him
down, then he does sin while he is in that state. For does he first cast
away his faith, and the grace of the sanctifying spirit, and then commit sin,
and not before? What greater sin then the falling from the faith, and casting
forth utterly the grace of sanctification? But see how Saint John meets with
all cauilles, in the reason which he annexeth to confirm that first member.
Why does not any one that is borne of God, sin? For (says he) his seed
remains in him. What is the seed of God which remains in all that are borne
of God? The word of God is called the incorruptible seed by which God does
beget his children, 1 Pet. 1.23. That word is but an instrument, the holy
Ghost is the worker of the new birth: and therefore our Savior teaches, except
a man be borne again of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. Ioh. 3. verse. 5. The seed of God then is the graces of the
sanctifying spirit, and the lively word. Those men that say, a man may lose his
faith, and the spirit of sanctification, do in flat speech contrary that
which the holy Apostle here speaks. The seed of God (says Saint John)
remains in all those which are borne of God, and therefore they do not sin,
that is to say, they do not sin that deadly sin of falling from God, or of
being separated from Christ: which is not true if their saying be true: for
there remains no seed of God in those that do wholly lose their faith, and in
whom the sanctifying graces are utterly extinguished. It may be they will here
again add their vain cavil, that the seed of God remains in them so long
as they be borne of God, and hold the faith, and stand in grace. As if Saint
John should say thus, the seed of God remains in them, so long as the seed
of God remains in them. Is not this a very wise speech to be ascribed to the
holy ghost? He speaks absolutely, that whosoever is borne of God, the seed of
God ever after does remain in him: and therefore he sins not. Let them go
with their ridiculous distinction, the seed of God remains in them, so long
as it remains in them: for that speech they must be forced to utter, unless
they will confess, that when he says his seed remains in them, we must
take it remains in them for ever. If the seed of God remain for ever in the
regenerate, then does faith and the sanctifiing spirit remain in them for
ever. For will they separate these? But to put all out of doubt, and to
minister sound comfort, or (as the holy ghost speaks) strong consolation to
all that have the true and lively faith, even to let them know indeed, and
understand for certainty, that they can not perish, that they cannot be
overcome by Satan in the battle: he adds, Neither can he sin: confirming it
with this reason, because he is born of God. What can they say unto this? How
will they avoid this? Will they say that Saint John meant here some other
matter? Is it not clearer then the Sun, that the regenerate cannot wholly be
deprived of faith, nor of the spirit of sanctification, when he says, they can
not sin? Can they wholly loose their faith and all the sanctifying grace, and
yet can they not sin? O how happy and blessed is the state and condition of
that man which has attained to the true and lively faith, who has the spirit
of sanctification, by which he is led, even the spirit of adoption that
bears witness with his spirit that he is the child of God, seeing he may be
tempted, and sundry times be led awrie into some sins, but it is impossible
that he should fall from God? And what is the reason by which he proves that
he cannot so fall: Because (says he) he is borne of God. Consider where the
force of this reason lies. Men are mortal, their seed is corruptible, and
that which is borne of man is corruptible and mortal. God is incorruptible and
immortal, and so the seed of God is called incorruptible seed and immortal:
whereupon it does follow that the birth which is of God is incorruptible and
immortal. Where the life of God is, it cannot be be extinguished. Think it
not strange then that Saint John says, he cannot sin, because he is borne of
God. Except they will deny the manifest and clear testimonies of the word of
God: except they will affirm that the seed of God is corruptible and so
decays, and does not abide in those that are begotten of God: except they
will also make the testimony of the spirit of adoption deceivable and false:
finally, except they will make the seal of God and the pledge which he gives,
of none effect, denying that men are to make their calling and election sure,
and so to have strong consolation. Let them renounce this Popish error, that
the true and lively faith, and the sanctifying spirit may be in the reprobate,
and that the same lively faith and quickening grace may be wholly put out for
a time in the elect. It may be demanded that seeing the word of God is so
evident, that men are to resist the devil steadfast in the faith, as being fully
assured that he which has once attained the lively faith can never be overcome
nor perish: what should be ye cause that some do hold that true faith and the
spirit of adoption may be had and lost again? What should cast them upon such
rocks, or drive them into such absurdities? Surely they be driven into these
while they do (as they suppose) eschew more dangerous rocks and greater
absurdities. They would have it to be somewhat in man's own will and power to
receive faith and the whole work of regeneration. They would have it be in the
power and will of man to retain the same faith and sanctifying spirit, and to
lose the^. Why are they of that mind? Is it because they envy, that god should
have the whole praise and glory of man's salvation, as man being not able to do
any thing, the grace is wholly of God? We cannot say so. But it is another thing
that drives them hereunto: and that is this they take it that unless it be in
man's will and power to receive and to retain faith, it will follow from an higher
cause, and that is this: namely that such as God has chosen unto life, to
those he gives faith and works in the^ by his spirit the new birth. Then the
other sort (if there be no power in man) cannot attain to the faith and
regeneration, they be before ordained unto eternal destruction. The^ will it
follow that there is predestination, eue^ an eternal decree of God, by which he
has chosen and ordained some to life everlasting, and appointed others to
eternal destruction. This doctrine they say charge God with injustice and
with cruelty. For what is more cruel then of purpose to create and make any
of his works or creatures to be condemned unto eternal torments? Where is
then (say they) the infinite mercy, justice and goodness of God? To charge the
Lord God with any cruelty or injustice, is most wicked, blasphemous and
abominable. And therefore they hold this the most safe course for the defense
of the justice and mercy of God, where the word of God speaks of election, to
take it thus, that GOD has chosen unto life eternal all those whom he did
foresee would receive the faith, walk in obedience and continue to the end,
and so their faith, good works and perseverance which God foresaw, is the cause
that moved the Lord to choose them. On the other side, that he has not
reprobate any, but he has foreseen that they either would not receive the
faith at al, or else after they have received it, of their own wickedness fall
from it utterly and finally, and so he has before ordained them in his
foreknowledge unto damnation. This they say stands with reason, the other
they hold to be repugnant to reason. What shall we say to this? shall we here
enter for to discourse at large by the scriptures touching election and
reprobation? I have no such purpose. But only so far as agreeeth with our
present matter, namely to make it appear, that the steadfastness of our faith,
and the full assurance of our salvation, depends upon the knowledge of our
election. As namely, if we find in us the true and lively faith, which goes
with the spirit of sanctification, we may then rise up to that high cause, and
be assured that the Lord has in that his eternal and unchangeable decree
chosen us in Christ to be his children, so that we cannot perish.

To come then to an answer to those men: Is not this a strange thing, that
they will comprehend by reason how God could decree the choice or election of
some of his creatures unto life, and the reprobation of others unto eternal
destruction for their sins, and yet not unjust? If we allege the sentence
of the Apostle, But who art thou O man that pleadest with God? They answer
that they do not plead with God, but they stand for the defense of the
justice and mercy of God, least that should be imputed unto him which is unjust
and cruel. No? Is not this to plead with God, or against God. when he shall
be just, he shall be good, he shall be merciful, no further than thy
reason can comprehend? He must yield a reason unto thy understanding and
capacity, with what right or equity he could do so, or so, or else thou will
reject it? Is not this I say, to plead against God? Saint Paul after he has
disputed of the rejecting of the Jews, and the calling in of the Gentiles,
breaks forth into this exclamation: O the deepnesse of the riches both of
the wisdom and knowledge of God: how unsearchable are his judgments and his
ways past finding out! Romans 11. To this agrees the Prophet in the Psalm,
saying, Thy judgments are as the great deep. Let it be demanded, what
judgments of God are those which be unsearchable, or which be as the great
deep? Are they not those judgments which he executes upon his creatures, and
especially upon his chief creatures, Angels and men? If these his judgments be
as the great deep, even unsearchable and inco^prehensible both unto men and
Angels, then is it so in the highest matter, namely that he has ordained by
his eternal decree to bestow eternal life and glory upon some, and to appoint
other some unto eternal ignominy and torments, which they shall endure justly
for their sins: For if any judgments of God be unsearchable, or any
where, it is in predestination. It may be rightly said, that if the counsels,
and ways, and judgments of God be not unsearchable in that eternal decree;
then is there no judgment of god unsearchable: which is to deny not only the
saying of the Apostle and of the Prophet, but also after a sort to deny God,
for he that will make his judgments to be searchable, makes also God himself
to be searchable. Will thou measure and comprehend the counsels, the decrees,
and the judgments of God by reason? Then measure and comprehend God himself,
even that eternal and infinite majesty, with thy reason. Now if it be so,
that God has chosen some for this cause that he did foresee that of their own
will and power they would be faithful, do good works and continue to the end.
And on the other side, that he did foresee who would be unfaithful, wicked,
and rebellious even to their death, and those in his foreknowledge he saw to be
justly damned. Here is nothing incomprehensible in these judgments. For thy
reason does find out, and thy understanding does comprehend all causes, and
thou can show a reason how God has done every thing, and yet is just: yea
all the causes of his counselles he open unto thee, if it be so. Why then did
Saint Paul cry out, How unsearchable are his judgments! Why says the Prophet
also, That they be a great deep? The Prophet was dull of conceit (it seems)
and so was Paul: for thou have entered into this great deep, and have with the
light of thy reason searched out all things, and whatsoever is not agreeable to
the same thy reason, thou doubtest not to dash it out of Gods decrees. Thou will have nothing to stand higher then thy reason can reach unto and
comprehend. Thou say that whatsoever is contrary unto reason is absurd.
Well, but take heed that thou do not extol reason too much. It does indeed
comprehend the principles of logic: but that it will from thence rise up to
comprehend God, and his eternal decree, it is extreme folly. If we look a
little in particulars, we shall find it to be so. We do believe and confess
that the Lord God by his eternal power and infinite wisdom created heaven and
earth, and al things which are in the^, both visible and invisible. Of the
invisible creatures in heaven, the Angels, some sinned and fell, whom he has
condemned unto eternal fire: they be now devils. Others (whom the holy
Apostle calls the elect Angels) never sinned, neither shall ever any of them
sin, as they be well assured, but shall remain very glorious and blessed
for ever.

Tell me now, were not all these the creatures of God, and created in the same
estate and condition? How comes it that some of them stand, and others do
fall? Will ye not say that of his infinite goodness and love, he had decreed
to stay up the one part, so that they should never sin, nor be in danger of
falling: and that he had also decreed to leave those other to their own will
and power? why did he not show the same goodness and love toward all? why
did he set so glorious creatures in such estate, as that they should fall from
the heavenly glory into devils torments? was he not able to support them, and
to retain them in glory with the rest? He created man in great dignity, even
after his own image; why did he not keep him in that estate? why did he
suffer the devil to enter in unto the woman and to tempt her? why did he not
forewarn the man and the woman, that such an enemy would set upon them? or
why did he not give the^ strength to get the victory in that temptation? O
will thou say, God did only suffer those things to be done by the devil: he
did not ordain that any such matter should fall out: for that cannot stand
with equity or justice: it agrees not with mercy. Well, thou have a child, and
when it is in thy power to let, yet thou wittinglie do suffer a terrible
Lion to enter in unto him and to devour him: who will say that this is a
sufficient excuse to clear thee from cruelty: to say that thou did not
decree it, but only suffer it to come so to pass? If this be no excuse to
defend thee, how foolish art thou in using it to defend the justice and mercy
of God? VVilt thou thus call the justice of God and his mercy under the
account of thy reason, that thou may by thine own wit comprehend it, or else
it cannot be justice? O how much better is it that thou should cry out
with the Apostle, How unsearchable are his judgments! And where thou can not
comprehend by reason how God should in justice either decree or suffer the
fall of Angels and men; yet to rest in this, that howsoever we cannot
comprehend those things, yet we are sure that there can be no unrighteousness
with God: but whatsoever he decrees, it is most holy and just, for his will
is the perfect rule of all righteousness.

To proceed, when man was fallen, and had cast himself and all his posterity
into endless misery, a redeemer is promised. All are lost alike, there be
none which are in themselves better or more worthy than other, why then is not
the redeemer sent unto all? If any shall reply and say he was sent unto all:
that is untrue: for God chose the seed of Abraham, the nation of the Jews, he
separated them from al other nations of the world, he gave them his laws and
ordinances, even the lively Oracles for to teach them. The other nations he
left in the dark, to walk in the vanities of their own mind, subject to the
manifold illusions and sleightes of diuelles, and that for many ages together,
among whom there were so many famous wise men, Philosophers, Poets and
Orators. Yea there were among them infinite thousand thousands which could never
hear of Christ, and of infants dying and perishing in their native corruption,
that is, in original sin. Who can search out and comprehend the judgments
of God in this? were they not the work of his hands? Yet there is no hope
offered unto them. But at the length Christ Jesus, the only light and salvation
of the world, is preached to the Gentiles. Why did he not now open the eyes
of all? why did he not give that effectual grace of his spirit unto all as to
believe in his son unto salvation? When he opened the heart of Lydia, why did
he not also open the hearts of the rest that heard Paul preach? Some will say
they would not. Yea but he of those that were most unwilling made willing
where it pleased him: As we have a perfect example in Saint Paul, who was a
cruel persecuter. Christ says, No man comes unto me, except the father
which sent me draw him. Ioh. 6. Why did he not draw Herod, and Pilate and
the high Priests, as well as Paul? We see in these latter days that there
be great Nations, as the west Indies, which had never heard of Christ until
of late time, and then by a most cruel and idolatrous people which have
murdered them most wickedlie, so that they have been made to stumble and to
be further from Christ. Who is able to comprehend the depth of these
judgments? Shall not we lay down the pride of our own understanding, and
say with the Apostle, Has not the Potter power over the claie, of the same
lump to make one vessel unto honor and an other unto dishonor? Or shall the
thing formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? O beloved,
let us lay aside all such vain and curious presumptions: and let us, as the
holy Scripture directs us make our singular comfort of that eternal decree
of God. Thus we are with it to fortify our selves against the Devil. God of
his own good will has chosen in his son Jesus Christ, even before the
foundations of the world were laid, those whom he will save, as the heirs
of eternal glory. He has in his prefixed time redeemed them, not with gold
or precious stones, (as Saint Peter says) but with the blood of his son, as
of a Lamb immaculate and without spot. He does also call them, he does
sanctify them. This decree of God is unchangeable, it is impossible that any
of his elect should perish. Who can pluck them out of the hands of Christ?
Then in the next place we are to be assured that none can have the true faith
but the chosen of God. Not any do receive the spirit of adoption which
witnesses to their spirit that they be the children of God, but the elect. The
elect are only regenerate and borne of God, and sealed with the holy spirit
of promise.

Then come down to thy self: If thou can truly say, I have the lively
faith, I have received the spirit of adoption, which does witness with my
spirit that I am the child of God: I am regenerate, I have the true
repentance, I am sanctified: Satan does tempt me strongly many ways, but I
am sure, though he often as it were soil me, and cause me to go awrie, that
he shall never get the victory over me. Is not this a singular comfort to a
man? If any that has the spirit of adoption may lose him: then where is the
steadfastness of faith which Saint Peter here requires, in resisting the
Devil? If it come once to lie in our selves, we cannot be undoubtedly sure
and steadfast: we may well waner and doubt: but when we know that we are kept
by the power of God, as it is written, 1. Pet. 1. Then have we a rock whereon
to rest: then do we stand steadfast armed with the power of God.

This faith may be tried, and seem oftentimes to be sore shaken, but it can
never be overcome. Yea, will some man say, but every man cannot come to know
that he has received the true and lively faith, or the spirit of adoption, we
see many go far in the profession of the gospel, and think that they have
the true faith, and the sanctifying spirit, which yet fall quite away. It is
true that there be many which embrace the gospel and profess it with such
feeling that they suppose God has called them as his children: there is for
the time such a touch and such a moving in their hearts, and yet in time they
manifest themselves not to be of God. One occasion or other drives them awrie,
so that some of them become heretics, some of the^, although they fall not
into heresies, yet they fall into vices, and become so irreligious, that all
the former graces which they had tasted of, do vanish and are lost. And this
is the cause we are willed by Saint Peter to make our calling and election
sure. For seeing the reprobate receive a kind of faith and zeal, which yet is
not the true and lively faith, we are willed to be diligent and careful to see
that we rest not in that faith. We must labor to attain to that testimony of
the spirit of adoption: we must seek to be confirmed and even sealed with the
holy spirit of promise, and so come to that full assurance of faith and hope
which never confounds. And that is it which Saint Peter teaches the way to
come unto, in the place before alleged, where he wills us to join virtue
with our faith, with virtue knowledge, etc. For if we follow that rule which
he there prescribes, we shall be sure never to fall, we shall then with a
steadfast faith resist our adversary the devil, and get the victory over him.
It is a matter of great importance, I pray and beseech you, as you tender the
happy estate of your own souls, look unto it. Set your hearts upon the
lively Oracles of God, and seek day and night after the knowledge of holy
things, and how to please the Lord your God. Then shall you be blessed for
evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
Four Sermons upon the seven chiese virtues or principal effects of faith,
and the doctrine of election: wherein every man may learn, whether he be
Gods child or no.
2. Pet. chap. 1. 1 Simon Peter a servant and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to
you which have obtained like precious faith with us by the righteousness of
our God and savior Jesus Christ.

2 Grace and peace be multiplied to you, through the acknowledging of God and
of our Lord Jesus.

3 According as his divine power has given unto us al things that pertain
unto life and godliness, through the acknowledging of him that has called us
unto glory and virtue.

4 Whereby most great and precious promises are given unto us, that by them ye
should be partakers of the divine nature, in that ye flee the corruption which
is in the world through last.


BEfore we begin to handle or to entreat of the words of this text, it shall
not be amiss to note to whom and when this Epistle was written. Concerning
the first of these, it appears by the 3. chap. and 1. verse, that it was
written unto the same that the former epistle was. For thus he speaks. This
second Epistle I write unto you, beloved, in which I stir up your sincere mind;
by putting you in remembrance now these were the Jews which were scattred
abroad in ye dispersion through diverse countries, as it is expressed in the
first chapter of the former Epistle: for the Jews were specially his charge,
as the care of the Gentiles was committed unto Paul. Galat. 2.7.8. The words
are these: When they saw that the gospel of the uncircumcision was committed
to me, as the gospel over the circumcision was unto Peter: for he that was
mighty by Peter in the Apostleship, over the circumcision, was also mighty by
me toward the Gentiles.

For the second, this epistle was written by Peter in his extreme age, when
he had even finished his course, and was ready to lay down his tabernacle, as
he speaks here in the 14. verse. As for the occasions which moved him to
write, they shall appear in the particular handling of the matters.

1. Now let us come to the words of the Text, the 1. verse has two members: In
the former he sets forth his own dignity, that he is not only a setuant
of God, but a principal servant, and one which comes unto them as the
Ambassador of God, to the end that they might know that they had to do with
God, and not with men, and so submit themselves to the doctrine and message
which he brought, for whatsocuer God spoke by the Apostles, he so guided their
tongue and pen by his Spirit, that nothing which they spoke or wrote, was
their own, but altogether his. In the second member, he sets forth the
dignity which those to whom he writ had with himself: in these words, To
those which have obtained the like precious faith with us: as if he should
say, Although I be above you in the Apostolical dignity and function, yet you
are equal with me and with the rest of the Apostles in the chief and
principal dignity, and in that wherein all happiness does consist, even our
precious faith. Here it may be demanded, how Saint Peter can ascribe unto
them a faith equal or like precious with his own, seeing he did so far
excel them in gifts and graces, as in knowledge, and strength of faith? The
answer is easy enough, namely, that this comparison is not made in the
measure and quantity of faith, for therein some have excelled others far,
because GOD does not give his gifts to all alike: but in the effect, which is
the apprehending of Christ with all his merits, which the weak faith does as
well as the strong, and therefore in this respect is equally precious. This I
speak, not to make any slothful, when as the Scriptures do prick us
forward so much to seek increase of faith, but for the comfort and hartening
of the weak, which feeling their infirmity and weakness of faith, if it were
not for this which the Apostle speaks, might doubt whether they were
partakers of the same happiness with them: now hearing this, they may be well
assured although their faith should be but as a grain of mustard seed, yet if
it be true faith it coupleth them to Christ, and makes them partakers of
redemption, to have their sins washed away in his blood of righteousness, to
be covered with his obedience of life, to be heirs of the kingdom of
glory, as well as the faith of Peter, or any other. Unto this is also joined
that wherein the stablenesse of this their faith does stand, as upon a sure
foundation, even the righteousness of GOD, and of our Savior Jesus Christ.
And indeed the building of faith is so weighty, and the frame so heavy, that
it can stand upon no other foundation but this, that is to say, the
righteousness, faithfulness, or truth of GOD which cannot lie. For if we
would persuade a man to believe by this reason, that the thing which we
speak, is that which has been taught by diverse men of great learning and
singular godliness: yet because we know that all men are liars, except we
be fure that the things which they speak be those which God has spoken, we
shall still waver, and our faith shall be no faith, which alone can rest in
the authority of God, and not of men.

2 The second verse contains his salutation, even that which is common to him
with Paul, and the other Apostles: wishing grace and peace, to those unto whom
they write. And this they do, because it is the chief scope and principal
end of their ministry, to bring men again into Gods favor, and to be
reconciled unto him. Of this thing speaks S. Paul, 2. Cor, 5.18. saying, All
things are of God, which has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and
has given unto us the ministry of reconciliation, for God was in Christ, and
reconciled the world to himself, not imputing their sins unto them: and has
committed unto us the word of reconciliation. Now then are we Ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ his
steed, that you be reconciled to God. This being the chief end of their
tranell, causes them so earnestly to wish it for the people: and to be so
serious, not only in teaching them this generally, but also pointing out as
it were with the finger, the way to the same: and that not only in their
doctrine, but also in their lives. Whosoever digresseth or casts his eyes
aside from this mark and end of his ministry, cease to be the Minister of
Christ. As for example, If he preach the Gospel to purchase renow me,
estimation, wealth, or ease, to himself, and not to seek this reconciliation
between God and men, and to have grace and peace multiplied upon them, he may
well sometimes preach the truth, but not truly.

Likewise those parents which set forth their children to learning, with this
mind: My son snall, live an easy and merry life, he shall get some
liuinges, promotions and dignities in the Church, do lay acorrupt and rotten
foundation, and have not learned this doctrine of the Apostle, and therefore the
building follows agreeablie: for the most, when they come to have learning,
not forgetting this lesson which they learned of their fathers, do become
greedy cathers of benefices and promotions, rather then careful feeders of the
flock of Christ. But here it may be objected, how the Apostle can wish that
grace which is the free favor of God, should be multiplied upon them, seeing
that Gods love and favor does not increase nor diminish, but he loves and
favors always alike, being subject to no alteration or change? This may
well be answered, that Saint Peter does not speak here of grace, as it is in
it self in God toward men: but of their feeling the same, which grows by
degrees from less to greater, and because it is a thing so precious, the
Apostle wishes that it may be multiplied upon them. He expresses the mean
to be the knowledge and acknowledging of God, and of Jesus Christ our Lord.

3 According as his divine power has given unto us all things that pertain
unto life and godliness, through the acknowledging of him that has called us
unto glory and virtue.

This is fitly joined to the former verse, to show that the abundance of grace
and peace is not without cause required at our hands, as if the Apostle should
say, You are not to content nor to satisfy your selves with a scant measure of
Gods gifts and graces, seeing that there is offered unto you, and set forth
in Christ, unto whom you may resort as to a storehouse fully furnished with
all treasures, all things which pertain to life and godliness.

Secondly, we have to observe in this verse, when he says that all things
are given unto us by his divine power, that here is nothing left in the work
of our salvation unto our selves: so that it must needs follow, that these
which defend free will, do not speak with the same Spirit, which the Apostle
does here. For setting forth a contrary doctrine to this, it must needs
proceed from a contrary spirit. The Apostle does not say here, that all
those things which we want, through the weakness of our nature, shall be
supplied, but to show that there is nothing in us at all, but that we are
quite stripped of all things which pertain to life and godliness, He speaks
not of repairing or helping in some part, but of a whole and free gift in
every part: when he says without exception that all things are given unto us
by the divine power which pertain unto life, and godliness: and so this
doctrine does challenge all the praise and glory of our salvation to God
alone.

Thirtllie, it may be demanded why the Apostle should say that all things
are given unto us by the divine power or godhead of our Savior Christ, when it
is manifest that we fetched all things from his manhood: and therefore he says
in the sixth chapter of Saint John, verse 46. I am that bread of life. And
again in the 54. verse of that same chapter, He that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood I will raise him up in the last day: For my flesh is meat
indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. By this it is manifest, that life is
given unto the world by the manhood of Christ. The answer is easy, that
Christ in his manhood is a creature, and therefore has nothing of his own,
but whatsoever is in him, as to be the life of the world, and the light of
men, and to have in him all the treasures of wisdom: This comes from the
Divine nature, which dwells in him bodily, as Saint Paul speaks. Now the
cause why all these are put into the manhood of Christ, is that from thence we
may be partakers of them: for so long as they have residence only in GOD,
we are so far removed from him that by no means we can approach or come
near unto him to draw out of him any drop of the same. Therefore though
all things be given us by this means, that GOD has put them into the flesh
of Christ, and so is come down near unto us, that we may lay fast hold of
him: yet nevertheless because the propriety of them remains still in the
divine nature, the gift of them is here ascribed unto the power thereof.

Fourthlie, we are to note in this verse, that the Apostle does briefly set
down the end and sum of religion, and of all these gifts, when he says,
which pertain to life and godliness: for in these two words, unto which the
other two do answer, which are set down in the latter end of the verse,
glory and virtue, all those gifts are contained. For that which he expressed
first by life, here by glory: that which before he called godliness, here
he calls virtue: they are as much as to say, eternal felicity, and life
with glory, and the way which we must pass through to the same, which is
godliness and virtue. Here we are to take great heed, that we do not
sever or sunder those things which the Lord himself has so nearly coupled
and linked together. And this admonition is so much the more necessary,
because there are very many carnal professors and beastly abusers of
Christianity, which do seem very willingly and gladly to embrace the
promises of the Gospel, concerning redemption and eternal life purchased in
Christ Jesus: and they make great boast that they look for their part in the
same as well as any other, and yet they look nothing at all to this godliness
and virtue, through which we must pass unto it, for God has not called us,
but as he says here, to glory and virtue, so that whomsoever the Lord has
called to know him aright, and so to be made heirs of eternal glory, he
has also garnished them with virtues and graces of the spirit of
sanctification. Until such time therefore, as there shall rise up a new Peter,
which with contrary pen shall write a new and contrary Gospel, these men shall
never assure themselves, nor yet persuade others that they shall ever come to
the kingdom of God, seeing they go a quite contrary way.

4 Whereby most great and precious promises are given unto us, etc. Now he
shows by what means or by what instruments the divine power does bestow those
gifts upon us, and the same are as he calls them, most great and precious
promises which are given unto us, whereby we are called to glory and virtue,
as he speaks in the former verse: these are called most great and precious,
because the things which are offered unto us in the Gospel of Christ, for
greatness and dignity are incomparable. For what can we seek out to match
with this that here is offered unto us? namely, the remission of our sins
in the blood of his son, deliverance and freedom from the thraldom of Satan
and power of darkness, that of damned creatures and children of his wrath, he
has given us this high dignity to be his sons and daughters: and as S. John
says, Revel. 1. Christ has washed us in his blood, and made us Kings and
Priests to God his father: what a change is this, from the lowest misery,
even in the gulf of hell, to be lifted up to the highest dignity, to be
glorified with God in the kingdom of heaven? Because therefore these things
are the greatest and most honorable, Saint Peter calls the promises of the
Gospel, most great and precious. But wherefore does the Apostle ascribe all to
the doctrine of the Gospel? for when he says, that by these we are made
partakers of the divine nature, he includes all. Because it is by the Gospel
that we are called home to the Lord: for although he utter his will unto us in
his Law, yet therein he shows himself none otherwise unto us, but as a
severe Judge, we can see nothing there, but the dreadful curse and vengeance
of eternal fire: his brightness appears therein, but we be not able to
behold the same, but are dazeled with the sight thereof, amazed and
confounded, so that we cannot but run from him, because there is nothing but
that which is terrible. Contrariwise, in the Gospel, he has revealed
himself in the face of his son, where he shows an exceeding glory, but
with such fatherly love and pity, such abundance of mercy, and sweet
allurements, by which he calls us and draws us to himself: that here we
are able to look upon him with open face, and here his countenance is so
cheerful, that the soul which has once, with the cie of faith seen but a
glimse thereof is so inflamed and ravished with desire of a nearer and fuller
sight, that it can never be satisfied. For this cause Saint Paul making
comparison between the ministry of the Law and the ministry of the
Gospel, 2. Cor. 3. terms that the ministration of death, and the letter
which kills; and this the ministration of the spirit which gives life. Which
by the way also is to be observed, because there be at this day among us many
frantike brains: namely those of the Family of love, which call the true and
sound interpreting of the word, the literal sense, or the letter which kills,
and their own gross and foolish allegories the spirit: not knowing that Saint
Peter speaks of the difference between the Law, and the Gospel. Here also
appears of what price and dignity the Gospel is: for who can set forth the
worthiness of this, when he says, that by these promises we are made
partakers of the divine nature. We were indeed at the first created after the
image of GOD, and so partakers of his nature: but we lost all this with our
first parents, and in steed thereof we were made partakers of the devilish
nature, bearing his image, and fulfilling his lusts. Now by faith in the
Gospel, this image is restored and built up in us again, whilst we receive
the spirit of sanctification joined with the same. If men did know this
first, that all happiness in men is to be made partakers of the nature of
God, and to communicate with him: and then that this is wrought only by the
Gospel: men would not so lothsomelie despise it, and prefer every light
commodity, and trifling pleasure before it: men would not seek to disgrace and
slander it: men would not be so soon weary in hearing of it, nor think
every hour ten, while they be at it. Finally men, unless they were mad
men, would not as they do now almost every where, think themselves best at
ease when it is furthest from them: for who would willingly throw himself
headlong to destruction? who would so play the mad beasts, as to thrust God
from them, and refuse to be made partakers of his heavenly nature? which all
they do, that have as yet felt no sweetness in the Gospel, or at least have
so little tasted that it can scarce obtain cold love at their hands. But
there needs somewhat to be said upon the phrase of speech which Saint Peter
uses, for it is somewhat hard to some, and as it was in old time foully
abused by Heretics, so is it wickedly at this day perverted by the lovely
Family, which holding this doctrine that men are deified, and God is
hominified, as their language is, meaning that the very essence and substance
of God is transfused into men, and his substance and theirs mingled together,
take great hold of this, that the Apostle says, We are made partakers of the
divine nature. But you shall see that every simple man may casilie confute them:
if we ask what the nature of an horse is, will a man answer that he is made of
the earth: then a horse and a man are both of one nature, forman is also made
of the earth: It is manifest then that none is so foolish but he will
confess, that when we speak of the nature of any thing, we mean not the
substance, but the qualities and properties: even so in this place we must
needs grant, that by the divine nature in this place is nothing else meant, but
that there should be such a nature and such qualities in men, as may carry a
resemblance of the divine nature: as for example, God is holy, we must be
holy, he is pure, good, just, gracious, bountiful, loving and merciful, all
these and such like must be also in us: we shall also come to be partakers of
life, of glory, of joy, of happiness, and eternity, and so in a nearer sort
to be partakers of the divine nature: What are all those now the better, which
have so received the precious promises, that their qualities are even as
agreeable to the nature of God, as light is with darkness, or Heaven with
Hell, or Christ with Beliall? Since so many shameful and beastly sins, flow
and reign in them, which are so many partakinges of the Devilish nature, let
them for shame deny that they have ought wherein they communicate with God, in
any thing saving a bare profession. Then what is it which makes a good man?
The promises of the Gospel. What is it which brings life and salvation? The
Gospel. Who are they which have embraced the promises, and have the true and
lively faith? The holy. Who are they whom God has called to life eternal, to
be those whom he loves as children, bearing his Image? The pure and
undefiled. In the last clause of this verse he shows his meaning very
plainly, In that, says he, ye flee the corruptions which are in the world
through lust. This is the way to be made partakers of the divine nature, for
as corruptions and filthy defilinges the more they cleave unto us, the more
they separate us from the Lord: so contrariwise, the more a man does fly and
eschew them, so much the nearer he does approach unto God, who is the
fountain of all purity. We are here to note that Saint Peter makes all
corruption and naughtiness in the world to spring out of concupiscence: or as
it is usually translated, Lust: where we must learn first, what this
concupiscence or lust is, which is here said to be as it were the seat of
sin, and indeed it is the root and fountain out of which grows and
flows all evil that is committed in the world, either in thought, word, or
deed: to be short, this is that which is forbidden in the tenth commandment,
when he says, Thou shall not covet: at least so much of it is forbidden there,
as pertains to the second Table, that is the root and fountain of all evil
against men, for there is nothing recited in the same last commandment, but
toward men: and when our Savior Christ sets forth the sum of the first
Table, he says it is to love the Lord with all the heart, withal the soul,
etc. Now where the whole heart is required, there concupiscence must needs be
forbidden: but ye will say, what is it? wherein does it consist? It is not in
deeds, words, nor thoughts, but a more close and inward sickness, bred as
they say in the bones, the natural blot and spot of original sin, which we
have by inheritance from our first parents, and bring with us out of our
mothers womb, out of which al evil thoughts and desires do arise in us. Saint
James in the first chapter of his epistle makes it the womb and mother which
conceiueth and brings forth sin, Let no man (says he) when he is tempted,
say, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither
tempts he any man, but every one is tempted when he is drawn away by his
own concupiscence, and is entised: then lust when it has conceived, brings
forth sin, and sin when it is finished brings forth death. The first
thing we have here to note in this doctrine is this: that all corruption is of
our selves, not coming from any outward cause: It is true that Satan is an
instrument, and as it were the bellows to stir and kindle in us the lusts
of sin, and bears a very great stroke in the matter, but if it were not
for this concupiscence that is in us, he could not bring his matters to pass,
the prouocations and allurementes of wicked men, are so many means to drive
us and draw us into sin, but yet the cause is in our selves. A chief point
to be observed that we may learn to condemn our selves when we have done
amiss, and not after the manner of men, which look when they have faulted how
they may disburthen themselves, and be discharged of the blame, and therefore
they will either cry out of the devil, as though he, as they say, ought them a
shame, or else they will say, woe worth such or such that ever I knew them, if
it had not been for them, I should not have done thus. The Prophet David when
he had committed murder and adultery, being reproved by Nathan, although he
knew right well that the Devil was a great furtherer, in the matter:
likewise he might have thought upon the fond dealing of the woman, which so
vndiscreetlie washed her self in such a place as others might see her: yet he
lets these go, and to the end he may wholly and fully condemn himself, he
looks home to the welspring of all this foul and beastly sin, and says,
Behold I was borne in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me: as
if he should say: O Lord, I cannot seek any way to be excused, for all this
rebellion against thee, is conceived and bred in mine own corrupt breast, I
brought the root of it from my mothers womb. This is a good lesson for us to
learn: for so long as we do not know it, but like partial and corrupt judges
go about to excuse our selves, and to rid our hands of that we have committed,
we shall never come to any sincere repentance. Further, we are here to
observe in this place, that all corruption coming from this lust, if we will
repent indeed, we must begin here. For if they be changed only in their
outward deeds and words, and this inward sickness not healed, they have
gained nothing, no more then a man which would destroy a tree, and does no more
then lop and shred off certain boughs and twigs, leaving the stumpe and root
behind: for so long as this does live in them, they may well seem in the
eyes of men, to be very great conuertes, if they of ignorant idiotes, are
become such as have gotten some skill and knowledge: from drunkards, ruffians,
adulterers, and such like, they become sober, modest, and of good behavior; as
this may be done before men, and yet the heart nothing altered before God: for
there be many causes which may move men to seem outwardly to be godly, when
the heart within is fraught with loathsome lusts, and full of rotten
corruptions, which make men still altogether abominable before God. To be
short therefore, a man shall never rightly judge of himself whether he have
repented, unless he look to the bottom of this sore, that it may be
healed. The greatest multitude of men, being as blind as Beetles in this point,
imagine that repentance, is a very light and easy thing, which they can have
when they list: when a man of wisdom says this, that here lies so deep a
matter, that here be roots which are hard to be pulled up, he is moved to
be the more careful, least he deceive himself. Look therefore every man to
his thoughts, for by them is the trial made: if the thoughts be changed,
and the inward desires altered, so that of profane and worldly, they are
become holy and heavenly: then he may boldly say, I have a new heart, and
there is a right spirit renewed in me, I have repented, I have not played the
hypocrite, I feel an upright heart toward God, I feel the corrupt fountain
stopped, so that the filthy matter, and stinking mudde does not boil forth
as it did. It may also be demanded here, whether this lust be not a sin or
a corruption of it self, because Saint Peter says, that corruption rests in
it. The place which I alleged out of the 51. Psalm, does prove it to be a
sin: also it may be proved out of the fifth to the Romans, where Saint Paul
proves that infantes have sin, because they are subject to death, which is
the reward of sin, although, as he says, they sin not after the
similitude of the transgression of Adam. Therefore if we had none other but
this, it were enough to condemn us, and utterly to cast us away. Let us never
cease therefore, until we feel a change in our selves, even in this secret
infection, for otherwise we shall never be able to fly the corruptions which
are in the world, or as Saint James speaks in the first chapter of his
Epistle, to keep our selves unspotted of the world, so long as we carry the
corrupt world in our breast: neither shall our religion be pure, for thus it
is faide, If any man among you seems religious, and refraineth not his
tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's religion is vain. Pure
religion and undefiled before God, even the father is this, to visit the
fatherless and widows in their distress, and to keep himself unspotted of
the world.

The second Sermon upon the 5.6. and 7. verses.
5 Therefore give even all diligence thereunto, join moreover virtue with your
faith: and with virtue knowledge.

6 And with knowledge, temperance: and with temperance, patience: and with
patience, godliness.

7 And with godliness, brotherly kindness: and with brotherly kindness,
love.


ANd hereunto give all diligence, etc. He has declared in the former verses,
among other chief matters, this one especially, to how great holiness and
pureness through sanctification, we be called: which was chiefly expressed in
these words, that by them ye may be made partakers of the divine nature, in
that ye fly the corruption which is in the world through lust: unto this now
he joins an exhortation, requiring at their hands not only to put to their
diligence, but also, as he says, even all diligence. For as it is the greatest
and chiefest thing which we are to look after, so there is required at our
hands, to give our principal care and study thereunto: this equity must
easily be granted, that if we cannot obtain or get the things of this life,
which are small in comparison, unless we put to our diligence, for God will
have it to be so, that then of good right, look how much heavenly things
exceed in dignity the earthie, so much must the care and diligence bestowed
upon them exceed. How far almost are all men from this doctrine both in
practice and judgment: first when we see the exceeding travel and pains which
they stick not willingly to bestow, in getting the beggarly trash of this
world, either riches or honors: they will ride and run, early and late, by
night and by day, by sea and by land, winter and summer, wearing out their
bodies, almost pine and starve themselves with hunger and beating their brains
with as great diligence as can be possible: but when it comes to these
things which Saint Peter speaks, as things of no price, they pass by them,
in such wise, that they are here even as slothful and careless, as they are
diligent in the other. For judgment in this behalf, if a man talk with these
worldly men, they will show their mind and opinion, ask them why they be so
careful for these worldly things, their answer is ready, we shall otherwise
come short of them, and go without them: and why do ye not seek as fast for
heavenly things, they be the greatest? they be indeed the greatest: but we
commit that to God, we will not meddle with that. Thus they shift off the care
of godliness, as though God did not require it at their hands: never hearing
of this which Saint Peter requires: we must take heed of this, giving ear
to God, who teaches us this lesson by the holy Apostle: for if we let this
pass, we are most miserable. Here also when we are warned to give all
diligence, appears plainly how hard a thing it is to fly from corrupt
lusts: for if it were an easy thing to be done, less diligence might serve:
but sin cleaves near and sticks fast in us, and is not easily shaken
off: it is deeply rooted, so that unless we dig very deep, we are sure
to leave the roots still behind, which will grow and spring again as fast as
before, yea oftentimes seeming to be dead, they suddenly revive: so that we
are set a work while we live here without any intermission, to be still
toiling to pull up these weeds, the ground is so rank, that in a very short
time it will be wholly ouergrowne. Therefore such as despise the means which
God has appointed, or use them over negligentlie, must needs have their heart
ouergrown with these stinking weeds of lust and concupiscence: and so if ever
there be any good seed in them, as good motions or inclinations to fear God,
they are by and by choked, so that they can bring forth no fruit, or at least
no ripe and timely fruit.

But here may be objected, that this agrees not with the former saying, that
the divine power has given us all things which pertain to life and
godliness, there he ascribes all to God, and takes all from us; here he
seems to give somewhat unto our diligence, and so to establish free will in
us. We must answer here, that God works all in all, and alone strikes the
stroke, yet he does not work in us, as the Carpenter or Mason works upon
the log and the stone, which have no feeling of that which is done upon them,
and therefore nothing of them is required: but we have a will in us and
reason, which of themselves being corrupt, do nothing but hinder this work,
until such time as God has fashioned them a new: we have appetites and
affections in us, but of themselves mere rebels, these he tameth and subdueth.
So that this work of God in us, is not without a feeling of it, for he moves
us to will, to desire, to sorrow, to rejoice, and such like, so that our
diligence is required, because he works in none but he does make them
diligent, here is still then that which God does bestow upon us, and not that
which we have of our selves. By this place all those are answered, which cloak
and defend themselves in their naughtiness and sloth in the service of God,
after this manner: We have that which God has given us, all men are not alike
godly, every man cannot do as you do: when their own heart and conscience
does tell every of them the contrary, saying, thou art careless and
negligent, thou have as much as thou desire; for God does increase all gifts
and graces in those which use all diligence in seeking after him. Let us learn
therefore, brethren, to put in practice all those things which are here
taught, to give greater diligence, and so beat our brain more earnestly
about heavenly things, then about these earthly, to labor and travel more
for godliness, then for treasures and riches. Which if we do, we shall feel
increase of strength to cast out corrupt lusts, although not so much as feign
we would, yet God being true, we shall have so much that we cannot fail or
miss of our desire. It follows, Join moreover virtue with your faith, etc.
Saint Peter knows what babes we be, how unable to guide our steps in the
paths of godliness, and that makes him not only to move and persuade to
godliness, but even as it were, taking us by the hand, and teaching us how to
tread every step, he rehearses particularly the things wherein we are to
travel when he says, Join moreour with your faith, virtue: with virtue,
knowledge: with knowledge, temperance: with temperance, patience: with
patience, godliness: and with godliness, brotherly kindness: and with
brotherly kindness, love.

Faith here is set in the first place, unto which all the other must be
joined, because without it we cannot by any means please God, it does justify
us before God alone, but yet it does not

Now if we mark well, what manner of men they were to whom he wrote, namely no
babes nor yoonglinges in the Gospel, for he said they had obtained like
precious faith with him, and afterward in this chapter he says, they did
know and were stablished in the present truth: we shall easily perceive how
this may stop the mouths of many, which hold blind errors. First of all of
those, which affirm that ignorance is the mother of devotion, if Godliness
and virtue be the true devotion, then it must needs follow, that their
doctrine is false and devilish, seeing we are charged to join unto our virtue
knowledge: it is true if they mean Popish devotion, for they could never have
kept men in awe, to be zealous of their religion, and to seek for that at the
hands of men, which God alone does give, unless they had kept them in
blindness and ignorance: and therefore they took a wise way, to keep the
people from knowing the word, which so soon as it brake forth again,
disclosed all their falsehood and treachery, in so much that neither good nor
bad almost, have any devotion unto them. Secondly, of those, which although
they be not rank Papists, yet have in them still, a smacke and savor of
popish principles: and therefore like fools, are also enemies unto knowledge.
For thus they speak, It were no matter if there were less preaching, I think
the people be the worse for it, there is knowledge even enough, what should
lay men be troubled to learn, or to seek for the knowledge of the
Scriptures, let them tend their work, and look to their occupations, and
learn to be quiet, and to deal honestly: Against these poor blind beasts,
(for I may use no gentle speech) we are to reason out of this place: first,
that all men, know they never so much, are here commanded to increase in
knowledge, to the end they may increase in faith and godliness. Secondly,
let them consider to what manner of men Saint Peter wrote, namely, to poor and
rich men, women and children, to all sorts, and to be short, to as many as
would have faith and virtue, and so come to life and glory, and therefore as
well the poor ploughman, as the great Clearke is commanded to increase his
knowledge out of Gods book. Thirdly, they much ouershoote themselves, when
they would bear them in hand, that knowledge, which is the guider of virtue,
should be the cause of vice. Nay, if we wipe our eyes, and look better to the
matter, we shall see, that there is a flood of ignorance, which has almost
overwhelmed all, and in many which seem to know very much, if they were
sounded to the bottom, there should be found in them gross ignorance, and
palpable darkness: and so indeed the true cause of all foul sins, which
abound at this day among us, and flow even as a swelling sea, is the want of
true knowledge. This ignorance has taken suchroote, that all they which have
made proof, will confess with me, that our time is like the time of the
prophet Esaias, chap. 28. who having labored himself as it were out of breath
and teaching, and seeing so small profiting, being commanded of the Lord still
to go to his business, bursteth forth in these speeches: Whom shall I teach
knowledge? whom shall I make for to understand? them that are wained from the
milk, and drawn from the breasts? for precept must be upon precept, precept
upon precept, line unto line, line unto line, a little here, and a little
there. And in another place he says, The word of the Lord was like a sealed
book, if he come to one, saying, Read this I pray you, he makes answer, I
cannot read; to another that can read, he answers, I cannot, for it is
sealed.

Furthermore, let those silly creatures learn of this place to be ashamed of
that, wherein they seem after a sort to glory, when they use to say as they
think in defense of themselves, we be without skill, we have no knowledge,
we be poor honest men, we have no learning: it is as much as to say, we
have no faith, we have no virtue, we have no godliness: for we be plainly
taught here that faith, virtue, and knowledge, must increase and grow up
together. Let us all print this lesson deeply in our minds, that it may drive
us to make haste to come out of our ignorance, and to seek apace after
knowledge. Let us take heed of flattering our selves as some other do, which
having gotten some skill, or at least think that they have set very light by
the public teaching of the word, they do excuse themselves after this sort,
I thank God, I am not of the ignorant sort, nor of the meanest judgment, I
know somewhat, let them hunt after preaching that need, it is very good for
them, as for me, I am sufficiently acquainted with the matter already: this
kind of men are hard too deal withal, because they be wise in their own
conceit, and not in the Lord, for if they had once but even a little tasted
of true knowledge, of the sweetness and power thereof, they would never have
enough of the first sponefull, if they had an healthful stomach, they could
never be brought so soon to loath, and as it were to vomit up again, so
wholesome sustenance. But let us learn here, that when our knowledge is grown
to be never so great, because we know but in part, and we know nothing as we
ought to know, as Saint Paul says, even then we are to give all diligence,
to join to our virtue, knowledge, unless when we have begun and proceeded so
far, we mind to fall back again. This place does plainly set forth the
woeful and miserable state of those which be without teaching, or have it in so
scanty a measure, that they come almost to no understanding: they are merry and
think all is well, and think themselves best, when they are least dealt
withal, but judge righteous judgment, which the Lord by his Apostle teaches
us to judge, and we shall see that their mirth is nothing else, but a mad
laughter, even in the midst of fearful and horrible destruction. Unto
knowledge join temperance, etc. Or continence, for so the word which Saint
Peter uses may be translated. But what does he mean, having bidden us to
join virtue to faith? Again as though he had forgotten himself, to express
certain several kinds of virtues, which he will have us to join to the
former, when as indeed, the word Virtue contains them all. We may not
think but that he is very well advised, and that he knows with whom he
has to do, what babes and Children we are, which must not have meat set
before us, in gross to be our own caruers, but it must be minced to our
hands, we must also be fed as it were by spoonfuls. For this cause he did
not contenthimselfe to exhort in general unto virtue, but also to name and
point us out certain chief branches, which we must especially labor about,
for unless God should deal with us in this wise, so vain are we, that we
should wander and roue as it were in a wide field, and never come nigh the
mark, or at least, in looking after some one virtue or other, forget and let
go the chief and principal. For we see many that can roll in their mouth
the name of virtue and godliness, and nothing almost but virtue, virtue, as
though they would persuade men, that their garden did grow full of such
herbs, but when we come to this particular examination, to look for this
virtue and that, in steed of these sweet herbs, we shall find nothing but
stinking weeds. Here is a great part of our diligence and wisdom, therefore,
that when we study forvertue and godliness, and when we call upon the Lord
for gifts, we search out every part, and branch, least we be ouerseene in some
special point, and least while we seek to increase one virtue, another decay
in us, for that shall come to pass, if we cast not our eyes diligently on
every side, and so often times we rather loose then gain, rather go backward
than forward. Out of the negligence in this point of doctrine, or for want of
knowledge in it, men grow into security, and a very little contenteth them,
yea though it be but even some show of virtue, and slouthfullie they shuffle
off the matter: a thing greatly to be taken heed unto. Because, out of all
question it is, that which has caused diverse forward men, in continuance of
time as it were gathering rust to become slack: if we have desire therefore to
continue, let us learn to put this lesson in practice. But why does he will
us to join temperance or continence with knowledge, it should seem he had no
regard of any affinity in matching these things together, for temperance is
conversant about pleasures and delights: Yes verily, we shall plainly see,
that there is great cause for which he joins every one of these virtues
together. And first, to begin with this, ye are to note that continence is not
conversant alone, about the delights of the body, but also of the mind: so
that in seeking knowledge, which we must do very eagerly, we are to take
heed of these extremes which are contrary to a continent mind, either to be
so wavering, that every puff do drive us from the manifest truth, or else on
the other side to be so stiff, and so wilfully wedded to our own judgment,
that we will stand in defense of that which we have once liked, and not admit
any reason to the contrary: both these are contrary to a continent mind: and
both of them enemies to true knowledge. Therefore we are warned here in our
diligent search for knowledge, to take heed that when we have learned the
truth, we continue steadfast and immovable in it, not to be tossed to and fro,
as some unstable minds are, who when they have been taught the truth, the least
doubt that is raised against it, causes them by and by to shake, and to fear
whether they be in the right way or no, also we must take heed of that
stiffenesse, which causes some to speak when it were better for them to
hear, and to be heard aloft, when a lower voice might serve them better:
far from the counsel of Saint James, who wills us to be swift to hear,
and slow to speak. Let us be sure our knowledge be well grounded, before we
settle our selves to continue in it: least in steed of heaping up gold, we
fill our chestes with nothing but dross. Also we must beware, that we bend our
study for the knowledge of these points which serve to increase godliness,
and to true edifying. For many seek for knowledge, but their vain brain does
carry them to seek after curious questions, and to let pass those things
which should do them most good: and this is a sore and grievous sickness in
men, as the questions they commonly move, do show. He adds, To temperance
join patience. This also may seem to be somewhat strange; but if we look
well unto it, we then shall perceive the meaning more plainly: patience is
not only requisite in those which have received the profession of the Gospel,
to bear and endure all persecutions and afflictions, which oftentimes are so
raging, that (except we have our hearts well stayed, and seasoned with
patience) we shall be driven to forsake and to forswear our knowledge: but
also it is very requisite to be well armed and fenced with it, when we shall
have to do with those which are absurd and gross, and therefore it is as a
dagger to a man's heart, to hear all their blockish reasons against the word,
to see how senseless they are, when the plain truth is laid before them:
Likewise their spiteful railings and fleeting mocks which they will use: their
bold abusing of Gods word, their arrogant presumption, which causes them to
prattle very fast, even they know not what: or else we shall be huried hither
and thither upon rocks, and make shipwreck of our mildness, and so mar and
disgrace the good cause which we have in hand. For wicked men will judge all
to proceed of rancour and anger, and ascribe all to choler, and so by this
means there is procured some dishonor to God, who should greatly be honored
if we could meekely (as his Apostle wills) instruct those which are contrary
minded, proouing if God at any time will give them repentance, to come out of
the snare of the devil of whom they be holden captive, to do his will, and
so to stop their mouths, that they cannot be able to answer. The want of
this virtue oftentimes brings great inconvenience to the conference of
brethren, which should bring together (as it were into one heap) whatsoever
every one has gleaned by himself, that so the one might supply ye want of the
other; but the impatience of some is such, that great inconvenience does grow
thereby. To conclude this matter, seeing troubles are allotted unto us, and
sufferings for the truth, and that we are subject to so many reproaches,
railinges, tauntes, and mockes at the hands of absurd and evil men: whosoever
looks to walk in the way of knowledge, he must seek to possess his soul
in patience. It follows, With pattence, godliness, etc. A man may demand what
manner of order is here used, in willing us to join godliness to patience,
and then to godliness, brotherly kindness: is not godliness the whole or the
general, and these branches are members of it? True it is that this word is
often used generally, to comprehend all goodness, but in this place, it
comprehends but the first Table of the law, wherein we are willed to be
devout or zealous: a very necessary caveat to beware that we do not become so
patient, that we forget to be zealous in the Lords quarrel: it is as if
Saint Peter should have said: I would not have you so meek, as to bear and
put up al, I would have you withal to be hot in Gods quarrel, forget not
that. For many under a color of a meek patience, do cover the want of
religion, for if God be dishonoted, his truth defaced, his servants
slaundered, they can hear and see, and yet be as meek as a Lamb: but if
themselves be touched ye shall see them play the Lions, and of luke warm to
become fire hot: this therefore is no patience which wants godliness. We must
learn then, both with patience, and meeknes, to deal in the Lords matters,
and also with fervent zeal: least in steed of this excellent virtue of
patience, which was commended unto us, there be nothing but a profane
ungodliness and an irreligious mildnes, in which at this day more do offend,
then through impatience: for these Atheists have this as an excuse very
readily. Are we not commanded to be gentle and soft? Is it not our duty to
maintain love, and charity with our neighbors? Indeed they be great
swearers, and sometime they use to speak against Gods word, if they be awry,
I think they shall answer for themselves, if we should gainsay, or seem to
reprove them, they would not take it well, therefore I think good not to
disquiet them. Here is now wonderful patience, these are very godly and
charitable persons, yea even a treachery toward God and men. For is there
any of them, which being slandered with some foul crime, whereby they should
receive great injury, or be spitefully rayled upon, if some of their near
friends sit by and hold their tougues, when they know they be iniuried, that
cannot by and by feel and say, this was cold friendship, that they could not
have dealt so vnlouinglie toward their friends, by whomsoeeuer they should
have heard them so abused, they could not have held their tongues? Then belike
God nor his truth are none of their dear friends that they can put up such
injury done toward him. There is plenty of this patience in all places, but
godliness cannot be suffered to come near, for he is a break peace and a
very unpleasant fellow, he is over rough and precise, and over captious,
there was good neighborhood and friendship before he came, they could be
merry together, and be in unity, without any jar: had it not been better
to use gentleness and patience, then to have this broyle? for there is nothing
better then love, and where that is not, there is nothing good. O miserable
days, this is the good love now among men, that they cannot love one another,
but they must hate God, to have peace and concord with men to be at odds with
God for men's sake, to put up the dishonoring of his name, not to continue in
patience, unless godliness be wanting. The ungodly world and lewd nature that is
in men, takes occasion to accuse godly zeal, under this pretense: and to
find fault with the preaching of the word, because, say they, it sets men
at strife. But we must learn in this place to join godliness with our
patience, for otherwise we shall be found to be nothing else but irreligious
and profane dogs: although we pretend love never so much. The time will not
suffer to handle the rest, which remains in this Text. Let us rememeber that
which has been said, and give all diligence to pursue these excellent
virtues, that so we may approve our selves to be right Christians, and look
for the blessed hope promised in Jesus Christ.

THE THIRD SERMON.
7 And with godliness, brotherly kindness: and with brotherly kindness,
love.

8 For if these things be with you and abound, they will make you that ye shall
not be idle, nor unfruitful, in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

9 For he that has not these things is blind, and sees not a far off, and
has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.


ANd with godliness brotherly kindness, etc. We have heard already, that
with our faith must be joined virtue or godly deeds, which it cannot be
without, if it be a true faith: with virtue we are commanded to join
knowledge, which may be a guide thereunto, our knowledge must go with
temperance, with this must come patience, and thereunto must be joined
godliness. There remain yet two branches of these special virtues, about
which we are to travel: the first of these is brotherly love or kindness,
which must be yoked with godliness: as I said, that this godliness he
speaks of, is referred to the first Table of the Law, respecting God and his
religion, that we be sound and zealous in the same, and not as those which are
for all all times, and all religions, and therefore care not what be said
against religion, being very bellie-gods and Atheistes: so this is referred to
the second table, showing what we owe unto men. This is very fitly and
necessarily added, for as there be many, which regarding men only, how to
please, and not to grieve or offend them, altogether forgetting their duty
toward the Lord God, and wholly shutting him out, as though their chief care
should be of men, let pass godliness: so there be some that offend on the
other side, which looking always so high, as to have respect to the Lord and
his truth, to be earnest and fiery in that, ouerlooke men, forgetting the
duties which they owe unto them: the holy Apostle meets with this mischief,
and tells us that we must so love God, that we also love men: join, says
he, to your godliness brotherly kindness: For unless this be joined, and go
with our zeal of Gods word, it is no true godliness, although we be never so
sound in judgment, and seem to be as hot as Moses or Elias, yea even to be
swallowed up with burning zeal: for it does not proceed from Gods spirit, who
does also work the love toward men whersoeuer he goes: but it does proceed
of some corrupt cause, as of vain glory, or self-love, and such like, and
deserves not indeed to be called godly devotion, no more than the true faith
can be without virtue, or deserves to be called ought, save a shadow or
image of faith, if it be without good works: but it is a bitterness, which
resembles the true zeal, which does evermore carry with it, a love and care
toward men. True it is that to be zealous in spirit, is a singular and
special gift of God, and they which be without it are but brutish, and
senseless creatures, not knowing God, nor how precious his glory is: yet this
must be looked unto in every one of us whether we bear a loving affection
toward our brethren or no: for if we love God, we must needs love men, which
bear his image. If we delight in the word of God, this is one chief point of
doctrine that is taught in it, that we be loving and kind unto men. Therefore as
S. Paul 1. Cor. 13. shows, that very excellent gifts do not profit without
love, so likewise in this place we be taught, that if we would seem to be
godly, and have not love, it is nothing worth. Let every man therefore lay
this doctrine to his heart that he must be earnest in the causes of the Lord,
zealous in religion, preferring God and his truth, before all men, whosoever,
and whatsoever they be: but yet withal, that he must look down unto men,
rendering unto them their due also, this doing he may be bold he is in the
right way. Unto this brotherly love we be charged to join love. It may be
here demanded again what manner of speech this is, which the Apostle does
use, for is not brotherly kindness or brotherly love, as the word does
signify, and love all one? We must be far from thinking Saint Peter to
deal with so little heed, as to will us to join the very same thing to the
same: we must therefore seek a difference between these two. We may take
this difference, either that the first of these does express what we owe
toward the godly, who be chiefly called the brethren, and the latter what
we owe unto all, both good and bad: or else the former does signify the inward
affection of love, and the latter the outward practice of the same: for the
doctrine in both these, is needful to be opened. If we take then the former
sense, we be willed to join with our love toward the godly and faithful
brethren (whom we ought chiefly, and more dearly to favor) a love also which
may reach even over al, good and bad, friend and so. This Saint Paul teaches
when he wills us to do good to all men, but especially to them which are
of the household of faith. So that we must acknowledge our selves bound, in
some sort, even to the wicked, according as our Savior does teach, Matthew. 5.
Bless them which curse you, pray for them which hate and persecute: and saint
Paul says, Romans 12. If thine enemy hunger, feed him: if he thirst, give him
drink. Well then, although this be very hard to man's nature, yet the Lord
does straightly require it at our hands: and so that if this be wanting, we
do but deceive our selves. If we take it in the latter sense, the first word
to signify the inward affection of love, the other, the outward practice:
then we have here a notable point to be observed, not to ouershoote our selves
in our love, in judging it to be right, and sincere, when it is halting and
lame: for many when they hear that we are so straightly charged for to love
our neighbors, and that without the same, there is nothing good in us, or
which God accepts; look no further but thus, whether they bear any grudge
or evil will in their minds, and if they can say, I hurt no man, nor I mean
no hurt to any, they persuade themselves that this is an excellent love. And so
a stone meaning no hurt may be said to love: other somewhat wiser, do not
only look to that one thing, whether they bear evil will, but also whether
they have any kind of affection in them, and here they stay when they should go
yet this step further, to see that this kindness in them, breaks forth into
good and charitable deeds: for there may be some loving affection in a man, and
yet bring forth but slender fruits, because there is a great sloth in nature,
which hinders men from putting their love in ure, for love is laboursome and
painful, as Saint Paul sets it forth 1 Thessalonians. 1. when he says, Your
laboring love. If then we will love the brethren, here is the touchstone, by
which we may prove our love, that we spare not for any labor or cost, nor yet
wax weary, because love is not like one that is laizie and luskish, loitering
at home within a man's breast, but steppeth abroad, and is very diligent:
neither does it prefer every light commodity and vain pleasure, before the
benefit of the brethren. Then by this it is manifest, how that all those which
would seem to be godly, and yet have cast away the care over their brethren,
at the least thus far, that they will neither travel, nor be at any
charge, for other men's sake, whose wealth they should procure, especially of
the soul, for therein lies the chief trial of love: because it is a
preposterous thing, to be very tender over the body, a rotten carcass, and to
pity the misery thereof so much, and in the mean while, not to care for
that, that is more precious, namely the soul, the releeuing and healing of
which, shall be the happiness of the whole man for ever. This I speak because
we see many, that will bestow somewhat upon the relief of the bodily
misery, which have no pity upon men, which wander in blindness and
ignorance, whose souls are famished and pined, for want of food, full of
deadly wounds and sores, which are not salued, bound in the bands and chains
of sin, holden under captivity by Satan, even ready to be swallowed up of
the bottomless gulf of hell: the cause indeed is, that they have not yet
learned to pity their own souls, and therefore cannot pity the souls of
their brethren: for for if they did know the spiritual misery, they would
neither spare night nor day in traveling to have it eased: whereas now
contrariwise they can pull back men from godliness, and discourage them from
seeking after salvation: they can laugh and sport themselves in their own
sins, and in the sins of their neighbors, as though there were no misery
therein, finally, being cruel murderers of souls, would nevertheless
gladly be deemed charitable. But their bountiful alms does want seasoning.
Let us learn therefore to pity, and show kindness to the bodily necessity
of men, and not to forget especially and above all, to procure with all
diligence, as much as lies in us, the salvation of their souls: otherwise we
can never be said to join love, and godliness together.

In that which follows in the four next verses, there is showed partly the
great and singular commodities, which we shall reap, if we be garnished with
these foresaid virtues: and partly the discommodities, which we shall find,
in the want of the same. And this Saint Peter sets forth, not staying in
the bare declaration of the virtues, which indeed of themselves, being so
precious and excellent, should move us, but deals with us, as with those
which be lumpish and dull, needing many spurs to be pricked forward withal,
and all little enough: let us be careful therefore to take heed to that he
says, If these things be with you, and abound, they will make, etc. In this
eight verse, he begins to show the commodities, which shall redound unto
us, if we so give our diligence, that we may be richly decked with these
graces: They will make you, says the Apostle, that ye shall not be idle nor
unfruitful in the acknowledging of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is a shameful
thing, when God has showed himself unto us in his son, has called us into
his service out of miserable bondage, for us to be idle and unfruitful: If
the Lord have planted us, if he have dressed us, then, as it is also said by
our Savior Christ, John. 15. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye go and
bring forth much fruit. Then it is by this place very apparent, that a man may
draw out a sure and infallible argument against all those which are idle, and
slothful in the profession of religion, and, as they say, key cold, or slack
in the service of God, or unfruitful in good works; namely, that they are
graceless, void of faith and those virtues which do ever accompany the same;
for when Saint Peter says, If these things be with you, they will make that
ye shall not be idle nor unfruitful, it follows necessarily, that such as
be idle, which arises for want of zeal, or be unfruitful, continuing in
their sins, it is because they did never yet come to the true knowledge of
Christ; they may well boast themselves of their strong faith, make a brave
show of their skill and fine wit, so that men might think there were some
deep thing in them, and that they should be able even to judge, and give a
right verdict in all matters; but a man reading but even this place, finding
them idle and unfruitful, (yea even a simple man) shall easily sound them to
the bottom, and say of them, that they have not as yet known or learned
Christ: because they want those former things. We must note this also, when
he says, If these things abound in you: this is, that we should not content
our selves with a scant and bare measure of faith, of virtue, of knowledge, and
of the rest, as he sets them down: but we must labor to have a daily
increase, for that must be gathered by this, that he pricketh forward these
ripe and grounded men. A doctrine most necessary to be urged, because if men
have gone two or three steps, or have once a little begun to labor about
these things, so that they can look back, and see some come behind them, or
can say, I thank God, I know somewhat; I hope that I am not without faith,
somewhat there is which I have done, that I would be loath to do again: they
by and by persuade themselves, that they are sufficiently furnished: so that
they will not stick to say. I trust I have that which shall serve the turn.
Nay, the Apostle tells us another thing here from the Lord, and that is,
that we must ouerflowe in these, and abound: and truth it is, that these men
which think they be well fraught, and so seek for no further increase of
store, have as yet nothing, for if they had once found the sweet of these
things, and seen withal that they are far behind, and in beggarly need,
they would never content themselves with so little: for who is he, which
feels increase in worldly treasure, that will cry hoe, and say, I have
enough? Is there less in the heavenly treasures to draw men to like them,
than in the earthly? Or is it because men do not know them? We must learn
to take heed of such therefore, as would bear men in hand that it is
sufficient, yea, that it is best of all, for men to content themselves with
some civil honesty, and not to seek, and weary their minds to gain
knowledge. But these were never as yet the men, which might be rightly called
the scholars of Christ, much less we are to deem them worthy masters or
teachers of others, when they go flat contrary to the holy Apostle of Christ,
who wills to seek for so great abundance: when as they would content
themselves, and persuade others to be contented, with scant a shadow of these
things, which should be so plentifully found in them: Notwithstanding some
are so blind, that having no shadow or show at all of goodness, yet think
they be gone far enough. In the next verse where he says, He that has
not these things is blind, and sees not a far off, and has forgotten that
he was purged from his old sins: He sets forth the discommodities which
follow the want of these virtues. And this he does, because some man will
be little moved to hear that commodity which he spoke of, and will say,
what care I though I be idle? What care I though I be unfruitfully? I will not
go about to be better then other men, what should I labor to excel those
which are wiser than I? If then they will not regard this, that these virtues
will make them excellent servants of God, yet let them consider what the
Apostle makes them without the same, where he affirms them first to be
blind, (a very miserable thing in the bodlie sight, much more in the
spiritual, which he here means,) when God has so clearelie revealed
himself in the face of his son, in the knowledge which brings salvation,
that the God of this world, as Saint Paul speaks, 2. Corinthians. 4. should so
blind their minds, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ which is
the image of God, should not shine unto them. Secondly, he says, they cannot
see a far off, or that they be poreblinde, for such as have the beams of
sightscattering, or spreading asunder, so soon as they be out of the eye, can
see well enough just by them, but not far off, to these Saint Peter does
compare those men. But it may be asked what he means; first to say they be
stark blind, and afterward to attribute some sight unto them. It may seem by
this word, that he makes their case not so evil, as before he had said it
was; yes even as evil, for he says as much in this word as he did in the
other; for when he says, They cannot see a far off, he takes from them
all sight of heavenly things, which are removed from us, and seen only by
faith; he does not deny them the sight of those things which are at hand,
because they have a good and a sharp sight in the things of this world, for
the most part, better then they which can see a far off. But what are these
quick wits the better, when they are but for this world; and their condition
no better then that of the poor beast, (yea much worse) when we respect the
misery in the world to come? Let not this therefore cause them to set up their
bristles, that they can see so well and pearcinglie at hand, (that is, in
earthly things) when as they are as blind as beetles in things a far off,
that is to say, in heavenly things. Here we must seek to have eyes given us
of God, with which we may be able to see beyond this world: for before such
time as the Lord has given us some glimmeting of heavenly things, we shall
never covet to obtain them. And this is the cause that these poor blind men
never pass greatly to know the Gospel of Christ. Thirdly he says, they have
forgotten that they were purged from their old sins: as he said they were
blind, so now he says, they are forgetful: and this forgetfulness is so
much the more shameful, as it is in a chief and principal point of true
religion. But where shall we find the man, which if he be examined will
confess that he has forgotten this point? It seems none do forget it,
because the very wicked will seem to set all upon this score, that their
sins are purged, and that makes them sin so frankly. But if we understand
the Apostle well, we shall find very many which have forgotten this point.
Now here we must first note that our sins are said to be purged, when there
is satisfaction made for them by redemption in the blood of Christ.

Secondly, that they are said to be purged by grace of sanctification, when by
the power of Gods spirit, sin, or all sinful affections are suppressed and
killed in us: so then there is a purging in redemption, and there is also a
purging by sanctification. Now if they have not forgotten so much, but that
they can prattle of the purging their sins, by redemption; yet they have
forgotten this, that they were redeemed to the end they should no longer serve
sin, but purge away the old leaven: but being without those former graces,
he says they have forgotten this, not meaning thereby that they had ever
learned it, for if they had, yet at the least they had not well learned it: we
may see by this how many there be, which are stark blind, and have forgotten
that Christians are called to live in righteousness and holiness of life. If
we look upon the small number of those which have a care to seek after the
Lord, and how small a part of them do come (I will not say to abound) but to
have a compotent measure of those forenamed virtues: let us come always to
this true measure, and not be deceived neither in our selves, nor in other. Let
us be ashamed if we be carnal, to take upon us the name of the true
professors: let us deny unto them the honorable name of Christians, which are
but filthy swine, and profane dogs, as our Savior Christ calls them: to
conclude this matter, none are allowed to be true receivers of the Gospel, but
such as join virtue with their faith, and with virtue knowledge, and so
temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness, and love, and such as
also do seek to abound in them: the rest which care not for these, or content
themselves with the bare show of them, although they would seem to be
worshippers of GOD, and devout persons, yet they are by this doctrine of the
Lord wholly shut forth, until they have learned a new lesson. Remember that
this is the doctrine of God, and not of man. Remember that we must stand and
dwell upon it, not for a day, or two, while we have heard it, but all our life
long to bring it to the practice: it is plain and clear, none can be excused
if they know it not, and so through simplicity stand upon the common faith,
thinking to shroude themselves well under the shadow of the multitude: but when
GOD has warned them, who will pity them, when they will not be warned? if
this were not told us, and that by God himself, we might think, as men do
commonly, that a very little does content the Lord, that no great things are
required at the hands of Christians, and other such foolish and vain opinions,
as to say, they must hope well when God tells them, there is no hope, unless
they walk this way, also that it is not good to be over precise, when as in
goodness a man cannot proceed too far, nor offer too much obedience to the
Lord. To make an end, let none of all these things blind us, because they
blind some, which stand in reputation of their own wisdom.

THE FOVRTH SERMON.
10 Wherefore brethren, give rather diligence to make your calling and election
sure: for if ye do these things ye shall never fall.

11 For by this means an entering shall be ministered unto you abundantly into
the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.


IT has been told unto you already, upon the verses which go next before,
how that Saint Peter regarding how dull we are and backward in godliness,
contented not himself with his exhortation which he makes, but sets down
what we shall gain if we follow his advise, and also what hurt we shall
sustain by the contrary: and this has partly been handled in the two other
verses, and partly in these two which we have now in hand: where indeed he
does propound so great a commodity which we shall gain, if we give all
diligence to pursue the former things, as is almost incomparable: even this,
that we shall come to the assurance, that we are called and chosen of God: a
thing so necessary for us to know, that without it, there is no right faith,
no frank and willing obedience, no sound joy. For although without this, men
seem to believe, yet it is but a wavering fantasy, to do many good things,
yet they proceed but from a servile mind, to laugh and rejoice, yet is it but
in a desperate madness, which in very deed is greatly to be wondered at, how
men should be able to sport themselves, and yet to speak in their consciences
after this manner, there is Hell, and eternal flames of vengeance prepared for
sinners, and I am not sure whether I shall escape or not: this desperate and
brutish security shall be apparent to be the more mad, if we compare it, and
set it forth by an outward comparison. Let it be thus, a man is taken in a
robbery or murder, imprisoned, brought before the Judge, and condemned, by
suit of friends repriued until such time as they may sue for to get him a
pardon: in the mean time some of his acquaintance come to this murderer, and
will him to be of good cheer, and merry: he will answer, unless he be some
mad and desperate ruffian, I am condemned to the gallows, the Judge has
pronounced the sentence of death upon me, I know not how hard a thing it will
be to obtain a pardon, I stand in great doubt, and for this cause I cannot be
merry, unless I might know for certainty that I should escape if I did once
know that, I could be as merry as any man that lives, before that time I may
seem to laugh, but my heart is full of fear and sorrow. And is it not thus
with us all, are we not all of us guilty, and already condemned by the
sentence of the highest Judge, not to some torment of one day, or short
continuance, but to the fire that shall never be quenched? When men can be
merry therefore and laugh even in those things which cause this destruction,
and yet do feel that they are not sure to escape this dreadful vengeance, is
it not a mad mirth and a desperate laughter, in which if they were not become
very senseless blocks, they should feel many gripings at the heart, which
would mar all their mirth, yea a worm that gnaweth in such wise, that they
can have no quiet rest, nor as I said before, no sound joy. If we were not
therefore more then desperate and mad fools, the thought of hell would dampe
all our mirth until such time as we be sure that we have escaped it. This then
which the Apostle says here is a princely commodity, that walking the way
which he has prescribed, we shall come to the assurance, that we are the
called and chosen of the Lord. But it may be demanded how this can agree with
other sayings in the holy Scriptures, which do plainly teach that GOD
chooses whom he will of his own free grace: for which Saint Paul alleges
out of Moses, that God will have mercy on whomsoever he will have mercy, and
whom he will he hardens: adding thereupon, that it is neither of him that
wills, nor yet of him that runs, but of God which shows mercy. Again,
the doctrine of Popery is, that God does make choice, conditionally respecting
the good deeds which he did foresee in them: and so the election should depend
upon the worthiness of the men: we are to answer, that this place has nothing
in it which is contrary to that free choice which God makes without respect
of any thing that is in us: for he could find nothing in us that might any
way move him, neither does it serve at all for to prove that election is
condition all: because Saint Peter does not handle in this place, whereupon
election is founded, or what moved God to make choice, nor to show wherein the
certainty and stablenesse of election does stand: but his meaning is, to teach
us how we shall attain to this incomparable treasure, to be out of doubt,
and surely resolved in our selves, not by fantasied opinions, but by sure and
substantial proof, that we be chosen of God, and therefore cannot perish. If
we respect the unchangeable counsel of GOD, therein does rest alone the sure
foundation of election, because GOD which cannot be deceived, nor cannot
repent, or change, has made the choice, therefore those whom he has chosen,
can never perish: but if we regard the way and means, by which we may come to
know this favor of God to be toward us, the Lord by his Apostle tells us,
that this is the way, even to give all diligence, and study to be richly
decked with his graces, or those forenamed virtues: for by these we shall
undoubtedly know, because if we have them, if they abound in us, if we walk
in them, we shall, as he says, never fall. Let us learn therefore first this,
that election in it self rests upon the unchangeable purpose and counsel of
God. Then secondly, that we are not to setch the certainty of it in our
selves, from some revelation, neither are we to clime up into heaven, to
search in the counsels of GOD, whether our names be in the book of life. But
we are to fetch our warrant from within our selves, and that from the fruits
of the spirit, which indeed although it be out of our selves, yet because it
is not of our selves, is certain and infallible. If ye will understand this
more plainly, first I say, it is out of our selves, or from within our selves,
because we must take the trial, whether those things be in us, which are given
to all those whom God does choose, then I say it is not of our selves: for if it
were, it should be altogether uncertain. But of the seal of God wherewith
he has sealed us, which is the spirit of sanctification: now mark well I
pray you, If you do (says S. Peter) these things, you shall never fall: and
why, is it because our doings are so perfect and sure, or that we are so
constant of our selves? no not so, but by these virtues we know that we are
sealed with Gods spirit, whose work we feel in us: we know also that as many
as are led by the spirit of GOD are the sons of GOD. Romans 8. From hence it
comes, that look how much more a man feels in himself the increase of
knowledge, the increase of virtues and heavenly desires, so much more sure he
is, that he is the child of God; and as the one increases, so increases also
the other. Contrariwise, when a man feels within himself an evil
conscience, feels that he is darkened in his understanding, led by the
lusts of sin: he shall in spite of his teeth within himself sing this
doleful song, I know not whether I shall be saved or not: and look how the
other may say, I know I shall be saved, because God has sealed me with his
spirit; so may this say, I am sure to be damned continuing in this case,
because I have not faith, but only a wavering and doubtful opinion. We may see
by this how beneficial they are, and merciful to their own souls, which
with all their power day and night give up themselves to seek after the
knowledge and obedience of the Lords will: for not giving over, nor waxing
weary, they shall in continuance of time, if they ply it hard, find such a
blessing from the Lord, in the increase of faith and virtue, that will cause
them to say, we have not lost our labor. On the other side we may see how
unkind and cruel they are to themselves, which through idleness and sloth, in
seeking after God, with their daily and continual sins, do even as it were
cut the throat of their faith, seeing they can not have trust in him, whom
they do so much disobey. This place is as a mighty engine to overthrow the
vanity of sundry opinions which do reign in men. As first of all in those
which cry out against this doctrine, as a thing which will make men careless
and idle in the service of God, and stop the course of good works, I beseech
you mark how well these great wise men have profited in Gods school, see how
they agree with the holy Apostle: he says we are to give all our study and
diligence in good works to come to the sure and undoubted knowledge, that we
be chosen unto life: they say quite contrary, if ye will have men careful of
well doing, away with the doctrine of election, for it will mar all: thus the
wisdom of flesh does proudly lift up it self even against God (but how
foolishly, a very child may see:) Does that thing which we can not come to
the knowledge of, without exceeding care of godliness, abundance of virtue, and
plenty of all good works, destroy in men the study and care of good works?
But proud flesh is worthily blind. Some other, although not thus brutishly
blinded, yet greatly ouerseene, when they think on this doctrine, which is set
up unto us as the mark for us to aim at in all our doings: and the trial
whether we have done well or not: I mean the trial in this respect, and when
a man has done many good deeds, he shall know he has not done them well, if he
yet doubt, whether he be one of Gods chosen, for howsoever he passes it over,
yet his conscience which does in some sort know, that he has not dealt but
for vaineglorie, or some other sinister respect, will not suffer him to have
this faith: For God does not work so darkely by his spirit in men, but that
they may learn to know whether it be of him, if they would make a due trial:
because we must not rest in the outward doing of good things, but in the right
doing. Let him therefore which gives himself to do good works, (and yet
feels not this, which S. Peter says, we shall) suspect that his doings are
misshapen, and be careful to fashion them after the rules of the word. A third
sort of men there be, which with might and maine will defend this doctrine,
that men ought to be sure of salvation, that we can not more honor God, then
to give full credit to his promises, and because the plain testimony of the
scripture compels them, they affirm it constantly, and condemn the
contrary as a soul error, that God has chosen men, and men come to feel
and to know this: And therefore because it is a true doctrine, they say also
that they themselves are sure, that God has chosen them, but when they take
not the way to become sure, which S. Peter has here set down, but go in a
contrary path, and are spotted with filthy crimes, we may boldly say, they be
liars: for although they brag with their tongues of that that they should be,
yet there is a bird in their breast, which does sing in a contrary note, and
tells them plainly what they be. Another kind of men there be, which in no
case can be persuaded, that any man can be sure of salvation, and therefore
with scoffs they ask of them which profess the word, when God told them so?
If it were a thing which were not to be, or could not be known, then the
Apostle has greatly ouershot himself, in telling us how we shall come to be
sure. But ask a question of them, whether they do not believe in God, every
one will answer, I put all my whole trust in him: reason then a little further
and tell them, that the Scripture which can not lie, says, That all which
trust in God shall be saved: how then will they join these together, that they
trust in God, and yet doubt whether they shall be saved? can God deceive? or
say they, they know not what? Undoubtedly if they did know that they have
trust, they should also know they can not perish. But let us learn by this the
misery of our time: in which men do still think this doctrine to be strange.
Now let us come to the particular application of this doctrine, in which every
one must come home to himself, remembering first, that such as God has called
home to himself, and chosen to be his children, he does also give unto them
true faith and feeling that they be his elect: and such as perceive no such
thing in themselves, are in a very miserable case, and as yet we may say
forlorn creatures: therefore every man in himself must ask this question of
his own soul, How goes the matter with thee? Art thou sure God has chose^
thee? Do thou feel any assurance of eternal life? The conscience will
answer uprightly if we be not negligent to make inquiry: then if we find
this within. I am not sure, for I doubt and stagger: we must inquire with our
selves thus, what is the cause, God is faithful which has promised eternal
life unto all which believe: our heart will make answer, Thou regardest not
the fear of God, thou art full of foul sins, evil lusts do reign in
thee, thou do not study for the knowledge of Gods word, thou art
unfruitful and barren in good works, therefore thou can not say, I am led
by the spirit of God, and therefore sure I shall be saved. If he be wise he
will not stay here, as the manner of fools is, saying I am not sure indeed,
neither do I think any man can be, I commit it to God, let him do with me
what he will: these speeches may seem to have some wit and godliness in them,
but they are indeed deuilish and mad, because God has taught us a contrary
lesson in this place: but go this step further, may I come to this assurance?
and which is the way? The Lord does answer by his Apostle, Thou may come to
this assurance, and points him out the way: eue^ that which you have heard,
wherein he must painefully travel and go forward, not for a gird or a braid,
and wax idle again, but still labor, for these men had gone a great way, and
yet they are willed to proceed still: if the Lord guie not this assurance, we
are to labor so much the more, and to be so much the more importunate to
suspect our judgment, and to seek for knowledge, to call our selves to a more
strait account, to set a watch over our affections to see with what mind we do
things, to foster no sin willingly in us, nor to be slack to any good work
which God has appointed, to call and cry unto God for faith, and his spirit
to guide us, to use the means diligently which God has appointed, as the
hearing, searching, and meditating in the word: thus in time (for it is wroght
in me^ by degrees, and they never come to the full) God will let the^ see that
he is their God. That neither life nor death, height or depth, things present
or things to come, Angels, principalities, nor powers, nor any creature shall
separate us from his love in Christ. It follows in the next verse, For by
this means an entering shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.

This is a confirmation of the last clause of the former sentence, where he
says, If you do these things, you shall never fall: and why, because you
shall have a great entrance into the eternal kingdom of Christ: as that is a
confirmation of the other, where he says, Make your calling and election sure,
as the reason follows there, Ye shall come to be sure: how? because he which
proceeds so far that he knows he shall never fall away from God to
destruction, he is (as it must needs be) sure also that he is chosen, for he
speaks not here of every particular fall into sin (which is of the most
godly:) but says S. Peter, I tell you if you do these things, ye shall never
fall: not because there is any such stablenes in our selves, or in our own
works, but we know that they be the fruits of Gods spirit in us, which is his
seal, set upon none but those whom he does mark up to life eternal, and he
is unchangeable: so it follows here, Ye shall not fall, for they that have a
rich entrance into the kingdom of Christ, which is everlasting, so that Christ
does reign in them, as he does in all the faithful by his spirit, can not
fall, until the power of Christ fail, and his kingdom come to an end. For we
must note, that the force of the reason rests in the difference which is
between the kingdom of Christ and the kingdoms of this world: in which though
they be never so mighty, and full of policy and wisdom, yet they should
come to an end: and therefore a man can not rightly say unto the subjects, you
have a mighty prince, who is bountiful and gracious, your peace therefore and
happy estate shall endure for ever: nay, the mighty may be overcome, if not
by men, at least wise by death, and so they may be to day in peace and good
estate, to morrow all in an uproar, to day under a loving and gracious prince,
to morrow under a fierce tyrant: so uncertain is the state of the kingdom of
this world: but in the kingdom of Christ, whose power is above all, and can
never come to an end, but is as he says here, eternal, it is far
otherwise, because his state is unchangeable, so is theirs that be once entered
thereinto, and therefore they are sure they can never fall. Whosoever does but
even straightly look over these words of the Apostle, if he have any sight at
all, he must needs confess all this, the matter is so clear, that we can
but marvel how it should come to pass that this doctrine of the Lord, set
forth by his Apostle, should find so few friends, and so many extreme enemies:
but in deed men which are liars, do in this thing confess the truth, that
they feel not any such matter, and therefore can not abide to hear that all
true godly men, and faithful Christians have this knowledge in themselves: but
let us give ear to the Apostle, who tells us how we shall come to have Christ
to be our king, and to reign over us, namely, if we yield up our selves to
the governance of his spirit, which works all goodness in our hearts,
subduing and vanquishing all the rebels which we be are about in us.
Contrariwise it must needs be granted, that such as are beastly Epicures,
following their own fleshly mind, letting loose the raines, and giving the
swinge unto the raging lusts of the flesh, despising the knowledge of Gods
will, and therefore regard not his word, though with full mouth they call
Christ their king and their Lord; yet when God says here by his Apostle, that
the entrance into his kingdom is by this means, that men follow after virtue,
knowledge, and godliness: they show that they be none of his subjects,
being altogether void of his spirit, but the bondslaues of sin and Satan,
whose kingdom they uphold, with tooth and nail: and that makes them, even
as those which are of another corporation to fight against the truth, and those
which profess it: devising all the colors and shifts they can to maintain
sin, inuenting all the slanders that may be to discredit the godly
conversation of such as follow the way here prescribed: condemning them as over
precise and curious, if they do but look this way which God wills all his
servants to walk: if God do open their eyes, to see but even in a glimmering,
that which he does teach in this place, they would be ashamed of their master
and blush at that, which now they boast and brag of: they would also confess
that like blind buzzards and mad beasts, they have fought against God, and
not men: finally it would make them change their ways, and seek diligently to
have the witness within themselves, that they be the servants of God. We must
mark well one other thing which is here spoken, to wit, that he says, an
entrance shall be ministered unto you, abundantly or richly: as if he should
say, When ye have labored and traveled, to be as it were, well soked and
seasoned in godliness, and plentifully decked with all graces and gifts of
the spirit, ye shall by degrees proceed so far, and gain so much, that your
entrance into the kingdom of Christ, shall be very great: whereupon it does
follow, that they shall be past danger, and may well warrant themselves of sure
standing, in as much as Christ has not only begun to reign in them, and to be
their king, but also in great measure and mightily. But does he not add this
one word more then needs? Is it not enough to have an entrance, unless we
have a rich entrance into his kingdom? does Christ once begin to reign in a
man, and to drive out the power of Satan, and afterward cast him off again to
destruction? I answer, that this word is not added in vain, for we are taught
thereby to take heed that we content not our selves with some little taste and
small entrance: for his purpose is to make a difference between such on the one
part as make some beginning, and have some good desires and motions in them,
and do taste of the good word of God, and are in some sort lightened, but
overcome with sinful lusts and vain delights of the flesh, they slide back
again suddenly, they were but for a brunt, it brings forth no ripe fruit in
the^, neither to speak properly did Christ ever reign in them: and such on the
other part as proceed unto the deep rooting out of sin, and sure and fast
planting the truth in their hearts, going forward daily from grace to grace,
and from strength to strength, until Christ have set up his throne in them,
and bear sway, to the overthrow of the power of darkness, and bereauing the
devil of the interest he had, and thrusting him from the possession which he
held: a doctrine which must needs do us much good if we believe it: and very
needful to be urged instantly, considering the nature and disposition of men at
this day: they are afraid of going too far in virtue and knowledge, they
count it a needles thing to be admonished or taught diligently, they take great
scorn to be counted such as may be amended, yea, and that which is more, when
as they have not learned the first point of a christian scholar, they will
seem perfect: so far are they from having this abundant entering into the
kingdom of Christ. Learn here therefore, dearly beloved, and learn it well,
lay sure hold thereof that it do not slip from you, for God teaches us here
the only way to life and happiness: let go the vain dreams and doltish
opinions of people sotted in their ignorance, which are so far blinded by the
malice of Satan, that which way soever they go, still they are in hope of
eternal glory, as though the way to heaven were so broad that a man could not
go out of it, and the entrance so easy, that he may enter when he will: for
this is the divinity of our time; howsoever a man spend his time in ignorance,
not caring for, nor seeking after the true knowledge of god, howsoever he be
defiled with foul and beastly sins, that indeed there be nothing in him but
pride, selfloue, vainglory, envy, gluttony, the lusts of adultery, and such
like, yea, so far, that the scripture does liken him to a swine or a dog: yet
as if they say, he have God in his mind, and ca^ say, Lord have mercy upon me,
they think this is all that can be required of men, they will not stick to
acquit all such: being nothing at all acquainted with that, which God tells
in this place by his Apostle, how far men must proceed in his fear before
they can well warrant themselves to be in good case. For ye may as well join
heaven and hell together, fire and water will as soon agree, light and darkness
are as like one another, as the common faith is to that which we are taught in
this place. But I will return to apply this doctrine to the godly, for whom
it is written: how they may, as we use to say, make this thing dead sure: for
there is many a godly man, which after long travel, and much care to please
God, is yet so matched with stubborn nature, so deeply infected and poisoned
with sin, that he is compelled, although he have gained much and does feel
the power of Gods spirit in him, sometimes to be in doubt, and to think his
labor but lost, because he can not get so great a victory as he would feign:
let not this man be dismayed, but let him go forward, remembering what is here
promised: the more he wants the more let him strive, and he shall plainly
perceive, that God regards his care and travel, considers his sighs and
groans, and will perform all his desires: let him remember that these men
whom S. Peter wrote unto, had obtained the precious faith, did know and were
established in the present truth, and yet they were not so far but that they
may be moved to make their election sure, to seek a further entrance into the
kingdom of Christ: and so to continue that which was but begun. We ought the
more to be moved hereunto, because the world is ever full of fearful
examples, which if they were well considered, would make a man's hair to stand
upright, when he shall see that for want of this doctrine, or at the least the
not practicing of it, there be many which seem not only to have had some good
liking of the truth, but also a great zeal, even to suffer somewhat for the
same, which are become as cold as ice, and scarce any point of godliness left in
the^: yea though they would bear men in hand that they have (like good
scholars) proceeded to the highest form, yet when our great master shall
pose them, they shall not be allowed to sit in the lowest: so dangerous a thing
it is once to relent or slacken our care, until we have gotten this full
assurance, and made this rich entrance into the kingdom of Christ, that we
feel our selves to be led by the spirit of God, and feel it, not by the vain
conceit of our own foolish brain, nor by sensles security, but by the
working and fruits of the same spirit. If this were well weighed, men would not
content themselves with so little or nothing: they would not make so slight
account of teaching; they would leave off their slanderous and reproachful
railings; they would not like filthy swine wallow themselves still in the
filthy mire of their sins: they would not prattle so much of this, that al are
sinners, and therefore think all are alike, shuffling together one with
another: nay God will sunder them, for he has taught here who be godly and
faithful, such as he takes and accepts for his children: and who be
ungodly Infidels, children of the devil and heirs of hell. For in very deed,
though all be sinners, yet they greatly differ: for some continue in their
sins, seducing and deceiving themselves with vain hope of Gods mercy: some
do repent after the manner here prescribed them, which stands in this, that
they cleanse themselves more and more from all filthiness of the flesh, and grow
in all virtues and graces, until they be decked in their souls with heavenly
ornaments, and have yielded up themselves to have Christ reign in them. As for
the common repentance, to cry only with words for mercy, in some light
measure to be grieved, to fear the judgments of God, and yet the soul within
nothing changed, nor the spirit renewed, nor Christ reigning in the heart: it
does but deceive al which trust to it. Most true it is, that what time soever a
sinner does repent, he is forgiven: but this is as like to that repentance,
which is here by S. Peter described, as we say, an apple is to an oister: for
if we look well unto them both, we shall find the^ to agree but in very few
things, and those even the least. Let us I say, once again fasten our steps in
this way, let us go forward, and not so much as look back, until such time
as we have by our own experience, proved that to be true which is taught by
S. Peter. For it is not enough to believe that this is true (although that be
somewhat) unless we try it to be so by our selves. He is now a stark fool
which sees this to be the only way to happiness, and for sloth will not walk
in it: as though the kingdom of heaven were not worth the traveling for. We
may gather also in this place, if we be not senseless, how great enemies they
be to the salvation of men, which would utterly debar them of the word, that
is appointed to be the instrument by which God works all these good things in
his servants: for without that (as it may be easily gathered here) we can do
nothing. It does also appear, that those are in a miserable case, whose
office and duty is, not only to show me^ some part of Gods will, but to bring
them thus far as S. Peter does require, if they be not well furnished, and have
walked first this way themselves: for how shall they bring other me^, to that,
which themselves have not nor know not? It does appear also that God has
showed a sore judgment against that people, which have such a guide as can not
show them this way: which is the only way to heaven: for doubtless it is more
then if he should thunder upon them from heaven, or fire their houses over
their heads: especially when they are so blind, that they see not the plague,
but think themselves in better case then those whom God over rules by his
word. But woe be to those blind guides which do not feed; and wretched is that
people that want a shepherd. For how shall they ever hear of these things? We
ca^ but pity their misery, and desire the Lord to send redress, in so
lamentable and desperate a case: which is thought to be nothing, because in
deed the most men know nothing: for had they but known what God requires in
that man whom he will save, though they were not partakers of it themselves,
yet they would consent and agree to the doctrine: and confess that there is no
way to attain eternal life, but by so sound teaching as may bring people to
the things here required. But I will here make an end.

O Lord, grant that this doctrine which thou have taught us in this thy holy
word, may enter into us, and dwell in us for ever: that so we may be sure of
thy favor and of eternal life, through Jesus Christ thy dear son our Lord
and only Savior. Amen.

FINIS.
A godly, zealous, and profitable Sermon, upon the second Chapter of Saint
James.
The Text. verse. 14, 15, etc. 14 What avails it, my brethren, though a man
says he has faith, when he has no works, can that faith save him?

15 For if a brother or sister be naked and destitute of daily food,

16 And one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, warm your selves, and fill
your bellies: notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful
to the body, what helps it?

17 Even so the faith, if it have no works is dead in it self.

18 But some man might say, Thou have the faith, and I have works: show me thy
faith out of thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works.

19 Thou beleeuest that there is one God: thou do well: the devils also
believe it and tremble.

20 But will thou understand, O thou vain man, that the faith which is without
works, is dead?

21 Was not Abraham our Father justified through works, when he offered Isaac
his son upon the Altar?

22 See thou not that the faith wrought with his works? and through the
works was the faith made perfect.

23 And the Scripture was fulfilled, which says, Abraham believed God, and it
was imputed unto him for righteousness: and he was called the friend of God.

24 Ye see then how that of works a man is justified, and not of faith only.

25 Likewise also, was not Rahab the harlot justified through works, when she
had received the messengers, and sent them out another way?

26 For as the body without the spirit is dead, even so the faith without
works, is dead.


I Have chosen this portion of scripture to interpret, because there is very
great use and commodity in the true and right understanding thereof: and the
doctrine therein contained, is most necessary for all Christians to know.
First, because it does directly and fully overthrow and beat down all carnal
profession of the Gospel, showing that the common and dead faith cannot save a
man. Secondly, because it is the principal pillar which the Papists do lean
unto, and the chief place of Scripture which they do pervert and abuse, to
prove and establish Justification by works, and the merits of men, and to
overthrow the free Justification we have in our Lord Jesus Christ through
faith. The hold which they take in this point, is upon the speeches and phrases
which the Apostle does use: as when he says, Abraham our father was justified
through works. Also Rahab the Harlot was justified through works. Likewise ye
see that of works a man is justified, and not of faith only. Herein the two
Apostles of Christ, Saint Paul and Saint James, do seem to be flat contrary
the one to the other: for whereas Saint Paul says, Abraham was justified by
faith alone, and not by works; Saint James says, he was justified by works.
Saint Paul says, and proves by sundry and invincible reasons, that a man is
justified by faith alone without the works of the law. Saint James says, ye
see that a man is justified by works, and not by faith only. This contrariety
is but in appearance: for they both wrote by one spirit which is always like
himself, and always agrees with himself. The whole blame thereof is to
light upon us, that we are so dim sighted as not to see how these two
servants of GOD do iumpe and agree together without any jar at all. I think
it needful for this cause before I come to handle the words of the Text as
they lie in order, first to take away this show of discord: If any man will
demand, what cause there was which made them to appear in outward show so
contrary the one to the other? I answer, that, although there be no
contrariety in the matter it self which they teach: yet the diversity of the
scholars, which they lighted upon, and the contrary affection of those whom
they instructed, caused them to use a diverse and contrary order of teaching.

Saint Paul having to deal with such as would seek to be justified, partly by
faith in Christ, and partly by their own deeds, or the deeds of the Law,
uses this order: first, showing that we were lost and condemned in our selves:
then next justified and saved through the merits of Christ: afterward that we
are sanctified in him, and must show forth the fruits of our faith in a pure
and holy life. Saint James lighting upon another sort of men, which confessed
the free justification through faith in Christ, yet in this they were deceived,
that they did not consider, how all those that are justified, are sanctified,
how all those that are in christ Jesus, are new creatures, that they are newborn, and walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit: that the true
lively and justifying faith does bring forth the fruits of righteousness in
a holy conversation. Now because this cannot be removed or separated from the
right and lively faith: Saint James goes as it were backward and proves,
that where this latter, that is to say, the fruits of faith are wanting, there
faith is wanting, and so his drift is to show that all ungodly and carnal
professors of Christ, have but a dead faith, which in no respect is able for
to help or save them. A second cause why they seem so much to differ, is
herein, that men do not mark well how they handle, not the self same matter,
nor have not the same drift. For Saint Paul labors to prove, that the true
faith does join us to Christ, and thereby save us. Saint James here beats
upon this point, that the dead faith which is but a bare image of the right
faith cannot profit a man, this shall appear in the words of the Text: and
also a third cause is, that they do not take this word justified in the same
sense, but diversely, as it shall be proved afterward. Now will I come unto
the Text. What avails it my brethren, though a man (says he) has faith,
when he has no works, can the faith save him? This is his proposition, and
the matter which he will dispute upon in the whole text following, thus much it
is in effect, that it does not avail a man to say he has faith, nor it does
not profit him to boast and brag, and to make profession thereof, when he
has no good works, the reason is this, because it cannot save him: mark and
observe this well, for here at the first entrance, the blindness of the
Papists, and their folly, does manifestly bewray it self, when as they do
not see nor understand, that it is not the purpose of the Apostle in this
place, to dispute upon this point, whether the true faith does save and
justify or not: but to show that such as have not good works, have not the
true faith in them, and therefore whatsoever they profess, they cannot be
saved. For he does not propound his matter thus: what avails it though a man
have faith and have not works: but, What avails it though a man say, he
has faith, and has not works? Whereby it is very manifest, that when Saint
James does attibute the name of faith unto this dead image, he does it not in
proper, but in abusine speech, and after the manner of those men which called
it says, when as in very deed it is none, but only a certain resemblance
and shadow thereof. Thus much for this entrance and state of his disputation:
now follow his reasons by which he does prove, that this kind of faith
cannot avail or profit a man: for he does prcoue it very strongly and
pithelie. The first of them is taken from a comparison or similitude which he
sets down thus: If a brother or a sister be naked and destitute of daily
food, and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, warm your selves, and
sill your bellies: notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are
needful to the booie, what helps it? This is the sum of the matter: There
comes unto you a poor man or a poor woman which lacks clothes and
sustenance; you give them gentle and fair words, God help ye, God succor ye,
and send ye relief, but ye give them nothing: can this help the poor man,
or the poor woman? Shall they not for all your loving words sterue for cold
and dye for hunger, if every man should serve them so, and give them no other
alms? Why do ye not see then, that as this alms and liberality to the
poor, which is but in fair speeches, is cold, and does not help: so in like
manner the faith which is but in words and outward profession of speech,
although it be with never so great bragges, is dead: and then further why do
ye not understand that a thing which is weak and dead in it self, can by no
means have power to give life and to save? But observe it a little better,
thus the comparison stands: if that liberality which is only in words be
cold or dead, and does not profit the poor, nor make him a liberal man which
uses it, then it follows also, that that faith which is only in speech is
dead, and therefore cannot save or profit him which has it: if words only
could profit or cause it to be faith, why should not words also profit the
poor man or woman which is destitute? If words only can make a faithful man,
why should not words make a liberal man? If for a man to say he has faith, be
of that power to do the greatest things, as namely to couple us to Christ, to
raise the soul from death to life, to put the devil to flight, and to
overcome the world, should it not be able to do ye lesser, that is to say, so
far to prevail with us, and to have such power in us, as to bring forth good
works? Dear brethren, know that if it be alive and do the former, it must
needs do this: if it do not this latter, the^ surely it is dead, and can do
nothing to save us. This is a most plain and forcible reason to prove, that
the faith of a carnal and worldly Gospeller, is but a dead show of faith, and
therefore he is not justified nor saved, neither can be justified nor saved
thereby: seeing it has no life in it self to work and to bring forth
fruits, it cannot give life unto him: for how should it bring that which it
has not? To set it forth more plainly, thus the Apostle adds: but some man
might say, thou have the faith, and I have works, show me thy faith by thy
works, and I will show thee my faith by my works. He shows here, how every
simple man which is a true Christian may be able to deal against the greatest
and most skillful Doctor that is, to prove that he has no faith if he have
not good works: for when he says, Some man will say, it is as much, as if he
had said, any man may say, thou have faith, that is, thou make thy boast that
thou have faith, show it by thy works: because faith is an holy thing,
wrought by Gods spirit, and a lively and mighty thing, therefore it cannot be
without holy and good actions. For as a man is known to be dead, when he does
not breathe, cannot stir, see, hear, and such like; and contrariwise, when
he does any of these, he is known to be alive: even so is it with faith, if
it can or do bring forth no good works, then is it dead: on the contrary part,
the actions and stirring thereof, do show it to be alive. This is a strong
place against all those which do not only vaunt themselves of a vain and
dead belief, but also would leave no mark to know who are of God and who are
of the devil: Let a man take them tardie in any foul vice, wherein they
wallow, and say unto them, ye are out of the way, ye have not the true belief
in God, ye are covetous, ye are a worldling, ye are a drunkard, and an
adulterer, or such like, their answer is ready: Who made you able to judge?
can you tell how I believe? will you take upon you to see what is in my heart?
whatsoever you say, I have as good a belief as your self. Mark well now I
pray ye, for here ye may learn how to answer such sellowes: say thus unto
them, Faith indeed of it self is a secret thing in the heart, but yet because
it can no more be without good deeds, then fire can be without heat; the Lord
does bid us by his Apostle to say unto you, show me your faith by your
works, and when your tongue is foul and your deeds are wicked, most certain
it is that the heart is unclean, and there is no right faith: for that does
purge the heart, as S. Peter says, Act. 15. Look but upon men's words and
outward brags of their belief, and ye would think there were such plenty of
faith, that there could be almost no more, every man does so strongly believe
in Christ. But come to this touchstone and trial which is here given us, show
thy faith by thy works, and it shall by and by carry us so far on the other
side, when we see such floods of all horrible and beastly sins, that it will
cause us to think upon this saying: When the son of man comes, shall he
find faith upon the earth? For if this be true, as it is most true, because
God himself has set it down: that the faith which is without good works is
dead, and those are Infidels, which like bruit beasts care not but for the
things of this world, and make no conscience of committing all kind of evil
works? Do ye suppose that if the son of man should now come, that he should
find any great store of faith? Alas, alas, how many are the sinful deeds of
the most men, which show that they have no faith? How few are the good works,
and how weak even in the small remnant of the godly, which does declare how
poor and slender their faith is? But we must yet proceed further in this
matter, and as it were strike it a little deeper. As men are wily to deceive
themselves, so they will here yet find a hole to creep out at, although they
be never so wicked: for thus they will say. It is true, Gods word says, that
faith is showed forth by good works: well, I thank GOD, though I have many
vices in me, and am full of infirmities, yet I am not altogether without good
works: I am not so graceless, but at some times I remember GOD by prayer: I
do according to my ability give to the poor: I am ready to pleasure my
friend: do not these things sufficiently show that I have faith? Dearly
beloved, take heed, for here you may soon be deceived, it is not the meaning
of the Apostle when he says, show me thy faith by thy works, that a few
scattered scrappes of good deeds among great heaps of sinful works, and as
it were a few grains of corn in a great heap of chafe, should be a true
witness of the same. For it must be showed both in forsaking and renouncing
all evil ways, and also in following after all goodness: for it is without
all controversy, that those which seem to be good works before men, are not
so before GOD, in the man which is given over to commit sin: can that which
is good come out of the same heart, in which ungodliness reigns? Either make
the tree good (says Christ) and the fruit good, or else make the tree evil,
and the fruit evil: A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, Matt. 12.13
Luke 6.43.
neither can an evil tree bring forth good fruit. Can the same tree bring
forth both good fruit and evil fruit? Does a fountain at the same place
(says S. James) send forth both sweet and bitter water? James 3.11. 1. John
3.7.
Be not deceived (says Saint John) he that works righteousness is
righteous, he that commits sin is of the devil. Some man will say, does
not the most godly man that lives commit sin, and does not the good and the
bad come together from him? The godly are laden with the corruptions of the
flesh, but yet they do not commit sin, that is to say, they are not given
over, as ungodly men are, to the obedience of sin: they are spotted with
imperfections, but they do not take pleasure therein as the wicked do:
although they feel a lumpishnesse in them unto good works, yet their whole
race is applied unto good works: they would very feign obey their God on both
sides, that is to say, in forsaking all that is evil, and doing all that which
he commands them. Contrariwise, the fleshly Infidel does with all his heart
give up himself in the whole race of his life to that which is filthy; if he
do any thing which is good, it is but in show, being not done sincerely, nor
coming from a good root: but of self-love, vain glory, or such like; he
does not any thing for the Lords sake, but for his own. For love him, and ye
shall find him ready to do you good: cease that, and his goodness does dye.
Praise him, he will praise you again, discommend him, although he deserve it
never so much, ye shall not come in his books, be ye never so good. Forget not
this then I pray ye good brethren, when God has set down so plain a rule to
try our selves by, whether we be faithful or Infidels. If we find our
selves full of good works, and our heart does bear us witness that we do
them even for love toward God: well are we, this does declare our faith. But
if our evil deeds abound, and our heart be unclean, it is time to look about
us, we are in a most miserable case. I wish of GOD, that we might often
think upon this, and be careful to show our faith to the world, by our good
and pure life. Be not afraid to apply this to our selves, and also to deal
against the ungodly with it. For in this dissolute age, wherein iniquity has
almost gotten the upper hand, it is most necessary that we use this instrument
which God has put in our hands. Thou say thou beleeuest, show thy faith by
thy works.

Now follows another reason. Thou beleeuest there is one God: thou do
well: the devils also believe and tremble. Way this argument well, and ye shall
plainly perceive, that it does nothing at all help a man to say he has faith,
when he has no good deeds: if this kind of faith could save him, then should
the devils be saved also, because they have the same belief: but because it is
most certain, that the devils shall not thereby be saved, therefore it is
also as manifest, that those men who have no other belief, but that which they
have, cannot be saved. Let us see then how far the faith of Devils does go.
Thou beleeuest (says he) that there is one God, or that God is one, and so
thou think this a great matter, not to believe as the vain Gentiles, which
did think there were diverse gods, and indeed for so far thou do well:
but yet mark what a great matter thou have attained, the Devils do believe
the same, and yet have thereby no benefit or reconciliation with GOD, for they
tremble when they remember the terrible judgment seat and the everlasting
fire which is prepared for them. This faith of the devils is not to be
restrained to some one point, but stretches unto the whole doctrine of Faith.
They do steadfastly believe and know that Jesus Christ dyed for the sins of
the world: this is a sure reason that they know the doctrine of GOD, when they
seek to deface and overthrow it by contrary errors. When a man therefore is of
a sound judgment in the Scriptures for matters of faith, and is able to
confirm every point, and to overthrow the contrary errors: though many will
say, he is a sound man, and he takes himself to be as great a Gospeller as
any other, yet if he have no works, if his faith be not a lively
regenerating says, he may esteem of himself what he will, but the Lord
tells us that he is no more forward then the devils, they are as found in
the knowledge of truth as he. And if this common and general faith would
serve, they should be saved as well as he. But it may be here objected, that
there is great difference between the faith of Devils, and the faith of those
men which believe, and yet have no fruits of godliness in them. The Devils
indeed do believe all matters of faith to be true, but they do not nor can
not believe, that they pertain any thing at all to them, they have no hope of
mercy: but men although they be very sinful, yet they are in hope that they
shall be saved. Here is a great difference therefore, and the faith of such
men goes far beyond the faith of Devils. The Lord give us eyes to see, and
hearts to understand, for I will show that the difference is, That the faith of
the Devils is more perfect: For what is the cause that the Devils have no hope,
and the wicked men think they have hope? Is it because they have less faith?
Nay, it is because they are more wise, and because they give credit to that
which GOD has threatened against them. They believe that he will power out his
wrath upon them because he has said it: but the wicked men they are more
foolish, and where GOD has pronounced against them for their sins eternal
fire, they do not believe him, and so indeed their faith comes short of the
faith of Devils: they should believe the Lord when he tells them that all
those which do not turn from their ungodliness, when he calls them to
repentance, shall be cast into Hell. But they blind themselves, and will seem
to believe quite contrary unto that which GOD affirms: this is not to shut
the door to repentance, but to move men to seek for it, while GOD does offer
himself: for they shall not be able when they will. It is GOD which must
beget us to himself, and give us the new birth, and sanctify us by his
spirit, to bring forth the true fruits of faith, and not to have such a dead
belief which does change us, no more then the faith which the Diuelles have,
does change them. For there be very many at this day, who being stuffed as
full of wickedness as ever they can hold, and their words and deeds do
plainly show that they are no more changed then devils, which will so brag of
their faith, and the strength thereof, that if there should be but ten in the
whole Country saved, they hope to be of them: they never understood the
doctrine which ye Lord teaches in this place: God give us understanding that
we be not seduced, but that we may seek at the hands of Christ, to give us a
faith which may differ from that which the devils have. Here also shall appear
the ignorance of the Papists: They would bear men in hand, that Saint James
does speak of the same faith, which Saint Paul does, and that he plainly
affirms it does not alone justify. But see here as he said before, What
avails it if a man say he has faith and has no works, can that faith which
is but in words, or the dead faith save him? So now he tells more plainly,
what faith it is which he speaks of, which cannot help a man, even that
which the devil has. Is not that belief which S. Paul says does justify,
wrought by the holy Ghost? Shall we be so blasphemous as to say the Devils
are partakers of him? You may well perceive therefore that Saint James does
speak nothing against that which Saint Paul has proved, how Christ alone is
our righteousness, whom we take hold of only by Faith: for he does but
show that the dead picture of Faith does not save. Remember well then what
Faith is here spoken of, and the controversy is soon decided.

The Apostle now proceeds to his last reason, which because it is wonderful
strong, he uses as it were a certain Preface unto it, least we should pass
lightly over it, without due consideration. But will thou understand (says
he) O thou vain man, that the faith which is without works is dead? See how
vehemently he thundereth here against the carnal professor, calling him a
vain man, likewise will thou understand, can not those former reasons satisfy
thee, are they not strong enough to persuade thee, or plain enough to teach
thee? I will let thee see such a reason, that neither thou norall the world,
shall be able for to gainsay, it is so strong and so manifest, that it will
stop the mouths of all the cauillers: and force them to confess, will they
nill they, that the faith that is without works is dead. See how marueilously
the holy ghost does labor to drive us from trusting to this broken staff, and
to force us to seek after the true and right belief, if we have any care to
save our souls. And doubtless daily experience does teach us how needful a
thing this is. For the greatest number of professors think nothing less
needful then to seek increase of faith: they suppose and they will say, they
believe well enough, they feel no want at all, what should preaching do, they
can but believe. In very deed this dead faith of theirs, seems to them to be
very strong, it cannot be shaken, neither is it tried or tempted, for to what
purpose should the Devil much labor to overthrow it: but those which have
any faith indeed, do feel what need there is to use all means to strengthen
it. But let us come to the matter; he proves now by examples, that the true
faith is known by good works: the first example is of Abraham: thus it is to
be opened: ye know that Abraham was an holy man, and a right man indeed, he
was highly in favor with God, the covenant was made with him, that in his
seed all nations of the earth should be blessed: ye will then confess that
he had the right faith, there is no doubt at all in that. Likewise ye must
needs grant, that as there is but one God, one mediator, so there is but one
faith: whereupon it follows, that as many as have such a faith, or the same
faith which was in Abraham shall be saved, and none else: for although every one
of the children of Abraham do not attain to the same measure and strength
that their father did, Ephesians. 4.5. 1. Tim. 2.5.
yet they are like him, and have the same belief. Then I beseech you, observe
well the second part, wherein is declared how the faith of Abraham was
fruitful, and did declare and show forth it self by good works, Genesis 21.
for he offered his son Isaac upon the Altar. Whereupon it does also follow
that all his children and all the sons of God, do declare and show forth
their faith, by their good deeds. And whosoever they be which do not so, they
are degenerates and bastards, none of his children, nor yet partakers of any
blessing with him, for their faith is dead, and therefore they are not alive:
do you not see, dearly beloved, the marvelous force of this reason, and that
it is as clear as the sun? Here is no starting hole left for a man to hide
himself in, nor to creep out at, but he is holden fast to this, that if he
will be saved, he must so believe, that he declare and show forth to the world
by his good works an holy life, how he walks in the steps of his faithful
father Abraham. But why does he choose this one work of Abraham before all the
rest? For his life did shine with holy works, he was merciful to the poor,
he entertained and lodged strangers, he was peaceable with all men, just and
true in all his dealings: doubtless this did excel all the rest, and so far
pass them, that it may well enough be mentioned instead of them all, it did
declare a wonderful faith and love toward God, as we may easily see,
considering all the whole circumstances of the story. God has called him out
of his native country, and from his fathers house, into a strange land: he had
promised him a son by his wife Sara, of whom the blessed seed should come;
he performed this promise in his old age, even when Sara was by nature past
childbearing, Genesis 21.12.
he had no other child by her, the promise was made in none but in him. In
Isaac shall thy seed be blessed.

Each man shall now be driven to confess, that here was a great trial, when
God does bid him take his only son, even Isaac, and go three days journey
to the place which he would show him, and to offer him upon the altar a slain
sacrifice. How great a grief is it for a loving father to loose a son which
he loves dearly, especially when he has no more sons? then how much
grief might this be, not only to see his son slain, but also to slay him
with his own hands: and most of all that child, in whom the covenant of
eternal life was made, because Christ should come of him, who being dead, all
hope of salvation did die with him. All this did not withhold, but the faith of
Abraham carried so great a love in him and fear toward God, that he never
grudged at the matter, nor never made delay, but went indeed to have slain his
son, having bound him upon the wood, and having taken in his hand the
sacrificing knife, to kill him. Then the Angel of the Lord from heaven did
forbid him. Before the Lord it was as if it had been done, because Abraham did
fully purpose to do it: then we see plainly by this, what the true faith is.
But if any man should object and say, this example is not fit, every man can
not be like Abraham, nor have such a faith as he had, he was a rare man, few
or none to be compared with him: Saint James does answer, If ye think this
example to be too high, and that ye are not to be measured by it, I will show
you another as low: what say ye to Rahab the harlot, was not she justified by
works, did not her faith declare it self by good works? Can ye take any
exception against this example? Will ye not be ashamed that your faith should
not be like hers? As the faith of Abraham did utter it self to the world, so
did hers, whereby she showed her self to be a right daughter of Abraham,
although she were not of his posterity according to the flesh, but came of
one of those cursed nations, which God had commanded the children of Israel to
root out and destroy, yet I say, she was his daughter, according as Saint
Paul sets it forth in the Epistle to the Romans, that he should be the
father not only of them which are of the Circumcision, but also of those that
walk in the steps of the faith of our father Abraham: like as all his children
both of the Jews and Gentiles must do, which will be blessed with their
faithful father Abraham. Then we have here the example of the father of all
the faithful, with the example of one of his daughters, which had been a poor
harlot, what excuse remains, or what can we pretend, shall we not blush,
and be ashamed to say that we believe well, and take our selves to be the
children of Abraham and the children of God, when we are no more like him, then
(as the common saying is) an apple is like an oister? Christ our Savior does
use this reason against the Pharisees in the Gospel of Saint John, If ye were
Abraham's children (says he) ye would do the works of Abraham: but now you go
about to kill me, a man that has told you the truth which I have heard of
God: this did not Abraham. And a little after: Ye are of your father the
devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. What would ye have more
plain than this? Even the very seed and posterity of Abraham, which took
themselves to be the children of Abraham and the children of God, yet Christ
Jesus tells them plainly they are the children of the devil, and why?
Because their works were not like the works of Abraham, their belief was not
like his, but it was dead. Shall we not then as boldly say at this day, nay
rather, does not Christ speak as plainly as he did? and tells ungodly men to
their face, howsoever ye brag of your faith, it is but dead: and howsoever
ye boast and take your selves to be the children of God, yet in very deed,
unless ye return from your ungodly ways, and show forth the fruits of a
true and lively faith, ye are the children of the devil: trust not unto your
vain hope and dead faith, for it will but deceive you. Dearly beloved, let
us not be so mad, when God tells us this with his own mouth, as to believe
the contrary, and to persuade our selves we shall do well enough, although
we continue in our sins. This is a most pestilent craft of Satan, and
comes from the root of Infidelity, as ye may see in our great grandmother
Eve: God had told her and Adam, that what day soever they should eat of the
tree, they should die the death: the devil told her, ye shall not die, she
believed him, but believed not God, she thought even as the devil told her,
she should do well enough, or else she would never have eat thereof: we have
sucked this poison from her breasts: when God tells us, if your faith bring
not forth good works, it is dead, it can not help ye, if ye continue in
these wicked deeds, ye are the children of the devil ye must speedily
repent, for ye can not when ye would. No, no, says the devil on the other
side, that is not true, your faith is good enough, go on, ye shall do well,
God has mercy in store, ye may repent afterward. Now the most does believe
the devil in this, and give no credit at all unto God, and never seek to try
themselves, whether they be in good case or not.

When the Apostle says here, that Abraham was justified by works, and that
Rahab was justified by works, etc. We must note that this word Justified is
taken diverse ways in the scriptures, which is one cause (as I noted before)
why Saint Paul and Saint James seem to be contrary; Saint Paul proouing that
we are justified by faith, takes it as contrary to this word condemned, for
being by our sins guilty, and to receive the sentence of condemnation, we
are in Christ (into whose mystical body we are incorporate thorough faith)
acquit and discharged, which is called justification: this cannot be by the
works of the law, because there is no perfection in the deeds of any, but
even the most pure are unclean and spotted. Therefore as Saint Paul says,
they are all under the curse, which hold of the works of the law: for it is
written, Cursed is every one which continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the law to do them. The reason of this is to be
considered in the most holy and pure nature of God, unto whom no unclean
thing can be coupled, no vnpure thing (although it be but in part) can abide
his presence, or have fellowship with him.

The word Justify, is also taken in this sense, as when a man does declare and
show forth before men, that he is a righteous person also before God: and
that is the meaning of the word in this place, that look how by faith we are
justified before God: so by the fruits of our faith, we are justified, that
is, declared to be just before men.

For proof that the Scripture does use the word Justified in this fense,
look upon the saying of David. That thou may be justified in thy saying,
and pure when thou iudgest: there it can signify no more but that God might
show and declare himself to be just. In the Gospel of Saint Luke chap. 16.
verse. 15. You are they (says Christ to the Pharisees) which justify your
selves before men, but God does know your hearts. In this saying it is most
apparent, that there is a justifying before men, which the Pharisees in
colored hypocrisy did seek for; but Christ tells them, they were never the
better, because they were not of upright heart before God. The word is also
taken in another sense, which I omit. If any man will now demand how it can be
proved, that Saint James does use it in this latter sense rather then in the
former? I answer, that the very place it self, and go no further, does
declare this thing: for when the Apostle says thus, Some man will say, show me
thy faith by thy works, is it not apparent, that he speaks of that which is
before men or declared unto men, and not of that which is before God? In like
manner, when he says, Abraham was justified by works, when he offered his
son Isaac upon the altar. Does not the scripture show, that before God
Abraham was justified long before by faith? If it be objected again, that it
may also be said, how he was before that time justified before men, or that
he had showed by his deeds unto men, that he did fear and love God, and then
what should hinder but that it may be taken for a more full and perfect
justification, or an increase thereof, as well before God as before men? I
answer, that before God a man being justified, to speak properly there is no
increase thereof, for he is fully and wholly discharged and acquit, or else it
is no justification. But because we have received the grace of justification
but in part and not in full measure, therefore our justifying before men is
more and more declared by degrees, as good works do more and more abound in
us, and so Abraham was by this one work more justified before men, then by all
the rest of his deeds, and therefore it may well be set down in stead of all
the rest We see here then that because by the scriptures this must needs be
taken for an increase of justification in our father Abraham, that it must
necessarily be understood of that justification which is before men: ye see now
the meaning of this text and the drift and scope of the Apostle is laid open
unto ye, but my chief purpose is yet behind, and that wherein we are to be
wrought upon yet remains, which is a more particular application and handling
of this doctrine. For we must not pass away thus with the matter, unless we
mind to take small fruit thereby.

Ye will confess these things which I have handled to be true, as of
necessity we are forced thereunto, we can not but grant that the holy Ghost
has given a perfect touchstone: then am I to exhort you in the name of God,
and as ye tender and love the salvation of your souls, to give attentive heed
a little, and not to let this thing slip away from ye: Do ye grant that the
faith which is without works is dead? and that it is no better then the faith
of devils? And yet will ye still suppose, that idolators, swearers, railers,
adulterers, covetous worldlings, and griping usurers, and such like are in good
case, or continuing such, can hope for mercy? Do ye confess that there is
but one true faith, which was the faith of Abraham and Rahab? Do ye also
acknowledge that the same faith in them did show it self by good deeds? And
will ye still accept it for a sufficient proof of a good and sound testimony
of a true belief, when any man can say, I do hurt no man, I live uprightly,
and pay every man his own, I have always been reputed and taken for an
honest man, what would ye require more of me, I live as my neighbors do, I
trust God will hold me excused, although he have no regard of any obedience to
the word of God, to consider wherein his glory does consist, nor yet any care
of men, to profit either their souls or their bodies: but contenteth himself
with this, if he do them no good, to do them no harm.

I will show you dearly beloved, how these sorts of people are declued by two
foul errors, which this text does most strongly overthrow: the first is this,
that they look but unto men, and restrain their duty unto them, whereas they
should chiefly look unto that which they owe unto God, and then to that
which belongs to their breethren: the second is, that they suppose themselves
bound no further but to abstain from hurting, without regard of doing the
duties of love, wherein one man is to profit and further another.

As concerning the first of these, both the example of Abraham, and also of
Rahab, do manifestly convince them, because the fruits of their faith or the
works whereby they were justified, did not so much respect man as God, for in
Abraham there appears only a love toward God, for whose sake he was
contented to forget the affection of a father, and to show that although he
loved Isaac dearly, yet he loved God more: so that if we feel our love to the
Lord our god, to be so small that it can not prevail with us, to kill and
mortify the lusts of sin, and vain pleasures of the flesh: how shall we
persuade our selves that we are like Abraham, which had denied the love of
himself so far, that he did never grudge, but would willingly have killed
his son: Rahab after she had made confession what she did believe concerning
the God of Israel, for the same Gods sake, for the true religion, and for the
Church and people of God, took the messengers and did hide them, to the hazard
of her life and all that she had, affirming to the king when he sent to seek
them, that they were departed. Does not this improoue the faith of those which
for the religion of GOD are so far off from hazarding their lives and goods,
that they dare not be seen when never so little danger does arise? wherein are
those like unto Rahab, which will turn with every wind? and a man can not
tell what religion they be of: they will be sure to row with the tide, and
never to strive against the stream: do such now justify them selves like
Rahab? have they such a faith as she had? No dearly beloved, they are as yet
very infidels, and love them selves and the world, more then they love GOD
and his truth: this thing then is most evident, that the true belief does make
all those that have it, ready and willing to lose their lives and their goods
for the Gospel: this must not seem to be a strange doctrine, when as our
Savior tells us in sundry places, that he that does not forsake all, and
take up his cross and follow him, can not be his disciple. Well, we must
therefore be so hot and zealous in the profession of true religion, that it
cause us to forget our own state and commodity: we must have so burning a
love to Gods truth, that nothing may be able to quench the same. We must not
stagger and vary, because we shall endure trouble. Let us conclude this
point, wherein it is proved that they err and are deceived, which do not make
account of keeping religion pure, of loving it before all other things, and so
of giving to God his due honor. Remember that from hence ye are to fetch the
first part of the true description of a godly man, and the trial of the
justifying faith which is but one, and therefore works alike in all which are
partakers of it, though not in the like measure, and withal mark how far
the holy ghost does differ in setting forth a righteous man from the common
manner of worldlings, whereas he takes it to be the chief work which
respects God himself and his truth: they pass over that, and count it no
matter though a man be an idolater, or superstitious, or a swearer, which does
not reverence the name of God, so that he be a friendly man to his friend, and
such like, how great an enemy he be to the word of God, it skilleth not:
these are bruit beasts without understanding, very Atheistes, which will say
plainly they can see no difference between the papists and the professors of
the gospel: both because they are not able to judge of doctrine, and also that
they look but unto men. Now let us come to the second thing wherein they err,
and which this text does confute sharply: they suppose (as I told ye) that men
are to have no further regard but to this, not to hurt, passing by all those
duties, wherein they are to do good unto their brethren, not duly considering
how the law of God does not only bind us to abstain from hurting our
neighbor, but also does most straigtly tie us to do all good deeds unto them:
so that he is guilty before God, not only which commits that which the law
forbids, but also which leaves the thing undone which the law inioyneth.
Now then because the true faith brings us to have care to obey God wholly.
Saint lames requires that a man should show his faith, not only by leaving
that which is evil, but also by the perfourmance of that which is good: for
thus he says, Show me thy faith by thy deeds: and that faith which is without
works is dead. Here by the way observe by comparison, how far off are those
from grace, which swarm full of unclean vices, and their whole race is
nothing but a continual sinning: whereas this is evidently here proved, that
such men as carry a great show of vprightnes, in refraining from sundry
vices, are still without testimony of true belief, because their holy deeds
do not appear, for when as the holy scriptures do testify, that the heart
is purified by faith, that those are borne again in the new and spiritual
birth, that they are new creatures, and have a new heart, and a right spirit,
created and renewed in them, it must needs be that they are prepared unto every
good work, they have not only put off the old man with his corrupt lusts,
but have also put on the new man, which is created in righteousness and true
holiness: and as they have walked in darkness, so now they walk in the light.
There is one step yet further in this matter, I trust that as ye will confess
this, That if those do not believe well which have no good works to show,
although they be in some things upright, and much more the foul and filthy
livers which dishonor God and his truth: so ye will also be brought to see,
that those miserable men are yet further off, which bark against this holy
doctrine, and can not abide that a man should say to the wicked and ungodly,
thou art in the way to hell, thou shall die the death, if thou return not from
these evils. They may thunder and rail against men, and say they utter
damnation: but let them look if they can quench the light which the holy ghost
has given in this text. Let us return to the former matter again. We must
not only abstain from evil, but also do good: there be many likewise deceived
in their doing good, restraining it to the baser and lesser part: they look
but unto the bodies of their brethren, and suppose they are to have no further
regard but of them, to relieve and ease the miseries of the flesh, let the
soul be never so blind, never so sick, in never so great danger of eternal
destruction, they have no pity of that, which does bewray that they see no
further then this life, they have no true love nor pity in them, for then
would they love the souls of men, which are so precious, they would pity the
woeful misery that they be in. For how absurd a thing is this, that one should
be careful to case the calamity which lasts but for a day, and not respect
that which is eternal? I must therefore here again admonish ye, that such as
will have proof of their faith by good works, must exercise the same as well
to the souls as to the bodies of men, and because therein does stand the
greatest love of all other, they are therein to show themselves most earnest.
There is no more excellent note of faith, and of the true fear and love of
God, then when a man is grieved, and mourns to see men out of the way to
life, running headlong in their sins unto destruction, and when as he does in
love and pity admonish them, and seek by instruction to draw them out of the
snares of the devil. On the contrary side, he can never say he has any
drop of grace, which delights and sporteth himself, at the lewd and
wanton behavior of other men. Judge dear brethren these Cockbraines, which
can not be merry, but at the sinful and profane speeches of vain men: do
they show the fruits of faith? Those abominable beasts, which delight to make
men dronk, to the intent they may laugh: are they of GOD, or of the devil? We
must diligently exercise the contrary, laboring to draw one another to God:
and to convert their souls which go astray: which is the special and chief
good work that we can do unto men. To feed the hungry, to clothe the naked,
to visit the sick, and those which are in bonds, to open as it were the bowels
of mercy and compassion to all that are in misery, are very excellent and
glorious fruits of faith, and have great promises of reward in the holy
Scriptures; yet are they not comparable to these, when the soul is sick in
prison, and in the chains of Satan, to visit and relieve it. When it is pining
away for want of heavenly food, to minister unto it: when it is full of
grievous sores and deadly wounds, to give wholesome medicines and salues unto
it, to mourn with the bowels of pity and compassion for it. From hence it
arises that all true faithful hearts do sobbe and groan with sorrow, when
they see men left without instruction and when they behold the desolations and
ruins of the Church, it does pinch them even at the heart, it causes bitter
tears to flow out of their eyes, when they behold any famine and death of the
food of life: and when they see them run from sea to sea, and from the one
end of the land to the other to seek for it. When they see the young man and
the beautiful virgin perish for thirst, he that shall deny this, or stand in
doubt thereof, never knew as yet what the use and benefit of the word is, nor
yet what that love in the spirit is, which the Lord commends unto us. I might
here stand long in particulars, to show the cruelty of those parents, which
suffer their children to be without the knowledge of God, and to perish in
their sins. For one of the chief fruits of their faith does stand in this
which the Apostle commands. Ephe. 6.4.
Fathers provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them up in the nurture
and instruction of the Lord. For those which have the riches and wealth of the
world, the holy Ghost faith: 1. Ioh. 3.17.
He that has this worlds good, and sees his brother stand in need, and
shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? If
this be true, that the rich men of the world do not love GOD when they will
not part with their riches, to relieve that miserable carcass of their
brethren: then doubtless it is a more strong argument against them, when as so
many souls perish, for want of good and pure instruction, which by their
wealth they might procure, if they did not make more account of their riches,
then of the salvation of men. Gods word pronounces them blessed, which employ
their goods to feed the poor: then how much more blessed a thing is it when
they are employed to the ministering of spiritual food, which never perishes?
But let us come to those which have the charge of souls, what is the
principal good work, which they are to show their faith by: and wherein they
are to declare their love toward Christ and his Church. John 21.15
Simon Ioanna love thou me? Feed my sheep, feed my Lambs, feed my
sheep. When as therefore the hireling, the idle drone, and the idol shepherd
have the flock of the sheep and lambs of Christ, and do not feed them, or
at the least do so feed them, that they are never the better: where is the
faith which they boast of? is it any other then the dead faith and the faith of
Devils? Whosoever therefore will have the testimony of his faith in this
calling, he must execute the office as the Scripture binds him. Is it
possible that he can give credit to the word of God, and be of a right
belief, and not regard this? The rest of his good deeds, whereby some man
will say he does show his faith, are no good deeds: for if he did them of
love toward God and his brethren, would he not then do that, wherein his
love to both should most of all show it self? Can he love God, and hate God?
Can he love men, and hate men? Or can he love God, and not regard to do his
will? Or can he love men, and not care for the salvation of their souls? O my
brethren, who cannot say to such a man, Show me thy faith by thy works? Who
will be so blind as to think such are in good case?

I will now draw toward an end, only by this place exhorting every man while
GOD gives him time and ability, to give himself to the exercise of good
works, and the service of God. And dear brethren, what should make us so
slack, considering how short our time is, and how great reasons there are to
persuade us: as first to begin with that, which is taught in this place: Is it
not a marvelous blessing to have the witness of our faith? Is it not a
miserable curse, to be without the true peace of conscience, and to abide still
in doubt? Does not God promise us also, although we can deserve nothing, but
when we have done all that we can, we are still unprofitable servants, that
all our good works shall be rewarded, Mat. 10.42. Luke 12.33.
even to a cup of cold water, which is given for his sake? Make ye bags
which never wax old, or treasure which never fails in heaven, etc. Shall
not the promise of reward move us? Go further, how dear and precious ought
the name of our God to be unto us? how much ought it to delight us to hear it
magnified? how much ought we to abhor to see it stained and dishonored? Is
not his name honored, when those which call upon him, are fruitful in good
works? John 15.8.
Herein says Christ, is my Father glorified, that ye go and bring forth much
fruit. Also he says, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see
your good works, Matt. 5.16.
and glorify your father which is in heaven. Is not Gods name dishonored by
the evil conversation of those which profess his word? Says not Saint Paul,
Romans 2.24.
The name of God is evil spoken of, through you, among the heathen? Ought not
the Gospel to be dear unto us? Is it not in the mouth of the greatest number
of worldlings, when they see the evil deeds of professors? Lo, these are
your Gospellers, here is their holy doctrine, these are they which hunt after
Sermons, ye may see what they are, and what their teaching is, they have as
few good works as other men, they are all in words. O wretches, shall not
these things move us to let the world see our faith and love toward God, by
our good works? Likewise, is there any greater love which can be showed
toward men, then when they shall be moved by our good deeds, to glorify God
in the day of their visitation, when our godly dealing shall cause them to
confess that it is an holy religion which we profess, and so give ear and
join themselves unto the same? O happy man which by his holy life is a mean
to draw others from their evil ways, and to bring them to be scholars in
the same school that he is. Contrariwise, what a woeful and miserable wretch
is that which slaundereth and dishonors the holy word by his sinful life,
which drives other from it, and so thrusts them on headlong to destruction.
Ovncharitable man, shall not the blood of such in some sort be laid to thy
charge, when thou driuest them from the Lord and his truth, as much as lies
in thee, and driuest them headlong to destruction. I might proceed to many
particulars, but then I should be over tedious. The Lord plant these things in
our hearts, and give us grace to continue in all goodness to our lives end,
to his glory, and our eternal comfort. Amen.

FINIS.
A Sermon on the third Chapter of Saint James.
The Text. verse. 1, 2, 3, etc. 1 Be not many masters, my brethren, knowing that
we shall receive the greater condemnation.

2 For in many things we sin all. If any man sin not in word, he is a
perfect man, and able to bridle the whole body.

3 Behold, we put bits into the horses mouths, that they should obey us, and
we turn about all their body.

4 Behold also the ships, which though they be so great, and are driven of
fierce winds, yet are they turned about with a very small rudder, whither
soever the governor lists.

5 Even so the tongue is a little member, and boasts of great things. Behold
how great a thing a little fire kindles.

6 And the tongue is fire, yea a world of wickedness: so is the tongue set
among our members that it defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the
course of nature, and is it self set on fire of hell.

7 For the whole nature of wild beasts, and of birds, and of creeping things,
and of things of the sea is tamed, and has been tamed of the nature of man.

8 But the tongue can no man tame, it is an unruly evil full of deadly
poison.

9 Therewith bless we God even the father, and therewith curse we men, which
are made after the image of God.

10 Out of one mouth proceeds blessing and cursing: my brethren, these things
ought not so to be.

11 Does a fountain send forth at one place sweet water and bitter?

12 Can the fig tree, my brethren, bring forth olives either a vine figs?
so can no fountain make both salt water and sweet.


THis portion of holy Scripture, beloved in the Lord, contains in it two
things. The one of them is a precept against rigorous judging of our brethren:
the other is for the ordering and guiding of the tongue in general. Men offend
generally and commonly in them both, and the offenses therein committed be not
light, but very heinous in the sight of God. As touching the former, how
heinous it is it appears in this, that he says, knowing that we shall
receive the greater condemnation. The heinousness of the offenses committed in
the other is manifest by the very speeches of the Apostle, by which he sets
forth the poison of the tongue. And in the first chapter of this Epistle,
verse. 26. he says, If any man among you seem to be religious and bridleth
not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, that man's religion is vain.
Heerby then it is evident that the matters be of great importance, and such as
it stands us nearly upon to be well instructed in: and therefore I pray you
let us hearken attentively to the voice of our God, and make conscience to obey
the same: for that is requisite also unless we will deceive our selves, as he
speaks in the first chapter, touching such as be hearers of the word only,
and not doers. And doubtless he that shall look upon the profession of the
Gospel, which is at this day among men, and withal consider how common the
vices of the tongue be, and what the Lord here pronounces against them, it
will even abash and astonish him, for he shall be even forced to think that
there is scarce any true religion to be found among men, seeing there be so few
which are not rigorous Judges; and scarce any that do bridle their tongue.

But let us come to the words of the Text. Be not many masters, my brethren,
knowing we shall receive the greater condemnation: for in many things we
sin all. Here be three branches in this: the first is the precept, Be not
many masters, my brethren. The second is a threatening of terrible vengeance,
if we do not eschew that vice, which is in these words, Knowing that we shall
receive the greater condemnation. The third, renders a reason both why men
should not be rigorous and seucre in judging their brethren, and also that if
they be, their judgment shall be the heavier before God, in these words, For
in many things we sin all.

Now to the first branch, which is the precept, Be not many masters. Saint
lames speaks somewhat darkly in this, because Master, or masters, is a word
of office in the Scriptures. Christ is called so, and rightly, for he is the
great master. Ye call me, says he to his Apostles, Ioh 13. verse. 13. Ho
didaskalos, master and Lord, and ye say right, I am so: And Saint Paul says,
that Christ has some Apostles, some prophets, some Evangelists, some pastors
and Didaskalous, that is Doctors, teachers, or as we translate it here in Saint
James, Masters. The word does cause some to take it that he means here the
public office of teachers, and especially because he says, be not many
masters: for in that he says, be not many, it seems that he allows the
Mastership which he here speaks of, in some few: otherwise, why does he
not say (if he speak of a thing, which is simply a vice in it self) My
brethren, let no man be a master? And so they take it, that he reprooueth that
great vice, when men are so ready to thrust themselves into the Ministry,
which they should not do so rashly, being indeed unfit. This carries a color
in it to lead us to take the precept of the Apostle here, as that he wills
us that many should not enter into the public office of Doctors, seeing God
gives gifts but to a few, to be able to discharge it well. But indeed he
does not here deal with that public mastership, but with a vice wherein each
man takes upon him to be a severe censurer, a judge and a condemner of others,
for in this men take upon them to be masters. If it shall be objected, that
then the holy Apostle might more plainly have said, Let no man be a master,
seeing no man may be a severe and rigorous condemner of others: I answer, that
he applies his speech according to the sin which he reproves for almost all
take upon the^ to be masters, and imperiously to judge and controwle all
others. As in the diseases of the body, if a man have an infirmity, he shall
find many Physicians: for almost all men and women will have some one medicine
or other to prescribe, and not knowing the complexion or constitution of the
body or from what manner of cause the disease grows, though sometimes they
hit right, yet often they miss, and so hurt. If one should speak and say, let
there not be many Physicians, it must be taken against all such unskillful
ministering of Physic. And so here when he says, Be not many masters, he
both notes the vice to be common, reprooueth it that there be many severe and
rigorous condemners of their brethren. As if he should say, Let not this fault
remain, that there be so many masters: not (by saying, many) allowing it in
any one, for it is the fault which our Savior forbids, Matthew. 7. verse. 1.2.
Men are naturally given to be sharp sighted and curious about other men's
faults: yea they will pronounce very hardly and rigorously of them. Moreover
they do not only judge small faults to be heinous offenses in others: but also
deprave and take in evil part that often times, which is well done, or which
may be well construed: especially where there is entered an opinion or conceit
of great knowledge above others. As we see it is almost the whole religion of
many to deprave and to epsy faults even in the best men, and therein they
glory much, and seem thereby to be great masters excelling al others. For such
as do sharply find faults, do highly please themselves as men in a more
perfect estate. Of these it is written, Prou. 30. verse. 12. There is a
generation which is clean in their own eyes, which are not washed from their
filthiness. These are become so great masters, that they disdain to be taught
by any: they be masters, they be disciples no longer. If a man do not please
them, and as it were even fit their humor in every small quillitie, all that
he does, be he never so excellent, is with them nothing worth. Against this
uncharitable and vnbrotherlie severity, the threatening is added, Knowing that
we shall receive the greater damnation. This shows how highly God is
displeased with that kind of men, against whom there is so heavy judgment
threatened. It is to this purpose to terrify men from so foul a sin, in
which they do please themselves as in a special virtue. For they go
oftentimes away with it, as it were a zeal of godliness against sin. It
teaches also on the contrary, how much it pleases God, that we judge of the
frailties of our brethren with charity, with pity and compassion, and with
that spirit of meeknes which the Apostle requires, Galath. 6. ver. 1. The
reason of both these does appear in the words following in the third branch,
For in many things we sin all. For first it follows upon their own
judgment which they give so rigorously against their brethren, that the
judgment of God is just against them, having the same faults or as great, yea
often times greater, as our Savior sets it forth, How see thou a mote in
thy brothers eye, and beholdest not the beam that is in thine own ete? Mat. 7.
This being the state of rigorous carpers at the faults of others, that small
things amiss they epsy in their brethren, and condemn the same with rigor,
when as they have in themselves foul offenses, which they spare, they cover
and they mittigate with excuses: shall not the judgment of God be just and
severe against them? About this matter S. Paul reasons thus, Thou art
therefore inexcusable O man, whosoever thou art, that iudgest another, for in
that thou iudgest another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou do the same
things which condemnest others. Now we know that the judgment of God is
according to truth against those which do such things. Do thou think
this, O man, which iudgest those which do such things, and do them, that
thou shall escape the judgment of God? Romans 2.1.2.3. We might reason thus, If
I a sinful and corrupt man do condemn others as evil men not worthy to be
spared, for such and such sins which they commit, then how shall I escape the
judgment of the most just and righteous God, seeing I am also guilty? We
shall sometimes hear some that profess the gospel, swear some small oath, a
fault indeed to be condemned, and a fault over common: for the holy seripture
is plain, Swear not at all. Now some that refrain swearing, will be so
rigorous, and uncharitable and so severe in judging the party for this, as to
be void of all religion and fear of God, when as in the mean time they do not
see a vaineglorie, a self-love, a bitter wrath and anger which in themselves,
if it be moved, is as hot as fire, with sundry other foul sins. If motes
(as our Savior calls the smaller frailties and faults in men) be judged by
us so severely: the^ how shall such foul and loathsome sins in the iudgers
escape the sentence of God? now the^ as this proves that he which is a
rigorous judge against his brother, cannot escape the severity of gods
judgment, because he is also guilty in the things for which he conde^neth
another, so may it also mitigate our severity, it may move us unto a
moderation in our sentence which we are so ready to give of others, when we see
them slip. For thus it should be in our mind: beholding my self I see that I
sin in many things, I am full of imperfections, I would have the Lord to show
mercy and pity toward me: I would not have men rigorously to judge of me,
but with charity and compassion. And shall I not then when I see my brethren
in the same case be favorable toward them? would I find mercy at the hands
of God? or would I have men charitable toward me? And yet without mercy,
charity, or compassion I judge them rigorously, being but in the same estate
and condition that I my self am in? Judge in your selves brethren, is it not
equal, when as in many things we sin all, that if we would have mercy and
compassion showed toward us, that we should then lay aside rigor and show
mercy and compassion toward our brethren which are weak and frail, and
subject unto manifold temptations even as we be. What a perverseness is this,
that I should think my self worthy to be pitied, and not others? I would
have all men deal charitablie toward me, and I again to show no charity. I
may touch others at my pleasure: but if any touch me, it may not be endured.
As look upon these great masters which S. James does speak of, that carpe
daily at the faults of others, and you shall see that when they have whipped
other men with the scourge of the tongue, and pierced them through as with a
sword, if any do but touch them but even as it were with the prick of a pin,
how they startle and how they call for charity: they feel not that which they
do unto their brethren, when they make small faults to be heinous offenses, yea
when they peruersly deprave that which is well done, it is very light: but if
any speak a word against some fault of theirs, the case is altered, it is sore
injury; if it be a fault, yet they ought to deal charitablie. Heerby it does
appear what an high price men do set themselves at, and how basely they do
esteem of all others. Other men (because of their sins) be stark naught, not
to be regarded nor pitied: we having the same sins, or as great are still
very precious. Thus may we see how far men are a wry from that which they ought
to be. The Lord calls us from it, and it is our duty, if we will be wise, to
seek to be cured of so grievous a disease. A right precious and an acceptable
thing it is to God, when we can so consider and judge of our selves among
others, as that we value our selves with them as poor sinners to be pitied,
and so become pitiful also and full of mercy toward them. For that is it
which the Lord says by the prophet. I will have mercy and not sacrifice. Osee.
6.7 But here we must beware that it be charity and mercy which we show
toward our brethren, and not an irreligious cloking of sin, or soothing men
up in evil. For many under pretense of this, that we are commanded not to
judge, will have no faults to be reproved, but every man have to do only
with himself, and let others alone. This is a bad collection, this is
contrary to the doctrine of the holy Scriptures, which wills us to admonish
one another. Mat. 18. verse. 15. It is contrary to the rule of charity as it is
written, Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but thou shall plainly
rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin, Leuit. 19. verse. 17. And our
Savior Christ when he says, Judge not, does not will us that we should not
admonish and reprove our brethren for their faults. so we do it rightly.
For he does not say. What have thou to do with the moate that is in thy
brothers eye, or why medlest thou with the faults of others? but cast first
the beam out of thine own eye, and then may thou see clearly to cast the
moat out of thy brothers eye. Here is the matter, if we will be right
reformers, we must first begin with our selves. For shall we be fit to teach
others that teach not our selves? What good mind can it come from? Can a man
be rightly careful that another should be godly and saved, and not care for
godliness and salvation in himself? Can he pity the souls of other men,
which pitieth not his own? Again, what a rebuking is that, when he is so
severe and rigorous against others small offenses, and spares his own great
sins? Wherefore we may perceive a great difference between that Christian
and charitable admonishing and rebuking which the Scripture commands, and
that rigorous judging which it forbids. For touching the one, he that is
truly reformed feeling the grace, the mercy and the love of God, he is moved
with mercy and compassion toward others, and wishes their reformation to
their good. This causes him to look into the faults of his neighbor whom he
loves and wishes well unto: and when he does amiss, he tells him friendly
of it. Who can say that such a reproouing is to be misliked? Nay, we are all of
us to thank God highly when he gives us such a friend as will so put us in
mind of our duty: for we can see other men's faults, and other men can epsy
our offenses more clearly than we our selves. In worldly matters men are
very willingly found fault withal: and taught wherein they have erred, so
they see that there come profit unto them or gain thereby And shall we not be
as willing to have that told us, which may benefit our souls? But now for
those masters which S. James speaks of, their doing is nothing like. They are
not reformed themselves, they find not fault of love. They do epsy faults,
they judge severely of them, they carp, they object: but not of pity or
compassion, not respecting the good of those whom they so judge: but to
diffame, to discredit, and to bring into contempt. Is it not (think you) a
very strange thing, that these men void of charity, and full of great sins,
should bear themselves in hand of a more perfect estate then is in others, and
take upon them a mastership, so severely to judge, even because they can epsy
faults? Marvel not, beloved, that the scripture does so thunder against this
kind of people: for their doing is abominable. True it is, that a wise man,
when any of these masters spreads reports of his faults (if any frailties or
imperfections do break from him) or when they vpbraid him with the same to
his face, is to make his profit thereby, and not so much to consider with what
mind they do it, as how true it is, and to amend it. For I say if we be wise,
we may make great use of the hard speeches of uncharitable reproouers: for by
them oftentimes we hear of some imperfections which our friends are blind in,
or at the least are over favorable and will not deal plainly with us. Yea
and it causes us also to be somewhat the more circumspect and wary in our
doings, when such severe judges do observe us narrowly. Thus much touching
the first part of this scripture.

The second now follows, which is for the ordering and guiding of the
tongue. And this has two parts: the former part sets forth how the
ordering of the tongue well carries such a force with it, though it be but a
little member, that all is well ordered when it is right. And to set forth
this there be two similitudes used, which are of small things that yet direct
and order great things. As the bitte of a bridle is but a small thing, and the
rudder of a ship. The second part declares the wonderful and exceeding power
that the tongue has, when it is not well ordered, unto all mischief. Where
also, least it might seem strange that so infinite evil should proceed from so
small a thing, he uses a similitude from a spark of fire, from which a great
matter is set on flame. Further he shows by the comparison of the nature of
ye most wild and cruel things, what an horrible unruly evil the tongue is,
doing that which is monstrous and as it were against al course of nature. But I
will come to the words as they lie.

If any man sin not in word, be is a perfect man, and able to bridle the whole
body. In this proposition, which is, as they say, hypotheticall, he shows
that he which is able to rule and does rule, his tongue so that he does not
offend with it, he is perfect, and does bridle and order well the whole body.
For where that little member goes right al goes right. But does not the
Apostle put a case here which never falls out? Is there any man perfect,
which sins not? It is out of doubt, that if Saint James do mean by a
perfect man, such an one as has no sin in him, that then he puts a case
that is never found: and if we take him so, yet his matter stands sure. For
doubtless if there could be a man absolutely perfect in his tongue, he should be
perfect throughout. Or if we take him as the scripture does use to speak,
calling them perfect which are come unto a sound strength of godliness, and ripe
knowledge of God, as 1. Cor. 2.6. We speak wisdom, says S. Paul, among
those which are perfect. And Phil. 3.15. As many as are perfect, let us think
his. And Heb. 6. verse. 1. Let us be carried on unto perfection. If I say we take
perfection so, then look how far a man is grown in all godliness, so far is
it in his tongue, and look what wants in his tongue of such perfection, that
he wants in all other parts: for the perfection or the want in the whole man
goes with the want and perfection of the tongue. Our Savior Christ shows
the cause, saying. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: A
good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good things:
and an evil man out of the evil treasure brings forth evil things. Matt.
12.34.35. The tongue is the special instrument to utter every thing which is
in the heart. Look how far the heart is sound and good, so far will the tongue be
good. For let the heart proceed unto never so great perfection, the tongue
will utter it, and be good according to the goodness of the heart. And look what
evil is in the tongue, it comes from the heart. And when wicked thoughts be
in the heart, the tongue cannot so dissemble, but at one time or another they
will break forth in speech: As come to particulars, If the heart be full of
light, of knowledge and true wisdom, the tongue will utter it. If there be
darkness, ignorance and error, the speech will be according. If there be
faith, the tongue will confess it: if the love of God, there will break forth
praise and thanksgiving. If meekness, the words will be gentle. If pride
and wrath, the tongue is fierce and bitter. If chastity, then pure speech and
from unclean lusts, a foul mouth. What should I rehearse particulars? the
tongue is as the heart is in all things: a vain tongue argues a vain heart.
Let no man stand upon this and say, words are but wind, it is no great matter
what a man's words be, there is no harm done, it is but communication. This
is an ignorant speech, for the words are of such weight, that our Savior
says, Of every idle word you shall gine a reckoning at the day of judgment.
By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be
condemned. Matt. 12. verse. 36.37, Shall a man then say further, though my
words be but vain and foolish, yet I mean no hurt, my heart is good? Alas
what an imagination is that? Is not the tongue the opener of that which lay hid
in the heart? Even as a man beholds his face in a glass, so may we behold
the heart of a man in his tongue. True it is that the hypocrite which has a
wicked heart, can speak good words: but yet the wickedness will break forth
at times do what he can. But shall such a little member extend so far as the
Apostle here speaks? Shall he that does bridle it bridle all parts of the
body? No marvel, as he declares by his two similitudes. Horses that be
strong, fierce and full of courage, are yet with a little bit in their
mouthturned about by the rider. A ship is a great thing, and often driven of
fierce winds upon the seas: and yet the governor with the little rudder
turns them about which way he will. As such little things turn about great
and mighty things: so the tongue though it be but a little member, yet he
says boasts great things. This seems a very hard application. For he
speaks here before of the well ordering of the tongue what power it has,
and now says boasts great things; for boasting is not good, and a man may
boast great things which yet he cannot do. The bit in the horse mouth does
turn him about indeed, and so does the little rudder more then boast of turning
about the great ship. Why then says he the tongue boasts great things?
Indeed the word may well be so translated: But S. James does use it not as a
bare boasting, nor in evil part: but as if he should say, look how the bit is
a little thing and turns about the whole body of a fierce horse, causing him
to obey the rider; and as the rudder is small and yet turns about a great
ship, or as these two little things do great matters: so the tongue being a
very small member lifts it self up to the performance of very great things.
It so boasts, that it performs them indeed. But what be those great
matters which it does so well? To speak briefly, it brings forth all the
good treasures of the heart, as our Savior has said. Look what gift of grace
or heavenly thing the holy ghost works in the heart of man, his tongue
utters the same. The tongue is given as a special instrument to glorify and
praise god. Great duties it is to perform that way, and as it were to lead the
whole body. And also toward men it does many goodly things: Out of a wise
heart, it brings forth wisdom and knowledge to inform and to iustruct the
ignorant. It gives wholesome advise, and good counsel unto such as need. It
persuades and comfort, exhorts, admonishes and rebukes as need does
require. Yea infinite are the benefits which the tongue rightly ordered does
bring unto men. Let no corrupt communication (says Saint Paul) proceed out of
your mouths: but such as is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister
grace to the hearers. Ephesians. 4.29. And also he says, Let your speech be
always gracious and poudered with salt, that ye may know how to answer every
man, Coloss. 4.6. Beloved when we consider well of these things, it teaches
us how far off we be from perfection. For do we not come wonderful far
short of guiding our tongue aright to the performance of these great things,
both in glorifying God, and also in ministering grace by our talk at al times
unto me^. What shall speak of our wants in this point? If we did well and
thoroughly behold and discern the^, this one thing would manifest unto us, that
in many things we sin al: that so we might not be so rigorous in condemning or
judging others. For if we come so far short in the duties of the tongue, both
in praising God, and also in benefiting men so many ways as we might and are
bound: What shall we think is the number of all our sins? we may well
say, that they be more in number then the hairs of our head. But why has the
Lord set forth this power and good of the right ordered tongue? we must well
consider of that. It is not that we should come to the sight only how
imperfect we are, but that withal we should labor and strive toward greater
perfection. It is a most worthy thing to profess the holy faith, and to sound
forth the praise and glory of the most high God. Also it is an excellent
thing to speak such words as may at all times minister grace to the hearers.
Hereunto appertains that which Solomon says, The tongue of the just man is
as fined silver, and the lips of the righteous do feed many. Proverb. 10.20,
21.

Thus much concerning the first part, which is the ordering of the tongue
aright; which is an exceeding great matter: and now I will proceed to the other
part, that is the wonderful harm of the evil tongue: for look how great the
power of the tongue is unto good, where it is well ordered, so great force has
it also on the other part unto all mischief, where it is not bridled. And
least this might seem strange or incredible, the Apostle uses a comparison:
Behold (says he) how great a thing a little fire kindles. We all know, that
one little spark of fire lighting into dry matter, is enough to fire a whole
house, and so a whole city, a country, yea the whole world, so much as will
kindle and burn. This is a wonderful thing which God has given to the fire,
that from so little so great flames will arise, and that it will spread in such
sort. And Saint James says, that the tongue is fire. It is not of our common
fire: it is figuratively called fire: for it will spread far, though it be
little, and set all on a flame even as fire: yea it extends it self in
mischief so far, that he calls it a world of wickedness. What a marvelous
saying is this? Is the tongue so small a member, and yet contains in it such
a depth and such a gulf of all wickedness? A world is a great thing, it is the
universality of all creatures, and by this the holy Apostle does express the
wickedness of the tongue: as if he should say, the generality of all evil
and wickedness is the tongue. What evil, what mischief, what wickedness,
what treacheries and lies come not from the tongue? And mark how he says,
that the tongue is so placed or set among our members, that it defiles the
whole body. If a thing be full of evil, and set with such distance that it
can not touch another thing, then the evil is not spread but rests, and
defiles it self: but it is not so ye see with the tongue: for it is so set
that it defiles the whole body. And so fire, where the dry matter is absent
does nothing; but if it light upon it, then it enflameth all, and sets the
whole on fire: Even so he says, that the tongue reaches unto and sets on
fire the course of nature. The whole course of nature may very well be taken
for the whole world, as if he should say, The tongue even like a firebrand
sets the whole world on fire: for the truth is, that in all places there be
hot flames of contention, there be broiles and dissentions: yea all things do
boil and burn with the fire of the tongue. And in the next words he shows
what manner of fire the tongue is, and from whence it has that fire. It is
(says he) it self set on fire of hell. Then is the tongue not only fire,
but most pestilent and hellish or deuilish fire. Hell enflameth the tongue: how
can that be? Hell is here put for the devils of hell: they set the tongue on
fire, they do inflame it with the hellish fire: for as the holy ghost
inspiring and sanctifying the heart of a good or godly man, fills it with all
precious and heavenly treasures, which then the tongue brings forth to the
praise and glory of God, and to the benefit of men: so the devil fills the
hearts of wicked men with such treasures as hell does afford, and their
tongues do utter forth the same. And in that respect the holy Apostle says,
that the tongue it self is set on fire of hell. O that men would consider of
this, how their tongues are the^ special instruments of the devil, to spread
here in the whole world the fire of hell. O that they would weigh and consider
whom they serve, and whose work they do perform. That tongue which has
been given to be the chief instrument in the body of man for to magnify the
praise and honor of the Lord, and to benefit men: how is it turned and
changed to be the firebrand to set the whole world on fire, even with the fire
of hell? But if it be demanded, what is this same fire which it is enflamed
withal, and with which it does inflame the whole course of nature? You know
that Saint Paul says, The devil has fiery darts, which faith does quench:
now where faith is not, he fixes those darts in the heart of man, and so
when the heart is filled with that hellish fire, the tongue presently receives
it, and casts it abroad even like wild fire: he shoots the dart of pride
and vaineglorie and ambition into the mind, the dart of selfeloue, of envy, of
hatred, and of malice. Moreover, he fasteneth his darts of vanity and vain
pleasures, with the darts of all unclean lusts of fornication and adultery.
These are from hell, these are fiery, and the fire of Gods wrath is with them:
and the tongue hereupon scatters and disperseth all this fire abroad; as,
words of contempt, of disdain and reproach, words full of fury and bitter
rage, with lying, and slandring, and backbiting, words full of vanity and
horrible oaths, words full of filthy ribaldrie and all manner of beastly
songs. Shall I take upon me to number the stars, or to measure the sands of
the sea? If not, what should I take upon me to enter into all particulars in
this matter? There is nothing which the fiends of hell do suggest into the
wicked hearts of men, but the tongue pours it forth. Hereupon (as we see by
daily experience) all the world is on a flame, even with the fire of hell.
There is cursing, and banning, and raging: there is boasting, and quarrelling,
and reuiling: there is false accusing, lying, and condemning: yea, (as the
Apostle said before) there is in the speech even a world of wickedness: all the
parts of man are defiled by the same. It is a general contagion that
ouerspreadeth the whole. And Saint James does yet further set forth the
unruliness of the tongue by a comparison. There is a wonderful fierce nature
in sundry sorts of wild beasts, as in the lion, the leopard, the tygre, and
the wolf, with many others; and of these, men have caught some, and brought
them to be tame. There be also among the fowls, among the creeping things,
and among the fishes, things very wild and unruly, which yet by man have
been tamed: but (says he) the tongue can no man tame. All the cruel nature
of the sauadge wild beasts, of fowls, of serpents, and of fishes, is not like
the tongue, that passes them all; no wisdom nor power of man can tame that.
Is not this a wonderful thing? will men believe that this little member should
have such a nature in it, that no man can rule it? Marvel not at this, the
cause is evident, even by that which goes before in this text. Is there any
beast, any foul, any serpent, or fish, whose nature is to be compared to the
devil, or to the fire of hell? I doubt not but every man will confess and say
thus, There be horrible and savage natures among beasts, and serpents, and
dragons, but the devils go beyond them all, there is no comparison, hell can
not be matched, that fire can not be quenched, there is no taming of those
things. Then mark how he said, that the tongue is set on fire of hell. The
nature of hell, the nature of the devil is put into the tongue: and hereupon
it comes to pass that it is harder to be tamed then all the nature of
serpents and wild beasts. Then when he says, But the tongue can no man tame,
is it his meaning that there is nor was never any man, but his tongue has
been untamed, set on fire of hell, and so a firebrand to set the world on
fire? The tongues of the Prophets, the tongues of the Apostles, the tongues of
the martyrs and holy men have uttered the heavenly truth to the praise of God,
and to the singular good of men: how then is it said, The tongue can no man
tame? were not the tongues of these well tamed? yes verily: but yet this
stands still, The tongue can no man tame. For their tongues were tamed not by
themselves, nor by any wisdom, power, or virtue of man: but by grace, even by
the working and power of the heavenly spirit of God from above. No man then,
but the Lord God, whose power is above all, has ever tamed the nature of the
tongue. There is nothing in man from Satan or from hell, be it never so
pestilent and horrible, but the grace and power of God can subdue it. It is not
then the purpose or meaning of the Apostle, by saying, but the tongue can no
man tame, to lead men unto this, even to let it alone, for that which is
impossible unto man, he will not set upon it, at least, if he know so much. For
to what end and purpose should a man go about to do that which is above his
power? I say it is not the purpose of the holy Apostle so to persuade, but by
showing the difficulty and impossibility in regard of man's strength, he
moves men to seek unto God for the power of his grace, for there is all the
help. And seeing there is help in God, how can we be excused, if we do not
fly unto him? The thing is most horrible, we ought to abhor it that we
should carry in our mouth the fire of hell and the nature of the devil. Shall
we not thirst for those heavenly and pure waters of the holy ghost, which
shall extinguish such hellish fire? O beloved, it is the mind and purpose of
the Apostle when he shows us these things, to stir us up to seek more
earnestly unto God, and not to trust to our own strength: unless we make
small account to carry such a tongue, yea such a firebrande of hell in our
mouth, as is worse then any serpent. What a loathsome thing ought it to be to
the mind of every man to have his mouth full of the fire of hell ever and anon
for to cast abroad? we hold it a very rare and most strange and monstrous
thing, if any beast should carry rank poison in his mouth to cast forth far
and near: and the tongue of man spreads that which is a great deal worse
then any poison: for men spitte fire, even the very fire of hell. alas, shall
we not seek help for this? O beloved, be not deceived to think that the
speeches of the Apostle are more vehement then the matter requires. I confess
that the holy scripture uses sometimes hyperbolicall speeches, but in these
comparisons it is not so. The tongue indeed is (as he says) an unruly evil,
full of deadly poison. You know what is written in other places, Their mouth is
full of cursing and bitterness, the poison of Aspes is under their lips, their
throat is an open sepulcher, they flatter with their tongues. We can not
away with the poion of Aspes, we loath to hear of it: and shall we not then
loath to carry such horrible deadly poison in our tongues? Let us think well
of these things, and judge of them, as the Lord pronounces, and not according
to our own sense: for as every thing likes and loves that which is in their
own nature, (as the toad likes her own poison, so does the venomous
serpent, the Aspe, and the Cockatrice:) so shall men by nature like and love
well the poison which is under their tongue, and that fire with which it is
enflamed by hell. Men do indeed even glory in those horrible things which
come from their tongue. Let us therefore, as I said, judge of the things as the
Lord pronounces, and not according to our own sense. The Lord says, that the
tongues of men are full of deadly poison. If we were thoroughly persuaded
thereof, would it not even force us to seek unto the Lord to have such poison
removed? Would we like well to continue still as venomous serpents? Could we
think well of this that the devil should fire our tongues with the fire of
hell? Or that he should use our tongues as his instruments to set all in a
broile? God be merciful unto us, and help us, for our case otherwise is most
wretched and miserable. And let us now see what reason the Apostle renders, to
show that the tongue is full of deadly poison: for he gives an instance or a
taste of the same deadly poison in one particular, which is this: Therewith
bless we God even the father, and therewith curse we men which are made after
the image of God: Out of one mouth proceeds blessing and cursing: my brethren
these things ought not so to be. If he should stand to show the poison in
every particular, it were much: this one may lead us to the consideration of
many. To come then unto it, thus it is: There is not almost any so wicked, but
will have words of praising God in their mouth, yea those words are often so
godly and smooth, that they seem to be with devotion, even as if they carried
a reverence and a great regard to the name of the most high God. But let any
man displease them, and by and by they curse him: which shows that their
blessing and praising of God is but in a vain show. For if they did indeed
and aright love and reverence the majesty of God, then would they also regard
his image in man: for man is made after the image of God. Can they bless God
and curse his image? If we bless and praise the Lord in deed in all his
works, then chiefly in the workmanship of man, in whom he has set the print
of his own image. And if we cannot in that work behold his glory and
praise him, how shall we do it in other things? If any shall object, that the
image of GOD was broken down in man through the fall of our first parents: and
that such as be renewed in Christ, and the image of GOD again set up in them,
in those we may behold the glory of God, such we do not curse, but we curse
men that be evil and wicked. I answer that there is not always such regard
had, but the tongue does curse the good as well as the bad, and spares none.
And doubtless it is a greater and a more fowler thing to curse a right godly
man, then to curse a wicked man, because in the godly man, the image of GOD
does shine in beauty, and where his image does more appear, we are bound more
to love and to reverence: but yet it is a foul thing to curse any man, and
does in some sort reach unto God. For albeit the image of God, touching
righteousness and holiness is broken down wholly in them, yet there remain some
parts of his image, there is understanding or reason, and such things as by
which a man does greatly differ from a beast. Sundry excellent gifts there
be in man, which he that utterly despises, offers injury to the majesty
of God: and that is the cause why Saint James brings it in as an absurd
thing, that the same tongue blesses GOD, and curses men which are made after
the image of GOD. But what shall we say of this cursing of men, is it rare?
Surely it is very common where wrath is kindled, and displeasure arises. The
horrible curses and execrations which come out of men's mouths, would make a
man that fears GOD, even tremble to hear. There is no sparing of any, but
this deadly poison of the tongue is powered forth upon all. The brother curses
the brother, the Father the children, and the children again their Father, the
Husband the Wife, and the Wife her Husband. If a man would (as I may say)
defile his mouth, and the ears of those that should hear it, he might utter
so many of their usual curses and execrations as would make and fill a pretty
book. And let but two men fall out or two women, which have not learned the
true sear of GOD, do but mark the bitter poison of the words which will
come from them: What reuilings will each give unto the other? what words of
disdain, contempt, and reproach? How base will each of them set forth the
other for to be? What is it almost that can be devised which is base, vile
and loathsome, but the one will term the other by it? And with what
vehemency is it used to be done? There is no more regard of the image and
glory of God in each of them, then there is of a dog. What a poison is this?
what a vile wickedness proceeds from the tongue? Saint James shows that it
does as a monstrous thing pervert the order and course of nature: when out of
the same mouth there proceeds blessing and cursing. Does a fountain (says
he) send forth at one place sweet water and bitter? Can the fig tree, my
brethren, bring forth olives, either a vine figs? so can no fountain make
both salt water and sweet. If it be against the course of nature that such
things should be, then does it follow that some part of the words which come
from the mouth are as sweet water, and other some of them be bitter: nay they
be either all sweet or all bitter. Now it is most evident that the one part,
that is to say, the cursing of men, the contemptuous railings, reproaches, and
reuilings, is not sweet, but even as most bitter water. Hereupon then it
follows, that the other part which seemed to be very sweet water, that is,
their blessing and praising of God, is also very bitter. For as the holy
Apostle has showed, they cannot be both sweet and bitter. If one be bitter,
both are bitter. But how can their blessing of GOD be bitter? how can that be
poison? Is not the blessing and praising of God, a most precious and a most
excellent thing? Does S. James set that with the deadly poison of the tongue? I
answer, that the blessing, the praising and the honoring of God, is of all
other things the most excellent and precious, when it is rightly done: but if
it be done but in fashion and show, or in bare words, it is but a profaning
and an abusing of the most holy and glorious name of God. Then is it
hypocrisy, then is it sin, yea even an abomination. There can no praise be
given to God so great, but it is true. But every thing which in it self is
true, is not rightly done. We read in the Gospel, that Jesus would not
suffer the devils to confess him. And the devil in the maid that uttered
this saying touching Paul and his companions, These be the servants of the most
high God, which show unto us the way of salvation, displeased Paul. Act. 16.
So no doubt the praising or blessing of God with a wicked tongue, is not
acceptable unto him. Mark then briefly how Saint James has reasoned to prove
that God is not blessed nor honored by a tongue which curses men. First if
they did sincerely and from the heart bless God in deed, how could they curse
the image of God in men? Secondly, it is impossible in the course of nature,
that sweet water and bitter should come out of one fountain, and so is it,
that the true praising or blessing of God, and the cursing of men, should come
out of the same mouth. Let all then consider well, how they honor and
worship GOD. For this is it wherewith men do bear themselves in hand that
they be religious, that they call upon God, and that they ascribe glory and
praise unto him. They never consider with what manner of tongue they do it.
They curse and banne, they rail, revile and reproach. They swear borriblie,
they lie, they do slander and diffame. They flatter, they boaste, they scoff,
they jest, they power forth words of all vanity. They speak all manner of
unclean words, and out at their mouth comes forth as it were the stinking
mind of a most filthy puddle, or of a rotten dunghill: And then with the same
tongue so polluted, and in that unclean vessel of their mouth, they will
bring and offer up those sweet odors of the praise of God. Here is a great
instruction ministered unto us, which we ought carefully to hearken unto, and
to print it in our mind. If ever we have to do with any man or woman, which
is poor and base for outward respects, and take it that they offer us wrong,
so that our wrath begin to be kindled, let us take heed that neither our heart
so far despise them, nor our tongue utter such contemptuous speeches unto
them, such words of disdain and ignorminie, such base and vile terms, as
that we forget the image of God in them. O beloved shall not this a little
bridle us, shall we give such terms to the image of God, as we would scarce
give to a dog? If any shall object and say, some are so wicked and abominable,
that no speech can be too base for them. I answer, according to the doctrine of
the holy Apostle here, that howsoever we are to loath and to abhor their
wickedness, yea to give them such phrases of speech as may express their bad
estate (as we shall find the holy Scripture does) yet spare the image of God
in them, even so far as it remains: give them not such speeches, that be so
vile, as I am loath to name any of them, which ye shall usually hear
proceeding out of men's mouths, when they do fall out, least therein you
curse, revile, and utterly despise the image of God. To conclude, let the
fear of God bridle our tongues, that this deadly and devilish poison may be
taken out of them, and that with them we may magnify and praise the Lord
God, so that our praise may be acceptable unto him, and that our speeches may
be such as tend unto edification, and that minister grace to the hearers. Amen.

FINIS.
A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross the thirty day of March. 1591.
PSALM. 133. Behold how good and how, etc.


THe holy Prophet, King David was the composer and writer of this Psalm, as
the title thereof does expressly mention. It is called a song of degrees, as
there be 14. other besides this, here set together of the same title, but in
what sense: the learned interpreters are of diverse judgments. I will follow
that which is most probable by the holy Scriptures. The word Magnaloth, which
the Prophet here uses, does properly signify steps or stairs, by which we
ascend into higher places. But by a Metaphor (as I take it to be here used) it
signifies high estate, high degree, excellency, or dignity. For proof
hereof we read, 1. Chro. 17. verse. 17. where David speaking unto God, says,
thou have regarded me according to the estate of a man of high degree, using
the same word that is here. So then, if we consider the phrase of the Hebrew
tongue, which to expresie the superlatiue degree, uses the plural number, a
song of degrees, that is, a song of excellencies, or a song of dignities, is as
much as to say, a most excellent, or a most worthy song. The holy ghost in
giving this title, does, as it were, set a mark in the forehead of the Psalm,
to give notice unto us, that there is a treasure of most excellent doctrine,
and most fit for our instruction contained in it, that we may with the greater
diligence and attention give ear unto it.

The Argument or the matter here handled, is all but one. For the holy ghost
with a very high and singular praise, through the whole Psalm does set forth
and commend the unity and concord of brethren. The brethren (which he speaks
of and which are to keep this holy agreement) are all the faithful children
of the Church, fellow members of Christ's mystical body, and true worshippers
of GOD, among whom is the spiritual brother-hoode. The virtue it self which
is here commended, is that same which Saint Paul does so earnestly exhort and
persuade all Christian men unto, to keep the unity of the spirit, in the bond
of peace, Ephesians. 4. verse. 3. The Primitive Church is commended for the practice
thereof, in which we have a lively example set before us: for it is written,
that the multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and of one soul,
Act. 4. verse. 32. For as one body consisting of many members, has but one
heart and one soul, by which all the members are united, and love each other,
so the multitude were united in judgment and affection, as if there were but
one heart and one soul in them all.

The commendation and praise by which the holy Ghost sets forth the
excellent worthiness of this virtue, is under two Epithites, which are these,
good and comely. For he says, behold how good and how comely a thing it is,
for brethren also to dwell in unity. These two Epithites he afterward opens
and amplifieth by two similitudes: the one is taken from the annoynting of
Aaron with the precious ointment, to declare chiefly the sweet and pleasant
comelines of this unity: the other is taken from the dew of Hermon, which
comes down upon the mountains of Sion, to express the fruit and good that
comes thereof. And finally, he concludes from the highest cause, even the
Lord God, who has commanded the blessing of life eternal to be upon this
unity. This is briefly the sum of the Psalm, or of this praise which is
given. Now come to the exposition.

By the first word (behold) the Prophet does stir up the minds of the
Israelites, even of all the Tribes, to take view how blessed a thing unity and
concord is, even by their own experience which they had, partly by the former
times, and partly by the time then present. For in former days they had felt
with much sorrow, the great calamities, harms, and annoyances of discord:
and at this time now present when this Psalm was given, they saw the
blessings and benefits of unity and peace. For their former experience in the
days of King Saul, when he persecuted David which had done none evil, the
worship of God was neglected, good men were oppressed, evil men flourished,
with much griese of mind unto many, then was there discord, so far as men
durst speak.

When Saul was taken away, and David was anointed King in Hebron, Abner the
son of Ner Captain of Saul's army, took Ishbosheth Saul's son, and set him
up for King, the discord then grew much greater: for then one part of the
Tribes claue unto David, the other unto the house of Saul. They were indeed
all the sons of Iaacob and professed the God of Abraham, whom they should
with one mouth have worshipped and glorified, as Saint Paul says, Romans 15.
verse. 6. but they were divided and rent asunder, for there was bloody war
and long time continued among the Tribes: 2. Sam. 2. and 3 Brethren with deadly
hatred and enmity pursuing their brethren, seeking the blood each of other. It
could not be but that great calamities in this time of discord did ouerspread
the whole land: they might by experience then, and did behold how evil and how
mischievous a thing it is, for brethren to be at variance.

The cutting down of so great an evil, and taking away all occasion is a very
great good. Therefore when Abner and Ishebosheth were slain, all Israel came
together and set up David. Then there grew a reconciliation of Tribe unto
Tribe, and they which were before rent asunder, became again one body,
brethren embraced each other with love, the bitter hatred before among them was
cut down and extinguished. The worship of God was now set up, the blessings of
GOD were powered down from heaven upon them in great plenty, the whole land
did rejoice with joy and gladness: Therefore he wills them now to behold how
good and how comely a thing it is, for brethren to dwell also at unity. Thus
were they taught by their own experience on both sides: For they had found the
grievous annoyances of discord, and enmity on the one part, and the benefit
of peace on the other, and this is it he wills them to behold. Behold how
good and how comely a thing it is, which does cut down so great evil, and
behold how good and how comely a thing it is, which brings with it such
great blessings of GOD: thus much for the first word. Then to the praise it
self: the first Epithet is (how good) which contains the great fruit that
arises thereof, and is afterward set forth by the second comparison, that is,
of the dew of Hermon: for that is a thing fruitful and good. The other is
(how comely) the word is Magnim, which signifies beautiful, sweet,
comely, or pleasant: as in Psalm 16. where he speaks of the resurrection
and exaltation of our Savior Christ, saying: Thou will show me the path of
life, the fulness of joy is in thy presence, at thy right hand comely
pleasures for evermore. This comely pleasant sweetness of concord, is resembled
and shadowed forth by the former similitude, that is, of Aarons anointing:
for that was a very comely and a sweet thing, and had a mystical
signification.

To understand the better what is here meant, first ye may read of this
precious ointment, both whereof the Lord commanded it should be made, and how
Aaron and his sons should be anointed therewith unto the Priests office, in
Exodus 30. Then further we are taught in the Scriptures, that Aaron was a figure
of Christ, and that this anointing of his with that precious sweet ointment,
did represent the spiritual and heavenly annoynting of Christ Jesus with the
holy Ghost, whose graces distill from him the head, upon every part of his
mystical body, which is the Church. Of him it is said, The spirit of the Lord
is upon me, because he has anointed me, etc. Luke 4. verse. 18. Mark further
then wherein the comparison holds. Thus pouring the precious ointment upon
Aarons head, running down upon his beard, and to the skirts of his clothing,
was pleasant to behold, and cast forth a sweet savor unto all that stood
round about. Also in that it descends upon his beard, and so downward upon
all parts even to the skirts of his clothing, it resembles the graces of the
holy Ghost flowing down from the Lord Jesus Christ, upon all the members of
his body knit together in an holy unity. When it went down from Aarons head
upon his body united to the same, it descends even to the lowest part of his
garment, because there is no rent nor separation: Even so the Church united
unto Christ her head, and every member of the same united unto the rest in an
holy union, and making one body, the heavenly graces of the holy Ghost,
far sweeter then that precious ointment, flow from him upon them, and all are
partakers thereof, even the lowest and meanest member, even to the skirts. For
where they are joined in this spiritual unity, look what graces soever God
from his son Christ does power upon the highest members, (that is, upon
Princes and Pastors) they distill also upon the other parts and members, and so
from each to other.

That which was separate from the head, from the body, and from the garments
of Aaron, received no drop of that precious ointment, which descended from the
head to a body united, and to all parts of the garments wrought together. In
like manner the graces of the holy Ghost descend from Christ the head, upon
nothing that is separate and divided and rent from him, but upon all the
members united in one body. We may then briefly set forth what this
similitude declares, in this wise. The sweet ointment is powered upon the head
of Aaron, it goes down upon his beard, then upon his shoulders, and all parts
of his body even to the lowest border of his garments. Jesus Christ the head
of the Church is anointed with the holy Ghost, and from him the sweet graces
descend, and come upon all the body, and upon every member of the body even to
the meanest: this it is to be united to him, and to his Church: this is a
thing most sweet and most comfortable.

In the other similitude he resembles this unity unto the dew of Hermon,
which comes down upon the mountains of Sion: the waters which fall upon the
high mountain distill into the valleies, but into those valleies which are
joined thereunto at the foot thereof, and make them plentiously fruitful:
even so the heavenly spiritual dewes that come down from above upon the
mountains, flow upon the valleies which are united thereunto, and there is
great fruit, and all good things springing from thence. Thus much we may
consider in these similitudes, which express how good and how comely a thing
it is for brethren also to dwell at unity.

Now all this is from the most high God: for he says (there) that is to say,
upon those which dwell together in this holy unity, the Lord has commanded
the blessing, and life for evermore. It is Gods unchangeable decree that they
shall have the blessing, that is, the great great high blessing, even the
blessing of all blessings in everlasting continuance. This can never fail, for
God almighty is unchangeable, and what he has decreed and commanded, shall
stand for ever. This may persuade much to dwell in unity: for it is a goodly
matter to be under the blessing of almighty God: and there, that is, upon the
unity of brethren, he has commended his blessing, and no where else: for this,
there, is as much as to say, there only.

Now we see the praise it self of unity and concord here set forth unto
us, it remains, that we consider to what end and purpose the holy Ghost
gives this great commendation. This we all know, that when a thing is
dispraised, it is to bring us into a misliking and shunning of the same, as a
thing either unpleasant or hurtful. And contrariwise, praise, especially where
it is given by God, who knows the worthiness of euene thing, is to draw our
liking, and to make us in love with that which is praised.

This is then done here, that we may have our hearts inflamed, and that we
may be in love with unity and concord: and that we may studiously seek
after it, and embrace it, as a most precious jewel: and finally by all means
take heed, that we do not any thing which may hinder and disturb the same.
And doubtless if this can not move us, and kindle an earnest love and zeal
to be studious of godly peace, that it is so good, so sweet, and pleasant, and
that Gods blessing is upon it unto eternal life, how dull are we unto
spiritual and heavenly things, or what can move us? Shall we not care to have
that cut down which brings mischief and destruction, and to set up that
which carries all blessedness with it? Shall we neither care to avoid the
curse of God, plagues and punishments on the one side: nor yet covet to have
his blessing? that it may move us the rather, I will come now to the
application of this Psalm to our estate.

We have (as ye all know) received great blessings from the Lord our God, by
the means of our gracious Queen. For by her happy reign, we have enjoyed
long peace, even such as the like has not almost been seen or heard of in
this land. We have also great plenty of all things, our country ouerflowing
with milk and honey: every man fitting under his vine and under his fig tree.
And moreover, the Lord has protected us by her Scepter and power, from the
invasion of foreign enemies, and from the wicked practices and treasons of
domestical adversaries: these are great benefits received. But the greatest
blessing of all is, that by her government he has delivered us from the
bondage of Pharaoh, from the heavy yoke of Antichrist, out of Idolatry and
blindness, and has restored unto us his holy word, and his true worship. Yet
notwithstanding there has been among us, many years (as ye all know) great
discord and variance, and that not only against Papists and other enemies of
the holy religion, but even amongst brethren, which profess the same holy
doctrine and faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. In all this time we have tasted
the bitter fruits of enmity and discord, we have felt and fustained the
mischiefs, harms, and damages that grow from it, so that we have had
experience with the Israelites in the worser part, and can say of our own
knowledge, behold how evil and how uncomely a thing it is for brethren to be
at variance. To make this more apparent, if I should stand to rippe up, and to
lay open all the evils which have already come upon us by the discord of
brethren, it would be a long and tedious labor. I will therefore only note
some of the chief and most general, that beholding as it were our most
grievous wounds, we may seek to have them salued and cured if it may please
God.

First therefore, I may note as a principal evil fruit of enmity, that it is
a joy, and an encouragement unto the enemies of the Gospel, the Papists, for
to see brethren set against brethren: for as it is in an army of men, if they
be at deadly variance among themselves, Captain against Captain, band against
band, pursuing each other: that the adverse part (against which they should
wholly together bend their forces) will say, we shall not need to do much, we
shall easily prevail, for they will pull down and destroy themselves with
their own hands, and hereof will much rejoice. So is it in Gods Church,
Christ's army, which is set upon by deadly enemies on every side, when there
is discord growing unto sharp enmity, and the leaders themselves bent one
part against another, the wicked enemy does laugh, and receives boldness and
strength, for he says in his heart, This sharp contention among them will
proceed in the end even unto blood, and to the desolation of both parts. O how
much ought we to be pricked and grieved at the rejoicing and boldning of Gods
enemies? And how doleful a calamity were this, if it should among brethren
come unto blood? We see that among the children of Israel, the enmity and
discord brake forth even unto blood, and so doubtless, except the Lord in
great mercy turn it away (such is the nature of contention when it grows
sharp) that the end among us also will be most grievous. This one evil ought
to move us to love and embrace the holy unity here commended in this Psalm.
I would the consideration of it might be deeply printed in our minds. The
wounding of the weak is another great evil that arises from discord:
doubtless many are cast down, or turned out of the way, or at the least wife
are much hindered hereby in our Church. Stumbling blocks being thus laid,
before the blind and lame. What pity this ought to move, and how much the
sight of it should vex and grieve us, the doctrine of our Savior Christ
uttered by him self and by his Apostles does every where show: threatenings
also and woes are pronounced against them, that shall cast down the weak: and
shall not we regard this thing at all? shall neither the compassion and love
to our brethren for whom Christ died, nor the threatenings and woes denounced
take any place? Thirdly, the discord of brethren, does bring both parts into
contempt and disgrace among many. And so by this means the ministers of the
Gospel, the messengers of Christ, which should be had in precious account and
estimation for their works sake, even as the vessels of gold and silver in the
Lords temple, and as the Angels of the Lord of hosts, are basely esteemed,
even as if they were vessels of earth or wood. If this did reach only unto the
men themselves or unto their disgrace, it were the less, and might with less
grief be borne: but the contempt and disgrace reach indeed even to the
glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, because in the disgrace of the men, the power
of their ministry is weakened. For where the teacher is evil thought of and
despised, the multitude does not regard his doctrine. This evil goes deep,
and if we consider well of it together with the former which I have mentioned,
ye shall see that upon our own experience we may say, indeed behold how evil
and how uncomely a thing it is, for brethren to be at enmity and discord.
These evils do highly displease Almighty God, and if they be continued in
without redress, who is able to show the punishments and calamities which in
time will ensue and come upon us in this land? The contempt of the Gospel, and
growing into Atheism thereby, will draw down infinite plagues and miseries.
For the righteous God will not always suffer such abuse unrevenged. Then
seeing unity is so good, bringing so many blessings; and discord so evil,
drawing such an heap of mischiefs with it, the one as a nourisher of true
life, is to be sought for and maintained by all godly Christians, and the other
is to be eschued as a deadly pestilence: and this is to be done of us speedily,
because dissension is like the breaking out of waters, the longer it
continues, the wider is the breach made, and so becomes the more difficult
to be recovered. This being confessed of all, for there is no man I think that
will deny, but that it is a most necessary thing in Gods Church and among
brethren, to eschew discord and to seek unity: therefore let us in the next
place consider and understand how it is to be sought: for let it be that we
both agree, it is to be sought, and also do seek for it; yet if we seek not
the right way, we are never the better for seeking. First then know this, that
there are two sorts of unity and agreement, the one is in God, being in the
truth, in the spirit, in true holiness and sanctification. The other is in
error and sin and not in the Lord. Now indeed it is the holy unity in the
Lord, which is praised in this Psalm, and which we must seek after, upon
which the blessing of God shall come. This may ye see by that exhortation of
Saint Paul, Ephesians. 4. When he says, studying to keep the unity of the
spirit in the band of peace: for he adds as the reason, There is one body,
and one spirit, as ye are all called in hope of your calling: one Lord, one
faith, one baptism, one God and father of all, etc. For like as all the
members of the natural body are coupled together by one soul and make but
one body: so by one spirit of the Lord, all the faithful are united, and
become all one mystical body of Jesus Christ: by one faith, and by one
baptism, they are all in one Lord, and in one God. The foundation of this
unity is in the truth, and by it men grow up together in God: and for this
cause it is said in the first verse of the Psalm, Brethren also to dwell in
unity: He says (also) because as there is a reconciliation wrought by Christ
between God and man, and so a man is come into unity with God, he must also
grow into unity with those which are together reconciled to the Lord with
him: seek this unity, to be united with our brethren unto God, otherwise,
all shall be dissolved and scattered again in confusion. Touching that other
concord which is in error and wickedness, they which possess it (who are of
diverse sorts) do commend it, and much complain of the disturbance and breach
thereof. As first of all the Papists make a great exclamation against us which
profess the glorious Gospel, and have forsaken them: that like wicked
Schismatics we have disturbed and broken this holy unity, by rending our
selves from the true Church, and so from the faith, and from Christ's mystical
body: this is a grievous and a sore accusation, if their unity which they
glory of, were in the truth. But seeing it is most evident that they have
forsaken the truth of God, blaspheme and condemn it, and set up abominable
errors and cursed Idolatry: all their agreements, all their holy league (as
they term it) is no more but a most wicked and cursed conspiracy against God
and his people. What is their unity more then that which is described by the
Prophet David, Psalm. 2. Why do the Gentiles rage, and the people meditate that
which is vain? The kings of the earth stand up, and the Princes take counsel
together against the Lord, and against his Christ? Here is a great unity, nay
a conspiracy of wicked traitors against Christ. This perplexity is fulfilled
by them: And we have the commandment of God by the voice of the Angel, Come
out from among them my people, and separate your selves: so that all their cry
is nothing against us, we have not dissolved this blessed unity here
commended, but have forsaken their cursed conspiracy, which the nearer a man is
joined unto, the further off he is from God. Let no man therefore be troubled
or disquieted by their great words, but forsaking them, embrace the holy
faith, and be united thereby together with the Prophets and Apostles, and all
holy men, unto Jesus Christ.

Ye shall hear many other sorts of men complain, that there is not fellowship
and unity kept with them. When indeed as they walk after their wicked and
unclean lusts in all abominable sins, as in contempt of gods word, in
drunkenness, whoredom, pride, ambition, covetousness, usury, extortion,
briberie, oppression, envy, and many such like. The holy ghost says unto us,
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove
them, Ephesians. 5.11. We can not join Christ and Belial, we can not be united to
the Lord and have fellowshippe in wicked sins. If we say we have fellowship
with him (says S. John) and walk in darkness, we lie, etc. 1. John. verse.
6. Ephesians. 5.11. He that cries out for peace, and does walk in ungodly ways,
straying from the truth and from sanctification, whatsoever he will seem to
be, he is nothing else but a disturber and breaker of all holy unity. For who
can take part with him in those things, but he shall separate himself (as I
have showed) from truth and godliness, without which there can be no blessed
unity? Saint Peter calls our Lord Jesus Christ a living stone, unto whom
all the faithful coming as living stones, are built up and become a
spiritual house. 1. Pet. 2. If stones be not squared and made smooth to fit
and join together, how shall they grow into one building? If men be not framed
in faith and godliness, how shall they be united in the Lord? Indeed there be
imperfections both in doctrine and manners, all the best he wen stones have
some ruggedness remaining, and men must bear one with another in much: for
charity must cover the multitude of sins. 1. Pet. 4 while the Temple of God
is in the world, the stones are not perfectly set together, but the work is
still in hand, this Temple is still in building, we must beware of the
downfall on that side also. Then seeing this blessed unity must be in God, in
the truth, in the spirit, to be built up in Christ Jesus in true
sanctification, (for he that is in Christ is a new creature:) and seeing all
concord without this foundation, shall fall down as a rotten building, let the
holy book of God be our ground, let it be brought forth to cut down all
controversies, and let men if they look for any part of the blessing here
promised, yield all honor and glory unto this sacred word: yea let no man
stand upon his own honor or reputation, if he have maintained any thing awry;
but so soon as ever he espieth the truth in any matter, yield thereunto, let
the truth of God go before and lead us the way. For this is the only way to
grow into this holy unity. And let such as walk a wrie, forsake their evil
ways, embrace the heavenly truth, and follow the rules thereof, if they will
be accounted studious of peace and concord. Joining thus unto the truth, both
in faith and godliness of life, we shall be joined together in the Lord, and it
shall be said, Behold how good and how comely a thing it is for brethren also
to dwell at unity. It shall be like that precious ointment upon the head of
Aaron, etc. The heavenly graces and gifts of the holy ghost, shall come down
upon us plenteously and flow unto every member: we shall bring forth fruit
unto God watered with heavenly dewes: we shall have that great and high
blessing of God almighty unto eternal life. Therefore if it be not too late,
that the sins of this land have provoked the Lord to displeasure, let all
men lift up their hearts and cry unto the Lord, that he will bestow this
precious jewel upon us, that we may be at unity (not in all manner of
wicked vices, nor in errors) but in the Lord. And now who shall seek this
unity? who shall study to advance it? This may be in question. I answer, even
all states and degrees of men, private persons, rulers and teachers, even all
and every one that will look for any part of gods blessing must advance it.
Every man I say must look unto the heavenly truth of the holy religion, and
embrace the same with all love and hearty affection. Every man ought to be
zealous in spirit for the glory of Christ.

For if a man have not the zeal of religion, he can not be a good man,
whether he be ruler or private man, though he seem to be never so peaceable,
but as the Lord says to the Angel of the Church of Laodicea, Reu. 3. Because
thou art neither hot nor cold, I will spewe thee out of my mouth: God does
reject all such dull and drowsy Atheistes, and irreligious persons, which are
so earthly minded, as that they regard not the heavenly graces which are
offered in the Gospel. Let all men therefore stir up their hearts to be
fervent in Gods truth, and let not godly zeal be quenched. Then further (as I
have also showed before) we must join the practice of this holy word, as the
Apostle S. James wills: Be doers of the word and not hearers only,
deceiving your selves. Iam. 2.19. for the great disturba^ce of peace and the
grievous breaches of unity, and all bitter dissentions do chiefly arise from
hence, that all sorts and degrees of men walk not in the rules which God has
prescribed unto them in his word. We must therefore enter more particularly
into this matter, that we may see how each man is to further this blessed
unity. I begin with the private person, for whom there are rules prescribed in
Gods word for him to observe, if he will be a true member of the Church, and a
seeker and preserver of this unity, and so a partaker of Gods blessing unto
life everlasting. One rule is touching subjection and reverence unto governors
both civil and ecclesiastical: for God has commanded to honor and obey them.
Submit your selves unto all manner ordinance of man, for the Lords sake:
whether it be unto the king, as unto the superior; or unto governors, as unto
them that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well. 1. Pet. 2. v. 13, 14. Also of this obedience and
subjection for conscience sake, of this reverence and honor to be rendered, S.
Paul writes, Romans 13. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Likewise obey them that have the
oversight of you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls as
they that must give accounts, etc. Heb. 13.17. The neglect and breach of this
rule, even the denying of obedience, reverence, and honor unto the rulers,
governors, and teachers, disturbeth and overthrows the unity which is here
praised. If then a man will not make conscience to perform this duty in
obeying the holy doctrine of the Lord, what is he other then an enemy unto the
true concord, a dissoluer of unity and peace? But what if rulers offend,
pastors and governors fail, and come short in some duties, and thereby seem
unworthy to be regarded? I say if they do, they shall answer before God for it,
but yet private men are not set at liberty, they are not discharged from this
obedience and rendering honor unto them: for it is unto the authority, and unto
Gods ordinance that they do it, and not in respect of man. God has not
prescribed the duties of men which are to be done unto others, under this
condition, if they perform all that which they ought to do on their parts,
or if they be such manner of men as they ought to be. But he has prescribed
every man's duty absolutely. If an other fail in his, he shall answer (as I
said) for it before God, thou have no warrant hereby to depart from the rule
which God has set unto thee. For thou art tied in conscience unto God to obey
his will, and not in regard of man, or of thine own benefit to do this or
that: for by the doctrine of the blessed Apostle, we see that Christian
subjects and faithful servants, are commanded even for conscience to give
honor unto heathen princes, and infidel masters, Romans 13.1. Tim. 6.1. we
must then from this express word of God observe, that when governors do
amiss, men have not their tongues set at liberty to revile, and to reproach
them, or to dishonor them with evil speech; seeing it is also written, Thou
shall not curse the ruler of the people. Exodus 22. v. 28. But contrariwise,
prayers and supplications are to be made unto God, for rulers and teachers of
the Lords people. When they offend, it is with great hurt to the Church, and
therefore men are to lament and mourn for it, and not to make themselves
merry with iestes and reproaches. Let all evil speeches of disgrace then be
turned into prayers, and the laughter into tears, for this shall be more
pleasing unto God. Let no man bear himself in hand, that he is not guilty of
the breach of holy concord, when he observes not the rules of this doctrine,
of submission, of reverence and honor to be given unto governors.

Another rule is given by the Apostle, in these words: That ye study to be
quiet, and to meddle with your own business, and to work with your own
hands, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. as God has distributed unto every man, and as
the Lord has called every one (says the Apostle) so let him walk, and so
ordain I in all Churches. 1. Cor. 7.17. God has ordained the several places
and callings, he has given gifts of ability to men to perform the things he
requires in the same: he has also set the bounds and limits within which
every one is to keep himself, and to walk orderly, meddling with that which
appertains unto him. This is an holy thing and comely, a preserver of unity;
but it is much broken, and great evil ensues thereof: for there be many
private persons, which would seem very religious, and to seek the holy unity
above others, which leave the duties of their places and callings, and busy
themselves wholly with those matters which do not belong unto them. For as if
the matters of their trades and sciences were too base, or as if the care of
their family were a thing over vile, they set these aside, and neglect them,
and take upon them greater and higher business. For beholding any thing amiss
in the Church, as if God had set them to be overseers of the governors and
teachers, contrary unto this rule of Saint Paul, They labor not with their
hands, nor meddle quietly with their own business, but they bend all the
powers of their mind, to dispute and reason about government, and the duties
of governors and teachers, wandering about, and seeking to persuade and draw
others to their mind. They think thus to do God high service: But who has
given them power to dispense with this rule, that ye study to be quiet, and
to meddle with your own business, and to labor with your hands? Has God
called them and set them a work about greater things, and freed them from
these? Is it not the ordinance and will of our God, that men shall instruct and
guide their families in his ways? Is there not labor and pains and care to
be taken, that the children and servants may learn the holy doctrine and walk
in it? But there are many which deeply meddle in public matters, and if they
have two or three children and as many servants, they are left ignorant, no
pains taken about them, they may walk awrie many ways, the care thereof is
little. Also a man's own matters which Saint Paul wills to meddle with, are
in providing earthly things, necessary for his family: so that Saint Paul
says. If there be any that provides not for his own, namely for them of his
family, he denies the faith, and is worse then an infidel. 1. Timoth. 5.8.
and so in other duties. Shall we think the truth is obeyed, or that God is
pleased by such ways? when the rulers and guides of Gods people do amiss, a
man is to sorrow at it, he is to look to his way that he keep upright before
God: but when in reprehending that which others fault in, he neglects his
own calling, how shall he eschew this sentence, Thou art therefore inexcusable
O man) whosoever thou art that iudgest another, for in that thou iudgest
another, thou condemnest thy self: for thou do the same things that thou
iudgest, Romans 2. v. 1. Thou leauest undone thy duty in guiding that small charge
committed unto thee. And let us make the comparison, Is he not more worthy
blame that finds fault with the greater, and does it not in the lesser, when
the greater is more difficult to be performed? It is harder to govern a whole
kingdom, a city, or a flock, then a little family, and more faults will
appear. How unreasonable a thing then is it that a man which guides not his
little family in any such order as god requires, should let go the sight of
his own defects, and wholly give himself in speech to deprave the public
guides. Lament and sorrow for evil, consent not thereunto in any wise, follow
the ways of the Lord, obey the rules of the word: and therefore let al men
regard this, and keep their place and standing which God has set them in, and
so walk, as that they may answer before the high judge, and give account how
they have discharged their duty.

To come now to the governors and guides of the Lords people: and first to the
pastors and shepherds which have the power and authority ecclesiastical.
These are principal, and above all other, and after a special sort to
procure, and to preserve this blessed unity, as the end for which they are
given of Christ, does show. He has (says S. Paul) given some to be Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and teachers: and then he shows
to what end, saying, for the repairing of Saints, for the work of the
ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ: till we all meet
together in the unity of faith, and that acknowledging of the son of God,
unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the fulness of Christ,
etc. Ephe. 4. verse. 11.12.13. This is their whole work and labor appointed
them, even to build up Christ's body, the temple of God, by framing and
coupling together the living stones, unto that unity of brethren, which is
commended in this Psalm. Then let us see the rules prescribed in Gods word,
which they must observe to perform this holy work. The Elders (says S.
Peter) that are among you, I beseech, which am also an Elder and a witness of
the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shall be
revealed, feed the flock of God which depends upon you caring for it not by
constraint, but willingly: not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind: not as
though ye were Lords over Gods heritage, but that ye may be examples to the
flock. 1. Pet 5. verse. 1.2.

First the sheep of Christ are to have food, their life depends thereupon.
It is required therefore in all shepherds that will answer their calling
before God, to have the same affection in the^ which Christ had: who when he
saw the multitude he had compassion on them, because they were as sheep
without a shepherd, Mat. 9.36. Pity and compassion upon the straying sheep
must move them to seed: yea love must constrain. For Christ says to Peter,
Simon Ioanna love thou me more then these? feed my sheep: love thou me?
feed my lambs: love thou me? feed my sheep: as if he should say, of all
love do this for me. Here I am to move those which be in authority in the
Church, if it may any way come to their ears, I do humbly beseech the^ for the
Lord Jesus Christ's sake, to have compassion upon the flock, that the sheep
may have their appointed food, even the bread of life plentifully broken unto
them, that they may be led into the green pastures, and unto the fountains
and streams of the living waters: cry also unto the Lord of the harvest, that
he will power down his spirit upon them, that in compassion, there may be
laborers sent forth: and that such as have taken upon them the charge, and be
idle or absent, may be compelled to do their duty: that such as be not able
to feed, or that walk in a dissolute and wicked behavior in life and
conversation, may be removed: And that such as be both skillful to teach, and
of godly life, may be set over them, to guide them both by doctrine and
example. If this be not per formed, how is the true concord and unity sought?
If the people be not instructed and led in the way of godliness: how shall they
be framed and built together in one holy temple? If the Shepherd be ungodly,
and give corrupt example: what peace, what unity, or what agreement can such
as will fear God, hold with him? And if there be a division between the
sheep and the shepherd, where shall be the unity of brethren? It is out of
all controversy that the mean to work the godly unity of brethren, is,
that the flock of Christ be fed and guided by skillful godly men, which
teach doctrine, and give good example in life and conversation.

And now touching the care of the flock, not by constraint, nor for gain, but
willingly and of a ready mind: not as Lords over Gods heritage, but as
examples to the flock; I do again instantly beseech the pastors and
governors even for Christ's sake, to abound and to increase in all fatherly
love toward the Lords people, without which this care cannot rightly be
performed. Follow herein the example of Saint Paul, who setting forth his
labor and travail, not of ambition or desire of gain, nor with roughnes, but
as he says, we were gentle among you even as a nurse cherishes her children.
1 Thessalonians. 2. ver. 7. where this fatherly love is broken off, there follows
(to the exceeding decay and desolation of the Church) that which the Lord
complained of by the Prophet Ezechiel against the pastors of Israel. Woe be
unto the shepherds of Israel, that feed themselves: should not the shepherds
feed the flocks? Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe ye with the wool: ye kill them
that are fed, but ye seed not the sheep: the weak have ye not strengthened:
the sick have ye not healed, neither have ye bound up the broken, nor brought
again that which was driven away: neither have ye sought that which was lost,
but with violence, and with cruelty have ye ruled them. Ezec. 24. verse. 3.4.
This was the state of the flock then, and shall be even to the worlds end:
that among Christ's sheep as some be strong, so some be weak, some sick,
some going astray. Yea such are the frailties of all the faithful, so many are
the errors and the sins which do break forth: but yet they are still the
sheep of Christ, the Israel of God, and the shepherds of Israel are to look
to them. Now I say, if there be not a fatherly love in the shepherds to cover
the multitude of sins: if there be not a tender compassion, as in the Nurse
toward the little babe, in stead of care to heal the broken and sick, and to
support the weak, to bring into the way that which straieth, they shall
despise and loathe them as not worthy to be regarded, yea they shall with
violence and rigor beat and bruise them, certain it is, that the greater the
frailties are, the greater care and compassion is to be showed. So that
violence and rigor are not fit to be in the shepherds. For shall the nurse
throw the little infant against the stones, or push it forward when it can
hardly stand alone? Shall the shepherd take his staff and strike the young
and tender Lambs? or shall he beat and bruise the weak and feeble sheep?
What shall we say, are the sheep of Christ of less value? Many of them are
weak and feeble in knowledge, many of them are but as young babes, as touching
the spiritual power of sanctification. A number of sins do break from them.
Many are wounded in conscience and troubled in spirit: here is place for the
love, the care, the compassion and labor of Shepherds. O ye shepherds of
Israel put on this love and compassion, loathe not the sheep of Christ for
these frailties, rule them not with violence and cruelty: but feed and
support, and heal them with all meeknes and long suffering. Let no perverseness
or injuries of any of the sheep toward the shepherds, break off the course
of this love and care. For if they look unto this, how the sheep despise them,
how they walk stubbornly against them, they shall never be able with patience
and meekenes to go through with the work. If we think it an unworthy
thing, or such as does discharge the shepherd from his tender love and care,
or that may warrant him to be rigorous, that many of the sheep do not
reverence him. Look upon Moses and Paul two great and notable servants of God,
two special shepherds of the Lords flock, who is worthy to be compared with
them? They have left an example to be followed. How great things did Moses for
the people? And yet how often did they murmur against him, and were ready to
stone him? How many were their rebellions and injuries done unto him? And yet
his love is not quenched, his care does not fail, but his prayer is most
earnest unto God to pardon them: he still esteems them (though not all) as
the Lords chosen people. What can they do more unto us, then go about to
stone us? Behold also the exceeding abundant love of Paul, who wished himself
accursed from Christ, that his kinsemen the Jews which were obstinate might be
saved. How much greater was his love to the faithful of his kindred? And yet
could they, even the Church of Jerusalem, scarce think any thing well of him all the time that he lived, but thought hardly of him, though he did never so much
for them? This is gathered by that which he writes, Romans 15. where he first
shows that it had pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to give somewhat to the
poor Saints in Jerusalem, and that he went with this their beneuole^ce to see
it delivered: and then he entreated them to be very earnest in prayer to God
for him, that he might be delivered from the disobedience of Judea, and that
his ministry toward Jerusalem might be accepted of the Saints. It is a
marvelous thing to consider, that there being so great need in the Church at
Jerusalem, and that money being so welcome to those which are in penury, and
he carrying so plentiful store, yet there needs earnest prayers that this his
service might be accepted. He had moved the Churches of the Gentiles, (as
appears in his second Epistle to the Corinthians) to make this liberal
contribution. He wrought this matter, he goes up with it, so great was his
care. Yet when he shewethal this love and diligence toward the^, how great was
their misliking of him, that he fears his ministry would not be acceptable
to the^? The cause of the misliking, James does show unto him when he was come
up, Act. 21. ver. 21. Namely, that it was reported he had taught the Jews
among the Gentiles to depart from Moses, and not to circumcise their children.
We see he loves them dearly for all this, and calls them saints:
notwithstanding their great frailty in this matter, and the hard opinion they
conceived and held of him, so great and so worthy a servant of the Lord Jesus
Christ. What a pattern of meekenes and fatherly love is here for all the
shepherds of the Lords flock to follow, among the poor feeble and wandering
sheep, which do not so reverence and regard them as they ought to do. The
shepherds as S. Peter requires, must be examples to the flocks, and
therefore of all other are to show meekenes, long suffering, and that love
which covers the multitude of sins. Where the pastors abound in this
fatherly love, and do not fall upon the frail sheep and tender lambs with
rigor and violence, the blessed unity of brethren here praised is chiefly
furthered: for the building up of Christ's body in sanctification, is greatly
advanced by the example of the pastors and teachers. The multitude are drawn
thereby to embrace and to follow the truth. I do therefore again humbly
beseech all the pastors and guides of the Lords people, to consider of this
holy rule and worthy examples, and to practice it, that the people of the Lord
may be brought into true concord and brotherly amity. Then lastly, it
appertains also unto rulers in civil matters to maintain this unity
according to the truth. They are to minister justice and true judgment unto
all, to punish the evil doers, and to cherish and maintain the good. Mercy
and love is also necesssarily required in them, that they may deal even as
fathers when they correct and chastise. If this be not, there will great
mischiefs ensue, even to the disturbance of all godly peace and concord: for
let a ruler, a Judge, or a mighty man be void of religion, and withal given
to anger, dealing among the Lords weak and feeble sheep, he will be ready to
beat them down and to crush them in pieces. The frailties and sins are many
that break forth even from some of Christ's sheep and lambs (as we see,
there be the weak, the sick, the bruised, and such as err) the thing is
odious in the^, because they profess holiness, and therefore cannot in them
be borne: therefore lift up your hearts in earnest prayer unto God, that he
will power down ye spirit of fatherly love and mercy upon rulers and judges,
that they may deal in the Lords flock, and toward his poor weak sheep, with
such regard as that they may answer before Christ. Thus if we honor and
embrace the truth, if we practice the rules thereof, every one performing those
duties which the Lord inioyneth, the rulers and judges, pastors and governors
in the church, as also the private persons, we shall grow into this holy unity
which the holy Ghost here praises, we shall receive all heavenly gifts and
blessings, yea even that great blessing of all blessings, the lfie for
evermore. Grant this unto us O Lord, for thy dear sons sake our redeemer and
Savior: to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, three persons, and one
everlasting God, whom we worship, be all honor, glory, dominion and power,
for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

