Of the Christian Sabbath a godly treatise of master Julius of Milayne,
translated out of Italian into English, by Thomas Langley.

Exodus xx. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day.

Anno Domini. 1552. Mense Maio.

To his very entier friend master William Jews of London, Thomas Laugley
wishes grace and peace in Christ.
THE discipline of good conversation (gentle Master Jews) stands chieflye,
or rather altogether in ij. points: that is, in doctrine, and exercise. By
doctrine is taught to know what should be done, by that other, men be brought
to custom, that they be willinge and ready to put in execution that, which
they have learned. And the one of these with out the other is maimed and
imperfect. Wherefore Moses seems to have taken better form of government,
the^ any politic ruler of the heathen, in his laws making. For where the
Lacedaemonians and Cretians ordered al by doings and use, without much a do
making in words: and contrary wise the Athenians spente long space in decrees
making, but were slack in requyrynge the performaunce of the same: Moses most
diligently has coupled And ioygned them so together, that nether he parted
good custom of living from doctrine, nor suffered doctrine to be without
inuring of works. But because they should agreablye be matched, he as well
made laws for rest and forbearynge of works, as he did for the dilygence of
labor to be occupied, not that their ceasynge from works should maintain
idleness and sloth, but that thereby they might be guyded by knowledge, and that
their offenses should not be cloked or excused by ignorance. For that day,
that they rested (which they named therefore the Sabbath, and was not ones or
twyse in the year, but every weke ones on the seventh day) they came
together to here the law of God, wherein was contained all such things, as
they should do and expres in their behavior.

The manner of their coming together (as Philo tells) was thus. When the
ordinarye day came, they assembled to their temples with much speed, and there
did sit giving good audience, and diligenteare to the scriptures, unless at
times with one accord, they spoke a word in commendation of that, yt was there
said, and read, and the priest or one of the elders rehearsed the law, and
expounded it, and this fashion they used at the seventh day, till the evening
tide, and then departed. By means whereof they neded not to ask of the lawiers
what they should do, nor could be in their evil discharged by any colored
excuse of lack of knowledge, but the husband to the wife, the father to his
children, masters to their servants, declared the commandments of the
law. Thus was doctrine taught one day, and exercise and practice all the weke
after, was put in execution, and used.

Whatsoever labor let them from resorting to the hearing of the law, was
straightly forbidden, and sharp pain appointed for correction of the
offenders therein. Now if this precise order was used on the Sabbath day,
under Moses, and his doctrine so duly taught, and all to bring men to a
civil order, and outward rightewesnes: how much more needful is it, yt we,
which profes christ, be busied in learning the laws of the gospel, the law of
the sprite, the word of life, which whosoever knows, shall receive for their
obedience and honest conversation not only reward temporal in this life, but
also in ye world to come salvation of our souls, and life everlasting. Let it
not therefore grieve us, which be in the daylight of the gospel, on the days of
assembling together devoutly to use our selves: seeing the Hebrews, ye were
hud^^ the cloudy shadow and letter of the law, showed themselves so willing
and forward to observe the same. For albeit the Iewysh Sabbath touching ye
seventh day be abrogated and expelled, yet is not the commandment of ye
Sabbath sanctifiyng disanulled, but remains still as a headful part of
christian religion, co^teyning all such due service, as belongs to the glory
of god. And for that cause our elders (when otherwise blind ignorance had
ouershadowed the hole world, that the Sabbath might reverently be hallowed)
ordained by act of parliament, yt in this realm no fayres nor markettes should
be kept upon the sunday, or other solemn feast, as upon christmas day, easter
day, with so^day, and ascension day, as appears in the acts of Henry the.vi.
king of this realm. But now, when for our knowledge we should be better:
thorough unbridled liberty, we be growe^ to such badnes, yt al (law of god
and man) set aside, men be wholly given over to follow their lusts on ye sabbath
days, not only by going to markets, fayres, and gasinge games, but also by
misusing their time, (yt should be spent in reading or hearing of ye word of
god, in prayer, and visiting of ye poor) in bear baiting, hauking, hu^ting,
da^sing, carding, dising, ba^quetting and other kinds of riot and surfeiting.
And thus make those days most unholy of all the weke, and worthier to be named
idle days for their evil occupiyng of ye rest, then holy days for any hallowed
working: where our rest from works of body should be an earnest exercising of
our sprites in goostly doings. Wherefore it is to be wished, yt a reformation
and redress might be taken therein by the magistrates, for the restoring of the
sabbath to it own propre kind. And because I perceived yt this treatise of
master Julius of Milayne, declares and handles this matter at large, I
thought good (so as I could) to turn it into our native speech, yt thereby ye
christian reders might learn what their office is on ye holy days, and se how
far we be swarued out of frame from the true natural use thereof. And albeit ye
argument be universal, and mete for all men for the matter, yet it specially
seems very fitting, yt it be dedicated to your ge^tlenes: as well for that you
be given to the study of ye Italian tongue (ye by reading hereof you might be an
Aristarchus to examine how nere I have gone to the Italian Phrase, and meaning
of ye author) as also because it was my duty to show some testimony unto you,
of the good heart ye I have borne to you, ever sithe^we were first conuersa^t
together, in familiarity of company, and conference of study, which as it
began long agone, so has it still continued, fixed and steadfast on my behalf.
Pleases it you therefore to accept in good part this toke^ small in quantity,
but great both for godliness of ye work, and good will of the presenter, and
chiefly for yt it is your wont ge^tlenes to set much by any gift, ye comes
from your herty friends. And I shall daily, as occasion and opportunity serves
further utter my faithful love toward you, by such things as my ability
shall be sufficient to perform, and be a continual petitioner to god for your
prosperouse health long to endure. Fare you hertelye well. From Headcrone
the.xxi. of March. 1552.

Of the Christian Sabbath.
THERE is nothing, that has been more mystaken of the Scrybes and Phariseis,
then ye bodily obseruaunce and keeping of the Sabbath day. Because that God
ordained it not, to the intent that the outward right and usage of
forbearynge work and bodily labor, should with so much religion, or
rather scrupulosite be regarded, but the Sabbath was instituted, to be as it
were a shadow and figure of the spiritual rest, from fleshly works, which a
Christian ought continually to practice, and put in ure in his living and
conversation. In consideration whereof, we read that our savior Christ had
little respect and less reverence to that It wish ceremonye of the Sabbath,
and buselye labored to persuade the Jews, that to put difference betwixt
days was rank superstition, and starcke hypocrisye. Wherefore he did many
works on the self Sabbath day: ^eth. x. ij
he healed the man yt had the wythered hand, ^uc. vi.
on the Sabbath day. The Apostles rubbed out the ears of corn to eat, on
the Sabbath day: John. v.
he healed at the pond by the slauter house the man that had been xxxvi^ years
diseased, John. ix.
he caused the the blind borne to se: and says this day in the Gospel:
John. vij.
if a man break not the Sabbath in circumcisynge a child, why are ye grieved
and wode with me, because I have healed a man on ye Sabbath day? Luc. xiiij.
We read in S. Luke that our master healed on the Sabbath a man diseased
with the dropsey, and the Phariseis, as their wont manner was, murmured, and
grudged at that dead. But our master opened, and showed euidentelye forth
that, their error with this answer, saying. Which is there among you, if
his ox or ass should fall into a pit on the Sabbath day, that would not
do his best to rydde him out, and yet were not the Sabbath broken thereby. And
the reason thereof our master shows, where he says, The son of man is
Lord of the Sabbath: that is, man is above the Sabbath, and in his affayers
should not have any eye or consideration to the corporal ceremonye, whosoever
were ye author of it. But because the Jewish Sabbath has bred, and brought
forth great hypocrisye in the Christian church, it is expedient^ and neadfull,
that we wayg^ and examine, in what manner man was Lord of the Sabbath, before
that Jesus Christ^ suffered, to thintente that the liberty of days, yt we have
in the Christian congregation, now sith that Christ has suffered and is
ascended into heaven, may be the better (...) more thoroughly known. And lest
peradventure any error or false opinion should grow in the beginning of this
talk, thou must understand that all sawes, that be found any where, either
be natural or posityue.

Natural laws be those, Natural laws.
that the Lord God has graven in the natural reason of man, which afterward
being written in the stonye tables, by mynysterye of Moses, were made
playner, and more open, then they were be fore in our conscience. As for
example, the law of honourynge of God, of reuerensing his name, of obeyinge
our parents, and other superiors, of not robbynge, of not committynge
adultery, of not killyng, and finally of not doyn^ to others that we would no^
were done to our selves. These be called by the nam^ of Gods laws, not
only because God appointed the^ to Moses, but also for tha^ the Lord has
prynted them in the mind of every living man. Which thing Sayn^ Paul
declares, where h^ says, Romans ij.
that the heathen show the works of the law written in their hearts, they^
own conscience bering the^ witness of ye same. Two sorts of positive laws.
Laws positive (which have their orig^nall of the laws of nature b^ of.ij.
sorts. For either they be Ecclesiastical or else the^ be cyuill
Ecclesiastical laws which in the old Testamen^ are called ceremonial)
Ecclesiastical laws.
were ordained for the consecration of true faith, and pure religion in the
church of God. Of the old Testament
Of these laws there were a great number among the Hebrews, as the
circumcision, the Sabbath, the order of sacrifices, Laws of the new. Act. ij.
and all the leuiticall obseruaunces. Likewise in our Christen church there is
the institution of baptism, of the Lords supper, 1. Cor. xv^
of preaching the Gospel, of prayers, and collection, or collation for the
pouertye, with all such other laws, as concern the mynysterye of the word,
and of the Sacraments. These laws be of God, insomuche as they be appointed
by God in the new and old Testamentes. Semblablye ^ach laws as be added to
these, to thin^^^ that the church may be governed in formal order without
confussion, 1. Cor. xiiij Col. ij.
ought to be called Gods laws, Wherefore Paul, having se^ an order in the
public honestye, comlynes, and modest^ behauioure, that should be observed in
the congregation, as well in men, as in women, says these words: if any man
think him self a teacher or spiritual, 1. Cor. xiiij
let him know what things I write unto you, for they are the commandments
of ye lord God? Verily because yt in the church or assemblye of the faithful,
every thing must be handled in order with discretion, with confused
minglynge.

The second sort of laws posytyue be ciuyll, Civil laws.
or politic and Iudityall laws, which are devised for the keeping of the
public peace, common quiet, and vneuersall honestye in all states of men.
These were long ago made and given by God to Moses, and sith Moses time every
nation has invented their peculiar and several laws, and constitutions.
Which in like manner be named the laws of God, not only because that Moses
enacted them, but also because that princes, commonweals and other officers
be the ordinances of god, to punyshe malefactors, and promote ye good doers.
Romans xiij
Paul says: there is no power but of God, and the powers that be, are
ordained of god. Now that these things be declared, let us se, which of the
fore said laws, a man in the time of Moses, and before that Christ had died,
was Lord of and above: that is, which of them he might in case of nead break,
and omit. First and formest I say to you: that the laws natural, Law of
nature cannot be broken for any cause
be of such force and strength, that nether they ought nor may be broken for
any kind of necessitye or behofe, whatsoever: but a man is bound to neglect
honor, riches, despise himself, and contemn his own life, rather then
transgress the law of nature. For sooner a man should enter the fire, then
deny god, and be more willing to abide hanging by the neck, then blaspheme
the name of God, he ought redilyer dye any kind of terrible and dredeful
death, then bear false witness against his neighbor. Because there is no
manner thing that more straightly binds us, nor more narowly keeps us in, and
(as it were) pinneth us up, then does the obedience to god: nether can there
be any greater scourge over our head, then that is due for disobeying the
Lord. For it behooves that all our neades, all our perilous dangers, al our
profitable commodities, give place and rowme to the obedience of god: for that
we always obey to God, it is neadfull, but to continue still in this life
mortal, stands not in such necessitye. The other laws, that is,
Ecclesiastical laws be dispe^sed with.
ecclesiastical, and ciuyll, albeit they be ordained of god, yet be not so
holy and reuerente, but that they may in causes of necessytye, not only be
broken, but also altogether dysanulled, as though they never had been. And for
proof hereof, let us peruse the ecclesiastical laws of ye Jews. Those laws
were to be kept, and done, so long as the outward gouernme^te of the Jews
endured, and until that Christ was dead and risen again: they were ordained
of God by the hands of Moses, for the people of Israel, to the end, that
the name of God should be praised, and the promises made in Christ might be
taught, and true religion preserved, nether was circumcision, the sabbothe, the
sacrifices, and all that solemn and ceremonial service, and leuiticall
obsequies about the tabernacle of the Jews, ordained and instituted for any
other purpose the^ is before said. Notwithstanding, for so much as these
laws were only given to the people of the Jews, and to none other nation,
therefore the gentiles, and foreyne people were not burdened, nor charged, with
the kepinge of those statutes, nether did they offend in not keeping them, for
that they were not driven to live under those constitutions, although they had
forsaken Idolatry, and acknowledged one very God, by beleuyng the promyses of
Jesus Christ. We read, Example.
that the people of Niniue repented at the preaching of Jonas, and pleased,
Jones. iij.
and appeared God thereby, Niniue.
yet read we not, that they were circumcysed, nor yt they observed other
ecclesiastical laws of the Jews. Daniel. iij
Daniel witnesses, Babylon
yt the king of Babylon confessed openly the very true god of Israel, and
commanded by proclamation, that no man should blaspheme him, nevertheless it
is not read, that the king of Babylon was therefore bownden to ye ceremonies of
Moses. No the Jews them selves were not so bounden to these ecclesiastical
laws, but that they might omit them in time of neade, either for any
commodity, or for any matter of honestye. Many of the Israelites after their
deliuerye out of Egypt, while they were in the wilderness, were uncircumcised as
it appears in Iosue. Io^ue. v.
And very likely it is that many Jews died in the deserte without
circumcision, foreskin.
which by faith passinge from death unto life, were not damned, for having
their foreskin. King David fleinge the persecution of King Saul, i. Re. xvij.
lest he should dye for hunger, Show bread.
did eat (both he and his company) of the table of the lord, the holy bread,
that was dedicated, and appointed only for the use of the priests, and yet
sinned he not in so doing. By this example of David our master proves to ye
Jews, that in neadfull affairs and busynes, Math. xij.
ye son of man (that is, every man) is Lord of the sabbath. Nether did our
savior Jesus Christ by these words, mean that the Sabbath should not, or
ought not to be kept at that time, when as yet he was not dead, be showed
thereby, on what manner the ceremonies of Moses bound that nation to the
observing of them. For the Iewishe ceremonies (at that time) were to be
reverenced by the general commandment of God, Dispensations.
notwythstanding, if either need, or the profit of any neighbor constrained a
Jew to break them, he was not in such case bownde to keep them, because yt
(cause standing) the Jews was lord of the Sabbath, and offended not in
breaking and omyttynge them.

Therefore our savior Christ sinned not, when he healed sick and diseased
persons on the sabbath day, because that necessity, and neyghbourly charity
caused him to have small respect to the outward Sabbath, which was a shadow
and figur of the christian sabbath. So sone as christ was dead and risen
again, all the ceremonies of the Jews were utterly disanulled and repelled:
wherefore the Christian man was unburdened of the heaviness of them, and only
trusted to be saved by ye grace of God showed in Jesus Christ. For this cause
we christians ought not to make any difference of days, nor think that one
day is holyer then another. Wherefore S. Paul would not that a christian, Romans
^^^^
judge and think any diversity between day and day, Col. ^^.
nor that any man should accuse us for any fastiual day, or new moan, or
sabbath day, and feared lest he had trauayled in vain, in the church of the
Galathians, Gal. iiij.
because they were obseruers of days: willing to do us to understand, ye to
count one day holier then that other, was a thing, that parteyneth to a Jew,
and not to Christen men.

That, which we have spoken of ceremonies Mosaicall, Ceremonies of ye new
Testament.
namely that in neade, and other behoues they bound not any Jew, we may
likewise say and affirm of the ecclesiastical laws of Christendom whereof
some be autorised by Jesus Christ, and some by the father and elders of our
religion, yt the christen faith might be preached and taught in good order.
And albeit the ordinances of our ancestors, be not to be compared to those
that god the lord appoints, yet are they to be observed, and ought to be
reverently used, because that god would, that in the church, things should be
ordered in comely manner, and with due reverence. But for so much as these our
laws ceremonial are made for our commodity, and not to our loss, therefore
the lord would that they should yield, and give place to our necessityes.
Necessity is a dispensation.
There be many christen men under the Turk in vylanowse slavery, which can not
use the Sacrament of the Lords supper, and yet shall they not be condemned
therefore, so yt they have the faith of Jesus Christ. Many other be entangled
and chaltered in ye snares of Antichrists hypocrisy, which can not here the
sincere preaching of ye Gospel, and yet shall not for that cause be condemned,
if in the mean while they do believe and trust in Jesus Christ, al such do not
sin, because necessity excuses the^. Like process might be made of ye
Iuditial laws, but I will not at this time make any treatise upon them.

The Phariseis therefore, moved of an hateful hypocrisye, blamed our master,
as a wicked breaker of the sabbath, and yet understood not for what purpose God
had ordained the Sabbath. The Lord had an higher respect, then to the bodily
rest, when he command the sabbath in the law, saying to the Jews: Remember
that thou keep holy ye sabbath day, Exo. x^.
six days shalt thou work, and the seventh is the Sabbath of the lord thy
god, thou shall do no work there on. Iustitution of the sabbath.
In this speech God principallye shows to ye people of Israel, that a man
can not be sanctified nor justified by his own works, but proves yt to come
to holiness, behooves to keep goostly sabbath. This is purport and intent of
this commandment, namely that we ought to be dead to the works of our own
flesh, for bear and rest from sin, and continually have our meditation and
study of the kingdom of god: practisinge our selves in this goostly rest, we
sanctify the christen Sabbath. For this consyderation it is (I think) that
Austen (writing unto Ianuarius) says, Lib. 2. ca. 12.
that this commandment of the sabbath is figurative, and a shadow touching
the outward keeping of the day, which is clean abrogated together, with all
other shadows and ceremonies of Moses, by ye death of Jesus Christ. Wherefore
ancient writers say, three causes of ye sabbath.
that God appointed the co^maundment of the sabbath for three causes.

First cause.
First, because the lord under the commandment of the bodily rest, would have
understood the spiritual and goostly quiet, wherein the faithful surceasse
from fleshly works, and give place to god, to work in them the works of the
holy Ghost.

Second cause.
The second cause why the Sabbath was commanded to the Jews, is that the
people of the Hebrews might have an appointed to hear the word of the Lord.

The third cause is, that servants, Third cause.
and such as be in subjection and under the commandment or rule of others,
may have some ease and discontinuaunce of labor.

Thus, albeit yt we find how the sabbath was instituted for three causes
aforesaid, yet nevertheless, the principal and chief cause why this
ceremonial commandment was given, is because it should sygnify and importe
to us, the rest from sin, and halowing of our souls and minds. For this
cause we read in the old testament, that there was no commandment so
precisely and straightly given to ye Jews, Exo. xxxv.
as the keeping of the Sabbath was, when god co^playneth yt al religion was
destroyed and wasted among the Jews, Hier. xvii
he lame^teth that this sabbath is broken, Qezech. xx
that it is not kept not sanctified, as though the lord should say: sabbath is
all religion.
yt when the sabbath is defiled and despised, there remains no other thing
wherwyth God can be honored. Wherefore the lord commands the religion of the
Sabbath, above all other spiritual works, speaking to his people on this wise:
take head (o ye children of Israel) yt ye keep my sabbath, Exo. xixi.
because it is a sign between me and you, thorough out your generation, yt ye
may know, that I am the lord that sanctify you. Keep the sabbath, for it is
holy unto you, it is an everlasting covenant between me and the people of
Israel, and a perpetual sign. By these words of the Lord is well perceived,
yt the sabbath is a sign, whereby the people of Israel may know, yt god is
their sanctifier. A christian man can not become holy, unless first of al he
crucify the evil desires of his carnal will. Therefore ye straight keeping of the
ceremonial sabbath is not the thing yt can make us holy, but it is a shadow,
and sign, which teaches us to leave of from our fleshlye works, yt the
sprite of the lord may work in us the true sanctification, goostlye sabbath.
so yt the carnal will of the christen man, should give place to the sprite of
god, his worldly heart to the will of god. Our body with all the carnal me^bres
thereof should rest from voices and al dishonest works, yt god may do in us his
holy and goostly works. This is that spiritual sabbath, and christen holy day,
yt Paul describes to the Hebrews, Heb. iij.
where he says: therefore there remains a rest unto the people of god. Heb.
iiij.
For he yt is entered into his rest, ceasseth from his works, Gene. ij.
as god did from his, let us make have therefore to enter into ye rest. And
for so much as a true christian ought always to subdue and keep under the flesh
with it co^cupiscences and lusts, Continual Sabbath.
he therefore every hour keeps sabbath, and takes not one day to be more
holy then another.

This our spiritual sabbath we begin in this mortal life, and from day to day
(as ye power of the sprite of god increases in us) we more and more rest from
ye works of the flesh, and be more fervent and forward in halowynge the
sabbath. flesh breketh sabbath. Gal. v.
But because ye flesh continually wrastleth and strives against ye sprite and
abateth him from the perfect love therefore no christen man (whilst he abides
in this flesh) keeps thoroughly and perfectly the sabbath, notwithstanding at
the last, when we shall be coupled to Jesus Christ, and the kingdom shall be
resigned into the hands of god the father, 1. Cor. xv
and god shall be al in all, then shall we keep the perfect sabbath. This is that
perpetual sabbath, and continual holy day, that Esaias the Prophet describes
saying: Esaias. lxvi
there shall be sabbath after sabbath, and new moan after new moan, which also
was resembled and shadowed of the lord god to the Israelites, in the outward
keeping of the seventh day. This is that sabbath, for which the Prophet so much
bewayleth, because ye wicked went about to take it quite away from the earth,
Psa. lxxiij
saying: come of, let us take every sabbath of god out of the earth. Other
sabbath then this do not the children of God acknowledge, ye is, to stay and
trust in the merits of Jesus Christ, Christen sabbath.
by mean whereof they be justified, and crucifye their own flesh. And
for so much as a christian man is assuredly certified and knows yt he has god
for his father, therefore he lays al his trauayl and grefe upon him, which
takes care for his children. The faithful keep Sabbath, when they say in ye
lords prayer, o lord thy will be done. By these words the faithful is
replenished, and fulfilled with ye sprit of the lord, and knows, yt it is
not behouefull to follow his carnal will, that the will of god might be done, and
acco^plyshed. He yt is the brother of Christ, is guyded by the comfortable
sprite, and not by the wysdom of of his flesh. Whether death, or life, shame or
honor, riches, or poverty, trouble, or prosperity come, the christian man is
nether dismayed with despair, nor puffed up in pride. For he keeps diligently
the sabbath of the sprite, and takes it for certain, yt he is in the hands
of god. Happy be those Christians that sanctify the heavenly Sabbath in their
hertes, yea more then happy may I call them, for they are no more in despair
of conscience, they know how much Jesus Christ works in their minds, they
pass not upon shadows, yt be disanulled and destroyed by the coming of the
body of Jesus Christ. O unhappy be our days wherein raygneth more superstition,
then ever did among the Jews. This is ye marvelous chere, and rejoicing that
the Prophet makes for the solemnity of the day, dedicated to the lord,
saying: sing with triumph unto god our helper, Psa. lxxx.
make ye melody to the god of Jacob. Lift up your sweet tunes of the
cymbales: smite upon your Psalters, and touch clenly the strings of your swet
harpes, blow your trompettes in ye feast of your new moan, and in the solemn
day of your feast. This so^g and tune of the Prophet was expounded of Paul,
where he says: Col. iij. Ephesians. vj
yt we should in our hertes singe to the lord Psalms, and spiritual songs,
rejoicing in ye sprit, and ioyinge in this sabbath. Wherefore faith ioygned with
true confession, and love, makes us to sing to the very god of Jacob. This
rejoicing is known outwardly of our neighbor, by the confession, yt we make
in the name of the great God. psaltery
The Psalterye that we smite on in the solemnitye of this sabbath is the
loving and thanking of god. Cimbal.
The cimbal is the mortifyinge of humane wisdom, the crucifying of all man's
merits, and the denying of al superstitiouse religion. Harp.
The harp, that is played upon in the feast of ye sabbath, is the charity,
that we use toward our neighbor, which causes our conversation to be
dulcet, and pleasant. The trompet is the preaching of ye gospel, Tro^pet.
wherewith all christians be somoned and warned to sanctify the feast of the
sabbath, for in Jesus Christ is ordained ye everlasting Sabbath.

This is the time that pleases the lord, ^. Cor. vi. Esaias. xli^.
in which he hears us, for this is ye day of salvation, wherein he succoureth
us. Therefore the christian sabbath is, that a man despair of him self, yt he
condemn his own holiness, and all that, that can come of our own nature, and
put the trust and confidence of his salvation in one only Jesus Christ. By this
mean man rests from his carnal works, and gives place for the lord to
work in his heart the doings of ye sprite, whereby ye lord consecrateth us,
and haloweth us into his own service, as the Prophet says: The lord that
made every thing governs al, Psalm. xci.
for all things be in his hands. Jews offended
The Jew and the hipocrit, that here talk of this manner sanctifying of the
sabbath day, is discontented, yea and is starcke wood, his blood chafeth
wtin him, nether can he abide yt the superstitiouse ceremony of days be
overthrown. On other side the faithful man hears those things, the
faithful.
reioseth, is glad, and chereful in hy^ heart saying: Praised be t^ lord, in
whose hands and cust^dy is my salvation: Ihon. ^.
I am w^ assured to be saved, for no (...) can take or pull me out of (...)
hands of the eternal father The Sabbath therefore is (...) hallowed by being
idle, Idleness is not halowyng
nor standing with the fingers ^^der the girdle, nor yet wy^ ceasing from hand
labor o^^ day, as ye superstitiouse Ie^^ supposes. Wherefore we re^^ in the
Prophet Esaias, that (...) sanctifiyng of the sabbath ^^^deth not in the outward
and ^^^^dely religion of the holy d^^ but the true halowing is ^^^^ing our own
will, and glorify^^g the lord. For he says, if ^ou turn thy fete from the
^abboth, Esaias. l^^^ lviji.
so yt thou do not the ^^ing which pleases thy self (...) my holy day, the^
shall thou (...) called unto the pleasant, ^oly and glorious sabbath of the
^^rd, where thou shall be in ho^our, so yt you do not after thine ^wne
ymagynatyon, nether ^^ke thine own will, nor speak ^hyne own words, the^
shall ^hou have thy pleasure in the lord, which shall carry the high ^boue the
earth, and feed thee with ^he heritage of Jacob thy father. Nether is there any
doubt, but yt this ceremony of the day is abrogated by ye coming of Jesus
Christ, Ceremonye of time abrogated.
like as al other ceremonies of ye Hebru^es be. Jesus Christ is ye truth, at
whose presence all figure^ be destroyed. Jesus Christ (...) ye body, at whose
approchin^ al shadows vanishe away* he alone has given us the true
fulfylling of the sabbath by clothyng us with himself through his death, Romans
vi.
that w^^ being raised again with hi^ might lead a new life, whe^fore all
our life should be a perpetual sabbath, as I have sa^ to you before.

And although there be no d^^ferences of days in the christian congregation,
Romans xiiij
yet wo^^ Paul yt the weak in ye fayt^ were borne with, and suffered* and
that compassion be taken upon such, as be fre from a^ kind of hypocrysye and
dissimulation, because many, yt have already some knowledge (...) the word of
God, desire to ^o still forward. But for ye ^^ey be fell as children, and
^^ryshed and noseled in anti^^ristes religion, they believe that one day is
more holy ^^en another, of more reue^^nce, and more honor then another, of
this hypocrisye ^^rked up in the swathlynge ^^des, springs up also this ^ther
error, that the consci^nce of the hypocrite and simple (...) cloyed with
scrupulosity: And ^hinketh that he commits as it is commonly termed) a
^^adly sin, if on the holy ^ay he should go to plowing, (...) do any other
manner of hand ^^oure. The Apostle ther^^re would, Weak must be borne with.
that such feeble and ^^eake in the faith should not ^^raight way be divided
from the church. For with allo^ and charitable manner, our du^^ is first to
enstructe them, an^ do them to perceive and witte^ of what sort the christien
(...) euangelical liberty is, which is purchased and bought for v^ by Jesus
Christ. Afterwarde^ when the weak faythed i^ taught so far, that he knows
the liberty of days* of meats, of raiment, and o^ all other outward works
and nevertheless will be fro^warde, and refuse to enjoy (...) christen
liberty, then in such case ye infirmity is no leng^^ to be borne with, or
suffered* because so it might grow to be incurable. This error was bytterly
blamed of S. Paul, which inflamed with great grefe, rebuked ye church (...) ye
Galathians, saying: Gal. ii^^.
if ye ^^ue already known god, why ^^ye turn back a fresh to (...) weak
and beggerlye ele^^ntes, whereto ye would be ^^unden and thrak servants
^^ayne? Ye observe days, and ^^onethes, and times, and yea^^s, I am in fear
of you, lest I ^aue bestowed labor on you (...) vain. Two causes never
abrogated
The other two cau^^s, for which the sabbath of ^he Jews was instytuted, were
never abrogated in any age or time: but ought to be observed of Christen men in
the new testamente, with no less earnestnes, the^ they were of the Jews in
the old law. Wherefore it is expedient and mete, that among us be days
appointed, when the church ought to assemble and come together to hear the
preaching of the word of god, Act. ij.
Holy day behavior.
to use often the lords supper, to make common prayer for ye state of
christendom, to make collections of alms for the relefe of the poor, i. Cor.
vi
and that families and housholdes may be informed in the christen religion, and
godliness, to visit our friends in a christien manner, to visit the sick, and
to practyse such other like holy deeds. Youth of it self is unruly and
headye. The vplandishe and feeble faythed, sone fall into error, Holy days
be deadfull
wherefore it is necessary for this intent to ordeyne holy days, that ye
youth may be nurtred, and kept in awe* and that the ignoraunte may learn to
know, what christian religion is, and what service is due to be given to god.

The third cause, wherefore the sabbath was dyuised, is open and plain by the
words, that the lord spoke to the Hebrew people. Thou shalt observe and take heed (says the lord) yt thy servant, and thy maid rest them, remember yt
thou was a servant in the ^and of Egypt. For these two ^auses therefore, that
be cyuill, ^e christians must have cho^^n and determinated days, (...) the
church may continually (...) exercised and inured, as well in ^ardly in works of
the sprit, (...) outwardly in love toward ^ur neighbor. For this consi^^ration
the law of the Lord ^^^bad the Jews, only such ^orkes on the sabbath day,
(...) let the^, that they could have no leisure or respyte to hear the
word of God, Why work is forbidden
to do the ordinary oblations and sacrifices, to make public prayer, and other
exercises, full of charity, and love. As for example, they were forboden to
till the land, to buyld houses, and to do any other ordinary labor on the
sabbath day, because such works held a man busied all the day, yt he could
intend to no other thing, notwithstanding, because ye law of the sabbath was
ceremonial to the Jews, they sinned not, if for necessity, or for the weal
and profit of their neighbor, they chanced some time to break it, as I have
said above in this treatise.

We Christians be fre from those ceremonies, and those ordynaunces, Christians
be fre.
that the Jews were in bondage under. Therefore no law of meat, of days, of
clothing, of places, can bind us to a sin, as it did the Jews.
Nevertheless, for so much as the church can not be co^gregated, Days to what
use.
and gathered, except there be days appointed, wherein the word of God must
be preached, the lords supper minystred, public prayer made, and other
Christen works aforementioned must be practiced: Therefore our aunciente
fathers and elders, have determined and instituted, that at the lest one day of
the weke should be bestowed and given to these religyouse and devout seruyces.
i. Cor. xvi.
And in ye Apostles church the Chrystyans following the custom of ye Jews
came together on the sabbath day, so yt many years the holy congregation of
christendom used the sabbath, for the day dedicated to the spiritual
government. But afterward, when Christendom increased, and spread abroad, in
the time of ye great Constantine, yt the Jews should have no occasion to glory
against us, and that other should not think, yt a Christian man became a Jew,
and lastly to declare to the whole world, yt one day is not more holy then
another, the sabbath was altered into the day following, which was named of
the christians the dominical day, So^day. ^^o. i.
that is, dedicated to the lord. And the keeping of this day has been always
used, sythen yt in the church, things may be done with order, and reverence.
Now to prove yt the holy days were ordained of our ancestors for this
polytycall end, How ye fathers used the sabbath
and not to make one day holyer then that other, Lib. 4.
suffiseth the auctority of Tertulliane In his book against Marcion: and
Hierome upon the epistle to the Galathians, where he says: lest the vnordinary
congregatynge of the people should minish ye faith in Christ, therefore certain
days be appointed us, yt we might all mete together, not that, that day,
wherein we mete, is more holy or reverent, but to ye end yt more rejoicing may
come of the mutual beholding, whatsoever day we mete. Saint Augustine also in
his work de ciuilate dei, makes mention of certain memorialles of holy
days, as ye nativity of ye lord, the circumcision, ye passion, the
resurrection, ye ascension, and whit so^day, on which days ye christians did
accompany themselves to hear ye word of ye lord, to use ye communion, to make
common prayers, and do other christian deeds. The same is red in the
ecclesiastical historye of Eusebius. So yt our elders, knew that ceremonial
holiness of the sabbath days, as the Jews did. They only on those days
assemble for the same purpose, yt the Apostles did, Act. ii. The apostles use
on ye holy day.
which continued in doctrine, in prayer, breakyng of bread, and in the
communicating, yt is, in aydinge and releuing the poor. And it appears yt
Paul appointed the day of the sabbath, on which day, 1. Cor. xvi.
at ye time ye congregation came together, yt the church of Corinth should make
their collections of alms, that the poor christians at Jerusalem, which
died for hunger, might be releued and succored. I conclude therefore, ye
christians be fre from al superstitiouse hypocrisy of keeping the sabbath, and
other festiual days. The Jews among other feasts, John. x. Fest of tents.
did use to sole^mse a feast of tabernacles, so named because they dwelled vij,
days in pauilio^s and bothes. This feast was observed in remembrance, that
their fathers dwelled in the desert and wyldernes in tents, when they were
delivered from ye bondage of Egypt. According as the Lord commanded saying:
In the seventh month (which agrees with the month of October among us)
the.xv. Leui. xxx.
day of the month shall be the holy day of the tabernacles, and seven days
shall ye lodge in tents, yt your posteritye may know, how that I made the
children of Israel to dwell in bothes when I delivered the^ out of ye land of
Egypt. This solemnity should be kept without hipocrisye, and superstition,
because it was but only a memoryall, and remembrance of the benefyte, yt God
had done to their fathers. But the Jews forgetting the meaning of ye feast,
thought they should offend deadly, if on such days that were festyuall, they
had done any bodily and outward work. In like manner ye Phariseis expounded
unto ye people the precept of the Sabbath amiss. The lord says: thou shalt
not work on the sabbath day. This commandment only bound the Jews from
doing such labors, as let the people, that they could not come to the
common assembly, to be exercysed and occupied in the law and will of the Lord,
as I have already said here to fore.

The last cause of keeping the sabbath was, Rest of servants.
that the servants and laboring persons might have some quyetnes and releafe
of labor: nevertheless the Phariseis neglecting the true understanding of
ye sabbath, had bewrapped and folden the people in the snare of hypocrisye and
vain superstition. Over and besides this, Pharisaicall traditions.
they added of their own head infinite other obseruau^ces and rites, wherewith
they brought the people into better bondage, for they said: on the sabbath day
men ought not walk upon the grass, lest it wyther, and be dead, nor clymbe
trees, nor eat fruit gathered on the sabbath day, nor ride on that day,
least the Sabbath were broken, nor wash clothes that were filed, nor blende
wine and water, nor kill a fly, nor feed any thing, nor read by ca^del light,
unless there be two at the least together in a company, and innumerable other
superstityouse toys they put to of their own brain, by mean whereof they
made the people superstitiouse and hypocrytes.

And they were so earnestly given to such novelties, that they forgate the
weyghtye things of the law, that is, true faith in God, mercy and pytye
toward their neighbor. Of such things if perchance they spoke any thing to
the people, it was done very coldely, because they were strayghte kepers of
things of no value, and were satisfied in magnifyinge their carnal Sabbath,
Commons blinded.
by which means they so kept under the understanding of the common people,
that they never came to the knowledge of the very truth. But we Christians, to
whom is opened and declared the gospel, must kept a perpetual sabbath in
spryte. For to a christian only belongs the true rest of the spiritual
Canahan. Heb. iiij.
If Iosue had given the children of Israel the true quyetnes, when he went
over Iordane, GOD would not eftesones promise a true rest, nor speak of
another sabbath by the Prophet David, Psa. xxiiij
which was a long while after Moses and Iosue. Therefore Iosue was but a
shadow and figure of Christ, Heb. xiij. Iosue a figure.
which gives us the very rest, and spiritual sabbath. Let us keep a
spiritual and goostlye sabbath, and not a carnal, because we have not here
any continuyng city, but we seek for one to come. Wherefore let us (as Paul
says) know, (...) ^oure earthye house of this dwelling were destroyed, ij.
Cor. ^.
we have a building ordained of god, an house not made with hands, but
everlasting in heaven. And therefore in ye same, let us lighted, estringe to be
clothed with our mansion, that is in heaven. And a little after he says, we
that are in this tabernacle sigh and are grieved, for we had rather not be
unclothed, but be clothed upon, ye mortalytye might be swalowed up of life.
Therefore, whilst we be in this world, we can not perfectelye keep the goostly
sabbath: for the flesh in such sort combereth our thoughts, that we can not
cease from works of the flesh, that the spryte of the Lord might only in
us keep the goostly and heavenly Sabbath, and that we might be coupled with
Jesus Christ our head, which has given us the true rest, by entering into
the most desired land of Canahan, by the path and passage, that is made and
set open by his blood. To whom be glory world without end.

Amen.
Fautes escaped.
The vij. leaf b. the last live for consecration read conservation.

The viij. leaf b. the xviij. live for with read without.

Imprynted at London in Paul's churcheyarde, at the sign of the George by
Willyam Reddell. In the year of our Lord. 1552.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


