Vera effigies Gildae qui ob insignem Prudentiam, Morumque Severitatem
Cognominatus est Sapiens Floruit anno reparationis humanae DXXXXVI
Will: Marshall-sculp:
portrait of Gildas

THE EPISTLE of GILDAS, The most Ancient BRITISH Author: Who flourished in the
year of our Lord, 546. And who by his great Erudition, Sanctity, and
Wisdom, acquired the name of Sapiens.

Faithfully Translated out of the Original Latin.

LONDON, Printed by T. Cotes, for William Cook and are to be sold at his shop
near Furnivalls-Inne gate in Holborne. 1638.

Imprimatur,

Tho. Wykes* R. P. Episc. Land. Capell. domest.

Of Gildas and the Translation.
THE age of books shows the strength of their composition; Weak or abortive
births, perishing in the infancy, scarce numbered among the works of Time. This
Author lived near the so memorable desolation of this Island, when the Saxons,
under the conduct of Hengist and Horsus, forced the natives to cold and
inaccessible mountains, and conquered the Country so far, that they left it
not the empty honor of the former name.

The causes of their ruin, he passionately, but faithfully, attributes to the
misgovernment of evil governed Princes, ignorance of a licentious Clergy, and
an universal laps of the people into impiety. Against these as a zealous
Citizen of the world, and a most particular, but sad lover of his Country; this
Reverend Father inveighes, and profitably instructs the present, by correcting
the enormities of the age he lived ^n. The Translation was made near the
first entrance of the Scottish line upon the Throne of England. To the
continuance ^f which the Preface con^urres with most zealous ^ishes. In
rendering this ^^to English, much faith ^^th been observed; by which you may
discover, the ^uthor still the same* ^^ough in his apparel fashi^^ed to the
time. In peru^^ng whom, the Reader shall find, that impiety is the great
destroyer of Empires; and that kingdom that remaynes most emmaculate from
sin, stands safest from ruin.

TO THE INHABITANTS OF THE Island of great BRITAIN, Unity and Felicity.
IF all men are generally so much addicted unto the monuments of forepassed
ages, and every Country particularly unto the antiquities of the Land wherein
they inhabit, which is the reason that this our own Island so much delights
in beholding the ruins of Verolamium, the renowned Town of the Romans, the
huge and wonderful stones on Salisburies plain, the remembrance of the
Britanes, Thonge Castle the first seat of the Saxons, the trenches and
Fortresses of the Danes, and the Abbey of Battle the trophey of the Normanes,
that I may omit the quoines of the old. Emperors, the tombs of conquering
Kings, with the Arms, swords and Lances of famous men, being all held in
estimation, of purpose to reward with continual commendation the worthy
actions of deceased persons, and to leave us examples to imitate their right
Noble enterprises: How much more are we then bound with affectionate eyes to
behold this ancient Author Gildas, who does not only present unto our view the
lively Image of this Land, how in glory of beautiful Cities, in pollished
order of good husbandry, and in industrious traffic of merchandise, she
shined above a thousand years ago (at which time some ignorant men suppose
she was only overgrowne with a wilderness, and overwhelmed with Barbarism)
but also that she did as then bring forth unto the world learning, wisdom and
true religious virtue, which above all these are most highly to be honored.
And although some fresh water soldiers (who never saw the large Sea of ancient
writers) may imagine every shallow brook of our late pamphleters, to be the
very Ocean of learning, yet when overpassing our mechanical Chroniclers I look
into Malmsbury and Hungtington, and others such as these, yea and above them
into venerable Bede and Gildas, me seems that traveiling over the barren
Alps I descend down into pleasant and fruitful Italy, or sailing beyond the
rude Ethiopians and Indians, I arrive on the coasts of the incomparable Country
of China. But falling on this treasure of antiquity ( Gildas I mean) I found
my self instantly so devoted unto him, that what for mine own recreation, and
what to deceive the tediousness of my lingering imprisonment: and lastly, that
they who are not able, for want of the tongue to purchase the knowledge of him
in his own natural Latin, should not remain altogether destitute of so
great riches, I painted him out though unskilfully, yet howsoever in our
English language: In which attempt, I found two especial difficulties, the one
he was in many places (through the negligence of them in whose hands he rested)
so over-eaten with the rust of time, that I could scarcely discern his lively
Portrature, the other his sentences were so long and obscure, that they would
be harsh and disliking to the reader, yet love overcomming all, and pleasure
drawing me forward, I adventured as touching the first, to aim at this Image,
and give a guess where I could not determine the certainety, and for the last
to set himself (as near as I could) according to his proper fashion, knowing
it to be as undecent to turn his grave speeches into idle words, and his long
periods into short sentences, as to picture a sad man with a pleasant look,
and to draw the counterfeit of a reverent Judge not in his robes but in some
light attire: Wherefore I must entreat for the obscurity the readers
attention, for the tediousness his patience, and for mine own enterprise his
pardon.

The cause why Gildas alleges almost only the Scriptures.
One silly writer unskilfully notes how Gildas (leaving all authorities of men)
follows only the Scriptures, little considering that he intending to reproove
the depraved lives of Princes and Prelates, could find no Patrons so worthy
and able to protect him, as the volumes of the holy Prophets, who bent all
their powers to batter down the enormous offenses of Governors; as for the
Church having not long before (by the conclusion of the primitive persecution)
overcome her most grievous enemies, and instantly afterward incountring with
her unnatural rebels, the horrible Arians and others, she could hardly yet
find a time to suppress these abuses, and for the Doctors who were some of
them but lately dead, and others as yet unborne, the later were not extant, and
the former had not by continuance of time received their strength and glory;
for if I may compare small things unto great Authors are like coats of Arms,
which by antiquity purchase commendations. Gildas cites Scriptures not after
the vulgar Translation.


Another matter not only cavilled at by the former carper, but observed also
by Pollidor Virgill is, that in most of the citations of the holy Scripture, he
very far differs from the vulgar translation; a thing not much to be
merveiled at, for it is not unknown unto the learned, how in old time there
were many Translations of the Bible, for extinguishing of which dangerous
variety, and establishing of Gods Word in one perfect uniformitie, Saint
Jerome at the commandment of Pope Damasus, Translated the Old Testament out of
the Hebrew, and also the New Testament out of the Greek, whereof Gildas could
not be ignorant, sithence he flourished about one hund^ed years afterward,
and was a man of great knowledge and wisdom; but in respect this Island had
been long corrupted with Heretics, and now oppressed with Infidels, it is
likely that the Church in Britain (by reason of the tumults of such rebellious
and outrageous enemies) wanting her due preeminence, could not as yet display
the banner of this reformed Bible, but marched under the Ensign of some other
Translation which our Author speaking generally to the whole Land) has for
conformity unto the common fashion (as it seems) vouchsafed here to use,
being especially as apt as any other to reprove the disorders of the Island, and
no way patronizing either the Arians or Pellagians (the most deadly cankers as
then of the Christian Commonwealth) or any other heresy, that has ever since
lifted up her viperous head against the Church of God.

Another thing very much to be lamented and merveiled at is, The reasons why
Britain was at this time so defiled with vices.
that not only the temporal Princes, but also the Spiritual Rulers (whose
lives should be a light unto the rest, and salt to preserve the souls of men
from corruption) had at this time many of them so degenerated from all goodness,
as not only it provoked the justice of God to dispossess them of their Country
and give it to their deadly foes the Saxons, but also made Pollidor Virgill
suppose that Britain did never after the persecution of Dioclesian perfectly
return unto the unity of the Catholic Church again; an opinion by Gildasses
own words refelled, for he shows how after the stormy winter (as he
calls, it of this persecution, succeeded the flourishing spring of true
Christian and Catholic religion; but the Author himself declares some
notorious causes of the ruin of as well Civil as Ecclesiastical discipline,
and the first was heresies, for upon this fruitful seed of the Gospel, came
the Arians, and scattered the darnell of their detestable doctrine, yea (as he
says) all other damnable Sectaries breathed out upon the Land, their venomous
poison, and not only this, but also from the very bowels of Britain was borne
that accursed wretch Pellagius, and shortly after the death of Gildas were the
Britains overwhelmed with the darkesome cloud of the Quartodecimani (who
varied from the Church of God in celebrating the feast of Easter, these truly
were the mothes that did eat the garment of the government of the realm.
Another was bloody war (the depraver of Civil discipline, and the Author of
disorder, that for many years built here his Fortress, who as he commands
for the time all Spiritual and national Laws to silence, so he corrupts
the manners of all Countries through which he marches; by the power of war
were Infidels planted in the Land, who as they were professed foes of the faith
of God, so were their lives defiled with all offenses; and these also in all
likelihood infected the Britains with the plague of their vices. After the
wars were ended, and Britains together with the Saxons (like Sheep and
Goats) continued in one fold, altogether for a while the scourge of misery
(which chastised the Christian Britanes) terrified them from transgressing the
Commandments of God, yet plentiful peace (the Nurse of sensuality) so lulled
them afterward asleep in her lap with a seeming but deceitful security, that
hereupon sprung the last cause of their confusion (to wit) exceeding
wickedness sprouting out from the root of abundant wealth: For according unto
Moses; Incrassatus est dilectus, and recalcitravit; incrassatus, impinguatus,
dilatatus dereliquit Deum factorem suum, etc. and even as the Children of
Israel did sit them down to eat and drink, and then arose to play, until
the fury of our Lord was pawred out upon them; so the Britains growing fat in
worldly pleasures, and foul in hidious sins, continued on in their earthly
contentments, until the sword of the Saxons (which was scarcely as yet put in
the sheath again) was by the sufferance of God drawn out afresh to deprive
them of their pleasant Country. But although mine Author Gildas discovers the
defects of Princes and Prelates, yet let no man think that any Subjects can
for the deadly sins of their Superiors, either deprive or disobey them,
since neither David did for his adultery with Bersabee, and murder of his
faithful servant Vrias, lose his royalty, nor yet the Authority of the chair
of Moses, was any whit diminished, although Scribes and Pharisees for a time
possessed the same, but that the Leapers who were cleansed were sent to the
Priests (although unworthy of their Primacy) and Caiphas himself (albeit he
was the persecutor of Christ Jesus) prophesied, because he was high Priest of
that year; all which I profess against the Heretics who have perversely
maintained the contrary. Neither yet let any man falsely imagine, that the Land
was wholly as then drowned in iniquities, for (as Gildas does in 2 places
apparently manifest) there were diverse at that very time, whose virtues he
does most highly commend and reverence.

Now before I do harbor in the Haven of my desired end, I must of necessity
pass by three rocks of exceeding danger, the invectives (I mean) of Gildas,
against some sorts of people most happily combined under his Majesty's
government, the first the Britanes, the most ancient inhabitants of this
Island, the other the Irish together with the Scottish, and Pictes who next
possessed part of the Land, and last the Saxons and English who have very long
enjoyed the most large and fruitful portion of the Country. The Britains not
only by the pen of Sir John Price (a learned Knight and writer of theirs)
suspect Gildas for a Libeller, but do hardly also sustain other Authors, who
allege also out of him any thing that may seem disgraceful to the Nation,
unto whom truly as I have ever borne all due respect and tender affection, so
do I most humbly crave their pardon in a word or two without offense, to
defend their wise and worthy Countrymen whom I may well compare unto a father
who (correcting his child) tells him only of his faults and imperfections,
or unto the Prophets who in old time reproving the Israelites did lay nothing
before their eyes but their sins and offenses, or to the man in the Gospel
who laboring to make his vine bring forth the desired fruit; dresseth the
root with unsavory dung. He does not declare as now (O renowned Britains) how
ye releived your friends the Galls against the invincible Legions of Caesar,
how valiently ye defended your Land against his conquering army, how one King
of a little corner of your Island ( Silures or South Wales I mean) maintained
war against the whole power of Rome and the world, and afterward only by
misfortune falling into the hands of his honorable enemies, was by them held in
equal estimation for worthiness, with Perses the successor of Alexander* but
for valor with Alexander the great himself, he names not your victorious
Vortimer, nor yet your invincible Arthur who in twelve foughten fields
overthrew your cruel enemies the Saxons, he leaves those discourses to his
Chronicle which Henry of Huntinton in the actions of Arthur cites, he
reveals now only your reproaches, but why? because he would reform your
abuses; he chasticeth your vices, because he would cherish your virtues; he
aggravateth your offenses ut sugeret mel de petra oleumque de saxo durissimo,
that he may strike the fire of grace out of flinty hearts, and bring the oil
of Charity out of stony minds; he says the Romans did conquor ye, not so
much with Arms as with the threats of their countenances, but tells not how
before that ye encountered (as most true it is) with their puissant power, and
what was it (alas) for the naked to resist the armed, for them who were
altogether unskilful in the order of fight to join in battle with the best
practiced soldiers, and one little Island to contend with the whole world? Ye
fell with the general calamity of the earth, into the subjection of the
Roman Empire. But afterward (they say) ye were unfaithful because ye
killed them who were left in authority over ye: And who can tell what
occasion they offered ye to execute that slaughter upon them: we see the
cruelty that commonly all Conquerous exercise on their subjects; experience
teaches that all almost are tyrannous, and few or none moderate; ye wrought
the like stratagem as the Cecilians did, afterward on the Frenchmen; why are
ye so soulely condemned as unfaithful, but because it succeeded unhappily?
For ye were upon this occasion trodden under the feet of your enemies; it is a
Proverb that never Rebel prevails against his Prince, and what is the
reason? but this, if he prevails he is no Rebel, but usurpeth rather the
title of a reformer of the Commonwealth, I doubt not but King John and Henry
the fourth, if they had not obtained the royal garland, had been registered
for rebellious traitors, although now they are ranked among the famous Princes:
so actions are measured not according to the intents, but after the events. But
hereupon ensued your misery and reproach, ye were again overcome (as he says)
without resistance, and therefore not accounted valiant! and did not the Jews
(who were truly as courageous a Nation as ever was on the earth) open the
gates of Jerusalem to Alexander, because they could notwithstand him? did not
the Persians (those conquerours of the world) fly the face of the Macedonians?
and the Persians and mighty Macedonians* submit themselves to the Romans? did
not those nations who for warlike glory excelled all others, run away as
sheep before these Italian Lions? and why should we then accuse the Britains,
(who were in respect a small handful and never knew the Art of war) if they
resisted not the Romans who had three parts of the world at their commandment,
and were the most expert soldiers that ever marched on the earth? The
Britains upon this became captives! and what Nation was not in subjection to
the Romans who held the earth as a slave in bondage and ruled her Kings as if
they were but servants? These things (noble Britains) Gildas somewhat bitterly
recounteth, but why? that he may with the knife of correction, pruine away
your superfluous and dead branches and leaves of vain glory and other vices.
But although he swayeth throughout his work in great austeritie, yet can he
not so conceal the fire of his fatherly affection, but that it flameth ou^
very often to your singular commendation. Ye were at the first termed
unfaithful, upon what occasion I have declared; but afterward he shows
your faith in the highest degree, in profession (I mean) of the Christian
religion, in suffering terrible persecution, in obtaining most glorious
martyrdom: your flight is objected as reproachful unto ye, but when? before
ye had the knowledge of warfare, but after ye had achieved the art thereof,
he writes how under the co^duction of Maximus, ye overthrew, though unjustly,
yet most valiantly two Emperors of the world: but the lively blood of Britain
being extended into foreign Nations, and there extenuated, and lastly, by
misfortune extinguished, the entrails and heart of the Island began at home to
grow weak and cold, which made her body so long oppressed with the invading
diseases of the Scottish, Pictes, and Irish, and lastly, almost killed with the
deadly plague of the Saxons: and did not the like befall unto the Romans
themselves who having wasted their strength in overcomming and keeping other
Countries in obedience, became in the same sort weakened at home, and so fell in
^he end to be a prey, and spoil unto others? All this is but ^he course and
chance of fortune, or rather the high pleasure of God, to teach us that in this
world there is nothing permanent. And again our Author not containing
himself, breaks out into a singular report of your valor, when (in the
reproof of Maglocune) he says that your Soldiers were so courageous, as
their countenances in battle were not unlike the terrible looks of young
Lions. But that I may pass to the rest, and so conclude this point, he does so
highly extol the Country, Castles, and Cities of Britain, as truly I am out
of doubt the Island has never since that time flourished in the like glory as
then it did: and who so thinks me deceived, let him but look into the
histories of the Romans, where he shall read of ^he Emperors, that did ^n this
land of Britain ^ontinue or finish their ^ives, where among ^he rest he
shines in most eminent Majesty, who shutting up the temple of hellish
ido^atry, did first set open the gates of the Catholic Church, and of her
peaceable God, Jesus, I mean that Constantine, who being borne in Britain,
and of a Britain Saintly Mother, took on him the Imperial dignity, in this
very Island, where so many governors of the world would never have made
their royal residence, had not the Country been both fruitful and civil,
but barren and barbarous as the Romans at their first entrance supposed the
same to be. Lastly, he manifestly declares that the land was as then also
furnished with learning, because (vvriting generally an epistle unto the
Country) he uses the Latin tongue, which as it had been a great folly in him
to do, if the same had not been universally understood, so do I verily
think if the like work in Latin were at this time presented unto the realm,
it would little profit without an Interpreter.

The next sort somewhat bitterly taxed by Gildas, The excuse of the invective
of Gildas against the Scottish and Irish.
are the Scottish, Pictes, and Irish, who are reproved as bloody and barbarous:
but when? before ever they received the light and heat of civility, which from
the Sun of the Roman Empire did spread throughout all Countries, and
undoubtedly made a singular preparation to the Almighty Grace of the holy
Ghost, that afterward replenished the whole world; but after they had accepted
discipline, and were reduced into better order, and cheefely above all had
embraced Christian and Catholic religion, then behold what these Benjamins
proved, who by the British Jacob ( Gildas I mean) are termed Lupi ^ rapaces
ravenous Wolves? see if that was not truly fulfilled in them which was rightly
prophesied of that worthy Benjamin S. Paul, which is Mane rapit vespere dividit
escas, in the morning or at the first they gained their booties by spoiling,
but in the evening or at the last they distributed their food or baits; what
food? but to satisfy the hungry souls of men: what baits? but to catch such
fish as might serve for the festival table of our Savior: Look into Wales
and Cornwall, and see how many Towns bear yet the names of Irish Saints, who
harbored there, not as before to punish the Britains with death, but to draw
them to the rewards of eternal life! Peruse the histories of the Countries
beyond Humber, you shall read how the Pictes, and inhabitants of Scotland, who
sometimes broke down the Northern fortifications, and invaded the Land, did
afterward beat down the Bulwark of hell, delivered the souls which sin
did withhold in bondage, and made them the blessed captives of Christ, men
undoubtedly of rare holiness, and unspotted conversation, had they not been a
little blemished with an erroneous opinion, about the celebration of Easter,
which as venerable Bede signifies continued the longer among them, because
inhabiting in a far removed region of the world, they had not heard of the
Cannons of the Church which commanded the contrary. Moreover as our Savior did
feed them bodily, whom before he refreshed spiritually, so did they of
Scotland, not only with the bread of life, releeve their neighbors, but also
received the Britains (when they were expulsed out of their Country by the
Saxons) into their bosom, and suffered them quietly to inhabit by them in
Cumberland; and with like charitable affection entertained also the Saxons with
their Prince Edgar, when they fled from the countenance of the victorius
Norman, William the Conqueror. And as touching their old barbarous misbehaviour
(which Gildas here mentions) we have no more reason to upbraide the Scottish
therewith, then to cast in the teethes of the refined Italians, what their
Country was before Saturn did first instruct them in civility, being a time so
overgrowne with rudnesse as the Poets do thereupon wittily descant, that men
of that age were borne out of the trunckes of trees. For in process of time by
careful diligence comes the correction and amendment of Countries, and by
careless negligence falls the corruption and destruction of Nations.

The last are the Saxons and English, The excuse of his seveare censuring of
the English.
called by him a people odious to God and man, to God, because they were
Idolatrous Infidels, to man, because they murdered and oppressed the Christian
Britains, and although he enlarges himself in the dispraise of the Nation,
let no man nevertheless suppose that he utters this of any malice as stung
with the dreadful miseries with the which they vexed his Country: For who
knows not that the English were in his age enemies of Christ, religion, and
the Land: But according to Esaias, In the dens wherein dragons did formerly
dwell, green reeds and rushes did afterward grow; and after the sentence of
Hosea; Where it was said ye were no people of mine, there shall the same
persons be named the sons of the living God. Yea the Lions, the Liberds, the
Bears, and the Wolves shall (as the Prophet writes) quietly lodge and live
with Oxen, Sheep, Kiddes, and Calves, and a little child (no doubt the Son
of the Virgin) shall govern them all. For if ever the wild Olive were changed
into the rightful Olive of our Lord, or if ever tree brought forth the true
fruits of goodness, then were both these undoubtedly verified in the Saxons:
For although they came but lately into the Vineyard, yet having entered, they
labored diligently, and undertaking the race of a Christian life, they ran
most swiftly, and gained the garland victoriously; and who so thinks I
exceed in their commendation, let him but cast his eyes round about this
Realm, and he shall see the Churches and Monuments of religion (some fevv
only excepted) altogether founded by them; and that we may leave the dead
buildings, and come to the lively stones of the heavenly Jerusalem; how are the
Provinces, shires, and Parishes of the Land severally adorned with mighty
number of English Saints, and if we may measure by the Governors, what the
people were (since unto the examples of their Rulers, the subjects are commonly
conformable) let us but consider the royal offspring of the Saxons, and we
shall find that never in any land so many Princes left their worldly estates
to embrace Christian poverty, and draw in the Yoke of our Savior, and never
so many of Kingly blood were canonised in the heavenly Register, as in this our
Country; what shall I say more, In omnem terram exivit sonus eorum, their
renown is spread over the whole world, and their glory fixed above the
firmament; in so much as William of Malmsbury deriving the Pedigree of holy
Edward the Confessor, shows a descent, not only of Kings but also of Saints
so as to the Church then among us those Words of Esaias may be fitly applied,
Reges servient tibi: and again, Mamilla regum lactaberis, Kings shall do
service unto thee, and with the teates of Princes thou shall be nourished. Let
us leave the heavens and return to the earth, was the glory of the Saxons,
which now mounted in blessed virtues above the Sky, bounded here below, only
in the Cloystures of Monasteries? No, but as the shadow follows the body, so
likewise ensued all commodities requisite in a well ordered regiment, and first
as touching learning (which manureth the minds of men, and makes them in due
season bring forth their timely fruits) they foun^ded both the Vniversi^ties
of Oxford and Cam^bridge: For the ancien^ laws, the most excel^lent helm
which steared the state, the bridle which restrained distempered wills, and the
very soul of the body of the Commonwealth, they were by them chiefly framed:
and did their praise only consist in matters of piety and peace? and was not
their warlike glory equal to their civil government? not so truly: but as a
well compacted body has bones and sinews suitable to the head, so was their
powerful strength answerable to their other virtues, and not-onely of singular
proof at home; but also obtained a most high commendation abroad in foreign
Countries: All which heroical actions they accomplished in less than five
hundred years notwithstanding they were during the same time almost
continually either invaded by strangers, or molested by unquiet neighbors.

And thus have I somewhat enlarged my self in declaring the undoubted
worthiness of these three Nations, because I shall be enforced in this my
translation to discover their ancient imperfections; neither have I used this
commendation as sugar; Whereby these distasteful pills may be the better
swallowed, but of purpose to shut up their mouths who otherwise might perhaps
despightfully upbraide them with these old offenses; which truly they have no
more reason to do, than those irreligious tongues who (audaciously talking of
the blessed Apostles) call Saint Peter the denyer of his Master, Saint Paul the
Persecutor, Saint Matthew the Publican, for if we should be esteemed as we
have been, what were we other than the children of wrath; but by the grace of
God we are as we are, and I beseech Christ his grace may not be void in us.

How the Kings Majesty is descended of the blood royal of these three Nations.
And now verily it is with great applause to be received, that it has pleased
God to make the royal lines of these three several people to meet in the
Center of his Majesty's person: For of the first I mean the Britains) he is
come by his last and best known descent out of our Country, to wit the
daughter of Henry the seventh, whose Grandfather Owen Theoder was of their
Princely blood: For the second, as clear as the Sun, he is by due original
lawful King of Scotland: and for the third, it is known to those who have any
experience in antiquities, tha^ Margaret (from whom all the Kings of Scot^land
have these fiv^ hundred years issued) was the only true in heritrice unto her
great Uncle Edward the Confessor, and her Grandfather Edmund Ironside; and in
one word to all the Saintly Saxon Kings of England, so as a lineall right has
from that time hitherto remained in Scotland, although William the conquering
Norman did by the sword (as especial descider of kingdoms) not only obtain
the actual possession of the Realm, but also ever since leave the same unto
his posterity. And yet moreover that none of the Norman race may in his
Majesty's enjoying of the Kingdom, find themselves agrieved, God in his
wisdom also disposes (as to the whole realm it is most apparent) that he
likewise rightly deriveth his title from the offspring of the Conqueror. Yea
and that the Danish too (if any now remain who were planted here by their
puissant Lords) may have no cause to repine, behold the Queen his Majesty's
Wife and their Son our Prince, or exceeding hope, are come of the Danish,
among whom that renowned Canatus was sometimes King of this Land, in whom it is
hard to determine whether, his devotion to God, his great conquests, or his
general clemeney deserved high^st commendation: In all which is to be
considered how God of his goodness has in one man conjoined these mighty
houses, which were not only for descent and Country sometimes so diverse, but
also in deadly hatred so far disagreeing, and in bloody wars so violent and
contentious, not unlike the frame of a perfect body, which is contrived of the
four contrary and repugnant elements; and also that those people which since
the confusion of Babylon were ever several, should as loving brethren be now
united in his Majesty's Kingdom, even as the Rivers which arising from
contrary regions of North and South do notwithstanding fall into one maine
Sea, and are made in the end one mighty water; How the Saxons and Britains are
united in this Realm.
For as you shall perceive in this ensuing treatise, the Britains and Saxons
were not only sundry Nations, but also in discord most dissenting: to number
the battles that were fought between them, were an endless labor, they
confronted either others many hundred years in continual hatred, three
Languages were most different, their laws and customs diverse; the Britains
distressed and dispossessed of their noble, fertile, and Native soil, and
driven by the power of their adversaries to live poorly in the barren
mountains of Cambria or Wales, the English invaders reigned and disposed
freely of all the rest of the Land, until it pleased the God of peace to make
an end of all controversies. The English in time having overcome them received
the Britain into the body of their Commonwealth and kingdom, they never
excepted at the diversity that had been between their laws and ours, they
saw how in this very realm the Normanes had agreed before under one selfsame
rule and regiment with the Kentish Saxons, notwithstanding their legal
customs were of another fashion: For as by skillful Musicians is made of
sundry instruments one delightful consort, and as by Lapidaries of diverse
colored stones, one most rich Jewel, and as of the Stars (which vary in
several motions) proceeds the perfect harmony of the heavens: So of these
sundry Countries, and customs of Britains, Saxons, Danes, and Normans, is now
framed one most excellent Commonwealth: Neither yet was it objected that the
Britains having been long starved with oppressing poverty, would greedily
raven on the English riches and Possessions, for they were then nearer the time
of Christ, and so more perfectly instructed with his Charity, who received the
needy and sometimes prodigal child, to be partaker with his wealthy elder
brother, who rewarded him that entered into his work at the latter end of the
day, with as large hire as the other, who labored from the morning, who
accepted into his favor as well the Gentiles as the Jews. And what insued
hereupon? has any Englishman been hereby deprived of his profit? No surely;
but although there have reigned 5 Kings and Queens successively descended of
the Britain Nation, although we have had Generals, Councillors, Judges, and
Magistrates of that Country, there was never as yet any Welchman (as we call
him) boulstred out by their authority to afflict the English with any injuries.
The commodities that flowed from this blessed union were many: first the
charity between both Nations, a thing most acceptable in the sight of God;
the enlarging of the kingdom with the addition of so worthy a people; the
enriching of the same by making the marches and borders of the Country (which
heretofore lay waste by reason of the war) now subject to industrious
husbandry: the incorporating of that Land as a limb now of England, which was
not only sometimes a continual adversary, but also ever ready to entertain
and assist any foreign invasion: the fortifying of the power of the realm
with the forces of those who detained them before with discord at home from
augmenting their dominion abroad: the finishing of the unspeakeable charges of
war and expenses in maintaining garrisons on the fronteyres: the stinking
of all spoil and stuff; and the ending of the effusion of Christian blood.

And now if it be easier to imitate a former example, than be the beginner
of any action; why then do not the English and Scottish seeing this with
far more readiness conjoyne in one? If discord has heretofore reigned
between them, the like has also raged between the Saxons and Britains; if
the Laws of the one are diverse from us, the Laws of the other have been as
different, if the discommodities of war with the Britains have been so
great and grievous, no less have also been those with the Scottish; if the
commodities of peace between the Britains and us, are so great and gracious,
why should not the same be also in like sort between us and the Scottish? the
English and Britains were in language most unlike, the English and Scottish
are of one tongue; and if the names of persons and places do not much deceive
us, the Southern people of Scotland are either descended of the Saxons, or at
the least very much intermingled with the English blood, besides that, it is to
be supposed that many of them are issued from the Britains, since their
confiners in Cumberland (which was a part sometimes of Scotland) have
heretofore been Cambro or Welsh Britains: For Nations by Neighborhood pass
one into another, even as we perceive by neerenesse of property the purest of
the water to become air, and the finest of the air to change into fire; the
English might also have justly conceived a jealousy against the Britains in
admitting them into the community of the kingdom, least (as the Lawyers say)
they should have accounted themselves in their remitter, and upon this occasion
have claimed their ancient possession of the Land whereof in fore passed ages
they were (as they thought) wrongfully deprived; which can no way be objected
against the realm of Scotland who (saving the most righteous title of our
Sovereign Lord to the Crown) can make no lawful challenge of her forefathers
inheritance, but comes as a Princely Virgin with the royal portion of a
Kingdom, to be joined in marriage with her husband England; the banes
between England and Wales were bid with many a terrible battle, and the
match was made with blood shed; but the union of England and Scotland was begun
in loving wedlock, and established in lawful descending issue; Since it has
therefore pleased God to graft them both in one stock, let no man seek to
rent them into two sundry trees, or rather break them a sunder, since he has
formed them into one body, let none labor to dissever the members of the same;
since he has created them into one little world, and encompassed it about
with one mighty sea, and now after thousands of years reduced into one entire
regiment, let none presume to cut in two that web which God has weaued in
one, or separate what he has joined, or spurn against his providence.

It is no new thing to see the greatness of Kingdoms increase by the union of
Countries; How other Kingdoms have increased by Unions.
for to omit the Assirians, Persians, and Macedonians, who not only flourished
in the former and more unknown ages of the world, but also for the situation
of the regions are far distant from us, and to consider a little of the
Romans and other more familiar and adjoining Nations who have in latter days
grown to the height of their renown, did not those Iron legs of Daniels
statue, the City I mean that swayed over the universal world, gather her
first arising strength, by receiving diverse Territories (which she subdued)
into the corporation of her commonwealth? did not the French by combining
sundry Dukedomes and Earledomes together (of which some to our cost and loss
we have good cause to remember) become the most ample and fruitful Kingdom of
all Christendom? was not Spain within these few hundred years distracted in
several petty Dominions, the beams of whose glory by intermariages
conjoyning in one are grown, do not only shine through many parts of Europe,
but also to the East and West Indians? The Duchy of Burgundy the garden of
Christendom, was not sometimes divided in the small principalities of
Flanders, Henault, Holland, and the rest, all which are now by uniting of
houses gathered into one Coronet of exceeding beauty? But let us leave
travailing abroad and return home into our own Country; were not the Saxons
and English severed in seven small kingdoms, and afterward by conquest brought
into one whole Monarchy? Were not the Britains or Welsh divided in three
sundry regiments, and has not the force of the English furnace melted all
their crowns into one mighty stream of gold, and like the rod of Moses
devoured all the rods of the Magicians: and if we but enter into the histories
either of our own Island or otherwise of these foreign Nations, shall we not
every where easily find, that as by divided Kingdoms there came nothing but
discord, poverty, and debasements, so from united powers grows tranquillity,
plenty, and magnificence: we see the water of a great poole conserveth it
self, which if it were separated in small plashes would be quickly either
dried up with the sun, or soked down in the earth, and it is well noted by
Saint Gregory, writing upon Saint Luke, that at the coming of our Savior, the
Commonwealth of Rome was in her perfection, because she was contained under
the government of one Emperor, and how the Kingdom of the Jews ran then to
confusion, in regard it was distributed into sundry Seignories, grounding his
reason on those words of Christ, with which I will end this point, Omne regnum
in se divisum desolabitur, Every Kingdom divided in it self shall fall to
desolation.

Show not therefore your selves (as the Poet says) so far removed from the
Sun (which is the author of wisdom) that ye should seek with envy to
hinder the raising of that frame which God has so charitably builded, but
rather as the same Poet in the person of Dido utters, that a Trojan and
Tirian, shall by her with equal affection be respected, so let us all with
one voice, pronounce that English and Scottish shall by us now with love alike
be entertained. Neither yet if the matter it self can be concluded, let there
be any difference about the name of this Kingdom: How united nations have
been called by one general name.
for as it has been usual to unite Nations, so has it been as common to
call united Nations by one name; Although Greece had in times past been
divided into many Commonwealths and Principalities, yet being all subjected
afterward under the dominion of one, the former names vanished away, and the
whole was renowned by the name of the Empire of Greece, the like was of Italy,
whose several governments being gathered into one were all entitled by one
name; the Aquitanes, Celtes, and Belgickes were in former ages comprised under
the name of Galls, and having been afterward severed in sundry Provinces,
are now almost all conjoined in one entire famous Kingdom, which after the
name of the most puissant part thereof is termed France; our Ancestors not many
years since did familiarly know Castil, Arragon, and others, which are all now
universally converted into one mighty name of Spain; so were the West Saxons,
Mercians, Norfolcians, Northumbers, and the rest of the Saxon Soveraignties,
changed by our Monarch Egbert into the potent and glorious name of England: and
Scottland does in like sort not only comprehend the Scots but also the
Hebrides and others; How conveniently the name of Britain agrees to the
Kingdom of the whole Island.
If therefore this has been so greatly practiced, let us not refuse to follow
so many worthy presidents, especially since it is not required at our hands
that we should assume a newfound name, but the most ancient name of the whole
Island, the most famous name by which it has been known to all the mighty
Emperors of Rome, and blazed throughout the world, the most learned name as
the books of the Latins, and all other tongues and languages do largely
witness, and lastly the most general name of all the inhabitants, for what
are the English, Scottish, and Welsh, but three parts of the whole large and
most beautiful Island of Britain? And surely as it were absurd in familiar
speech of London to term it after the names of the particular Wards or
companies of the City, and not according to the entire Corporation, or to call
any Shire of the Realm, after the Hundreds or divisions of the same, and not
according to the well known title of the whole Country, so is it as far
against all reason that our little world of Britain being now included in one
Kingdom, should be dis^evered in names that would but ever rub up the
remembrance of former injuries, and be Nurses of dissension, which his Majesty
not unlike that ancient Romulus seeks providently to abolish, and making a
skillful mixture of the English, Scottish, and Welsh, labors now to severe
them all into three distinct orders, of the Nobility, Gentry, and Cominalty, of
his entire Realm of great Britain, which being of three sundry people framed
into one happy Soveraigntie, I beseech the Almighty Trinity, to bring to a most
perfect Unity.

Thus have I with The Conclusion.
more good will than good skill presumed upon the mention of these three
people to leap rashly into the matter of the union, wherein although I may
be condemned for want of discretion, yet no man shall ever accuse me for
lack of indifferency.

Here begins the Prologue of Gildas, surnamed the Wise, as touching the
overthrow of Britain, with his lamentation upon the same: being a sharp
reprehension of the Princes and people of the Land.
WHatsoever I shall throughout this Epistle of mine, rather by way of
lamentation than declamation prosecute with mine unworthy, but wellwishing pen;
let no man suppose I declare the same with any affectation of d^spising others,
or vainly esteeming my self better than all the rest, (being alas the man,
who with weeping complaints bewayleth the common loss of all goodness, and
the increasing heap of mischiefs)* but rather communicating my sorrow on the
discommodities and mis^ries of my Country; and on the contraryside my comfort
on the reformation of the same. Because it is not now my determination so much
to report the dangers of the bloody battles of most valiant soldiers, as the
perils of slothful men. In silence have I (I con^fesse) with exceeding grief
of my heart (as God the searcher of all secrets is my witness) passed and
overslipped full ten years space or more, mine unskilfullnesse, together
with my vile baseness ever (as at this instant) curbing me that I should not
presume to write any so little an admonition. I did notwithstanding read how
the admirable Lawgiver for the misdoubting of one only word never entered into
the desired land. Moses Number. 20.12.
Levit. 10.1.
How the sons of the Priest for offering with other fire than was commanded,
by a sudden death perished; how the people that broke the word of God, being
Number. 14.28.
six hundred thousands, yea, and they most dear to him, ( Exodus 14.22.
as whose smoothest way, was the sands of the deep red sea, whose meat Exodus
16.14.
the heavenly bread, whose Exodus 17.6.
drink, the new water passing out of the Rock, Exodus 17.11.
whose invincible army, but only the stretching up of hand^,) all these (two
upright men excepted) to have dyed through Number. 21.6.
serpents, Number. 14.45.
sword, and Deuteronomy. 1.45.
fire, here and there along the deserts of Arabia; yea, after the entrance of
the unknown Number. 11.1.
gate (as it were) of Jordan, and their Iosu. 3.16.
adverse Cities walls, by the only sound of trumpets through the commandment
of God overthrown, Ios. 6.20.
one silly cloak, Ios. 21.24
and a little gold presumptuously taken of the accursed spoil, to have been
the slaughter of many men; how the breaking of the league made with the 2 Samuel
21.1.
Gibionites (yea though the same were through subtilty extorted) was also to
some their destruction. I have read the complaining cries of the holy Prophets
poured out for the sins of men, and especially those of Jeremy, with his
fourefold Ieremies four Lamentations written with the order of the Hebrew
Alphabet.
Alphabet, lamenting the ruin of his City. I saw moreover in this our time
(as he in former bewailed) Thren. 1.1.
The widow City now sit alone, sometimes replenished with people. The Lady of
nations, the Prince of Provinces, (to wit the Church) to be made tributary;
Thren. 4.1.
The gold obscured the most excellent color (which is the beauty of the word
of God) changed. Thren. 4.2.
The sons of Sion, (that is of our holy mother the Church) sometimes famous
and clothed in the purest gold, to have embraced dung; And that which to him as
a principal man to me also (though an abject yet howsoever) increased this
mountain of sorrow, whilst beforehand he lamented them, living as yet so
famous in their flowing prosperity that he said, Thren. 4.7.
Her Nazarens were whiter than snow, redder than the ancient Ivory, fairer than
the Sapphire. Beholding in the old Testament, these and many others as certain
looking glasses of our life, I turned me also to the new, and there the shadow
now ceasing, and the light more clearly shining, more plainly did I read,
what before perchance was obscure unto me; I did read (I say) that our Lord
has said, Math. 15.24.
I came not but to the lost sheep of the house o^ Israel; and yet on the other
side, Mat. 8.12.
But the children of this kingdom shall be cast into outward darkness, there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. And again, Mat. 15.26.
It is not good to take the bread of the children, and cast it unto dogs. And
also, Mat. 23.13.
Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites. I heard, Mat. 8.11.
Many shall come from the East and the West, and sit with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven: And on the contrary part, Mat. 7.23.
And then shall I say unto them, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity. I have
read, Luc. 23.29.
Blessed are the barren, and the teats that have not given suck; And in
contrary position, Mat. 25.10.
They who were ready entered with him to the marriage, afterward came also the
other Virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us, to whom it was answered; I
know ye not. I did truly hear, Mat. 16.16.
Who so shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved, but who shall not
believe, shall be damned. I did read from the pen of the Apostle, Romans
11.17.
that the branch of the wild Olive was graffed on the good Olive, but
notwithstanding should be cut off from the community of the root of his
fruitful fatness, if he carry not himself in fear, but rashly entered into
high secrets. I knew the mercy of our Lord, but dreaded his judgments. I
praised his grace, but trembled, that every man shall receive according to his
works. Seeing the sheep of one fold, unlike in fashion, worthily I commended
the most blessed Peter for his full confession of Christ, and condemned most
miserable Judas for his thirsting covetousnes. I praised Stephen for his
glorious crown of martyrdom, but reproved Nicholas as miserable in respect of
the shameful mark of his unclean heresy. I did assuredly read, Act. 4.32.
They had all things in common: but likewise, Act. 5.9.
Why have ye conspired to tempt the spirit of God. I did on the other side
behold to how great a security men of our age were grown, as if there rested
no cause at all of fear. Wherefore considering with some, whatsoever
compunction of heart, full often in my amazed mind these things, and very many
other, which because of briefness I have determined to omit. If (quoth I) our
Lord has not spared his people so peculiarly chosen out of all Nations, his
royal race, and his solely Country, (to whom he said, Exodus 4.22.
My first begotten Israel,) If not her Priests, Prophets, Kings, throughout the
revolution of so many Ages, if not his servant and Apostle, and members of his
primitive Church, when they wandered from the right way: what will he then do
against such deformity of this of our present time, on the which, besides the
unspeakable and monstrous sins that it has in common with all the wicked of
the world, have also fallen, that natural quality (as it were) and
irrecoverable and inevitable burden of folly and inconstrncy? What? (I speak
to my self) have thou (oh wretch) so great a care cast upon thee (as though
thou were some eminent and most high Doctor) that thou should withstand the
b^llowes of so violent a stream, and keep the charge committed into thy
hands, against this race of invetrate vices, which throughout the space of so
many years, have without interruption been spread and continued? Hold
therefore thy peace, for otherwise thou will bid the foot see, and the hand
speak. Behold and plainly confess. Britain has rulers, she has watchmen.
Why do thou go about thus trifling to mutter? She has (I say) she has if
not more, not less then a just number, but because overpressed with so great a
weight they bend under their burdens, they have not left them a time of
breathing, My senses therefore as debtors joined in one obligation with these
and such like objections yea rather more biting mutually forebusted themselves,
they (as I have said) no small time (having read there is a time of speaking,
and a time of holding ones peace) as it were in a cumbersome narrow passage of
fear, Eccles. 3.7.
with wrestling strived, the Creditor notwithstanding at the last prevailed and
gained the victory, saying, If thou art not of that audacity that (among the
prosetical creatures, who in regard of the gift of reason, have the next room
to the Angelical messengers) thou do not fear to be marked with the comely
note of golden liberty, refuse not yet at least the affection of the
understanding Ass, The history of Baalam and his Ass.
to that d^y dumb, but then inspired with the Spirit of God, denying to carry
the mitred Magician who went to accurse the people of God, Number. 22.23.
and dashing in the streights of the vineyards his loosned foot, albeit she
therefore did feel his most cruel blows, to whom although unthankful and
furiously ^in the mean time beating against all right and reason her innocent
sides, she did as it were with a finger show the heavenly Angel threatening
with a naked sword, and crossing his course, whom he blinded with dull folly,
did not behold. Wherefore in the zeal of the house of our Lord and of his holy
law, be it that I am constrained either by the accounts of mine own con^^its,
or the religious prayers of my brethren, I do now satisfy the debt long
challenged at my hands, worthless truly, yet faithful (as I suppose) and
friendly to all renouned Soldiers of Christ's band, but grievous and in
supportable to foolish Apostataes; of whom the first, (unless I am deceived)
will with tears perchance that flow from the charity of God, receive the same,
and the last with sorrow, but such as is outwrested from the indignation and
pusillanimity of an attainted conscience. But before the performance of my
promise, I will (God willing) in few words endeavor to discourse, 1. Of our
Countries situation. 2. Of her disobedience. 3. Subjection. 4. And rebellion.
5. Of her second subjection, and dreadful slavery. 6. Of her Religion. 7.
Persecution. 8. Holy Martyrs. 9. And diverse heresies. 10. Of her Tyrants. 11.
Of two her wastfull adverse Nations. 12. Of her defense. 13. And also of her
spoil. 14. Of the second revenge taken on her enemies. 15. then of her third
confusion. 16. Of her famine. 17. Of the Letters written to Agitius. 18. Of her
victory. 19. Of her villainies. 20. Of the sudden rumor of her approaching
enemies. 21. Of the faminous plague. 22. Of her Counsel. 23. Of a foe far
more cruel then the first. 24. Of the overthrow of the Cities. 25. Of the
remnants of our Countrymen. 26. And of the last victory obtained by our Nation*
which was through the goodness of God bestowed on us in our time.

THE EPISTLE of GILDAS:
THE Island of Of the situation of the Island.
Britain placed in the balance of the divine poising hand (as they call it)
which weighs the whole world, almost the uttermost bound of this earth
toward the South and West; extending it self from the South West, out toward
the North Pole, eight hundred miles in length, and containing two hundred in
breadth, besides the far outstretched Forelands of sundry Promontaries,
embraced by the embowed bosoms of the Ocean Sea; with whose most spacious, and
on every side (saving only the Southern streights, by which we sail to
Gallebelgicke) unpassable enclosure (as I may call it) she is strongly
defended; enriched with the mouths of 2. noble Floods, Thames and Severne, as
it were two arms (by which outlandish commodities have in times past been
transported into the same) besides other Rivers of lesser account, strengthened
with eight and twenty Cities, and some other Castles, not meanly fenced with
Fortresses of Walls, embattelled Towers, Gates, and buildings (whose roofes
being raised aloft with threatening hugeness, were mightily in their aspiring
tops compacted) adorned with her large spreading fields, pleasant seated
hills, even framed for good husbandry, which overmastereth the ground, and
mountains most convenient for the changeable Pastures of cattle, (whose
flowers of sundry colors, trodden by the feet of men, imprint no unseemely
picture on the same) as a spouse of choice, decked with diverse jewels; watered
with clear Fountains, and sundry Brooks, beating on the snow white sands
together with silver streams sliding forth with soft sounding noise, and
leaving a pledge of sweet savours on their bordering banks, and lakes gushing
out abundantly in cold running Rivers.

Of her disobedience.
Secondly, this Land with a stiff proud neck, and stubborn mind from the
time since she was first inhabited, has ungratefully rebelled sometimes
against God, other whiles against her own Countrymen, and at other seasons
also against outlandish Kings and their Subjects. For what matter of fowler
deformity, or what greater injustice can in the attempts of men, either be, or
ever be committed, then to deny God of that awful fear, honest Countrymen of
that charity, and those who are placed in higher authority (without impeachment
of faith) of that honor due unto them, to break allegiance to divine and
humane reason, and casting away all dread of Heaven and Earth, to be ruled by
their own inventions and sensualities? Omitting therefore those ancient errors
common to all nations of the earth, with the which before the coming of Christ
in our flesh, all mankind was entangled and bound, nor yet recounting up the
monstrous Idols of our Country, surpassing almost in number the very devilish
devises themselves of Egypt, (of the which we behold as yet some, both within
and without the walls of their forsaken Temples, with deformed portratures, and
terrible countenances after the accustomed manner, now mouldring away) neither
yet crying out, namely one after another on the mountains themselves, or hills,
or floods, damnable sometimes, as to the which divine honor, by the people
then blinded was yielded, though now truly profitable to the use of mankind:
and letting pass in silence those old outworne ages of our detestable Tyrants,
who in other far remooved regions were infamous (in so much as Porphyrie that
outrageous easterling dog, who barked against the Church, has in the style
of his madness and vanity also added this; That Britain is a fruitful
Province of Tyrants.) I will only endeavor to set forth to the world those
miseries, which in the time of the Roman Emperors she suffered, and likewise
heaped on the heads of others, as well her Countrymen, as Strangers, and not
farther nevertheless then I am well able to declare, neither yet so much out
of the Chronicles of our Country, or the monuments of our own Authors (for why
these truly if any such there have been, are either now devoured with the
fires of our foes, or being transported into foreign Nations by the means of
our banished Countrymen, are quite vanished away) as by the relation of
outlandish writers which broken off with many interruptions does not
sufficiently appear.

Of the subjection of the Island.
Thirdly, for when the Rulers of Rome, had obtained the Empire of the world, and
now having brought under their government, all their next neighbors, Nations
and Islands) had toward the East confirmed with the power of their increasing
renown, the first peace of the Par^hians who confine on the Indians) which
being finished wars thenceased through out almost the whole earth, the fury
in a sort of this flame toward the West, could no^ with the bluish billows of
the cold Ocean Seas be suppressed or extinguished; but passing over without
resistance drew our Island to the laws of obedience, and subdued absolutely to
their command, the weak but unstable people not like other nations so much
with sword, fire, and warlike engines, as with threats, or amazing their minds
with the superficious frowns of their countenances, so deeply were their
hearts inwardly dismayed.

Of her Rebellion*
Fourthly, after whose return unto Rome, which for want of pay (as they said)
was present suspecting nothing less then rebellion, the subtle Queen Voadit^^
slew with the power of her Countrymen the Britanes threescore and ten or
fourscore thousand Romans.
Lioness murthred the Rulers, who were left behind of purpose more fully to
show; or rather to confirm the enterprises of the Roman Empire. Which being
so done, when the report thereof was declared unto the Senate, and they with a
speedy army made all haste to be revenged on the crafty foxes cubbs (as they
called them) there appeared no warlike Navy on the Seas prepared valiantly to
encounter for our Country, nor yet a square mustered army, neither the right
wing of the battle, nor other order of fight to withstand on the shore but
backs in place of sheilds were turned to the pursuing foes, necks subjected
to the conquering swords, cold fear invading all their limbs, and supplyant
hands stretched out* wom^n-like* to be bound; so that it was bruted far and
near, as a proverb and scornful reproach, that Britain were Neither
forward in war, nor stable in peace.
neither valiant in war, nor faithful in peace.

Fifthly; Of the second subjection of the Nation.
many therefore of the rebellious being slain, and some of the inthralled for
baser works (least the Land should be wholly brought to desolation) left
alive, they sailed from our Country (void of wine and oil) toward Italy,
leaving behind them some of their Governors, as scourges over our Countrymens
shoulders, and yokes on their necks, who should engrave, as it were, on the
very ground the name of their subjection to Rome, and chastise not so much with
warlike weapons, as with reproachful punishments the subtle people, and if
occasion so required, should fashion them (as they say) to wear their naked
swords by their sides, so that now it was not reputed as Britania but Romania,
and what soever Brass, Silver, and Gold it could possess, was stamped with
the Image of Caesar.

Sixthly, Of her Rebellion.
in the mean while, Christ the true Son of God, spreading forth not only from
this temporal firmament, but also from the Castle and Court of Heaven, (which
exceeds all times) throughout the whole world, his most glorious light,
especially (as we know) in the Reign of Tiberius Caesar, (whereas in regard
that the Emperor) against the will of the Senate threatened death to the
disturbers of the professors thereof, Religion was most largely without any
hinderance dispersed of his infinite mercy, did first cast on this Island,
starving with frozen cold, and in a far remote climate from the visible
Sun, his gladsome beams, to wit, his most holy Laws.

Of the Persecution
Seaventhly, which although they were received of the inhabitans, but with
lukewarm minds, remained notwithstanding fully in the souls of some, and in
others less, until the nine years persecution of the Tyrant Dioclesian, in
which the Churches throughout the whole world were overthrown to the ground,
all holy Scriptures (that could be found) burned in the streets, the chosen
Priests of the flock of our Lord, together with the innocent Sheep murdered,
to the end that not the least remembrance, truly of Christian Religion (if
possibly it might be) should in any place of the Provinces be left. How foul
the flights were then, how great the slaughters, what torments of sundry
deaths, what ruins of Apostataes, what shining Crowns of glorious Martyrs,
what furious madness of the persecutors, and on the contrary, what singular
patience of the Saints of God, the Ecclesiastical History declares: so as the
whole Church, in mighty thronging troops (leaving behind them all worldly
darkness) hastened with speed to the pleasant Palaces of Heaven as to their
proper seats.

Of the holy Martyrs of Britain.
Eighthly, God therefore whose will is, that all men should be saved, and who
calls no less sinners then such as repute themselves just, magnified his
mercy with us, who as we conjecture of his gracious aforenamed goodness, that
Britain should not be altogether overwhelmed with the black cloud of this dark
some night, lightened unto us in this time of persecution the most clear lamps
of his Holy Martyrs, the tombs of whose bodies and places of passion (were we
not for our most manifold offenses through the lamentable interruption of the
barbarous, deprived of them) would even now inkindle in the minds of the
beholders no small fire of the divine charity. I mean S. Alban.
St. Alban of Verolamium and Aaron, and Julius of Carlisle upon Vske in
Monmouthshire.
Carlisle with others of both Sexes persisting in many places with most singular
magnanimity in the battle of Christ. Of whom the first, after he had for
charities sake, concealed a Confessor, pursued by the persecutors, and even now
ready to be taken, by hiding him in his house, and then by changing garments
with him, and lastly, in the apparel of his fore-recited brother, had
willingly offered himself to the ensuing danger (imitating also in this
Christ, who gave his blood for his Sheep) so pleasing was he found in the
sight of God, and between his sacred confession and Martyrdom so exceedingly
glorified with miracles even in the very eyes of the wicked, who with
fantastical outrage presented the ensigns of the authority of Rome, as
entering in the fervor of his Prayers, together with a thousand others dry
sooted, the Channel of the noble River of Thames, he made a passage through
the waters that hung in the mean time as broken mountains on the one side,
and the other. Josh 3.17
not unlike to that dried and unworne way of the Israelites when the Arc of
the Testament remained long on the sands in the midst of the River of Jordan,
and by the sight of so miraculous a matter, he changed his first designed
executioner, from a Wolf to a Lamb. Yea and made him together with himself
most earnestly to thirst, and constantly to atchieve the triumphant victory of
Martyrdom. Others also were with such sundry torments tortured, and with such
unspeakeable tearing of their limbs rent in pieces, as without delay the
glorious conquerours fixed the tropheys of their Martyrdom, in the famous
gates (as it were) of Jerusalem. For they who remained alive, did hide
themselves in woods, in deserts and in secretdens, expecting when God the
rightful ruler of all things would pronounce upon their tormentors his severe
judgments, and grant themselves the safety of their lives. Ten years
therefore of the above named tempestuous hurlewinde being not yet fully ended,
and these wicked decrees by the deaths of their blooddy beginners now withering
away, all the Soldiers of Christ with joyful eyes, do after this long Winters
night, behold the mild season and fair light as it were of the Heavenly sky.
They reedifie their Churches battered down to the ground, they found, build,
and finish the Temples of holy Martyrs, and display far and near in a sort
their conquering banners, they celebrate holy days, and sacrifice with pure
hearts and mouths, yea all the children of the Church being now most lovingly
embraced and tenderly nourished in the bosom (as you may call it) of their
mother do exceedingly rejoice. Of the diverse heresies.


Ninthly, for this sweet consort of the members of Christ their head remain^d
inviolable, until the Arrian treason like an horrible serpent, vomitting out
upon us his outlandish poisons, brought to mortal discord brethren who dwelt
in one, and so all cruel beasts together, making as it were a passage over the
Ocean Sea, and spitting the damnable venom of every heresy from their
abominable mouths, fastened their deadly wounding teeth on our Country, which
is ever desirous to hear novelty, and never truly continues in any
certainety.

Of the Tyrants.
Tenthly, moreover also at the length, new springs of Tyrants increasing, and
even now growing up into a very wilderness of wickedness, our Island which
bore as yet the Roman name, but far degenerated from the manners and laws
of the same, yea rather which did cast away the first root of her most bitter
planting, furnished out unto the Galls The Tyranny of Maximus.
Maximus (not lawfully invested, but Tyrannically usurping, and advanced by
mutinous soldiers) with mighty bands of men to guard him, and ensigns of the
Imperial Majesty, (which never yet did any way become him) who rather first
which crafty subtilty then any valor, tying and combining together all near
adjoining Shires and Provinces against the estate of Rom^, as the nettles of
his perjury and falsehood for the atchieving of his wicked government,
stretching out one of his wings to Spain and the other to Italy, and seating
at Trire the Throne of his most unjust Empire, rebelled against his Lords with
so great outrage, as he expelled two most lawful Emperors, the one out of
Rome, the other out of his most Religious life; and without delay encouraged
with such fatal attempts, lost at the City of Aquilege his accursed head, who
before in a sort had thrown to the dust the Crowned heads of the whole worlds
Kingdom. Of two wastfull Nations.


XI. After this Britain being now dispoyled of all armed Soldiers, of warlike
companies, of (though outrageous yet) Rulers, and of her brave and valorous
youth, (who marching along with the before recited Tyrant, never returned to
their home again) and now absolutely ignorant of all practice of war, was
astonished, and lamentably groaned, as trampled many years under the feet of
especially two very fierce outlandish Nations, the Scots from the South, and
the Pyctes from the North.

XII. Upon whose invasions, Of the defense of the Island.
and most terrible oppressions, she sent Ambassadors furnished with Letters to
Rome, humbly beseeching with pittious prayers an host of Soldiers to redress
her wrongs, and vowing with the whole power of her mind her everlasting
subjection to the Roman Empire, so as these her foes might be once chased
further away. In whose behalf (all forepassed injuries being clean forgotten)
a Legion strongly provided for the war, was forthwith mustered: which being
Shipped and so transported over the Ocean into our Country, and incountring
hand to hand, with our grievous foes, and slaying an huge number of them, drove
them all out of the British bounds, and with so blooddy a fight delivered their
friends and subjects from that imminent thraldom. Whom they commanded to
build acrosse over the Island, from Sea to Sea a wall, which being manned with
garrisons of Soldiers, might be a terror to suppress the enemy, and a
safeguard to defend their friends. But this being without any director made by
the people, and unreasonable rout, not so much of stone, as of turfe, prooved
to little purpose.

XIII. Of the other spoil of the Country.
The army was no sooner with great triumph and rejoicing returned home but
their accustomed foes not unlike devouring Wolves, that ravening with extreme
hunger, and greedy jaws, leap over the fold, in the Shepherds absence, being
furthered and furnished with the wings of Oars, and the strength of Rowers,
and Sails filled with too prosperous winds, break down all bounds, commit
all murders, and as men who reap the now ripe corn, so tread they under
foot, and overrunne them all.

Of the second revenge taken of the enemy.
XIV. And now again they send supplyant complaining Ambassadors with rented
garments (as they say) and heads overspread with ashes, humbly beseeching
assistance from the state of Rome, and shrowding themselves like fearful
chickens under the most trusty wings of their Parents, that their miserable
country might not be altogether made desolate, nor yet the Roman name (which
now was only left with idle sound of words to fill the empty ear) basely
vanish away, as consumed with the reproachful despights of foreign Nations,
whereupon the Romans being moved (as much as man's nature possibly might be)
with the declaration of this so lamentable a tragedy, advancing forward (as
Eagles in their flight) withal speed their troops of Horse by Land, and
Mariners mustred on the Sea, do sease on the shoulders of their foes, first
with the unexpected, and then the terrible tallons of their swords, and
slaughtering, overthrow them as thick as leaves, that withered Autumn hurleth
down. And as the stream that powers out from the Mountains, and increases
with sundry brooks, that rise of tempestuous raines, which in her roaring
fall, surmounteth now all channels, and outragiously fometh with her furrowed
back and vehement boiling fountain, and leaping (as they say) to the very
clouds with her dashing waters (through whose diverse circuling wheels the
appels of our eyes, though often refreshed with our twinkling eie-lids are
notwithstanding dazzled) even with one billow, bears down all resisting
powers, so our rightworthy assisting friends most speedily chased the troops
of our foes (if any could so escape their hands) beyond the Seas, because
beyond the same Seas, they did year by year in great abundance greedily
transport their praises, no man daring withstand them. The Romans therefore
declaring unto our Country, that they could not endure to be so often troubled
with such tedious journeyes, nor yet to weary out the Ensigns of Rome,
together with such and so great an army, both by land and Sea, on these
wandering wasters; and persuading them rather by exercise of warfare, and
courageous fighting, with their whole powers of themselves to defend their
lands, goods, wives, children, and (which are dearer then all these) their
liberties and lives, and not in any case to yield unto Nations no way more
valiant then themselves (if by sloth and idle cowardlinesse they were not
weakened) their disarmed hands to be manacled in bands, but rather to show them
the same hands armed with Targets, Swords, and Spears, and manfully prepared
to make slaughter of their foes, do together with the poor miserable
inhabitants by the common charge of all and private helps of many, (because
they supposed it would be some advantage to the people, now left to themselves)
build a wall as the first, though not weak as the first, by level, directly
from Sea to Sea, along the Cities, which for dread of their ^oes, were there by
chance situate, give manfull admonitions to the fearful people, leave them the
art to make armor, and teach them the order of warfare. And moreover on the
Southern shore of the Ocean, where their Ships lay in Harbor (because the
landing of the barbarous savage sort, was there most to be feared) they do in
diverse and distant convenient places erect watchtowers, to ken over the Seas,
and now as never to return again, give them their last farewell.

Of the third wastfull spoil of the Land.
XV. They were notwithstanding no sooner gone home, but as the brownish bands of
worms and eamots, which in the hieghth of Summer, and increasing heat, do
swarming break out of their most straight and darkesome dens, the dreadful
routes of Scots and Pictes, partly dissenting in manners, but consenting in one
and the self same greedy thirst of shedding blood, and shadowing rather their
terrible faces, with shagging glibes, then hiding the secrets and shame of
their bodies with comely garments, do run in throngs and mustring troops, a
land out of their Ships, wherein they were transported over their Scithian
vale, The Sea between England and Ireland called Scyth^ca vallis.
and being assuredly informed, as touching the departure of our assisting
friends, and their absolute denial of ever returning again, even now more
boldly then at any time before they invade, and bereave the inhabitants of all
the Northern and uttermost bounds of the land, to the very wall it self. For
the withstanding of whose forces was placed on the fortress a sloathfull
garrison, backward to fight, unfit to encounter, an unprofitable dismayed
company, which day and night in amazement wasted away; in the mean while
cease not the hooked weapons of the naked enemies, with the which our
miserable Countrymen were pulled from the wall, and dashed down to the ground.
And yet truly they who lost their lives in this slaughter, reaped through the
torment of their untimely death, this commodity, that by their sudden ends
they eschewed the sight of those lamentable and imminent plagues and
punishments which fell upon their brethren and dear children. What need many
words? They left the Cities, they left the high wall, again they fly, and are
again dispersed in far more desperate sort then before; and now the enemy
pursues afresh, and afresh he hastneth, and heapeth slaughters on slaughters,
more cruelly then ever, and as Lambs by butchers, so our pitiful Countrymen
are by their foes hewed in pieces, insomuch as their habitation was like a
wilderness of salvage beasts.

XVI. For even they Of the famine.
themselves did not withhold their hands from ravening on their own miserable
Countrymen, yea for a little sustenance of a small deal of food, and so
overthrowes from the enemy were enereased with civil sedition, and the reason
was because through these such sundry wastefull spoils, the whole Country was
utterly disfurnished of all manner of provision of victuals, that only
excepted which they gat by hunting.

Of the Letters to Aeitius.
XVII. Wherefore again the ruthful remnants of us direct unto Agitius (a man
of power, in the state of Rome) their Letters indicted to this purpose. The
lamentation of the Britanes unto Agitius thrice Consul, and a little after in
this sort complaining. The Barbarous beat us to the Seas, the Seas drive us
back on the Barbarous, between these two dreadful kinds of death, we are
either slain or drowned; but nevertheless they obtain no manner of aid. In
the mean while a cruel and most notorious famine oppressed the struggling and
discomforted people, which enforced many of them without delay, for the gayning
but of a little meat to refresh their lives, to yield* their necks to the
yokes of their terrible spoiling foes, although others would never be
constrained thereunto, but rather from of the mountains and from out the dens
and defert woody forests made continual resistance.

Of the victory obtained by the Britains.
XVIII. And then first of all they overthrew their foes, who now for many years
had wasted their Country, yet not trusting in the strength of man, but in the
power of God, according to that of Philo. It is necessary to have divine
assistanc^, when humane forces fail. A while ceased the attempts of our
enemies, but yet not ceased the wickedness of our Countrymen, our foes left
our people, but our people left not their iniquities.

Of their offenses.
XIX. For it has been still a custom with our Country (as still al^s it
remains) that she has been weak to repress the power of their enemies, but
strong to raise civil broiles, and bear the burdens of offenses; feeble (I
say) to execute the laws of peace and truth, but able enough to sin, falsify,
and deceive. The impudent Irish wasters departed home, as they who not long
after determined to return again, and then first the Pictes seated themselves
(where afterward they continued) in the furthest part of the Island, breaking
every while forth in spoiling and defacing our Country. Wherefore in such
truces as these, the cruel sore of famine (which the desolate people
sustained) was now clear healed, another far more poisonous secretly
arising. For no sooner did the enemy desist from spoiling the Country, but the
Island abounded with so great plenty of all things, as no forepassed age could
ever remember the like, wherewith all kind of licenciousnesse in like sort
increased. Yea truly it increased with a mighty offspring; so that very aptly
to the same time might be applied the saying which is; To be short, such
fornication is heard of, 1 Cor. 3.1.
as among the Gentiles there is not the like. Neither yet this vice alone, but
all others that to humane frailty do accustomably befall, and chiefly (that
which now also overthrows in her the whole estate of goodness) hatred of
truth with her maintainers, and the love of falsehood with the framers thereof,
the acceptance of sin for sanctity, the worshipping of wickedness for
benignity, the desire of darkness for the Sunneshining, the embracing of
Satan for an Angel of light. Kings were anointed, not as God appointed, but
such as in cruelty excelled others; and within a while after were they by their
Electours without due examination of their deserts murdered, other more
blooddy Tyrants being in their places advanced, if any one of them were of a
milder disposition, or seemed to draw any whit nearer to the truth, on him as
the subverter of Britain were all men's hatred and vengeance with out respect
thrown, and at an equal rate was valued all that displeased and pleased God,
if that which displeased bore not the higher price. So as rightly to our
Country might be spoken those words of the Prophet, which to that people of old
were denounced. Esai. 1.5.
Children without a law, have ye left God and provoked to anger the holy One of
Israel, to what end shall ye be as yet strooken, adding iniquity? every head is
languishing, and every heart is grieving, from the sole of the foot even to
the very crown of the head, there is no soundness in him. And so they managed
all matters, that were contrary to their salvation, as if the true Physician of
all things could Minister no medicine to the enfeebled wound: And thus dealt
not only the Lay people, but the very flock of our Lord, and the Pastors
thereof, who ought to give all the Commons good example; very many as it were
washed in wine did carelessely waste themselves in drunkenness, and were
moreover attainted with the swelling of pride, the contention of anger, the
griping talo^ of envy, and the indifferent estimation of good and evil; so
that apparently (as now also it fares) there seemed to be powered out Psa. 106
Contempt on the Princes, who caused them to wander astray, and not in the way.

Of the sudden news of the enemy.
XX. God in the mean while being willing to cleanse his family, and with the
only report of tribulation to amend them who were infected with so great a
pestilence of mischiefs; the winged flight of no uncertain fame, peirced the
listening ears of all men, concerning the instant approach of their inveterate
enemies, even now resolved to make a spoil of all, and to possess after their
accustomed manner, the whole Country from the one end to the other. Yet did our
Countrymen nevertheless reap small commodi^y hereby, but like to bransicke
beasts, most wilfully taking (as they say) in the teeth the bit of reason, they
left the safe, though straight way, and ran mainely to the open passage of
sundry vices, that lead headlong to deadly destruction.

XXI. While therefore (as Solomon says) The stubborn Servant is not with
words amended, Of the faminous Plague.
the fool is scourged and feels it not. For a pestilent sickness did
mortally infect the unwise people, which (without any stroke of the sword) did
in short time devour so great a multitude of them, as the living were
unneathable to bury; but neither with this were their sins corrected, that
the same of Esaias the Prophet might be also in them fulfilled, saying* And God
has called to Lamentation, Isai. 22.12.
to baldness, and to the girdle of sackecloth, and behold they rejoice to kill
calves, and to slaughter Rams, to eat and drink, and to say, Let us eat, and
let us drink, for to morrow we shall dye. For why the hour drew on a pace,
wherein all their iniquities as those sometimes of the Amorrheians should be
fully accomplished.

XXII. For a Counsel Of the Counsel.
was called to determine what were the best or safest way to repulse and
repress such deadly and often invasions and spoylings made by the aforesaid
Nations.

XXIII. When all the Counsel, Of an enemy far more cruel then the first.
together with the proud Tyrant, were blinded in finding out this defense, nay,
offense, and utter destruction of our Country, that those most fierce and
detestable people named the Saxons, a Nation odious both to God and man, should
be sent for into the Island (as wolves into a fold of Sheep) to beat down the
Northern powers; then which nothing ever befell to this our Country more
pernicious and miserable. O most palpable darkness of their senses! O
desperate and blockish dullness of their minds! whom they dreaded in their
absence, more then death it self, were now freely and willingly invited to
inhabit with them under the roof (as I may call it) of one self same house,
by the foolish Princes (as it is said) of Taneos giving undiscreete Counsel to
their King Pharaoh. And then an huge litter of whelps ramping out of the den
of the barb^rous Saxony.
Lioness, in three Ciuls (according to their tongue, but (after ours) in three
long Ships or Galleys, with prosperous sails, fortunes and prophesies,
through which by a certain Southsayer among them was foretold, that they should
three hundred year possess the Country whereunto they directed their course,
and spend an hundred and fifty of the same (to wit) the one half in often
spoiling of the Realm, and landing first in the Eastern part of the Island,
fixed there, by the unhappy Tyrants commandment, their cruel claws, as it
were to fight for our Country, but more truly to overthrow the same. After
whom the aforesaid Saxony.
Dam, (finding her first beginnings had so good success) sends also forth a
new and greater supply of her ravening race, which being shipped over, join
themselves with the former bastardly bands. Hereupon the bud of iniquity, the
root of bitterness, and the plant of poison, answerable truly to our
demirits sprung out from this our native soil in fierce arms and branches.
The Barbarous therefore being invited and admitted into our Island, demand and
obtain allowance of victuals to be granted them as Soldiers and such as would
undertake mighty dangers (as they pretended) for their good hosts, and
entertainers which being a long time largely bestowed. stopped (as they say)
the dogs mouth. Yet afterward notwithstanding they cavil that they had not
sufficient victuals and habitations appointed them, forging thereupon, quarrels
of set purpose, and if they found not greater abundance of bounty, they protest
they would break the league, and sack the whole Island, and without delay they
make good their threats with following effects.

XXIIII. For the fire of just revenge, Of the overthrow of the Cities.
being in regard of our former offenses now inkindled, was increased and
continued from sea to sea, as fed by the hand of the sacrilegious Easterlings,
which spoiling and consuming al near adjoining Cities and Countries, when it
was once inflamed, ceased not till burning almost the whole Western face of
the Island, it dipped histerrible red scorching tongue into the Ocean Sea.
Wherefore in these assaults, not unlike those which the Assyrians sometimes
attempted against Judah, the same was also Historically performed in us, which
the Prophet lamenting said; Psalm. 73.7
They have burned with fire thy Sanctuary, they have pollat d in earth, the
Tabernacle of thy name. And again, Psalm. 78.1
O God the Gentiles have come into thine inheritance, they have defiled thy
holy Temple. In so much as all the towns with the often beatings of the
Rams, and all the Townes-men, Pastors, Priests, and People, with naked
swords that glittred on all sides, and crackling flames were together whirled
to the ground; lamentable and dreadful to behold, there lay the tops of
lofty Towers now tumbled down, the stones of high walls, the holy Altars, and
rented pieces of carcaces covered with distilling and congealed purple blood,
confusedly in the midst of the streets heaped in one, as if they were to be
crushed together in a certain horrible winepresse: and now besides the ruins
of houses, there remained no grave at all for the dead, but the bellies of
beasts and birds; be it spoken with reverence to the sacred souls (if many yet
were to be found) which at that time by the blessed Angels were assumpted to
the high Heavens; for that vine which was sometimes so good, had as then so
degenerated into bitterness, that (according unto the Prophet) like as when the
winemakers or harvest men have done, there was hardly a grape or ear of corn
to be seen. Of the remnant of the Britains.


XXV. Some therefore of the miserable remnants being taken in the mountains,
were in heaps murdered; others constrained by famine, came and yielded
themselves to be eternal slaves to their foes, if they were not instantly
nevertheless slain, which truly was the greatest favor that could be
offered them: some others passed over beyond the Seas, singing or rather
sighing with wonderful lamentation under the shadows of their sails, in
place of the Mariners sound, this heavy sentence; Psalm. 43.12.
Thou have given us as Sheep to be slaughtered, and among the Gentiles have
thou dispersed us. Others committing the safeguard of their lives, in continual
doubtful dread, to the mounting hills, to the fortresses of deep downefals, to
most thick woody forests, and to the Rocks of the Seas, remained (albeit
with trembling hearts) yet still in their Country. But in the mean while, an
opportunity happening, when as these most cruel robbers were returned home,
the poor remnants of our Nation (to whom do flock from diverse places round
about our most miserable Countrymen as fast as Bees to their hives, for fear
of an insueing storm) being strengthened by God, and with all their hearts
calling upon him, and lading (as they say) the Heavens with innumerable vows,
that they might not be now brought to utter destruction take arms under the
conduction of Ambrose the Aurelian a modest man (who of all the Roman Nation
was then alone in the confusion of so great a tempestuous season by chance left
alive, his parents who for their honor were adorned with purple, being slain
in the same broils, although his progeny in these our days do foulely
degenerate from the worthiness of their Ancestors) and provoke to battle
their cruel Conquerors, and so by the goodness of our Lord obtain the
victory.

Of the last victory granted by God to the Britains.
XXVI. After this sometimes our Countrymen, sometimes the Enemy won the field,
to the end our Lord might in this Land try after his accustomed manner these
his now Israelites, whether they loved him or not, until the year of the
siege of the mountain of Bath, and of the last almost though not the least
slaughter of our villainous foes, which was (as I am sure) forty four years
and one month after the landing of the Saxons, and also the time of my
Nativity. And yet neither to this day truly are the Cities of our Country as
before inhabited, but being forsaken and overthrown do hitherto lie desolate,
our foreign wars ceasing, but civil remaining. For as well the remembrance
of so desperate a destruction of the Island, as also that of the unexpected
recovery of the same remained in the minds of them, who were eye witnesses of
the wonderful events of both, and in regard thereof, Kings, public
Magistrates, and private persons, with Priests and Clergy men, did all and
every of them live orderly according to their several vocations. But when
these departed out of this world, and a new offspring succeeded, that was
ignorant of this troublesome time, and had only experience of the present
prosperity, all the laws of truth and justice were so shaken and turned upside
down, that I will not say one step, but not so much truly as one little
memory of these virtues hardly rested to be seen in the fore-recited orders of
men, a few, yea a very few excepted, who in respect of the loss of so great a
multitude, which rusheth daily headlong down to hell, are accounted so small
a number, that our reverent mother the Church does in a sort scarce behold them
reposing in her bosom, whom she does only accept for her true children;
whose worthy lives being admirable to all men, and of God beloved (by the
sacred prayers of whom, as by certain pillars and most profitable supporters,
our infirmity is sustained up, that it may not utterly fall down to the
ground) I would have no one suppose I go once about to reprove, if any way
enforced by the increasing heaps of offenses I shall more liberally, yea more
lamentably not so much declare as bewail the wickedness of those who are
become servants not only to their bellies, but also to the devil rather then
to Christ, who is our blessed God, world without end.

For why shall their Countrymen conceal, what foreign Nations round about
do as now not only know, but also cast in their teethes? Britain has Kings
but Tyrants, she has Judges but wicked, often spoiling and confounding, but
the Innocent; defending and protecting but the faulty and Felons; having very
many wives, but queanes and adulteresses, sundry times swearing but
forswearing, vowing and almost instantly falsifying the same, making wars,
but civil and unjust, mightily pursuing robbers abroad truly in the Country,
and yet not only loving but also rewarding such thieves as are with them at
their tables; giving alms bountifully, but on the contrary side heaping
upmountaines of mischiefs miserably, sitting in the throne of Justice, but
seldom seeking out the rules of rightful judgment, disdaining the honest and
humble, but extolling (as much as in them lies) unto the very stars, the
blooddy, the proud, the monstrous murderers, the combined and adulterous
enemies if so (as they say) they may prevail, of God himself, who together
with their very names are to be razed absolutely out of the earth; having many
fettered in their goales, but lading them with chains, whom they rather beat
down by deceits, then punish for any due deserts; making solemn oaths on the
Altars, and presently afterward despising the same Altars, as if they were but
durty stones. The reprooving of Constantine
Of which so horrible a crime, Constantine the Tyrannical whelpe of the
unclean Lioness of Dannonier is not guiltless. This self same year after
the taking of a dreadful oath (whereby he bound himself first before God, and
by a solemn sworn protestation, then calling all the quires of Saints, and
Mother of God to witness, that he would not contrive any deceipts against his
Countrymen) he did nevertheless in the reverent bosoms of two mothers, the
Church, and the carnal Parent, under the habit of the Saintly Abbot
Amphibalus, Amphibol^s.
amiddest the very holy sacred Altars (as I have said) in stead of teeth with
his abominable sword and lavelin, wound and rent the most tender sides of two
royal I think this should be rather thus.

Youths, and cruelly the entrails of two nurselings. For it appears to be
two several slaughter; the first of two young men, the last of two nurse
children, according to our Chro^icles;


children, or cruelly the entrails of two such nurselings, whose arms no way
defended with armor (which no man almost as then more stoutly, than these
poor babes used) but stretched against the day of Judgment, to God and the
Altar, did hang up (O Christ) at the gates of thy City, the venerable ensigns
of their patience and faith: yea so he did it as the purple cloakes (as it
were) of congealed blood, did touch the seat of the heavenly sacrifice,
neither did he commit this truly after any precedent commendable actions: For
many years before was he overcome with the often and interchangeable stenches
of adulteries, having thrust away his lawful wife against the commandment of
Christ, and also the Doctor of the Gentiles, saying, Mat. 19 6. Mark 10 9
What God has joined, let not man separate; and again, Ephesians. 5.28 Colos. 3.19.
Husbands love your wives, For why he had planted in the ground of his heart
(an unfruitful soil for any good seed) a certain most bitter set of
incredulity and folly, taken at the first from the Vine of Sodom, which being
watered with his vulgar and domestical impieties, as poyso^^nous kinds of
showers, an^ afterward to the offense of God more audaciously springing up,
has brought forth into the world the sin of horrible murder and sacrilege;
and not as yet discharged of the entangling netts of his former offenses, he
increases his new wickedness with old villainies. Go too now, I reproove thee
as present, whom I know as yet to be in this life extant; why stand thou
astonished, O thou butcher of thine own soul? why do thou wilfully inkindle
against thy self the eternal fires of hell: Why do thou in place of
enemies, desperately stabbe thy self with thine own swords, with thine own
javelins? What cannot those same poisonous cups of offenses yet satisfy thy
stomach? Look back (I beseech thee) and come to Christ, (for why thou
labourest, and art pressed even down to the earth with this huge burden) and
he himself, as he said will give thee rest. Come to him who wishes not Esa.
52.2.
The death of a sinner, but that he should be rather converted and live.
Unloose (according to the Prophet) the bands of thy neck, Ezech. 33.11.
O thou son of Sion. Return (I pray thee) although from the far remote
regions of sins, Luc. 15.13.
unto the most pyous Father who for his son that will despise the filthy
food of swine, and fear the death of cruel famine, and so come back to him
again, has with great joy accustomed to kill his fated Calfe, and bring forth
for this erronio^s wanderer, the first stole and royal ring, and then talking
as it were a taste of the heavenly hope thou shall perceive. Psa. 33.9.
How sweet our Lord is. For if thou do contemn^ these, be thou assured, thou
art almost instantly to be for ever tossed and tormented in the inevitable and
dark floods of endless fires. What do thou also thou Lions whelp (as the
Prophet says) Aurelius Conanus? The reproving of Aurelius Conanus.
Art not thou as the former (if not far more foulely) to thy utter
destruction, swallowed up in the filthiness of horrible murders, fornications
and adulteries, as in certain overwhelming floods of the sea? Have not thou
by hating, as a deadly serpent, the peace of thy Country, and thirsting
unjustly after civil wars, and often frequent spoils, shut up the gates of
heavenly peace and repose against thine own soul? Being now left alone as a
withering tree in the midst of a field, remember (I beseech thee) the vain
and idle phancies of thy Parents, and brethren, together with the untimely
death that befell them in the prime of their youth; and shall thou for thy
religious deserts, be reserved to live some hundreds of years, or to attain
to the age of Methusalem, being now bereft almost of all succeeding posterity?
No surely, but unless (as the Psalmist says) thou shall be more speedily
converted unto our Lord, that King will shortly Psalm. 7.13.
Brandish his sword against thee, who by his Prophet says Deuteronomy. 32.39.
I will kill, and I will cause to live, I will strike, and I will heal, and he
is not who can deliver out of my hand. Be thou therefore Esa. 52.2.
shaken out of thy filthy dust, and withal thy heart converted to him, who
has created thee, that Psalm. 2.12.
When his wrath shall shortly burn out, thou may be blessed in hoping on
him. But if otherwise, eternal pains will be heaped up for thee, where thou
shall be ever tormented and never consumed in the cruel jaws of Hell. The
reproving of Vortiper.
Thou also who like to the sundry colored Parde art diverse in manners and
diverse in mischeifes, whose head now wears hoare, who art seated in a Throne
full of deceipts, and from the botome even to the very top deflowred with
sundry detestable murders and adulteries, a naughty son of a good King, as
another Manasses sprung from Ezechias, Vortiper thou Tyrant of the Demetians
why do thou astonished stearve away? What! do not such violent gulfes of
sins (which thou do swallow up as most pleasant wine, if thou thy self art
not rather swallowed up by them) is yet satisfy thee, especially since the end
of thy life daily now also approaches? Why do thou heavily clogge thy
miserable soul with a lustful sin of all others the foulest, by putting
away thine own wife, and after her honorable death, with a certain
irrecoverable burden of thine impudent daughter? Wast not (I beseech thee) the
residew of thy life in offending God, because as yet an 2 Cor. 6.2.
acceptable time and day of Salvation shines on the faces of the repentant,
wherein thou may work well, that thy Math. 24.20.
Flight may not be made in the Winter, or Sabbath. Psalm. 33.15.
Turn away (according to the Psalmist) from evil, and do good, seek forth
blessed peace and follow the same, because the eyes of our Lord will be cast
upon thee, when thou do righteousnsse, and his ears will be then open unto
thy prayers, and he will not destroy thy memory out of the land of the living,
thou shall cry and he will hear thee, and out of thy tribulations deliver
thee, for Christ does never despise Psalm. 50.19.
an heart that is contrite and humbled with his fear. Otherwise Esaias 66.24.
the worm of thy torture shall not dye, and the fire of thy burning be never
extinguished. Marc. 9.44.
And why art thou tumbled in the old filth of thy naughtiness, The reprooving
of Cuneglasse.
yea since the very first spring of thy tender youth, thou Bear, thou rider
and ruler of many, and guider of the chariot which is the Bears bearour, thou
contemner of God, and depressour of his lot Cuneglasse, and by interpretation
in Latin a yellow or golden butcher? why do thou raise so great a war as
well against men as also against God himself, against men yea thy Countrymen
with thine especial powers, against God with thine infinite offenses? Why
besides other thine innumerable ruins having thrown out of doors thine own
wife, do thou with the lustful love, or rather blockish dullness of thy
mind, against the Apostles express prohibition, Galat. 1.21.
denouncing that no adulterers can be partakers of the Kingdom of heaven,
esteem (according to the Poet) as the exceeding dainties of the celestial
nymphs, her detestable sister, who had vowed unto God the everlasting
continency of her widdowhood? Why do thou provoke with thine often injuries
the lamentations and sighs of Saints, by thy means corporally afflicted,
which will in time to come like a terrible Lioness, break thy bones in
pieces? Psalm. 36.8
Desist (I beseech thee (as the Prophet says) from wrath, and leave of thy
deadly, and (that which will be) thy self tormenting fury, which thou
breathest out against heaven and earth which is against God and his flock:
make them rather with altered minds to pray for thee, who possess a power of
binding over this. world, when in this world they bind the guilty, and of
loosing when they loose the penitent. Tim. 6.17.
Be not (as the Apostle says) proudly wise, nor hope thou in the uncertainty
of riches, but in God who gives thee many things abundantly, and by the
amendment of thy manners purchase unto thy self a good foundation for
hereafter, and obtain a ^rue, and truly everlasting life, and not a
transitory one Otherwise thou shall know and see yea in this very world, how
bad and bitter a thing it is for thee to leave thy Lord God, and not have his
fear before thine eyes, and in the next, how thou shall be burned in the foul
incompassing flames of endless fire, nor yet by any manner of means ever dye.
For why the souls of the sinful are as well eternal in perpetual fire, as
the souls of the just in perpetual joy and gladness.

And likewise O Dragon of the Island, The reproof of M^glocune.
O depriver of many Tyrants, as well from their kingdoms as also from their
lives, and among the fore-recited the last in my writing, but the first in
thine own mischief, exceeding many in power, and also in malice, more
liberal in giving, more licentious in sinning, boystrous in arms, but
stronger in working thine own fowls destruction, Maglocune, to what end art
thou (as one Ier. 23.9.
Soken in the wine pressed out of the Sodomiticall grape) foolishly moyled in
that so ugly old deformity of thine offenses? Why do thou wilfully heap in
bands upon thy kingly shoulders, such huge weights of sins, not unlike (as I
may say) unto the unsupportable burdens of great mountains? Why do thou not
show thy self unto the King of all kings (who has made thee as well in
kingdom as also in stature of body higher than almost all the Dukes of
Britain besides) better likewise in virtues than the rest; but on the contrary
side for thy sins much worser? The certain affirmation of which sins, do
thou a while with an indifferent ear, hear and listen unto, wherein I will
not touch any whitte thy domestical and higher offenses (if yet any of them
are light) but only report those open ones which are spread far and broad
in the knowledge of all men. Did not thou in the very first entrance of thy
youth, most terribly oppress through sword, spear, and fire, the King thine
uncle together with his most courageous bands of Soldiers, whose countenances
in battle were not much unlike unto young Lions? Little esteeming those words
of the Prophet that say; Psalm. 54.24.
Men of blood and deceit shall not accomplish the middle part of their days:
and were not the sequel of thy sins such as insued) yet what revenge
should thou expect at the hands of the just Judge for this only offense; He
also saying by his Prophet: Esa. 33.1
Woe be to thee who spoylest, and shall not thou thy self be spoiled? and thou
who killest, shall not thy self be killed? and when thou shall make an end of
thy spoiling, then shall thy self ruinate.

But when the conceit of this usurping reign had succeeded according to thine
own hearts wishes, did not thou being taken with a desire of returning to
the right way, day and night as then (perhaps through the deep remorse of thy
sinful conscience) chaw first of all, the cudde of thy many meditations
about the service of God, and the observance of the rules of Monks, and
afterward make it known to the whole world, and for ever vow thy self before
Almighty God, and in the sight of Angels and men (breaking as it was thought
those most large nets, wherein fat bulls of thy sort are wont to be headlong
entangled, and overcomming all temptations of thirst of Kingdoms, Gold, and
Silver, and which is greatest that of thine own will) and were professed a
Monk without any thought (as thy self did say) of violating the same, and
did not thou being now become of a crow a dove, like the same bird, when she
sheareth swiftly with her singing wings the empty air, and avoideth with her
often winding turns, the fell talons of the ravenous hawke, safely recover thy
self to the cells, and reposes of Saints, as thy most trusty refuge? Oh how
great a joy should it have been to our Mother the Church, if the enemy of all
mankind had not lamentably pulled thee in a sort out of her bosom! Oh how
ample fuel of Heavenly hope, would have been inkindled in the hearts of
desperate sinners, had thou remained in thy blessed estate! Oh what, and how
great rewards in the Kingdom of Christ would have been laid up for thy soul
against the day of judgment, if that crasty wolf had not caught thee, who of
a wolf, was now become a Lamb (not much against thine own will) out of the
fold of our Lord, and made thee of a Lamb, a wolf like to himself, again?
Oh how great a joy would the conservation of thy salvation have been to God
the holy Father of all Saints, had not the devil the miserable father of all
castawaies, as an Eagle of monstrous wings and claws carried thee captive away
against all right and reason, to the unhappy root of his children? And to be
short, as great gladness and sweetness, did thy conversion to righteousness
minister to heaven and earth, as now thy detestable return, after the manner
of a sick mastive unto the horrible vomit again, breeds grief and
lamentation: which being done; Romans 6.13.
The members are now become the armours of iniquity for sin and the devil,
which in right sense should have been busily employed, as the armours of
justice for God: for now with thy listening ears are not heard the praises of
God sweetly sounded forth by the pleasant voices of Christ's Soldiers, nor the
Organs of ecclesiastical melody, but thine own praises (which are nothing)
rung out after the fashion of Bacchus giddy rout, by the mouths of thy
villainous followers fulfilled with lies, and also with foming malice, to the
utter overthrow of every one of their neighbors, so as the vessel sometimes
prepared for the service of God, is now turned to a vessel of dirt, and what
was once reputed worthy of Heavenly honor, is now worthily cast into the
bottomless pit of hell. Neither yet is thy sensual mind (which is overcome
by the excess of folly) any whit abated or debarred of his course with
committing so great sins, but hot and prone (like a young colt that coveteth
every pleasant pasture) runs* headlong forward, with irrecoverable fury,
through the large fields of offenses, in heaping new wickedness on the head of
the old. For the former marriage of thy first wife (although after thy violated
vow of Religion, she were not lawfully thine) yet being sometimes thine, was
now despised, another, the wife of a man then living, and he no stranger, but
thine own brothers son, being in her place beloved. Upon which occasion that
stiff neck of thine (being already laden with many burdens of sins) is now
moreover with two monstrous murders, the one of thy aforesaid Nevew, the other
of her who sometimes was thy married wife (as with the outrageous extremity of
thy sacrilege) from low to lower, and from bad to worser, bowed, bended, and
depressed down. Afterward also did thou accept her, (by whose deceit and
suggestion such mighty matter of offenses was undergone) publickely, and (as
the flattring tongues of thy parasites with feigned, but not faithful words
pronounce) lawfully as a widow, but (as we) say most wickedly to be thine own
in wedlock. And therefore what holy man is there, whose bowels being moved
with the narration of such an history, would not presently break out into
weeping and lamentations? What Priest (whose heart lies open unto God) would
not instantly upon the hearing of this, with marveilous mourning cry out that
saying of the Prophet: Ier. 9.1.
Who shall give water to my head, and to mine eyes a fountain of tears, and I
will day and night bewail those of my people, who are slaughtered. For why
full little (alas) have thou with thine ears once heard that reprehension of
the Prophet speaking in this wise: Eccle. 4 1.11.
Woe be unto ye (O wicked men) who have left the Law of the most holy God, and
if ye shall be borne, your portion shall be to malediction, and if ye die, into
malediction shall be your portion, al things that are from the earth, to the
earth shall be converted again, so shall the wicked from malediction pass to
perdition: (but ever supposed) if they return not unto our Lord, receiving
especially this admonition: Eccle. 21.1.
Son thou have offended, add no farther offense thereunto, but withal, do
thou pray for the forgiveness of the former. And again, Eccle. 5.8
Forslow not to be converted unto our Lord, neither yet do thou put of the
same from day to day, for his wrath does come suddenly. Because as the
Scripture says: Pro. 29.12
When the King hears the unjust word, Pro. 29.4
all under his dominion become wicked. And, The just King (according to the
Prophet) raises up his Region. But warnings truly are not wanting to thee,
since thou have for thine instructor the most eloquent Master, of almost all
Britain. Take heed therefore, lest that which Solomon notes, befalls not to
thee, which is: Eccle. 22.8.
Even as he who stirs up a sleeping man out of his heavy sleep, so is that
person who declares wisdom unto a fool, for in the end of his speech will he
say. What have thou first spoken? Wash thine heart (as it is written) from
malice (Oh Jerusalem) that thou may be saved. Despise not (I beseech thee)
the unspeakeable mercy of God, calling by his Prophet, the wicked in this sort
from their offenses Iere. 18.7
I will on the suddvine speak to the Nation, and to the Kingdom, that I may
root out, and dispearse, and destroy and overthrow. As for the sinner he does
in this wise exhort him vehemently to penance. And if the same people shall do
penance from their offense, I will also do penance upon the evil which I
have said that I would do against them. And again, Ier. 18.8.
Who will give them such an heart, as they may hear me, and keep my
Commandments, and that it may be well with them all the days of their lives,
And also in the Deuteronomy. 32.28.
Canticle of Deuteronomy, A people without counsel and prudence, I wish they
would be wise, and understand, and foresee the last of all, how one pursues a
thousand and two put to flight ten thousands. And again, our Lord in the
Gospel. Mat. 11.28
Come unto me all ye who do labor and are burdened, and I will make ye
rest. Take up my yoke upon you, and learn of me, because I am meek and
humble of heart, and ye shall find repose in your souls. For if thou do
hearken to these admonitions, but with deaf ears, if thou contemnest the
Prophets, if thou despisest Christ, and (although most base we are) make no
account of us, so long as with sincere piety and purity of mind, we observe
the same of the Prophet, that we may not be found, Esa. 56.10
Dumb dogs, not able to bark (howsoever I for mine own particular am not of
that singular fortitude, in the spirit and virtue of our Lord as to declare
Esa. 58.1.
To the house of Jacob their sins and the house of Israel their offenses) and
so long as we shall remember that of Solomon. Pro. 24.24.
Who so terms the wicked to be just, shall be accursed among the people, and
odious to nations, for they who reproove shall have better hopes. Eccle. 24.27
And again, Respect not with reverence thy neighbor in his ruin, nor spare
thou to speak in time of Salvation. And as long also as we forget not this,
Pr^. 24.11.
Withdraw them away by force, who are led to death, and forbear not to redeem
them who are murdered; because as the same Prophet says Pro. 11.4
Riches shall not profit in the day of wrath, but justice delivers from
death. And Pro. 11.31. 1 Pet. 4.18.
If the just truly be hardly saved, where shall the wicked, and sinner
appear? If thou scornest us and all these, the darkesome flood of hell shall
without all doubt eternally drown thee in that deadly whirlepoole, and those
most terrible fiery streams that shall ever torment and never consume thee,
and then shall the palpable knowledge of these pains, and sorrow for sins
be altogether to late and unprofitable unto him, who as now in this acceptable
time and day of Salvation deferreth his conversion unto the righteous way of of
life. And here truly if not before was this so doleful and lamentable an
history of the miseries of our time, to have received a conclusion, that our
mouth might no further discourse of the works of men; But that we may not be
esteemed fearful or overwearied, whereby we might the less carefully avoyde
that saying of Esaias, which is, Esa. 5.20.
Woe be unto them who call good evil, and evil good, placing darkness for
light, and light for darkness, bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter, Mat.
13.13.
who seeing see not and hearing hear not, whose he^rts are overshadowed with a
certain thick and black cloud of vices! We will breefely set down, what and
how great threatenings are denounced (against these five aforesaid lascivious
horses, the frantic followers of Pharaoh, through whom his army is wilfully
urged forward to their utter destruction in the red sea, and also against such
others) by the sacred Oracles, with whose holy testimonies (as with a fair
roof) the frame of this our little work, may be most assuredly covered, that
it be not subject to the showers of the envious, which otherwise would be
mainely powered thereupon. Let therefore the holy Prophets (who have been unto
mortal men the mouth in a sort) of God, and the Organ of the holy Ghost,
forbidding evils, and favoring goodness) answer for us as well now as in
that before, against the stubborn and proud Princes of this our age, that they
may not say we menace them with such threats, and so great terrors, only of
our own invention, and overbusie talking rashness. For to no wise man is it
doubtful how far more grievous the sins of this our time are, than those
of the first age, the Apostle saying Any one transgressing the law, Heb. 10.28.
being convicted by two or three witnesses, shall dye, how much worser
punishments think ye then that he deserves, who shall trample under his
foot the Son of God? And he first of all appears before us, Samuel (by the
Commandment of God) the stablisher of a lawful kingdom, dedicated to God
before his birth, undoubtedly known by admirable signs, to be a true Prophet
unto all the people, from Dan even to Bersheba, out of whose mouth the Holy
Ghost thundreth to all the Potentates of the world, by denouncing unto Saul the
first king of the Hebrews, only because he did not accomplish some matters
commanded him from our Lord in this sort. 1 Samuel 13.13.
Thou have done foolishly, neither yet have thou kept the Commandments of our
Lord thy God, that he has given thee in charge; which if thou had not
committed, even now had our Lord prepared thy reign over Israel for ever, but
thy kingdom shall no farther arise. And what did he commit adultery, or any
abominable murder like to the offenses of this time? No truly, but broake in
part a Commandment, because as well one of ours notes; The question is not of
the quality of the sin, but of the violating of the precept. Also when he
endeavored to answer (as he thought) the objections and after the fashion of
men wisely to make defenses for his offenses on this wise; Yea I have heard the
voice of our Lord, 1 Samuel 15.20
and walked in the way through the which he has sent me: with this
reprehension was he corrected by him: What will our Lord have burnt offerings
or oblations, 1 Samuel 15.22
and not rather that the voice of our Lord should be obeyed? Obedience is
truly better than oblations, and to hearken unto him, better than to offer the
fat of Rams. Because as the sin of Southsaying, so is it to resist, and as
the offense of Idolatry not to obey; in regard therefore thou have cast away
the Word of our Lord, he has also cast thee away that thou be not King. And a
little after. 1. Sam. 15.28.
Our Lord has this day rent the Kingdom of Israel from thee, and delivered it
up to thy neighbor, a man better than thy self. The triumpher of Israel
truly will not spare, and will not be bowed with repentance, neither yet is
he a man that he may be penitent
do penance, (supposed ever) upon the hard stony hearts of the wicked:
Wherein it is to be noted how he says, that to be disobedient unto God is the
sin of Idolatry. Let not therefore our wicked transgressors (while they do
not openly sacrifice to the gods of the Gentiles) flatter themselves that they
are not Idolaters, so long as they tread like swine the most precious pearls
of Christ under their feet. But although this one example as an invincible
affirmation might abundantly suffice to correct the wicked: Yet, that in the
mouths of many witnesses all the offenses of Britain may be approved, let us
pass to the rest. What chanced to David for numbering his people, the Prophet
Gad speaking unto him in this sort? Thus says our Lord. The choice of three is
offered thee, 2 Samuel 24.12.
Elect to thee one of these which thou will, that I may execute it upon thee.
Either shall there befall thee a famine for seven years, or three months
shall thou fly thine enemies and they pursue thee, or certainly there shall
be three days Pestilence in thy land. For being brought into great streights
upon this condition, and willing rather to fall into the hands of God who is
merciful, than into those of men, he was humbled with the slaughter of LXX
thousand of his subjects, and unless with the affection of an Apostolic
charity, he had desired to dye himself for his Countrymen, that the Plague
might not further consume them, 2 Samuel 24.17.
by saying, I am the same person that have offe^d^d I the shepherd have dealt
unjustly: these who are sheep what have they sinned? Let thy hand (I beseech
thee) be turned against me, and against the house of my Father. He should have
purged the unadvised pride of his heart with his own death. For what does the
Scripture afterward declare of his Son. 1 Reg. 11.6.
And Solomon wrought what was not pleasing before our Lord, and he did not
supply in his place, that he might as his Father follow our Lord. And our Lord
said unto him; Because thou have thus behaved thy self, 1 Reg. 11.11.
and not observed my covenant and precepts, which I have commanded thee,
breaking it asunder; I will divide thy Kingdom, and give the same unto thy
Servant. Hear now likewise what fell upon the two sacrilegious Kings of
Israel, (even such as ours are) Jeroboam, and Baasa, unto whom the sentence and
doom of our Lord, is by the Prophet in this sort directed: For what cause have
I exalted thee a Prince over Israel, 1 Reg. 14.7.
in regard they have provoked me in their vanities. 1 Reg. 16.2, 3, 4.
Behold I will stir up after Baasha and after his house, and I will give over
his house as the house of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat. whosoever of his blood shall
dye in the City, the dogs shall eat him, and the dead carcass of his in the
field, shall the fowls of the air devour. What does he also threaten unto
that wicked King of Israel, a fellow soldier of the former band (by whose
collusion and his wives deceit, innocent Naboth, was for his Fathers Vineyard
oppressed) talking by the holy mouth of that Elias, yea the selfsame mouth
that was instructed with the fiery speech of our Lord. Thou have killed, 1 Reg*
21.19.
moreover likewise thou have possessed, and after these thou will add yet
more. Thus says our Lord, in this very place, wherein the dogs have licked
the blood of Naboth, they shall lick up thy blood also. Which that it fell out
afterward in that very sort we have certain experience. But least perchance
(according as it befell unto the aforesaid Achab) The lying spirit which
pronounces vain things, 1 Reg. 22.22.
in the mouths of your Prophets may seduce ye, harken ye to the speeches of
the Prophet Michaias. 1 Reg. 22.23.
Behold God has suffered the spirit of lying to poss^sse the mouths of all thy
Prophets that do here remain, and our Lord has pronounced evil against thee.
For even now it is certain there are some Doctors replenished with a contrary
spirit, preaching and affirming rather naughty pleasure then truth: whose words
are softer then oil, Psa. 54.22 Iere. 6.14. and. 8.11.
and the self same are darts, who say, peace, peace and there shall be no
peace to them, who persevere in sins, as the Prophet in another place, on
this wise speaks. It is not for the wicked to rejoice says our Lord. Esa^
48.22 and 57.21.
Azarias also the son of Obed, did speak unto Asa, who returned from the
slaughter of the Army of ten hundred thousand Ethiopians, 2 Para^. 15.2.
saying, Our Lord is with ye, while ye remain with him, and if ye will seek
him out, he will be found by ye, and if ye will leave him, he will forsake ye.
For if Iehoshaphat but yielding assistance unto a wicked King, was thus
reproved by the Prophet Iehu, the son of Anany, saying. 2 Paral. 19.2.
If thou give aid to a sinner, or love them whom our Lord does hate, the
wrath of God does therefore hang over thee, what shall become of them, who are
fettered in the proper snares of their own offenses? whose sins but not
whose soule^s, we must of necessity hate, if we will fight in the Army of our
Lord, Psalm. 96.10
the Psalmist saying, Hate ye evil, who love our Lord. What was said to the
son of the before re^cited Iosaphat, named Ioram, that most horrible murderer
(who being himself a bastard, slew his noble brethren, that he might possess
the throne in their place) by the Prophet Elias, the wagon and wagoner of
Israel? 2 Paral. 21 21.
Thus speaks (quoth he) the Lord God of thy Father David. Because thou have
not walked in the way of thy Father Iosaphat, and in the ways of Asa the King
of Judah, but have made thy passage through the ways of the Kings of Israel,
and in unsensiblenesse according to the behavior of the house of Achab, and
have moreover killed thy brethren, the sons of Iosaphat, men far better
then thy self; behold our Lord shall strike thee and thy children with a
mighty plague. 2 Paral. 21.25.
And a little afterward. And thou shall be marveilous sick, of a disease of
thy belly, until the entrails of thy belly shall together with the malady it
self from day to day pass forth away from thee? And listen also what the
Prophet Zachary the son of Ioiades menaced to Ioas the King of Israel,
leaving our Lord even as ye now do, who arising, spoke in this manner to the
People; Thus says our Lord, 2 Paral. 24.20.
why do ye transgress the Commandments of our Lord and do not prosper?
Because ye have left our Lord, he will also leave you. What shall I mention of
Esaias, the first and chief of the Prophets, who begins the proeme and
entrance of his Prophecy, or rather vision, saying in this sort; Hear O ye
Heavens, Esa. 1.2.
and O thou earth conceive in thine ears, because our Lord has spoken, I have
nourished children, and exalted them, but they themselves have despised me. The
Ox has known his owner, and the Ass the manger of his Master, but Israel
has not known me, and my people has not understood. From this place forward
all the sentences of Esaias are omitted in another Book. Esa. 1.8.
And after a few words, framing threatenings answerable to so great a folly, he
says: The Daughter of Sion shall be uterly left as a shelter in the Vineyard,
and as a hovell in the Cowcumber Garden, and a City that is sacked. And
especial-conventing and accusing the Princes, Esa. 1.10.
he says, Hear the word of our Lord (O ye Princes of Sodom,) perceive ye
the Law of our Lord, O ye people of Gomorrah. Where truly it is to be noted,
that unjust Kings are termed the Princes of Sodom, for our Lord forbidding
sacrifices and gifts to be offered unto him by such where we with greedy
covetousness receive those offerings which in all Nations are displeasing unto
God, and to our own destruction suffer them not to be bestowed on the poor
and needy speaks to them who laden with abundance of riches, are likewise
given to the filth of offenses on this wise. Esa. 1.13.
Offer not any more your sacrifice in vain, your incense is abomination unto
me. And again he denounces. Esa. 1.15.
And when ye shall stretch out your hands, I will turn away mine eyes from
ye, and when ye shall multiply your prayers, I will not hear. And he
declares wherefore he does this, saying; Your hands are full of blood. And
likewise showing how he may be appeased, he says, Esa. 1.16.
Be ye washed, be ye clean, take away the evil of your thoughts from mine
eyes, leave of to deal perversely, learn to do well, seek for the judgment,
succor the oppressed, do justice to the pupil or Orphan. And then assuming
as it were the part of a reconciling appeaser, he adding says, Esa. 1.18.
If your sins shall be as scarlet, they shall be made white as Snow: and if
they shall be as red as the little worm, they shall be as white as wool. If ye
shall be willing and will hear me, ye shall feed on the good things of the
Land, but if ye will not, and shall provoke me unto wrath, the sword shall
devour ye. Receive ye, hear the true and public avoucher witnessing without
any falsehood or flattery, the reward of your good and evil* not like the
soothing humble lips of your Parasites whispering poisons into your ears.
And also directing his sentence against ravenous judges, he says thus. Esa.
1.23.
Thy Princes are unfaithful, companions of thieves, all love gifts, hunt after
rewards, they do no justice to the Orphan, the widows cause enters not unto
them. For this says our Lord God of hosts, the strong one of Israel. Alas, I
will take consolation upon my foes, and be revenged upon mine enemies, and the
heinous sinners shall be broken to powder and offenders together with them and
all who have left our Lord, shall be consumed. And afterward, Esa. 2.11.
The eyes of the lofty man shall be brought low, and the height of men has
bowed down. And again, Esa. 3.11.
Woe be to the wicked, evil be fall him, for he shall be rewarded according to
his handy works. And a little after, Woe be unto ye who arise early to follow
drunkenness, Esa. 5.11.
and to drink even to the very evening, that ye may vapouring fume with Wine.
The Harp, and the Lyra, and the Taber, and the Pipe, and Wine are in your
banquets, and the work of our Lord ye respect not, neither yet consider ye the
works of his hands. Therefore is my people led captive away, because they have
not had knowledge, and their Nobles have perished with famine, and their
multitude has withered away with thirst. Therefore has hell enlarged and
dilated his spirit, and without measure opened his mouth, and his strong ones,
and his people, and his lofty and glorious ones, shall descend down unto him.
And afterward, Woe be unto ye who are mighty for the drinking of wine, Esa.
5.22.
and strong men for the procuring of drunkenness, who justify the wicked for
rewards, and deprive the just man of his justice. For this cause even as the
tongue of the fire devoureth the stubbell, and as the heat of the flame
burns up, so shall their root be as the ashes, and their branch shall rise
up us the dust. For they have cast away the law of our Lord of hosts, and
despised the speech of the holy one of Israel. In all these the fury of our
Lord is not turned away, but as yet his hand is stretched out. And somewhat
after debating of the day of judgment and the unspeakeable fear of offenders,
he says. Howl ye out, Esa. 13.6.
because the day of our Lord is near at hand (if then near, what shall it now
be thought to be) in regard destruction shall proceed from God. For this shall
all hands be dissolved, and every man's heart shall wither away, and be bruised,
small tortures and dolours shall hold them, as a woman in labor so shall they
be grieved, every man shall at his neighbor stand astonished, burned faces
shall be their countenances. Behold, the day of our Lord shall come, cruel and
full of indignation, and of wrath, and fury, to turn the earth into a desert,
and break her sinners in small pieces from off her, because the stars of
Heaven and the brightness of them, shall not unfold their light, the Sun in
his rising shall be covered over with darkness, and the Moon shall not shine
in her season, and I will visit upon the evils of the world, and against the
wicked their own iniquity, and I will make the pride of the unfaithful to
cease, and the arrogance of the strong, I will bring full low. And again,
Behold, our Lord will disperse the earth, Esa. 24 1.
and he will strip her naked, and afflict her face, and scatter her
inhabitants, and as the people, so shall be the Priest, and as the slave so
shall be his Lord as the handmaid so shall be her Lady, as the purchaser so
shall be the seller, as the usurer, so shall be he that borrows, as he who
demands, so shall be he that owes. With dispersing shall the earth be
scattered, and with sacking shall she be spoiled. For our Lord has spoken this
word. The earth has bewailed, and has fleeted away, the world has run to
nothing, she is weakened by her inhabitants, because they have transgressed
laws, changed right, brought to ruin the eternal truce. For this shall
malediction devour the earth. And afterward, They shall lament all of them who
do in heart rejoice, Esa. 24.7.
the delight of the timbrells has ceased, the sound of the glad^some shall be
silent, the sweetness of the Harp shall be hushed, they shall not with
singing drink their wine, bitter shall the potion be to the drinkers thereof.
The City of vanity is wasted, every house is shut up, no man entering in; an
outcry shall be in the streets upon wine, all gladness is forsaken, the joy
of the land is transferred, solitariness is left in the town, and calamity
shall oppress the gates, because these things shall be in the midst of the
land, and in the midst of the people. And somewhat afterward, Esa. 24.^6.
Swarving from the truth, have they wandered out of the right way, with the
straggling of transgressors have they gone astray. Fear and intrapping falls,
and a snare upon thee who art the inhabitant of the earth. And it shall come to
pass: Who so shall fly from the voice of the fear, shall tumble down into
the intrapping pit, and who so shall deliver himself out of the downfall,
shall be caught in the intangling snare: because the floodgates from aloft
shall be opened, and the foundations of the earth shall be shaken. With
bruising shall the earth be broken, with commotion shall she be moved, with
tossing shall she be tottred like to a drunken man, and she shall be taken away
as if she were a pavilion of one nights pitching, and her iniquity shall hang
heavy upon her, and she shall fall done, and shall not attempt to rise again.
And it shall be, that our Lord in the same day shall visit on the warfare of
heaven in the high place, and on the Kings of the earth, who are upon the
earth, and they shall be gathered together in the bundle of one burden into
the Lake, and shall there be shut up in prison, and after many days shall they
be visited. And the Moon shall blush, and the Sun be confounded, when our
Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Sion and in Jerusalem, and be glorified in
the sight of his Seniors. And after a while, yielding a reason why he
threatens in that sort, he says thus, Behold the hand of our Lord is not
shortened that he cannot save, Esaias. 59.1.
neither yet is his ear made heavy that he may not hear. But your iniquities
have divided between ye and your God, and your offenses have hid his face from
ye, that he might not hear. For your hands are defiled with blood, and your
fingers with iniquity: Your lips have spoken lying, and your tongue utters
iniquity. There is not who calls on justice, neither is there he who judges
truly, but they trust in nothing, and speak vanities, and have conceived
grief, and brought forth iniquity. And a little after; Esa. 59.6.
Their works are unprofitable, and the work of iniquity in their hands, their
feet run into evil, and make haste that they may shed the innocent blood;
their thoughts are unprofitable thoughts, spoil and confusion are in their
ways, and the way of peace they have not known, and in their steps there is
no judgment, their paths are made crooked unto them, every one who treads
in them is ignorant of peace; in this respect is judgment removed far off
from ye, and justice takes no hold of ye. Esa. 59.14.
And after a few words; And judgment has been turned back, and justice has
stood a far off, because truth has fallen down in the streets, and equity
could not enter in, and truth is turned to oblivion, and who so has departed
from evil, has layne open to spoil. And our Lord has seen, and it was not
pleasing in his eyes, because there is not judgment. And thus far may it
suffice among many, to recite a few sentences out of the Prophet Esaias.

Now truly do ye a while with diligent ears hearken unto him (who was
foreknowne before he was formed in the belly, sanctified before he came forth
of the womb, and appointed a Prophet in all Nations) Jeremiah I mean, what he
has pronounced of foolish people and cruel Kings, beginning moderatly his
Prophecy in this manner.

And the Word of God was spoken unto me saying; Ierem. 2.2.
Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, and thou shall pronounce. Hear the
Word of our Lord thou house of Jacob, and all ye kindreds of the house of
Israel; Thus says our Lord; What iniquity have your fathers found in me, who
have been far removed from me, and walked after vanity, and are become
vain, and have not said, Where is he who made us ascend out of the Land of
Egypt? In another book this first sentence of Jeremy is only mentioned, and
the rest all omitted. Ierem. 2.20.
And after a few words; From the beginning of thine Age thou have broken my
yoke, violated my bands, and said, I will not serve, I have planted thee my
chosen vine, all true seed. How art thou therefore converted into naughtiness
O strange Vine? If thou shall wash thee with Niter, and multiply unto thee the
herb Borith, thou art spotted in my sight with thine iniquity, says our
Lord. And afterward; Why will ye contend with me in judgment? Ier. 2.29.
Ye have all forsaken me says our Lord, in vain have I corrected your
children, they have not received discipline. Hear ye the Word of our Lord. Am
I made a solitariness unto Israel, or a lateward Land? why therefore has my
people said, we have departed, we will come no more unto thee? What does the
Virgin forget her ornament, or the Spouse her gorget? my people truly has
forgotten me innumerable days. Ier. 4.22.
Because my people are foolish, they have not known me, they are unwise and
mad children. They are wise to do evil, but to do well they have been
ignorant. Then the Prophet speaks in his own person saying; O Lord thine
eyes do respect faith, thou have stricken them, and they have not sorrowed,
thou have broken them, and they have refused to receive discipline, they have
made their faces harder than the rock, and will not return. And also our
Lord: Ier. 5.20.
Declare ye this same to the house of Jacob, and make it to be heard in Judah,
saying: Hear ye foolish people who have no heart, who having eyes see not, and
ears hear not. Ye will therefore not dread me says our Lord, and ye will
not conceive grief from my countenance, who have placed the sand the bound of
the sea, an eternal commandment which she shall not break, and her waves
shall be moved, and they cannot, and her sourges shall swell, and yet not pass
the same. But to this people is framed an incredulous and an exasperating
heart, they have retired and gone their ways, and not in their heart said, Let
us fear our Lord God. And again; Because there are found among my people
wicked ones, framing wiles to intangell as if they were foulers, Ier. 5.26.
setting snares and ginnes to catch men; As a net that is full of birds, so are
their houses fullfilled with deceites. Therefore are they magnified and
enriched, they are become gross and fat, and have neglected my speeches most
vildly, the orphans cause they have not sentenced, and the justice of the poor
they have not adjudged. What shall I not visit over these says our Lord? or
shall not my soul be revenged upon such a nation? But God forbid, that ever
should befall unto you, which follows, Thou shall speak all these words unto
them, Ier. 7.27.
and they shall not hear thee, and thou shall call them, and they shall not
answer thee, and thou shall say unto them; This is the Nation that has not
heard the voice of their Lord God, nor yet received discipline, faith has
perished, and been taken away from out their mouth. And after some few
speeches, Whosoever falls does he not arise again, Iere. 8.4.
and who so is turned away, shall he not return again? why therefore is this
people in Jerusalem, with a contentious aversion alienated? they have
apprehended lying, and they will not come back again. I have been attentive,
and harkened diligently, no man speaks what is good. There is none who does
penance for his sin, saying, What have I done? All are turned unto their
own course, like a horse passing with violence into battle. The Kite in the
sky has known her time, the Turtle and Swallow and Storke have kept the
season of their coming, but my people has not known the judgment of God. And
the Prophet being stricken into fear, with so wonderful a blindness, and
unspeakeable drunkenness of the Sacrilegious, and lamenting them who did not
lament themselves (even according to the present behavior of these our
unfortunate Tyrants) he beseeches of our Lord, that an augmentation of tears
might be granted him, speaking in this manner; Ie^e. 8.21.
I am contrite upon the contrition of the daughter of my people, astonishment
has possessed me: is there no gum in Galaad, or is there no Physician there?
Why therefore is not the wound of the daughter of my people healed? Who shall
give water unto my head, and to mine eyes a fountain of tears, and I will day
and night bewail the slaughtered of my people? who will grant me in the
wilderness the Inn of passengers, and I will utterly leave my people, and
depart from them, because they are all of them adulterers, a root of offenders
and they have bent their tongue as the bow of lying, and not of truth, they are
comforted in the earth, because they have passed from evil into evil, and not
known me says our Lord. And again: Iere. 9.13.
And our Lord has said, Because they have forsaken my law, which I have given
them, and not heard my voice, nor walked thereafter, and have wandered away
after the wickedness of their own heart, in that respect our Lord of hosts
the God of Israel, says these words, Behold I will feed this people with
wormwood, and give them to drink the water of gall. And a little after
(speaking in the person of God) See therefore thou do not pray for this
people, Iere. 11.14
nor assume thou for them praise and prayer, because I will not hear in the
time of their outcry unto me, and of their affliction. What then shall now our
miserable Governors do, these few who found out the narrow way and left the
large, were from God forbiden to power out their prayers for such as persevered
in their evils, and so highly provoked his wrath, against whom on the contrary
side when they returned with all their hearts unto God (his divine Majesty
being unwilling that the soul of man should perish, but calling back the
castaway that he should not utterly be destroyed) the same Prophets could not
procure the Heavenly revenge, because not Jonas, when he desired the like most
earnestly against the Ninevites, could obtain it. But in the mean while
omitting our own words, let us rather hear what the prophetical trumpet
sounds in our ears speaking thus: Iere. 13.22
If thou shall say in thy heart, why have these evils befalne? For the
multitude of thine iniquities. If the Ethiopian can change his skin, or the
Parde his sundry spots, ye may do also well when ye have learned evil
(supposed ever) because ye will not. And afterward: Iere. 14.10
These words does our Lord say to this people, who have loved to move their
feet, and have not rested, and not pleased our Lord; now shall he remember
their iniquities, and visit their offenses, and our Lord said unto me, Pray
thou not for this people to work their good, when they shall fast, I will not
hear their prayers: and if they offer burnt sacrifices and oblations, I will
not ^eceive them. And again, And our Lord said unto me; Iere. 15.1.
^f Moses and Samuel shall stand before me, my soul is not bent to this
people, cast them out away from my face, and let them depart. And after a few
words: Who shall have pity on thee Jerusalem, Iere. 15.5.
or who shall be sorrowful for thee, or who shall go to pray for thy peace?
Thou have left me (says our Lord) and gone away backward, and I will stretch
forth my hand over thee, and kill thee. And somewhat after: Iere. 18.11
Thus says our Lord, Behold I do imagine a thought against you, let every man
return from his evil course, and direct ye straight your ways and
endeavors, Who said, we despair, we will go after our own thoughts, and
every one of us do the naughtiness of his evil heart. Thus therefore says
our Lord. Ask the Gentiles, who has heard such horrible matters, which the
Virgin Israel has too often committed? Shall there fail from the rock of the
field, the snow of Libanus? or can the waters be drawn dry that gush out cold
and flowing? because my people has forgotten me. And somewhat also after this,
propounding unto them an election, he speaking says, Thus says our Lord,
Iere. 22.3.
Do ye judgment and justice, and deliver him who by power is oppressed out of
the hand of the malicious accuser; and for the stranger, and orphan, and
widow, do not provoke their sorrow, neither yet work ye unjustly the grief
of others, nor shed ye out the innocent blood. For if indeed ye shall
accomplish this word, there shall enter in through the gates of this house,
Kings of the lineage of David, sitting upon his throne. But if ye will not
harken unto these words, by my self I have sworn (says our Lord) that this
house shall be turned into a desert. And again, Iere. 22.24
(for he spoke of a wicked King) I live (says our Lord) if so be that
Iechonias shall be a Ring on my right hand, I will pluck him thence away, and
give him over into the hands of them who seek his life. Moreover holy Abraham
cries out saying: Abac. 2.12
Woe be unto them who build a City in blood, and prepare a town in iniquities,
saying: Are not these things from our Almighty Lord? and many people have
failed in fire, and many Nations have been diminished. And thus complaining,
he begins his prophecy: Abac. 1.2.
How long (O Lord) shall I call, and thou will not hear? shall I cry out unto
thee, to what end have thou given me labors and griefs, to behold misery and
impiety? And on the other side; Abac. 1.3.
And judgment was sat upon, and the Judge has taken in regard hereof, the Law
is rent in pieces, and judgment is not brought fully to his conclusion,
because ^he wicked through power ^readeth the just underfoote. In this respect
has passed forth perverse judgment. And mark ye also what blessed Osee the
Prophet speaks of Princes saying: Osee 8.1.
For that they have transgressed my covenant, and ordained against my Law, and
exclaimed out. We have known thee, because thou art against Israel, they have
persecuted good, as if it were evil, Osee 8 4.
They have reigned to themselves and not by me, they have held a Principality,
neither yet have they acknowledged me. And hear ye likewise the holy Prophet
Amos, in this sort threatening: Amos 2 4.
In three heinous offenses of the sons of Judah, and in four I will not
convert them, for that they have cast away the Law of our Lord, and not kept
his Commandments, but their vanities have seduced them. And I will send fire
upon Judah, and it shall eat the foundations of Jerusalem. Amos 2.6.
Thus says our Lord; In three grievous sins of Israel, and in four I will
not convert them, for that they have sold the just for money, and the poor man
for shoes, which they tread upon the dust of the earth, and with buffets they
did beat the heads of the poor, and have eschewed the way of the humble. And
after a few words: Seek our Lord and ye shall live, Amos 5.6.
that the house of Joseph may not shine as fire, and the flame devour it, and
he shall not be, that can extinguish it. Amo. 5.10
The house of Israel has hated him who rebukes in the gates, and abhorred the
upright word. Which Amos being forbidden that he should not prophecy in
Israel, without any fawning flattery, answering says: I was not a Prophet, nor
yet the son of a Prophet, Amos 7.14
but a Goat herd, I was plucking Sicamores, and our Lord took me from my
herd, and our Lord said unto me, Go thy way and prophecy against my people of
Israel, and now hear thou the Word of our Lord (For he directed his speech
unto the King) Thou say, do not Prophecy against Israel, and thou shall
not assemble troops against the house of Jacob. For which cause our Lord says
thus, Thy wife in the City shall play the harlot, and thy sons and daughters
shall dye by the sword, and thy ground be measured by the cord, and thou in a
polluted land shall end thy life, but for Israel, she shall be led from his
own Country a captive. And afterward: Amos 8.4.
Hear therefore these words, ye who do outragiously afflict the poor, and
practice your mighty power against the needy of the earth, who say, When shall
the month pass over that we may purchase, and the Sabbaths that we may open
the treasuries. And within a few words after: Amos 8.7.
Our Lord does swear against the pride of Jacob, if he shall neglecting forget
your actions, and if in these the earth shall not be disturbed, and every
inhabitant thereof fall to lamentation, and the final end as a flood ascend,
and I will turn your festival days into wailing, and cast on the loins of
every one hairecloth, and on the head of every man baldness, and make him as
the mourning of one over his beloved, and those who are with him, as the day of
sorrow. Amos 9.10.
And again: In the sword shall die all the sinners of my people, who say,
Evils shall not approach, nor yet shall light upon us. And listen ye likewise,
what holy Micheas the Prophet has spoken saying: Mich. 6.10.
Hearken ye Tribes. And what shall adorn the City? shall not fire? and the
house of the wicked hoording up unjust treasures, and with injury
unrighteousness. If the wrongful dealer shall be justified in the balance,
and deceitful weights in the scales, by which they have heaped up their riches
in ungodliness. And hearken also what threats the famous Prophet Sophonias
thundereth out together: Sopho. 1.14.
Near draws on (says he) the great day of our Lord, near it is at hand,
and very swiftly approaches. The voice of the day of our Lord is appointed to
be bitter and mighty, that day, a day of wrath, a day of tribulation and
necessity, a day of clouds and mist, a day of the trumpet and outcry, a day of
misery and extermination, a day of darkness and dimnesse, upon the strong
Cities, and high corners. And I will bring men to tribulation, and they shall
go as if they were blind, because they have offended our Lord, and I will
power out their blood as dust, and their flesh as the dung of Oxen, and their
silver and gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of
our Lord. And in the fire of his zeal shall the whole earth be consumed, when
the Lord shall accomplish his absolute end, and bring solitariness upon all
the inhabitants of the earth. Come together and be joined in one, thou Nation
without Discipline, before ye be made as the fading flower, before the wrath of
our Lord falls upon ye. And give ear also unto that which the Prophet Aggeus
speaks on this wise: Aggei. 2.22
Thus says our Lord, I will once moove the Heaven, and Earth, and Sea, and dry
land, and I will drive away the Thrones of Kings, and root out the power of the
Kings of the Gentiles, and I will chase away the chariots of those who mount
upon them. Now also behold ye what Zacharias the son of Addo, that chosen
Prophet said, beginning his prophecy on this manner: Return ye to me, Zach.
1.3.
and I will return unto ye, (says our Lord) and be not like your Fathers, to
whom the former Prophets have imputed saying, Thus says our Almighty Lord,
Turn away from your ways, and they have not marked whereby they might
obediently hear me. And afterward: And the Angel asked me, Zach. 5.2.
what do thou see? and I said, I see a flying sithe, which contains in
length twenty cubits. The malediction which has proceeded upon the face of the
whole earth: because every one of her thieves shall be punished even to the
very death, and I will throw him away says our Almighty Lord, and he shall
enter into the house of fury, and into the house of swearing falsehood in my
name. Malac. 4.1.
Holy Malachy the Prophet also says, Behold the day of our Lord shall come
inflamed as a furnace, and all proud men, and all workers of iniquity shall be
as stubble, and the approaching day of our Lord of hosts shall set them on
fire, which shall not leave a root nor a bud of them. And hearken ye also what
holy Job debateth of the beginning and end of the ungodly, Job 21.7.
saying: For what purpose do the wicked live, and have dishonestly worn even
to old age, and their issue has been according to their own desire, and
their sons before their faces, and their houses are fruitful, and no fear
nor yet the scourge of our Lord is upon them. Their Cow has not been
abortive, their great with young, has brought forth her young ones and not
missed, but remains as an eternal breed: and their children rejoice, and
taking the Psaltery and Harp, have finished their days in felicity, and
fallen peaceable a sleep down into hell. Does God therefore not behold the
works of the wicked? Not so truly; Job 21.17.
But the candle of the ungodly shall be extinguished, ^^d destruction shall
fall upon them, and dolors as of one in childbirth, shall with hold them from
wrath; and they shall be as chafe before the wind, and as the dust which the
whirlewind has carried away. Let all goodness fail his children, let his eyes
behold his own slaughter, nor yet by our Lord let him be redeemed. And a
little after he says of the same men; Job 24.2.
Who have ravenously taken the flock with the shepherd, and driven away the
beast of the Orphans and engaged the Ox of the Widow, and deceiving, have
declined from the way of necessity. They have reaped other men's fields before
the time, the poor have labored in the Vineards of the mighty without hyre
and meat, they have made many to sleep naked without garments of the covering
of their life they have bereaved them. And somewhat afterward, when he had
thoroughly understood their works, he delivered them over to darkness. Let
therefore his portion be accursed from the earth, Job 24.18.
let his plantings bring forth witherings; let him for this be rewarded
according to his dealings: Job 24.20.
Let every wicked man like the unsound wood be broken in pieces. For arising in
his wrath has he overthrown the impotent. Wherefore truly Job 24.22
shall he have no trust of his life, when he shall begin to grow diseased,
let him not hope for health, but fall into languishing. For his pride has
been the hurt of many, and he is become decayed and rotten, as the mallows in
the scorching heat, or as the year of corn when it falls off from his
stubble. And afterward; If his children shall be many, they shall be turned to
the slaughter, Job 27.14.
and if he gather together silver as if it were earth, and likewise purify his
gold as if it were dirt, all these same shall the just obtain. Hear ye
moreover what blessed Esdras that Library of the Law, threatens in his
discourse on this wise. 4 Esd. 15.22.
Thus says our Lord God; My right hand shall not be sparing upon sinners,
neither shall the sword cease over them who spill the innocent blood on the
earth. Fire shall proceed from out my wrath, and devour the foundations of
the earth, and sinners as if they were inflamed straw. Woe be unto them who
offend, and observe not my Commandments, says our Lord, I will not forbear
them. Depart away ye Apostatizing children, and do not pollute my sanctuary.
God does know who do offend against him, and he will therefore deliver them
over to death and to slaughter. For now have many evils passed over the round
compass of the earth. 4 Esd. 16.3.
A sword of fire is sent out against ye, and who is he that shall restrain
it? shall any man repulse a Lion that hungereth in the wood? or shall any one
quench out the fire when the straw is burning? our Lord God will send out
evils, and who is he that shall repress them? and fire will pass forth from
out his wrath, and who shall extinguish it? it shall brandishing shine, and who
will not fear it? it shall thunder, and who will not shake with dread? God
will threaten all, and who will not be terrified? before his face shall the
earth tremble, and the foundations of the sea fleet from the depth. And mark
ye also what Ezechiel the renowned Prophet, and admirable beholder of the four
Evangelicall creatures, speaks of wicked offenders, unto whom pitifully
lamenting before hand, the scourge that hung over Israel, our Lord does say,
Ezekiel. 9.9.
Too far has the iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah prevailed,
because the earth is fully filled with iniquity and uncleanness. Ezeck. 5.8.
and 11.
Behold I am, mine eyes shall not spare, nor yet will I take pity. And
afterward, Ezeck. 7.23
Because the earth is replenished with people, and the City fraughted with
iniquity, I will also turn away the force of their power, and their holy
things shall be polluted, prayer shall approach and sue for peace, and it shall
not be obtained. And somewhat after; The Word of our Lord (quoth he) was spoken
unto me saying; Ezeck. 14.12
Thou son of man, the land that shall so far sin against me as
transgressing it shall commit an offense, I will streatch forth my hand upon
her, and break in pieces her foundation of bread, and send upon her famine,
and take away mankind and cattle from her; and if these three men, Noah,
Daniel, and Job be in the midst of her, they shall not deliver her, but they
in their justice shall be saved, says our Lord. If so be that also I shall
bring (...) evil beasts upon the land and punish her, she likewise shall be
turned to destruction, and there shall not be one who shall have free passage
from the face of the beasts, and admit these three men are in the midest of
her, I live (says our Lord) if their sons and daughters shall be preserved,
but they alone shall be saved, and as for the land it shall fall to confusion.
Ezeck. 18.20
And again; The son shall not receive the unrighteousness of the Father,
neither yet the Father the sons unrighteousness. The justice of the just
shall be upon himself. And the unjust man, if he turns him away from all the
iniquities which he has done, and keeps all my Commandments, and does
justice and abundance of mercy, he shall live in life and shall not dye. All
his sins, whatsoever he has committed, shall have no further being; he shall
live the life in his own justice which he has performed. Do I with my will
voluntarily wish the death of the unrighteous (says our Lord) rather than he
should return from his evil way and live? But when the just shall turn
himself away from his justice, and do iniquity, according to all the
iniquities which the unrighteous has committed, all the just actions (which
he has done) shall remain no further in memory. In his offense wherein he
has fallen, and in his sins in which he has transgressed, he shall dye.
And within some words afterward: Ezech. 29.23.
And all nations shall understand, that the house of Israel are led captive
away for their offenses, because they have forsaken me. And I have turned my
face from them, and yielded them over into the hands of their enemies, and all
have perished by the sword; according unto their unclean sins, and after
their iniquities have I dealt with them, and turned my face away from them.
This which I have spoken may suffice concerning the threats of the holy
Prophets: only I have thought it necessary to intermingell in this little
work of mine, as well as the former menaces, a few words also borrowed out of
the wisdom of Solomon, which declares unto Kings matter of exhortation or
instruction, that they may not say I am willing to lade the shoulders of men,
with heavy and insupportable burdens of words, but not so much as once with
mine own finger (which is with speech of consolation) to moove the same. Let
us therefore hear what the Prophet has spoken to rule us. Sap. 1.1.
Love justice (says he) ye that judge the earth. This only testimony (if it
were with a full and perfect heart observed) would abundantly suffice to
reform the governors of our Country. For if they had loved Justice, they
would also love God, who is in a sort the fountain and original of all
justice. Serve our Lord in goodness, Sap. 1.1.
and seek him in simplicity of heart. Alas who shall live (as one before us
has said) to see these things performed by our Countrymen, yea if perhaps they
may be any where accomplished* Sap. 1.2.
Because he is found of those who do not tempt him, he appears truly to
them who have faith in him. For these men without respect do tempt God, whose
Commandments with stubburne despite they contemn, neither yet do they keep
to him their faith, unto whose Oracles be they pleasing, or somewhat severe,
they turn their backs and not their faces. Sap. 1.3.
For perverse thoughts do separate from God, and this in the Tyrants of our
time very plainly appears. But why does our meannesse intermeddle in this so
manifest a determination? Let therefore him who is only true (as we have
said) speak for us, the holy Ghost I mean, of whom it is now pronounced; Sap.
1.2.
The holy Ghost verily will avoyde the counterfetting of discipline. And
again. Sap. 1.5.
Because the spirit of God has filled the globe of the earth. And afterward,
(showing with an evident judgment the end of the evil and righteous) he
says, Sap. 5.15.
How is the hope of the wicked as the down that is puffed away with the wind,
and as the smoke that with the blast is dispersed, and as the slender froth
that with a storm is scattered, and as the memory of a guest who is a
passenger of one day. But the just shall live for ever, and with God remains
their reward, and their cogitation is with the highest. Therefore shall they
receive the kingdom of glory, and the crown of beauty from the hand of our
Lord. Because with his right hand he will protect them, and with his holy arm
defend them. For very far unlike in quality are the just and ungodly, as our
Lord verily has spoken saying, 1 Samuel 2 30.
Them who honor me I will honor, and who so despise me shall be of no
estimation. But let us pass over to the rest, Hearken (says he) all ye Kings
and understand ye, Sap. 6 2.
learn ye Judges of the bounds of the earth, listen with your ears who
contain multitudes in awe, and please your selves in the troops of nations.
Because power is given unto ye from God, and puissance from the highest, who
will examine your actions, and sift your thoughts. For that when ye were
ministers of his kingdom, ye have not judged uprightly, nor kept the law of
Justice, nor yet walked according to his will. It shall dreadfully and suddenly
appear unto ye, that a most severe judgment shall be given on them who
govern. For to the meaner is mercy granted, but the mighty shall mightily
sustain torments. For he shall have no respect of persons, who is the ruler of
all, nor yet shall he reverence the greatness of any one, because he himself
has made both small and great, and care alike he has of all: but for the
stronger is at hand a stronger affliction. Unto ye therefore (O Kings) are
these my speeches, that ye may learn wisdom, and not fall away from her. For
who so observe what things are just, shall be justified, and who so learn what
things are holy, shall be sanctified. Hitherto have we discoursed no less by
the Oracles of the Prophets, than by our own speeches with the Kings of our
Country, being willing they should know what the Prophet has spoken saying,
Ezeck. 21.2.
As from the face of a Serpent, so fly thou sins: If thou shall aproach unto
them, the teeth of a Lion will catch thee, their teeth are such as kill the
souls of men. Eccles. 17.18.
And again, How mighty is the mercy of our Lord. and his forgiveness to such
as convert themselves unto him. And if we have not in us that Apostolical
zeal, Romans 9.3.
that we may say, I did verily desire to he amathematised by Christ for my
brethren, Notwithstanding we may from the bottom of our hearts speak that
Prophetical saying; Alas that a soul perishes. And again, Thren. 3.40.
Let us search out our ways, and seek and return unto our Lord: Let us lift
our hearts together with our bands to God in heaven, And also that of the
Apostle, Phil. 1.8.
We covet that every one of ye should be in the bowels of Christ. And how
willingly truly, as one tossed on the waves of the sea, and now arrived in a
desired haven; would I in this place make an end (blushing shame forbidding me
further to proceed) did I not behold such and so great mountains of malice
advanced against God by Bishops or other Priests, or clearkes, yea some of our
own order, whom as witnesses my self must of necessity first of all stone
(according unto the Law) with the hard blows of words (least I should be
otherwise reproved of partiality toward persons) and then afterward the
people (if as yet they keep their decrees) must pursue with their whole powers
the same execution upon them, not to their corporal death but to the death of
their vices and their eternal life with God. Yet (as before I have said) I do
crave pardon of them, whose lives I do not only praise, but also prefer
before all earthly treasure, and of the which (if it may be) yet before my
death I desire and thirst to be a partaker: and so having both my sides
defended with the double shields of Saints, and by those means invincibly
strengthened to sustain all that arise against me, arming moreover my head in
place of an helmet with the help of our Lord, and being most assuredly
protected with the sundry assistances of the Prophets, I will boldly proceed
notwithstanding the stones of worldly rioters fly never so fast about me.

IT is very aptly said, that sin creeps on as a Cancker, for no man in a
moment becomes absolutely evil, but even like the Sea that making his entry
first at a little hole, and afterward enlarging his passage, in the end
breaks down the bancke, and overwhelmeth the whole land; so vice has her
progresses in depraved minds; the lamentable example whereof, we may in the
history of Britain apparently behold. Our Author has already declared the
infection of Heresy, the corruption of infidelity, the disorders of war, and
the dissolution of manners, that distempered the body of the Island, he laid
open the sores of the temporal governors to the end that medicines might have
been the better applied for their remedies, and here now he begins to
discover the grievous imperfections of the Clergy, which are truly so much the
worse, by how much their lives ought to be more virtuous and exemplar; and yet
would I have you to know, that these were defects not of Religion but of life,
such as those offenses of the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, so often in the
word of God recited, whose sins (although too foulely they soiled their own
souls) yet could they never stain the immaculate Church of God, committed
unto their charge: Neither yet did Gildas as another Elias complain that there
was not one left but himself alone who worthily served God, since in sundry
places he shows how many were yet here in this land whose holy lives deserved
most high commendation, even as our Lord spoke to the same Elias saying. There
remained seven thousand in Israel, who never bowed their knees to Baal. But
suppose Britain had been wholly drowned in the deep Seas of offenses, yet
did Italy, Greece, and Gall. with many other mighty Provinces of the Christian
world, flourish at the self same time, both in virtuous Life, and true
Religion, not unlike the Kingdom of Judah, which in that season, when Elias so
complained of Israel, did notwithstanding openly maintain the true worshipping
of God; but this insueing Treatise tells us that in the field of our Lord,
there sprung up Cockell, and in his barn of purest Corn, there was found
chafe, and among his wisest Virgins, foolish ones, all which in this world
cannot be separated, but remain until the day of judgment, to be severally
divided; thus does he set before our eyes the beginning and proceeding of the
wickedness of Britain, whose blessed soul possessed with a true zeal to
God, departed to receive a Crown of eternal glory, before the conclusion of
this tragedy of sin, for (as ye shall read in venerable Bede) presently
after the decease of Gildas, they fell to open errors, and then to disobedience
of the Church in withstanding the authority of Saint Augustine, the first
Archbishop of Canterbury, although within a while afterward, it pleased God
of his singular mercy to recall them back into his Catholic fold again:
Neither let any man imagine I have Translated this work to disclose the faults
of Pastors, and Superiors; For I had rather with Sem and Iaphet conceal, then
with Cham reveal the imperfections of spiritual Fathers. But having Englished
the former part of Gildas, I did also (because I would not leave the work
maimed, and unperfect) adventure upon this latter, wherein I would wish the
Readers to consider that if this flame of sin did scorch the Cedars of
Libanus, no doubt but it may burn the lesser silly shrubs, if it infected (I
say) the spiritualty, it may assuredly (unless we be ware) consume us of the
Laity.

Britain has Priests, but some she has that are unwise; very many that
Minister, but many of them impudent; Clearkes she has, but certain of them
deceitful raveners; Pastors (as they are called) but rather wolves prepared
for the slaughter of Souls, (for why they provide not for the common peoples
commodity, but covet rather the gluttony of their own bellies) possessing the
houses of the Church, but obtaining them for filthy lucres sake; instructing
the Laity, but showing withal most vilde examples, vices, and evil manners;
seldom sacrificing, and seldom with clean hearts, standing at the Altars;
not correcting the Cominalty for their offenses, while they commit the same
sins themselves; despising the Commandments of Christ, and being careful with
their whole hearts to fulfill their own lustful desires, some of them usurping
with unclean feet the seat of the Apostle Peter; but for the demerit of their
covetousness falling down into the pestilent chair of the traitor Judas;
detracting often, and seldom speaking truly; hating verity as an open enemy,
and favoring falsehoods, as their most beloved brethren; looking on the just,
the poor, the impotent, with stern countenances, as if they were detested
Serpents, and reverencing the sin ^ull rich men without any respect of shame,
as if they were heavenly Angels, Preaching with their outward lips that alms
are to be disbursed upon the needy, but of themselves not bestowing one
halfepenny, concealing the horrible sins of the people, and amplifying
injuries offered unto themselves, as if they were done against our Savior
Christ; expel^ing out of their houses their religious mother perhaps, or
sisters, and fami^iarly entertaining with indecency strange women, as ^f it
were for some more se^ret office, or rather, to ^peake truly, though fond^y,
(and yet not fondly to ^ne, but to such as commit ^hese matters) debasing
themselves unto such bad ^reatures; and after all these ^eeking rather
ambitiously ^or ecclesiastical dignities, ^hen for the Kingdom of Heaven; and
defending after a tyrannical fashion their achieved preferments, nor ever
laboring with lawful manners, to adorn the same; negligent and dull to
listen to the precepts of the holy Saints (if ever they did so much as once
hear that which full often they ought to hear) but diligent and attentive to
the plays and foolish fables of secular men, as i^ they were the very waye^ to
life, which indeed are but the passages to death* being hoarse, after the
fashion of Bulls, with the abundance of fatness, and miserably prompt to all
unlawful actions; bearin^ their countenances arro^gantly a loft, and having
ne^verthelesse their inwar^ senses, with tormenting an^ gnawing consciences,
depressed down to the bottom, or rather to bottomless hell, with the
gaining of one penny glad, and with the loss of the like value sad, floathfull
and dumb in the Apostolical decrees (be it for ignorance or rather the burden
of their offenses) and stopping also ^he mouths of the learned, but singularly
experienced ^n the decitfull shifts of worldly affairs; and ma^y of this sort
and wicked conversation, violently in^ruding themselves into the ^referments of
the Church, ^ea rather buying the same ^^ an high rate, then being my way
drawn thereunto, and moreover as unworthy wretches, wallowing (after the
fashion of swine) in their old and unhappy puddell of intolerable wickedness,
after they have attained unto the seat of Priesthood or episcopal dignity,
(who neither have been installed or resident on the same) for usurping only
the name of Priesthood, they have not received the orders or apostolical
preeminence, bu^ how can they who are no^ as yet fully instructed in faith, nor
have done penance for their sins, be any way supposed meet^ and convenient
to ascend unto any ecclesiastical degree (that I may not speak^ of the
highest) which non^ but holy and perfect men and followers of the Apostles, and
(to use the words of the Doctor of the Gentiles) persons free from
reprehension, can lawfully and without the foul offense of sacrilege
undertake. For what is so wicked and so sinful as after the example of Simon
Magus, Act. 8.18.
(yea although with other faults, he were not before hand defiled) for any man
with earthly price to purchase the office of a Bishop or Priest, that only
with holiness and righteous life is lawfully compassed? but herein they do
more wilfully, and desperately err in that they buy their deceitful and
unprofitable ecclesiastical degrees, not of the Apostles or their successors,
but of tyrannical Princes, and their father the devil; yea rather they raise
this as a certain roof and covering of all offenses, over the frame of their
former serious life, that being protected under the shadow thereof, no man
should lightly hereafter lay to their charge their old or new wickednesses, and
hereupon they build their desires of covetousness and gluttony, because being
now the rulers of many they may more freely make havocke at their pleasures.
For if truly any such offer of purchasing ecclesiastical promotion^ were made
by these impudent sinners, (I will not say with Saint Peter) but to any holy
Priest, or godly King, they would doubtless receive the same answer which
their Father Simon Magus had from the mouth of the Apostle Peter, saying: Act.
8, 20.
Thy money be with thee unto thy perdition. But (alas) perhaps they that order
and advance these ambitious aspirers (yea they who rather throw them under
foot, and for a blessing give them a cursing, whilst of sinners, they make
them not penitents (which were more consonant to reason) but sacrilegious and
desperate offenders, and in a sort install Judas, that traitor to his Master,
in the chair of Peter, and Nicolas the author of that foul heresy in the
seat of Saint Stephen the Martyr) it may be did by the same means at the
first obtain their Priesthood themselves, and therefore do not greatly
dislike in their children, but rather respect the same race, that they their
fathers did before hand assuredly run. And also if finding resistance, in
obtaining their Diocesses at home, and some, who severely renounce this
chaffering of Church Livings, they cannot there attain unto such a precious
pearl, then it does not so much loathe as delight them, (after they have
carefully sent their messengers before hand) to cross the Seas, and travail
over most large Countries, that so in the end, yea although with the sail of
their whole substance, they may win and compass such a pomp, and such an
incomparable glory, or to speak more truly, such a durty and base deceit, and
illusion. And afterward with great show and magnificall ostentation, or rather
madness, returning back to their own native soil, they grow from stoutnesse
to stateliness, and being wonted to level their looks to the tops of the
mountains, they now lift up their drowsy eyes straight into the air, yea to
the very highest clouds, and as Novatus that foul hog, and persecutor of our
Lords precious jewel, dealt sometimes at Rome, so do these intrude themselves
again into their own Country, as Creatures of a new mould, yea rather as
devilish instruments, being even ready in this state and fashion to stretch
out violently their hands (not so worthy of the reverent Altars, as the
revenging flames of hell) upon Christ's most holy Sacrifices. What do ye
therefore (O unhappy people) expect from such belly beasts (as the Apostle
calls them? Tit. 1.12.
) Shall your manners be amended by these, who do not only not apply their
minds to any goodness, but (according to the upbraiding of the Prophet) also
labor to deal wickedly? Iere. 9.5.
Shall ye be illuminated with such eyes as are only with greediness cast on
those things that lead headlong to vices (which is to say) to the gates of
hell? Nay truly, if according to the saying of our Savior, Mat. 7.16.
ye fly not these mostravenous wolves like those of Arabia, Genesis 19.20
or avoid them as Lot, who ran most speedily from the fiery shower of Sodom
up to the mountains, then being blind and led by the blind, Mat. 15.14
ye will both together tumble down into the infernal ditch. But some man
perchance will objecting say, that all Bishops, or all Priests, (according to
our former exception,) are not so wickedly given, because they are not defiled
with the infamy of Scisme, pride, or unclean life, which neither we our
selves will deny, but albeit we know them to be chaste, and virtuous, yet
will we briefly answer.

What did it profit the High Priest Hely, 1 Samuel 2.11.
that he alone did not violate the Commandments of our Lord, Examples of the
Old Testament.
in taking flesh with forkes out of the pots, 1 Samuel 4.11.
before the fat was offered unto God, while he was punished with the same
revenge of death wherewith his sons were? what one (I beseech ye) of them
whose manners we have before sufficiently declared has like Abell upon the
Abell. Genesis 4.8.
malicious emulation of the more acceptable sacrifice (which with the heavenly
fire ascended up into the skies) been martyred? since they fear the reproach
even of a seely ordinary word, which of them has hated the council of the
malicious, Psa. 25.59.
and not sat with the ungodly, so that of him as a Prophet, this may be
verified which was said of Enoch; Enoch. Genes. 5.24
Enoch walked with God and was not to be found in the vanity (forsooth) of the
whole world, as then leaving our Lord and beginginning to halte down right
after Idolatry? which of them like Noah in the time of the Deluge, Noah. Genes.
7 7.
has not admitted into the Arc of Salvation (which is the now present Church)
any adversary unto God, that it may be most apparent that none but innocents or
singular penitents, ought to remain in the house of our Lord? Who is he that
offering sacrifice like Melchisedeck, Melchisedeck.
has only blessed the conquerours, and them who delivering in the number of
three hundred (which was in the Sacrament Genesis 14.18.
of the Trinity) the just man have overthrown the deadly armies of the five
Kings, together with their vanquishing troops, and not coveted the goods of
others? Abraham.
Which of them has like Abraham at the Commandment of God freely offered his
own son on the Altar to be slain, Genes. 22.1.
that he might accomplish a precept of Christ, Math. 5.29.
agreeable to this saying, thy right eye if it scandalizeth ought, Ier. 48.10.
to be pulled out, and another of the Prophet, that he is accursed who
withholdeth his sword from shedding blood? Joseph.
Who is he that as a Joseph has rooted out of his heart the remembrance of an
offered injury? Genesis 50.15.
Who is he that as a Moses speaking with our Lord in the Mountain, Moses.
Exodus 19.16.
and not thereupon terrified with the sounding trumpets, has in a figurative
sense presented unto the incredulous the two tables, and his horned face which
they could not endure to see, but tremble to behold? Which of them, praying for
the offenses of the people, did from the very botome of his heart cry out, like
unto him saying: Exodus 32 3.
O Lord this people has committed a grievous sin, which if thou will forgive
them, forgive it; otherwise blot me guilty out of thy book? Who inflamed with
the admirable zeal of God has courageously risen for the revenge of
fornication, Phin^es. Number. 25.7.
curing without delay by the present medecin of penance, the affection of
filthy lust, left the fire of the wrath of God should otherwise consume the
people, as Phinees the Priest did, Ps. 105.31.
that by this mean justice for ever might be reputed unto him? Who verily of
them has in a moral understanding imitated Jesus Nave either for Jesus Nave.
the utter rooting forth (even to the slaughter of the last and least of all)
Ios. 24.11.
the seven Nations out of the land of promise, or for the establishing of
spiritual Israel in their places? Which of them has showed unto the people of
God their final bounds beyond Jordan (that it may be known what to every
tribe is convenient) in such sort as the aforenamed Phinees and Jesus have
wisely divided the land? Phinees and Jesus.
Who is he that to overthrow the innumerable thousands of Gentiles, adversaries
to the chosen people of God, has as another Iephte, Iephte.
for a sacrifice of a votive placation or appeasing, Iud. 11.29.34.
slain his only daughter (which is to be understood his own proper will)
immitating also therein the Apostle, saying, (Not seeking what is profitable to
me, 1 Cor. 10.33.
but to many, that they may be saved) which daughter of his, met the
conquerours with drums and daunces (to wit carnal desires?) Which of them
that he might disorder, put to flight, and overthrow the camps of the proud
Gentiles, Gedeon.
by the number of three hundred (being as before we have said, Iud. 7.6.16. and
20.
the mystery of the blessed Trinity) and with his men holding in their hands,
those noble sounding trumpets (which are Prophetical and Apostolical senses,
according as our Lord said to the Prophet, Exalt thy voice as a trumpet, Esaias
58.1.
and the Psalmist of the Apostles; Psalm. 18.5.
Their sound has passed throughout the whole earth) and bearing also those
famous flagons shining in the night season, with that most glittring fiery
light (which are to be interpreted the bodies of Saints adjoined to good
works, and burning with the flame of the holy Ghost, yea having as the Apostle
writes, 2 Cor. 4.7.
This treasure in earthen vessels) has after the hewing down of the
Idolatrous grave (which is morrally meant, duske and dark desire) marched on
like Gedeon, Iud. 6.25.
with an assured faith in the evident sign of the fleece, which to the Jews
was void of the heavenly moisture, but to the Gentiles made wet with the dew
of the holy Ghost? Iud. 6 36.
Who is he that (earnestly wishing to dye to this world, and live to Christ)
has as another Sampson.
Sampson utterly extingui^shed such innumerable luxurious banquetters of the
Gentiles, Phil. 1.23.
while they praised their gods (which is meant while the senses of men extolled
these earthly riches, Iud. 16.30.
according to the Apostle speaking thus; Iud. 16.23, 24.
And covetousness which is the service of Idols) shaking with the power of
both his arms the two pillars (which are to be understood, Coloss. 3.5.
the naughty pleasures of the soul and body) by the which the house of all
worldly wickedness is in a sort compacted, Iud. 16.30.
and underpropped? Samuel.
Who like Samuel that with prayers and the burnt sacrifice of a sucking lamb,
1 Samuel 7.9.
drove away the fear of the Philistians, raised unexpected thunderclaps, 1 Samuel 12.17
and showring clouds, established without flattery a King, 1 Samuel 10.1 and 17.
deposed him when he displeased God, and anointed another his better in his
place and Kingdom, 1 Samuel 13.14 and 15.18. and 16.13.
when he shall give to the people his last farewell, shall constantly appear
in this sort saying, 1 Samuel 12.3.
Behold I am ready, speak ye before our Lord and his anointed, whether ever I
took away the Ox or Ass of any man. If I have falsely accused any one, if I
have oppressed any body, if I have received a bribe from the hands of any? Unto
whom it was answered by the people; Thou have not wrongfully charged us,
neither yet oppressed, nor taken any thing from the hands of any? Which of them
like the famous Prophet Elias, Elias.
who consumed with heavenly fire the hundred proud men, and conserved the fifty
that humbled themselves; 2 Reg. 1.9.11. and 13.
and afterward denounced without fawning dissimulation, unto the unjust King
(that sought not the Counsel of God by his Prophets, but of the Idol Accaron)
his imminent death, has utterly overthrown all the Prophets of Baal (which
are interpreted worldly senses ever bent (as we have already said) 1 Reg. 18.40.
to envy and avarice) with the lightning sword (which is the Word of God?) and
as the same Elias moved with the zeal of God, 1 Reg. 17.1
after the taking away of the ayrie showers from the Land of the wicked, who
were now shut up with famine in a strong prison, as it were of penury for three
years and six months, being himself ready to dye for thirst in the desert,
has complaining said, 1 Reg. 19*10.
They have murdered (O Lord) thy Prophets and undermined thine Altars, and I
alone am left, and they seek my life? Which of them like Haeliseus Haeliseus.
has punished his dearly beloved disciple if not with an everlasting
Leprosy, 2 Reg. 5.23 27.
yet at least by abandoning him, who was extraordinarily burdened with the
weight of worldly coveting, those gifts which his Master before (although very
earnestly entreated thereunto) despised to receive? 2 Reg. 6.15 and 17.
and which of these among us has like him revealed unto his servant (who was
troubled with despair of life, and on a sudden trembled at the warlike army
of the enemies that besieged the City wherein he was) through the fervency of
his prayers, powered out unto God those spiritual visions, so as he might
behold a mountain replenished with an heavenly assisting army, of warlike
chariots and horsemen, who shined with fiery countenances, and also believe
that he was stronger to save, then foes to offend? And which of them as the
afore-recited Helizeus with the touch of his body, being dead truly to the
world, but living unto God, 2 Reg. 4.34
shall raise up another course perishing and carried out with a contrary
funeral of death undoubtedly to God, but of life to vices, so as instantly
revived, he may yield humble thanks unto Christ for his unexpected recovery
from the hellish torments of all mortal offenses? which of them has his lips
purified and made clean with the fiery coal carried by the tongues of the
Cherubin, Esaias. Esa. 6.6.7.
from off the Altar (that his sins may be quite wiped away with the humility
of confession) as it is written of Esaias, 2 Reg 19.1.
by whose effectual prayers adjoined with the aid of Esa. 37.1.
the godly King Ezechias an hundred fourscore and five thousands of the
Assirians Army through the stroke of one Angel without the least print of any
appearing wound, were overthrown and slain? which of them like blessed Jeremy
Jeremy.
for accomplishing the Commandments of God, for denouncing the threats
thundered out from heaven, and for preaching the truth even to such as would not
hear the same, Ier. 1.17.
has suffered loathsome stinking prisons as momentary deaths? And to be breef
what one of them (as the Doctor of the Gentiles said) has endured like the holy
Prophets to wander in mountains, Iere. 20.
in dens, and caves of the earth, to be stoned, Heb. 11.38.
to be sawed in sunder, and attempted with all kinds of death, for the name of
our Lord? But why do we dwell in examples of the old Testament as if there
were none in the new? Let therefore them (who suppose they do without any
labor at all, under the naked pretense of the only name of Priesthood, enter
this straight and narrow passage of Christian Religion) hearken unto us while
we recite and gather in one a few as the highest and cheifest flowers out of
the large and pleasant meddow of the Saintly soldiers of the New Testament;
Examples of the New Testament.
which of ye (who rather sleep than lawfully sit in the chair of Priesthood)
being cast out of the council of the wicked, Act. 11.50.
has after the stripes of sundry rods, Act. 16.23.
as the holy Apostles given from the bottom of his heart, Act. 5.41.
thanks to the blessed Trinity that he was found worthy to suffer disgrace for
Christ's true Deity? What one for the undoubted testimony of God, having his
brains dashed out with the Fullers ^lubbe; Act. 12.2.
has as James the first, a Bishop of the New Testament, suffered corporal
death? Which of ye like James the brother of John was by the unjust Prince
beheaded? Who like the first Deacon and Martyr of the Gospel (having but this
only accusation, Act: 7.57.
that he saw God, whom the wicked miscreants could not behold) was by the
ungodly hands stoned to death? What one of ye, like the worthy keeper of the
keys of the heavenly Kingdom, being nailed to the cross with his feet
upward, in regard of the reverence of Christ, S. Peter.
whom no less in his death than in his life, he endeavored to honor, has so
breathed out his last gasp? Which of ye for the confession of the true word
of Christ, has like the vessel of election, and chosen Doctor of the
Gentiles, after suffering the chains of imprisonment, S. Paul.
sustayning of Shipwreck, after the terrible scourges of whips, the continual
dangers of Seas, of thieves, of Gentiles, of Jews, and of false apostles,
after the labors of famine, of fasting, etc. after his incessant care had over
all the Churches, after his exceeding trouble, for such as scandalized, after
his infirmity for the weak, after his admirable peregrination over almost the
whole world in Preaching the Gospel of Christ, through the stroke of the sword
lost his head? which of ye, as the holy Martyr Ignatius, S. Ignatius.
Bishop of the City of Antioch, has after his miraculous actions in Christ,
for testimony of him been broken in pieces by the jaws of Lions, as he was
sometimes at Rome? whose words (being now led to his passion) when ye shall
hear (if ever your countenances were overcome with blushing) ye will not,
only in comparison of him esteem your selves no Priests, but not truly so
much as the meanest Christians; for in the Epistle which he sent to the Church
of Rome, he writes thus: From Syria even unto Rome, I fight with beasts, at
Land and Sea, being bound and chained unto ten Leopards, the Soldiers (I
mean) appointed for my custody, who for our benefits bestowed upon them become
more cruel but I by their wickedness am the better instructed, neither yet am
I in this justified; Oh when shall come those beasts the causers of my
Salvation (which are for me prepared)? when shall they be let out loose at me?
when shall it be lawful for my carkas to enjoy them? whom I do most earnestly
wish to be eagerly enraged against me, and truly ^ will incite them to devour
me, moreover, I will humbly pray, least perchance they should dread to touch my
body (as in some others they have heretofore done) yea also if they doubtfully
stagger. I will offer violence, I will enforce my self upon them. Pardon me
(I beseech ye) I know what is commodious for me, even now I begin to be the
Disciple of Christ; let all envy, be it either of humane affection or else of
spiritual wickedness surcease, that I may diserne to obtain Christ Jesus,
let fires, let crosses, let cruelty of beasts, let breaking of bones, and
renting of limbs, with all the pains of the whole body, and all the torments
devised by the art of the devil, be altogether powered out on me alone, so
that I may merit to attain unto Christ Jesus. Why do ye behold these things
with the sleepy eyes of your souls? why do ye hearken unto them with the deaf
ears of your senses? Shake off (I beseech ye) the darkesome and black mist
of the slothfulness of your hearts, that so ye may see the glorious light of
truth and humility. A Christian and he not mean, but a perfect one, a Priest
not base, but one of the highest, a Martyr not ordinary, but one of the
chiefest, says: Now I begin ^o be the Disciple of Christ. And ye like the same
Lucifer, who was thrown down out of Heaven, are puffed up with words not with
power, and after a sort do chaw under the tooth, and make pretense in your
actions, even as the Author of this your wickedness has expressed saying,
Esa. 14 13.
I will mount up into the Heavens, and be like unto the highest: And again, I
have dug and drunk water, Esa. 37.25.
and dried up with the steps of my feet all the rivers of the banks. Where
more rightly ye should have imitated him and harkened unto his words (who is
doubtless the most true example of all goodness and humility) saying by his
Prophet, Psalm. 21.7.
I am verily a worm and not a man, the reproach of men, and the outcast of the
people. Oh unspeakeable matter! that he called himself the reproach of men,
when as he washed quite away the reproaches of the whole world. And again in
the Gospel, I of my self am not able to do any thing. Ioh. 5.30.
When as he being coeternall with the Father, coequall with the Holy Ghost, and
consubstantiall unto both, Created not by the help of another, but by his own
Almighty power, the Heaven and Earth, with all their inestimable Ornaments, and
ye nevertheless have arrogantly lifted aloft your voices, notwithstanding the
Prophet says, Eccle. 10.9
Why does earth and ashes swell in prid^. But that I may return unto the
purpose. which of ye (I say) like the famous Bishop of the Church of Smerna
Policarpus, St. Policarpus.
that witness of Christ, has courteously entertained as guests at his table,
those who violently drew him out to be burned, and being for the charity which
he did bear unto Christ) brought to the stake said, He who gave me grace to
endure the torment of the fire, will likewise grant me without fastening of
nails to suffer constantly the flames. And now overpassing in this my
discourse mighty armies of Saints, I will as yet touch but one, for examples
sake, S. Basil.
Basil, I mean the Bishop of Caesaria, who when he was thus by the
unrighteous Prince threatened, that (unless he would on the next morrow be as
the rest, defiled in the durty dunghill of the Arrian heresy) he was
absolutely to be put to death, answered (as it is reported) I truly will be to
morrow the same as to day, and for thee, I wish thou would not change thy
determination. And again, O would I had some worthy reward to bestow on him
that would speedily discharge Basil from the bands of this breathing bellows.
What one of ye to daunt the menaces of Tyrants, does inviolably keep the rule
of the Apostolical speech, which in all times and ages when some ever has
been observed by all holy Priests to suppress the suggestion of men, when they
sought to draw them headlong to naughtiness, saying in this manner, It
behooves rather to obey God then men. Act. 5.29.
Wherefore after our accustomed manner making our refuge unto the mercy of our
Lord, and to the sentences of his holy Prophets, that they on our behalf may
now level the darts of their Oracles at unperfect Pastors (as before at
Tyrants) so as thereby receiving compunction they may be cured, let us behold
what manner of threats, our Lord does by his Prophets utter, against slothful
and dishonest Priests, and such as do not as well by examples as words,
rightly instruct the people. For even Hely the Priest in Silo, for that he did
not severely proceed (with a zeal worthy of God) in punishing his sons, when
they contemned our Lord, but (as a man overswayed with a fatherly affection)
too mildly and remisly admonished them, was sentenced with this judgment by
the Prophet speaking unto him: 1 Samuel 2.28
Thus says our Lord, I have manifestly showed my self unto the house of thy
Father, when they were the servants of Pharaohin Egypt, and have chosen the
house of thy Father out of all the Tribes of Israel, for a Priesthood unto me.
And a little after, 1 Samuel 2.29.
Why have thou looked upon mine incense, and upon my sacrifice, with a
dishonest eye? and have honored thy children more then me, that thou might
bless them from the beginning in all sacrifices in my presence? And now so
says our Lord: Because who so honor me I will honor them again: and who so
make no account of me shall be brought to nothing. Behold the days shall come
and I will destroy thy Name, and the seed^ of the house of thy Father. And let
this be to thee the sign, which shall fall upon thy two sons Ophnee and
Phinees, in one day shall they both dye by the sword of men. If thus therefore
they shall suffer pains, who correct them that are subjected under their
charge, with only words, and not with condign punishment, what shall become
of those who by offending exhort ye, and draw others unto wickedness? It is
apparent also what befell unto the true Prophet, who was sent from Judah to
prophecy in Bethel and forbidden not once to taste any meat in that place,
after the sign which he foretold, was fulfilled, and after he had restored
the wicked King, his withered hand again, being deceived by another Prophet,
(as he was termed) and so made to take but a little bread and water, his host
speaking in this sort unto him, 1 Reg. 13.21.
Thus says our Lord God; Because thou have been disobedient to the mouth of
our Lord, and not observed the precept which thy Lord God has commanded, and
have returned, and eaten bread and drunk water in this place, in which I have
charged thee that thou should neither eat bread nor drink water, thy body
shall not be buried in the Sepulcher of thy forefathers. And so (says the
Scripture) it came to pass, that after he had eaten bread and drunk water, he
made ready his Ass, and departed, and a Lion found him in the way and slew
him. Hear ye also the holy Prophet Esaias, Esa. 3.11.
how he speaks of Priests on this wise. Woe be unto the ungodly, evil befall
him; for the reward of his hands shall light upon him. Her own exactors have
spoiled my people, and women have borne sway over her. O my people who tear me
thee blessed, they themselves deceive thee, and destroy the way of thy
footesteps. Our Lord stands to judge, and stands to judge the people. Our
Lord will come unto judgment with the elders of the people and her Princes. Ye
have consumed my Vine, the spoil of the poor is in your house. Why do ye
break in pieces my people, and grind the faces of the poor, says our Lord
God of Hosts? And also; Esa. 10.1.
Woe be unto them who compose ungodly laws, and writing have written
injustice, that they may oppress the poor in judgment, and work violence
unto the cause of the lowly of my people, that widows, may be their prey, and
they make s^^ile of the Orphans, what will ye do in the day of visitation and
calamity approaching afar of? And afterward, But these also in regard of wine
have been ignorant, Esa. 28.7.
and in respect of drunkenness have wandered astray, the Priests have not
understood, because of drunkenness, and have been swallowed up in wine, they
have erred in drunkenness they have not known him who sees, they have been
ignorant of judgment. For all tables are filled with the vomit of their
uncleanness, in so much as there is not any free place to be found. Hear
therefore the Word of our Lord (O ye men ye deceivers) who bear authority over
my people that (...) in Jerusalem. Esa. 28.14.
For ye have said, we have entered into a truce with death, and with hell we
have made a covenant. The overflowing scourge when it shall pass forth shall
not fall upon us, because we have placed falsehood for our hope, and by lying we
have been defended. And somewhat after, And hail shall overthrow the hope of
lying, Esaias. 28.17.
together with the defense. Waters shall overflow, and your truce with death
shall be destroyed, and your covenant with hell shall not continue, when the
overflowing scourge shall pass forth, ye shall also be trodden under foot,
whenever it shall pass along thorough ye, it shall sweep ye away withal.
And again, And (...) Lord has said: Esaias 29.13
Because this people aproacheth with their mouth, and with their lips
glorify me, but their heart is far removed from me, behold therefore I will
cause this people to admire with a great and amazed wonder. For wisdom shall
decay and fall away, from her wisemen, and the understanding of her sages shall
be concealed. Woe be unto ye that are profound in heart, to conceal counsel
from our Lord, whose works are in darkness, and they say who sees us? And
who has known us? for this thought of yours is perverse. And somewhat
afterward. Thus says our Lord: Heaven is my seat, and the earth the foot
stool of my feet. Esaias 66.1.
What is this house that ye will erect unto me, and what place shall be found
of my resting repose? all these things has my hand made, and these universally
have been all created says our Lord, on whom truly shall I cast mine eye,
but on the humble poor man, and the contrite in spirit, and him that dreadeth
my speeches? he that sacrifices an Ox, is as he that kills a man; he that
slaughtereth a beast for sacrifice is like him who beats out the brains of
of a dog; he that offers an oblation is as he that offers up the blood of
an hog; he that is mindful of frankincense, is as he that honors an
Idol: Of all these things have they made choice in their ways, and in their
abominations has their soul been delighted. Listen ye also what Jeremy that
Virgin and Prophet speaks unto the unwise Pastors in this sort; Thus says
our Lord: Iere. 2.5.
What iniquity have your fathers found in me, because they have removed
themselves far off from me, and walked after vanity, and are become vain?
And somewhat after; Ier. 2.7.
And entering in; ye have defiled my Land, and made mine inheritance
abomination. The Priests have not said, Where is our Lord? and the Rulers of
the Law, have not known me, and the Pastors have dealt treacherously against
me. Wherefore I will as yet contend in judgment with you, says our Lord, and
debate the matter with your children. And a little afterward, Iere. 5.30.
Astonishment and wonders have been wrought in the land. Prophets did Preach
lying, and Priests did applaud with their hands, and my people have loved such
matters. Iere. 6.10.
What therefore shall be done in her last and final ends? To whom shall I
speak and make protestation that he may hear me? behold their cares are
uncircumcised, and they cannot hear. Behold the word of our Lord is uttered
unto them for their reproach, and they receive it not: because I will stretch
out my hand upon the inhabitants of the earth, says our Lord. For why from the
lesser even unto the greater, all study avarice, and from the Prophet even unto
the Priest, all work deceit, and they cured the contrition of the daughter of
my people, with ignomy, saying, Peace, Peace, and peace there shall not be.
Confounded they are, who have wrought abomination: but rather they are not with
a confusion confounded, and have not understood how to be ashamed. Wherefore
they shall fall among those who are ruinating, in the time of their visitation
shall they rush headlong down together, says our Lord. And again, All these
Princes of the declining sort, walking fraudulently, Iere. 6.18.
being brass and iron, are universally corrupted, the blowing bellows has
failed in the fire, the Fi^er of metals, in vain has melted, their malicious
acts assuredly are not consumed, ^all them refuse and repro^ate silver, because
our Lord ^ath thrown them away. And after a few words, I ^m, Iere. 7.11.
I am, I have scene says ^ur Lord. Go your ways to ^y place in Shilo, where
my ^ame has inhabited from ^he beginning, and behold that I have done
thereunto (...) the malice of my people of ^srael. And now because ye have
wrought all these works says our Lord; and I have spoken unto ye, arising in
the morning, and talking, and yet ye have not heard me, and have called ye,
and yet ye have not answered. I will so deal toward this house, wherein my
name is now called upon, and wherein ye have confidence: and to this place
which I have given unto y^e, and to your fathers, as I have done to Shilo, and
I will cast ye away from my coun^enance. And again, Iere. 10.20.
My children have departed from me, and have no abiding, and there is not he
who any more pitcheth my tent, and advances my Pavillion: because the Pastors
have dealt fondl^ and not sought out our Lord. Wherefore they have not
understood, and their flock has been dispersed. And within some words after,
Iere. 11.15
What is the matter that my beloved has in my houses committed many offenses?
shall the holy flesh take away thy malitiousnesse from thee, wherein thou have
gloried? our Lord has termed thy noone a plentiful, fair, fruitful, goodly
olive, at the voice of the speech a mighty fire has been inflamed in her, and
her Orchards have been quite consumed* therewith. And again, Come ye to me,
Iere. 12.9.
and be ye gathered together all ye beasts of the earth, make ye haste to
devour. Many Pastors have thrown down my vine, they have trampled my part
under foot, they have given over my portion which was well worthy to be
desired into a desert of solitariness. And again he speaks: Thus says our
Lord unto this people, Iere. 14.10
which have loved to moove their feet, and not rested, nor yet pleased our
Lord; now shall he remember their iniquities and visit their offenses.
Prophets say unto them, ye shall not see the sword, and there shall no famine
be among ye, but our Lord shall give true peace unto ye in this place. And our
Lord has said unto me, The Prophets do falsely foretell in my name, I have not
sent them, neither yet laid my Commandment on them, they prophecy unto ye a
lying vision, and divination together with deceitfulness, and the seducement
of their own hearts. And therefore thus says our Lord: in sword and famine
shall those Prophets be consumed: and the people to whom they have prophesied
shall by means of the famine and sword be cast out in the ways of Jerusalem,
and there shall be none to bury them. And moreover; Iere. 23.1.
W^e be to the ^astours who des^roy and rent in pieces the floc^e of my
pasture, says our Lord. Thus therefore says our Lord God of Israel unto the
Pastors who guide my people, ye have dispersed my flock, and cast them forth,
and not visited them: Behold I will visit upon ye the malice of your
endeavors, says our Lord. For the Prophet and the Priest are both defiled,
and in my house have I found their evil, says our Lord, and therefore shall
their way be as a slippery place in the dark, for they shall be thrust
forward, and fall down together therein, for I will bring evils upon them, the
year of their visitation, says our Lord. And in the Prophets of Samaria, I
have seen foolishness, and they did prophecy in Baal, and deceived my people
of Israel, and in the Prophets of Jerusalem, have I seen the like resemblance,
adultery, and the way of lying, and they have comforted the hands of the
vildest offenders, that every man may not be converted from his malice: they
have been all made to me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as those of
Gomorrha. Thus therefore says our Lord to the Prophets; Behold, I will give
them wormwood for their food, and gall for their drink. For there has passed
from the Prophet of Jerusalem pollution over the whole earth. Thus says our
Lord of hosts; listen not unto the words of Prophets, who prophecy unto ye,
and deceive ye, for they speak the vision of their own heart, and not from
the mouth of our Lord. For they say unto these who do blaspheme me, our Lord
has spoken, peace shall be unto ye; and to all that walk in the wickedness
of their own hearts, they have said, Evil shall not fall upon them. For who was
present in the counsel of our Lord, and has seen and heard his speech, who
has considered of his word, and hearkened thereunto? Behold, the whirlewinde
of the indignation of our Lord passes out, and a tempest breaking forth, shall
fall upon the heads of the wicked, the fury of our Lord shall not return,
until the time that he works and until he fulfilleth the cogitation of his
heart. In the last days of all shall ye understand his counsel. And little
also do^ ye conceive and put in execution, that which the holy Prophet Joel
has likewise spoken in admonishment of sloathfull Priests, and Lamentation of
the Peoples damage for their iniquities, Joel 1.6.
saying: Awake ye who are drunk, from your wine, and weep and bewail ye all,
who have drunk wine even to drunkenness, because joy and delight are taken
away from your mouths. Mourn ye Priests, who serve the Altar, because the
fields have been made miserable. Let the earth mourn, because corn has
become miserable, and wine been dried up, oil diminished, and husbandmen
withered away. Lament ye possessions, in regard of Wheat and Barley, because
the vintage has perished out of the field, the vine withered up, the figs
diminished: the pomegranates, and palm, and apple, and all trees of the field
are withered away, in respect that the children of men have confounded their
joy. All which things are spiritually to be understood by you, that your souls
may not wither away with so pestilent a famine, for want of the word of God.
And again, Weep out ye Priests, Joel 2.17.
who serve our Lord, saying; Spare O Lord thy People, and give not over thine
inheritance unto reproach, and let not Nations hold dominion over them, that
Gentiles may not say, Where is their God? And yet ye yield not your ears unto
these sayings, but admit of all matters by which the indignation of the fury of
God is more vehemently inflamed. With diligence also attend ye what holy O see
the Prophet has spoken unto Priests of your* behavior. Osec 5 1.
Hear these words (O ye Priests) and let the house of Israel, together with
the Kings house mark them; fast^n ye them in your ears, for that unto ye
appertains judgment, because ye are made an intangling snare to the espying
watch, and as a piched not more and worse then the toil which the followers of
hunting have framed. To ye also, may this kind of alienation from our Lord, be
meant by the Prophet Amos saying, I have hated and rejected your festival
days, Amos 5.21
and I will not receive the savor in your solemn assemblies, because albeit
ye offer our burnt sacrifices and hosts, I will not accept them, and I will not
cast mine eye on the vows of your declaration. Take away from me the sound of
your songs, and the Psalm of your Organs I will not hear. For why the famine
of the Evangelicall meat consuming, in your abundance of victuals, the very
bowels of your souls, rages violently within ye, according as the aforesaid
Prophet has foretold, Amos 8.11.
saying: Behold the days shall come* says our Lord, and I will send out a
famine upon the earth, not the famine of bread, nor the thirst of water, but a
famine in hearing the word of God, and waters shall be moved from sea even to
sea, and they shall run over from the North even unto the East, seeking out the
word of our Lord, and yet shall not find it. Let holy Micheas also pierce your
ears, who not unlike a certain heavenly trumpet sounds shrilly forth
against the deceitful Princes of the People, saying: Hearken now ye Princes
of the house of Jacob, Miche. 3.1.
is it not for ye to know judgment, who hate goodness, and seek after
mischiefs, who pluck their skins from off men, and their flesh from their
bones? Even as they have eaten the flesh of my people, and fl^yed of their
skins from them, broken their bones to pieces, and hewed them small as meat to
the pot, they shall cry to God, and he will not hear them, and in that season
turn his face away from them, even as they before have wickedly behaved
themselves in their inventions. Thus speaks our Lord of the Prophets who
seduce my people, who bite with their teethes, and preach against them peace,
and if a man gives nothing to stop their mouths, they raise and sanctify a
war upon him. Night shall therefore be unto ye in place of a vision, and
d^rkenesse unto ye in l^we of divination, and the sun shall set upon your
Prophets, and the day shall wax dark upon them, and seeing droames they shall
be confounded, and the diviners shall be derided, and they shall speak ill
against all men, because there shall not be any one that will hear them, but
that I myself shall do mine uttermost and strongest endeavor in the spirit
of our Lord, in judgment and in power, that I may declare unto the house of
Jacob their impieties, and to Israel their offenses. Hearken therefore unto
these words ye Captains of the house of Jacob, and ye remnants of the house of
Israel, who abhor judgment, and overthrow all righteousness, who build up
Sion in blood and Jerusalem in iniquities: her rulers did judge for rewards,
and her Priests answered for hire, and her Prophets did for money divine, and
rested on our Lord, saying: And is not our Lord within us? evils shall not fall
upon us. For your cause therefore shall Sion be ploughed up as a field, and
Jerusalem as a watch cabin of a garden, and the mountain of the house as a
place of a woody wilderness. And after some words ensuing, Mich. 7.1.
Woe is me for that I am become as ^e that gathers stubble in the harvest,
and a cluster of grapes in the Vintage, when the principle branch is not left
to be eaten. Woe is me, that a soul has perished through earthly actions, the
reverence of sinners arises even reverencing from the earth, and he appears
not that among men corrects. All contend injudgement for blood, and every one
with tribulation afflicts his neighbor, for mischief he prepares his
hands. Listen ye likewise how the famous Prophet Sophonias debated also in
times past, with your fellow banqueters (for he spoke of Jerusalem, which is
spiritually to be understood the Church or the soul) saying: Sopho. 3.1.
O the City that was beautiful and set at liberty, the confident Dove has
not obediently hearkened to the voice, nor yet entertained discipline, she has
not trusted in our Lord, and to her God she has not approached. And he shows
the reason why, Soph. 3.3.
Her Princes have been like unto roaring Lions, her Judges as Wolves of Arabia
did not leave toward the morning, her Prophets carrying the spirit of a
contemptuous despising man; her Priests did profane what was holy, and dealt
wickedly in the law, but our Lord is upright in the midst of his people, and
no unjust morning will he make, in the morning will he give his judgment. But
hear ye also blessed Zachery the Prophet, in the Word of God, admonishing ye:
For thus says our Almighty Lord, Zach. 7 9.
Judge ye righteous judgment and work ye every one toward his brother mercy
and pity, and hurt ye not thorough your power the Widdoow, or Orphan, or
stranger, or poor man, and let not any man remember in his heart the malice of
his brother; and they have been stubborn not to observe these, and have
yielded their backs to foolishness, and made heavy their ears that they
might not hearken, and framed their hearts to be not perswasible that they
might not listen to my law and words, which our Almighty Lord has sent in his
spirit, through the hands of his former Prophets, and mighty wrath has been
raised by our Almighty Lord. And again, Because they who have spoken, Zach.
10.1.
have spoken molestations, and diviners have uttered false visions and
deceitful dreams, and given vain consolations; in respect hereof they are
made dry as sheep, and are afflicted because no health was to be found; my
wrath is heaped upon the Shepherds, and upon the Lambs will I visit. And
within a few words after, The voice of lamenting Pastors, because their
greatness is become miserable. Zach. 11.3.
The voice of roaring Lions, because the fall of Jordan is become miserable:
Thus says our Almighty Lord; who have possessed have murdered, and yet has
it not repented them, and who have sold them, have said; Our Lord is blessed
and we have been enriched and their Pastors have suffered nothing concerning
them. For which I will now bear no sparing hand over the inhabitants of the
earth, says our Lord. Hear ye moreover what the holy Prophet Malachy
denounces unto ye, saying, Mala. 1.6.
Ye Priests who despise my name, and have said: Wherein do we despise thy
name? in offering on mine Altar polluted bread: and ye have said, Wherein have
we polluted it? In that ye have said: The table of our Lord is as nothing, and
have despised such things as have been placed thereupon; because if ye bring
what is blind for an offering, is it not evil? If ye set and apply what is
lame or languishing, is it not evil? Offer therefore the same unto thy
governor, if he will receive it, if he will accept of thy person, says our
Almighty Lord. And now do ye humbly pray before the countenance of your God,
and earnestly beseech him (for in your hands have these things been committed)
if happily he will accept of your persons. And again, And out of your ravenous
theft ye have brought in the lame and languishing, Mal. 1.13.
and brought it in as an offering. Shall I receive the same at your hands,
says our Lord? Accursed is the deceitful man who has in his flock one of
the male kind, and yet making his vow offers the feeble unto our Lord,
because I am a mighty King, says our Lord of hosts, and my name is terrible
among the Gentiles. And now unto ye appertains this Commandment, O ye
Priests, if ye will not hear, and resolve in your hearts to yield glory unto
my name, says our Lord of hosts, I will send upon ye poverty, and accurse your
blessings, because ye have not settled these things on your hearts. Behold I
will extend out an arm upon ye, and disperse upon your countenances the dunge
of your solemnities. But that ye may in the mean time, with a more thirsting
desire prepare your Organs and instruments of mischief, to be converted into
goodness, hearken ye (if there remains as yet any so little inward
listening in your hearts) what he speaks of a holy Priest saying; My covenant
of life and peace was with him (for historically he did speak of Levi and
Moses) I gave fear unto him, Mala. 2.5.
and he was timorous of me, he dreaded before the countenance of my name, the
law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips, he
walked with me in peace and equity, and turned many away from unrighteousness.
For the lips of the Priest shall keep knowledge, and from out his mouth they
shall require the law, because he is the angel of our Lord of hosts. And now
again he changes his style, and desisteth not to rebuke and reprove the
unrighteous, saying; Mal. 2.8.
Ye have departed from the way, and scandalized many in the law, and made void
my covenant with Levi, says our Lord of hosts. In regard whereof I have also
given ye over as contemptible and abject among my people, according as ^ee have
not observed my ^ayes, and accepted counte^ance of men in the law. What is
there not one father of us all? What has not one god created us? Why therefore
does every one despise his brother? And again, Behold our Lord of hosts will
come, Mal. 3.2.
and who can conceive of the day of his coming, and who shall endure to stand
to behold him? For he shall pass forth as a burning fire, and as the fullers
herb, and shall sit melting and trying silver, and he shall purge the sons
of Levi, and cleanse them as gold and as silver. And somewhat afterward, Mal.
3.13.
Your words have grown strong against me, says our Lord, and ye have spoken
thus. He is vain who serves God, and what profit because we have kept his
Commandments, and walked sorrowful before our Lord of hosts. We shall
therefore now call the arrogant blessed, for because they are erected and
builded up, while they work iniquity, they have tempted God, and are made
safe. But hear ye also what Ezechiel the Prophet has spoken, saying: Ezec.
7.26.
Woe upon woe shall come, and messenger upon messenger shall be, and the vision
shall be sought for of the Prophet, and the law shall perish from the Priests,
and counsel from the Elders. And again: Thus says our Lord; Ezec. 13.8.
In respect that your speeches are lying, and your divinations vain. For this
cause, Behold, I my self unto ye says our Lord; I will stretch out my hand on
your Prophets, who see lies, and them who speak vain things, in the discipline
of my people they shall not be, and in the Scripture, of the house of Israel,
they shall not be written, and into the land of Israel they shall not enter,
and ye shall know that I am the Lord, because they have seduced my people,
saying, The peace of our Lord, and there is not the peace of our Lord. Here
have they built the wall; and they anointed it, and it shall fall, And within
some words afterward; Ezec. 13.18
Woe be unto these who fashion pillowes, apt for every elbow of the hand, and
make veiles upon every head of all ages to the subversion of souls, and the
souls of my people are subverted, and they possess their souls, and
contaminated me unto my people for a handful of barley, and a piece of bread
to the slaughter of the souls, whom it behooved not to dye, and to the
delivery of the souls, that were not convenient to live, while ye talk unto
my people that listeneth after vain speeches. And afterward: Say thou son
of man, Ezec. 22.4.
thou art earth which is not watered with rain, neither yet has rain fallen
upon thee in the day of wrath, in which thy Princes were in the midst of thee
as roaring Lions, ravening on their preyes, devouring souls in their potent
might, and receiving rewards, and thy widd^wes were multiplied in the midst of
thee, and her Priests have despised my law, and defiled my holy things.
Between holy and polluted, they did not distinguish, and divided not equally
between the unclean and clean, and from my Sabbaths they veiled their eyes,
and in the midst of them they defiled. Eze. 22 30.
And again, And I sought among them a man of upright conversation, and one who
should altogether stand before my face, to prevent the times that might fall
upon the earth, that I should not in the end utterly destroy it, and I found
him not. And I powered out upon it, the whole designement of my mind, in the
fire of my wrath for the consuming of them: I repaid their ways on their
heads, says our Lord. And somewhat after: Eze 33.1.
And the word of our Lord was spoken unto me saying: O Son of man, speak to
the children of my people, and thou shall say unto them: The land whereupon I
shall bring my sword, and the people of the land shall take some one man among
them, and ordain him to be a watchman over them, and he shall epsy the sword
coming upon the land, and sound with his trumpet, and signify unto the
people, who so truly shall then hear the sound of the trumpet, and yet
hearing shall not beware: and the sword shall come and catch him, his blood
shall light upon his own head, because when he heard the sound of the
trumpet, he was not watchful, his blood shall be upon him, and this man, for
that he has preserved his own soul, has delivered himself. But the
watchman if he shall see the sword coming, and not give notice with his
trumpet, and the people shall not beware; and the sword coming shall take away
a soul from among them, both the soul it self is caught a captive for her
iniquities, and I will also require her blood at the hand of the watchman. And
thou O son of man, I have appointed thee a watchman over the house of Israel,
and if thou shall hear the word from out my mouth, when I shall say to a
sinner, Thou shall die the death, and yet wilt not speak whereby the wicked
may return from his way: both the unjust himself shall die in his iniquity,
and truly I will require his blood also at thy hands. But if thou shall
forewarne the wicked of his way, that he may avoid the same, and he
nevertheless will not withdraw himself from his course, this man shall die in
his impiety, and thou have preserved thine own soul. And so let these few
among a multitude of Prophetical testimonies suffice, by which the pride or
sloth of our stubborn Priests may be repelled, to the end they may not
suppose that we do rather of our own invention, then by the authority of the
Laws, and Saints denounce such threats against them. And now let us also
behold what the trumpet of the Gospel, sounding to the whole world, speaks
likewise to disordered Priests; for as we have often said, this our discourse
tends not to treat of them, who obtain lawfully the Apostolical seat, and
such as rightly and skilfully understand how to dispose their spiritual food
(in time convenient) unto their fellow servants (if yet at this time there
remain any great number of these in this our Country) but we only talk of
ignorant and unexpert Shepherds, who leave their flock, and feed on vain
matters, for learned and good Pastors are free from these vanities. And
therefore it is an evident token that he is not a lawful Pastor, yea not an
ordinary Christian, who rejects and denies these sayings, which are not so
much ours (who of our selves are very little worth) as the decrees of the old
and New Testament; even as one of ours right well does say, We do exceedingly
desire that the enemies of the Church should also, without any manner of truce,
be our adversaries: and that the friends and defendours thereof, should not
only be accounted our confederates, but also our fathers and governors. For
let every one with true examination, call his own conscience unto account, and
so shall he easily find, whether according unto righteous reason he
possesses his Priestly chair or no. Let us see (I say) what the Savior and
Creator of the world has spoken. Ye are (says he the salt of the earth,
Math. 5.13
if that the salt vanishes away, wherein shall it be salted? it prevails to
no purpose any farther, but that it be cast out of the doors, and trampled
under the feet of men. This only testimony might abundantly suffice to confute
all such as are impudent, but that it may be yet by the Words of Christ, more
evidently prooved, with what huge intolerable bands of offenses, these false
priests, entangle and oppress themselves, some other sayings are also to be
adjoined; For it follows: Ye are the light of the world. Math. 5.14
A C^ty placed on a mountain cannot be hid, neither yet do they light a
candle, and put it under a bushel, but upon a candlestick, that it may shine
unto all who are in the house. What Priest therefore of this fashion and time,
who is so poss^ssed with the blindness of ignorance, does as the light of a
most clear burning candle, shine with the lamp of learning and good works,
in any house, to all that sit in the darkesome night? What one is so accounted
a safe public and apparent refuge, to all the children universally of the
Church, that he may be to his countrymen a most defensible and strong City,
situated on the top of an high mountain? Moreover, which one of them can
accomplish one day together, this that follows: Mat. 5.16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father who is in Heaven: Since rather a certain most obscure
cloud of theirs, and the black night of offenses, do in that sort hang over
the whole I^land, that they turn all almost away from the righteous course,
and make them to wander astray through unpassable and cumbersome paths of
wickedness, and so their heavenly Father is not only by their works not
magnified, but also by the same intollerably blasphemed. And truly I gladly
would in some historical or morrall sense how so ever, willingly interpret (as
far forth as our meandness could afford) these testimonies of Holy
Scripture, which are either already cited, or hereafter to be intermixed in
this Epistle, but for fear least this our little work, should be unmeasurably
tedious unto those who despise, loathe, and disdain, not so much our speeches
as Gods sayings, I have already alleged, and mean hereafter to affirm these
sentences plainly without any circumstance. And to proceed, within a few words
after: Mat. 5.19.
For who shall break one of the least of these Commandments, and so instruct
men, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven. Mat. 7.1.
And again, Judge ye not that ye may not be adjudged: for in what judgment ye
shall judge, ye shall be judged. And which one (I pray you) of your Company
will regard this same that follows; Mat. 7.3.
But why do thou see (says he) the mote in the eye of thy brother, and
considerest not the beam in thine own eye? or how do thou say to thy
brother, suffer me, I will cast the mote out of thine eye, and behold the beam
remains still in thine own eye? Or this insueing: Do ye not give what is
holy to dogs, Mat. 7.6.
neither yet shall ye cast your pearls before swine, least perchance they
tread them under their feet, and ^urning against ye break ye asunder, which
has most often befallen unto ye. And admonishing the People, that they should
not by deceitful Doctors (such as ye) be seduced he says: Keep your selves
carefully from false prophets, Mat. 7.15.
who come unto ye in the clothing of sheep, but inwardly are ravenous wolves:
by their fruit shall ye know them. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistles? So every good tree bears good fruit, and the evil, evil. And
somewhat afterward: Not every one who says unto me, Mat. 7.21.
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but who so does the will
of my father that is in Heaven, he shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And
what shall then become of ye, who (as the Prophet has said) believe God only
with your lips, and not adhere to him with your hearts. And how do ye
fulfill that which follows; Mat. 10.16
Behold I send ye forth as sheep among the midst of the wolves. Who do
clean contrariwise, proceed as wolves against a flock of sheep; or the
other ensueing sentence; Be ye wise as serpents and simple as doves, Mat. 10.16
since ye are only wise to bite others, with your deadly mouths, and not to
defend (with the objection and adventure of your whole body) your head, which
is Christ, whom with all the endeavors of your evil actions, ye tread under
foot; neither yet have ye the simplicity of doves, but the resemblance rather
of the black Crow, which taking her flight out of the Arc, (which is the
Church of God) and finding the carren of earthly pleasures, did never with a
pure heart return back thither again. But let us look on the rest. Fear ye
not (says he) them who kill the body, Mat. 10.28
but are not able to slay the soul, but fear ye him, who can overthrow both
soul and body into hell fire. Receive in your minds which of these ye have
performed? And what one of ye is not wounded in the very deep secrets of his
heart, with this testimony following, which our Savior utters unto his
Apostles, of evil prelates, saying, Mat. 15.14.
Do ye suffer them, the blind are leaders of the blind, but if the blind be
a guide to the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. But the people
doubtless whom ye have governed, or rather beguiled, have just occasion to
listen hereunto. Mark ye also the words of our Lord speaking unto his Apostles
and to the people, which words likewise (as I hear) ye your selves are not
ashamed to pronounce full often in public: Mat. 23.2.
Upon the chair of Moses have Scribes and Pharisees sat, observe ye therefore
and accomplish, all whatsoever they shall speak unto ye; but do ye not
according unto their works. For they do but speak, and they of themselves
do nothing. It is truly unto Priests a dangerous and superfluous doctrine,
which is overclouded with sinful actions. Woe be unto ye Hypocrites, Mat. 23
13.
who shut up the Kingdom of Heaven before men, your selves truly enter not
in, neither yet do ye suffer those that are entering to pass in. For ye
shall with horrible pains be tormented, not only in respect of the great
offenses of your wickedness, which ye do heap up for punishment in the world
to come, but also in regard of those who daily perish through your bad example,
whose blood in the day of judgment shall be required at your hands.

Yield ye in like sort diligent attention unto the misery, which the Parable
sets before your eyes that is spoken of the servant, who says, Mat. 24.48.
in his heart, my Lord makes delay in his coming, and upon this occasion
perchance, has begun to strike his fellow servants, eating and quaffing with
drunkards. The Lord of the same servant therefore (says he) will come on a
day when he does not expect him, and in an hour whereof he is ignorant, and
will divide him (from holy Priests undoutedly) and will place his portion with
hypocrites (with them certainly who under the pretense of Priesthood do
shadow much iniquity) affirming that there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth; Which sorrow in this present life, neither for the daily ruins of the
children of our holy Mother the Church, nor yet for the desire of the Kingdom
of Heaven, they have often sustained. But let us see what Paul, the true
Scholar of Christ, and Master of the Gentiles (who is a mirror of every
ecclesiastical Doctor, 1 Cor. 11.1.
Even as I (says he) am the Disciple of Christ) speaks about a work of such
importance in his first Epistle on this wise: Because when they have known
God, Romans 1.25.
they have not magnified him as God, or given thanks unto him; but vanished in
their own cogitations, and their fool^sh heart is blinded, affirming
themselves to be wise, they are made fools. Although this seems to be spoken
unto the Gentiles; look into it notwithstanding, because it may conveniently
be applied unto the Priests and people of this age. And after a few words; Who
have changed (says he) the truth of God into lying, Romans 1.25.
and have reverenced and served the creature rather than the Creator who is
blessed for ever: therefore has God given them over unto the passions of
ignominy. And again, Romans 1.28.
And even as they have not approved themselves to have God in their knowledge,
so God has yielded them up unto a reprobate sense, that they may do such
things as are not convenient, being replenished with all iniquity, malice,
uncleanness of life, fornication, covetousness, naughtiness, full of envy,
murder, (of the souls truly of the people) contention, deceit, wickedness,
backbiters detracters, hateful to God, spiteful, proud, puffed up, devisers
of mischiefs, disobedient to their Parents, senseless, disordered, without
mercy, without affection, who when they had known the justice of God,
understood not that they who commit such things, are worthy of death. And now
what one of the aforecited sort has indeed been void of all these? And if
he were, yet perhaps he may be caught in the sense of the ensuing sentence,
wherein he says; Not only who do these things, but also who consent unto
the doers, Romans 1.31.
to wit, that none of them truly are free from this wickedness. And
afterward; But thou according to thy hardiness, Romans 2.5.
and impenitent heart, do lay up for thy self wrath, against the day of
wrath, and revelation of the just judgment of God, who will yield unto every
one according unto his works. And again, For there is no acceptance of
persons with God. Romans 2.11.
For whosoever have offended without the Law, shall also without the law
perish: whosoever have offended in the Law, shall by the Law be judged. For not
the hearers of the Law, shall with God be accounted just, but the dooers of the
law shall be justified. How severe a sentence shall they therefore sustain, who
not only leave undone, what they ought to accomplish, and forbear not what
they are forbidden, but also fly as an hideous snake, the very hearing of the
word of God, though lightly sounding in their ears. But let us pass over to
that which follows to this effect: Romans 6.1.
What shall we therefore say, shall we continue still in our sin, that grace
may abound? God forbid, for we who are dead in sin, how shall we again live
in the same? And somewhat afterward, Romans 8.35
Who shall separate us (says he) from the charity of Christ? tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or danger, or the sword?
What one (I pray you) of all you, shall with such an affection be possessed in
the inward secret of his heart, since ye do not only labor for atchieving of
piety, but also endure many things for the working of impiety, and offending of
Christ? Or who has respected this that follows: Romans 13.^2
The night has passed, and the day appreached. Let us therefore cast of the
works of darkness, and put on the armor of light, even as in the day, let
us honestly walk, not in banqueting, and drunkenness, not in couches, and
wantonness, not in contention, and emulation, but put ye on our Lord Jesus
Christ, and make no care to bestow your flesh in concupiscences. And again, in
the first Epistle to the Corinthians, he says: As a wise workemaster have I
laid the foundation, 1 Cor. 3.10.
another builds thereupon, but let every man consider how he builds
thereon. For no man can lay any other foundation besides that which is Christ
Jesus. But if any man builds upon this, gold, and silver, precious stones,
hay, wood, stubble, every ones work shall be manifests; for the day of our
Lord shall declare the same, because it shall be revealed in fire, and the fire
shall prove what every man's work is. If any man's work shall remain, all by
the fire shall be adjudged. Who so shall build thereupon, shall receive reward.
If any man's work shall burn, he shall suffer detriment. Know ye not that ye
are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God inhabiteth in ye? but if any
man violate the Temple of God, God will destroy him. And again, 1 Cor. 3.18.
If any man seems among ye to be wise in this world, let him be made a fool
that he may become wise. For the wisdom of this world, is foolishness with
God. And within some words afterward: Your glorying is not good. 1 Cor. 5.6.
Know ye not, that a little leaven corrupts the whole mass? Purge ye
therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new sprinkling. How shall the old
leaven, (which is sin) be purged away, that from day to day with your
uttermost endeavors is increased. And yet again. 1. Cor. 5.9.
I have written unto ye in mine Epistle, that ye be not intermingled with
fornicators, not truly the fornicators of this world, or the avaritious,
ravenous, or idolatrous, otherwise ye ought to depart out of this world. But
now have I written unto ye, that ye be not intermingled, if any one is named a
brother, and be a fornicator, or avaritious, or an idolator, or a slaunderer,
or a drunkard, or ravenous, with such an one, ye should not so much as eat.
But a felon condemns not his fellow thief for stealing, or other open
robbery, whom he rather likes, defends, and loves, as a companion of his
offense. Also in his second Epistle unto the Corinthians; Having therefore
(says he) this administration, 2 Cor. 4.2.
according to that we have obtained mercy, let us not fail, but let us cast
away the secrets of shame, not walking in subtilty, nor yet corrupting the word
of God, (that is by evil example and flattery.) And in that which follows, he
does thus discourse of wicked Doctors, saying: For such false apostles are
deceitful workmen, 2 Cor. 11.13
transfiguring themselves into the Apostles of Christ. And no wonder. For
Satan himself transfigureth him into an Angel of light. It is not much
therefore if his ministers are transfigured as ministers of justice, whose end
will be according unto their works. Listen ye likewise what he speaks unto
the Ephesians? and consider if ye find not your consciences attainted as
culpable of this that follows? where he denounces thus; Ephesians. 4.17
I say and testify this in our Lord, that ye do not as now walk like the
Gentiles in the vanity of their own sense, having their understanding obscured
with darkness, alienated from the way of God, through ignorance, which
remains in them in regard of the blindness of their heart, who despairing,
have yielded themselves over to uncleanness of life, for the working of all
filthiness and avarice. And which of ye has willingly fulfilled this that
next ensues; Ephesians. 5.17
Therefore be ye not made unwise, but understanding what is the will of God,
and be ye not drunk with wine, wherein there is riotousnesse, but be ye
fulfilled with the holy Ghost. Or that which he says to the Thessalonians. 1 Thessalonians. 2.5
For neither have we been with ye at any time in the speech of flattery, as
your selves do know; neither upon occasion of avarice, neither seeking to be
glorified by men, neither by ye, nor any others, when as we might be honored
as other Apostles of Christ. But we have been made as little ones in the
midst of ye, or even as the nurse cherishes her small tender children, so
desiring ye, we would very gladly deliver unto ye, not only the Gospel, but
also our very lives. If in all things ye retained this affection of the
Apostle, then might ye be likewise assured, that ye lawfully possessed his
chair. Or how have ye observed this that follows: Ye know (says he) what
precepts I have delivered unto ye. 1 Thessalonians. 4.2
This is the will of our Lord, your sanctification, that ye abstain your
selves from fornication, and that every one of ye know to possess his own
vessel, in honor and sanctification, not in the passion of desire, like to
the Gentiles who are ignorant of God, and that none of you do encroach upon or
circumvent his brother in his business, because our Lord is the revenger of
all these. For God has not called us into uncleanness; but unto
sanctification. Therefore who despises these, does not despise man, but God.
What one also among you has advisedly and warily kept this that insueth:
Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth, Colos. 5.3.
fornication, uncleanness of life, lust, and evil concupiscence, for the
which the wrath of God has come upon the children of disfidence. Ye perceive
therefore upon what offenses the wrath of God does chiefly arise, in which
respect do ye likewise hear what the same holy Apostle with a Prophetical
spirit, foretells of you, and such as your selves, writing plainly in this
sort to Timothy; For know you this, 2 Timothy 3.1
that in the last days there shall be dangerous times at hand. For men shall
be selfelovers, covetous, puffed up, proud, blasphemous, disobedient to their
parents, ungrateful, wicked, without affection, incontinent, unmeeke, without
benignity, betrayers, froward, lofty* rather lovers of sensual pleasures, then
of God, having truly a show of piety, but renouncing the virtue thereof, and
avoid thou these men. Even as the Prophet says; I have hated the congregation
of the malicious, Psalm. 25.5.
and with the wicked I will not sit. And a little after, he utters that
(which in our age we behold to increase) saying: Ever learning, and never
attaining unto the knowledge of truth: 2 Timothy 3.7
For even as Iannes and Mambres resisted Moses, so do these also withstand the
truth: men corrupted in mind, reprobate against faith, but they shall prosper
no further; for their folly shall be manifest unto all, as theirs likewise was.
And evidently does he also declare how Priests in their office ought to behave
themselves, writing thus to Titus, Show thy self an example of good works,
Tit. 2.7.
in learning, in integrity, in gravity, having thy word sound without offense,
that he who stands on the adverse part, may be afraid, having ^o evil to
speak of us. And moreover he says unto Timothy; Labor thou as a good
Soldier of Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.3.
no man fighting in Gods quarrel intangleth himself in worldly businesses,
that he may please him unto whom he has approoved himself, for who so
striveth in the lists for the mastery, receives not the crown, unless he
has lawfully cont^nded. This is undoubtedly his exhortation given to the good.
Other matter also which the same Epistles contain, is a threatening
advertisement unto the wicked (such as your selves, in the judgment of al
understanding persons, appear to be.) If any one (says he) teaches
otherwise, 1 Timothy 6.3.
and does not peaceably assent to the sound sayings of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and that doctrine which is according unto piety, he is proud, having no
knowledge, but languishing about questions, and contentions of words, out of
the which do springing arise, envies, debates blasphemies, evil suspicions,
conflicts of men corrupted in mind, who are deprived of truth, esteeming
commodity to be piety. But why in using these testimonies, here and there
dispersed, are we any longer (as it were) tossed up and down in the silly boat
of our simple understanding, on the waves of sundry interpretations? We have
now therefore at the length thought it necessary, to have recourse even unto
those lessons, which are worthily gathered out of almost all Texts of holy
Scriptures, to the end they should not only be rehearsed, but also be
assenting and assisting unto the benediction, where with the hands of Priests,
and others of inferior sacred orders, are first consecrated, and that thereby
they may continually be warned never by degenerating from their Priestly
dignity, to digress from the Commandments, which are faithfully contained in
the same; so as it may be plain and apparent unto all, that everlasting
torments are reserved for them, that they are not Priests, or the servants of
God, who do not with their uttermost power follow and fulfill these
instructions and precepts. Wherefore let us hearken what the Prince of the
Apostles, Saint Peter, has signified about this so weighty a matter saying:
Blessed be God, 1 Pet. 1.3.
and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who through his mercy has
regenerated us into the hope of eternal life, by the resurrection of our Lord
Jesus Christ from the dead, into an inheritance which can never corrupt, never
wither, neither be defiled, conserved in heaven for ye, who are kept in the
virtue of God; Why then do ye fondly violate such an inheritance, which is not
as an earthly one, transitory, but immortal and eternal? And somewhat
afterward; For which cause be ye girded in the loins of your mind, 1 Pet.
1.13.
sober, perfectly hoping in that grace which is offered ye in the revelation of
Jesus Christ: Examine ye now the depths of your hearts, whether ye be sober
and do perfectly conserve the grace of Priesthood, which shall be duly
discussed and decided in the Revelation of our Lord. And again he says, 1
Pet. 1.4.
As children of the benediction, not configuring your selves to those former
desires of your ignorance, but according unto him who has called ye holy, be
ye also holy in all conversation. For which cause it is written; Be ye holy
because I am holy. Which one of ye (I pray) has with the burning desire of
the-whole mind, so pursued sanctity, that he has earnestly hastened, as much
as in him lay, to fulfill the same? But let us behold what in the second lesson
of the same Apostle is contained, 1 Pet. 1.22.
My dearest (says he) sancti^ie your souls for the obedience of faith through
the spirit in charity, in brotherhood, loving one another out of a true heart
perpetually, as borne again not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible,
through the Word of God, living and remaining for ever. These are truly the
Commandments of the Apostle; and read in the day of your ordination, to the
end ye should inviolably observe the same, but they are not fulfilled by ye in
discretion and judgment, nay not so much as duly considered or understood.
And afterward, Laying therefore aside all malice, 1 Pet. 2.1.
and al deceit, and dissemblings, and envy, and detractions, as infants now
newly borne, reasonable and without guile covet ye milk, that ye may thereby
grow to salvation, because our Lord is sweet. Recount ye also in your minds,
if these sayings which have sounded in your deaf ears, have not often
likewise bin trodden by ye underfoote; And again, Ye truly are the chosen
lineage, 2 Pet. 2.9.
the royal Priesthood, the holy nation, the people for adoption, that ye may
declare his virtues, who has called ye out of darkness into that his so
mervoilous light. But truly by ye are not only the virtues of God not
declared and made more glorious but also through your wicked examples are they
(by such as have not perfect belief) despised. Ye have perchance at the same
time likewise heard, what is read in the lesson of the Acts, on this wise;
Peter arising in the midst of the Disciples said; Act. 1.15.
Ye men my brethren, it is expedient the Scripture be fulfilled, which the
holy Ghost has by the mouth of David foretold of Judas. And a little after,
This man has therefore purchased afield, Act. 1.18.
of the reward of iniquity. This have ye heard with a careless or rather
blockish heart, as though the reading thereof had nothing at all apperteined
unto your selves. What one of ye (I pray ye) does not seek the field of the
reward of iniquity? For Judas robbed and pilled the purse, and ye spoil and
waste the sacred gifts and treasures of the Church, together with the souls of
her children. He went to the Jews to make a Market of God, ye pass to the
Tyrants, and their father the Devil that ye may despise Christ. He did set to
sale the Savior of the world for thirty pence, and ye even for one poor
halfpenny; what need many words? The example of Matthias is apparently laid
before ye for your confusion, who was chosen into his place, not by his own
proper will, but by the election of the holy Apostles, or rather the judgment
of Christ, whereat ye being blinded, do not perceive how far ye run astray
from his merits, while ye fall wilfully and headlong, into the manners and
affection of Judas the traitor. It is therefore manifest that he who wittingly
from his heart, terms ye Priests, is not himself truly a worthy Christian.
And now I will assuredly speak what I think: This reprehension might have
been framed after a milder fashion, but what avails it to touch only with
the hand, or dress with a gentle ointment, that wound which with impostumation
or stinking corruption, grows now in it self so horrible, as it requires
the searing iron, or the ordinary help of the fire, if happily by any means
it may be recured, the diseased in the mean while not seeking a medicine, and
the Physician much erring from a rightful remedy? O ye enemies of God, and
not Priests; O ye traders of wickedness and not Bishops, O ye betrayers and
not successors of the holy Apostles, O ye adversaries and not servants of
Christ! Ye have certainly heard at the least, the sound of the words, which
are in the second lesson taken out of the Apostle Saint Paul, although ye have
no way observed the admonitions and virtue of them, but even as statues (that
do neither see nor hear) stood that day at the Altar, while both then and
continualy since he has thundered in your ears saying; Brethren it is a
faithful speech, 1 Timothy 3.1.
and worthy of all acceptance. He called it faithful and worthy, but ye have
despised it, as unfaithful and unworthy. If any man coveteth a Bishopric, 1 Timothy 3.1.
he de^ireth a goodworke. Ye do mightily covet a Bishopric in respect of
avarice, but not upon occasion of spiritual commodity, and for the good work
which is convenient for the place; ye want it. It behooves therefore such an
one, 1 Timothy ^.2.
to be void of all cause of reprehension. At this saying we have more need to
shed tears than utter words; for it is as much as if the Apostle had said, He
ought to be of all others most free from occasion of rebuke. 1 Timothy 3.2.
The husband of one wife, which is lkewise so contemned among us, as if that
word had never proceeded from him; 1 Timothy 3.2.
Sober, Wise, Yea which of ye has once desired to have these virtues ingrafted
in him, Using hospitality. For this, if perchance it has been found among ye,
Ibidem.
yet being nevertheless rather done to purchase the favor of the people, then
to accomplish the Commandment, it is of none avail, our Lord and Savior
saying thus; Verily I say unto ye, they have received their reward. Mat. 6.2.
Moreover, A man adorned, 1 Timothy 3.2.
not given to wine; no fighter; but modest; not contentius, not covetous: O
lamentable change! O horrible contempt of the heavenly Commandments! And do
ye not continually use the force of your words and actions, for the
overthrowing or rather overwhelming of these, for whose defense and
confirmation (if need had required) ye ought to have suffered pains, yea and
to have lost your very lives. But let us see what follows; Well governing
(says he) his house, Ibidem.
having his children subjected with all chastity. Imperfect therefore is the
chastity of the Parents, if the children be not also endued with the same. But
how shall it be, where neither the father, nor yet the son as depraved by the
example of his evil parent, is found to be chaste? 1 Timothy 3.5.
But if any one knows not how to rule over his own house, how shall he
employ his care over the Church of God? These are the words, that with apparent
effects, should be made good and approoved. 1 Timothy 3.8.
Deacons in like manner, that they should be chaste, not double tongued, not
overgiven much to wine, not followers of filthy gain, having the mystery of
faith in a pure conscience, and let these also be first approoved, and so let
them administer, having no offense. And now trembling truly to make any longer
stay on these matters, I can for a conclusion affirm one thing certainly,
which is; that all these are changed into contrary actions, in so much that
Clerks, (which not without grief of heart, I do here confess) are
shameless and deceitful in their speeches, given to drinking, covetous of
filthy commodity, having faith (or to say more truly) unfaithfulness in an
unpure conscience, ministering not upon probation of their good works, but upon
foreknowledge of their evil actions, and being thus defiled with innumerable
offenses, they are notwithstanding admitted unto the holy function, ye have
likewise heard on the same day (wherein ye should with far more right and
reason have been drawn to prison or punishment, then preferred unto
Priesthood) when our Lord demanded whom his Disciples supposed him to be, how
Peter answered; Thou art Christ, Mat. 16.16
the Son of the living God, and our Lord in respect of such his confession,
said unto him: Blessed art thou Simon Ba^jonas, Mat. 16.17.
because flesh and blood has not revealed unto thee, but my Father who is in
Heaven. Peter therefore instructed by God the Father, does rightly confess
Christ; but ye being taught by the devil your father, do with your lewd
actions, wickedly deny our Savior. It is said to the true Priest, Thou art
Peter, Mat. 16.18
and upon this rock will I build my Church: But ye are resembled unto the
foolish man, Mat. 7.26.
who has builded his house upon the sand. And verily it is to be noted, that
God joyneth not in workmanship with the unwise, when they build their house
upon the deceitful uncertainty of the sands, according unto that saying: They
have made Kings unto themselves* and not by me. Semblably that (which
follows) sounds in like sort, Mat. 16.17
speaking thus: And the Gates of hell (whereby the infernal sins are to be
understood) shall not prevail. But of your frail and deadly frame, mark what
is pronounced? The floods came, Mat. 7.25.
and the winds blew, and have mainely dashed upon that house and it sell, and
great was the ruin thereof. To Peter and his successors our Lord does say: And
I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: Ma^*t 16.18
But unto ye; I know ye not, depart from me ye workers of iniquity, that being
separated with the goats of the left hand, ye may together with them, go into
eternal fire. It is also promised unto every good Priest; Mat. 16.18. He
speaks not of the power and jurisdiction but of the decency and ^itnes ^ince
no Priest but may absolve another though in sin himself, neither can he
excummunicate himself. Prove. 5.22.
What soever thou shall loose upon earth, shall be likewise loosed in heaven:
and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be in like sort bound in
Heaven. But how shall ye loose any thing, that it may be loosed also in Heaven,
since your selves for your sins are severed from Heaven, and hampred in the
bands of your own heinous offenses, As Solomon says: With the cords of his
sins, every one is tied? And with what reason shall ye bind any thing on this
earth, that above this world may be likewise bound, unless it be your only
selves, who entangled in your iniquities, are so detained on this earth, as ye
cannot ascend into Heaven, but without your conversion unto our Lord in this
life, will fall down into the miserable prison of hell? Neither yet let any
Priest flatter himself upon the knowledge of the particular cleannenesse of
his own body, since their souls (over whom he has government) shall in the
day of Judgment be required at his hands as the murderer of them, if any
through his ignorance, ^loth, or fawning adulation have perished, because the
stroke of death is not less terrible, that is given by a good man then which
is inflicted by an evil person: Otherwise would the Apostle never have said
that which he left unto his successors, as a fatherly Legacy; I am clear and
clean from the blood of all: Act. 20.26.
for I have not forborne to declare unto ye all the counsel of God. Being
therefore mightily drunken with the use and custom of sins, and extremely
overwhelmed with the waves, (as it were) of increasing offenses, seek ye now
forthwith the uttermost endeavors of your minds, (after this your shipwrake)
that one board of penance, which is only left, whereby ye may escape and
swim to the land of the living, that from ye may be turned away the wrath of
our Lord, who says: I will not the death of a sinner: Ezec. 33.11
but that he may be converted and live. And the same Almighty God, of all
consolation and mercy preserve his few good Pastors from all evil, and (the
common enemy being overcome) make them free inhabitants of the heavenly City of
Jerusalem, which is the congregation of all Saints, grant this, O Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, to whom be honor and glory, world without end, Amen.

FINIS.

