A POSIE of Gilloflowers, each differing from other in color and odor, yet
all sweet. By Humfrey Gifford Gent.

Imprinted at London for John Perin, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Angel. 1580.

To the Worshipful his very good Master Edward Cope of Edon, Esquier, Humfrey
Gifforde wishes many years of prosperities.
Having by your worships favorable permittance, convenient opportunity in your
service, to bestow certain hours amongst my books, with which exercise (of
all earthly recreations I am most delighted) both reason bids me, and duty
binds me, to make you partaker of some of the fruits of my studies. And
farther, your woorship being the only master that ever I served, unto whom
(my parents excepted) I acknowledge my self more bound, then to all the
world besides, I might be said to carry a very bad mind with me, if I
should not endeavor by some one means or other, to show my self thankful
for your benefits. And not knowing better how to do the same, I have (amongst
other toies by me taken in hand) made special choice of these translations
ensewing, to present you with, as a pledge of my loyalty and testimony of the
duetiful zeal that I bear yon. The first thing that shall herein be offered
to your view, is a most excellent Epistle, written first in Italian by Master
Clodius Ptholomoeus, which according unto my simple skill, I have converted
into English, although not with such eloquence as some other might
(peradueuture) have done it: yet I trust with such diligence that ye shall
find the intent of the Author sufficiently explaned. He made it for the
comforting of an acquaintance of his, who being fallen into poverty, did bear
it very impaciently, wherein he has discharged the duty of a friend, so
faithfully, that no man can say so much in the commendation of it, but that it
will deserve a great deal more. An^ what indifferent judgment, it shall
seem too want of the praise that I give it, shall appear to come to pass
through the imperfection of the Translator, and not any default of the Author,
wohse ability, if it shall not in all points answer to the willingness of
his mind, meriteth the rather too be pardoned in that he has done his
goodwil. Next unto this Epistle follows another of the same man's composition,
which for the occasion, whereupon it was made, is not inferior to the first.
For the golden examples and divine sentences that are cowched in them, I
christened this discourse by the name of A Comfortable Recreation, nothing
doubting but that whosoever shall peruse it with advised consideration, will
acknowledge that what the Title does profess in show, the treatise will
perform in substance. As the ylnesse of my manner of handeling of it was as it
were a bridle to hold me back from giving my consent that it should come
forth, so the goodness of the matter contained in it, served me as a spur
to prick me forwards to yield to their entreaties that craved to have it
published. Such other french and Italian toys as I have translated, and added
hereunto (if I flatter not my self overmuch in mine own follies) are such
as will bring more delight then disliking to the perusers of them. I am to
crave pardon for my presumption in dedicating them to your woorshippe, which I
have done, in that passing under the shadow of your protection, they shall of
a number that know you, be received with the greater favor.

Thus hoping that my welmeaning and willing endeavor shall be constred in the
best part, remaining most thankful to your worship, for your benefits
bestowed on me, I put an end to my rud preface, wishing unto and you my
mistres, with your little ones, and all other your welwillers, many years of
prosperities. With humble and hearty intercession unto God, that as ye have
already planted a good and lawdable beginning amongst your neighbors, and live
in credit in your country, with the love and good liking of as many as know
you, that so ye may grow and go forwards with daily increase of worship,
until it shall be his good pleasure, that ye shall exchange this earthly
mansion, for a heavenly habitation.

Your servant Humfrey Gifford.

To the Reader.
CVrteous and friendly Reader, being desirous to content many, and not give
occasion of offense to any, I have suffered the importunacie of some my
welwillers to prevail so far with me, that I have yielded them my consent for
the publishing of this Treatise, not being ignorant unto what hazard of reproach
they oppose themselves, that permit their doings to be laid open to the view
of a multitude. For as the better sort will pronounce their oppinions of it,
answerable to the verity of the substance, that shall be in the works
contained: so the greater sort do commonly give their verdit according to the
vanity of the surmises that shall by them be conceived: often kindling a kind
of mislike with the matter, for some secret malice that they bear to the man:
And more oftener for a resolute and settled determination that they have
grounded in them, never to like well of any thing, unless it meet iumpewtth
their own doting and peevish imaginations, or be some pigge of their proper
farrowing: being in this point not unlike the crow, who always thinks her own
birds fairest. But daily examples teach us, that they which vomitte forth the
poisoned rancour of their malicious stomachs, against the lawdable attemptes
of others: most, are such as of themselves can do least: who neither carry a
mind to undertake any commendable exercise themselves, nor have a meaning to
permit others that would, to perform it without their venomous backbyting. If
comparisons were not odious, I would here liken all such whelps of Zoilus,
to that crabbed and canckerly naturde curre, which being laid upon a bottle of
hey, would neither feed of it himself, (being meat contrary to his
complexion) nor suffer the poor hungerstarued beasts to approach near it
quietly: but would lie still snapping and snarling at them. But to omit these
preambulations, and come to the purpose, I tell thee (gentle Reader) if thou will vouchsafe the ouerlooking of this comfortable recreation, with a mind to
profit, thou may reap benefit, and be greatly bettered by the reading of it.
For the brydling and keeping under of our disordinate affections: for the
restrayning and containing of our desires within the compass of a contented
mean: For the use and abuse of riches, and for the gayning and obtaining of
the true and perfect tranquillity of mind, one may read much, and yet not
find it more pithily and substantially set down, then in these Epistles
following: And especially in the first, where thou shall meet with such
plenty of sweet and comfortable consolations, collected out of the ^owelles
of the scripture, and applied so aptly, as will move them, if thou have never
so little taste or feeling in them of God, or godliness, to mind thy creator,
and be thankful unto him for his benefits. And my hope is, that the goodness
and excellency of the matter shall so ravish thy senses that my imperfections
in the translating of them, shall be past over by thee unespied. Nevertheless if
either in the edition of this, or other my trifles, any thing shall chance to
escape me, which in thy impartial opinion shall seem unfitting, I will most
willingly submit my self to the censure of thy judgment, and upon a^monition
amend the fault by repentance, yielding thee thanks for thy friendlinesse,
answerable to the mind and good meaning that I shall see thee to advertise me
of it. ^ut if I shall perceive thee to speak it, more of malice to reprehend
me, then of meaning to amend me, it will so discomfort and discorage me, and
take down mine edge in such sort, that I doubt, I shall very hardly be brought
hereafter to repose confidence again in thy courtesy. Yet if thou be
learned, and wilt tell me of my faults lovingly, spare not, I will take it most
tha^kfully: also if thou be one of Momus mates, and do rail at my doings
spytefullie Icare not, I will brook it most patiently, accounting it no less
commendation to be ill spoken of, by one that is ignorant and foolish, then
to be well spoken of, by one that is skillful and wise.

Thus we should do, and thus (would to God) we could do: but as it is most
easy to profess patience in words when our estate is in quiet: so is it very
difficulte to express it in deeds, when our affections are distempered. Such
as take men's purses from them undesired, pass often by the sentence of a cord,
and shall such as rob men of their good names undeserved, be suffered to
escape scotfree? This may be set down for a rule that never fayles: that as
many men would be glad to be better thought of, then his dealings shall
deserve: so any man would be loath to be worse thought of, then his doings
shall demerit. For to be defrauded of deserved praise, and pursued with
undeserved reproach, may well be accounted a double injury. To conclude
(gentle Reader) I have bin so charie in the choice of the things contained in
this pamphlet, that thou may find many things herein to delight thee, and
not any thing to dispight thee. If thou shall take pleasure, or gain profit by
the reading of them: be thankful to the authors, and vouchsafe to think well
of the translator, who when he would thee worst, wishes thee well.

Thine in all courtesy, Humfrey Gifford.

An Epistle written in Italian, by Master Claudius Ptholomoeus, for the
comforting of his very loving and learned friend, Master Dionysius, being
fallen into poverty, and englished by H. G.
Ye should have done me a great pleasure, if (as I requested you) ye had come
and remained with me at my house this Summer; where, far from the rumors of
the city, amiddest the delectable woods, ye should have avoided a great part
of these greefes, with which ye now are molested; and above al, ye should not
so sharply have felt the bitinges of poverty, which in your last letter, ye so
cruelly complain of. For it is a thing most manifest (as S. Hierome says very
well) that our eyes are the chief cause, that poverty seems so sharp and
bitter unto us. Take away the sight of riches, by and by poverty seems light
unto me. When I see not the pompes, the treasures, the jewels, the rich
attire, delicious tables, sumptuous palaces, great traynes of servants in
others; I neither search for them, nor covet after them, neither am I careful
for being without them. But as soon as these wild beasts are once presented
before my eyes, straightwayes with their false and deceaueable beauty, like
enchauntresses, they lyme my desire, which done (like infernal furies) they
torment it with a thousand anoyes; by the means whereof, all quiet and
tranquillity is banished from the mind of man; in place whereof, unpleasant
cogitations, broken sleeps, froward hatred, blind envy, servile fear,
doubtful hope, and diverse other their cruel companions, and copesmates,
reign, and govern our affections. Truly, I my self, who do now think by
long experience, and sound judgment of mind, to be somewhat stablished, and
confirmed in temperate desires; when sometimes I am conversant (I say) amongst
the pompes of the city, I seem to feel certain waters of vain appetites to
bubble up wtin me, which might peradventure breed some grievous infirmity in my
mind, if I did not suddenly kill and keep them down with the tempest of
moderation: and doubtless as often as I make repair into these places, I seem
to be carried on a calm Sea, with a moderate wind, without swelling of the
waves, or danger of any tempest. Ye might (I say) have done me a most
acceptable pleasure, if ye had come unto me, to have avoided the dangers and
annoyances of poverty amongst these solitary woods, and ye should also have
delivered me of a great trouble in writing unto you. For that here ye green
grass, the floorishing trees, the crystal streams the chirping birds, the
harmless beasts, the open air, the seeing of every thing to rejoice at the
gifts of nature, would have been better masters for the instructing of you,
then all the schools of Philosophers in Athens. Or if this had not been
sufficient, yet had it been more easy for me to have told you what was
convenient in walking, and (as it were) sporting with you, (then being
distant) I can now do by writing. But a friend is never to be abandoned,
rather we should endeavor to search out every remedy, for his health; to
undertake any travel; and to put our selves betwixt every danger, for his
safety. Although I believe, ye demand consolation of me, not for that ye
want it in your self, I knowing you to be both wise and temperate; but for
that (as it comes too pass) ye esteem the consolation given by a dear
friend, to be more pleasant than your own. For in this ye taste but your
self only: in the other ye shall participate both of the fruit of your
self, and of your friend. I say unto you (Master Dionysius) that first, I
know not, whether to be poor or rich, be a thing y^ has his foundation in
nature, or is altogether placed in the opinion of men. But this I clearly
know, ye poverty is an evil or affection, which men without necessity, have by
opinion only placed amongst the evils, and affections, which nature has
bestowed on us; and have made y^ same of her, as ( Menander says) they have
done of ambition, of the injury of words; of unlucky dreams; of wonders, and
many other things, which not being given us by nature for any evil at al; we,
nevertheless through our foolish imagination, account the^ as a disgrace y^ not
a little tormenteth us. Through which it comes to pass, that man is more
unfortunate, then any other living creature whatsoever. Who is he living
according to the use of men nowadayes, seeing himself to fall out of favor with his
master, had not rather have ten burning fevers, then lose this his favor?
whereas if he had sound judgment, and would not suffer himself to be
corrupted, with false imagination, he ought rather to choose the disfavor of
four masters, then to suffer one only fever; for that the first, is an evil
springing only of opinion, and this is grounded and founded in nature it self.
So likewise seems it unto me of poverty, yt if it be an evil (wc I believe
not) it takes his original only of ye fantasies, and thoughts of men of weak
understanding, having no foundation at all in nature. And therefore Jesus Christ
our savior most prude^tly and divinely comforted, not only his disciples, but
all the poor also, with this goodly and most beautiful example of two sparowes.
Is not man (says Christ) of greater price then two sparowes? has not God
greater regard of him, then of these little byrds? and yet they want nothing
that is needful for their sustenance. Shall any thing be wanting the^ unto men
with are had in greater estimation, both with God and nature? And verily, it is not
to be doubted but that poverty and riches sprang first of the division of
dominions; being brought in rather by the greedines and ambition of men, then
by any order of nature. O blessed be ye little beasts; you feel not at al,
those pearcings, and privy bytings of poverty, but live freely and joyfully in
the pure law of nature, without encombring your selves, with either riches or
poverty. Let poverty be what she will, I know not wherefore we should
accounte of her, when as she is not of the things that are within us, but
reckoned in the number of those that are without us.

For man is made and framed of soul and body only, and it is not necessary to
the composition of him, that there should appertain a soul, a body, and
riches. Now if poverty be not of the things within us, but without us, what
evil (I pray you) can she do us? Surely it must be much less, then that
which offends the parts of which we are truly composed sickness, and
diseases make death seem unto us more bitter then gall; likewise ignorance,
dullness, envy, sin, and wickedness corrupt the beauty of our souls: of
these in part we are framed. But what has poverty to do with us? she has
respect (as has been said) to the things without us, and should not anoy
us, if we (enemies to our own selves) took not her darts in our hands, and
with them most bitterly pierced our own souls. But I say unto you farther,
that the restless grief, the loathsome irkesomnesse, and cruel prickinges
that poverty procures, spring all from one root: which is, the desire of
superfluous things. Take away the desire of those things that are needelesse,
and all this troublesome Sea will presently become quiet, and calm. Of a
troth, that sentence manifested by the Philosophers, celebrated of ye sages,
and allowed by long experience (that nature is contented with very few
things) is most true Whervp^^ Cleanthus gave unto men this worthy lesson. Wilt
you (said Cleanthus) be quickly rich? be thou then poor of desires. I pray thee
tell me how needful is it, from defending one from the cold, to be clothed in
velvet, purple or gold, and to be always in sundry fashions? These garments
bring no help unto nature, but increase the smoke of our ambition; neither yet
can we ever be satisfied: whereby we gain no other thing, but to make our
vanities, and the blind cloud of our desires more apparent. What necessity is
there for the feeding of our body and sustentation of our life, to have our
tables loded with a hundred diverse meats: al placed in vessels of silver and
gold? First this is certain, that if nature desire a measurable quantity of
meat for her sustenance; y^ which is taken more, is to the destroying and
corrupting both of nature and life, whereby it was well and truly spoken, that
many more are slain by gluttony, then by the sword.

And it is daily seen, that many of them, at whom the foolish commonaltie so
greatly wonder, in the end are paid home with a deserved punishment for their
ambitious gluttony: Some replenishing themselves with rhewmes, others gaining
to themselves the gout: other some wasting and consuming their liver, and
causing their sinews to shrink: others dying miserably long before their time.
It is manifest also, that with their sundry kinds of sauces they have brought
it so to pass, that nothing sauoureth of it self; and that they very seldom
eat with appetite, or delight. O how true is that notable sentence, and how
well proved at all times; That hunger is the best sauce of all others, which
makes all meats sauerie and delightful! The example of Darius is no less
true then common; who in his flight after a battle being wearied, and
drinking a quantity of muddy water, did swear, that in all his life time, he
never drank more pleasauntly: Behold therefore; the poor men are most rich of
those things, of which the rich (through their blind vnsatiablenes) are most
poor. Finally it is manifest, that this superfluous feeding is an example of
cruelty: First, against themselves, that use it: for because (as it is said)
many are diseased, many killed, and many brought to misery:) Next, against a
number of the poor, who (if it were well seen unto) might be relieved
temperately with that which these consume immoderately. How much better should
they do, and what more praise might they deserve, both of God and the world,
if (restraining their diet to an honest and temperat moderation) all that which
is vainly spent, were by them converted into some better use, either in
marrying some maids, or in giving exhibition to young men addicted to study,
or in using any other bountiful courtesy. Truly, I am not of opinion, that
for being rich they had need to eat more: neither that their wealth doubling
they should redouble their eating and drinking; and y^ they increasing these;
should increase more also. To proceed farther in the matter, I say what need
is there, for the keeping us from the rain, the wind, and the sun, to dwell
in sumptuous palaces, replenished with most costly ornaments, as though a
little cottage might not be sufficient to fence and defend us from such
impressions, in which also, for the most part, more rest and safety is found,
then in the other. What a fondness? yea, what a monstrous appetite was it of
Nero, when that of all the mount Celio and more, he made but one only house,
through which it was doubted, least that therein he would have swallowed up
all Rome: and he was not ashamed to say, that now he began to live, as was
convenient for men? It pleases me well, that sumptuous and stately buildinges
be seen in the world, not for any need and tranquillity of man, but for the
bewtifying, and setting out of Cities, and for the demonstration of the
wonderfulnes and excellency of arts. But he that is without them, so that
he have some cotage to cover himself therewith, ought not to be troubled for
not having of them.

What shall we say of the quiet bed for the wearied members? is it requisite
that it be adorned with gold and precious stones? as the lascivious Emperors
did often use to do in times past at Rome? or is it sufficient that it be of
leaves, as was used in the first world? though but homely, yet more natural?
True it is, that Laertes had in his house none other but one old woman, which
brought him his meat and drink, who slept commonly on the ground, on a
mattresse made of leaves. I will not here enter into the discourse, what is
pertinent to the use of man's life, where ambition and vanity is out of measure
augmented beyond that which the necessity of Nature does require; and with
this increasing, has brought unto mortal creatures many troubles, diverse
displeasures, and infinite vexations, springing only of a foolish, nay rather
frantike, and raging appetite of superfluity. Only thus much I say unto you,
that unto a wise man, who will not suffer himself to be carried away, with
false resemblances, or fained apparances, it suffices that he have wherewith
to defend himself from hunger and thirst; and from the cold and heat: so
that the Philosopher Epictetus, with a gallant similitude did say very well. As
the foot is the measure of the shoe: so the measure of having is the body of
the man it self; if thou desire to be stayed herein, a moderation must be
observed in thy desires, beyond the which if thou pass, thou must of
necessity run headlong into infinite inconveniences. And to bring this to
pass, I think it not necessary to have the substance of Craesus, or
Lucullus; but very few things may suffice for the attaining of it, in such
sort that almost every one may attain unto it with little difficulty, if they
would but bridle and restrain their desires within the limits of an honest
moderation.

Verily, when I way and ponder these things with my self, that divine
sentence of Seneca, seems unto me to be worthily spoken, who with a true
lesson warns us, saying, If ye have respect unto that, wherewith Nature is
suffised, ye shall never be poor: if ye look unto that which opinion
craves, ye shall never be rich. O most golden sentence, wherein the greatest
part of the travail and repose of man con^isteth! Who is he, that having
respect only to the necessities of Nature, can ever be poor? Again, who is he
y^ following the appetite of vain things, and the desire of superfluities that,
can ever be rich? This man possessing a bewtiful house^d sireth a village;
having obtained that, he would have a stock and furniture for them both: This
being granted, he craves great store of money for diverse uses, and
necessities; also this money being gotten, he has a desire to be Lord over
castles, and to have vassailes under him: having brought this also to pass, he
aspireth to be a Marquess, next a Duk, then a King, farther, an Emperor; and
in the end he would be Lord of all the world: yet this would not satisfy his
greedy appetite: for he would (with Alexander the great) be Lord of all the
worlds of Anaxagoras, in such sort, that he that possesses most, is farthest
from his end: for that greater riches engender greater desires. This cruel and
unmeasurable lust of having, is so great, and insatiable.

I would gladly learn when it may be said, that a man has sufficient; when
it may be said, that he is rich. Marcus Crassus was wont to say, that no man
was rich, unless with his yearly revenues he could keep and maintain an
army. What fondness? what insatiableness is this? Truly Aglaius Profidius did
not possess so much, but had only one little plot of ground, which he manured
with his own hands: never the less he was judged by the Oracle to be most
happy of all men. But shall I now declare unto you how many men in extreme
poverty have lived joyfully and contentedly, being had in estimation, and
honored greatly? My web should be ouerlong, if I should here recount them
all, but these shall suffice. Amonst the Grecians Aristides, Phocion,
Epaminondus, Pelopidus y^ Thebane, Lampsacus the Atheniensen, Socrates and
Efialtus were most poor, yet were they all wise and just men, and well
esteemed in the world. Also of the Latins there are many notable examples: but
this of Curious and Fabritius shall serve for all, of whom the one would rather
command him that possessed gold, then possess it himself: The other with a
bold courage refused many gifts that the Samnites did profer him. But whereof
sprange this temperaunce in them? Without doubt no other where, but that they
had clypped the wings to the desire of superfluous things. Of a troth this
distinction of the Philosophers is most true; that our appetite is of two
sorts; the one measured, and having end; the other infinite, and without end.
Al those that desire riches, only for the love that they bear unto them, have
never any end in their desires: but like him that has the dropsy, the more
they possess, ye more always they covet: but they that temperately search
after riches, not for mere love they bear toward them, but to employ them
to some necessary and determinate use, find some end, and repose in their
desires. For so much they ought and commonly do desire, as is needful for
that end and use, for which they did desire it.

But diverse entangle themselves, proposing hurtful and unprofitable ends, at
the least wise unnecessary. I therefore have made choice of one chiefly, being
both pure and natural: which is ye conservation of our selves, and those that
are begotten of us: all other ends are corrupt, full of pride and ambition,
and unnatural. O that it pleased God, that men might desire riches to no other
use, but for that only, which they indeed stand in need of. Doubtless, great
rumors, many lamentations, infinite sorrows should be quieted, which for the
want of these enticing riches, are daily made amongst men. But know ye
wherefore he is always pensive, why he seems continually to be poor, and
what the cause is, that he is never contented with his estate? shall I tell
you the only occasion hereof? it proceeds of no other cause, but that he
always looks before him, fixing his eye on him that is more rich, and more
mighty then himself, and either pricked forward by envy, or drawn unto it by
covetousness, he would not only reach and ariue unto the same, but also pass
farther: and they never look back, or cast their eyes on the poor, which are
(as it were) behind them, but rather hold them in a continual contempt: and
there are very few that can, or know how to moderate themselves, from these
intemperate disorders. Of a treath there are many (yea very many) that bitterly
complain of poverty: who, if the whole world were divided into equal parts,
would not have so much unto their shares, as they now possess. I verily
believe, that if all the men and women were placed on the one side, and all the
riches of the world on the other, and that his part were equally divided unto
every one (as it is said Lycurgus did in Sparta) it should come to pass, that
many that now cry out, of poverty, should apparently see, that they were over
rich, and had more then their parts. Amongst which number, I think my self
should be one, which now account my self to be poor, and so peradventure,
would you also: so that if ye respect this honest and measured end, it may be
that this your poverty will not make you seem to be so poor, as ye
esteemed your self to be, nor bring you so great affliction, finding it far
less then ye deemed it to be. But you will say peradventure (and I deny it
not) that there are a great many rich, which feel pleasure, contentment, and
honor by them: whereas I by my poverty receive sorrow, displeasure, and
shame. What complaints are those? Should thou despair, for not having that
which other men enjoy? Wherefore then do these rich men (which bring you in
this estate) despair, seeing others above them to be Dukes, Princes, Kings
and Emperors? Why do not many, that delight in eating and drinking hang
themselves, for not being able to drink so much as Trigungius did with the
Romans; or because they cannot devour a whole table of meat, as Catellactus
has done in our time? and to bring a more true and lively example, why are not
all men afflicted, and as it were brought into despair, because they have not
ye strength and force of a Lion; the sight of an Eagle; the swiftnes of a
Tiger; the senting of a Dog; the length of the life of a Heart, and in the
end, the flyeing of birds.

It is not needful to look to that which others have, but to that which is
convenient for our estates and callings. And herein (according to every man's
degree) to repose our chief contentment and felicity. But perhaps, you will
say that it is not requisite to make such an arithmeticall division of the
goods of Fortune, but rather that it were more convenient to make^ a
Geometrical, not according to the number, but the desert. It were well said.
But who shall judge of this desert?

This, doubtless is the head fountain and original of all errors. Every one
does deem, and judge better of himself then there is cause why.

Selfeloue does corrupt our judgment, and sedure our senses in such sort,
with false imaginations that it presents unto us, that in partial esteeming
of our selves, every one suffers himself pleasauntly to be deceived. Infinite
is the number of them, unto whom it seems, that they have deserved a great
deal more then they have: but there are very few of the other sort, that
think they have a great deal more then they have deserved: whereof grievous
perturbations, and continual lamentations, for the want of riches and
preferment, do afterward ensue. I know not then how in this general
discourse we should consider of the desartes of every one aright, through
which, all things might be brought into question and controversy.

It is a great deal better to ponder by this Arithmetical division, that the
greatest part of them, that complain of poverty, shall find themselves
deceived, if the world were divided into equal parts. But let us pass on
farther, if it please you; and let us set down, with what just measure riches
and poverty ought to be measured. Every one does love, honor, and reverence
riches, and covet after them. Every one holds poverty in contempt, despises
her, and flies from her. Know ye wherefore? For that every man only
respects the good, and commodity of riches, never forecasting the evils and
discommodities that they bring with them. Contrarily, every one looks unto the
evil, that is found to be in poverty, and there stays himself; but none
respects or has regard to the good, and commeditie that comes by her: so
that it is not to be wondered at, if (the eyes being opened to the good that
riches has in them, and shut to the evil) so many do praise and desire them.
Neither is it any marvel likewise, if (opening them to the evil that
poverty has in her, and shutting them to the good) every one despises, and
escheweth it. Know ye then whereof this proceeds? surely of none other cause,
but the first apparaunce. For that riches does present her self unto us,
which a gladsome and cheerful countenance, bringing with her a certain
counterfeit beauty, that does dasell our eyes, and lime our senses and
affections, with her enticement: in such sort, that we are drawn, and as it
were brought besides our selves, with these colored encha^tments, believe that
every thing of her is pleasant, bewtifull and good: And these shadows, and
feigned resemblances, wherewith she is set out unto us, will not permit us to
penetrate into the naughtiness, that she conceales within her, nor suffer us
to see the poison that lies hidden under her, through which that chances
oftentimes, which is spoken of the Marmaides, that (alluring with their sweet,
but deceaueable voices) men see not the great evil that lurketh under them,
and is prepared for them. On the other side, poverty presents her self unto
us with a filthy and horrible countenance, in such sort, that none would ever
surmise, that any good thing were contained within her* nevertheless, under il
favored counterfeites, most bewtifull figures, and wonderful works, both of
art and nature are oftentimes comprehended. But (as I said) these measures are
not just, neither can the troth ever be boulted out by them.

It is not sufficient of one thing to open only the good, concealing the
evil; and of another, to lay forth only the evil, not revealing the good:
and troth cannot possible be descerned from a doubtful matter, if a division
of the good and the evil that rests in either of them, be not first made
and sifted out, and the substance of the thing after considered of
accordingly. It being a most true and infallible principle, that all things
under the Sun, are (I know not in what sort) entermixed with good and evil,
so that nothing is neither wholly good, nor wholly evil: and now it may well
be said, that riches bringes with her much evil; and poverty contains in
her not a little good. Neither is it convenient that they, whose poverty is
great, should be left without an advocate, as we often see they are: but good
and just Princes should see their right granted them without any expense.
Behold again y^ riches puff men up with a certain vain kind of insolency, and
makes them become proud, and disdaineful, whereas poverty replenisheth them
with humility, and makes them humble and courteous: we see Pallantes the free
man of Clodius to be out of measure rich: we see him likewise to be passing
proud, in such sort, that in a long season, he would not vouchsafe to speak
to any of his servants: we see Fabritius to be most poor, we see him
therewith, very lowly and pleasant. But one example may suffice for a
thousand, for we may daily read, hear, and see them. This first Dowry
therefore is to be detested, that riches brings with her, in that it makes men
proud and insolent; as that of poverty is to be beloved, in that it makes men
humble and courteous. Riches make not men only to be puffed up with pride, but
also drowneth them in diverse kinds of voluptuous naughtiness, for it makes
them lascivious, vain, given to gluttony, always occupied in earthly
delights, and wallowing in worldly wantonness, and filth of the flesh: for
that being possessors of great riches, they deem it a privilege, and reckon it
in place of great game, that by the means of them they may feed their
superfluous appetites and disordinate affections. Whereas the poor
acknowledging his estate, for the most part lives sparingly and temperatelie,
not so greatly corrupted, nor defiled with vain and worldly allurements. That
Plutarcke said very well, tearming poverty to be an abundant temperance, and
a strict observance of the Laws, in such sort that Arcesilaus was accustomed
to say, that poverty was sharp after the manner of craggie Ithaca, but yet
brought forth good sons, teaching them to abstain and suffer, and making
them frugal, concluding that it was a notable schoolehouse and open wrestling
place for all virtue. What shall I say more? Riches make men become dispisers of
God, at the leastwise little acknowledging his power, and bounty. For the rich
man seeing himself to abound in wealth, and increase in substance, seems in
his own conceit not to stand in need of any other assistance, wherefore he
very seldom has recourse unto God, and seldom prays unto him, or is
thankful for his benefits: but as it were, depends of himself only,
swelling and wondering at his own wisdom, and (as one might say) playing the
Peacock in his felicity. Whereas the poor man confessing his imbecility,
runs unto God for refuge; and acknowledging his bounty, co^mits himself
wholly to his custody, lauding and praising his name, and calling him to his
aid and assistance. But riches do not only corrupt the will; but together
therewith, are a hinderance, and impediment to the understanding: for these
(for the most part) accounting it enough to be rich, seldom or never give
their minds, to good and laudable studies; or noble and high contemplations,
either of philosophy, or of any other science: but rather addict their whole
endeavors, either to some vayn and frivolous pastimes* or to the increase of
their riches. Whereof it comes to pass, that the true and right end of science
is changed into a false, and counterfayte. For that the right use to learn
science in deed, is, for the more, and better perfecting and ennobling the
mind of man: But the common sort, wrest it clean contrary, accounting the
acquiring of substance, to be the only end of the learning of Science.
Through which the rich man weaues the web of his own woe, saying in
himself; what cause is there, that I should travel my self in study? if I
be already rich, I am come to the end; what need is it then that I have
recourse, either to the beginning or midst. But the poor man, moved either
with the right or wrong way, with great desire and fervent affection follows
his study: Through which it has been seen, and is seen daily that many
poor men by learning, attain unto great excellency, promotion, and
preferment. So that Taletus the noble Philosopher said very well; who so
affirms (quoth he) that poverty withdraws a man from Philosophy, and riches
inflame him with the desire of it, is deceived greatly. O God, how many do we
see, hindered rather by abundance of substance, then by scarcity? is it not
evident that the poor (for the most part) give themselves to study? that the
rich busied in other affairs, either cannot, or will not follow their
learning? So much of Taletus. But let us proceed farther. Who sees not that
the rich men with great difficulty come to the knowledge of the troth? having
always about them a company of feigned friends: and swarm of flatterers? Many
examples might here be alleged of rich men that have bin abused by such
dissemblers; whereas y^ poor man is free from this plague? none going about to
circumue^t him by flattery, it being a thing most manifest, that they that
profess to be his friends are true friends, it being far from any suspicion,
that they should come to flatter him, or fayn to be his friends, to the end, to
pluck his wealth and substance from him, who stands more in need to be
relieved himself, then to give to others. What shall I here speak of the snares
that are intended against the rich: both toward their substance and persons?
It were better for the beast called the Castor, that he had not those virtuous
stones, when as for them he is so pursued of the hunters; it should be better
also for men y^ they had not these riches, when as so many snares and deceits
are laid by other men for the getting of them. But even as the Castor (as some
write of him) seeing the hunters pursue him, bytes of his stones, for the
sauegard of the rest of his body: so should that rich man do, which sees
himself besieged with snares, and counter watches for his substance, and rather
to choose to cast al away, then not to be assured of his life, and liberty.
That deed therefore of Crates the Philosopher was worth the noting: who seeing
himself encombred, and his estate endangered, through a great quantity of
jewels, and money y^ he had, threw all into the Sea: saying, I had rather
drown you, then ye should cause me to perish or be destroyed. Great are the
number of the rich men with are iniuried and pursued of the mighty, to the end to
procure their substance from them. Wherefore was he that was banished at the
instant request of Fuluia so hardly dealt with, but that Fuluia would have had
his fair house from him? The books of histories both old and new are
replenished with examples of them, with makes me in opinion to be contrary to
Anacarsus. He said, y^ the laws were like the spiders web, into with if any
light or small thing fell, it there remained, but being great, it passes
through, and brake it asunder. Contrariwise, I say that they are like unto ye
nets of hunters, into the which if any little beast happen, he presently
passes through the meshes, the nets not being made to that end: but if any
good beast enter therein, as a hare, a goat, or a Dear, he sticks fast, and
is taken, being both good and profitable for the hunters. Verily the covetous
rich man lives continually in great suspicion and fear, least that his
substance be taken from him; or that he be beguiled of it, or forced to depart
with it against his will; so that every shadow seems a Bugbeare unto him;
every little stirring in the house disquieteth him: so that both at home in his
chamber, and abroad in his journey, he is never without suspicion, not unlike
the man that is ielous of some woman whom he loves. Whereas the poor man, not
having his breast loaded with such fear; and feeling himself to be light in
his journey, stands not in doubt to be robbed: As that common verse says,

The man, that traveling by the way
no wealth with him does bear,
Amids the troops of thieves may sing,
not having cause of fear.
AND doubtless if it be well considered of, the poor man has but one care,
which is, to procure a little sustenance wherewith to live, but the rich man
has three thoughts and cares together. The one to conserve the riches that he
has: the other how to increase them: the third how to dispose the^: through
which it comes to pass, that the poor man is replenished with greater hope
then fear; and of the other part, the rich man is assailed more with fear,
then hope. He always hops to change his poor estate and miserable fortune
into the better, being already placed in the lowest degree that Defilus said
w^ll.

The man that is most poor,
most happy is of all;
For that he never fears
in worse estate to fall.
This always doubts least that his sweet will be transformed into sower,
through which it is evident, that the poor feels a greater tranquillity in
his mind, being replenished with hope, then does the rich being surprised
with fear. What farther? That poverty brings forth more worthy effects
then riches, not only in it self, but in others also. For poverty rayseth
pity and compassion in others which are most beautiful virtues in man's mind,
but riches inflame and stir them up to envy, which is a most wicked vice.
Wherefore if good effects come of good causes, and nanghtie of naughty
causes, it is very likely that poverty is more virtuous that ingendereth
virtue, then are riches, that produce vices in others. What more shall I say,
that riches procure delights, delights tenderness and delicasie of the body,
tenderness and delicasie causes weakness and faintness, through which it
happens that rich men are less able to tolerate travel, heat and cold,
and other human discommodities, then the poor are, who by a patience
perforce, are taught to endure all labor and travel, and every little
impression of the air, neither are brought down with every little trifling
disease, as the rich are. What farther? Riches engender faintness of courage,
in the possessors of them, in that for fear of abandoning of them; they will
not adventure to hazard them selves in any danger, neither for their friends,
nor for their kindred, nor country, neither yet for themselves, but are always
of a timorous and fearful mind. But the poor man not drawn back with the
ielosie of this worldly pelf, shows his valor boldly, and courageously
exposes himself to perils and dangers for the love of his friends, and
country. What besides this? Abundant riches make men sluggish, not suffering
them to awake to any good exercise; whereas poverty seldom permits them to stand
drowsy and idle, but awakens them to beautiful inventions, and laudable
travels. But let us consider one point that touches rich men to the quick,
but the poor nothing so much. All men both by the law of God and nature, of
necessity must once die. But he that aboundes in riches, with what grief and
torment does he depart this life? he would not leave his fair house, his
gallant village, his costly apparel; his brave horses, his bright silver: his
glittering gold, and other infinite commodities, and delights that he tastes
in this world: which seeing that he must needs forgo, he is out of measure
vexed, and through inward grief killes himself, before the hour of his death
approach. But the poor man, who takes little joy in this world, makes no great
reckoning to leave it, not tasting that bitter sorrow, with dying, which the
rich men feel: hoping to enjoy a better life in the world to come. The poor
also in this world have great consolation: and it is no small comfort unto them,
to think that the rich (will they, nil they) must die, and that they are forced
(in spite of their teeth) to forgo al their substance. Neither will we omit to
say, that sometimes honest poverty brings with it more liberty and contentment
of life, then unmeasurable riches: for that is frank and free, and this is
tied and bound, to respects, and suspicions. So that now we perceive, that al
is not pleasant, and delightful that is found in riches, nor al unsavory, and
bitter that is tried in poverty, but in this, much of the sweet; and in the
other not a little of the sour: in both seen, felt, and tasted. Now let us
proceed a little farther. And (if ye think it good) let it be granted, that
poverty is evil and contemptuous, and has in it no consolation (but truly it
has in it all these comforts, of which we have before made mention, which
being well tasted of the poor man, he shall feel no little contentment in
his poverty) let this be considered farther, that he is not only poor: and
that this evil is not taken from all others, and cast on him alone: but the
number of the poor are innumerable, when as of the rich there are very few:
Through which, if to have company in ones adversity, make the evil to seems
the less, how light should the evil of poverty be, the poor man having so
great a number of other poor men to associate him? Let us consider farther
that poverty does not always pinche, but only then, when he feels the
want of some thing that he greatly needs. It is not like a quotidian Agewe,
which whiles it endures, always vexes and tormenteth a man; but this yeeldes
the rest and repose, first whilst thou sleep, thou have no feeling of her:
whereof this ancient Proverb took his original; That in one half of their
life, there was no difference betwixt the happy, and unfortunate.

Further, many hours of the day, a man thinks not of it: but lives joyfully,
as if he were rich, and in good case. I have seen many poor men, lead their
lives so iocundly, as did never king nor Emperor. On the other side, I have
known many rich men, have their minds always troubled and disquieted, as if
they were wrapped in extreme want, and misery: never to laugh, never to be
gladsome, nor joyful, whereby I have noted, that the true tranquillity of the
mind springs not of things that are without us, but of that delectable
music, and well tempered harmony, of the humayne affections that are within
us. Let us farther consider how that poverty is a thing that may be taken
from us in a day, in an hour, and as it were, in a moment. It is not as too
be blind, lame, foolish, or maimed, or a calamity whereof no hope remains
ever to be cured; but poverty may sodaynlie be taken away: either by the
benevolence of thy prince, or some noble man, or by the means of some wealthy
friend, who moved by some favorable motion, will advance thee too riches.

Abdolomenus was most poor, Alexander the great had a desire to make him king,
and it was done presently. Heere-vpon Menander said well, that of all evils,
poverty was the lightest, for that any friend that will assist thee, may unload
thee of it. On the other side, riches are frail, and fugitive, when as a man
in a moment may be bereft of all. (O God) how many have we our selves seen,
either by spoiling on the land, or by drowning their ships on the Sea, or by
confiscation of their goods, or through the displeasure of the Prince, of most
rich, on the sudden to become most poor. Let us farther consider that the
poor man is nearer the attayning of his end, then is the rich: Forasmuch as
he does not ordinarily desire more then wherewith to supply his necessities,
which (as has been showed before) are few, and may easily be remedied. But the
rich man, swelling through the pride of his substance, has his natural, and
reasonable appetite corrupted, and desires to increase infinitely in his
riches, whereby it may be seen, that he is farther from his end, then the
poor man. What more? That the rich man increasing in wealth, increases also
in desires, and by how much his riches are the greater, so much the greater
also are his needs. Whereof this sentence was wisely spoken. Necesse est eum
multis indigere, qui multa habeat: He that has many things, must of necessity
want many things. Let it be considered farther that man is borne naked, and
has that which he possesses of the mere grace of God, in such sort, that if
he will rightly esteem every thing: he ought not to be pensive and sorrowful
for that he has not, but ought rather to render immortal thanks unto GOD,
for that which he has. Finally, let this be wayde, that if poverty be
evil, it is very short, let it endure as long as it can; for all the time we
have to live here, being compared with the infinite eternity that endures
everlastingly, is but as it were the twinkling of an eye.

But I greatly marvel, that man, knowing how he must die, and sometimes
thinking thereof, does not take comfort of his poverty, and (as it were) of
every other evil that he suffers: For that, either he believes that our
soul is immortal (as we ought true and resolutely to believe) or thinks (as
some naughty and perverse people do) that she shall die together with the
body. If he deem it to be immortal, and sees infinite rewards in an other
world, set down for the good, and everlasting torments for the wicked, who
is he (as one might say) that would not little set by all the evil and good
of this world, to gain the felicity of the other. But if he now think the
soul to be mortal, how can poverty afflict him, if he consider of the
entire destruction of himself? But if he resolve of neither of these, it is
an evil of al others most to be detested. Hyppocrates in his divine Oracles,
says, that when two evils afflict one place, of which the one is great, and
the other very little, the lesser is not felt. If then poverty, in comparison
of the entire destruction of himself be a light evil: how should it so pinch
and torment them? But as it is most requisite, let us be Christians, and
affirm not only the immortality of the soul, but unfeignedly believe the
infallible law of Jesus Christ, revealed unto us by the light of his grace,
taught us by the divine scriptures, confirmed by the testimony of so many
Martyrs, showed by so many lights of divine understandings, approved by the
universal law of God, by which we are guided through this sea of faith. Let
us I say, be Christians, and then we ought not to account poverty to be
evil, but deem it rather to be a true imitation of Christ, who whiles he
remained in this world, lived always poorly, and meekely. But besides this
imitation, the commandments that the eternal verity has left us, to do in
many places, teach it us, which if I should here set it down at large, I
greatly fear, that in steed of a comforting friend, ye would think me to
be a tedious preacher. I will only rehearse unto you his wonderful and divine
philosophy, when as he says; I say unto you, Be ye not careful what to
eat, nor wherewith to cloth your selves. Is not the soul of more value then
meat? and the body, then raiment? Behold the little fowls of the air, who
sow not, neither reap, nor gather into their barnes, and yet our heavenly
father feeds them al. Are not you of more account then they? which of you is
there, that with all your thought can ad one cubyt to your stature? Why are you
so careful for apparel? consider the Lyllies of the field in what sort they
grow, they work not, they spinne not, and yet I say unto you, that Solomon in
all his royalty was not clothed like unto one of these. And if God cloth the
grass of the field, which too day is seen, and too morrow is thrown into the
furnace, how much rather will he cloth you, O ye of little faith? wherefore
be not troubled in your selves, saying, What shall we ^at, or, what shall we
drink, and wherewith shall we be clothed? These thoughts are of the
heathen, and not of Christians. Your heavenly father knows well, what ye
need. Seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all other
things that ye stand in need of shall be given unto you. Be ye not careful
what to eat tomorow: but let too morrow care for it self. Sufficient is unto
the day, the travail thereof. O most divine Philosophy, which, if it were well
tasted of men, and not lightly passed over, no man would ever be grieved or
afflicted with poverty. But we, (for the most part) have not any fervent
desire to enter to the quick, in the searching out the troth of things,
through which it comes to pass, that we seldom, or never understand aright.
It is not needful to lay up treasure here on earth, where rust and moathes
do consume; but in heaven, where neither rust nor moathes do consume, nor
thieves break in and steal. And if we consider farther, how hard it is for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven, there is none of so little
understanding, but will despise and abhor riches: not, but that rich men may be
saved: but for that ye most part of them have their minds so encumbred with
riches, y^ it is very hard for them to attain salvation: and therefore Christ
said, it is less easy for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven,
the^ for a Camel to pass through the eye of a needle. For he whose affection
is greedily set on riches, seldom thinks reverently of God, but so fixes his
desire on earthly things, yt he makes himself unworthy of the glory of heaven,
preferring mundane vanity, before Gods verity. Whereas Christ teaching
christian perfection, says otherwise, to the Hebrew young man: Go, and sell
that which thou have, and give it to the poor, and after follow me. Truly
poverty is a dowry most convenient for a Christian: Therefore, when ye know
your selves to be poor, be ye not comfortless: but rather think that ye
are the more in Gods favor, who in all his sayings, and doings, recommended the
poor, praised them, called them blessed, and received them into his
protection, being dear and beloved of him: so that it is a most goodly thing
to live poorly, in this short and transitory life; to become most rich in the
life to come, which shall be permane^t and everlasting: to set at naught the
false and deceaueable Jewels of this world; to gain most plentiful and
abundant treasure in paradise. O most worthy merchandise! O most plentiful
gain! which neither thieves can rob thee of; nor servant beguile thee; nor
debtor deceive thee: but will fill and replenish thee with far greater, and
better fruit, then by the tongue of man may be expressed. What shall I say
farther? that those things are few, and very easy to be procured, with which
our humane nature is suffised: but many and infinite, which our appetite
desires.

And that the grace of God is never wanting unto those, who filled with a
fervent spirit, refrain their earthly affections, and restrain them within
the limits of Christian temperaunce. Whereof Saint Paul writing unto Timothy
most diuinly said, It is a great gain of godliness, to be contented with y^
which is sufficient. We brought nothing into this world, and it is manifest,
that we shall carry nothing hence with us. But having convenient food and
apparel, let us content our selves therewith: for they that would become rich,
fall into the snares, and temptations of the devil, and into sundry hurtful
and unprofitable desires, which drown the^ in ruin and perdition: for that
covetousness is y^ root of al evil: which diverse falling into, stray from the
true faith, and are encombred with many ears and sorrows. O words worthy to
pearce into the lively hearts of men, and so there to be grounded and graven,
that with no earthly force, they might ever be rased out.

The divine words of Paul being thoroughly considered of, there is no cause
wherefore poor men should be pensive or sorrowful. But wherefore wade I
farther in the comforting of them; when as it is impossible for me to say so
much, but that much more will remain unspoken? And I am assured, I have
scarsly launched out from the shore, and am far from being half entered from
this most profound, and large sea. And yet, herewith I know assuredly, that the
least part of that, which has been said, is sufficient for the quieting and
co^forting of any mind, that is not become either beastly, or furious with the
prickings, or pinchings that poverty may bring unto him: so that, if those
things, which I have said, and many other that I could allege, do not
moderate and pacify him, believe me, poverty is not the cause hereof: but
this distemperate, and ill composed mind, which also would have molested him,
if he had been rich. For he would have found out some other arrow, or sword
wherewith to have through pierced his heart. You then, who have your mind
stored with so many good lessons of Philosophy, comfort your self, and take
all things that God sendes, in good part; hope in him, who never fails nor
deceaueth them, that put their trust in him. He will open you the way, and
minister the mean, whereby to cure these wounds of pouerrie; at the least he
will teach you, how to bear them with patience: and peradventure also will
give you manifestly to understand that it is for your health and consolation.
Comfort your self, in that although ye want riches, yet want ye not y^ true
knowledge, and beauty of wit and understanding, and virtues of the mind, which
things are more appertinent and proper unto you, then are riches; which are
placed among the external things, and are no part of you; and so much the more
comfort your self, by how much the gifts of your mind cannot be taken from
you, neither by men, nor fortune; but of your riches and worldly substance,
thieves may spoil you in a moment. Comfort your self, in y^ ye have many
good friends, which love you entyrely, who will never endure to see you long
in poor estate. But rather after the manner of true and steadfast friends, will
account your poverty to be their own, and with some part of their substance,
will take it from you: comfort your self, with your books, which ye were
always accustomed to hold in great estimation; they will feed and nourish
your understanding, and with singular declectation, always recreate your
senses: they will pacify every stormy and troublesome tempest; and both by
night and by day; within doors, and witho^t; in good fortune and bad, will
remain your most faithful friends, and comfortable companions.

Finally, comfort your self, in that, if poverty be evil, yet have ye not
this evil by your own offense, or procuremen, not by dicing and carding, nor
by haunting the tauern; not by playing the harlot, nor by any other sort of
lewd life, or naughty behavior: but in every action your usage has been
honest, and temperate; your mind being no less adorned with lawdable
customs, and conditions, then learning. Ye are then fallen into this
necessity, by the offense of Fortune, who (as it is not unknown to the most
part of Rome) being envious at the good course that ye have taken, has many
years sithence wounded your body, and brought you into a miserable and
dangerous estat, oftentimes even to death; has also settled and let you
back, from all good enterprises and operatio^s both of body and mind; and in
this her rage has caused you to make far greater expense, then your ability
will reach unto; in such sort, that ye are now brought into that miserable
estate, in which ye now are, only by her sinister procurement: so that if
with her great outrage, there were not joined an arrogant impudency, she
would not for very shame of her self be seen any more in the world. But
besides these consolations, let reason and necessity move you; ye afflict your
self; what does this affliction avail you? is your poverty taken away by
making of so great sorrow as ye do? if it were so, it were a very good
remedy. But, alas, she is not yet departed, but remains as at the first, or
rather greater; and this incessant sorowing does not only profit, but rather
endomage you greatly. Adding to the first evil, the most grievous evil of
affliction; whereof Plato in his books of a Common wealth, said most divinely,
That it was the best thing that could be in calamity, to take it so patiently
and to be contented therewith as we possibly can: in ye first it is uncertain,
whether the thing, for which we lament, be good or evil. Farther, the being
sorrowful, does not in any thing remedy that which is happened: besides that,
no human thing should be of such estimation, that it should move a man to
dwell in anguish for it.

What more? that grief and sorrow are a hinderaunce to those remedies which
might speedily have been taken. Most true and worthy are those reasons of
Plato, which if they were well wayed, and duly considered of, who is there
that ever would afflict himself for any worldly calamite? Truly such sorowing
is forbidden to all: but to the learned and virtuous, much more: whereof
Fauorinus said most wisely, that a man of bold courage, trained up in the
golden precepts of true Philosophy, should have tranquillity of mind, shut up
and settled in his breast, before any ill hap light upon him: which is no more to
say, but y^ a wise man should have a strong Armor in a readiness, wherewith to
defend himself against every stroke and assault of fortune. But what mean I
to go forwards to speak vainly as a Philosopher, having already reasoned
with you as a Christian? The largnes of the matter does carry me away; and the
great affection that I bear you, does prick me forward, neither can I well
set down, which of these two are greater. Therefore, unless I would always
speak, it is needeful that I make an end of speaking. It was an easy thing,
to enter into the deep sea of this argument, but uneasy to get forth.
Wherefore I must do here, as Alexander the great did by Gordianus his knot,
who being unable to undo it, did cut it in sunder with his sword. Now although
poverty have not all that dowries of me, which God and Nature has endewed
her with: yet have I bestowed so many on her, that she may every way go richely
to her husband. Ye ought not to fear of being any more poor, she bringing
so wealthy a dowry to your house: neither need ye to stand in doubt of
having many riualles, to contend for her, as Eurimacus, and Antinous, with
other woers did for Penelope, for that poverty (as Xenophon in the person of
Socrates says very well) amongst other her virtues, has this privilege: that
she provoke not men, to brawle and fight, and to deceive and seek one an
others death for the having of her, as it often comes to pass, for the
attaining of riches, honor or kingdoms: for although she be not locked up,
nor guarded, she conserues and keeps her self, and that which is most to be
esteemed, she is so modest and chaste, that none in the house where she
dwells, will be ielous of her. See then whether she be honest, or deserve
to be had in reputation, or no.

But know ye not why she remaies without a husband? It is not for want of any
goodness, or beauty, being endued plentifully with either of them: But because
every one does stain and defile her; every one holds her in contempt, filling
her with filthiness, and most spiteful pollutinges, in such sort, that her
true and native beauty cannot be seen. But if any man would lovingly bring
her to his house, and purify and wash her, adorning her with her true and
proper ornaments, no doubt she would appear most gallant and bewtifull: and
it will then evidently be seen, how vile and contemptible riches are in
comparison of her. Behold almost, I cannot end, and yet I will end. Fare ye
well: and repose your confidence in God, who is the true and bountiful
dispenser of all good things.

An answer of Master Clodius Ptholomoeus, to a Letter sent him by a friend,
that meruelled wherefore he having such learning, remained in so mean and
base an estate of calling.
IN the last Letter that I received from you, great was the wonder and
complaint that ye brought in against me, which considering that it springs
altogether of the over great affection that ye bear toward me, I neither
marvel at it, nor am sorry for it.

This avouches that to be true, which is spoken by Plato, That the lover is
often blinded in the thing beloved: I account my self deeply indebted to your
courtesy, for this your affection: but therwithall I wish your judgment to be
somewhat more temperate: for I would not that contrary effects should meet in
me at one instant, feeling pleasure of the love y^ ye bear me, and
displeasure of your judgment. I pray you therefore better to consider of this
point following, and after pronounce such judgment of me, as ye shall
think requisite.

That as an ancient cauiller did appeal from Caesar being moved and angry,
to Caesar being not moved nor angry; so I at this present appeal from you
being carried away with over great affection, to your self having Reason for
your gouernesse. Ye do not a little marvel that I, in so long a time have not
lept to any degree of honor or fortune. It seeming unto you that my lineage, my
country, my age, my studies, my customs, my long aboade in the court, my
favor acquired with men of high calling, and finally, my present noble and
honorable service, should have advanced me; yea and farther that many other are
daily to be seen in the court, endued with qualities far inferior to mine,
to leap suddenly to degrees of preferment; and that I was accursed, and that it
was a shame for me, to remain thus always in base fortune, and private
condition. And in the end (as a disdaynful friend) ye conclude, that this
cannot come to pass, but of an extreme soft spritednesse in me, in that I
help not forward my fortune as I should, putting me in mind of that ancient
sentence of the Spartans, that in calling for aid of God, it is necessary that
we set to our own helping hands, as the instruments of God. Truly I know not
with what beginning it were best to answer this your long marvel, and
tedious complaynt. And being desirous to do you a pleasur, eit came in my
mind once, to grant you that which you affirm to be true; thinking at one
instaunt, to ease my self of labor in answearing, and you of annoy, in
reading this my troublesome reply. But I should err in performing the duty
that is convenient to a true friend, if either to flatter you, or to avoid
labor; I should not apparently tell you that which I think.

First, I know not whether this greatness of fortune y^ ye wish me, be a
thing that brings felicity to a man yea or no, or whether it take it from
him. For y^ as the most wise and ancient sages have set down vntovs) there is
no man that perfectly knows what is good or evil unto him in this world.
Whereupon Socrates would not that any particular thing should be craved at Gods
hands, but that only, which is good. And when I look well about me, I find
not in them that are advanced to high degrees, any tranquillity of mind, but
rather as their dignity, and greatness augmenteth, so increase they likewise in
greater perturbations and frettings of the mind. For it seldom or never comes
to pass otherwise, but that with the abundance of the gifts of fortune;
ambition, and greater desire of honor and riches increase. Through which the
oracle did not judge any king to be happy, although he were most rich, and
mighty; but rather Aglaius Psofidius, who manuring a little piece of ground
that he had, and taking care of nothing, with great joy and contentment, lived
a most happy and fortunate life. Those that persist infinitely in the desire
of riches, may be compared unto them which in old time ran to a mighty great
mountain, with dogs, nets, and other engines with purpose to have taken the
moon, which they verily thought to have done; but they that first (with great
travel and labor) arrived to the top of this huge hill, found themselves so
far distant, and no less out of hope, then those with were climed up but to ye
side of it, or those others, who removed not from the valley. Tranquillity does
not spring of those things that are without us, but of the harmony of a
temperate mind within, which does truly create felicity in us, and is the
cause thereof. For even as some great pillar placed in the bottom of a deep
well, is nevertheless great; and a Dwarf placed on the top of some steeple,
is always little: so the free and noble mind wrapped in basest fortune, will
show his magnanimity, and the base mind in the highest degree of dignity will
discover his vility. I speak not this now as concerning Christian perfection,
for ye know that making mention hereof, it shall not be needful to enter into
question; when as neither riches, nor honor bring happiness unto men, but rather
y^ one and the other are oftentimes the occasions of bringing them into
extreme misery, and cause the gate of heaven to be shut up against them. For
the true and only felicity of a Christian, is the grace of God, and no other
thing. I speak then as a gentleman governed by humane reason and civil orders,
living betwixt the law of men and nature. He verily, which sees not how that
honor and riches deprive men of felicity, it is manifest and apparent, that he
has his eyes blinded and darkened with the smoke of ambition and clouds of
covetousness, which are the two beasts, compared by the Poet Dante, to a Lion,
and a she woolfe, which let and hinder us from leaping to the mount of
felicity. I deny not, but that riches and dignity may help toward the
contentment of the mind. In this point I will be a Peripatetike, and purpose
not to defend as a Stoike, that only virtue suffices. Let it be so, that
riches and dignity are requisite toward the acco^plishment of felicity: should
it the^ have no end? Behold Abdolomenus borne of the stock royal lived in
passing tranquillity, in a little farm, tilled, and sowed with his own hands,
in such sort that he never heard of the bruit and rumors of the army of
Alexander the great, which had driven all Asia into a maze and astonishment. He
tasted far greater felicity in this his poor calling, then when afterward
by Ephestion he was advanced to the title of the kingdom. Of whom being
demanded how he could with patience brook that poor and abject estate, with
a hawty and coragious mind, answered him, saying; O that I knew so well (if it
pleased God) how to support the troubles, and weightines of the kingdom.
Dioclesian a most prudent and puisant Emperor, having wayed and considered of
the annoyes, and encombrances that bearing rule, brought with it, returning to
a private life, gave it over; and at Salon a manor of his, he planted herbs
and trees with his own hands, neither could he ever be allured by any
persuasion, nor removed by any occasion, from this his fixed and determinat
resolution, preferring ye quiet tra^quility of this private life, before ye
troublesome turmoyles of principalities, and Empires. The like we read of ye
emperor Adria^, a most puisant captain, who by great travel and intercession,
obtained license in the end of his days, to dwell in a little village of his,
where he lived 7. years in great ease and quiet. Who dying, left an apparent
testimony, that the life led in honor and dignity, was not the true life. For
he caused these words to be graued on his toombe: Here lies the wight whose
age is of many years, but he lived but only seven. I could here bring to
your memory, with how many hatred and enimities the worldly promotions are
environed, so that nothing is sure in them, nothing without suspect, in such
sort that the Poet Pindarus said that the Gods with one good had always
entermixed two euilles. And I dare boldly aduouch that in these smokes, and
vain pompes, for every one contentment, ye are attached with ten
displeasures. But ye know well that this place being of the philosophers most
largely entreated of, is of many men not understood, of othersome despised, of
very few believed, and almost of none followed. But for the better manifesting
of both our intents) I will come nearer unto you. Be it so that riches and
honor are full of these felicities, that are commonly believed to be in them,
by them that praise them, and hold them in reverent admiration. What of this?
is it of necessity that it must be good for others also? The natures,
instincts, desires, and motions are not equal and alike in all men: either by
the influxion of the stars, or the variety of temperaments, or diversity of
educations, many things delight and recreate some one mind, which work
contrary effects in another: And for those things that Hirachtus wept
bitterly, Democrates laughed joyfully. Then is it not greatly to be woondred
at, if those things which are comfortable, and nutritive unto other men's
minds, seem noisome and bitter unto me? How many are there that abhor wine,
a most healthful and precious liquor? and how many are there that cannot savor
roses, being flowers most delectable? Ought these therefore to be reproved,
and made to drink wine, and smell roses by force? And why may I not say y^ unto
you by the law of nature, which Alexauder the great did to Parmenio by reason
of his fortune? Who propounding a condition of peace unto Darius, and profering
him a part of his kingdom, demanded Parmenio his advice and judgment
herein. Who answered, saying, if I were Alexander, I would do it. So would
I, answered Alexander, if I were Parmenio. So whereas in your letter ye say,
if that you were my self, you would do it, and say it: I likewise reply and
answer you that I should peradventure both say it, and do it, if I were you.
But as Alexander esteemed it a discredit to his fortune to consent to such a
peace; so I account it inconvenient for my disposition, and nature, to enter,
and encomber my self with that care and bondage, which ye depaint out unto
me, whiles ye allure me thereunto with the enticing baits of honor and riches:
yet I would ye should understand, that I have not a mind so backewarde and
dull, but that I take comfort of those things, that other men commonly delight
in. Let it be granted, that it is good for me to be advanced to riches and
dignity: does it follow that I should be despised or blamed, or despair, and
think the worse of my self, if I reach not to that preferment, which might
be desired, or hoped for? What woonderings? what complaints are these of
yours? as though ye were ignorant, that many things are desired, that are not
obtained; much hoped for, that is not inioyed; many more run, then get the
goal: and finally far greater are the number of them that shoot at a mark,
then those which strike it? May not all this happen of the malignity of my
fortune, which will not permit or suffer me, to be lifted up from the ground or
advanced? if it be so, is ye fault mine? Of a truth diverse Astrologers, by the
view of the day of my nativity, have found out by their rules and obseruances
that most unlucky condition, unto which I am predestinate, y^ is to say,
continual feeblenes and baseness of fortune; And although I am Didimus in y^
they say, and an heretic in their science (as I have often told you here in
Rome) nevertheless, in this unlucky forewarning I have over well known, and
found by experience, y^ they have told me the troth. Yet will I not lay the
blame hereof upon fortune, as on a dumb image that cannot answer to the
accusations that are brought in against her, let it be granted that the
chiefest part of human proceedinges, are directed by man's wisdom, and let
him be (as the wiseman affirms) the framer of his own fortune. What should I
then do? with what instruments (I pray you) would you have me to frame and
fashion this my good hap? with remaining long in Rome, and looking for
occasions? it is now twenty and five years sithence I came first into this
court, and I think that in this long season, I was never three miles distant,
and yet neither have I any good or fortunate success by my service, neither
stand in hope of any. Yet have I been a continual waiter, and was never
almost at liberty, whereof it greatly repents me: not for that the service of
noble men little liked me: but rather because ye iniquity of fortune has (by
my long courting) brought me into such a miserable servitude and slavery, that
no good resolution of mind can enter into me. I have heertofore done too much,
but I tell you that hereafter, neither will I, nor can I, neither is it
convenient that I do it, this is a practice for young men, and not of old men,
amongst which number I now reckon my self. Young men abound in leisure, and
travel seems not tedious unto them, which wants in old men, unto whom
every little coffeehouse is a torment. And as gracious and seemly as it is
to see a young man attendant on some noble man: so unseemly and ridiculous is
it, to see an old man.

Truly the long loss of time that is spent in courting, is to me very
noyso^: and chiefly in that I stand there, as an image or painted table. And
rather would I employ it either in reasoning, with my friends or in learning,
amongst my books, or in pleasuring or profiting others, by my studies; and this
is a laudable means, whereby to mount to those degrees of dignity that ye
propound unto me. But alas, if y^ nature has given me small wit, not over great
memory, weak judgment (and y^ which more greeueth me) vnhealthfulnes of
stomach; sorenes of eyes and every other part of my body il affected, what can
I do here in? it might here unto be added, that at this present I am tossed
with such sundry mishaps, that they never permit me quietly to incline my mind
to study. Whereof ye desire only is left me, my forces being insufficient any
longer to undertake any such travel. Wherefore if I do not and cannot ariue
unto this praise, let the torment and anoy (I pray you) that I taste and suffer
in being deprived of that sweet consolation, which study bringes with it,
suffice, without adding new griefs unto me, of the privation of my deserts;
what I knew to do, I have done, no more could I do.

And I assure my self, that although for learning I can challenge no
commendation, yet am I not unworthy of some excuse, in that I have always
taken a singular delight, to see these things in other, y^ I find wanting in my
self; I have loved, reverenced, and as it were, adored them. Neither did I
ever account any more worthy of the titles of honor and dignity, then those
which have lifted up their understandings to beautiful contemplations, through
which their minds are replenished with virtuous wisdom. And I have put such
betwixt these men and others, as is betwixt the living, and things painted.

But you will peradventure, dema^d me whether I mean it of those that are
virtuous indeed, or of such as counterfaite a certain outward hypocritical
show of virtue: do not so much as surmise it, I beseech you, that I speak it
of the feigned. For my nature does detest nothing more then counterfayte
virtue, and rather would I make choice to die, then deceive the world, in
enforcing my self to be holden for devout, when as I am neither good, nor
godly. And I believe for troth, that there are no men in this world more
pernicious, nor greater enemies to our savior Christ, then are such hipocrites.

But as touching true bou^ty indeed, I tell you for certain, y^ I think nothing
more pertine^t unto a man the^ it, and so far forth I deem it proper unto him,
that a man leaving it, and giving himself over to wickedness, is no more to be
counted a man, but that rather under his humane shape, he carries the mind
of a brute beast. Now it seems not unto me that bounty should be used for
the hope of reward, but rather for the band of humanity, and love and desire to
do well. And it shines so much the brighter in any man, by how much he is not
led astray by any other end, then goodness it self. Of which if any sparkle
be in me, either by nature, or election, it is not to be marvelled at if it
want the reward ye look for; in that first, I know very well, that not only
by the universal human debility, but by that which is proper and peculiar to
my self, I find it so slender in me, that of it self, it gives no light at
all; Farther, I never directed it to the end to receive guerdon by it, being an
exercise (in my opinion) far different from the neat and pure condition of
being good. I tell you truly that I have and do receive a far greater
reward then that ye desire in me. For that little which I feel in my self,
makes me taste, how much the life of the good, is more blessed then that of the
wicked: How this aboundes in sweetness, tranquillity and consolation; how that
is ye spring and fountain of al fears, hatreds, debates, vexations and
travels. In such sort that when a man will not, for Gods sake do the deeds of
an honest man, and good Christian; yet me thinks at the leastwise he should do
it for the quiet and comfort that is tasted thereby in this world. But you
will tell me that rewards ensue virtue, as the shadow follows the body.

Now, as the body being not made too the end to bring forth the shadow,
nevertheless brings it forth: so virtue is the cause that reward is
obtained, although it be not sought for, or used to that end.

You would have me confess it, and I grant it also, that I am not arrived,
through ye mortification of my body, and quickening of ye spirit, to that high
degree and spiritual union, with which the old divine fathers, conjoined
themselves to God; neither am I yet come to that christian perfection, which
was required in the Hebrewe youngman. I have not sold that little which I
have, and given it to the poor: neither have I denied my self, nor taken
Christ his cross on my shoulders, and followed him. What more? that in slack
observing of the commandments of Gods law, I neither merit, nor have
deserved the title of a perfect Christian; for that many occurrences have
happened, which have caused me to wander wide from these divine observations.

What farther? that (setting christianity aparte) I am not (as a moral
Philosoper) arrived to that excellency of manners, which are fitting and
convenient for a purifyed mind, as in times past was known to be in
Aristides, in Socrates, in Phocion, and diverse others, with most apparent
examples of justice, temperance, and fortitude, and other rare and divine
virtues. But rather my doubt is, that (as a man that is not governed by any
learning, but lives only by the instinct of nature) I want greatly that,
which is requisite for that estate: through which I know not how to challenge
unto my self these praises, which my conscience tells me I am unworthy of.
And finally, as of no part I deem my self praisewoorthy: so, if there be any
thing in me, that does not altogether deserve praise, it is this: that I have
had a care in what I might, not to injury others: then I have done mine
endeavor (when occasion has been offered me) to pleasure and gratify as many
as I might, being induced thereunto by Nature, persuaded by precepts of good
writers, and confirmed therein by judgment, which has imprinted a settled
resolution in my mind: and this I account to be the chief fountain, from
which al other virtues (that maintain human society amongst us) first flow
and proceed.

Now, if those virtues that are requisite to the aduauncing of me to the
degrees of riches and honor, be not in me: will ye marvel if I be not
advanced? And if there be any such in me, wherefore do ye reprehend me? ought
I, in not deserving those degrees, to have them; and deserving them, to be
reprehended for not having them? If I deserve them not, for Gods sake let me
live with so many others my equals, subject to the like fortune, and add not
the sin of arrogancy, to the want of desert. For it is a foolish and
presumptuous part for a man to aspyre to those degrees, of which he knows him
self unworthy. But if it seem unto you y^ I have deserved the^, it had been
your part rather to comfort me, the^ reprehend me, and ye might have said, y^
oftentimes my betters have been deprived of the fruits of their desert and
praise that they have merited; and that it is much better to deserve an honor,
then to have it. For honor may be received by the will of him that gives it,
virtue not being the guide of it: But no man can deserve it, but y^ virtue must
first make a way to the desert. Hereunto the example of Cato might be added,
who would rather that it should be demanded, wherefore Images were not set up
to Cato, then why they were set up.

And if now it seem strange unto you, that more then two hundred are gone
beyond me, in pre^erment; ye ought in the best part to enterprete such
accidents, and herein imitate the example of Pedaretus, a valiant man with
the Spartans, who amongst three hundred that bare office in their City,, not
being elected for one, ioyed greatly: who being demanded (of his friend
Ephorus) the cause of his gladness, pleasauntly answered; what should I do,
but be joyful, seeing that there are three hundred men in our City, better
then my self? so should you rejoice of Rome in having so many good men that
excel me. And ye ought to wish, that not only two hundred, but five hundred,
a thousand; yea three thousand men should pass me in virtue, and wisdom,
and by consequence, in fortune and honor: through which I deem it would come
to pass, that this our Realm should be much more flourishing and honorable,
then now it is.

I do not seem to my self to be such a one, as should deserve those
dignities that ye wish me: but be it that I had many of these parts, which
you call desert in me, nevertheless neither could I, nor should I have any of
these honors but by favor: in that I stand assured that the fountain from
whence these preferments flow, is beyond and above all our merits and
desartes. But in the end, I know you will say, that being often conversant
with them, in requesting, and being importunate, I might have obtained riches,
and dignity, and that this is the means that has helped, and does help a
number daily, and that it is the very same whereof mention is made by Christ
in his Gospel, when he says, Ask, and it shall be given you; knock, and it
shall be opened. What shall I answer hereunto? but that not deserving it, it
seems an unadvised part of me to crave reward, and deserving it, me thinks
it should come without asking. As I have said, so will I say, that I know not
whether I have deserved it or no.

Now, if there be any that thinks me worthy of any thing, let him request it
for me: but not by my commandment. For if I knew that I deserved it a
thousand times, yet would I not be so shameless and impudent to demand it.
For I have not directed my operations to that end, that I should crave guerdon
for them; besides that, it is not convenient for a Gentleman so to do.

What farther? that it is a thing clean repugnaunt to my nature and
disposition, and in the craving thereof I should be so cold and timorous,
that (as the Proverb says) I should teach others to deny me. For I being
unable to demand any thing, without speech of some desert of mine, how shall
this be done without arrogancy, when as I know none to be in me? And if
there were any, could I speak of it my self, without blushing?

To conclud, I think it neither good, profitable, nor honest for me.

Thus I pray you, judge of me, that although I have no great substance of sound
virtue: yet want I not some little shadow of decent modesty. Neither would I
have you wish me to become a new Satibarsanes, with Araxzrxes, or Turinus, with
Alexander. And of this resolve your self, that it for these twenty and five
years, I have with a bold courage, known how to tolerate many strokes of
Fortune: I hope also with like fortitude to ouerpasse the rest of the time that
God has appointed me to live in this world: and shall (perhaps) taste
greater tranquillity in this my poor and mean calling, then a number of
others do, with their riches and honor.

To conclude, I know this your advice to proceed of an incredible affection
that ye bear me, but yet I purpose not to put it in practice, nor follow
it: but as Marius, when that certain veins in his legs should be cut, made
answer, that the health of his legs was not such, as that it should deserve
to be bought with such terrible anguish, and torment: so seems it unto me,
that the smoke which proceeds from these honors and promotions, are not so
benificial, as that they should merit to be bought with so great trouble and
affliction, both of body and mind.

I would not wish you, to take in hand, to answer every part of my letter, nor
that desire should so far transport you, a^ to make you to taste new annoyes
by the same: put an end thereunto, I beseech you. And if you will needs write
again, send it to Laconica, either reproving me, or confirming me in that I
have written. Whatsoever it shall be, I will take it in good part from you,
whom I love entirely, and reckon of amongst the number of my best and chiefest
friends.

A translation out of french, of a Supplication presented by John Meschinot,
Esquire, unto the Duke of Brittane his Lord and Master, wherein he names
himself the Banished from Ioyfulnesse, by H. G.
MOst humbly complayneth unto your honor, your poor vassayle, loyal subject,
and obedient servant, The banished from ioyfulnesse, remaining in the diocese
of misfortune, the parish^oner of affliction, and near neighbor of despair:
giving you to understand, how from his young years, he has continually
served my Lords your predecessors, whose souls God has received: And whom
it has pleased you (for which I yield you humble thanks) to entertain
amongst the number of them, which are of your special sauegarde and
protection. Nevertheless, a thief, (the common enemy of human creatures)
named Mishappe, remaining always with Fortune, accompanied with an old lean
woman, called Poverty, have incessantly warred, and almost in every place
pursued your said supplyant, tending to his total destruction: whose rage and
fury has until this present been resisted by the good aid and support,
that it has pleased you, and your honorable ancestors to make for him. And
it is so (Sovereign sir) that although in times past, the Banished from
ioyfulnesse has been cruelly handled, and sharply assailed by the forenamed
Mishappe and Poverty: yet at this present, they have taken and bound him, in
such lamentable sort, that without your speedy aid and succor, he cannot
long endure to resist their malice. And for the better bringing of their
purpose to pass, they have first dispoyled your said supplyant of fifty
years, and more, which he had received of God and nature, being deprived of
all hope, of ever recovering any of them again. And in this sort, as a slave
or bondsman, do they detain him against his will. And for his farther
punishment, they have given express commandment, and delivered it strictly in
charge to Fury, Sorrow, thought and vexatio^ being their armorers, to forge for
y^ said banished from ioyfulnes a strong and weighty armor of proof, double
sodored, the stuff thereof being of the steel or melancholy; The smythy or
hearth whereon they heat, it is Langor, which is kindled with the fire of
fretting, from whence yssues so great flame, and smoke of anger and fury,
occasioned through the wind, proceeding from the bellows of sighinges and
gronings, as it is a thing most horrible to express. And God, thou know,
how sour most ugly and hideous old women, that is to say Impatience,
Lamentation, Injury, and Misery, continually strike and beat on it, on the
anuill of anguish, with the hammers of Rygour. Afterward they temper the said
armor with the water of bitterness, near the which leapes forth a salt
river of trickling tears, taking his course through the vallie of shame,
ouerneere the sorrowful aboade of your said supplyant: so that oftentimes
through the superabundaunce of rain and showers of sorrow, the waters of
disquiet and controversy grow and flow so hye, that the village of his heart
is, as it were all drowned.

It rests to tell you how they scowre, and make bright this harness. They
have a great grinding stone of torment, turnde about by feebleness and
slander on the one side, and ruin and confusion on the other side. The
masters of this work, are Danger, Debate, and displeasure, which often
besprinckle the said harness with the powder or sparkdust of rage, making
therewith a black vernish. With this armor of proof have they determined to
arm your foresaid suppliant, upon a doublet of dolor, tied on by travel,
with the points of discomfort, and their purpose is to make him carry it on
foot through the dark kingdom of solytarinesse, to war against felicity.
And I verily think, y^ in the end, they will take from him the power to do you
any longer service (which I beseech your honor, most souereine Lord, not to
permit) for neither they, nor any other whatsoever, shall never be able to
take from him the desire that he has still to serve you.

Now it is so, that a notable and reverent Lady called old Age* (seeing into
what misery and captivity the foresaid Mishappe and Poverty have brought
your said supplyant) has promised and determined shortly to deliver him out
of their hands, and in the mean season will keep him good and comfortable
company, until the end of his days, so that he may obtain your good favor
and assistaunce. For otherwise wanting wherewith to supply his necessities, he
cannot be restored to his freedom.

Might it stand therefore with your good pleasure (most sovereign Lord) to
command Honor the procurer general of your enterprises, to stand with your
said supplyant, and take such order in this behalf, that his forenamed enemies
may be expulsed, and that he no longer remain beseeged with such iminent
destruction. Consider that this riot has been made, whiles I remained under
your sauegard and in your service.

Lastly therefore, these are most humbly to pray and beseech you, so to ordain
for the estate of the banished from ioyfulnesse, that he may with joy and
contentment finish and accomplish the short time that he has to live in
this world.

In so doing ye shall reform him, both in changing his name, and the place
of his abode; so will he more and more enforce himself, to dwell nearer your
palace, to do you loial service to his power, during life: making continual
intercession to god, y^ he may grant you peace and repose of spirit, ease and
health of body, honor, good and long life; with all that your noble heart
wishes, and heaven for your final inheritance.

Translated out of Italian.
Two sworn Brothers, being soldiers, married two sisters: the one of them
made much of his wife, entreating her with all lenity that might be, yet would
she not obey his will and pleasure: The other threatened his wife, and kept her
in obedience, and she always did, what he commanded her. The one requesteth
the other, to teach him ^ow to make her obediente, which he did, whereupon he
threatening and using her as the other did, she laughed him to scorn.
THere dwelt in times past, in a garrison near adjoining to Rome, two sworn
brothers, who no less loved one the other, then if they had issued out of one
womb: of which the one had to name Siluerius, the other was called Pisardus,
and both of them by profession were soldiers: although their amity was great,
yet they dwelt not in one house. Siluerius, the younger wanting a gouernesse
for his house, took to wife the daughter of a taylour, being named Spinella, a
gallant and bewtifull maiden, but of a high, and lofty disposition. The
marriage being ended, and the wife being brought home to his house, he was so
ferue^tly inamoured on her beauty, that he thought there was not any woman in
the world, able to go beyond her: and in this his doting mood, suffered her
to say and do what she listed, and gave her every thing that she demanded:
through which Spine Ila became so bold, and heddy, that she little or nothing
esteemed her husband; and the ignorant fot was now come to such a pass, that
when he willed her to do one thing, she would go about another thing, and
bidding her to come hither, she would go a clean contrary way, and laugh him
to scorn. And her husband being none of the wisest, dared neither to remedy
it, nor to reprehend her, but suffered her in every thing to do, what best
pleased her fancy. Within a year after, Pisardus was married to another
daughter of the foresaid Taylour, who was called Fiorella, being full out as
beautiful as her sister, but inferior to her in bravery, and suttlety of wit.
The nuptials being finished, and the wife brought home to his house, Pisardus
took a pair of breeches, and two cudgels, saying unto her,

Fiorella, these are the breeches of a man, take you one of these staves, and I
will have the other; and we will try by combat, which of us shall carry away
the breeches; on this condition, that he which shall be conqueror, shall have
them; and he that shall be overcome shall always remain obedient to the
Conqueror.

Fiorella hearing these words of her husband, without any delay, readily
aunsweared with great humility: Alas, my husband, what mean ye by these
speeches that ye utter? are not you the husband, and I the wife? Ought not the
wife always to be obedient to her husband? How should I ever then commit such
a folly? Now carry you the breeches and wear them, for they belong more unto
you, and will better become you, then me.

I will then (answered Pisardus) still wear the breeches, and be the husband,
and thou as my beloved wife, stand obedient unto me. But take heed, that ye
alter not your determination, in seeking to make your self the husband, and me
the wife, for that after it shall repent you.

Fiorella, who was wise, confirmed that he had spoken, and at the same instant,
her husband gave her the government of al his house; then said he, wife I will
bring thee to my stable and show thee my horses, for that thou may know what
order to take for them, if I shall chance to be absent. And being come
thither, said, Fiorella, how like ye these my geldings? are they not fair? are
they not gallant, and in good plight? To whom she answered; they are in deed,
Sir, but behold (said Pisardus) how ready, and obedient they are: and taking a
wande, touched now the one, and now the other, saying; Holla, hoyst, come
aloft, and they showed themselves most obedient to their master. Amongst the
rest, Pisardus had one horse, fair enough to the eye, but very dogged of
disposition, which was the cause that he little esteemed him; coming unto him
with the rod in his hand, he said; come here; come there; and struck him; but
the horse being by nature knauish, suffered his master to lay on him, not
doing any thing of that he bad him, but that he kicked and spurnde at him, now
with one foot, now with both. Pisardus seeing his crabbednesse, with a great
and tough cudgel beat him a good, but all prevailed not. Which his master
seeing, being kindled in choler, set hand to his sword that he had by his side,
in the presence of Fiorella, ran him through, and killed him; whereat she being
moved with compassion, said, alas my husband, why have ye killed this horse?
He was very fair, and it is great pity so to kill him. Pisardus with a
troubled countenance, answered, I let you understand, that al they, which eat
that is mine, and do not what I bid them, shall be paid with the same money.
Fiorella hearing this answer, was very pensive, and said within her self,
Alas, sorrowful creature, and wretch that I am, in ill time came I hither, I
thought that I had a wise man too my husband, but now I see I have happened on
a beast. See how for little or nothing he has killed a galla^t horse. Thus
remained, she very pensive in her self, not knowing to what end her husband
spoke it. Through which Fiorella was so exceedingly afrighted, and stood in
such awe of him ever after, that when she heard him but stir, she would
tremble for fear, and whatsoever he willed her to do, it was accomplished
presently, and scantly could her husband open his mouth to speak, before she
understood him, and there was never any contention, or brawling heard betwixt
the^. Siluerius who loved his friend Pisardus passing well, oftentimes came to
visit him, and would dine and suppe with him, who noting the mild demeanor
and modest behavior of Fiorella, marvelled greatly, saying within himself. O
God, why was it not my hap to have taken Fiorella to wife, as well as my brother
Pisardo? See how she gouernes the house, and does what he commands her most
obediently. But mine (wretch that I am) does clean contrary, not affoording
me neither a good word, nor cheereful countenance unless she may have her
own will in every thing:

Siluerius on a certain day walking alone with Pisardus, and debating of
diverse matters, amongst other communication, he said. Brother Pisardus, thou
know the love and goodwill that has long remained betwixt us. I would
willingly learn of you, what means ye used at the first, in bringing your
wife to such obedience and to win her to make so much of you. I can never so
lovingly command Spinella to do any thing, but she answeares me ouerthwartly,
and herewith does al things contrary to that I bid her.

Pisardus smyling hereat, from point to point told him, the order and means
that he had used when he brought her first to his house, persuading him to do
the like, and prove whether it would take effect, which if it did not, he
knew not what advise to give him. This liked Siluerius very well, who taking
his leave of his friend and being come home to his house, without any delay
called for his wife, and taking a pair of his own breeches, and a couple of
staves, did as his friend Pisardus had cou^selled him. Which Spinella seeing,
said unto him. What new thing, Siluerius, is this that ye are about to do?
What buzzes are there put in your head? Are you now become a fool? Do we not
know, think you; that men, and not women, should wear breeches? and what
necessity is there I pray you, in doing these things, so besides the purpose?
but Siluerius making no answer, proceeded in his determinate order, giving her
the rule and government of his house.

Spinella maruelling heereat, cuttedly said unto him. Think you that I cannot
do these things sufficiently without these your godly instructions that you so
hotly give me? But her husband held his peace, and going with his wife to the
stable, did the like to his horses, that Pisardo had done before, and killed
one; Spinella seeing such fondnes, thought verily that he was besides himself,
and said unto him, Alas, I pray you tell me Sir, what mad moodes are these?
what is there come in your brain? What is there meant by these unadvised parts
y^ ye play? Are ye witless? Siluerius answered. I am neither mad nor
foolish. But all they that live at my charge, and do not obey me, shall be
chasticed in like sort as ye have now seen.

Spinella perceruing to what end this was done by her unwise husband, said unto
him: Ah sot that thou art. It seems well that thy horse was a simple beast, to
suffer himself so miserably to be killed at thy hands. But what mean ye by
this? Think ye to do that unto me, which ye have done to your horse? in
truth; if ye so think ye, are deceived greatly: and ouerlate it is now to
look unto that, which ye would look unto.

The bone is over much harde^ned; the wound is now grown to a scarre:
neither is there now any remedy. Order should sooner have been taken with
this your strange manner of coniuration, O fool, O witless Goose, do thou
not see that thou sustainest both loss and scorn by these innumerable
^ollies? And what gain ye hereby? In good faith, nothing. Siluerius hearing
the words of his subtle wife, and seeing his loving purpose like to come to no
effect, determined against his will, patiently to suffer this his hard
fortune, till death should end these his dolours. And Spinella seeing her
husbands counsel not to prevail, whereas she took an inche of liberty
before, took an Ell afterward. For a woman that is by nature obstinate, had
rather suffer a thousand deaths, then alter her settled determination.

Master Gasparinus a Physician, by his cunning, heals fools.
THere dwelt in times past in England, a very rich man who had one only son,
called Gasparinus, whom he sent over too the university of Padua, that he might
there follow his study: but he making no account of learning, spent his time
in gaming and rioting, haunting brothel houses, and other suspected places,
leading ye most dissolute life that might be: His father thinking that he spent
his time in the study of Physic; he practiced in steed of books, bowls; for
disputing di^ing; and whereas he should have attained learning, he altogether
freque^ted loytring. Having remained there ye space of five years, he returned
into his country and showed by experience y^ he had learned backwards, for
going about to seem a Roman, he manifested himself to be a Barbarian; and
men noted him and poynted at him, as a common laughing stock, in the town
where he dwelt. What grief it was unto the poor father to see his cost lost,
and his only child as it were cast away, I refer the consideration thereof
to your discretions. Wherefore for the mitigating of his sorrows, he called his
son unto him, and opening a chest full of money and jewels, laid forth unto
him the one half of his goods (which verily he deserved not) and said, Take
here (my son) thy portion of thy fathers hereditamentes, and get thee far
from me; For I rather choose to remain without a child, then to live with thee
in infamy. No sooner were these words spoken, but he most willingly obeying
his fathers commandment fingering the money, took his leave and departed. And
being far distant from him, at the entrance of a wood near a river, he
built a costly and sumptuous palace, the gates being of brass, and with this
river it was moated about. Herein with a device of sluices he made certain
little pooles, whose depth he would increase or diminish at his pleasure. Into
some, the water entered the depth of a man; into some other, y^ it would reach
to his eyes; others, unto the nauel, some to the middle, and some to the knees;
and unto every of these pooles, an iron chain was fastened. Over the gate of
this palace was a title written, which said, A place, wherein to heal fools.
The fame of this palace, in short space, was spread abroad in most places of
the world, and fools repaired thither in great abundance, to be cured, but (to
speak more nearer the troth) to be washed. The master according to the
greatness of their follies, would plundge them in these pits, and some of these
he would heal with whippings, some with watching, some with fasting, and other
some by little and little he would restore to their former estate, and
understanding, by the te^perature and suttlety of y^ air. On a time in a large
court, without the gates of this palace, as certain of the meanest sort of
these fools, were sporting themselves in the heat of the sun, it fortuned
that a Falconer came by, which carried a sparhawk on his fist, having a great
number of Spaniels waiting on him. Who presently being espird by these fools,
they marvelled greatly what he meant to ride with that bird and spaniels: and
one of them demanded of him what bird it was that he carried on his fist? He
answered, a Sparhawke. And to what end (quoth he) do ye keep her? (quoth the
Gentleman) she is a bird greedy at her pray, and I keep her to kill
Partridge with, which is a great bird, and delicate in taste: these are called
spaniels which spring and retrine the birds, and this sparhauke kills them,
and I eat them. Quoth the ^oole then: I pray do tell me what this Sparhawke
and Spaniels stand thee in? The Falconer made answer, I bought the horse that
I ride on, for six pound, the Sparhawke cost me twenty shillings, and my
Spaniels three pouud: and the feeding and nourishing of all these yearly, I
value at xx. pounds. Now I beseech thee tell me said the fool how many
Partridges thou take yearly, and what they be worth. I catch (quoth he)
about two hundred, and they are at the least, worth twenty shillings. The
fool, but not a fool herin, but rather he showed himself very wise, with a
loud voice cried unto him, fly, fly, fool that thou art, which spendest
twenty pound yearly, for the gaining of twenty shillings, and yet reckonest
not the time, that is vaynely consumed. Fly with all speed, for the passion of
God, fly, for if my master find thee here, he will throw thee into a pit,
where thou shall be plunged over head and ears, and be suffered hardly to
escape with life. For I which am a f^ole, may discern that thou art more
foolish then them which are most foolish of all.

The Florentines and the Citizens of Bergamaske, bring all their Doctors to a
disputation, and they of the city of Bergamaske, with a pretty policy
confuted, and had the victory of the Florentines.
IN times past, it happened that diverse Merchants of Florentine and Bergamaske,
met: who riding together (as it often chances) had talk and conference of
diverse matters, and digressing from one thing too another, one of the
Florentines said, Truly you of Bergamaske (as far as I can perceive) are
dull sprited, and men of small capacity, and were it not for that little
traffic of merchandise that ye practice, for the great grosenesse and
unaptness that is in you, ye were good for nothing. And it comes to pass,
that ye have prosperous success in merchandise, not for any skill that ye
have, or dexterity of wit, but for the greedines, and covetousness of gain,
that is in you. For I know not any that may go beyond you, in grosenesse and
blockishnesse. Having thus spoken, one of the city of Bergamaske, stepped forth
and made him answer, saying: And I tell thee that we of Bergamaske in all
points, are able to go beyond you. And albeeit you Florentines are smoothly
tounged, and bring greater delight with your fyled speech, to the ears of the
hearers, then we: nevertheless in all other things ye are far inferior
unto us, and if ye consider it well, there is not one amongst us, be he great
or little, but has some smacke in learning; and herewith we are apt to every
courageous enterprise, which is not found in you, or if it be, it is in very
few of you.

The contention growing to be very great, both of the one side, and the other,
they of the City of Bergamaske not entending to yield unto the Florentines,
nor the Florentines to them, every one defending his own side with great
stoutnesse, one of Bergamaske stood up, and said. To what end are all these
words? Let us make proof of it by deeds. Let a solemn disputation be
appointed, whereat ye flower of learning, and doctors may meet, and then shall
it manifestly be seen, which of us is most excellent. Hereunto the
Florentines yielded their consent: but this was the difference; whether ye
Florentines should go to Bergamaske, or they of Bergamask to Florence. After
many words, it was concluded y^ they should cast lots. And it so fell out, ye
the Florentines must go to the City of Bergamaske. The day of disputation was
nominated to be in the month of May. The Merchantes returned to their Cities;
and acquainted their Doctors, and other learned men what match they had made^
who understanding the matter, were very well pleased, and made provision for a
gallant and long disputation.

They of the Town of Bergamaske, as wise and subtle men, determined to work
so, that the Florentines should remain both confuted and scorned. Wherefore
all the most learned men of the City being assembled, as well Grammarians as
Rhetoricians; and well common lawieres, as Canonistes, as well Philosophers, as
divines, and Doctors and masters of all other sorts whatsoever, they made
choice of the chiefest of them, and retained them in their City, that they
might be their rock and sortresse in their disputation against the
Florentines. The others being apparelled in course and ragged apparel, against
the day of the disputations, they sent forth of the City, toward that part
where the Florentines must needs come. And charge was given, that they should
speak nothing unto them but Latin.

These Doctors being thus attirde in clownish apparel, and intermixed amongst
them, of policy, they set hands unto diverse exercises: some dug ditches,
some carried wood, and some did one thing, and some an other.

These Doctors of Bergamaske remaining in these exercises, and seeming to be
clownes, behold the Florentine Doctors came ryding by with great pomp, who
seeing these laborers, said unto them, God save you brethren. To whom the
clownes answered in latin, Been veniant tanti viri. The Florentines thinking
that they iested, demanded how many miles it was to the City of Bergamaske:
to whom the Clownes answered, december, vel circa.

The Florentines hearing this answer; unto them. O brethren, we speak unto
you, in your mother tongue, and from whence comes it, that you answer us in
latin? They of Bergamaske replied: Ne miremini, excellentissimi Domini,
vnusquisque enim nostrum, sic vt auditis loquitur, quoniam Maiores and
sapientes nostri sic nos docuerunt.

Riding on their journey a good distaunce off, they saw other clownes, which in
the broad ways cleansed diches: and staying, said unto them. Hoe companions,
God speed you: to whom they answered: Et Deus vobiscum semper sit. How far
is it to Bergamaske? said the Florentines. The other answered, Exigua vobis
restat via. And entering from one word to another, they began at length to
reason in Philosophy, and these clownes of Bergamaske framed their arguments so
strongly and profoundly, that the Florentine Doctors were scarce able to
answer them. At which all of them wondering, said amongst themselves: How is
it possible, that these clownish men, brought up in digging of the ground, and
other rusticall exercises, should be so well instructed in humane sciences?
Departing from them, they road toward an inn, not far distant from the
City, which was fair and large. As they came somewhat near it, an Ostler
came forth to inuit them, saying: Domini, libet ne vobis hospitari? Hic enim
vobis erit bonum hospitium. And for that the Florentines were very weary, they
alighted, and meant to ride no farther that night. As they were mounting up the
stayres to go to their lodging, the goodman of the Inn met them, saying:
Excellentissimi Domini, placetne vobis, vt praeparetur coena? hic enim sunt
bona vina, oua recentia, carnes, volatilia, and alia huiusmodi. Heereat the
Florentines were amassed, and knew not what to say: for that all they, with
whom they had speech, spoke latin, and pronounced no otherwise, then if they
had been brought up in study all the days of their life. Shortly after a
maid servant, indeed^ came unto them, which was a young woman, both witty
and learned, and craftily brought thither for the purpose, which said.
Indigentne dominationes vestrae re aliqua? placet vt sternentur lectuli, vt
requiem capiatis? These words of the Maiden brought greater astonishment to
the Florentines, who began to reason with her, who having answered to many
things exceedingly well, (and all in latin) they questioned with her of
divinity, of which she did argue so catholiquely, that there was not any y^
heard her, but gave her singular commendation. Whiles the Maiden talked with
them, there came one in, arayde like a baker, his face blackt with coals: who
hearing the disputation that they had with the Maiden, began to argue in her
defense, and interpreted the holy scriptures so learnedly, that all the
Florentine doctors affirmed amongst themselves, that they had seldom or never
heard his better. This d^sputation being finished, the Florentine Doctors went
to supper, and so to their rest. And the next day approaching, they took
counsel amongst themselves, whether it were better to go forwards, or return
home again. After great contention had about this matter, they resolved, that
it was better to depart, thinking thus with themselves, that if the Inkeepers,
laborers, hostlers, and women had such profound learning: what was to be
looked for in the City, where are most excellent men, which continually
follow nothing else but their books and study.

This determination being well considered of, without any longer tariaunce,
they put it in practice. And not as much as seeing the walls of the City of
Bergamaske, taking their horses, took their journey back again toward
Florence. And in this manner, the Florentines were by policy conquered of the^
of Bergamaske. And from thence forwards the Citizens of Bergamaske had a
privilege from the Emperor, to pass safely through all the parts of the
world, without the let or disturbance of any man.

Of one that hired a foolish servant, and was served accordingly.
PAndolfus a Gentleman of Padua, on a time standing greatly in need of a
ser^^iant, chanced to meet with one, wh^ he thought would well serve his
turn: of whom he demanded, whether he would serve him for reasonable wages,
who made answer that he would: but with this condition, that he would at no
time do him any other service, but look to his horses, and ride with him.
Heereon they concluded, and there were Indentures of covenants drawn, sealed,
and delivered for the performance of the premises. It happened on a certain
day that Pandolfus, as he rode with his new servant, in a filthy mirie way,
his horse stumbling, fell into a ditch, and Padolfus under him: who being in
great fear and danger, cried unto his man for help. His servant standing
still, gave him the looking on, saying that he^ was not bound to do it, and
that there was no such thing contained in his Indenture of covenant, and
taking the copy thereof out of his pocket, began from point to point to
read the conditions of it, to see whether it were therein contained, or no,
that he should help him in such a i^operdie. His master cried out unto him,
saying, For the passion of God help me. He answered, I cannot sir: for that
it is against the couenantes of my Indenture. His master told him, that if
he would not help him, and deliver him out of this danger, he would not
pay him such wages, as was therein contained he should have. The foolish
servant said that he would not do it, for fear of incurring the penalty
contained in the Indenture of covenant. And if his master had not been
presently helped by one that came that way, doubtless he could never have
escaped.

For this cause, after their return home, there were new couenantes drawn,
unto which he yielded his consent, under a certain forfeiture, to perform
and observe them truly: which was, that he should assist his master at all
times; in all causes that he commanded him, and should never depart or
separate himself from him.

It chanced on a time, that Pandolfus entering into one of the chiefest
Churches of the City, with certain Venetian Gentlemen, his servant always
followed him at his shoulders, and would never leave him.

The Gentlemen and other that were by, for the rarenes of the sight, took up a
great laughter, through which the master returning to his house, chidde him
bitterly, showing him what a foolish and unadvised part he played, in walking
so childishly with him, in the Church, without any respect, either of him, or
the Gentlemen that were with him.

The servant alleged unto him, that he had not done contrary to the
couenantes that were drawn betwixt them, and had fulfilled the contents thereof
and no more. Upon this there was a new covenant put in, that he should go
farther of from him.

After that time the servant would keep himself aloof, and not come near
him by forty foot, at the least. And although his master called him, and had
need to use him: Nevertheless, his servant would not for fear of incurring
the penalty contained in the Indentures. Heereat Pandolphus fretting a good at
the folly, and simplicity of his man; told him that his coming farther of him,
was to be understood about a three foot distant The servant thinking
himself now too be apparauntly advertised of his masters meaning, took a
staff of the length of three foot, and as he went in the city, would set
one end thereof against his breast, and holding the other toward his masters
shoulders, so followed him. The Citizens, and Prentises, seeing him to go in
this order, deeming him to be some notable fool, did laugh at him
vnmeasurably. The master as yet not knowing wherefore they so laughed, marvelled
greatly, but being afterward advertised how he carried the staff after him,
he was in a great rage, reprehending his servant vehemently, threatening also to
beat him. And he weeping and lamenting, excused himself, saying, ye do me
manifest injury, Master, in going about to beat me; made I not a bargain
with you? have I not observed all the covenants? When did I any thing contrary
to that you willed me? read the Indenture, and then punish me if I have failed
in any thing. And thus his master could never justly take him at any
advantage. At another time his master sent him to the Market, to buy meat,
and speaking figuratively unto him; said; Go thy way, and let it be a year
ere ye come again: meaning that he should make speed. The servant over
obedient to his master, went into his Country and there tarried till the year
was expired; and within one day after came home: and brought the meat with him
to his master, who maruelling thereat greatly; having forgotten what he gave
him in commandment to do, rebuked him as a Runaway; saying: ye are come
somewhat too late, that the gallows take you. But I will reward thee according
to thy deserts knave and varlet, that thou art; and thou shall be sure to pay
the penalty that thou have forfeyted, and gettest not one penny of wages of me.

The servant answered that he had not swarued from any one covenant contained
in his Indenture: but had observed them all, and had obeyed him in every thing
that he commanded.

Call ye to mind master (said he) that whiles ye willed me to tarry a
year, ere I came again: I have done so: and therefore pay me my wages that
ye promised me. And here upon they waged the law, and in conclusion the
master was constrained to pay him his wages, whether he would, or no.

THere dwelt in the City of Ferrara, an exceeding rich man, and of a
worshipful house, who had a servant called Fortunius, a young man of no great
wit. It chanced that his master on a time sitting asleep in his orchard,
in the extreme heat of the sun, Fortunius having a bush of feathers, kept of
ye flies from his master, ye he might take his rest the more quietly. Amongst
the other flies, there was one so importunate, that not waying the bush of
feathers, wherewith she was stricken, often, with her sharp sting would never
lin biting the balde pate of his master, and having been three or four times
to anoye him, would still prf^er to come again.

In fine Fortunius noting the malapert presumption of the beast, not being able
any longer to forbear her, very unadvisedly determined to kill her. And the
fly sitting on the balde pate of his master sucking out his blood Fortunius
like a simple and ignorant set, took a weighty pestle of brass that by
chance lay some what too near him; and lifting it up with great force with
intent to kill the fly, knocked out the brains of his master. He seeing his
master to be ^^aine in deed, and thinking that he should be hanged for it,
determined to run away, and save himself by flight: But altering this his
purpose, he thought it better to bury him in some secret place, and putting
him into a sack, did so. And then taking a great he Goat of his masters,
flong him into a well, that stood near the Orchard where he slept. The
goodman not coming in at night, as he was accustomed, began to think evil
of the servant, and demanding of him for her husband, he made answer, that
he saw him not.

Then the good wife being very sorrowful, began to weep bitterly, and with a
skriking voice, called her husband, but all in vain. Her parents and
kinsfolks seeing that the good man could not be found, went to the Mayor of
the City, and there accused Fortunius the feruaunt, saying, that he should
be committed to prison, and so to be had on the rack, there to be made to
confess, what was become of his master.

The Mayor presently caused him to be taken, and bound, and upon presumptions
committed him to the rack. The servant not being able to abide the torment
thereof, promised to manifest the whole: so that he might be let down, and
being taken down, and had before the Mayor, with a crafty disceate, he
said, as follows.

Yesterday, as I was asleep in the orcharde, and suddenly a great noise awaked
me, which seemed, as though some great stone had fallen into the well. I being
astouied thereat, ran sodeinly thither, and looking into the water, saw it
quiet and still, so that I sought no farther: whiles I returned, I heard an
other like noise, and I stayde. And I verily think it was my master, who
being about to draw some water, fell into the well. But for that the troath may
be known of the matter, let us al go thither, and I will descend into the well
to see whether that it be true or no, which I gather by presumptions.

The Mayor desirors to make proof of the troth hereof, called all his brethren
with him, and with diverse other Gentlemen came to the well. And with them went
a great company of the common sort of people, both men and women, being
desirous to see the issue of this matter. And behold as the wicked fellow by
the commandment of the Mayor descended into the well, and sought for his
master in the water, he found the goat which he had before thrown therinto,
and there with cried out to his mistress, (which was amongst the rest of the
company) saying, hoe, mistres; tell me, had your husband any horns? I have
found one here in this well, which has a pair both great and long, was he
ever your husband? she being surprised with these speeches, said never a words.
The Mayor with all the rest of the company stood still, being very desirous
to see the dead body, which being drawn up, when they perceived that it was a
Goat, they made such exceeding joy, that they were like to break insunder
with laughter. And the Mayor seeing the chance, adjudged the servant to be
trusty, and released him as innocent, and it was never known what became of his
master; and the good wife with the scorn of the horn, remained defamed ever
after.

To the Worshipful John Stafford of Bletherwicke Esquier, Humfrey Gifford most
humbly sends greeting.
ACknowledging my self deeply indebted to your woorshippe for your professed
courtesies, and good opinion conceived of me, and desiring by some one means or
other to make manifest my thankful mind, I have adventured the dedication of
this trifling toy, unto your protection, notdoubting of your favorable
acceptance, in that I bestow it as an earnest penny of my well meaning, and
testimony of the unfeigned goodwil that I bear you. The thing that I here
present you with, is a posie of Gillowflowers collected out of the garden of
mine own inventions. Which if they shall come too short in show and color, or
prove inferior in sent and odor to that which is to be looked for of so
fragrant a flower, let the Gardener (I pray you) be excused, who has done his
goodwill and endeavor in the sowing, and setting of them, and lay the fault in
the barrenness of the soil, wherein they were planted: which had it been
better, their virtue would have proved to be greater. Though all the flowers
herein contained, carry one name, yet each of the differs from other, both in
color and savor, the better to satisfy the diversity of eyes that shall
view them, and variety of noses that shall smell them. Now if the spider shall
happen to suck any poison out of them, let not the flowers be the worse
thought of, but consider that it is his property to do the like, out of the
most pure and delectable flowers, that ever were. And God in giving unto her
and other such like creatures this nature, does no less manifest his
omnipotent power herein, then in his other wonderful works. For reason tells,
and experience teaches, that in this vale of misery, there is nothing so
beautiful, but that it has some blemish; nor so pure, but that it savors of
some imperfection: so that as long as the world is a world, corruption must
continue amongst us. Which filthy dregs and poisoned humors, if they were not
in part drawn and drayned away by the venomous beasts and worms of the
earth, they would a great deal more annoy us, then now they do. And it is to
be doubted whether life could any long time be conserved a mogst us. I might
here take occasion to liken the crew of curious carpers (which more of malice
then good meaning accustomed to cauel at other men's doings, playing the idle
drones themselves) to the venomous beasts and worms before spoken of: Whom
for their congruity in condition, and affinity in disposition I might bring
them within the compass of one comparison, and conclude that both the one and
the other are necessary evils. But lest that the old proverb be objected
against me, Ne suitor vltra crepitam, let the Gardener meddle no farther the^
his spade, I will leave the^ to their predecessor Zoilus (whose apes they are in
imitating his conditions) and return again to my Gillowflowers, eft foones
beseeching your worship to accept those that I present you with no less
tha^kfulnes then the Gardener does offer them willingly, whereof he doubts not,
calling to mind your accustomed courtesy. In one thing I have used such
circumspection as my simple skill, would permit me, which is that the beauty of
my flowers be not blemished with the weeds of wantonness, that commonly grow
in such gardens. I hope therefore, ye shall find them rooted out in such sort,
that if there remain any, my trust is they shall not fall out, to be many. The
only thing that I doubt of this in my dedication, is that your worshipp shall
have cause to account me a deep dissembler and one that has been more lavish
in promise, then he is able to pay with performance. For whereas by my former
speeches, ye might peradventure look for some delicate Gillowflowers, it will
fall out to be but a copy of my countenance, having done nothing else, but (as
the fashion of the world is now adays) set a good face on a bad matter. For
(to deal plainly with you) I was never Gardener in all my life. And the thing
that I here present you with, is but a collection of such verses and odd
devises as have (at such idle hours as I found in my master his service)
upon sundry occasions by me been composed. The one I confess far unworthy
your view, and yet such as when ye shall return home weeried from your field
sportes, may yield you some recreation. The chief mark that I leuel at is,
the continuance of your woorships courtesy and good mind toward me, which as
they have already surmounted the reach of my deserts, so if I might enjoy the
fruition of them hereafter, in that fullness which I hope for, I shall account
all the duetifull endeavor that I can possibly show you insufficient, for the
satisfaction of the least part of them. Thus for fear of being tedious, I
end, wishing your worship, with my good mistres your wife and all yours many
years of prosperity, with daily increase of worship, and heaven for your
haven to rest in, when the dangerous sea of this life shall be over sailed.

Yours in all dutifulness, HG.

D Do guide my paths, O Lord my God,
T that I walk not astray:
O O who can mount thy holy hill,
E Except thou lead the way?
R Renew me with such grace, that I
M May learn thy laws aright:
O Order my steps, so shall I be
P Preserved day and night.
T The wicked Serpent every hour,
E Endeavors me to spil:
H Haste to my help, so shall I, Lord,
R Right well eschew the il.
Y In thee I put mine only trust,
A Assist me then at need.
S Stand on my side; but thee alone,
N None else my suit can speed.
A Amidst the sea of sin and death,
C Continually we ride,
M Making still shipwreck of our souls,
E except thou be our guide.
V Unto the Lord with humble suit,
I I lift my heart and hands:
E Incline thine ears to my request,
V Unloose my sinful bands.
L Let not vile Satan's crafty traynes,
S So sore our souls assail:
D Do thou protect us with thy shield,
T Then shall he not prevail.
A As to a Rock of safe refuge,
I I still to thee do fly.
N None else there is I know, that can
C Cause al my sins to die.
I I do confess my force is weak,
E Increase my faith (O Lord)
E Expel from meal heresies,
P Protect me with thy word.
L Let not the fiende that seeks my foil,
R Rejoice at my decay,
D Do make me strong in lively faith.
V Unto thee still I pray.
A All truth, al good and godly deeds,
D Do still proceed from thee:
N No man can think one holy thought,
E Except their guide thou be.
V Unless thou Lord do give increase,
N No fruit our deeds bring forth.
E Esteemd we are as rotten weeds,
C Corrupt and nothing worth.
R Remember not my sins forepast,
E Eluminate my ways:
S So shall I still with heart and voice,
G Give thee all laud and prays.
H Happy are they that do thee serve,
I In thought and eke in deed:
V Unturned never is thy face,
F From them in time of need.
M Make Lord in me a steadfast faith,
F For ever to abide.
F Frame still my life to keep thy laws,
A And I shall never slide.
R Remove from me all errors blocks,
R Right so shall I remain.
I In perfect footesteppes of thy paths,
D Deuoyde of worldly pain.
To his approved friend.
Serve God Serve God thy Lord, delight to keep his laws.
always. Always, have care to do his holy hest.
Commit Commit not that which may his anger cause.
no evil, No evil, then (dear friend) can thee molest.
Still fear Still fear and mind the dreadful judgment day.
to sin, To sin, breeds death, but mercy do require,
defy Defy such things, as work thy souls decay;
the devil. The devil, so shall leese his chief desire.
If thou If thou, wilt spend thy days in great content.
praise God Praise God, each hour, serve him in fear and dread,
with heart With heart contrite thy former sins lament.
and mind, And mind, hence forth a better life to lead
Great joys Great joys the Lord (as his pure word does say)
in heaven In heaven, above, for good men has preparde,
thy soul Thy soul when that this life shall pass away,
shall find. Shall find such bliss, as cannot be declarde.
The life of man metaphorically compared to a ship, sailing on the seaes in a
tempest.
HAste homewardes, man, draw nearer to the shore,
The skies do scowle, the winds do blow amain:
The raged rocks, with rumbling noise do rore,
The foggie clouds do threaten storms of rain.
Each thing foreshewes a tempest is at hand,
Hoyst up thy sails, and haste to happy land.
In worldly seaes thy silly ship is tossed:
With waves of woe besette on every side,
Blown here, and there, in danger to be lost:
Dark clouds of sin do cause thee wander wide,
Unless thy God pity some on thee take,
On rocks of rueth, thou needs must shipwreck make.
Cut down the mast of rancour and debate,
Vnfraight the ship of all unlawful wares:
Cast over boorde the packes of hoorded hate,
Pumpe out foul vice, the cause of many cares.
If that some leeke, it make thee stand in doubt,
Repentance serves, to stop the water out.
Let Gods pure word thy line and compass be,
And steadfast faith use, thou in anckors steed:
Lament thy sins, then shall thou shortly see,
That power divine, will help thee forth at need.
Fell Satan is chief rular of these seas:
He seeks our wrack, he does these tempests raise.
In what we may let us always repress,
The furious waves of lust and fond desire:
A quiet calm our conscience shall possess,
if we do that which duty does require:
By godly life in fine obtain we shall,
the port of bliss, to which God send us all.
A doleful Dumpe
WHo so does moan, and lackes a mate,
to be partaker of his woe,
And will discourse of his estate,
Let him and I together go:
And I will make him grant in fine,
his grief to be far less then mine.
Perhaps he will, to win the best,
paint forth what pangs oppress his mind,
How that he feels no quiet rest:
how fortune is to him unkind:
And how he pines in secreet grief,
and finds no means for his relief.
These and such like a number will,
allege to witness their distress,
Some roll up stones against the hill*
with Sisiphus; some eke express,
That like to Tantalus they fare,
and some with Yxion do compare.
But I not only feel the smart,
of al those euilles rehearsed before:
But taste the forment in my heart,
of thousand times as many more:
So that the worst of their annoyes,
Is best and chiefest of my joys.
I never fed on costly meat,
Since that this grief oppressed me first:
Dole is the dainties that I eat,
And trickling tears do cool my thirst:
Care is my caruing knife, God wot,
Which daily seeks to cut my throat.
Muse not that here I secret keep
The cause that first procurde my grief:
What does it boot a man to weep,
When that his tears find no relief?
Contents me only, this repose,
That death ere long will end my woes.
In praise of the contented mind.
IF all the joys that worldly wightes possess,
Were thoroughly scand, and pondred in their kinds,
No man of wit, but justly must confess,
That they joy most, that have contented minds.
And other joys, which bear the name of joys,
Are not right joys, but sunneshines of anoyes.
In outward view we see a number glad,
Which make a show, as if mirth did abound:
When pinching grief within does make them sad.
And many a one in these days may be had,
Which faintly smile to shroud their sorrows so,
When oftentimes they pine in secreet woe.
But every man that holds himself content,
And yeeldes God thanks, as duty does require:
For all his gifts that he to us has sent,
And is not vexed with over great desire:
And such, I say, most quietly do sleep,
When fretting cares does others waking keep.
What does avail huge heaps of shining gold,
Or gay attire, or stately buildinges brave:
If worldly pelf thy heart in bondage hold?
Not thou thy goods, thy goods make thee their slave.
For greedy men like Tantalus do fare,
In midst of wealth, they needy are and bare.
A wary heed that things go not to loss,
Does not amiss, so that it keep the mean:
But still to toil and moyle for worldly dross,
And taste no joy nor pleasure for our pain:
In carke and care both day and night to dwell,
Is nothing else but even a very hell.
Wherefore I say, as erst I did begin,
Contented men enjoy the greaetst bliss:
Let us content our selves to fly from sin,
And still abide what Gods good pleasure is.
If joy, or pain, if wealth, or want befall,
Let us be pleased, and give God thanks for all.
In the praise of Friendship.
Reveal (O tongue) the secrets of my thought,
Tell forth the game that perfect friendship brings:
Express what joys by her to man are brought,
Unfold her praise which glads all earthly things:
If one might say, in earth a heaven to be,
It is no doubt, where faithful friends agree.
To all estates true friendship is a stay,
To every wight a good and welcome guest:
Our life were death, were she once taken away,
Consuming cares would harbor in our breast.
Foul malice eke, would banish al delight,
And puff us up with poison of despite.
If that the seeds of envy and debate;
Might yield no fruit, but wither and decay;
No canckred minds would hoorde up heaps of hate.
No hollow hearts dissembling parts should play.
No clawback then would fawn in hope of meede,
Such life to lead, were perfect life in deed.
But nowadayes desire of worldly pelf,
With all estates makes friendship very cold:
Few for their friends, each shifteth for himself,
If in thy purse thou have good store of gold:
Full many a one, thy friendship will embrace,
Thy wealth once spent, they turn away their face.
Let us still pray unto the Lord above,
For to relent our hearts as hard as stone:
That through the world one knot of loyal love,
In perfect truth might link us all in one:
Then should we pass this life without annoyes,
And after death possess eternal joys.
A commendation of Peace.
WHen boiling wrath perturbs ma^s troubled breast,
Outraging will bids reasons lore adue:
Turmoyling cares bereave all quiet rest,
And hasty ire makes harmefull happes ensue,
Great storms of strife are raisd, through dire debate,
But golden peace preserues the quiet state.
A gift divine, than precious pearl more worth,
Is blessed peace, to discord deadly foe.
Most plenteous fruits this blooming tree brings forth
When war and strife yield crops of care and woe.
Rash rancours rage procures fond furious fightes,
Peace makes men swim in feaes of sweet delights.
If that this peace be such a passing thing,
That it by right may challenge worthy praise:
What thanks owe we unto our heavenly king,
Through whom we have enioyde such happy days?
Next to our Queen, how deeply are we bound,
Whose like on earth, before was never found?
If England would perpend the bloody broils,
And slaughters huge that foraine realms have tried,
It should me seems, by warnd by their turmoyles,
In perfect love and concord to abide.
But (out alas) my heart does rue to tell)
Small fear of God, amongst us now does dwell.
And where that wantes, what hope does else remain,
But dire revenge for rash committed crimes?
Heaps of mishaps will fall on us amayne,
If we do not lament our sins betimes.
Unless with speed, to God for grace we call,
I fear, I fear, great plagues on us will fall.
England therefore, in time convert from vice,
The pleasant spring abides not all the year.
Let foraine ylls, forewarne thee to be wise,
Storms may ensue, though now the coasts be clear.
I say no more, but only do request,
That God will turn all things unto the best.
For Soldiers.
Ye buds of Brutus land, courageous youths, now play your parts
Unto your tackle stand, abide the brunt with valiant hearts.
For news is carried too and fro, that we must forth to warfare go:
Men muster now in every place, and soldiers are pressed forth apace.
Faint not, spend blood; to do your Queen and country good.
Fair words, good pay, will make men cast al care away.
The time of war is come, prepare your corslet, spear and shield,
Me thinks I hear the drum, strike doleful marches to the field,
Tantara, ta^tara, y^ tru^pets sound, with makes our hearts with joy abou^d,
The roaring guns are heard a far, and every thing denounces war.
Serve God, stand stout; bold courage brings this gear about.
Fear not; forth run; faint heart, fair Lady never woonne.
Ye curious Carpet knights, that spend the time in sport and play
Abroad and see new sights, your countries cause calls you away:
Do not to make your Ladies game, bring blemish to your worthy name.
Away to field, and win renoune, wc courage beat your enemies down.
Stout hearts gain praise, when Dastards sail in slanders seas:
Hap what hap shall, we sure, shall die but once for all,
Alarm me thinks they cry, be packing mates, be gone with speed,
Our foes are very nigh, shame have that man that shrinks at need.
Unto it boldly let us stand, God will give right the upper hand.
Our cause is good, we need not doubt, in sign of courage give a showte.
March forth, be strong, good hap will come ere it be long.
Shrink not, fight well, for lusty lads must bear the bell.
All you that will shun evil, must dwell in warfare every day,
The world, the flesh and Devil, always do seek our souls decay.
strive with these foes with al your might, so shall you fight a worthy fight.
That conquest does deserve most praise, where vice do yield to virtues ways.
Beat down foul sin, a worthy crown then shall ye win.
If we live well, in heaven with Christ our souls shall dwell.
To his friend.
MUse not too much (o wight of worthy fame)
At view of this my rude and ragged rhyme,
I am almost enforst to write the same:
Wherefore forgive, if I commit a crime.
The cause hereof, and how it came to pass,
I shall declare, even briefly as it was.
Reuoluing in my mind your friendly face,
Your bounty great, your love to every man,
I heard my wit, and will to scan this case,
If I should write or no, thus will began.
Take pen in hand thou fearful wight she said,
To write thy mind what should make thee afraid?
Not so (quoth wit) acquaintance has he small,
With him to who^ thou bidst him write his mind,
What tho (quoth will) that skils nothing at all,
He writes to one that is to all a friend.
Him so to be (quoth wit) none can deny.
Thou art a fool (quoth will) then to reply.
Great cause (quoth wit) should make him to refrain.
He would (quoth will) declare his friendly heart.
What if (quoth wit) he chance to reap disdain?
Of such foul fruits (quoth will) friends have no part.
Perchance (quoth wit) it will be taken ill.
Well meaned things, who will take ill (quoth will?)
He has no skill (quoth wit,) how should he write?
Al want of skill (quoth will) good will supplies.
I see (quoth wit) thou will work him despite.
For counsel good thou, geuest him rash advice.
Wit said no more: But will that stately Dame,
Still bad me write, not forcing any blame.
Since will, not wit, makes me commit offense,
Of pardon yours the better hope I have.
To show my love was all the whole pretense,
That made me write. This only do I crave:
In any thing if pleasure you I can,
Command me so, as if I were your man.
A renouncing of love.
AL earthly things by course of kind,
Are subject still to reasons lore:
But sure I can no reasons find,
That makes these Lovers love so sore.
They fry and freese in myldest weather,
They weep and laugh even both together.
Even now in waves of deep despair,
Their bark is tossed too and fro.
A gale of hope expels al fear,
And makes the wind to ouerblow:
Twixt fear and hope these Lovers sail,
And doubtful are which shall prevail.
At night in slumber sweetly laid,
They seem to hold their love in arms:
Awaking then, they are afraid,
And feel the force of thousand harms.
Then do they toss in restless bed,
With hammers woorking in their head.
A merry look from Ladies face,
Bringes them a foot which could not go:
A frowning brow does them disgrace,
And brues the broth of all their woe,
Hereby all men may plainly know:
That reason rules not Lovers law.
But reason does me thus persuade,
Where reason wants, that nothing frames:
Therefore this reason has me made,
To set aside all lovely gaynes.
Since reason rules not Venus sport,
No reason bids me scale that forte.
A will or Testament.
When dreadful death with dint of pearcing darte,
By fatal doom, this corpse of mine shall kill;
When lingering life shall from my life depart,
I thus set down, my testament and will.
My faithful friends executor^ shall remain,
To see performde what here I do or dayne.
To thee (O world) I first of all do leave
The vain delights, that I in thee have found,
Thy fained shows wherewith thou did deceive,
Thy fickle trust, and promises unsound.
My wealth, my woe, my joys commixt with care.
Do take them, all do fall unto thy share.
And Satan thou, for that thou were the cause,
That I in sin did still mispend my days,
I thee defy, and here renounce thy laws,
My wicked thoughts, my vile and naughty ways,
And eke my vice do to thy lot befall,
From thee they came, do take them to thee all.
To thee, O earth, again I do restore,
My carrion corpse, which from thee did proceed:
Because it did neglect all godly lore,
Let greedy worms upon it always feed;
Let it in filth consume and rot away,
And so remain until the judgment day.
But my poor soul, who^ Christ most deerly bought
Which hated sin, and loathed to offend,
Together with each good and godly thought,
Into thy hands, sweet Jesus, I commend.
O savior Christ, do guide my steps so well,
That after death, she still with thee may dwell.
A Complaynt of a Lover.
IF ever woeful wight had cause, to pipe in bitter smart,
I which am thrall to Cupids laws, with him may bear a part.
Whose joyful days alas, are gone; whom daily cares do toss,
But wot ye why I thus take on? my luck is turnde to loss.
Erecruell love my heart possessed, no cares did vex my head,
But since he harbored in my breast, my golden days are fled.
Time was when fortune did allow, great gladness to my share,
But ah, for that time is not, now does grow my cause of care.
Time was when I liude in delight, and reapt of joys my fill:
But now time is, works me despite, would waste had tarried still.
No hap so hard, no grief so great, whereof I feel not part,
Now shiuering cold, now flaming heat, anoyes my woeful heart.
So that hope is the only stay, on which my life dependes,
Which if it once be taken away, my date of living ends.
God grant my hope, such hap may see, that good success ensue,
Which if it long prolonged be, through grief I die, adieu.
For his friend.
I That in freedom lived of late,
And never stoupt to Cupids lure,
Have now made change of my estate,
And thousand torments do endure.
As late abroad I cast my looks,
In fancies lune I fast was cought,
And beauty with her bayted hooks,
Has me alas in bondage brought.
I love, but lack the thing I crave,
I live, but want my chiefest good,
I hope, but hap I cannot have,
I serve, but starve for want of food.
Then so to love, what state more ill?
Such life affoordes small time of joy,
Such wavering hope does often kill,
To serve and starve what worse anoy?
Yet will I love whiles life does last,
And live whiles any hope remains,
And hope when dismal days are past,
To have reward for all my pains.
Lo thus I live by hope sustaynd,
Yet through despair, die every hour,
In sorrow glad, in pleasure painde,
Now fed with sweet, now choakt with sour.
Dear Dame in humble sort I sew,
Since mine estate to you is known,
Voutsafe my doleful case to rue,
And save his life who is your own.
Somewhat made of nothing, at a Gentlewomans request
YE gladly would have me to make you some toy,
And yet will not tell me whereof I should write:
The strangenes of this does breed me anoy,
And makes me to seek what things to endite.
If I should write rashly what comes in my brain,
It might be such matter as likes you not best,
And rather I would great sorrow sustain,
Then not to fulfill your lawful request.
Two dangers most doubtful oppress me alike,
Ne am I resolved to which I might yield,
Wherefore by perforce I am foretd to seek,
This slender device to serve for my shield.
Since nothing ye give me to busy my brain,
Nothing but your nothing of me can ye crave.
Wherefore now receive your nothing again,
Of nothing, but nothing, what else would ye have.
Of the instability of Fortune.
WHo wisely ways false fortunes fickle change,
Which in short space turns love to mortal hate,
Shall find small cause to deem it wondrous strange,
To fleet from happy life to worse estate.
For why her sweet is always mixed with sour,
If now she fawn, she frowns within an hour,
Her smiles are wyles to cause men hope for hap,
Her traynes breed pains, though pleasant be the show,
Him whom she now does dandle in her lap,
Straightway sustaines a wretched over throw.
And whom thou see at foot of wheel down cast,
Within short space, she hoyseth up as fast.
The raging Seas which daily ebbes and flows,
The wavering winds, which blow now here now there,
More constant are then fortunes flattering vows,
Who in one hoode, a double face does bear.
To trust her looks, when she does fleere or laugh,
Is nothing else but trust a broken staff.
Pollicrates (as ancient writers tell)
On Fortunes wheel most highly was aduaunste,
And many a year she favored him so well,
That no ill hap long time unto him chaunst.
Yet in the end, to show her double ways,
With hemping roape, she causde him end his days.
If thou will shun all sorrow and distress,
By fortunes threats do set but little store,
If thine affairs have ever good success,
Yield hearty thanks to God thy Lord therefore.
If great annoyes do fall upon thee fast,
Think them due plagues for some offenses past.
By prayer then make level with the Lord.
Repentant hearts have mercy when they call:
Love him with fear, delight to read his word,
So great good haps unto thee will befall.
So shall thou lead thy life without annoyes,
And after death possess eternal joys.
Of the vanity of this life.
I Read in Poets feigned books,
That wise Ulysses wandering came,
Where Circes through her fawning looks,
Did work his men a spightfull shame.
She causde them quaffe great bowls of wine,
And presently they turnde to swine.
But he which followed virtue still,
Refusde to taste this proffered charm,
And would not work her beastly will,
As one that doubted farther harm.
Her witchcraftes and enchantmentes strange,
Were not of force this man to change.
The world with his alluring toys,
Is Circes witch of whom they write:
Which temptes us with her sugared joys,
And makes us swim in such delight,
That we so play with pleasures ball,
As if there were no God at all.
If man would way, what enemies
Are always pressed him to devour,
Me thinks from sin he should arise,
And make defense with all his power.
For why, the world, the flesh, and devil,
Do never cease to work us evil.
These so bewitch our foolish brains,
That naught we force eternal pain:
And every one in sin remains,
As if hell were a fable vain.
Alas we are seduced so,
That all true hearts do bleed for woe.
The sheep does yearly yield his fleese,
The plodding Ox the plow does draw:
And every thing in willing wise,
Keeps and obayes dame Natures law:
But man in wit, which should excel,
Against his Lord does still rebel.
Each does defer from day to day,
And thinks the morrow to amend:
But death arestes us by the way,
And suddenly some makes their end.
O wretched case that they be in,
Which die, and not lament their sin.
Thou silly man, still fear the Lord,
Thy former sins with speed forsake:
The judgment day in mind record,
In which each soul account must make,
Confess thy faults to God therefore,
Repent, amend, and sin no more.
Of the vanity of the world.
AS I lay musing in my bed,
A heap of fancies came in head,
Which greatly did molest me.
Such sundry thoughts of joy and pain,
Did meet within my pondring brain,
That nothing could I rest me;
Sometimes I felt exceeding joy;
Sometimes the torment of annoy,
Even now I laugh, even now I weep,
Even now a slumber made me sleep.
Thus did I with thoughts of strange device,
Lie musing alone in pensive wise:
I knew not what means might health procure,
Nor finish the toil I did endure.
And still I lay, and found no way,
That best could make my cares decay.
Reuoluing these things in my mind,
Of wretched world the fancies blind:
Alone a while I ponder:
Which when I had perused well,
And saw no virtue there to dwell,
It made me greatly wonder.
Is this that goodly thing (thought I)
That all men love so earnestly?
Is this the fruit that it does yield,
Whereby we all are so beguilde?
Ah Jesus, how then my heart did rue,
Because I had followed them, as true.
Alas we have lost the heavenly joys,
And have been deceived with worldly toys;
Whose fancies vain, will breed us pain,
If Christ do not restore again.
O wretched man, leave off therefore,
In worldly things put trust no more.
Which yeeldes no thing but sorrow:
To God thy Lord with speed convert,
Because thou most uncertain art:
If thou shall live too morrow,
Leave of to quaffe, to dance and play,
Remember still the judgment day,
Repent, relent, and call for grace,
For pardon ask, whilst thou have space.
Who does from his heart repentance crave,
Forgiveness (says Christ) of me shall have.
He will not the death of a sinner give:
But rather he should repent and live.
Still laud the Lord, peruse his word,
And let thy deeds with it accord.
A Lesson for all estates.
Have thou desire thy golden days to spend,
In blisfull state exempt from all annoyes?
So live, as if death how thy life should end,
Still tread the paths that lead to perfect joy.
Be slow to sin, but speedy to ask grace,
How are they blessed that thus run out their race?
Each night, ere sleep shut up thy drowsy eyes,
Think thou how much in day thou have transgrest;
And pardon crave of God in any wise,
To do that is good, and to forsake the rest.
Sin thus shake of, the ^^end for envy weeps,
Sound are our joys, most quiet are our sleeps,
Have not thy head so cloyd with worldly cares,
As to neglect that thou should chiefly mind:
But bear an eye to Satan's will snares:
Who to beguile, a thousand shifts will find,
Vain are the joys that wretched world allows,
Who trust them most, do trust but rotten bows.
Shun filthy vice, persist in doing well,
For doing well does godly life procure:
And godly life makes us with Christ to dwell,
In endless ^lisse that ever shall endure.
We pray thee Lord, our follyes to redress,
That we thus do, thus live, this bliss possess.
A Dream.
IN pleasant month of gladsome May
I walked abroad to view
The fields, which nature had bedeckt
With flowers of sundry hew.
The sight whereof did recreate
My senses in such sort,
As passes far beyond my power,
Thereof to make report.
Then sat I near a pleasant wood,
And listened with desire:
Unto the small birds chirping charm,
Which set my heart on fire.
Of Goldefinch and of Nightingale
I there might hear the voice:
The Wren, the Robin and the thrush,
Did make a heavenly noise.
Whose sweet melodious harmony
My senses so bere^t,
That I in this delightful plot,
A pray to sleep was left.
In slumber mine an ancient dame,
Before my face appears:
Whose hollow cheeks and wrinckled face,
Did argue many years.
Her vesture was as white as snow,
Her countenance very sad,
It seemed by her watery eine,
Some inward grief she had.
For why, great streams of trickling tears,
Distilled down her cheeks,
And thus to me with trembling voice,
This aged beldam speaks.
My friend (quoth she) be not dismayde,
At this my sudden sight,
Ne let the speeches I shall use,
Thy fearful mind afright.
I am not of the furies brood,
Ne damned sprites of hell:
But he through whom my being is,
Above the skies does dwell.
And Lady Concord I am calde,
From foreign Realms exilde:
Once mutual Love my husband was,
And plenty was our child:
But, ah, quod she, a hagge of hell,
That long has sought their spoil
Has slain them both, unless they dwell,
Within your english soil.
Heerewith there issued from her eine,
Of tears abundant store:
And sighs so stopped her feeble voice,
That she could speak no more.
The sight whereof (me thought) did raise,
Great dolours in my breast:
Yet praying her for to proceed,
She thus her mind expressed.
Vile Covetousness that fury fell,
Has wrought us all this woe:
To Concord and to Mutual Love,
She is a deadly foe.
Time was, when we were well esteemde,
And calde each countries stay:
But Covetousness now rules the roast,
And bears all the sway.
And were it not that in this land,
I find some small relief:
I had been dead long ere this time,
Through greatness of my grief.
Debate and rancour night and day,
On this vile Dame attend,
Whom she to work her beastly will,
About the world does send.
These two have raysde such war and strife,
In parts beyond the Seas,
That now few nations in the earth,
Enjoy their woonted peace.
Now gold is reverenced as a God,
Each hunts for private gain.
Men care not how their souls shall speed,
So wealth they may attain.
Of conscience now, few make account,
Him men esteem most wise:
Which to beguile his neighbor poor,
Can craftiest means devise.
This said, me thought the ancient dame,
Did vanish straight away.
And I awaking here withal,
Went home without delay,
Where taking paper, pen, and ink,
With speed I there enrolde:
The circumstaunce of all the tale,
That Concord to me told.
Which makes me wish that every one,
Would mutual love embrace:
And that no spots of covetousness,
With sin their deeds deface.
A Dream.
Laid in my quiet bed to rest,
When sleep my senses all had drowned;
Such dreams arose within my breast,
As did with fear my mind confound.
Me thought I wandered in a wood,
Which was as dark, as pit of hell:
In midst whereof such waters stood,
That where to pass, I could not tell.
The Lion, Tiger, Woolfe, and Bear,
There thundered forth such hideous cries:
As made huge Eccoes in the air,
And seemed almost to pearce the skies.
Long vexed with care I there abode,
And to get forth I wanted power:
At every footesteppe that I troad,
I feared some beast would me devour.
Abiding thus perplexed with pain,
This case within my self I scand,
That human help was all in vain,
Unless the Lord with us do stand.
Then falling flat upon my face,
In humble sort to God I prayde:
That in this dark and dreadful place,
He would vouchsafe to be mine aid.
Arising then a wight with wings,
Of ancient years me thinks I see:
A burning torch in hand he bringes,
And thus began to speak to me.
That God, whose aid thou did implore,
Has sent me hither for thy sake:
Pluck up thy sprites, lament no more,
With me thou must thy journey take.
Against a huge and lofty hill,
With swiftest pace me thinks we go:
Where such a sound mine ears did fill,
As moved my heart to bleed for woe.
Me thought I heard a woeful wight,
In doleful sort power forth great plaintes:
Whose cries did so my mind afright,
That even with fear each member faintes.
Fie (quoth my guyd) what means this change,
Pass on a pace with courage bold,
Hereby does stand a prison strange,
Where woonderous things thou may behold.
Then came we to a fort of brass,
Where peering through great iron grates,
We saw a woman sit alas,
Which ruthfully bewaylde her fates.
Her face was far more white then snow,
And on her head a crown she ware,
Beset with stones that glistered so,
As hundred torches had been there.
Her song was woe, and weal away,
What torments here do I sustain?
A new mishap did her dismay,
Which more and more increast her pain,
An vggly creature all in black,
Ran to her seat, and flang her down,
Who rent her garments from her back,
And spoyld her of her precious crown.
This crown he plaste upon his head,
And leaving her in doleful case,
With swiftest pace away he fled:
And darkness came in all the place.
But then to hear the woeful move,
And piteous groans that she forth sent,
He had no doubt, a heart of stone,
That could give ear and not lament,
Then (quoth my guide) note well my talk.
And thou shall hear this dream declard:
The wood in which thou first did walk,
Unto the world may be comparde.
The roaring beasts plainly express,
The sundry snares in which we fall,
This Jail is named deep distress,
In which Dame virtue lies as thrall,
She is the wight which here within,
So dolefully does houle and cry,
Her foe is called deadly sin,
That proffered her this villainy.
My name is Time, whom God has sent,
To warn thee of thy souls decay,
In time therefore thy sins lament,
Least time from thee be taken away.
As soon as he these words had said,
With swiftest pace away he flies,
And I hereat was so afraid,
That drowsy sleep forsook mine eyes.
For a Gentlewoman.
LIke as a forte or fenced town.
By foes assault that lies in field,
When Bulwarks all are beaten down,
Is by perforce constraynde to yield,
So I that could no while withstand,
The battery of your pleasant love,
The flagge of truce took in my hand,
And meant your mercy for to prove.
My foolish fancy did enforce,
Me first to like your friendly suit,
Whiles your demands bred such remorce,
That I could not the same refute.
I bad you take with free consent,
All that which true pretense might crave,
And you remaynde as one content,
The thing obtaynd that you would have.
Such friendly looks and countenance fair,
You freely then to me professed.
As if all troth that ever were,
Had harbored been within your breast.
And I which saw such perfect shows,
Of fraudlesse faith in you appear.
Did yield my self to Cupids Laws,
And shewde likewise a merry cheer.
No loving toys I did withholde,
And no suspect did make me doubt.
Til your demeanure did unfold,
The wily trains ye went about.
Who sees a ruinous house to fall,
And will not shift to get him thence.
When limines be crushed, and broken all.
Its then too late to make defense.
When pleasant bait is swallowed down.
The hooked fish is sure to die,
On these Dame Fortune often do frown,
As trust too far before they try.
Of had I wist, who makes his moan,
Its ten to one he never thriues,
When thieves are from the Gibbet thrown,
No pardon then can save their lives.
Such good advice as comes too late,
May well be calde, Sir fore wits fool:
Elsewhere go play the cosoning mate,
I am not now to go to school.
But clearly do at length discern,
The mark to which your bow is bent,
And these examples shall me warn,
What harm they have that late repent.
Your sugared speech was but a bait,
Wherewith to bleare my simple eyes,
And under them did lurk deceit,
As poison under honey lies.
Wherefore since now your drift is known,
Go set your staule some other where:
I may not so be overthrown,
Your double dealings make me fear.
When steed by thieves is stolen away,
I will not then the door lock fast,
Wherefore depart without delay,
Your words are wind, your suit is wast.
And this shall be the final doom,
That I to your request will give,
Your love in me shall have no room,
Whiles life and breath shall make me live,
For a Gentlewoman.
What lucklesse lot had I alas,
To plant my love in such a soil,
As yields no corn nor fruitful grass,
But crops of care, and brakes of toil?
When first I chose the plot of ground,
In which mine Anchor forth was cast,
I thought it stable, firm, and sound,
But found it sand and s^ime at last.
Like as the Fouler with his ginnes,
Beguiles the birds that think no ill,
By fyled speech* so diverse winnes
The simple sort to work their will.
But I, whom good advice has taught,
To shun their snares and subtle charms,
Am not into such danger brought,
But that I can eschew the harms.
The skillful Faulconer still does prove,
And praise that hawke which makes best whing,
So I by some that seemd to love,
Have had the proof of such a thing.
From (...) they did pursue their game,
With swifte^^ whing and ega^ mind,
But when in midst of flight they came,
They turnde their traynes against the wind.
Ye haggards strange therefore adieu,
Go seek some other for your mate,
Ye false your faith and prove untrue,
I like and love the sole estate.
Like as Ulysses wandering men,
In red seas as they past along,
Did stop their ears with wax as then,
Against the subtle Mermayds songue.
So shall their crafty filed talk,
Here after find no listening ear,
I will bid them go pack and walk,
And spend their words some otherwhere.
By proof experience tells me now,
What fickle trust in them remaynes,
And tract of time has learned me how,
I should eschew their wily trains.
Such as are bound to Lovers toys,
Make shipwreck of their freedom still,
They never taste but brittle joys:
For one good chance a thousand ill.
Cease now your suits and gloze no more,
I mean to lead a Virgins life:
In this of pleasure find I store,
In doubtful suits but care and strife.
A Godly discourse.
LIke as the wight far banished from his soil,
In country strange, oppressed with grief and pain,
Does nothing way his long and weary toil,
So that ye may come to his home again:
And not accounts of perils great at hand,
For to attain his own desired land.
Such is the state of us thy servants all,
(Most gracious God) that here on earth do dwell:
We banished were through Adams cursed fall,
From place of bliss, even to the pit of hell:
Our vice and sins, as marks and signs we have,
Which still we bear, and shall do to our grave.
When that all hope of remedy was past,
For our redress when nothing could be found:
Thine only son, thou did send down at last,
To salve this sore, and heal our deadly wound:
Yet did they please to use him as a mean,
Us banished wights for to call home again.
And for because thy Godhead thought it meet,
The sacred book of thy most holy will,
Thou did us leave a lantern to our feet,
To light our steps, in this our voyage still,
Directing us what to eschew or take:
All this thou do, for us vile sinners sake.
Grant us sound faith, that we take steadfast hold,
On Christ his death which did our ransom pay,
So shall we shun the dangers manifold,
Which would us let, and cause us run astray.
The wicked world, the flesh, the Devil and all,
Are stumbling blocks, each hour to make us fall.
This Dungeon vile of Satan is the nest,
A Den of dole, a sink of deadly sin.
Heaven is the haven in which we hope to rest,
Death is the door whereby we enter in.
Sweet Savior, grant that so we live to die,
That after death, we live eternally.
In the praise of Music.
THe books of Ouids changed shapes,
A story strange do tell,
How Orpheus to fetch his wife,
Made voyage unto hell.
Who having past old Charons boat,
Unto a Palace came,
Where dwelt the Prince of damned sprites,
Which Pluto had to name.
When Orpheus was once ariude
Before the Regal throne:
He playde on Harp, and sang so sweet,
As moude them all to moan.
At sound of his melodious tunes,
The very souls did moorne,
Yxion with his whirling wheel,
stood still and would not turn:
And Tantalus did not assay,
The fleeting floodes to taste:
The sisters with their hollow siues,
For water made no haste.
The greedy Vulturs that are faynde,
On Titius heart to gnawe,
Left off to feed: and stood amasde,
When Orpheus they saw,
And Sysyphus which roules the stone,
Against a mighty hill,
Whiles that his music did endure,
Gave ear, and sat him still.
The furies eke which at no time,
Were seen to weep before,
Were moude to moan his heavy happ^
And shed of tears great store.
If muficke with her notes divine,
So great remorce can move,
I deem that man bereft of wits,
which music will not love.
She with her silver sounding tunes,
Reuiues man's dulled sprites,
She feeds the ear: she fills the heart,
With choice of rare delights.
Her sugared descant does withdraw,
Thy mind from earthly toys,
And makes thee feel within thy breast,
A taste of heavenly joys.
The Planets and Celestial parts,
Sweet harmony contain,
Of which if creatures were depriud,
This world could not remain.
It is no doubt, the very deed
Of golden melody,
That neighbors do together live
In love and unity.
Where man and wife agrees in one,
Sweet music does abound,
But when such stringes begin to jar,
Unpleasant is the sound.
Amongst all sorts of harmony,
none does so well accord,
As when we live in perfect fear,
And favor of the Lord.
Who grant unto us sinful wightes,
Sufficient power and might,
According to his mercy great,
To tune this string aright.
A pleasant Jest.
SOmetimes in France it did so chance,
One that did service lack:
A country clown went up and down,
With fardell on his back.
When that this swad long trauailde had,
Some service to require:
His fortune was, as he did pass,
A farmar did him hire.
When April showers, y^ brings May flowers,
Made spring time bud and sprout:
This country swain, for masters gain,
Did ride his fields about:
Now as he road, in ground abroad,
In prime of pleasant spring:
Hard by their town, this country clown,
Did hear two cuckoes sing:
One of them sat fast by a gate,
In their town field, which stood
In place neereby, he might discry
The other in a wood.
These Cuckoes seemde, as lobcocke deemde,
With envy to contend:
Which of them twain, in plain song vain,
The other could amend.
Thus sange they long, their woonted song,
Their townefielde Cuckoes throat
Was nothing clear, which chaungd the cheer
Of farmers man, God wot.
His horse he ties, and fast he hies,
Upon a tree to stand:
And made a noise, with Cuckoes voice,
To get the upper hand.
He thought not good, he of the wood,
Should bear away the praise:
To make him yield, to him of field,
Himself the Cuckoe plays.
Cuckoe, quoth he, upon the tree,
And cuckoe, cuckoe said,
With cuckoe, cuckoe, and cuck cuck cuckoe,
Long time these cuckoes playde.
As they thus stand, from woods at hand
Two wolves for pray that sought,
By chance espied, the horse fast tied,
That lobcocke thither brought,
To him they hye, and presently,
In pieces did him tear:
Whereat amasde, the lobcocke gazde,
And pist himself for fear.
When Wolves were gone, coming down anon,
Homewardes he hide with speed:
And there does tell, all that befell,
Of this unlucky deed.
His master swore, being wroth therefore,
He would none other nay,
But that the flaue, and foolish knave,
The price of horse should pay.
But to proceed, it was agreed,
The wives that there did dwell,
The case should scan, of this poor man,
If he did ill or well.
It being seen, he did it in.
Defense of all the town:
With one intent, they gave consent,
For to accquite the clown.
They eke him gave a garland brave,
Adornd with many a rose:
And great and small, him captain call
Of Cuckoes, where he goes.
Now in my mind, he were unkind,
That would wish any ill:
Unto a wight, in townships right,
That showed so great goodwill.
A Newyeeres gift to a Gentlewoman.
IF pure goodwill, not meaning ill, might boldly, might boldly,
Presume to tell his mind:
I would not use, in terms diffuse, thus coldly, thus coldly
To show my self a friend.
But now adays, so sin preuailes,
That faith decaies, and friendship fayles,
Most men are so infected with ielous musing brains,
That trust as one rejected, forsaken clean remains.
And things are constred clean awry,
When naught was meant but honesty.
Thus much I say, as by the way, reciting, reciting,
What danger may ensue:
Because that I suspiciously, in writing, in writing,
Do send my mind to you.
Some will surmise, that I p^etend,
By such device some naughty end:
But let them speak and spare not, I force it not a bean,
For all their talk I care not, whilst guiltles I remain.
Such as have not transgrest the laws,
Do never fear to plead their cause.
But now, sweet heart, it is my part; to open, to open,
The sum of mine intent:
I send this bil, for pure goodwill, in token, in token,
That former year is spent.
It is in deed a simple shift:
To serve in steed of new years gift,
Though slenderly I make it, your pardon let me have*
If in good part you take it, no more of you I crave:
So shall you bind me day by day,
To pleasure you in what I may.
But I offend, such words to spend, in seeking, in seeking,
That you should pardon me:
If often I do, that breeds in you, misliking, misliking,
Corrected let me be.
My self to you I yield and give,
As prisoner true, whilst that I live:
So may you be revenged, for my presumptuous heart:
Which has perhaps offended, to play so leawd a part.
Condemn me to be prisoner still,
So may you boldly work your will.
Proceed my dear, the case is clear, now stay not, now stay not
Give judgment out of hand:
If you ordain, perpetual pain, I way not, I way not,
Your just decree shall stand.
And if you will award it so,
That I must now to prison go:
Your heart shall be the prison, wherein I will abide,
Until by right and reason, my case be thoroughly tried.
O God, how happy should I be.
If such a gaile enclosed me?
A delectable Dream.
AS late abroad asleep I lay,
Me thought I came by wondrous chance:
Whereas I heard a harper play,
And saw great store faeries dance.
I marched near, drawn by delight,
And pressed these gallant Dames among:
When as their dance being ended quite,
Of him that playde they crave a song.
My presence naught appalde their mind,
He tunde his harp, his voice was clear:
And as a foe to woman kind,
He sang this song that follows here.
A Woman's face is full of wiles,
Her tears are like the Crocadill:
With outward cheer on thee she smiles,
When in her heart she thinks thee ill.
Her tongue still chattes of this and that,
Then aspine leaf it wagges more fa^^
And as she talks she knows not what,
There yssues many a troathlesse blast.
Thou far do take thy mark amiss,
If thou think faith in them to find:
The Wethercocke more constant is,
Which turns about with every wind.
O, how in pity they abound!
Their heart is mild, like marble stone,
If in thy self no hope be found,
Be sure of them thou gettest none.
I know some pepernosed dame
Will term me fool and saucy jack,
That dare their credit so defame,
And lay such slanders on their back.
What though on me they power their spite,
I may not use the glosers trade,
I cannot say the crow is white,
But needs must call a spade a spade.
Heerewith his songue and musik ceast,
The Faeries all on him did frown:
A stately dame amongst the rest,
Upon her face falls prostrate down.
And to the Gods request did make,
That some great plagues might be assind
To him, that all might warning take,
How they speak ill of womankind.
Heerewith (a wonder to be told)
His feet stood fast upon the ground.
His face was neither young, nor old,
His harp untouched, would, yield no sound.
Long hair did grow about his s^ull,
His skin was white, his blood was read,
His paunch with guts was bombast full,
No dog had ever such a head.
His color often did go and come,
His eyes did stare as he did stand:
Also four fingers and a thombe,
Might now be seen in either hand,
His tongue likewise was plagued sore,
For that it played this peevish part,
Because it should offend no more,
'Twas tied with stringes unto his heart.
Yet in his mouth abode she still,
His teeth like walls did keep her in:
Which now grind meat, much like a mill,
His lips were placde above his chinne.
Thus was he chaungd, that none him knew,
But for the same he was before:
By silent signs he seemde to sue,
That Gods would now torment no more.
And he would there without delays,
Recant all that, which erst he spoke.
He pardoned is, on harp he plays,
And presently this songue did make.
AMongst all creatures bearing life,
A woman is the worthyest thing:
She is to man a faithful wife:
She mother was to Christ our king.
If late by me they were accusde,
I have therefore received my hyre:
Unless they greatly be abusde,
They never are repleate with ire.
They neither chide, fight, brawle, nor lie,
The gentlest creatures under sun:
When men do square for every fly,
To make them friends the women run,
And where they chance to fix their love,
They never swerve, or seek for change:
No new persuasions can them move,
It Is men that have desire to raunge.
Like Turtles true they love their spowse,
And do their duties every way:
^ hey fee good orders in the house,
When husbands are abroad at play.
And to conclude they Angels are,
Though here on earth they do remain,
Their glittering hew, which shines like Star,
And beauty brave declares it plain.
This said, the Faeries laughed,
And seemd in countenance very glad,
To speak my mind, I then had thought.
How some were good, and some were bad,
But (mark ill hap) a friend came by,
Who as he found me sleeping so,
Did call me up with voice so hye,
That slumber sweet I did forgo.
To his most faithful friend.
A Thing most strange to tell, of late did chance to me:
whiles y^ I took my pen in hand, to writ my mind to thee,
As I had thought in have to pach a verse or two,
Without regard, as common friends, accustomd often to do:
I could not for my life, mine eyes so waking keep,
But that a sudden slumber came, which made me fall asleep,
In dream I seemde to see, appear before mine eine,
A comely Lady well be seen, attirde in decent wise,
Most modest were her looks, most cheerful eke her face,
Me thought therein was picturd out, a worthy matro^s grace.
O thanklesse wretch, she said, and can thou so neglect
My worthy laws? is there with thee of friends no more respect?
Do know to whom thou writest? is he a common friend?
Suffiseth it in common sort, that thou should show thy mind.
Has his deserts deserude of thee no better meede?
Is this due guerdon for y^ love, which did from him proceed?
In that he has in deeds, been always friend to thee,
Let him peceiue by friendly words, thee thankful still to be.
He looks not for thy deeds, he knows thy power is small,
And will thou then deprive him, wretch, of words, of deeds and al?
Brute beasts requite good turns, it cannot be denied,
Will thou the^ be ungrateful which have reason for thy guide?
Shall friendship dwell in beasts, and men be found unkind?
Shall they for love, show love again, and thou forget thy friend?
With that she gave a beck, and bad me to awake,
And said, do show thy thankful mind, and so requital make.
Herewith she did depart, my slumber past away,
I felt my cheeks bedewd with tears, through words y^ she did say
Her bitter sharp rebukes, did make me muse a space,
Chiefly in that they did proceed, out from so fair a face.
But then I called to mind, that Gratitude she was,
That tha^kful Dame whose custom is from friend to friend to pass.
I took my pen in hand, with purpose to declare
The Circumstance of this my dream, with cloyd my head with care,
Herein also I thought her precepts to obey,
And all the plot of thy deserts, most largely to display,
But when my dream was done, I found such little store:
Of paper, that I could not have, wherein to write the more.
One that had a froward Husband, makes complaynt to her mother: Written in
French, by Clement Marott,
AND is there any wight alive,
That rightly may compare.
Or go beyond me silly wretch,
In sadness and in care?
Some such may be, but this I say,
One must go far to seek,
To find a woman in this world,
Whose grief to mine is like:
Or has so just a cause of moan,
In dumps of deep despite,
I linger on my loathsome life,
Depriud of all delight.
Men say the Phoenix is a bird,
Whose like cannot be found,
I am the Phoenix in this world,
Of that those care does wound.
And he that works me all this woe,
May be the Phoenix well,
Of all enraged senseless wightes,
That in the earth do dwell.
I moan not here as Dido did,
Being stryken at the heart,
As worthy Virgill does record,
With dint of Cupids dart.
Nor in my playnts some Lover name,
As Sappho did of yore:
But husband is the cause hereof,
Which makes my grief the more.
For Lovers if they like us not,
We may cast of again,
But with our husbands (good or bad)
Till death we must remain.
I do not speak these words, as if
His death I did desire,
But rather that it might please God,
His thoughts so to enspire,
That he might use me as he ought,
Or as I do deserve,
Since that I him (as duty byndes)
Do honor, love, and serve.
And seems it not desert think you?
At his command to have
The beauty great and other gifts,
that nature to me gave?
Is It not desert, such one with him
In loyal bed to lie,
As always has most faithful been,
And will be till she die:
To look on him with cheerful face,
to call him Spouse and friend,
To coll and kiss, all this he has,
With frank and willing mind,
And all things else as God commands,
And duty does allow,
Yet am I dealt with at his hands,
Alas, I know not how,
He thanklesse man, does ill for good,
Against all right and law,
He had of me good fruitful Corn,
And pays me chafe and straw,
For meek and humble courtesy,
Fierce cruelty he geues,
For loyalty, disloyalty,
And that which most me grieves,
Is when in sweet and humble sort,
I come to make my moan,
His heart no more is mollified,
Then is the Marble stone.
The cruel Lion ready bent,
With paws and teeth to tear,
When that the silly Hounde does yield,
His malice does forbear.
When Attalus the Romayne host
Did erst subdue in field,
His heart to mercy was enclinde,
As Soon as they did yield.
Black Pluto eke the Prince of hell,
Uneasy to be woone,
When Orpheus had playde on harp,
His rankour all was done.
By sweetness and by courtesy,
What is not wrought alas,
Nerethlesse the sweetness Feminine,
Which others all does pass
Can nothing do before the eyes,
Of my hardhearted feere,
The more that I submit my self,
The stranger is his cheer.
So that in wrongful cruelty,
And spite he does excel,
The Lions wild, the Tyrants stout,
And monsters eke of hell.
As often as I reuolue in mind
The greatness of my harms,
I think how forth the Fowler goes,
with sweet and pleasant charms,
To take the birds, which once betrayed,
He either killes straight way,
Or keeps them pende in pensive cage,
That fly no more they may.
And so at first, I taken was,
By his sweet fleering face,
And now depriude of joy alas:
Am handled in like case.
Now, if the birds (as some avouch,
Do curse his keeper still,
In language his, why curse I not,
The Author of my ill.
That grief does ever greater harm,
Which hidden lies in breast,
Then that which to some faithful friend,
By speaking is expressed,
My sorrows then shall be reuealde,
Some steadfast friend unto,
My tongue thereby unto my heart,
A pleasure great may do.
But unto whom should I disclose
My bondage and my thrall?
Unto my spouse? No surely no,
My gaynes should be but small,
Alas to whom then should I moan?
Should I some Lover choose,
Who in my sorrows and my griefs,
As partner I might use?
Occasions great do counsel me
To put this same in ure:
Mine honor and mine honesty,
Forbid such rashness sure.
Wherefore ye lovers al, adieu,
Unto some other go:
I will observe my vowed faith,
Though to my greatest foe.
To whom shall I power forth my plaints?
To you most loving mother?
For they by duty do belong,
To you, and to none other.
To you I come to seek relief,
With moist and weeping eyes:
Even as the heart with thirst oppressed,
Unto the fountain hies.
If any salve in all the world,
may serve to cure my wound:
Dame Nature says undoubtedly,
In you it must be found.
Now if some succor may be had,
Assisted let me be,
But if it lie not in your power:
Yet spend some tears with me.
That yours with mine, and mine with yours
Might so keep moist the flower,
That erst proceeded from your womb,
And wastes every hour.
His Friend W. C. to Mistres F. K. whom he calls his Captain.
AS Soldiers good obey their captains will,
And ready are to go, to ride, or run:
And never shrink their duty to fulfill,
But what they bid, it by and by is done.
So rest I yours (good Captain) to dispose,
When as you please, to combat with your foes.
Your foes, said I? alas what may they be,
That have the heart, to harm so sweet a wight?
Who dare attempt to try his force with thee,
Shall conquered be, ere he begin to fight.
Let thousand foes against thee come in field,
Thy beauty great will make them all to yield,
To yield, said I? nay rather would they choose,
By thee subdude, to live in bondage still,
Then lead such life as Conquerors do use,
In thy disgrace, and wanting thy good will.
But strike the drum, and let the trumpet sound,
To take thy part, whole legions will be found.
So many ears as ever heard thee speak:
So many eyes as have thy feature vewde,
So many hands thy puysance has made weak,
So many hearts thy beauty has subdued,
Each of these ears, each eye, each hand, each heart,
(Sweet Captain) still are pressed to take thy part.
Each ear, to hear when envy seeks thy foil:
Each eye to spy who works thine anoy,
Each hand, with blade to conquer them in broyle:
Each gladsome heart, for victory to joy.
Thus every part the trusty friend will play,
For thy behoof, whom God preserve always.
The complaynt of a sinner.
LIke as the thief in prison cast,
With woeful wayling mones,
When hope of pardon clean is past,
And sighs with doleful groans:
So I a slave to sin,
With sobs and many a fear,
As one without thine aid forlorn,
Before thy throne appear.
O Lord, in rage of wanton youth
My follies did abound,
And eke, since that I knew thy truth,
My life has been unsound.
Alas I do confess,
I see the perfect way,
Yet frayltie of my feeble flesh,
Does make me run astray.
Aye me, when that some good desire,
Would move me to do well,
Affections fond make me retire,
And cause me to rebel.
I wake, yet am asleep,
I see, yet still am blind,
In ill I run with hedlong race,
In good I come behind.
Lo thus in life I daily die,
And dying shall not live,
Unless thy mercy speedily,
Some succor to me give.
I die O Lord, I die,
If thou do me forsake,
I shall be likened unto those,
That fall into the lake.
When that one prop, or only stay,
Holds up some house or wall:
If that the prop be taken away,
needs must the building fall.
O Lord, thou art the prop,
to which I clean and lean:
If thou forsake, or case me of,
I still shall live in pain.
Although my hard and stony heart
Be apt to run astray:
Yet let thy goodness me convert,
So shall I not decay:
Sweet God do rue my plaints,
And sheelde me from annoy:
The^ my poor s^ule this life once past
Shall rest with thee in joy.
Of the discontented estate of Lovers.
WHo so attempts to publish and display,
Of Cupids thrals the strange and awkward fits,
Does seek to count the sand amidst the Sea,
And wades beyond the compass of his wits:
Whose griping greefes and passions to disclose,
Is to describe a world of care and woes.
More easy its to weild the weighty charge,
That Atlas has in bearing up the Skies:
Then to unsold, and picture out at large,
The vn^outh caresin lovers breasts that lies.
Whose rest is toil, whose joy is endless grief,
They often sue, but seeldome find relief.
If Plutoes den that ugly pit of hell,
Great griefly plague, and torments has in store:
I dare avouch that those in love which dwell,
Do taste them all, and twice as many more.
Which makes me say, and not without good cause,
Thrice happlesse wights, that yield to Cupids laws,
As Aetna hill does belke forth flakes of fire,
And hydeous sounds are hard within the same:
So Lovers burn through inward hot desire,
And hollow sighs burst out amidst the flame:
Whose scorched hearts despair and anguish gnaw
Like greedy Gripes, that peck Prometheus maw.
In mirth they moan, yet smile amidst their woe,
In fire they freese, in frost they fry straight way:
Swift legs to run, yet are not able go,
Such is the state, in which poor Lovers stay:
As houering hope does hoyst them up on hye,
Fear clips their wings, so that they cannot fly.
They feign in hell, one only plague to fall,
For just reuendge to those that do amiss:
But they that love, are subject to them all,
And never feel one lightning hour of bliss:
That (to conclude) thrice happy is their chance,
That never knew to tread the lovers dance.
A Newyeres gift to Mistress C. P.
SWeet wight be glad, pluck up your sprites,
Old Friendship is renewd:
Mild Concord has thrown down the broth.
That Discord lately brewd.
Foul Envy, Malice, and Debate,
In tears their time do spend:
In that the platform which they laid,
Came not to wished end.
The mighty Jove, which rules all,
Their prayers heard, no doubt:
Else could not their hot kindled wrath,
So soon be quenched out.
Thus far their fury did prevail,
A time and place was set,
Whereas at their appointed hour,
To try it out, they met,
And dealt. For vows had rashly past,
So long foes to abide:
Until the one, the others force,
In open field had tried:
I shrink, to think what horror great.
Now gripes your heart through fear.
I seem to see each member quake,
As if ye had been there:
To hear my muse unto your ears.
This doleful tale to tell.
Put fear to flight, cast care aside,
All things are ended well:
But Rancour vile, could thou power forth,
Thy spite upon none other:
But that to combat thou must bring,
My father and my brother?
And I my self with eyes must see,
And view this doleful sight?
Go pack, thou have sustaind the foil,
For all thy poisoned might.
For by the blows that they did give,
Their friendship does increase,
And in their hearts established is,
An euerduring peace.
The seeds that thou in them did plant,
Are plucked up by the root:
Thy sister Discord never shall,
Again set in her foot.
For if in dealing of their blows,
Their hands had not been blessed:
A late repent had made them rue,
For harboring such a gest.
But of ungrate discurtesies,
We justly might complain:
In that entreaties would not serve,
To make them friends again.
If in their mad and brainsicke heads,
Dame Reason had borne sway:
But malice, rancour, and debate,
Had banished wit away.
So that occasion of this broyle,
Was not our faithful friends:
But these forenamed furies fell,
And other hellish fiendes.
Whose daily driftes are to deface,
Of friends the pure estate:
And makes them harbor in their hearts,
Great heaps of deadly hate:
In that things past, betwixt them are
For given and forgot:
Let us embrace and love them so,
As if this happened not.
If strange it seem, that stranger I,
in verse to you do write:
Assure your self, it does proceed,
through greatness of delight,
That I conceive in that I see,
them reconcilde so well,
Whom no persuasions lately serude,
their furies to expel.
These simple verses to your view,
I have thought good to send,
In token of a good neweyeere,
and so farewell, I end.
A strange history.
Ye that would hear a Story strange
To this example rare,
Attentively take heed:
Which pictures here, before your face,
A worthy wight indeed.
A Phoenix well she may be calde,
Whose like cannot be found,
Chaste Camna was her name:
Endued with such comely gifts,
As none can tell the same.
All wives that in those days did live,
This woman did excel:
In constant love toward her spouse,
As does my Story tell.
Sinatus was her Husband called,
a gentleman by blood,
Whose grave advice in time of need,
did neighbors his much good.
In such chaste love this man and wife,
together did remain.
That no man could their spotless life,
With any blot distaine.
In self same city where they dwelt,
A tyrant vile bare rule:
Sinoris was his name,
Who being taken with her love,
Did woo this worthy Dame.
When after many onsets given,
He had sustaind repulse,
His travail spent in vain,
Her worthy spowse Sinatus then
He caused to be slain.
For he surmisde the fervent love,
That she to husband bare,
Did hinder him from his desires,
And eke procurd his care.
This done, afresh this tyrant vile,
Pursues in cursed suite
Of her: then that he did before,
He reapes none other fruit.
The secret flames of Cupids fire,
Now broyled so in his breast:
That naught but Camna could restore,
Sinoris wonted rest.
Resolved fully was he then,
To take this dame to wife,
Though baser in degree:
When no means else could serve his turn,
To crack her honesty.
Then suite was made unto her friends,
Who waying well his wealth,
Would have her needs consent.
She after great denialles made,
At length did seem content.
Sinoris, when he heard this news,
Was passing measure glad:
And order gave in all post have,
For marriage to be had.
To temple of Diana then,
With speed these couple go:
And with them sundry worthy wightes,
The marriage rites to do.
In outward show she did express,
Great signs of mirth and joy:
But in her heart she did contriue,
This tyrant to destroy.
Ere that they fully were assurde,
Chaste Camna bad one bring,
To her a drinking glass:
Of which she must to husband drink,
As there the custom was.
She tempred had a pleasant drink,
With balefull poison strong:
Of which she drank one part,
And to Sinoris gave the rest,
Which so did prick his heart:
That Phisickes skill could not prevail,
To save his vading life,
Which well did please the mind of her,
That then should be his wife.
When Camna saw that her device,
Did frame even as she would:
She greetes Dianas Image there,
With thanks a thousand fold.
And meekely kneeling on her knees,
Ah Goddess, then she said,
Thou know from murdring of my self
How hardly I have stayde.
Thou know, quoth she, what bitter pangues,
Has gripte my heart with grief:
Since my dear husbands death:
And only hope of just revenge,
Prolonged has my breath.
Which since I see now come to pass,
With gladness will I die,
And seek that soul to find:
In life and death, which then my self,
To me was deerer friend.
And thou, thou caitife vile (quoth she)
Which did my marriage crave:
In steed now of a marriage bed,
Prepare thy self a grave,
But seeing then Sinoris dead.
To husbands sprite she cried:
Oh, let not thy sweet company,
To me now be denied:
Come meet me now my loving mate,
Who still I tender most:
And saying so her arms abroad,
She yielded up the Ghost.
Amery lest.
SOmetimes in France, a woman dwelt,
Whose husband being dead:
Within a year, or somewhat more,
An other did her wed.
This good wife had of wealth great store,
Yet was her wit but thin:
To show what hap to her befell,
My Muse does now begin.
It chanced that a scholar poor,
Attirde in course array,
To see his friends that dwelt far thence,
From Paris took his way:
The garments were all rent and torn
Wherewith this wight was clad:
And in his purse, to serve his need,
Not one deneere he had:
He was constrainde to crave the alms,
Of those which often would give,
His needy and his poor estate
With some thing to relieve.
This scholar on a frostie morn,
By chance came to the door:
Of this old silly woman's house,
Of whom we spoke before.
The husband then was not at home,
He craves of the dame:
Who had him in, and gave him meat,
And asked from whence he came.
I came (quoth he) from Paris town,
From Paradise (quoth she)
Men call that Paradise the place,
Where all good souls shall be.
Cham zure my vurst goodman is dear,
Which died this other year:
Chould give my friend a good gray groate,
Some news of him to hear.
He saw she did mistake his words,
And thought to make some glee:
And said, your husband is in health,
I lately did him see.
Now by my troth (quoth she) cham glad,
Good scholar do declare:
Was not he wroth, because I sent
Him from this world so bare?
In deed (quoth he) he was disppleasd,
And thought it far unmeet,
You having all to send him hence,
With nothing but a sheet.
(Quoth she) good scholar, let me know,
When thou returnst again,
He answered, Dame I will be there,
Within this week or twain.
She said, my friend if that iche durst
Presume to be so bold,
Chould pray thee carry him some clothes,
To keep him from the cold.
He said he would with all post haste,
Into the town she hies,
Hat, doublet, shert, coat, hose and shoes
She there for husband buys,
She praying him in earnest sort,
It safely to convey,
Did give him money in his purse,
And so he went his way,
Not half of half an hour was past,
Ere husband hers was come,
What news she heard from Paradise,
She told him all and some.
And farther did to him declare,
What token she had sent,
Whereat her husband waxed wroth,
And woondrous ill content.
He calde her sotte, and doting fool,
And after him does ride,
The Scholar was within a Hedge,
And him a far espide.
He was afraid, and down does fling
His fardell in a dike,
The man came near, andaskt him news,
Of one whom he did seek.
That bare a fardell at his back,
The scholar musde a while,
Then answearing, said, such one I saw,
Pass over yonder style.
With hasty speed he down alightes,
And does the scholar pray,
Till he the man had ouertane,
So long the horse to stay.
Until he passed out of sight,
Full still the scholar bides,
Who taking then his fardell on
His horse, away he rides.
When he returned and saw himself,
By scholar flouted so,
Your selves may judge what cheer he made,
If he were wroth or no.
He swear I think a hundred oaths,
At length per mundum toots,
For that he had no shoes to wear,
Martch homewardes in his boots.
His wife did meet him at the door.
Hayee cought man? (quoth she)
No Dame (he said) he caught my horse:
The Devil take him and thee.
With that she laughed, and clapped her hands,
And said cham glad ich swear,
For now he has a horse to ride,
He will be quickly there.
When that her husband well had wayde,
That remedy there was none,
He takes his fortune in good part,
And makes no farther moan.
Now whether that this honest wife,
Did love her first good man,
To such as shall peruse this tale,
The case I leave to scan.
To his friend.
IF thou will shun the pricking briers,
And thornie cares that folly breeds,
Put bridle to thy fond desires,
Make reason mistres of thy deeds.
Attempt nothing by rash advice,
If thou thus do, then art thou wise.
Where Wit to Will is slave and thrall,
Where fond affection bears sway,
Ten thousand mischiefs do befall:
And virtue clean is cast away,
For having rashness for their guide,
Such cannot choose but wander wide.
Their credit quickly lies in dust,
Which yield as bondslaues to their will,
And follow every foolish lust,
Such leave the good, and choose the ill,
The ways of virtue those forgo,
And tread the paths of care and woe.
Will thou possess eternal joys,
And port of bliss at length attain?
Still praise the Lord with heart and voice,
From doing ill thy steps refrain.
These things obserude, be sure at last,
In heaven with Christ, thou shall be plast.
A Newyeeres gift to Master G. R.
THe courtesies ye have to me professed,
The bounty great that does from you proceed,
Would make me deem that day to be most blessed,
In which I might stand you in any steed:
When if I flinch, cry on me open shame,
And where you come, do bafful my good name.
If ye do muse that I but now begin,
For to express that heart has long concealde,
Assure your self, my secret thought within,
So prick me forth, it needs must be reuealde.
And eke desire does bid me let you know:
The loyal zeal, and duty that Iowe.
As I confess there is not in me ought,
To answer that my Velle would fulfill,
So (make account) right far he must be sought,
That does surmount or pass me in goodwill.
Which as in words I have given out to some.
My deeds shall try, if once occasion come.
A crew there are, whose nature is to gloze
And vaunt in words, when heart thinks nothing less,
Assure your self, that I am none of those,
But will perform, what here I do profess.
If that I shrink, when you have cause to rid me
Do cast me off, and utterly deny me.
Of fortunes gifts since slender is my part,
Take here in sign of happy year at hand,
These ragged lines true herauldes of my heart
By which ye may my meaning understand,
Their master has given them in charge to tell,
When he would worst, y^ he does wish you well.
A Translation out of French.
O Heavenly God, all beasts that do remain,
And nourisht are with food that thou do send,
Within the wooddes, the mountains, and the plain,
Thy holy hest, and laws do not offend.
The scudding fish that swimmes amidst the Sea,
The pretty birds that play them in the air:
Sun moon and stars, each thing does thee obey,
And at thy voice do tremble all for fear,
But man alas, yea man, whom thou do make,
More perfect far then all things else that live,
Man whom thou would thy proper shape to take,
To whom for guide, thou reason eke did give,
And wit, and sense for to discern aright,
What thing to take, what likewise to refuse:
He, he, vile wretch, and most unthankful wight,
Thy majesty, and honor does abuse.
A Complaint of a Sinner.
O Lord most dear, with many a tear, lamenting, lame^ting,
I fall before thy face,
And for each crime, done ere this time, repenting, repenting
Most humbly call for grace.
Through wanton will, I must confess,
Thy precepts still I do transgress,
The world with his vain pleasure,
Be witcht my senses so,
That I could find no leisure,
My vices to forgo.
I grant I have through my deserte,
Deserud great plagues and bitter smart.
But yet sweet God, do stay thy rod, forgive me, forgive me,
Which do thine aid implore,
O cease thine ire, I thee desire, believe me, believe me,
I will so sin no more.
But still shall pray thy holy name,
In the right way my steps to frame,
So shall I not displease thee,
Which art my Lord of might.
My heart and tongue shall praise thee,
Most humbly day and night.
I will delight continually,
Thy name to lawde and magnify.
With sighs and sobs, my heart it throbs, remembering, remembering
The fraylty of my youth,
I ran a race, deuoyd of grace, not rendering, not rendering
Due reverence to thy truth.
Such care I cast on earthly toys,
That naught I past for heavenly joys,
But now it me repents,
My heart does bleed for woe,
Which inwardly lamenteth,
That ever it sinned so.
With many a sigh, and many a groan,
O Lord to thee I make my moan.
Though furious fires of fond desires, allure me, allure me,
From thee so wander wide:
Let pitiful eyes, and moystened eyes, procure thee, procure thee
To be my Lord and guide.
As Scripture says, thou do not crave,
A sinners death, but would him save:
That sinful wretch am I O Lord,
Which would repent and live,
With ceaseless plaints I cry Lord,
Thy pardon to me give.
O Lord for thy sweet Jesus sake,
Do not shut up thy mercy gate.
Mercy, mercy, mercy, grant me I pray thee, I pray thee,
Grant mercy loving Lord,
Let not the Devil which means me evil, betray me, betray me,
Protect me with thy word.
So shall my heart find sweet relief,
Which now feels smart and bitter grief,
O Lord, I do request thee,
To guide my steps so well,
That when death shall arest me,
My soul with thee may dwell
In heaven above, where Angels sing,
Continual praise, to thee their king.
A Dumpe.
THE pangues, the privy mones,
The inward secret smarte,
The griefs, the heavy groans,
That vex my doleful heart,
So plundge my life in pains,
And reaue me of all joy,
That death is only means,
To rid me from anoy.
I grant that vital breath, preserves life in me,
Yet live I so, that death more welcome far should be.
No wight was ever so perplexed with despite,
I live to taste each woe, and die to all delight.
Although by outward looks, some deem me void of thought
Looks are no certain books, but bear false titles often.
For sundry times I jest, when joy (alas) is small,
And laugh amongst the rest, yet have no lust at all.
Lo thus in secret strife, my lingering days are led,
I die yet am alive: I live, as being dead.
The more I bear it out, as if I felt no ill,
The greater griefs, no doubt, do grow within me still.
The thing which does amate, and most anoy my mind,
Is that my hard estate, no remedy can find.
As one that loathes to live, and daily calls for death,
These lines to thee I give, in witness of my faith.
A Dumpe by his friend. G. C.
MY heavy heart in dolours drownde,
Consumes and pines away:
And for me wreth, naught can be found,
To cause my cares decay.
Ye eyes of mine, help to bewail,
Power forth your brinish tears,
To rue, alas, his wretched state,
In whom no joy appears,
How should I wretch take any rest,
How can my heart feel joy,
When as the wight, that loves me best,
Lies plundged in annoy?
Whereto serve tears, but to bewail,
The loss of such a friend:
Weep eyes, alas, weep on your fill,
And never make an end.
His troubled state, if to redress,
The spending of my blood:
Or that small pelf that I possess,
Could do him any good.
Then should your eyes sometimes permit,
Me silly wretch to sleep,
But out alas, it may not be,
Wherefore cease not to weep.
Such inward grief does me assail,
Through thought of his estate:
That if I long of succor fail,
All help will come too late:
O sacred Jove, to cure these woes,
Use thou some speedy means:
Or else, alas, with some short death,
Dispatch me of these pains.
For his friend.
LAte being new fangled, so fancy did move,
I was fast entangled in nets of blind love,
(Good friends, do believe me) I chose out a trull,
Which daily does give me a shrewd crow to pull.
Favor with her fellows raisde coals of desire,
Beauty was the bellows, that first blew the fire.
Thus was I enflamed, no reason was left me,
My senses were lamed, my wits were bereft me.
In hope of some favor, I then fell awooing:
Such was her behavior, she sought my undoing,
Small is my promotion, most foolish, what meant I,
To yield my devotion, to such a dame dainty?
Since love first soiourned, such ease do I feel,
As Yxion, turned about on the wheel.
Although by deserving, she ought to be mine,
With Tantalus staruing, in grief still I pine.
And through her controlling, my rest is as ill:
As Sisiphus rolling the stone up the hill.
Thus is my state changed, deep dolours do fill me:
My mirth is estraunged, good death come and kill me.
Whiles I here in moning, the time out do linger:
My grief and my groaning, is fallen in my finger.
My finger, my finger, my finger, believe me:
Alas little finger, full sore thou do grieve me,
Was ever a finger perplexed in such taking,
I think my poor finger will never leave aching.
The cause of my sadness, at length I conjecture:
Is love with his madness, that breeds this infecture.
I force not a pin, it forth now is gotten:
Yet whole is the skin, the flesh is not rotten.
I heard when it fell, now feel I no evil:
Dame dainty farewell, adieu to the devil.
A strange History.
AYoungman once, by chance that lost his way,
Through deserts wild, as on a time he past:
Four Lions fierce, that sought to gain some pray,
With gasping throat, he saw make at him fast.
Who running swift, to shun this danger great,
Espied a well, small trees about it greewe,
By which he honge, and in the same did leap,
Their ramping paws and malice to eschew.
Thus as he thought the peril to escape,
He did discry a mighty Dragon fell,
With open mouth most hidiously to gape:
Him to devour in bottom of the well.
Then lifting up his head, he looked out,
And might perceive the Lions still remain,
Which in such sort beset the well about,
That of escape, all hoping was in vain.
Thus as with death himself besiegde he saw,
A chance befell, which made him more dismayde,
Two beasts, one white, the other black did know,
The little twigges, that him from falling stayde.
With danger thus desette on every side,
He in a hole, behind his back did find,
A honny pot, which some man there did hide,
Now casting all his care out of his mind,
He with one hand the honny sweet did taste:
The other did from falling him sustain:
Until the beasts had gnawne the twigs at last,
That down he fell, and ruthfully was slain.
This well, the world does truly represent,
In which we live in danger every hour:
By Lions four the elements are meant,
Which daily seek all mankind to devour.
The Dragon fell, does signify our grave,
The twigges self love, the beasts, the night and day,
The honny pot, the great desire we have
To worldly joys, even to our souls decay.
Each one therefore, I earnestly advise,
Here in this world to use themselves so well*
And spend their days in such a godly wise,
That after death their souls in heaven may dwell.
Farewell Court.
The Preface to a Treatise ensuing, compyled by the Author, upon a theme given
by his approved friend and kinsman Master A. D.
I Have, according to my promise, though slenderly, compiled this simple
discourse on the theme that ye gave me, which was your Farwell to the court:
which although it be nothing so well handled, as by some experienced courtier
it might have been done: nevertheless it being considered, that my education
has been so far distant from the court, that I never saw the fashions of the
court, I hope that the privilege of a pardon may be purchased for my excuse
in this behalf. I have herein introduced Wit and Will as two domestical
counselors, always attendant on a man marching in this vale of misery: The
one giving him trusty and wholesome admonitions, how he should here direct his
life to the glory of God, and his souls health: The other with the flattering
alluremets of the sinful flesh, enticeth him to the pursutes of the pleasures
of this world, in the end drouning him in the puddle of al abomination, to
the utter confusion both of body and soul. Under the person of Wit is
prefigured a man, having a certain careful regard of his calling, which is
once in a man's life instilled into the hearts of those, whom God has sealed up
unto salvation, and causes them clean to cast away the vile and vain
vanities that the wicked world accounts as precious, and addict all their
doings toward the attainement of life everlasting. Under the person of Will, is
picturde out, how a man letting flippe the bridle of his affections, is carried
from the precious paths of perfect felicity, to the inevitable dangers of
drowning Caribdis: and so passing the sea of this world, not stopping his ears
with the wax of understanding, the voluptuous pleasures thereof, as subtle
Sirens, entice him to the following of them, whom they presently drown in such
delights, that he has never farther regard to the preserving of his soul,
but imitating the nature of brute beasts, addicteth himself only unto that,
which his own sensual appetite shall allow to be good. Although this may,
peradventure seem unto you, a too far fetched circumstance, little or nothing
pertinent to the purpose: yet my hope is, that when ye have thoroughly perused
it, ye shall not find the theme that ye gave me, left altogether untouched.
The best is, I know your thankful disposition to be such, that how soever it
be, being willingly offered, it shall not of you be ungratefully accepted. Thus
referring the view hereof to your discret consideration, I wish you and yours
abundance of such prosperity, as your heart desires.

H. G.

Farewell Court.
I Youth, when Fancy bare the sway,
Within my peevish brain:
And Reasons lore by no means could
My wanton will restrain:
My gadding mind did prick me forth,
A courtiers life to prove:
Whose golden shows, and vain delights,
My senses then did move.
Not half so fast the bowdged ship,
The water in does drink:
When foes by force of roaring gunnes,
Endeavor her to sink:
As when the floodes of fond desires,
Came rumbling in my head:
Which clean extinguished Virtues sparks,
That Nature there had bred.
No power I had the sinful snares
Of filthy vice to shun:
My good desires did melt away,
As snow against the sun.
If wit sometimes would go about,
Me wisely to persuade,
How that I spent my time amiss,
And used a naughty trade.
Then wilful will would be at hand,
And pluck me by the sleeue:
And tell me plain, wit was a fool,
And could no counsel give.
His lores (quoth will) are very sour,
His precepts are but cold:
Do follow me, then all delights
To use thou may be bold.
He talks of scripture every hour,
Unsavory to digest:
And I will always serve thy turn,
With that which likes thee best.
Who would not rather rome abroad,
To seek some pleasant sport:
Then to be pend in study fast,
Like soldier in a forte?
To hawke, to hunt, to card, to dice,
To sing, to dance, to play:
And can there be more pleasant means,
To drive away the day?
To toss the buckler and the blade,
Lewd women to entice:
Are not these virtues most esteemde,
And had in greatest price?
To lend each man a firiendly look,
And use the glosers art:
In outward show to bear good will,
And hate him with our heart.
Are not such men as flatter best,
In every coast esteemde?
Is not Tom teltroath every where,
A busy cockscombe deem?
It is a world to see the sotte,
To have a check, he knows:
And yet the noddy never linnes,
Men's vices to disclose.
He ever tells men of their faults
Such is his rude behavior,
When he by speaking naught at all,
Might purchase greater favor.
Who countes it not a wisemans part,
To run with hare and hound?
To say and unsay with one breath,
So winning may be found:
Wherefore rejoice, set coc^e on hoope,
Let nothing make thee sad,
Be merry here: when thou art dead,
No mirth can then be had.
Thus wanton will would every day
Still whisper in mine ear:
And wit, which could not then be heard,
Was fled I know not where.
Who tries the hazard of the seas,
By sturdy tempest tossed:
If that a drunkard guide their ship,
Are they not quickly lost?
How like (I pray you) is he then,
To^ suffer shipwreck still,
Whose wit and wisdom gouernde is,
By his unruly will?
This Pilot vile, in me long time,
Did masters room supply:
Till good Advice did tell me plain,
I ran my course awry.
He spyed a time to break his mind,
When Will was gone apart:
And thus to me he did unfold,
The secrets of his heart.
O Man, for whom Christ on the cross,
His precious blood did spill:
What do thou mean in mundane toys
To spend thy time so ill?
Do thou not think that God has eyes.
To see thy vile abuse?
What show of reason can thou bring,
Thy rashness to excuse?
Did Christ sustain must bitter death,
All sinne^^ to red^eme:
And will thou wallow still in lust?
And not his laws esteem?
If he by death, and no means else,
Men's sinful souls could save,
Do thou then think by wanton life,
Eternal joys to have?
Too too too much thou art deceaude,
If so thou do believe:
That he to have men live in vice,
Himself to death would give.
With upright eye peruse his laws:
And thou shall clearly see,
Into what sinkes of deadly sin,
Thy will has carried thee.
Thine eyes do see, thine ears do hear:
Thy senses all do serve thee,
Yet can thou neither hear nor see,
Such things as should preserve thee.
In earthly toys thou can discern
That which may best avail thee,
But in such thing as touch thy soul,
Thy eyesight still does fail thee.
O what a madness moves thy mind*
Thou see and have thy senses:
Yet will thou blindly wallow still,
In filth of vile ^ffences.
It better were for one to be,
Of sight deprived clear,
Then see to sin, and not see that
Which chiefly should be seen^.
Take heed therefore: at length repent,
Its better late then never:
For Christ the Cockle from the corn,
At harvest will disseuer.
At day of doom, the good and bad,
Shall not alike remain:
The good shall taste incessant joys:
The bad eternal pain.
Doste think that such as tospotlike,
Set all at six and seven,
Are in a ready way to bring
Their sinful souls to heaven?
And those that in great Princes Courts,
Do Ruffian like behave them,
Doste deem that they thereby procure,
A ready mean to save them?
To swear, to stare, to bib and bowse,
To flatter, gloss, and lie,
Is this (tell me) the steadfast faith,
That men are saved by?
If white be black, if night be day,
If true pretense, be treason:
If fire be cold, if senseless things
Fulfill the rule of reason.
Then may the pleasures of this world,
Be cause of our salvation,
For otherwise, thou must confess,
They further our damnation.
Take heed therefore, and warned thus,
Let not the world beguile thee,
Ne let the lusts of lawless flesh,
With sinful deeds defile thee.
Let wilful will be banished clean,
With all his wanton toys,
Which filles thy head with vain delights,
In steed of steadfast joys.
Note well my words, still serve the Lord,
Repent and sin no more,
Christ has for true repentaunt hearts,
Great mercy still in store.
When good advice had told this tale,
Prostrate I down did fall,
And humbly holding up my hands,
Thus on the Lord did call.
OMighty God which for us men,
Did suffer on the Cross,
The payneful pangues of bitter death,
To save our souls from loss,
I yield thee here most hearty thanks,
In that thou do vouchsaue,
Of me most vile and sinful wretch,
So great regard to have.
Alas none ever had more cause,
To magnify thy name,
Then I, to whom thy mercies shewde,
Do witness well the same.
So many brunts of fretting foes,
Who ever could withstand,
If thou had not protected me,
with thy most holy hand?
A thousand times in shameful sort,
My sinful life had ended,
If by thy gracious goodness Lord,
I had not been defended.
In stinking pooles of filthy vice,
So deeply was I drownde,
That none there was but thee alone,
To set my foot on ground.
Whenas the fiend had led my soul
Even to the gates of hell,
Thou caldst me back, and do me choose,
In heaven with thee to dwell,
Let furies now fret on their fill:
Let Satan rage and rore,
As long as thou art on my side,
What need I care for more?
MY Prayer said: me thought I felt
Such quiet in my mind,
As shipmen after tempest past,
In wished harbor find.
My will would then no more presume,
To rule in reasons place,
For good advice would be at hand,
His doyngs to disgrace.
Who told me plain that wanton will,
Did always serve the Devil,
And was his busiest instrument,
To stir up men to evil.
Although the gallant be so brave,
And sell such pleasures here,
They that best cheap do buy the same,
Shall find it all too dear.
Yet they that would adventure there,
The Devil and all may gain.
With every inch of pleasant joys,
He selles ten Else of pain.
If that thou wisely wilt foresee,
Such winnings to eschew,
Ere beggary take thee by the back,
Do bid the Court adieu.
Henceforth exile vile wanton will,
Which is thy cheifest foe,
Go get thee home: live to thy self,
And let all courting go.
Experience now should make thee know,
What vice in court does rain,
And tract of time should teach thee shun
Her pleasures mixed with pain,
Though some may daily there be seen,
That follow virtue still,
Which honor God, obey their Prince,
And fly from dooyng ill,
Yet sure, of them the greatest part
Are carried so away
With vain delights, that they ne think,
Nor mind their souls decay.
O that I here told not a lie,
O, were it not too true:
That very few, their Princess steps,
In godliness ensue.
Should I pass on her golden gifts
And graces to declare?
The sands in bottom of the Seas,
More easily numbered are.
If tongue or pen should take in hand,
Her virtues to unfold,
Tongue should not speak, pen would be worn
Ere half the tale were told.
She is (next God) the only spring,
From which our welfare flows:
She is a tree, on which naught else,
But graftes of goodness grows.
She is a Sun that shines on us,
with beams of blissful happes,
She is a dew that daily drops,
Great plenty in our lappes.
When angry Neptune shipwreck threats,
Through force of wrestling waves
She is a port of safe refuge,
Which us from danger saues.
When duskie clouds of errors black,
Had dimde our joyful day,
Through Christ she causde the Gospel shine
Which drove them all away.
She worthy statutes has ordaynd,
To keep men still in awe,
But every man unto himself,
Will now set down a law,
Such as his will does fancy best,
They never care how bad,
Nor far from God and godliness,
So pleasure may be had.
If lawless lust were lawful love,
If wavering words were deeds,
Then would the Court bring forth more fruit,
And not so many weeds.
Thou know among the courting crew,
How little faith is forced:
Sound friendship from the most of them.
Is utterly deuorced.
Who cannot flatter, gloss and lie,
And set thereon a face,
Is never able for his life,
To get a Courtly grace.
Who sweates not in his suits of silk,
And is not passing brave,
Amongst them bears no countenance,
They deem him but a slave
As long as thou have store of coin,
And spendst it with the best,
In outward show great friendlinesse,
To thee shall be professed.
But if thy wealth begin to wear,
If pence begin to fail thee,
Their friendship then in time of need,
But little shall avail thee.
For they will shrink their heads aside,
And leave thee posts alone,
If twenty were thy friends before,
Now hardly getst thou one.
I pray thee let us scan this case,
And do thou sadly tell,
What thing at first, did make thee like,
And love the Court so well?
Did think that there a godly life,
Might soonest be attaynde,
And motions of the sinful flesh,
Most easily be refraynd?
That cannot be, for all men see,
How vice is there imbraste,
And virtue with the greatest part,
Is utterly defaste.
Did hope of wealth, first prick thee forth,
In Court to spend thy life?
Or did thou think that liberal gifts,
With noble men were ryfe?
If ought thou carry in thy purse,
Thou quickly there may spend it:
But when thy lands, and rentes are gone,
How can thou then amend it?
To beg would grieve thy lofty mind,
That erst had store of wealth,
And hanging is the end of such,
as take men's goods by stealth.
Because thou serust a noble man,
Perhaps thou makst no doubt,
In hope that he at such a pinche,
Will always bear thee out.
Such hope has hanged many a one,
Whom wilful Will did guide:
By often proof in these our days,
Too true it has been tried.
For when a halters sliding knot,
Has stopped their vital breath,
He was (say they) a handsome man,
Its pity of his death.
Thus all too late their pity comes,
But seldom comes their aid,
Wherefore do not forget these words.
That I to thee have said,
Be not sedewste by wanton will,
Let warnings make thee wise.
And after this in all thy deeds,
Be ruled by good advise.
This tale being told, he heald his peace,
And I which found it true,
Did yield him thanks and gate me home,
And bad the Court adieu.
We till to sow, we sow to reap,
We reap and grind it by and by:
We grind to bake, we bake to eat,
We eat to live, we live to die.
We die with Christ to rest in joy,
In heaven made free from all anoy.
FINIS.
A Preface to certain questions and Riddles ensuing, translated out of Italian
verse, into english verse, by H. G.
AL ye unto whom the skanning and viewing,
Shall come of these questions, and riddles ensuing:
I let you first know thus much without fayning,
That all of them carry a good and clean meaning,
If so they be constred aright in their sense,
Thus much may I boldly speak in their defense:
But if in ill part some fortune to take them,
We fail of the end, to which we did make them.
Which was for the solace of them that can use them.
What things can be sound, if men will abuse them?
To such as are clean, what can be vnpure?
Such as are defilde, ill thoughts have in ure,
If of any riddle badde sense ye pick out,
Guess at it again: ye fail without doubt,
And do not aright his meaning expound:
Their true exposition is honest and sound.
And that shall be proved, if you will crave trial,
So truly, that no man will stand in denial.
Committing the sequel to your approbation,
I finish the preface of this my translation.
1
A Father once, as books express,
Had sons twice six, nor more nor less:
Each son of children had scores three,
Half of them sons, half daughters be.
The sons are far more white then snow,
The daughters blacker then a crow.
We see these children daily die,
And yet they live continually.
2
A mighty black horse, with gallant white wings,
Within his graund paunch bears many strange things:
He often does travail for masters avail,
And caryes his bridle tied fast to his tail.
In going he flies twixtearth and the air,
And often, where they would not, his riders does bear:
He has diverse eyes, and yet cannot see,
I pray you do tell me what may this beast be?
3
A certain thing lives in place near at hand,
Whose nature is strange, if it be well scand:
It sees without eyes, it flies without wings.
It runs without feet, it works wondrous things.
To places far distant it often does rome:
Yet never departs, but taryes at home.
If thou do it covet to feel or to see,
Thy labor is lost, for it may not be.
4
What am I that wanting, both hands feet and head,
Of all them that see me, being deemed for dead.
Of breath have great store, and move too and fro,
Now up, and now down, now hye, and now low?
Alas what hard fortune does to me befall:
That guiltless am spited of great and of small.
They strike me, and push me, South, West, North and East:
Yet do I no harm to most, neither least.
When as my breath failing, I can do no more,
They then give me over, and never before.
5
I being the daughter of my uncles brother,
Am now of late become a mother:
And with my milk from my pappes which flows,
I nourish a son, my mothers own spowse,
Now tell what I am, declare mine estate,
For I give him suck, that first me begat.
6
None lives more iocound in all the whole land,
Though head does lie buried in mucke and in sand:
My beard it is gray, though not very old,
The strong I make weep, nor for heat, nor for cold:
Yet such is my state, that the poor love me well.
And still I am forced with great men to dwell.
7
From south and west comes a strange warlike nation,
Atti^de and apparel^ in wonderful fashion:
In garments milk white, these people are clad,
Which strike and oppress both good men and bad,
But favor they show in dealing their blows.
And save him from danger, each on his way goes.
And on his back caryes dead bodies great store,
Which with their thick buffets had beat them before,
Great furies are kindled at end of the fray:
Which makes this strange nation all vanish away.
8
Long is it since first to the world I came,
Small am I of body, poor, feeble, and lame*
Yet none in this world, nor one neither other,
In richesse and substance surpasses my mother.
8
Not long am I granted this life to enjoy,
So many there are that work me annoy.
O Lord how they rent me, it cannot be told:
What torments I suffer in heat and in cold.
One while am I drowned, such hap does befall,
Then next do they roast me: yet this is not al.
When thus they have used me, they cannot forbear me,
Ere first being beaten, by peecemeale they tear me.
Then serve I the turn of every estate,
But one kind of people me deadly does hate.
9
Do tell me my friends, what creature is he,
That two times is borne, as all men may see,
And lives a space, though not very long:
And often is killed, not having done wrong?
When y^ his breath fails, it lives no more,
It then is baptized, and never before.
Though many a one do evil entreat it,
They love it right well, and often do eat it.
10
A certain dead creature in mine arms I take,
With her back to my bosom, great glee does she make.
As thus I do hold her, she greatly does cheer me,
And well are they pleased, that see me and hear me.
Whilst erst it remained in forest and field,
It silent remaining, no speech forth did yield.
But since she of life, by death was deprived,
With language she speaks, men's sprites are revived.
11
A father begat me, yet I have no mother.
Nor Uncle nor aunt, nor sister, nor brother.
Straight when I was born, I began to flourish,
For every estate took care me to norish,
Thus many score years, they have loved me full well:
And eke entertaind me, amongst them to dwell,
All parts of the world I viewd in short space:
And still was bad welcome, in every place.
Though many by me, reap loss, care, and woe,
They never will license me from them to go.
12
Hard fortun does haunt me, by nature estranged
From male into female, I often am changed.
And where as before I liud well contented,
With prickings and punchings I now am tormented:
Now, more to accomplish their greedy desire,
They cruelly heat me, and scortch me with fire.
Though badly they use me, so mild am I still:
That I yield them life that thus do me kill.
13
Amongst the firiendships rare,
Of which old writers tell:
This may be plaste in highest room,
And does deserve it well.
Whiles death with gasping throat
Did gape for bloody pray,
Life conquered death, and saude that life,
Which death did seek to slay.
That life which did this deed,
As death would straight have flaine:
That life which late by him was saude,
Preserude from death again.
14
Begot wi hout father, in earth I remain,
And often I am turned, to my mother again.
By night and by day I labor always,
And with my sharp savor both please and displease.
Thus here in this earth my race out I run:
And never have issue, nor daughter, nor son.
15
A female I by name,
Am sister to a brother:
In all the world may not be found,
Our like, nor one nor other.
For he no sooner dies,
But I straightwayes do live:
And I often yielding unto death,
Still life to him do give.
Often after him I hie,
And gladly would him stay:
But he than arow from the bow,
More swiftly flies away.
Straight ways he folowes me,
My presence to attain:
And as he fled from me before,
I fly from him again.
Though strange our state does seem,
By proof ye may it try:
That both of us are still alive,
Yet both do daily die.
That ye may better know,
What strangers great we be.
We day and night do dine and sup,
With men of each degree.
16
Two are we in name, though in substance but one,
First framed by art then finished with moan.
Before we are ready, for those that will buy,
Through greatness of torment, we howl and we Cry.
Yet feel we no grief, for all this anoy,
Great numbers by us have comfort and joy.
Who when for their profits we have done what we may,
They then do reject us, and cast us away.
17
Fair art thou and ^^d, deserving great praise,
And all men thee reverence, and honor always,
Whiles that thy white banner abroad still is spread,
For then thou do comfort both living and dead,
But if thy black banner be spread forth in view,
All honor farewell, all gladness adieu.
Such woe then thou bring to more and to less,
As pen cannot write it, nor tongue may express.
18.
Of thee (O my friend) a thing I do crave,
Which thou never had, nor never shall have.
If that for thy self thou purpose to gain it,
Thy labor is lost, thou may not obtain it.
Although thou should live a whole thousand year,
And seek it, yet should thou be nothing the near.
Now if thou do love me, even so as thou say,
Do give it. For truly, I know that thou may.
The solutions of the riddles.
1 THe father the year: the xii. sons, y^ xii. months: the ix. children, the
xxx. days, and xxx. nights.

2 A Ship.

3 Amans mind.

4 A footeball made of a bladder.

5 An old man being in prison, his daughter coming to visit him, would give
him suck of her breasts and so nourish him.

6 An Onion.

7 Men trauellng in the snow are beaten with it, and carry the dead bodies on
their garments until they come to a fire, which makes them vanish away.

8 Hemp.

9 A chicken, being first an Egg, and then a chicken.

10 A Lute.

11 Play at all kind of games,

12 Wheat being the Newter Ge^der, in Latin is turned into farinam, meal,
which is the feminine, which is then co^nerted into bread, and so nourishes
them that bake it.

13 A man coming to a fountain to drink, saw a serpent climbing up on a
tree, to devour a neast of young Egles, which serpent he slew with his
sword, and so saved their lives, being about then to drink of the water, the
young birds, scraping out the filth of their nests fowled it in such sort,
that it let him from drinking: a spaniel that he had there with him, tasting
of it, was presently poisoned.

14 Salt.

15 The night and day.

16 A pair of sheares.

17 A good tongue and a bad

18 A maid being in love with a young man, desires him to give her a
husband, which in marriyng with her he might do.


