A COMMENtarye upon the Praphet Mycha. Written by Antony Gilby.

Anno domi. M.D. Li.

A preface with the sum of the Chapters and the time and life of the Prophet.
The word of God to Micha of Maresha in ye days of Iotham, Achas, Iehiskiah
kings of Judah, which he did see over Samaria and Jerusalem.
WE do need no new Prophets. We do need no mo Prophecyes. We do nead no mo
Miracles, signs, or tokens, which now do live in these latter days: if we
will call old things to memory: neither of we will believe the old
hystoryes reported by Moses, and the terryble threatenings of the Prophets.
Could we believe if the greateste miracles of raysinge the dead, to speak
amongs us were wroughte in our days (as Christ our sauyoure says too the
rich glotten.) Wherefore suffer me, I beseech the, too renew old things
written by this Prophet Micha, the most earneste rebuker of vice in his
time, and the most dylygente watch man to warn both of good and evil, for
to come upon his people, and if so be that the words of this old truth, do
chayfe your old sores in this perilous time, wherein all old euyls seem too
have dysgysed them selves with new vysers: rather suffer them to be ripped to
the heard coore then to spurn impudentlye against the prycke, to strive
against the stream. For the time is at hand by the unchangeable appoyntmente
of the euerliuinge Lord and most mighty Judge, when every man shall be tried
and Judged, approved of refused by the thoughts of his heart, by the words
of his mouth, and by the fruyts of his own imaginacions.



the true Prophets.

In the third Chapter he rypeth

In the.iiii. he promises a kingdom

In the.v. he threatens the desolacion with their own swearde points.

In the sixte he contendeth with the people in the person of God for their
ingratitude, teaching the true worship of God to stand in iudgmente,
mercy, and the reverence of the sacrate magesty of the almyghtie. He detesteth
in the parson of God al dysceytful dealyng and promises worthy recompens and
just rewards for all evil doers.

In the.vii. and last Chapter, the prophet bewaileth the skarsitye of ye good,
the small trust of worldely frendeshyp, he teaches patience, he gives
comfort, he promyseth delyueraunce to faithful Jacob, to the shame and
confusyon of God his enemies, and the land and praise of God his great mercy
and truth. Amen,

This have we hear in this Prophet wholesome doctrine for all ages. For the
spyryte of God sees from time to time contynuallye our iniquytyes, and
stryueth evermore there against, No hill is so high, no valleye so low, that
he sees not. He shakes the foundacyo^s of the earth, when he rebukes the
world in the rygoure of his wrath.

Let us therefore remember the old world before us plaged for sin, drowned
for their wyckednes, and fear the fire of gods wrath, threatened by the
Prophets, to be kyndled in these last times, to the everlasting destruction
of all evil doers, who with the devil and his angels shall have aworme, the
which shall hereafter gnaw and grate their conscience for ever, and a fyry
tormente which shall never be quenched whereof our Prophet warns the wicked
world, threatnyng woo and damnacyon with feruente spryt and sorrow of heart,
brastynge forth into tears, yellynge and syghinge for the evils he did say
toward them. Micha. i.

For this Prophet Micha seems to be another Eliah fervent in spyryt and
zeloous for the glory of God, he was of the pryncelye trybe of Judah, and
therefore acquaynted with the pryuy practices of the potentates and princes, he
did well inoughe know their idle deuyses, their vain imagynacyons: and cold
espy the lynkynge together of the high officers and Judges. He lived in ye
time of Esaiah, Hoseah, and Amos, under these.iii. kings. Iothana Achas and
Hezechiah. A man of such an high reuelacyon that Esaiah dare alledg the
greateste mysteryes of his hole prophecy of the spiritual kyngedome of Christ
and of the great tranquyllytye under him by the same words that this manne
of God Micha had spoken them. It shall be in the last days, and so forth
Esa.ii. Hieremiah also alleges him by name saying, Micha of Marescha was a
Prophet in the days of Ezekiah and says to all the people of Judah. Thus
says the Lord of hosts, Sion shall be plowed like the feilde, and Iherusalem
shallbe an heap of stones, and the hill of the house of the Lord shall be an
high wood. Hierem.xxvi. and the came is red the third Chapter of our
Prophet word for word.

We do read of ii. Prophets of this name. The first is named Micha the so^ of
Iemla an Israelite, whom Achab did say that he had only left one a live
among all the Prophets of the lord, but I do hate him (says he) for he
never Prophesied good toward me.iii. kings.xxii. The other is of Judah (our
prophet) which lived almost.ii. C. years after ye first Micha. He was borne in
a city called Maresha, which is in the trybe of Judah. Joshua.xv. His propheci is
general to al cities and cuntries, but unto Jerusalem and to Samaria, he
chiefly utters his threatninges because there he did know and see their
wyckednes to be great, amongs whom he did see cruelti, extorsio^, tyranni,
covetousness, avarice, ambicion, the contempt of God his true religion,
Idolatry, and like abhominacio^s to raygne (not only unpunished) but by the
chief Lords, greatest Pears, and Princes, practysed, used, and frequented.
In his time both these.ii. kingdo^s were greuousli vexed with wars without, and
treaso^s within themselves. They were polluted and defiled with Idolatry. So far
given over to minds reprobate, that forgetting al true worship of God and al
natural inclinacion, they did sacrifice their own children by fire unto Baal.
These wicked times wherein he lived under Iotham, Achas, and Ichiskiah, ar set
forth in the.iiii. book of the Kings.xv.xvi. and.xvii. Chapters.

As for Samaria, it was given over to al wyckednes. zacharia the wicked and
Idolatrous king reigning but.vi. months, was traytorously slain by Sellum,
which Sellum usurping ye crown but one month, was slain by Manahen, which
also slew all the enhabitants of Thapsa and most cruelly murdered all the women
with child, and rypte their bellyes, and tyrannouslye with taxes and trybutes
did vex all his subjects, to mayntaine his wyckednes, which causes our
Prophet to say, that they did flay their skyns of their backs and the flesh of
their boanes. Then Phacea his son raygned after him one year, as wicked as
his father, and they al walked in the wicked ways of Jeroboam the son of
Nabat, which set up the golden calfe. Thefore were they given over to minds
reprobate with gredynes to fulfill al their wicked lusts.

In the second year of the raygne of Phacea the son of Manahea, Phacea the
son Romalia wrought treason against him, slew him, and usurped the crown
and departed not from the wicked ways of his predecessors kings of Samaria.
Under him Theglathphallassar the king of Assiria, inuadeth Galile, and carries
away captive the trybe of Nephthalim. Again Osee the son of Hela wrought
treason against this Phacea, slew him, and usurped his crown, Against who^
Salmanasser moves war, does beseige his chief city Samaria, takes and
destroieth it, and so leads ye.x. tribes captive into Assyria. Thus with wars
and wickedness was Samaria destroyed, and as our Prophet warned in his time,
brought to an heap of stones which might have caused Jerusalem to have taken
heed to his threatenings. But no warninge can serve the wicked and stifnecked.
For Iotham the king of Judah and Jerusalem in many things, a man praise worthy
(though he did se many of these great plages fall upon Samaria for their
Idolatry) yet did he suffer his people to sacrifice in the hill altars,
contrary to God his holy commandment. As for Achas king of Jerusalem. He was
worsse the^ wicked Achab king of Samaria, for beside al other abhominacions he
did offer his son in fire unto Baal, after the manner of the heathen Cananees,
and spoiled ye treasures of the house of the Lord to give them to
Theglathphelasser. And though Ezechiah ye good king following him destroyed ye
idols, did break down the hill alters, and ye brase^ serpent, though I say ye
king himself, favored true religion, yet was their old wickedness so roted in
ye herts of his nobles and commons, that besides co^spiracies and pertakings
within his own realm, and also much war of fore^ nations without wherewith God
worthily plaged his subjects for their stobernes. Al their walled Cytyes were
taken by Senacheryb from the vttermoste borders unto Lakis, whereof our Prophet
speaks in the first chapter: yea, Jerusalem was obsessed and beseged as he
also prophecieth that this plage should come to the gates of Jerusalem.

Now we that read and hear these old things of Samaria and Ierusasalem,
their kings and Princes. In the end of the world, must know that they are
written for our learning, that we being warned by their scourge, Plage, and
fall: should fear to do the like wyckednes. And hear in this prophet
cheiflye we are warned of Idolatry, ambition, and extorsion. As for Idolatry
(though our governors here in England through the mighty hand of God have
forth comfort of his elect banyshed the outward show thereof) Yet one sort
making this most godly and glorious fact to serve their luker and gain: to
the sclaunder of such a notable enterprise: have seemed too change the kind
of Idolatri, making ye muck which they found heaped about those idols, to be
their god. So that they may worthily be called Idolaters, so long as they have
it, keep it, and set so much store by it, nether is it any new learenyng to
call this their avarice Idolatry, for so Paul calls it to Ephesians the v.
Chapter. Another sort there is which in their hearts have Idolles still, and
utter it when occasion serves, saying: that it was a good world when these
Idols of Wasyngeham, Canterburye, and their blessed Mass were worshipped and
regarded. There be moo sorts which will be called Gospellers, that have some
their bellye for their God, some their subtle wits and worldly policies,
some one thing, some another so that in effect Idolatrye is not banyshed, but
reigns more clokedly amo^gs us, too the ignominye and shame of the truth of
one God, which we would seame to set forth and maineteyne. As for ambicion
and extorcion the devil practices at this day too stop the glorious
kingdom of Christ by thyem, and rayseth ambytyous stomachs, haulte, and
proud minds amongs those, which would seem the stoutest captains of godly
cheualrye, which through their insatiable ambicion and gready desire of
gathering althings into their hands, robs, and reaueth, pilleth, polleth and
oppresses their fellow sougiours. So that under their holy profession and
pretensed religion, they do betray their grau^d captain and master of
religion, and works more wyckedly of the deuyls part, for the contempt of God
his word: then does any one which openly bears his badge and cognisaunce.
Against such therefore brings our prophet sore threatenynges, yea terryble
thoundrynges. Whereunto it behooves hye and low, the earth and all earthlye
creatures to give ear, and to harken. For it is the word of the Lord, not of
man which Micha brings. The Lord him self does speak it from the holy
temple of his majesty, from whence he shall come down right shortelye to be
both a wytnes and Judge against us.

Wherefore let us judge our selves, now warned by God his word, that we
be not judged of the Lord, and so for our wyckednes with the world
condemned. For our God, whose word is now sent amongs us, is a consuming
fire, before whom no syn can be cloked. His word is the hammer breaking the
hard stone.

The word of God to Micha.
THe word or message of the euerlyuyng Iouah (yt is) of him which now s, that
has been, that shall be. By whom also al things have their being: for so much
contains that hye name of God, which we do for the most part translate
(lord) thorowout the Bible, because the Jews not daring to pronounce it,
neither by any other word being able to expres so much of God, does place in
the stead thereof Adonai, which does sygnyfy Lord. Which I do note to this end
to admonysh the reader to avoid such cauillacions as the enemies of the
gospel have here to fore styrred about thee Lord, and our Lord, and to teach
the ignorant to have a deep consideracion of the magesty of this Lord, which
is, which has been, and which shall be, by whom al creatures have their being so
often as they do hear the Lord named and so call them to the reverence of the
name of God, so long by us Christians contempned, despised, and vyllanously
blasphemed, with usual oaths and abominable perjury. Where as the Jews dare
not speak nor write this great name with marvelous obseruacaons and much
reverence, to our great shame I do speak it, which do toss like a tennes
ball without al fear and reverence the name of our Lord God from mouth to
mouth, accountinge him unmeet for all good company, especyallye for a kings
court which will not take the name of god in vain at eueri other word

Oh ye blasphemers must this be the first entrye into your Courts and
company, to shake of the fear of God. So despitefullye to break his hollye
precept and commandment? so contumelyouslye to abuse his holy name, great
before all creatures, high before the angels, and terryble to the devils.
Learn some other couretynge before this Lord in his dreadful majesty come
down among you. You can talk reuerentlye of the kings Majesty, his
hyghnes, his hanorable counsel, my Lords grace, my Lord Bishops grace and
my ladies grace, and is there nothing left for the Lord of al Lords, the king
of all kings, but Gods blood, Gods wounds, Gods passion, blasphemyng
outragiously both God the father and his son Christ (who for to save us, shed
his blud, suffered these wounds and bitter passion) Is neither God, who
created thee? nor Jesus Christ, who redeemed thee, of no more reputacion? Is
this right courtyng? to set so light by thy creacion? thy redemption, thy
salvation? Then cursed be courtyng, woe worth the wicked company.

Here al people, The Text.
hearken thou earth, and all that therein is. The Lord God be a wytnes against
you, the Lord from his holy temple.

Loo, no kings course is excepted, but al people must do reverence unto this
Lord, al knees must bow before his magesty. The heaven is his seat, the
earth is his foot stool. The king in his pryuy chamber has this Lord a
wytnes of his doings. The Lords of the priuay counsel, can not shut
forth of the counsel chamber, this unreprovable witness. No King, no
Court, no Emperor, no Poope, Prelate shall woorcke so pryuelye, but this Lord
shall espy and se, shall both wytnes and judge al their doings.

Let us therefore tremble and diligently give ear when the Lord speaks, and
with fear and reverence humble our selves to his name. Desiringe as his son
taught us, his name too be sanctified, hallowed, renowned, reuere^sed and
magnified, and waitinge most obedientlie whiles his holy will be fulfilled.

Moses does call heaven and earth to witness against us, as does our Prophet
Micha. Deuternomi. iiii. xxx. and xxxii. So does Esaie also in his first
Chapter, teachinge us that the heavens, that is to say: the heavenly spyrytes
and angels, the earth, that is too say: al men create upon thee earth:
shallbeare witness at the great and terryble time of God his last Judgment,
wythall true preachers and Prophets, against our sinful stubbernes, which
will not repent, being so often admonished. Yea the euerliuinge and everlasting
Lord in his dreadefull Majesty comes as an unreprovable witness too
aduenge the contempt of his hollye name, and all other abominations, as this
our watch manne warns, will we not yet stoop? abate our Pride, pluck
down our high courtly lokes, halte cou^tenaunces, and leave our bleather
blown bragges, set forth with shamlesse oaths, too the contempt of God his
holy name, and that bitter passion which Christ our savior, suffered for
us.

Well, the Lord is higher then al, and he will shortly come down from his
holly temple. Then woe to the ex^^n of pride, the blasphemers of his name. Woe to
the ambicious Tiraunts and covetous caitifes.

Woe to the dronken in their lusts, either hear in England, or else where,
for there is one God which hates sin ever sense he made manne, and one
sprite which has by the holy word uttered sin, rebuked it, and foughten
against it from the beginning, one Lord, which shall be boothe witness
and judge over all flesh, which shall come sodaynelye upon the wicked,
strongelye, and myghtely, like an hayle storm, like a whyrle wind, or like a
sooden floude of waters falling upon a great plain Esaias. xxvii.

The Text.
For loo God shall come forth of his place, he shall come down and walcke upon
the high places of the earth. And the hills shall melte under his feet, the
valaies shall cleave in sonder, eue^ as the wax melts against the fire and as
the waters which fall down with violence.

Our Prophet Micha doothe paint the coming of the Lord to judgment boothe
with the Jews and also with the hole world with most euydent similitudes of
coming down and walking, which can be applied unto God, who fylleth all
places but only by borrowed speech as Moises did say. Genesis iii. God did walk
in Paradyse at the euentyde because he did then open his Majesty most
presentlye unto Adam, howbeit upon our savior Christ whom we believe bodilye
too be in one place, not in all: according to the saying of the angel unto the
women. He is not hear after his resurreccyon, but the men of Galile stood and
beheld his humane body, go up into the heavens, and the angels said again
unto them: ye me^ of Galile, this same Jesus shall com again, as ye have seen
him go up in to the heavens. Acts. i. and God has appointed a day, says
Paul: when he will judge the world with ryghteousnes, by this man whom he
has raised from death. Act. xvii. The which day and time of the Lords
coming seems here to be chieflye and pryncypallye descrybed, though the
destruccyon of the Jews be therewyth insumate, for thus does Christ him
self cople both together.xxiiii. of Matthew and David in the.xvii. Psalm
doothe adioyne the day of his particular deliverance to this day of the
Lords coming, saying: the Lord has heard my voice from his holy
temple. The earth was moved and trembled, and the foundacyons of the
Mountains were troubled, and shaken. The smoke did come forth in his wrath
and the fire did flame from his face, so that cooles were kindled therewith, he
bowed down the heavens and came down and darkness under his fete.

Of this day and of these high places whereupon the Lord shall walk,
speaks Esaias the Prophet. In that day the Lord alone shall be exalted for it
shall come upon all the high and proud, upon al them that are arrogant, and
they shall be brought low, and up on all the high Ceder trees of Lybanus, and
upon all the Oaks of Basan, and upon all the high hills, and upon every high
tower, the pride of me^ shall be brought down, and their high lokes be brought
low says Esaias, which is the meaning of our Prophet.

The Text
And the hills shall melt.

For our God is a consuminge fire and who is able to abide the heat of his
heavy displeasure? and as Esaias says the Lord shall come in fire, and his
Chariot shallbe like a whyrle wind, to utter forth his furye with great
rage, and his rebuke in the flame of fire. For in the fire and the sweard shall
the Lord Judge all flesh. Esaias. lxvi.

Now, where the proud world does think yt the lord lives in the heavens,
not seeing, nether regardi^g their doings upon earth, our Prophet rebukes that
gross opinion, and tells the^ that as he did come terryble down upon the
mount Sinai when he did give the law of the.x. commandments. So will he
come with fire, to make their hearts to melte, when he will ask accomptes of
the keeping and fulfillynge of these holy commaundeme^ts. The which fearful
communication and threatninge may worthily cause us in these latter days,
upon whom the end of the world is come, to quake and tremble, consideringe our
careless life, which do al things so wilfullye and wickedlye as though either
there were no God at al, or no day appointed to make answer for our doings.
But the Lord will come spedely from his holy temple.

For the wickedness of Jacob, The Text.
all this and for the sin of the house of Israel.

After the Prophet have threatened utter destruccyon of the.ii. kingdoms
Samaria and Jerusalem, set forth by open similitude of the mountains melting,
ye valleys cleaving in sondre, like as wax does before the fyrye flame, he
shows the cause of the ruin of the^ both and of ye great wrath of God, and
as all prophecies be general being given by one spirit, which sees to the
end evermore stryuyng against the syn of al nations. So does the spirit teach
us that the only cause of Gods wrath in all ages, and al places, is the sin
and wickedness of the world, for the which he said once: It repents me that
I made man. Genesis.vi. For sin God destroyed the whole world, which he had
made, both man and beast, save only a seed reserved in the Arc, to preach
his justice, and his mercy, in a new world, renewed by his spirit. For the
proud synful words of the old Giantes, did the great plage of the confusion of
languages come up on the world, which we do feel unto this day, so that one
man unto another being of a strange nation, is made as it were a dombe and
speecheles beast. For syn were the.v. cytyes burnt with fire. For sin were
the old Giants Og king of Basan, and the monstrous seed of Suachim
destroyed. For sin the Cananites, the Heuites, the Hethites, the Iebusites,
and to be short after them who were placed in their Countries, the chosen
Israelites being in noumber like the sand of the sea, were myserably wasted,
destroyed, and consumed. The.iiii. pryncipall Monarchies which Daniel
descrybeth, be all beaten down for sin. And the.x. little horns or kingdoms
also, has been every one of them, ofter then once changed and translated.
Finally al realms countries, towns and cities, shall for sin have the like
ruin and destruction. Some sooner and sorar, to cause the rest to repent, and
at the length all because the reward of sin is destruccio^ by the mighty Lord
his unchangeable ordinance. So sore a thing is sin in the syghte of God,
that who so ever synneth, deserves death. This was the old learning which the
Lord taught Adam in Paradise, which all the seed of Adam feels and tastes
continuallye, and yet can neither see nor avoid the cause of their
destruction, but as Media did say: Even seeing, wittyng, and wyllyng we do
perysh.

Who was the cause of sin to Jacob? was it not Samaria? The Text
and who of the hie places of Judah? was it not Jerusalem?

This sentence can not stand as it is commonly translate, what is the syn?
because the interogatiue in the Hebrew is the Masculine ge^der, and therefore
must be referred to the author of the sin, and hye places, whereunto the
answer also serves that Samaria and Jerusalem, that is to say: the chief
cities and kings courts are the causes of al wyckednes and Idolatrous
abhominacion. Even so so said Elias to king Achab: Thou and thy fathers house
has troubled Israel which have forsaken the commandments of God, and
followed Baalam. For like as the king and court is, such are the people, as the
experience of al ages playnelye teaches. For the people always by flatteryng
and counterfaityng kings and princes, does imitate and follow their manners and
condicio^s. And this is nothing unnatural, that the body and inferior members
should follow the qualities and disposicion of the head, but rather impossible
that it should be inclined any other ways. Here is to be noted for the variety
of tra^slacion, of this text that it is a defective sentence, and by sundry
interpreters is diuerstye supplied like as many mo are in the old testament.
For the Hebrew tongue in se^te^ces of vehemencye, and also of great haste does
leave out certain words easy to be understand. itti mi, who with me, ha shalam,
how peace, such eclypsed phrasies have we in the English tongue, as how now?
horse, horse. Samaria was the kings of Isreal's seat, as we read.iii.
King.xvi. Amry king of Israel bought the hyl Thamor of Themer, and buylte it
for his palace, where as the kings were named before to raygne in Thyrsa, as
appears in the same chapter.

This Samaria is much blamed in scripture, because of the golden calfes which
Jeroboam set up, and all the kings of Israel in this city chiefly maintained
after him. And Jerusalem is annexed as her sister by birth, being both of one
people, brought forth of Egypt, and also like of condition in all kind of
abhominacions, as the third chapter of Ieremye, and xxiii. of Ezechiel does
at large under ye names of Ahola and Aholiba declare. Where as Jerusalem is
accounted much more wicked, because she could not beware by her systers fall,
but increased her abhominacions, and therefore much more greuouslye to be judged
and condemned.

In what case then are we living in these evil days, in our great cities,
courts, and kings houses, which have not the terryble example of one of the^
only, but of infinite other set before our eyes. We do read of the wicked
kings in Jerusalem Achas and Manasse, which did not only excede in wyckednes
the kings of Israel and princes of Samaria, but they are charged yt they far
pass the wickedness of that people which the Lord did drive forth before
them for their sins. And abominations the wicked Cananees, where the kings
and Princes were so evil, the people could not be good, therefore did come upon
them horrible destruccyon at the end. What shall we say in these perilous
times wherein al men co^plaineth, religion to be neglected, charity to be clean
quenched, al good manners and orders perverted and corrupted, covetousness so
depelye grounded, and riot so rooted in their hearts, which have authorytye
over us, that these poisons are spread like smyttinge lepryes, from the head to
the hole body even to the souls of the feet and lowest members.

Repent (we say) O you princes and judges of the earth, remember these
examples of old, consider that al is laid upon your backs, for you must
answer for the sins of the people, even you I say, which should be as it were
earthlye gods unto the people, to minister all goodness. Become not devils the
authors of evil and wickedness, have often in mind the godli sayings of the book
of wisdom, that power is given unto you of the Lord, and authoriti from the
hiest, which shall examine your works and shall search your very thoughts,
because that you being the ministers of his ki^gdome, have not used right
judgment, nor kept ye law of righteousness, nether have you walked after the
will of God.

Horribly therefore and spedelye shall he appear unto you, for a most strait
judgment shall be to them in authority. Unto the small mercy shall be showed, but
the mighty shall be mightily tormented. etc as in. Sapi. vi.

Repent we cry again O ye lords of the earth of your former negligens in
religion. Lay down your couetouse ambicion, sease from riot and your
lascivious wantonness. Away with your stinkinge fornycacyon. Let go your
oppression and extorsion.

Sease to do evil. Learn to do good. Least you do perish with these.ii.
cities before named Samaria and Jerusalem. The pore people your subjects must
needs follow your example, if you do unfeignedly repent as did ye ki^gs and
princes of Niniue. Like as they can not eskape unpunished if you do sink in
sin with the princes of Sodo^. But oh, where be ye exa^pls and proclamacio^s of
the kings and princes of Niniue, which admonished of their syns by Jonah only,
proclaimed a fast for young and old, man and beast, commanding most straightly yt
they should cry unto the Lord with all their might, and every man torn from his
evil way, and from the wickedness, wherein he was practiced. That God might
repent of his word and turn awa his wrath. But you contrariwise, not
repenting, but forgetting how you have offended God with your old idolatry, do
abuse his light, now sent amo^gs you, to the satitfying of your lusts, and to
conde^nacio^ of your own souls, cause god his holy word, and ye preachers
thereof to serve your couetusnes. You do make proclamacio^s daily I do grant
against the covetous dealings of your inferior members and subjects: but be
sure, ye body can not be delivered of this disease except ye head be first
pourged. Wherefore be warned in time by the prophets and preachers, for if we
still both head and foot, continue in evil, we must look to gether to perish with
the wicked world before us.

The Text
I will lay Samaria in forowes to plant vines, I will cast down her stones into
the valei and raise her foundacyons.

Lo, utter destruccio^ is threatened to this city for the wickedness of the
inhabitants. And it was performed which ye prophet speaks by Salmanasar, San
herib, Phul, and Theglathphelaser, as appears in ye.iiii. book of the kings
the xvii. and.xviii. chap. And shall our polluted Samarita^s of London escape
unpunished, the Jews could not meddle with the Samarita^s without pollucio^,
neither ca^ ye faithful come to London but they are contaminate. Their eyes
with filthye sightes, are full of adultery, their ears with wicked tales and
blasphemies, ar obturate and made deaffe, their minds with infinite errors
occupied, with ye diversity of diuilish delucions deme^ted, that neither
Samaria, neither Sodo^ it self, has deserved before god and man any sorar, or
more extreme punishment. God is there none amo^gs the^, nether yet erthly king,
as appears by their laws co^te^pned, no love amongs me^, no shame fastnes
among women, no faith, no fear, no trust, no co^fide^ce, no master content
with one office and calling, no servant for love, does show obedience.

In shadow and outward show, have banished Idolatry, and changed their
religion, yet do they serve the devil still as much as ever they did in all
kind of abhominacio^. Therefore shall this Englysh Samaria be wasted and
destroyed, because from this sea all sinful poodles of England does flow and
spread abroad.

And all the graven images of Samaria shall be broken in pieces, The Text
the gifts and offerings shall be brent with fire, and all her temples shall I
make desolate, for she has gathered all of the hyre of an harlot, and to the
hyre of the harlot, they shall be returned.

The graven Images, the golden calves, and what so ever the Assyryans fou^din
Samaria, they spoiled and waisted it, they destroyed their towns and temples
as is towched.iiii. Kings.xvii. They did take away their golden calves.
Hosea.viii. whereby the lying Lord would utter the weakness of those feigned gods
which could not help them selves, and the foolyshnes of all men which will
worship such broken cesterns that can hold no water. Yea, their foolyshnes and
shameless abhominacion is much more uttered in that the Prophet says that
Samaria had gathered all this of the hyre of the harlot: charging the^ as does
Ezechiel.xvi. Chap. that where unto all common whores, there is given rewards.
Israel lokinge for no reward of her Idols, with whom she has ren of
whoringe, has contrariwise made the^ rich with her gifts and rewards. But
as goods evil gotten must needs be evil spente (according to the common
Proverb) so now comes it to pass, that these rich Jewels gold and silver
offered Idols in Samaria, are carried into Babylon to be dedicate to their
Idols again, or elsse are ready to be converted upon such harlottes as
communelye follows such garrisons of orderles sowgioures and by the curse of
god and most heavy temptacion (as we do se in our time) that which was
gotten by spiritual fornicacion is spent in beastly and bodily whoredom.

Wherefore I shall mourn and yel, The Text
I shall go spoiled and naked, I must murne like the drago^s, and wayle like the
Estriches.

The Prophet brasteth forth with tears, with sighing, sobbing, yelling, and
criyng, to lament the state of these miserable times, which he did see and
behold to hang over the heads of his people. So does Christ our Savior seeing
Jerusalem, wept over it. So does Esaiah. So does Jeremiah, and al true prophets
and preachers lament and bewail the miseries, which needs must follow the
synneful stubbernes of the wicked. Thus always, the wicked world greueth the
holy spirit of God, in these holy men: but never will they mourn for their own
sins, unless it be so as our prophet may be right well understand, that
afflyccion, danger, and distres, do give them understanding, as in their
fearful famine, when the delycate women, were feign to eat their own tender
babes, to eat rates, horse heads, the very dounge of Asses when their king
was carried captyue, and his eyes put forth, when the bewtye of their fair
women was wythered with waylyng, with heat and burning of the weather, when
the playtynge of their hair was turned into baldnes, and all their strong men
slain in battle. Then as Esaiah says: their gates shall mourn and the city
being spoiled, shall sit upon the earth. Esaias. iii. Thus may it be very aptly
understand, either of the Prophet or of the people.

Of this spoil and nakedness Moses by the mouth of God, did Prophecye.
Deuterno. xxix. Because they have forsaken the covenant of God, which he has
made with their fathers, when he brought them out of the land of Egyptte,
shall their land lie spoiled and wasted. Again. Hos. cha. iii. A long time
says he, shall the children of Israel sit without king, without Prince,
without sacrifice, without altar, Ephot, and Ieraphim.

Wherein is to be marked that the fall and destruction of al cities and
cou^tryes are for seen to the spyryte of God, and the cause of their ruin is
only sin and wickedness, even the forsakynge of the Lord.

This it is which shall make the proud Dragons which fometh forth fire from
their mouths to yel and cry at the end, for the misery which shall come upon
them. This shall cause the great Estriches to groan and mourn for very
distres and anguishe. Fynallye, this sin shall cause all the earth to shake and
quake, to yell and wayle, when the word of god shall be poured forth upon it.

O Lord be merciful unto us, for our sins sake do we feel at this day thy
heavy dyspleasure, too rage and rain through our hole realm, and
especially at this present, upon thy house of Suffolk, once beautifyed by
thy glorious Gospel but now by our unworthiness spoiled naked and byryued of
the crown of glory of thy chosen vessels, the hope, honor, and comlines of
that house. O Lord why does not the wicked peryshe which knows not the nor
cares for thy commaundme^ts? But the iudgmente begins at thine household
children, the heard hearted Estriches and devouring Dragones shall yel and
mourn in the end.

The proud tirauntes are lykened to Dragons Ezechiel.xxxii. Job. xl. For the
Dragons how they dye pressed to death by the huge Elephante Plinius
declares. Lib. viii. Cap. xi. The Estryches ar described. Lib. x. Cap. i.
Strabo. Liber. xvi.

Because her wou^des ar in curable: The Text
For to Iehuda is it now come: it is come too the gates of my people even to
Jerusalem,

Lo, this is the cause worthy of much moureninge, weepinge, and wailinge
(says our Prophets) because Iehuda has sinned, and as Esaias says from the
head to the foot, there is nothing but swelling soores, stripes and wonds, no
place left where they may be plaged any more. The wrath of the Lord is so
soore kindled, that he has given the^ up to their own sinful lusts and
therefore worthily has also brought upon the^ miserable plagues, the fire of
his vengaunce can not be quenshed but still the Idolatrous people of Samaria
too the chosen kyngedome, it rages from Iehuda even to Jerusalem that holy
city, whereunto the perpetual priesthode and kingedome unto the coming of
Messiah was promised, so yt as Esaias lamenteth the cities round about
Jerusalem being destroyed. Jerusalem was left alone like a watch house in
the vineyarde or the cottage in the garden of Cucummers, and clear without
any sucoure obsessed and besieged by Rabsace as appears.iiii. kings.xviii.
Here by now England and all those people whom God has specially called in
these our times by the light of his Gospel has great cause too tremble and
fear God his secret judgment, consydering yt we have not so many promyses as
had Jerusalem and their fall was for their unthankfulness and forgetfulness of
their duties toward god, as appears by our Prophet. What shall we the^ look
for: like fall with ye Germans. Nay, much worsse and much sorar because we
will not yet be warned.

Do not declare this in Gath: neither weep you nor wayl you there, The Text.
in the houses of Sephratumble thy self in the duste.

A like lamentacion makes David for the death of Saull and Ionathas ii.
kings.ii. show not this thing in Gath nor Askalon says he, lest the
uncircumcised Philistines do reioise at ye fall of Israel, Wherein is declared
the cause yt in Gathe named a city of the Phelistines, whence ye great enemy
Goliath did come the fall of god his people should not be known least the
uncircumcised should say where is their God. As the great Turck and the proud
Pope with their adherents do not stick at this dai to sai of the Germans that
they were in an evil way else should not god have given the^ to their enemies.
O let us beware lest ye name of God or his holy doctrine be by our wicked
sinfulnes at any time so hainouslye blasphemed. But as for Ophir which is
hear called Aphra (for the hebrew allusion with Aphar which signifies dust)
which was in the tribe of Benjamin one of the high cities of Judah the prophet
byddeth it after the custom of mourners to mourn in dust and ashes. So ought
we in our own co^gregacions amo^gs our selves, bewail our miseries, and the
miseries of our brethren, and thus judging our selves, we shall not be with the
wicked condemned, but by our unfeigned repe^tau^ce, cause God to show his mercy
upon us, as did the Ninevites repe^ting in ashes and sackloth at the preaching
of Jonas. But O merciful god what flintish hearts have we? The enemies of
Christ do laugh and reioise at these our miseries. Yet we ca^ not bewail
the^. The proud papists ca^ say they are plaged for their sins, yet will we
not espy them. They do say (I do fear me ouertrulye) that we neither do fast
nor pray but cause the Gospel to serve our folyshe fantasyes, and therefore
does God send these plages upon us, that we may be made new vessels apt and
mete to these spiritual works, thereby to put away thy wrath so sore kindled
against us, and to stop the mouths of our enemies.

The Text.
Get the hence Saphir with thine enhabitaunce, thou had thy name of beauty,
but thou art naked with shame. And zaena^ which had the name of goinge
forward, shall not go forth to bewail Bethhazell, the enemy shall take from
you through his long seige. For the citizens of Maroth has sorowed for their
riches sake, because that evil is come from the Lord unto the gate of
Jerusalem. Yoke thy chariote with thy Dromedaries and swift running Camels, O
Lakis, for thou wast the first beginning of the sin of Israel the daughter of
Sion, for in the was found the wyckednes of Israel.

The Prophet does rehearse the chief cities whence Jerusalem should have
had healpe and succoure, and sets before her eyes the extreme misery
whereunto she was brought by sin. The bewtiful Saphir was smitten with shame.
zaenan which was not always ready before time to go forth against the enemy,
and thereof had the name, dare not now go forth to lament her neighbors of
Bethhaezel: no, the enemy has taken from them both men, monye, and al
municions by their long siege against them. The rich city of Maroth also
does mourn for her riches, where she hoped for the good blessing of God which
is here named, Tob, and doothe signifye all goodness. The contrary even the
curs and wrath of God threatened in the law, did pearce to the ports and gates
of Jerusalem. Now Lakis which is named ye.x. of Joshua to be ye kings seat which
is laid also to ye princely trybe of Judah. Iosue the.xv. is commanded by our
Prophet to fly away in chariots and to be carried with most swyfte beasts
for so does all the Hebrew commentaries agree that, Rekes, does signifye.
Though some do translate mules, some Camels, some Dromedaries, and some does
say it is the name of a beast unknown to us. The meani^g of the Prophet is to
utter in how great fear they shall be before the enemy. And as the Prophet
speaks it was fulfilled the.xiiii. year of the reign of king Esechias, when
Senaherib did take all the strong fenced cities of Judah, and being in the
city of Lakis, Ezechias sent Messengers to desire him too depart and apoint
what tribute he would, iiii, kings.xviii. The Prophet does further utter the
cause of this terrible fear, from which they should fly, saying: yt this Lakis
was the first fountain of the Idolatrye, brought from Samaria to Jerusalem,
which ought therefore chieflye to tremble, because it was the first and chief
cause of God his wrath thus kyndled. Let al them learn hereby to repent which
are the authors of evil unto other, for when the almightye shall shake his
sweard it shall be to late to seek for help at horses and Chariots.

The common fame goes that in Boston in Lincoln shere there, was seen a
swearde hanging in the air, but we need no feigned matters: we do feal the
fearce wrath of God and his sore swerd in this sode^ death and murren of me^,
which might cause us to repent, if we were not indurate and given over to our
own lusts. Our beauty is shent, our forward men are spente, our riches is
consumed. Ca^ we help this with the frendshyp of foran nations? can we
resist the wrath of God by our pollycyes? especyallye ioynyng hands with
papystes, the friends of Antechriste by profession, and our auncyente enemies.

Therefore shall thou send gifts to Moresheth which is in Gath, The Text
and the house of Akrib shall lie unto the kings of Israel. Yet again will I
bring an heir unto the thou city of Maresha unto Adulla^ shall come the glory
of Israel. Make thy self bald and be shaven, for delicate and daintye children
enlarge thy baldnes and nakedness like the Egle because they are gone into
captivity from the.

Moresheth and Maresha are.ii. diverse cities of diverse con^tries and in the
Hebrew playnelye dystyncte by letters and vow else. Moresheth, Bathe was a
city of Palastine which David brought in subieccion and made tributarye. The
which our Prophet does now say, shall make Jerusalem trybutary in contrary
condycion, and Likewise Aksib was a citi of Judah, Iosu.xv. whose citizens were
like the lyinge and deceiuable waters geuinge no refreshinge to them which
sought relief at their hands.

Maresha was in the trybe of Judah, The prophet b^ the mouth of god, threatens
to bring in a new heir and owner to Maresha the city, wherein he was borne,
to give them knowledge, and to bring into remembrance the benefyte of old,
when God brought them forth of Egypt, did drive forth the Cananees, and set
them as heirs and owners in their land. The which work of God they nothing
regardyng, but couetyng the spoil one of another, every man taking house and
land from his own brother, as follows in the second chapter, by worthy
punyshmente and just recompense, God brings and sets in their place new
heirs and owners. And unto Adullam, which was a city night to Jerusalem, shall
come this heir, this owner, and new possessioner, who^ al Israel shall hold as
their lord, and count as their king. Wherefore he is here called their glory,
the glory of Israel, which was fulfilled in the king of Assure. Sanherib which
did come and conquer all the cities of Iewry, save only Jerusalem, which was
left like a cotage in the field when the harvest was ended, as Esaias says:
where the Prophet bids the whole land of Jury, so make it self bald, and
shave of the hear, for the loss of her children. He sets forth the great
heaviness and murnyng which should follow this destruction. Like as Ezechiel
xxvii. Let them sprynckle their hands with duste and ashes, and shave them
whiles they be bald. Also, Jeremy.xvi. of the contrary where there shall be no
murnyng. They shall dye great and small together, they shall not be buried nor
lamented, neither shall any cut them self or any baldnes be made for them. Job
is named to have been shaven in his great sorrow in the first chap.

This similitude of ye Egle is brought in to amplify and set forth their
spoil and destruction, for as the Egle in extreme age, does cast al her fair
feathers and loses them. So Israel naked and spoiled, bald and baren of al
ornaments, shall mourn and lament, the which symylytude of the Egle, may
represente also to the spiritual man, the renuynge of the spiritual Israel,
which can not be any other way, but by the mortifyfiyng of the carnal Israel.
Whereunto the Prophets as unto their chief mark (though darkely for the time)
does apply their prophecyes. Of this renewing of the Egle, besides the profane
writers, we read Psa. ciii. Esa. xl. of the renewyng and restoryng of the
spiritual Israel. Esaias. lx. Ambrose does at large set forth this similitude,
and apply it to the renewing of the faithful, in a Sermon made principally for
the same purpose. Now to appyly this prophecy to our time and manners. What if
we be likewise compelled to please with gifts our enemies? what if we being
disepossed, other do invade our possessions? Who^ can we blame, but our own
wyckednes? which being so often warned, wilfullye do ren forward to provoke the
wrath of God upon us. This sore plage of this sudden death, send among us
(unless we do shortly repent and amend our evil lives) seems to be the
weakenyng and rootyng out of us against the coming of some foraine enemies.
For thus God uses first to warn by his word, then by some fatherly
correc^ion. After when the people does wax stubburne against his word, and
cruel amongs themselves, he gives them up to the cruelty of their enemies,
which causes baldnes, nakedness, and al myseries. Therefore let us pray with
David that we fall into the hand of God, rather then into the hands of men.

The second Chapter.
WOE to them that imagine vanity and work wyckednes upon their beds and early in
the morning will do the same, The Text
because that power is in their hands. They couetted fields, and have gotten
them by extorcion: houses have they desired and taken them away. They have by
vyolence oppressed the man and his house, the man and his heritage.

Our Prophet here to fore has chiefly rebuked the people for their Idolatry
and unthankfulness toward god. Now when he comes to touch their gross
covetousness against their brethren, he is compelled to cry, woe worth them
that thus wyckedlye lyinge upon their soft beds where they should thank God for
his benefits, and pytye their brethern which have not the like: does clean
contrary imagine only, lying upon their beds in the night season, how they may
work wyckedly against their poor brethren, and in the morning do speedelye
perform their wicked dyuyses. This is so plain it needs no expositour, the
Prophet tells them what they imagine, only how they may get their neighbors
house and living. We al grant this is plain, we say al ye this is true, and
we do confess an everlasting woe and curse shall come upon such covetous
caytyfes, but which of us cares for it. The poor man says this curs
belongs not to him. The Lords and rich men they care but for the time. The
Bishops and priests do look over as the devil does look over Lincoln (as is
the common proverb of that country) or else durst they never practice for
purchasyng other men's lands and houses to make their wifes ladies, and their
sons Lords. Yet can I praise the Bishops of the Popish church for their
clenly co^uetau^ce of their matters, in regard of our protestauntes, which
thus openly shame their profession. Will you yet be a church all alone, O
English Bishops and and priests, will you neither follow Christ nor his
Apostles, neither the Bishop of Rome and his Bishops. At you wyser then the
one sort or will you be worsse then the other? What shall Isai? You do know
enough What shall I heap scripture and reasons against you? repent or elsse
with the Prophet we must all cry woe, woe, against you, it is your ambycyon
and covetousness that makes our Lords heads and gouernoures to do so evil,
you can not worthelye rebuke them being evil your selves. Therefore our alder
Master Christ coming to reform the world, begins with the Scribes and
Pharisees, the Bishops and thee priests, and tho^dereth woe against them.
Saying the Scribes and Pharisees set in Moses seat whatsoever they commanded
you, that look you observe and keep, but do not according to their works for
they speak but they do not. Woe therefore unto you says Christ, which shut
the kyngedome of heaven unto men, neither entering your selves, neither
sufferinge them that would enter.

Marcke for thee love of your own souls, how like you be to these Pharisees,
they did set in Moises seat and did teach and preach the law of God, as you
do sometimes. But because they did love the worldly kingdom and Lordeshyp more
then the kingdom of heaven, as Christ here charge the^, that they will be
great and be called Lords and masters: by this lewd example, they shut the
kingdom of heaven that neither they nor other blinded by their ambycyon, and
led astraye by their evil example cold enter therein.

Woo unto you Scribes and Pharisees, says he, you Hypocrytes which do
devour the houses of the wyddowes under the pretense of long prayer, therefore
shall you be more greuouslye punyshed. You know that the goods of your sees
and churches, althose lands and rentes which you receive in your Dioces are
the goods of the poor wedowes and fatherless. And he that defrawdeth the
pore is a Murderer. How dare you then devour this to purchase lands for
your wife and children? But you do it under the pretense of the Gospel, as
they did under the pretense of prayer, therefore doothe Christ call you
Hipocrites which under so holy a clooke dare cover your wickedness, and he
says forther your damnacyon shall be greater.

Shall we goo forther and say: Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, which labor
so busylye with flearyng and flatteryng, with threatnynge and prysonnynge to
gather moo into your feloweshyppe too wear your gaye gear, too take your
vain tytles with you, that when they have stepte forward too one peace of
your supersticyon, they become more soorar defenders of your fondenesse then
you were before them. Shall we say? Woe unto you Scrybes and Pharyseis which
strive for the gaye golden garments too be used at the Lords supper and for
setting of the altar in the quyere and for round Cakes, and for the people
too gape and take them in their mouths like Babes.

But for the godly ministracion of this holy supper, and for the church and
faithful congregation of Christ scattered a broad with Popyshe Boores,
devoured with couetouse and greadye Wolfes, Bears, and Lions, and trode^ under
the foot with stinkinge Goats, you do care nothing. I will goo no further but
in the name of this your head Bishop, whom you profess to follow: I warn
you to repent, least this woo and curse come upon you, and for your causes
upon us al. You are the salt of the earth, if the salt be unsavory what can
be seasoned therewyth. I trust verelye there is some good among you that be
Bishops and Priests, but in this point are your al, that I know, fowllye
faultye, that wyncke at your fellow Bishops and fellow priests both in
purchasing of Lands, gatherynge of riches, and other abhominatyons. Away with
covetousness the root of all euilles. Away with your Lordlines which makes
you unlike Peter, and take unto you larges for your gold n Miter, and mekenes
for your rotehet. Bewyse as Serpents but simple as Doves. So wicked Achab
oppressing Naboth, and his companions, be they Noble men, be they pen
men, whereof this world is full. I do cry with Esaias the Prophet: woo unto you
which do i^ine house to house and field to field Esaias.v. and with the Prophet
Ieremye, woo unto him that buyldeth his house in unrighteous, and his
parlers not in Judgment, and with the Apostle James. Go to now you rych men,
weep and howl upon the miseries which shall come upon you. etc. Ia. v. Know
this old saying to be most true. Every rych man either is wicked, or heir to
the wicked. There be many secret imaginacions and privy practyses, wherwyth
both Bishops and other might here worthelye be charged, but this do I write
secretly to admonyshe that they may be moved to repentance not openly to
publish any pryuy secret seeing their open crimes asks speedy vengaunce.

Wherefore take heed al ye that imagyne vanitye and myckednes in your secret
chambers, thinking to begyle both God and man by your wyly wits. God which
made the eye, does he not see? He which made ye heart, has he not
understanding? Is any night so dark* that he can not se therein? na^, ^yght is
no night, darkness is light before him. Therefore woe shall be unto you and your
shame shall never cease, when he brings into light your pryuye practyses
your crafty conueiaunce, your subtyle inuencio^s, your syne wyts spent in
vain and unprofitable ymaginacio^s. There is nothing done so closely in
secret, but it shall be reueiled openly, be you suit, for Christ our
aldermaster speaks it. The rych nygard imagening vainly to build mo barnes
and stoare houses, and so to rest in the strength of his own labors, had this
answer from the lord: O thou fool how vaynely do thou ymagyne, this night
whiles thou do ymagyne thus lying upon thy bed, shall they take thy soul
from thee.

Nebuchadnezer imagenynge vaynely of his own strength and power, was so
punished and plaged for his vain imaginacion, that he did lose his reason,
wit, and understanding, and became a brute beast, eating grass in the field
for the space of.vii. years. And if so be that these men imagenyng vain
things only were thus entreated: how shall wicked Haman and his fellows
eskape? imagenyng myschiefe against the chosen of God. How shall stought
Nymrothe avoid punishment, which buyldeth his palaces with the spoil of his
brethren. Where shall become the Cainites which ymagine how to get the blood of
their brethren. As for the imaginacion of Iezabel, to optayn the vineyarde, the
enheritaunce of Nabothe, it is no strange thing in these latter days but a
common practice, and a polytyke inuencion for the kings advantage. For our
wits far passes our predecessers in the imaginacion of mischief, as one day
therein always teaches another. And the scolers of this scoole can ever find
somewhat to encreace and augment the wyckednes of their masters. As we have
seen most euydentlye in the popyshe church, how Pope after Pope did
enlarge the inuencyons of Antechriste with new and strange deuyses so long,
whiles the ground of Christ's relygyon clean forgotten, the Champyons and
Captains of that wicked court and company, did affirm and contend that all
Christen Relygyon did stand and consyste wholly upon Ceremonies, the
imaginacions of the Idle brayns of Popes and prelates) even so holelye and
fullye as the goods and substance of the rich Merchant stands upon
farthings, so that like as by taking away farthing after farthynge from the
rich manne, al his substance is at length consumed even so (says Stephan
Gardinet of late a stout Prelate, of his devilish Sophistry in ye very latter
end of his book stands our relygyon upon the Mass and heap of Ceremonies
which by division contempned, the subtance of our religion by prodygal
children is wasted and consumed,

But praised be the Lord God these vain imageners, are put to silence, and
confounded hear in England, and who so list to read of their vain
imaginacions, No man has more clearly uttered, nor more playnelye painted
them in their own colors then out contry man of worthy memory William
Tindal in his book of the practice of prelates. So that I thought it not so mete
much to meddle with their inuencyons in this treatise as to rebuke the vices of
our time and the vayn imaginacyons of the carnal Gospellers which would feign
serve both God and Mammon, which will make their, bellye their God, and say
they serve the Lord which would seem to be enemies to Popyshe relygyon, but
they are adversaries to Christ his truth and Gospel, and do more harm
thereunto by evil and lascivious liberti of the flesh by covetousness and other
crimes, open to the eyes of all the world, the^ the other did by cruel
persecucyon, and all the craftye imagynatyon of the craftye court of Rome.

Therefore comes this woo upon us now living, because we do imagine how to
maintain by pour our wicked deuyses and iustyfye our evil doings. We can
imagine laws to maintain our adulterye. We can make diuorsmentes for very
sklenderlye approved causes. We can color our couetusnes with the cloak
of religion. Brifly we can establishe al our vain imaginacion by laws of our
own making, that no man shall dare be so bold as once to (...) against them,
though they be contrary to god his own laws. For where God has commanded in.
the.xxii. of Exodus yt thou shall not hurt the widow and the fatherles, and if
you do hurt or hinder the^ by any means either in Lands, in goods, in
Cattayle. For the Hebrewe word is general of all manner of hurtynge or
hynderyng of them. If thou do hurt or hinder them says the Lord, and they
do cry unto me. I will hear their cry, and my wrath shall be kyndled
against you, and I will sleye you with the swearde, and your wives shall be
widows and your children fatherless wards. Let us compare our craftye
imaginations and wrong wraisting of laws to this commandment and see how we
shall avoid the woo and curse for the breaking af the same.

We do imagine a law how to spoil the poor wydowe, first plaged of God, with
the want of her husband, with fartherlosse of the lack of her eldest child
(which should be her synguler comfort in the stead of his father) soulde
from Chapman to Chapmanne, and to Chapmanne again like an Ox or an Ass or
some bond slave. To be brought up in drogerye or handled like a ward for
both is one thing by common Proverb, and at length against his will, which
is the most miserye of al, and far from the law of nature, contrary to the
law of God and too all good polytyke law of free cytyes, compel him too
Marrye whom he hates either for her own vntowardenes, for such are appointed
forwards (for the most part) as no other manne would gladlye chose? either
can not love for the extremytye of her Parents. For no vyolence can bring
love, but free and coragyous stomakes, hate compulsion and sets much by
choice and lybertye, Especyallye hear where upon hangs the comforthe or
care of the hoole life, and either furtheraunce or hinderaunce from the
endelesse felicity.

But behold what becomes of our imaginacions. We heap the cursses and woe
threatened against us, upon our heads, and causes such widows to mourn
and cry unto God for their miseryes, we do make these fatherless, these
wards, whereof we have a careful charge by the mouth of God in many places
of scripture: too blaspheme God and manne in thee anguishe of their hearts by
our couetouse cruelty: Cursyngethe time of their birth, their Parents,
their Lands and Land Lords

We cople them too our Daughters too cause contynuall Adulterye in boothe
parts. Who being thus married with thee Deuylles Marryage, seeks for
deuorcement when they are forth of bondage, which as it may in some cases be
permytted, so for to be made common and usual, shall be the greatest plage that
come to any common wealth. And these men having their minds occupied only
in strange love, can never be apt instruments for any such service as might
be for the glory of God, for the kings honor, for common tranquillyty, either
in war, or in peace, but unprofitable to al purposes, as experience proves,
and the plage of God compels us to pronounce.

Yt were to long and tedious to touch the tenth part of your vain imaginacions
for the fyllyng of your pursses, either in this court of the wards, or in the
courts of augmentacions, and impossyble for any man to utter them in the
other courts, neither am I very skylfull of them or in them, thanked be the
Lord: but the evil effects of them, the pyllyng and the pollyng, the extorcion
and the brybery, every poor man of the country feels and cries out there
upon, therefore am I compelled to touch it, in hope that God will give you
hearts to amend these things, in whose hands the power rests.

Will you be loved of your subjects? Will you have no vproates nor commotion of
your commoners? The^ let them see some cause or love in you, for forced
violence and love which comes by co^pulsio^, cannot be long lasting, The
vain imaginations or the late vpskips of England too make the people
peasaunts and slaves, is not the right path way to quyetnes. For even now the
commons are so base and pore that they cry out of the evil abuse and openly
against the Justices of the bench. And what will follow trow you? in your
subtle imagions and fine wits, O ye vpskippes the deuourers of the people, and
destroyers of al public weal, which by wards, by Symonye, by lease mongynge
and like Marchaundyse, make waste this hoole realm, before your time most
welthye. O no^ le counsaloures, se to the safetye of your selves and your
subjects in time. The Lord our God has often shaken his rod, Let us all
repent of all vain imaginacions against his holy laws. Especyally he to the
fatherles as fathers, and to the wydowes as their husbands, and you shall be
the obedyente children of the highest, and he shall tender you more then your
own mother, as it is promised in the.iiii. of Ecclesiasticus after the which
rule I do wyshe our courts of wards to be reformed, to ye glory of god the
salvation of your souls, the profit of the common weal.

Now for the subtyle ymagynacyons of the other courts. I do say no more,
but if you will suffer all your spiritual men (as they be called) too have
their first fruits, therewyth too keep hospitality and maintein ye pore
whereof this profit aryseth. You shall drive the^ home to their benefices, and
ceas much slander, which before your commons, they do seem worthily to lay
upon your backs. They do come now once or twice in ii. or iii. years to their
Paryshe and say, O good people we would feign keep houses among you
according to our duties: but the kings Officers have so much of us that we
can not recover it this.iii. years at the soonesse. And I wot not what
Devil is occasyon thereof, they take such a custom in this space yt they never
keep good hospitality after.

If you will also reform the wrong and improper usage of the impropryatyons,
first given to the cleargye, for teaching of the people and releyfe of thee
poor: but sense that time aultered by subtle deuyses too the monastaries and
Abbayes, and now come into the kings hands, some men can tell how. If you
will restore these and such like to their former uses, and leave such vain
imaginacions as has led you too abuse the^, you shall win the peoples herts,
seeing such cha^ges and reformacyons which hitherto suspecteth al suppression
of Abbaies, of idols, of Colleges, of Chauntryes, of hospitalles, and all
reformacyon of relygyon, to be made only for your own pryuate profytes and
purposes, which their suspycyon and fond ymaginacyon (as you do account it)
can no other ways be wyped away, be you sure, but by the departing from
such things wherein they do see you take unlawful gaynes, whereof part
are here named. The spoil of the fatherles, and the spoil of the pore, in the
goods of the church.

But this gear is against the kings profytte and youres, O my Lords, shall
some vain ymagynours twytle in your ears?

Oh what shall the kings Magetye gain if he win the whole world and do
lose his own soul by mainteining against justice, against good conscience,
against God his holy will, your vain ymaginacions, myscheuous marchandyse and
Symoniacall sales of your gayneful chaffer. Our Prophet doothe threaten the
endless woe of everlasting dampnacion against al vain ymageners, which having
power in their hands, do have to perform their wicked deuyses. For this is
the sense and meaning, this is the true understanding of the latten, and of the
first verse where the Hebrew has, El, and diverse have translate the same God,
and has thereby encombred themselves with dyuersity of interpretacions. But as
it is taken by the best learned in the Hebrew tongue, it sygnyfyeth here in this
place power, like as. Gene. xxi and Proverb. iii. So that the prophet speaks
of the^ which have authority and power in their hands. Neither is the spirit
of God afraid of them any more the^ of other. Search your own consciences
therefore you that have this power in yuur hands, for all eniuries, violence,
oppression, yea of every vain thought and Imagynacyon, you shall give a full
strayte answer, and the mighty shall be myghtelye tormented. The Lord knows
the thoughts and imaginacion of man, that they are but vain, and he takes
the wise in their own wylynes.

Therefore thus says the Lord: lo, The Text.
I do imagyne evil against this family, whence you shall not pluck forth your
necks, neither shall you goo vpryghte, because this time is evil. At that day
shall the mourner make his parable upon you, and mourn lamentably, saying: we
are sore waysted and destroyed, the porcio^ of my people god will change. How
shall he take that is mine? our lands shall be restored, the enemy shall deuyde
it.

Because that these men of power did abuse their power against their inferior
members, imagenyng myschyefe upon their beds. Lo the Lord of al power will
shorten their horns, and lessen their strength. He will set his thoughts
against their thoughts, his deuyses shall stand. He will lay a yoke upon
their necks which shall cause them to stope and lay down these haute and
high looks, wherewith they ouerloke every poor man whom they would oppress,
but beware you proud of the earth which huffe up your noses into the wind
after the srensh guise, you shall be feign to hang down your heads for the
shame and miserye which the Lord shall worthelye bring upon you. You have
dyspised the pore, spoiled them of home and harbor, brought them into
bondage, made them your slaves and Pesauntes, have killed and slain them.
You must by the just and righteous judge have the like unto you measured. The
Lord does even now begin to bring his yoke upon your necks which might
cause you to stope with flying away with your fine Phisik with all your
inuencio^, you cannot avoid it, he suffers you yet to live and behold it in
others that he may provoke you to repentance but the time is at hand if you do
not repent when either with this or other plage more grievous you shall be wholly
destroyed. The^ shall ye false prophets which have flatred you in your wickedness
make lame^tacio^ and cry out for your destruccio^ which suddenly shall come upon
you. Their idle brains shall muse and meruel how this land promised to be
yours, should be take with the enemy? Yea after they shall be taken together with
you by the enemy, they shall promise you to be restored as did Hanamah. Hiere.
xxviii. sayeinge: I have broken the yocke of the king of Babylon. But at
lenghte he shall se his hope all vain whiles the enemy deuideth the land as
it was divided too the Lutheans and Babilonians. iiii, kings xvii. read the
latter end of the.xxxiii. of Ezechiell for the declaracyon of this Text, how
shall he take that is mine?

Therefore shall there be none which shall deuyde the lotte by line unto the,
in the congregacicion of the Lord. The text.


Because you have imagined mischefe against other by covetousness, extorsion,
violence oppression, have wroght and brought forward your wicked devises,
therefore shall you be so spoiled, that you shall have no hope to have your
possessions restored, but shall be utterly roted forth both of this
co^gregacio^ who^ the lord has with such miracles brought forth of Egypt
fostered and cherished in wilderness and hitherto so wonderfullye guided and
governed, and also with the rich gloten you shall be secluded from the holy
company reastynge in Abraham's bosom. For the rotynge out of the.x. trybes so
that other nacyons occupied their enherytaunce read.iiii. kings xvii. For the
other.ii. trybes we do know that they co^tynue scattered in all countries unto
this day. What shall we now look for, unless we do repent, whose syn in
number does far pass theirs, our iniquities are like the sand of the sea.
Think we not that it is the same God which refused his chosen people for their
sin?

Do not prophecye thus shall they say. The Text
Let them not Prophecy least they be put to shame.

Thus has the wicked world always resysted the spyryte of God and labored
to quench the sprytes, to stop the mouths of the Prophets, to put them to
shame as they supposed. Therefore says Jeremy I am made a laughinge stock all
the day long. Ieremye.xx. They do all deryde me because now a long space
I have cried against their iniquity and told them of destruction, and the
word of the lord was laid unto me as a rebuke and shame all the day long.
Therefore says Esaye. The people provoke my wrath they are lying children,
children which will not hear the law of the Lord, which do say unto the
Prophets and seers: see not? and Prophecye not unto us things, that are
light, but speak pleasant things unto us. Esaias.xxx.

Thus the unkind people does alwai hate the truth, and rather then they will
depart from their beastlye lusts, wherein they wallow like swyne, they will
desire Christ him self to depart with the Gaderines and Satazens. This is the
condempnacion of the world, that light is come into the world, and men love
rather darckenes then light. Therefore are they given over into minds
reprobate to do things uncomely filled with all unrighteous, whoredom,
craft, and covetousness. Romans.i.

This is the heavy temptacyon from the which we ought too desire our
heavenly father at this present too deliver us, for even now wickedness
has so gotten the Masterie, and Flatterers are had in such estimation,
that our tender and delycate ears can not abide the truth of gods spyryte
to scrape them.

But with contencion, sedicion, and I wot not what else shall the true Preacher
be charged to stop his mouth if it be possible. But there is one even the
father of sprites which alone can either open or stop the mouths of the
spirits. There was one Phassur in the time of Jeremy the Prophet which with
strokes and imprisonmente would have bette down his spyryt. We have had
like Phassurs in our time, mo the^ one, whereof some of them has been plaged
with Phassur, let the rest be warned. For it is not ^e^tmye nor Latimer, nor
Leauer, nor Hoper, nor Beacon, nor Horn that speaks unto them, but the
spirit of God which always by such weak vessels doothe so utter it self
that when these are gone other comes of their ashes. And if these should not
speak, the very stones should cry out against our wyckednes. For Ieremye
would have holden his peace when he was so evil handled, but he said that
the fire of this spirit was in his heart, and with in his bonds that he was
weried with holding it in and cold refrayn no longer. Then sets he forth
the fear of men against him, but streyghte he adds these comfortable
words.

The Lord is with me like a strong Giaunte and therefore shall they fall head
long which persecute me, and they shall not prevail against me, but shall be
put to shame, because they cannot prosper, but an everlasting shame shall come
upon them which shall never be forgotten. O you English Phassurs fear and
tremble for this is your judgment from the Lord of spyrytes. The shame you
would lay upon the true preachers lasts but an hour: no it is no shame but
the greatest honor, you ca^ do the^. But your shame is everlasting.

The Hebrewe Na^aph hych is here translate to Prophecye and to speak, is
borrowed by Metapher from the rain which of many small drops doothe grow to
greaft abundance and makes the earth fruteful in the end. So does the word
of God, therefore says Moses. Deuteronomi.xxxii. my doctrine shall drop down
like the rain.

O thou that art called the house of Jacob, The Text
is the spyryte of the Lord shortened, are not these his works, are not mi words
good to him that walks upright?

Thou that will be called by the name of the chose^ people, though thou be not
so, thou ought to know the power of God, thou should think that the same
spirit which has drawn forth the sweard against the old world, the same
spirit which has foughten with Pharao, and drowned his army, which has for
their sins driven forth the Cananees before thee, and has not spared the
kings Saul and Jeroboam, the same spirit has not his arm shortened that for
lack of power, it should be afraid of the face of any man, to keep silence
at commandment, no, thou know that these wonders before rehearsed, and the
terryble plages now threatened, are the works of the almyghtye. Why then will
thou suffer thy flatterers still to bolster the up in thy wyckednes, and bid the
proceed in thine own imaginacions, saying: that God is mercyful, he will not
stryke. Surely the lord is mercyful, and his words are comfortable, but as the
Prophet tells the, if thou walk vpryght. So does Moses in the geuynge of
the promyses, at the first add this condition. If thou wylt hear the word
of the Lord, keep it, and do it, thou shalt have all the blessings
promised. But if thou will not hear the word of the Lord to fulfill all
his commandments, the cursses written in the law shall come upon the. Deue.
xxviii. Wherefore neither the Jews in their time, neither we in our time may
boast of the promyses, unless in walkyng uprightly we will fulfill our conditions
and couenantes.

And already my people is risen against me like an enemy, The Text
they do rent of the coat and cloak one of another: Even from him which
walks careless by the way, as though he were eskaped from battle. The
wives of my people have you driven from their houses full of pleasures, and
from their children, have you taken my glory for ever.

O Lord was this the fall of Israel? because they did stand against Gods
commandment, openly to defend their wicked ways? When Naboth was killed,
Iezabell did drive out the pore widow. Yea as the Hebrew seems to sound when
one against other, and one from another. Mimul. did snatch, sctatch take and
reno the pore bribing from the rich, the rych pilling and polling the poor
unto the bare skin. When the stranger and travailing man was spoiled and
robbed as though he had been taken prisoner in battle. The thieves by the hye
ways, and the Sherifes and judges had part of the spoil, when their princes
were become lions, and learned to ra^^ne for their pray: to devour me^, and had
learned to make widows as Ezechiell speaks of Iehoiakim. Eze. xix. if these
crimes were the cause of the utter destruccio^ of the chosen kingdom (as the
prophet vt the mouth of god here utters) what ca^ we look for which have
filled the measure of wickedness so full: ye we may eue^ now feel it ren oner
into our own bosoms: but only by ye just judgment of god to suffer the like
at our enemies hands, yt we have done to our brethren and neighbors. And here
might occasion serve to charge out relm with the sore ha^dli^g of widows and
fatherles children, by our wicked laws of wards, and our sore laws of
felonies, whereby ye poor widow and innocent children ar spoiled, but I have
touched it before, and we ca^ look for none other thing the^ the Lord
threatens, if we do not repent which is as we do read Exo. xxii. yt he will
make our wives widows, and our children fatherles, let us beware therefore how
we do drive forth of their lands and houses ye poor desolate widows, and
cause their children by our cruel dealyng, to blaspheme God, and curse their
parents, against God his commandment, and therefore against his glory and
honor,

The last sentence. From their children have they taken my glory for ever, is
by diverse interpreters understand of the adultry wherwyth the children were
diffamed, accounted as Bastards, other because yt the children robbed of their
parents had now none to bring the^ up to ye glory of god. And some because
they had not their parents who^ they might honor in gods stead unto his glory.
Munsterus also in his anotio^s brings a very good interpretacio^, which does
answer to the word for ever, where the Lord had create man to be immortal, which
work was for don by sin, it pleased the lord god by perpetual procreacion to
recover mankind from destruccio^ and so to preserve ye world by this lawful
procreacio^ of children, to the acco^plishing of his glorious works in his
church, this thing is me^t by ye saving of the woman by the bringing forth of
children in ye second chap. of the first epistle to Timothe. and in the.cxxvii.
Psalm this which Micha calls the glory of the Lord, David does call it
the enheritaunce of the Lord, and Christ confyrmeth it saying: that his
kingdom is of such, and that their angels does always sethe face of his
father. Wherefore whether they be slain by Herodes solgiers, or by English
murderers, whether they be made odious by ours or they stinking whoredom,
whether the glory of God be taken from the children by the court of wards or
other cruelty, better were it for that manne, by whom they be hurt, be it
king or Caiser, not only to have forsaken all worlolye glory, but to have a
millstone tied about his neck and to have been cast into the botom of ye sea, if
adultery, if oppression, if tira^nye, if extorsion, finallye, if any kind of
vice do reign unpunished in any kingdom of the chief heads and
magestrates, must be charged therewith, which as Paul says doothe not
only the like, but are fautors and favorers to the^ which do so wickedly,
which thing the spirit of the Lord is not shortened to see, to show, and sharply
to punish.

The Text
Arise get you hence. This is not your rest, because your land is poluted,
therefore shall it destroy you with detestable destruction.

Lostyl continually the Prophet beats into our ears, that syn must needs
have destruction following, that is the reward of sin from the beginning, in
so much that this same land of Jury which was promised to be their heritage for
ever, was spoiled, waysted and destroyed, after that it was with Idolatry
polluted, and as Moses threatened. Leuiti. xviii. the same land should vomyte
them like as it did the Cananites, saying: Beware that the land do not like
wise vomit you sorthe again if you do the like wyckednes, as it did vomyte
forth the people before you.

Wherefore like as the Prophets of al ages, when they did see syn raygne
unpunished, did cry out against the governors, pronouncing these and such
like sharp sentences against them. So may the Prophets and preachers of our
times, holdlye by the same spirit pronounce and publysh like destruccio^ and
ruin to ours here in England, especially seeing our country contaminax with
covetousness and polluted with glotoni, lechery and al kind of filthiness does
bring forth new kinds of disseases to other contries and old phisicio^s
unknown. Here appears ye Paul writes to the Roma. that this creature
subject unto our vanities against her will mourns and groneth to be delivered
from this corruptible seruitute and seems thus to say unto us: O my children,
whose wyckednes with much werines I have thus long borne and sustained, I must
needs a^ the length ease my self of so unprofitable a burden. For your sins am
I strike^ with steriliti and bara^nes you do dig so deep in my bowels by your
greedy covetousness yt I must needs breathe forth sulphuzeal ephalations and
poysened breathynges to destroi such a serpentine generation, which toileth
and trauaileth so carefullye to kill me your mother, you selfs and your
brethren.

The Text
If a man walk vaynelye and with open lies lyinge unto you do sai: I will
Propheci unto you for wine and dronke^nes he shall be a Prophet unto this people.

As though he should say: oh it is a very hard and unpleasant thing for the
people to hear their vices reprehended and destruccio^ for syn prophesied.
Therefore can they not bear the true prophets, they cannot away with the^: but as
Achab answered unto king Iosaphat askinge for some one prophet of the Lord
after that.iiii. C. false prophets had prophesied plesau^t things, There is one
man yet left one live but I do hate him because he does not propheci unto me
good: iii. Re. xxii
but evil, but what follows this refusing of the true prophet and choosing of
ye false. The Lord sends a strong elusion and causes Achab to perish by the
counsel of ye wicked and lying prohets which would not be saved by the council
of the good and true prophets read the chapter and see the judgment of god
against the^ which do refuse true prophets. Again of the Prophets which follow
wine and dronke^ship. They have erred, for wine and gone astray for dronke^nes
the preiste and the prophet has both erred for strong drink, Esa. xxviii
they are swallowed up of the wine they have erred in vision and fallen in
judgment. So does all that seeks gain voluptuousnes and plesures, they ought
not to be trusted they are lyinge prophets yet are they only of ye blind world
magnified and received, mi lords will have none other to their chaple^s for with
a fat prebe^d such may be choked yt they will follow mi lord in all his fo^d ways
and allow al his wicked counsels, but that Micha that tells ye truth he is
thrust forth of the doors he is of a furious sprit, mylord hates him as unmeet
for his house and al good company.

The Text
I will gather the together O Jacob, I will gather the wholly. I will gather and
join together the remnaunte of Israel, I will put them together like the
sheep of Bozra, and like as the flock gathered in the fold. They shall hurl
together for the great multitude. The spoyler is gone before them, they have
spoiled and passed the gate, they have gone forth thereby, and their king has
gone for the before them, and the Lord as their captain,

Such a glorious Prophecye does the false prophets bring forth to king Achab Go
up to Ramoth say they, and the Lord will give it into thy hands. Again
zedechia made him horns of iron and said thus says the Lord with these shall
thou toss and fold Siria whiles you have destroyed it. So does this glorious
sentence appear to be brought in of our prophet as a flattering illusion of ye
false prophet, whereby they did keep the people still in the co^te^pt of god and
the true prophets, promisyng the^ lybertye and tryumphe over their enemies,
notwithstanding their enormities and great wyckednes. Such flatterers we have
in all ages.

Therefore take heed (O England) then that thus tell the (...) the in thy
wickedness with ^ayre promyses, they do deceive the, and do seek benefyces
and Bishopprickes, that they may fill their bellyes with wine and strong dryn^^
(...) as the Prophet said before. I do know that this text is for the most
part understand as a Prophecye of the coming of Christ, and it may well so
be, but I had rather so to expound the prophets, that they might seem to
hang together by comelye order, then to tear them in peaces. Bozra was a
city full of people, full of sheep and catall, whereunto the false Prophets
therefore does lyke^ their felicity.

The iii. Chapter.
Vt I said hear I pray B you O Princes of Jacob and dukes of ye house of
Israel. Does it not pertein unto you to know judgment? you do hate ye good
and love ye eul, you do fle of ye skin of their backs and ye flesh of their
bones. You have devoured thee flesh of my people and plucked their skin from of
them, and have broken their bones and crushed the^ in peaces, as in a pot, and
like the flesh in the midst of the Chaldren.

Princes ought to know judgment, they ought to be wise me^ fearing god, yea
standing in gods stead to the people, having ye truth within the^ yt they need
not to seek it at their chaple^s. They ought to be me^ which hates avarice,
Exo. xviii. for they execute the judgment of the lord. Deu. i. and whatsoever
they shall judge, shall redou^d and be required upon the^.ii. Cori. xix. but you
do think you mailiue as you list O princes and dukes of our wicked time, you
do not think yt you have taken an office whereof you must give answer. But yt
you have attained to such honors that ye should be accounted as earthly
gods, that no man should be so beard ye as to talk of your doings, and dare
follow the Pope in making such proclamations, though they be such in very
dead as our Prophet hear paynteth which are so plain they need no
interpretacion. Therefore I do say with the Prophet Esaias, hear O ye deaffe
men, and sharpe^ your sights to se O ye blind. But who is so blind as my
servant? or so deaf as my messengers whom I sent unto them? For who is so
blind as my people and they that have the rule of the^. They are like as if
thou vnderstodest much and keep nothing, or if one herd well but were not
obedient. The Lord be merciful unto the^ for his righteousness sake yt his word
might be magnified and praised. They do boast to know the word: but beware
the servant which knows and does not, shall be beaten with many stripes.

You do fle of ye ski^ of their backs If you do read ye.xxxiiii. The Text
of Ezechiel you shall se the difference betwyxt these evil pastors and
shepherds which fead the^ selves with ye spoil of ye sheep, and ye good sheperd
which cherysheth his sheep. Now where our prophet says that the Princes do
hate ye good me^ and love the evil: it is the experience of al ages for dicers,
dauncers, flatterers and such like ar received into their pryuyc hambers when
true Preachers are prysoned. And if it chance that a noble man have one honest
man in his house, he is a sheep among Wolves, deluded and decyded by my
Lords own minions and most sage counsaylers, at the length, either banyshed,
or put to silence, because the whole course of his life, conversation, and
co^municacion, is contrary to theirs, and unprofitable for their purposes.

Then shall they cry unto the Lord, The Text
and he will not hear them, but will hide his face from them at that time, like
as they have don evil in their wicked works. Thus says the Lord of the
prophets, which do seduce the people, thus the Lord says against them: When
they have any thing to byte upon, then they preach that all shall be well, but
if a man put not so^thing in their mouths they preach of wat against him,
Therefore your vision shall be turned to night, and your prophesying to darkness.
The sun shall go down over these Prophets, and the day shall be darcke unto
them. Then shall the vision seers be ashamed, and the sothsayers confounded, yea
they shall be feign all the pack of them to stop their mouths, for they have not
gods word.

Like as the princes, Judges and governors has been turned from Gods, to
minister goodness unto Tyrants, workyng al wickedness. So shall God himself
bring upon their heads heavy destruction. And as the book of wisdo^e says:
these mighty men shall have more terrible torment. Sapie. vi.
Then thought they cry unto the Lord, he will not hear them, but hyde his face
from them, like as they have turned their faces from the poor, and rather
regarded Hawks and Hounds dice and cards, dancing and tossinge of balls
like babes, then the pyteous co^plaintes of their poor members made of the
same molde, and boughte with one price with them. And as for their chaplaynes
which do chop with the^ their benefices, and gives an whole years rent or they
enter, or greater gain peradventure, and so long as my lord and they can agree
of couenau^ts, or that my lord will get them mo promocio^s, they will tell my
lord, he may hawke, he may hunt, he may bowl, he may play at the bal, and what
he will, so he do stop their mouths with somewhat al is well, and it please your
grace: but against their poor brethren, which have nothing to give them,
they are cruel and devouring wolfes. They pole their parishners, they pyl
their tenauntes, they send polling proctors, and are most ready by all means to
trouble the poores to move war against him, both with their good word to my lord,
if need be, and other pretipractise. To these wicked hipocrits shall come
darkness, angwish, sorrow, heaviness, all the wooes and cursses, all the plages
spoken of in the scriptures. This great misery is meant by night and darkness as
we may perceive. Esa. v.xiii. Ierem. xv. Mat. xxiiii
Here note also the terryble sentence of God, his sincere justice against the
wicked, which shall cry unto god, and shall not be herd, where always he hears
the good before they do cry, Esaias.lxv. he rejects the wicked with their
sacrifie. Esaias.lxvi.

The Text
But I am full of the power of the spirit of god, full of judgment and strength,
to show unto Jacob his iniquity, and to Israel his syn. Here this I beseech
you O princes of the house of Jacob and dukes of the house of Israel which do
make judgment abominable, and do pervert al equity, building Sion in blud,
and Jerusalem in wickedness. Her princes did judge for reward, and her priests
did preach for wagyes, and her prophets did prophecy for money, and still made
the Lord their staff, saying: is not the lord in ye mids of us? there shall com
none evil upon us. Therefore for your cause Sion shall be plowed like the field,
and Jerusalem shall be an heap of stones, and the hill of the temple, shall be an
hie wood.

Mark the mighty power of god his holy sprit, o princes, he causes ye
prophets to speak, or else they do remain spechles, Ieremye says: I can not
speak because I am a child. But what answers the Lord: say not so Jeremy
that thou art a child, for thou shalt go to all that I shall send the, and
shall speak all that I shall command the Fear not before their faces, for I am
with the to deliver the says the Lord, ye do set the^ over the people says
ye Lord, and over kingdoms to root up and to destroy, too waste and scatter,
to build and too plant. I shall cause the not too fear their faces, for I
have made the like a walled city, an iron pyller, and a brazen wall to the
kings of Judah to the Princes and priests, and to all the people of the land,
they shall fight against the, but they shall not prevail for I am with the
sayethe Lord to deliver the. O why are you faynte hearted, which have the
like Office, what can be said more to encorage you? Why dare you not cry
against the wyckednes of our time, as the prophets did in their time. Does
not our iusticiaries and judges peruerte justice, and make their judgments
abhomynable? Is there no rewards in the hands of our Princes? are al these
fair houses about London or elsse where gotten with good conscience and builded
without blood? Nay sure lie, for one of your great builders did write
worthelye upon his walls a confession for all his fellows. No man waxes rich
but by the discommoditie of others, but you are but hyrelynges, preaching for
wages and can espy no faults. Yet dare you say for these ramping Lions:
have not they banyshed the Popish religion? is not God among us? have not
they set forth the Bible? are not they Gospellers? Yes to their open shame
doutlesse, for heretofore, there was some pretense of religion, some colorable
cloak of virtue and honestye, that is shaken of I do grant, and not so much
left as fyg leaves to cover their shame, how can God be among this people?
among whom the Devil raygneth and rages by covetous ambicion, whordome,
exhortacion, contempt of true religion and all ^u^ill governance. They have
set forth the Bible that al men may se how far they do swerve in life from
God his hollye word. They are called Gospellers in spyte (as I do take it)
of the holy Gospel. For the holy Gospel of God is slaundered and evil
spoken of, booth of our Papists in England and in other nations, so far as
our Englysh gospellyng is known. Because in the beginning thereof al things were
compelled to serve their covetousness and lascivious lybertye and so it is still
continued. True relygion is sought of no body, private gain which aryseth of
the great possessions of the spoiled kingdom, is sought of every body and how
perilous a thing it is to bring such cursed spoil into out houses, read
the.vii. of Iosue of Achan the son of Charmy, and repent with the Niniuits
both king, which shall answer for all these iniquytyes, and Dukes, Earls,
Barons, Bishops, which do turn to your private commodityes things dedicate
to publyke uses. Repent I say lest with Jerusalem your houses be turned into
heaps of stones. Ieremi.xxvi. has the same saying forth of our prophet and
our savior in.xix. of Luke.

The.iiii. Chapter.
The Text
But it shall come in the last days that the hill of the house of the lord shall
be prepared in the top of the mountains, and it shall be taysed above all
their tops, and the people shall flow unto it. Much people shall go and say:
let us goo up into the hill of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob,
and he shall teach us of his ways, and we shall walk in his paths, for the
law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, and he
shall judge many nations, and correct strong and mighty people for a long time.
And they shall break their swerds into shares and their spears into syckles.
And one nation shall not lift a sweard against another, neither shall they lern
ye feats of war any more, but eueri man shall sit under his vine, and under his
fygtree, and no man shall a fraye him, for the mouth of ye lord has spoken it.

Esaias the Prophet in his second chap. has his same Prophecye the which of all
our interpretours and of the Jews also is understand to be of their Messiah,
and Christ our savior but after a sondrye sort. For we do take it that the
Prophet in his time, seeing in the earthlye Jerusalem religion neglected,
judgment perverted, and justice banished, did cast up the eyes of his spirit
into that great and high hyl, whereof Ihon speaks in the.xxi. of his
reuelacion and did see the house of the Lord, the spouse of the Lamb, the
great city, the holy Jerusalem coming down from heaven, having the clearnes
of God and al manner of virtues, and al kind of knowledge, which is mente by
those manyfolde stones there named. So that all the people which shall be saved
shall come thereunto, shall walk in the light thereof, and the kings of the
earth shall bring their glory unto it. Nothing polluted or defiled shall enter
into it. Apoca. xxi. Thus seems Saint Ihon to utter in other words the same
Prophecy which Micheas and Esaias did speak long before. Even as the sprite
of our heaue^lye father for the comfort of the elect should thus speak unto
us. Be of good comfort my children though you se mi word despised, my little
flock scattered, my pore oppressed, it shall not be always thus. I have
appointed a time. when I will have the mastrye, when I will raise up the hill
of my house (my chosen I do mean) above all hills above all the high and
glorious things in the world, that the Heathen shall flow unto it. The which
thing was fulfilled partlye when it pleased him at the time appointed to send
his son so to be exalted that he should draw althinges unto him. When he
commanded all his to be of good courage, for he had overcome the world, when
he spoeyled the Princes and powers, and put them to vtteraunce tryumphynge over
them by him self. Collo. ii. That this hill of ye Lords house might be
exalted. Christ gave him self for it, that he might sanctyfye it, Epheci. v.
that he might make it for himself a glorious congregacyon, without spotte or
wrynkle, against the which house, because it stands of a sure rock the gates
of hell can not prevail, neither death nor life, nor angels nor rule, nor
power, shall be able to drive this spiritual house forth of gods favor, no
the Deuyls dare lay nothing too the charge of this church and house of the
faithful. For the Lord even the God of Jacob dwells in it and who dare
stand against it. Thus lo the true temple of God and the house wherein the
holy ghost dwells, which are we, so many as do belief.i. Cor. iii. at the
coming of our sauyoure Christ was exalted, and set above all the high
mountains great glory, pomp, and pride of this world. The which glory
being published by Christ, and his Apostles it brought forth fruit
throughoute the hole world in Asia, Africa, and Europa.

Then began they to clyme up unto the hill of God, that is to the hill of
knowledge to be taught in the ways of the Lord and to walk in his paths as
our Prophet does declare him self. When the gospel did first come forth of
Sion and the gracious word and will of the Lord did spring from Jerusalem.
Then they come from the East to the West to seek this glory, to sit and rest in
the bosom of faithful Abraham in this glorious Jerusalem.

This is the reaste that follows where all shall be so quiet that they shall
break their sweardes into Mattockes and their spears into sythes never to
strive nor fight in this holy hill of the heavenly Jerusalem. Whereunto we
must lift up the eyes of our spyrytes contynuallye stryuinge to mortifye the
flesh which can not enter therein, because it is polluted.

This reaste is only begone in thee spiritual manne in this life, and can
not be made perfect tyil the last enemy be overcome, which is death. This
is our belief grounded upon scripture of this glorious raising up of the hill
of the house of the lord. Now the Jews does stycke to the outward letter and
naked words, both in this and many other textes touching the restitution of
their temple and kingdom. And surely as the Lord God sees from the beginning
of al his works to the end of the same: and his gifts are without
repentance, and the sprete of God does promise great things to that nacyon,
because their fathers were the root, and theirs was the adoptyon, glory and
testament to them was the law given the ceremonies and the promises of the^ was
christ concerning the flesh. And so mai^^t be by the secret work of god that
by this clear light of the gospel, so wonder fully spread among us in these
last days they shall confess their great crimes and grievous offenses of
Christ refused, and their blasphemies against the son of God, and so God in
them be glorified amongs al nations which, shall hear the mercies of the Lord
toward them, what promises they have, if they do repent, read.xxx. of Deuteronomy.
and of their return in the last days. Ose. iii. S. Paul also seems to
delate this matter. To. xi. asking for what purpose they did fall, and
answers, God forbid that they al did so fall, that they should all perysh.
But by their fall salvation did come to the Gentyles, for this purpose to
provoke them (even the Jews) to follow the same, and farther says Paul: if
their fall were the riches of the world and their decay the riches of the
Gentyls, how much more the fulness of the^. And if the castyng away of the
Jews were the reconcilyng of the world, what shall be the receiuinge of them,
but life brought from the dead? Again I will not have you ignorant of this
mystery (says Paul) that ye be not hye minded among your selves, that blyndnes
has chanced to Israel. But in parse whiles that the fulness of the Gentyls
should enter, and then al Israel should be saved again. By the Gospel they are enemies for you, but by the eleccion they are be loved for their fathers.
For the gifts and calling of God are such that he can not repent of them.
For like as you were sometimes not beleuyng, but now have obtained mercy by
their misbeleife: so are they now made myscreantes, because you have obtained
mercy that they might obtain mercy also. For God has for this purpose shut
al under sin that he might have mercy upon al. The Jews are chanced in
erroures and kept in excyle, so that they are talked of and taken as abiects
through out the hole world. We do account them and their doings, to be
fygures of us and our doings, and they^es always holy for their fathers as
Paul says. And in what blyndenes? in what and how gross darckenes of
erroures under our abominable desolacion, this long time have we, which
account our selves the spiritual Judah, been shut up, whiles the justice,
which is by faith in Christ has been forgotten, the justice of worckes set
in place, new sects founded, new relygion invented, open blasphemies against
the open word of God with swerd and fire maintained and filthy fornicatyon
allowed, shameless swearynge permytted and such abominable Idolatry erected
as before this time of Antechriste the like was never imagined.

The stynkinge breathe of man so soon as him lyked to blow forth a God
into a cake, and name it Christ god and manne, with other more deuelyshe
delusions then ever had the Jews. How be it all this boothe their synnefull
blyndenesse and ours, doothe serve too the magnyfyinge of the Majesty,
mercy, and power of the euerlyuynge Lord which works all for him self
even the wicked against the evil day. Because thee goodness of him is such
that he will turn the stubbernesse of the Jews hitherto and our long
continued blyndenesse under Antychriste to his glory, too the auauncemente of
constancye in mercy and truth too the great beautifyinge and glorious
setting forth of the salvation of his chosen, according too the sayeinge of
Saint Paul. All things together are aid and helps too them that be of
purpose called. Romans.viii. The incrudelytye of the Jews can not make the
Faith and promise of God void and of none effect. But rather our injustice
doothe commend his justice, and our untruth causes his truth to excel
unto his glory, that he may be found true and almen liars, and he over
comes when he is judged.

Then as the fall of the Jews must needs be confessed by Paul's doctrine, too
be that they may attain mercy, and God to be so gloryfyed, so may we look
for the fulfyllynge of such Prophecyes as appertains too that purpose at the
time appoyncted which is in these last days when God will have hoole Israel
saved. When he will have one fold and one flock, read the Prophecyes of the
restorynge again of the Jews. Esaye.xi.lxvi. Chapters. zacharye.ii. Chapter.
Osee.iii. Chapter. Diete xxii.xxxii.xxxiii Chapters.
Ezechiell.xx.xxxiiii.xxxvii. Amos.ix. And you shall perceive that God will be yet
much more among boothe Jews and Gentyles gloryfyed.

For all Prophecyes be not wholye ended, fulfilled, and therefore are they
darcke unto us because the appointed time is not come which shall bring light
unto them, save as I said before before that in the spiritual Israel they
may after a sort be verifyed but so that the Israel both by promise and by
sede ought not from such plain promyses to the^ made for to be secluded. But
because I would not be the author of any new doctrine I do submyt my
judgment herein and in all that I do write to them that do sit and ar able to
give judgment. Only I would have us to thyncke that the Jews had the
oracles, the promyses, the testament, the Prophets, and Christ our sauyoure
touching the flesh. They are the rote, the true and natural Olyue. We are
wild and be but grafted in them. They are reiecte and blinded a long time.
So have we been also. They are banyshed from their contry, we live banyshed
also from our natural country.

And shall it not be a comfort unto us, seeing all chances unto them in
figure to see them restored, the hoope of our restorynge unto our heavenly
country? Shall it not make much for the glory of God, to perform his
promise with the largess, now when all things seems boothe unto them and
unto us pass all hope and desperate? Shall it not commend and set forth
the mercy of God which so long time has suffered and sustained sinners?
Shall it not gr^atlye enlarge the kingdom of Christ too have gathered this
scattered flock of the Jews into his foulde? Shall not this consyderacyon,
give us occasyon too praise and magnyfye this glorious kingdom? too humble
our selves before the mighty worckinge hand of God whose only woorcke it is
boothe in them and in us, too elect and choose, too reiecte and refuse, to
illumynate, to excreate, to cast down, too raise up again.

Shall not this much move us charytablye too deal with them, too use all
loving means that may be to win them to the favor of God again? And the
rather may we do this with good hope of their salvation, because they do
live in such fear of God. For the most part of them as far as I can
learn, as the like is not to be sound among us Christians.

Every manne, woman and child among them is mydste perfyte in thee letter
of the law, and old Testamente. They abhor al Idolles and Idolatry. They
reverence the high name of God so wonderfulli, as we blaspheme it light tie.
Though the vale hang yet before their eyes in the reading of the law,
howebeit this do I say to them and al other which shall vouchsafe too read
these rude and plain commentaryes, that as I have conceived a hope by the
scryptures of the rayesynge again of the Jews too be a figure and example of
our resurreccyon. So me thyncke it may be hear judged against the Jews by
the words of our Prophet, that temple and kyngedome, governance, beatynge
down of enemies, and promised tranquillity, must be only by the word of
God, and therefore spirytual, not carnal, as they imagine, but much better
then they can yet behold, for first says our Prophet.

The Text
In the last days the house of the Lord shall be prepared in the top of the
mountains above all mountains.

And strayghtwaies he declares how that shall come to pass.

Much people says he shall say: let us go up into the hill of ye lord and he
shall teach us of his ways and we will walk in his paths, for the law shall
goo forth of Syon.

And straight adioineth unto this word and Doctrine of the Lord the judgment
and correction which are the chief points of the regymente and kingdom and
streyghte after the reast and quyetnes from all forran enemies, which
things folowinge so evidently, seems altogether to hang of the word of God,
and therefore shall not be carnal but spiritual and eternal even such joy
reast and peace as Christ promised unto his Disciples such as the world can
not give. When this shall be fulfilled our Prophet utters in the last day
says he: which last days are always spoken of the time of our Christ the
Messiah promised. For the Jews do reckon

From the delyueraunce of Israel





From Christ al these latter days of his reign by the Gospel. M.d.Li. years
which is the last.

Into the which last time of Christ al prophecies, al historyes the Prophets
them selves do look and behold. Therefore says Christ your father Abraham did
desire to see my day, he did see it and reioysed. Again, blessed ar your eyes,
which have seen that which many have desired to see and cold not.
Therefore says Simeon, now let thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes
have seen thy salvation. And aiust cause why these last times should be looked
for and made the marcke too shoot at and end of all prophecy. For streght
after ye fall of Ada^, these times were promised. This was she second Adam the
seed of the woman in whom the world again should be blessed. This time was
prefygured in the fludde. This Christ should deliver from the hellye Pharao.
This is the true Solomon and king of peace, buyldeynge him a temple without
spotte. Prophecye his delyuereth from Babylonycall bondage of Antechriste, and
all aduersarye powers, so that there was no further to be looked for but this
time before the law Melchisedeke without father and mother did prefigure this.
In the law al ceremonies were but shadows, and Christ was the body in who^ al
prophecies were fulfilled and al shadows ceased. So that these times of Christ
may worthelye be called the last times and as Paul calls it to the
Galathians and Ephesyans the fullness of time, wherein all things were
fulfilled. The last times also may they be called, because they are most
near to the coming of christ unto judgment, which shall be the last day of
al flesh, the last day of this heaven and this earth, as Ihon speaks,
Neither may we thyncke much that they were called the last days, and the
last times in the time of Christ and his Apostles and yet thus long are
continued. For as Saint Peter answers to this folyshe doubt wherwyth the
fleshly are deluded. One day with the Lord is as it were a thousand year, and a
thousand year as it were one day. And the Lord is not slow in coming as
the unwise do think him. But paciente toward us, not willing any to perysh
but to receive all to repentance.

The Text
For all people shall walk every one in the name of their God, and we will
walk in the name of our god, for ever and ever.

This seems to be spoken of the prophet, for a confirmation, and an assurance
to have this great promise fulfilled, because all nations set up some kind of
religin, and have some gods to whom they credit, whom they do obey and follow,
Yea, the wicked world drowned in Idolatri and al abhominacions, Imagyned of
their own mad brains every one to have his several GOD. All theyrs are
but feigned gods (says he) nay, they are deuylles and no gods. But ours is
the living GOD the lord which has made heaven and earth, and wrought all the
wonders both in heaven and earth, we may boldelye believe him, walcke and go
forward in the power of his name forever, how impossible so ever his promises
do seem to the flesh, he is able to perform the^. Though he do long deffer
the^ to try our faith, and to show his power whereunto nothing is impossible,
he lasts for ever, therefore we may never end our hope and trust of that
thing he promyseth.

In that day says the Lord: The Text
I will gather her which halteth, and is cast away, her who^ I have punyshed,
and I will make thee halt to have a succession and the outecaste to be a
strong people, and the Lord shall raygne over them in mount Syon, from hence
forth for ever. And thou O tower of the flock, the tower of the daughter of
Syon, to thee shall come, to thee shall come I say the first kingdom, the
kingdom of the daughter of Jerusalem.

In that day in the last days in the time of Messiah, for so does al
interpreters take it. I will gather you says your God though I have
chastened you, cast you away, and made you lame. I will not fail to make you a
strong people again, and give you a posterytye and succession without any
end and without all noumber. For I my self will be your king in the mount
Sion for ever. Thus does the Prophet continue in the confyrmacion of these
great promises so dark unto the flesh that with much busynes it can hardly
be persuaded in the promises of heavenly and spiritual works.

By the word halting, our Prophet would insinuate and bring into memory how
that Israel haltyng from god and clynshynge after Idols, as Elyas charge
them.iii. Reg. xxviii. had so provoked him to anger that he had worthily made
them halt and lame, that is to say, had grievously afflycted and skourged them
for so is the same word of halting used for grievous afflyccion. Psalm. xxv.
xxviii. and this Prophecye is red also. Esa. xxxv. how the lame shall leap and
skyp for joy.

The Text
And the Lord shall raygne.

Tyrants shall raygne no longer, but the Lord shall raygne which teaches us
still that this new restored kingdom shall be spiritual, for all men are flesh,
and all their kingdoms c^rnal, the kingdoms of all men have an end, but
this has none end, therefore is this the kingdom of God, the kingdom of the
son of God, which God the father did give him that he should occupye the
seat of David his Father and raygne in the house of Jacob for ever and of his
kingdom there should be none end as the aungel did say to the blessed
Virgin. Hear may the Jews by this place learn that their king whom they do
look for to be man of the seed of David shall also be God, for here he is
called Jehovah by the high name of God, and his kingdom named everlasting,
which only can be the kyngedome of God and not man. All this we do see
fulfilled in our Christ and his spyrytuall kingdom, so many as do believe
Christ to be God and man, and do feale how by his spyryte he begins to
reign in the hearts of his chosen.

The last verse is so vehementelye brought forth by the Prophet to confyrme
this promise that every word in it is twyse doubled. That which he calls
the tower of the flock, because the people was gathered thither thryse by the
year as the flock is gathered into a fold he calls it again the tower of
the daughter of Sion, and twyse he says shall come that the Jews should not
despair though they do se the time prolonged and defferred.

That which he called the first kingdom he calls it again the kyngedom of
the daughter of Sion, promising them that the relygyon, noble courage and
justice, the glory and wisdom of Salomo^, or whatsoever was praise worthy in
the beginning: that same shall most fullye be restored in this raygne of
Messiah, Esaye has the like in the end of his first Chapter. I shall restore
thy judges as in the beginning and the counselors as at the first.

Now why doste thou cry with such loud voice, The Text
is there no king in the? are thy counsaloures peryshed? Because sorrow is come
upon the as upon the womanne that trauayleth.

As though he should say I do know my words will grieve the so much more
as all things seems unto the flesh desperate. Thou dooste lack thy noble
captains and counsaloures unto who^ thou haste trusted, the which heretofore
has delivered the. And because thou have made flesh thy arm trustinge to
much to thy kings and counsaloures, and further haste exalted thy self
(which art but dust and ashes) as though thou haddeste power of thine own
without me, and therefore are these sorrows come upon the, even the sore
panges and throws of trauaylyng women.

Lamente, The Text
and sorrow O Daughter of Sion, like the womanne trauayelynge for thou shalt
now goo forth of the city, thou shalt dwell in the field Thou shalt goo to
Babylon. But thence shalt thou be delivered: There shall the Lord redeem the
from the hands of thine enemies.

Thou must I say to beat down this vain confydence and hoope thou haste
besides me befoore chastened, but be sure thou shalt be delivered in the
end. Thus says the Prophet O see of the same delyueraunce.

Along time thou shall look for me, and not be coupled to any housband, nether
yet ten of whoreyng, and I will look for the, thou shall be without king, with
out Prince and priest, and after return and seek the Lord thy God, and David
thy king, and fear the Lord for thy good in the last days.

The Text
And now shall many nacyons of the Heythen be gathered against the, saying: she
is polluted, our eyes shall behold Syon, and have their desire upon her, but
they have not known the thoughts of the Lord, nor understand his counsel:
For he has gathered them as a handful into the barn. Arise and threshe thou
daughter of Syon, for I will make the horns of yro^, and hooffes of brass, and
thou shall break in pieces much people. And I shall dedycate unto the Lord
their spoil and their riches to the Lord of all the earth.

The Prophet gothe forth to declare the state of the Jews in the days of
Messiah, for of that time all do take it. Now because ye time is not come
wherein the Jews shall receive our Christ, as their Messiah, their God and
their king, I do judge it unmeet for any man unless he have some special
Reuelacyon to wade any farther then the open word of God in the secret
worckes, which then shall be showed, nether may it be accounted as a great
^aulte to any of us if we do clearlye confess our selves ignoraunte, what or
how many nacyons shall be gathered against Israel or how they shall be
destroyed, but rather a great presumptyon if we should rashlye to take upon us
the clear light of such secret misteryes.

Like as of the other part I suppose the rash iudgmente of some which do say
that the Jews are so dampened and al together cast away, that they cannot be
restored, as it appears euydentelye too be pronounced against the
scryptures, so ought it not to be allowed but brotherlye to be reproved. As for
those enemies of theirs which reioyseth at this long captivity, and makes
them a ^estynge stock and a by word the Lord swears. Ezechiell.xxxvi.
that they shall suffer shame and ^ewyl sanctyfye his high name which was
polluted among the Gentiles, and they shall know that he is God.

In the.xxxvii of Ezechiell God promyseth the restorynge of the Jews by the
raysynge of dead bones, where in ^e breaths the spyryt and life which is
the receiuinge of them, whereunto Paul alludeth Roma. xi. saying what shall be
their receyuynge but life from the dead? Ezechiel. xxxviii.xxxix. is this
Prophecye of Micheas at the full, set forth who so shall have the
Reuelacyon of the spryte for to see this wondrous woorckes, as for us to whom
it is not fullye opened we do pray that too the glory of God and the
renoume of his high name, it may in the due time be revealed. Cryinge in the
mean season against our blyndenesse, as did Paul writing upon the same
high mysterye. O the profounde deepenesse of the riches, wysdom and knowledge,
of God, how unsearchable are thy ways and inco^prehensyble thy judgments.
For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counsel
geuer. Unto us it shall be enoughe whiles that time do try the truth further
too consider the enemies of Israel all most tryumphynge over it suddenly by
the mighty hand of God, destroyed such as Pharao, Sa^herib, Rabsace,
Nebuchadnezer, Antiochus, Herod.

And our enemies which are the spiritual Israel, wonderfullye vanquished
and by Christ and his word put too confusion The Romyshe Antichrist with his
Idols, his Cardynalles, his Bishops, his shauelynges, Monks, Chanons,
Friars, his Priests, regulars, and irregulers, out of all the rules and orders
of honestye, which Heathen company were entered our lands, were gathered
against us. Countynge us polluted Heretics worthy too satysfye their bluddy
eyes wysh our deaths hanging and burning. But they did not know the
thoughts of the Lord that he suffered them too rage that he might be
glorified in the end, when they should be threshen to powder geuynge his
faythefull such power that they should tread down all the power of their
adversary like chafe, to give God the glory of this spoil, and too knowledge
this too be his woorcke to the glory of his name. God grant that we unto
whom God has given this tryumphe, be not forgetful to pay our vows unto
our Lord. The Prophet voweth in the person of us too dedycate, and to give
him not only the calfes of our lips but the riches, and spoil to be a
moment and as he calls it Anathema a thing so separate unto the Lord that
no man may touch it, much less convert it to any pryuate use. Neither is
this the vow of our Prophet only but a plain commandment of God. Deuter.
vii. Thou shalt brene with fire their graven Images. Thou shall not covet
their silver and gold whereof they are made, nether shall thou take any thing
of them unto the, least thou offend because that it is the abhominacyon of the
Lord thy God, nether shall thou bring any thing of the Idol in to thy
house, least thou be accursed like as it is. Thou shalt abhor it as
fylthynes because it is Anathema and accursed. So was Iherico and Amelech,
Anathematysed if I may be suffered so too speak. And Achan was stoned for
touching of the one, Saul was put from his kingdom for having of the other.
God grant the noble houses of England to suffer no like damnage for the
turnynge too their pryuate uses such spoils as they have gotten of these
their spiritual enemies. I dare say nothing but this only that al men can
easylye judge that if the Idols found in that Babylon had been burnt with
all their Jewels unto them offered, and the lands and possessions put to the
mayntenaunce of true religion. To the fyndyng of the pore, to the setting forth
of godly learning and virtue, which was abused in supersticion and
Hipocrisy: we might have hoped for our zeal to godward, to have had his
mercy, and for our godli pollici to have seen a star: shing region. Where now
that covetousness that foul beast, blotteth and spotteth, al our doings in
the sight of God and man, we do fear the clean contrary. God grant us eyes
to se and hearts to repent for the glory of that name and that truths sake,
which we do profess.

Now shalt thou be compassed The Text
with gariso^s, thou daughter of garysons, he has laid seyge against us,
with a staff will they strike the cheke of the judge of Israel.

After the Prophet have ended his wonderful prophecy of ye last days, that
he may the better be believed. He tells them things which many of the^ should
see with their eyes. Now says he, even now is it at hand that Jerusalem full of
people and garysons of sougiers, shall be obsessed and beseyged with many
sougyers. And if did come so to pass in the days of Ezechyas, when Seneheryb
sent his army to Jerusalem, which did beseyge it and brought great famine up on
them, not wythstandyng there was destroyed of that great army and garyson, by
the angel of God. C, lxxxv. thousand in one night. Again within a few
years after, Pharao brought an army forth of Egypt, and did smite and stay
their good king Josias and ryghteous Judge of Judah. Like as also the last king
of Israel. O see was slain in the days of Ezechiah, under whom our Prophet
lived, and did write this prophecye, and the chief cyty of Israel Samaria, was
destroyed the same time. And not very many years after, the cyty of Jerusalem
was besyeged by Nabuchadnezer, Ioakim was taken prisoner, and zedekiah set in
his place, who caused Jerusalem to be again beseyged and destroyed, and him
self had his eyes put forth, and so was carried prisoner. Of the which
zedechias, they do for the most part expound this (...) of their chief Judge
stryken upon the cheek. And some does say that it is a prophecye of Christ
which should be stryken upon the chycke before the hye Priests. But to cause
it to agree with that which goes before and follows. Hear seems to be
set forth a prophecye what shall come upon Jerusalem, even great misery, and
things unto the flesh desperate, and times past all hope to the judgment of
man. How be it to the almighty power of the euerlyuyng Lord, unto whom al
godly Prophets and preachers always provoke al things that he pleases are
most easy to be fulfilled. The Lord is most near when he seems far
away. The Lord is most strong, when manne is most weak.

Therefore straight ways in the next verse folowinge our Prophet adioyneth
how that in times most terrible when they should be paste al hope, their
land with contynuall wars all wasted, their kings captiued. Foraine nacyons
bearyng rule over them. And that same time the Roman tyraunte Augustus Caiser
demanding a sore trybute upon them: Forth of a little vyllage not worthy to
bear any vewe in the musters and assembles of the people, should come forth
a captain contrary too man's iudgmente, which should govern Israel in
the strength of the Lord and the high and mighty name of God. So that no
power of man shall be able to resyste him: as is most evidently proved in yt he
has enlarged his kingdom and spread his name through out the hole world,
magry al tyraunts, al persecutors, al his enemies, and has continued it
this.M.d.li. years beating down with the breath of his mouth with out swearde
or weapon al his adversaries, and at this day most gloryouslye tryumphynge
over them.

The Text
And thou Bethlem Euphrata though thou be little among the thousands of Judah,
forth of the shall come unto me he that shall be the ruler in Israel, and his
coming forth from old, from everlasting. Therefore he will give them unto
other unto the time yt she which shall bear, have borne and the relydue of the
brethrene shall return too the children of Israel. And he shall stand and
govern in the strength of the Lord, and the high name of the Lord his God.

O wonderful blindenes of the Jews, which do not understand or not regard this
plain prophecye of Christ, princypally spoken for their comfort. O more
wonderful madness of the Anabaptists which wilfully refuses the knowledge and
true understanding hereof turning the^ to the folly of their own brains. The
Jewish Priests and Scribes do bring in this Prophecye to king Herod at the
first when he demanded where their Messiah, whom we call Christ should be
borne in Bethleem Judah, they do answer, for thus was it prophesied that thou
Bethelem, though thou be little. etc. Forth of the shall come a captain.

The wise Magis so wonderfully by the spirit of God called from far countries
forth of forayne and Heythen nations, brought by a stai to Jerusalem, to teach
them there of their own king, does follow the sta^ standing over this place
where this Prophet apointeth his natiuitye. There they do find him and worship
him as God and king in this little vyllage Bethelem.

At his birth first of all the Angels appeared unto the poor shepeherds to
utter unto the world that this kyngedome is not of the proud, but for the
poor, humble and meek, unto whom Messiah is sent. Esaias.lxi. and they se a
wonderful light, and hear a voice saying: that their Messiah was borne in
the cyty of David which is also named Bethelem, in the same chapter the first
of Luke, because David was there born i. Samuel.xvi. and anointed king. In the
same Chapter Symeon the Prophet which had promise made by the spirit, that he
should not se death before that he should, se this Messiah, confesses that this
is the light of the Hethe^, and the glory of the people Israel.

Anna the Prophetyse which night and day served in the temple with praying and
fasting, professed this to be the redemer of Israel.

Yea the voice of God from heaven in the presence of many people, does confyrme
al this, saying: this is my well-beloved son in whom I am well pleased, hear
you him.

The miracles without number both in his life time when he cured al dyseases
both of body and soul. When he caused the wyndes to cease, the seas to obey,
and death to give place, and in his death, when he caused the heavens to shet,
the earth to shake, the sun to loose his light. And after his death also when
he caused the hels to open, the graves to give again their prysonats. What
will you have more?

His most enemies the Scrybes and Pharyseis could not say in conscience,
but that al these wonders were done by the fyngar of God, and the sougiours
with their captain which kept him at his death, was compelled to cry.
Truly this is the very son of God. Math. xxvii.

Yea the very deuyls were driven to confess him to be Jesus the son of God
Math. viii. Mark.v. Luke.viii and yet some which do bear his name called
Christians, and some twyse christened, as they call it, dare deny unto him this
glory. O blasphemye intolerable, yea all the power of Satan and all the gates
of hell have not been able to beat down the church buylt upon this confession
as Christ out savior promised Math. xvi. though contynuallye this M.D.
and.Li. years they have with the swerd hangyng and burning most despitefully
stryuen against it, and yet these blind beasts dare attempt such folly. Yea,
though the Jews, though the Turks, though the Aryans, and the
Anababtistes, and all the lying rabble of the deuyls sougiers labor and strive
all that in them lies to hinder and stop the kingdom of this child borne in
despised Bethelem as he is man, but coming forth from old, from everlasting as
he is god. Yet lo it is now dilated and spread a long time through the whole
world, and at this present most gloryously spreads and triumphs over al.
Embrace therefore the son least he be angrye, and you do peryshe forth of
the way, al you ragyng people and vain imaginers against our Christ. Y^ you
gather you and set you against this Messiah the euerlyuing lord, will laugh
you to scorn. For he has anointed him king upon Sion his holy temple. He
writes it in his everlasting decree. He calls him his son, he gives him
power over al people to rule them with the iron scepter, and so following of the
kingdom of Christ. Psalm. ii.

Against the adversaries therefore of this kingdom which are the
Antychristes, whereof we are so often warned in the scriptures. Suffer me I pray
you to make a short digression, not for any sotie arguments that I will bring
against them, for that is contrary both to my purpose and profession. But for
my zele sake simply to utter the words of truth, if by that way we may win but
any one of the^. It is not said for naught by the holy Apostle. Heb. iiii. The
word of god is lyuelye and mighty in operacion: sharper then any two edged
swearde. Therefore will I use the sweard of God his holy scriptures to cut of
their errors, desyryng our heavenly father, will houte whom no man can come
unto Christ, to draw some of these blinded, and lost sheep home again to his
son Christ their only shepperde, and to his fold and, holy fellowship of the
faithful, living in Christen unity to the glory of his name and the
delatinge and enlargynge of his glorious kingdom.

There be.ii. sorts of the adversaries of this kingdom, the one denies him
to be God, the other to be man, wherefore I will declare, and prove by open
scriptures.

Christ God and Man.
First that the Messiah promised should be very man even of the seed of man
as we do read: Genes. iii. that the womannes seed shall break the serpents
head, again, Genesis xii. says God unto Abraham, in the shall all the kynredes
of the earth be blessed, and declaringe how this shall come too pass in
thee xvii. Chapter he promyseth to Abraham and to Sarai, a sede with whom he
will make an everlasting leage and couenaunte. And in the.xxii. Chapter after
he had brought this promised seed to be a slain sacrifice, as the Lord
had commanded, this was again from heaven pronounced that in the sede of
Abraham all nations should be blessed.

And in the.xxvi. Chapter unto his sonn^ Isaac was the same promise renewed
with these same words. In thy sede shall all the nacyons be blessed. Again to
his son Jacob in the.xxviii. of Genesis all the kynreds of the earth shall be
blessed in the, and thy seed says the Lord. Again says Jacob in the
spyryte of Prophecye to his children. The scepter shall not be taken from
Judah, nor the ruler from his seat whiles that Messiah do come, and to him shall
the people be gathered. Loo thus by plain testymonies most ancient, even
from the beginning may it be proved Messiah our Christ to be appointed man
of the seed of man. And after the troublous times when all their captains
failed, as Micha did Prophecy, then forth of a little village of the tribe of
Judah should come our Christ, the appointed and anointed ruler over the
faithful Israel. And to let you understand which are the enemies to Christ
his kingdom, that you do strive in vain there against mark that Balaam
provoked by ye king, Balaac cold speak nothing against this kingdom which
he did se more the^ a thousand.d. years to come after him: but did reverence
it a far of saying: There shall rise a star from Jacob and a rod from
Israel which shall stryke the captains of Moab. Of Jacob shall come this
great Lord which shall destroy the remnaunte forth of the city Numer.
xxiiii. Thus are the enemies of our Christ compelled to knoweledge him a man
of the seed of Jacob, and a glorious king over all his enemies tryumphynge.
Again. Deuteronomy. xviii. Moses the servant of God dare say thus. A Prophet up
from among thy brethrene even like me shall the Lord thy God raise unto
the, whosoever shall not hear him I will require it of him. Loo now hear is
the humility of Christ his man hode set forth but so that whosoever is the
despiser of him and his doctrine has this plainly promised that he shall give
accomptes for it, and God him self will questyon with him the cause why he
has refused him. For so stands the Hebrewe. Beware therefore as Esaias says,
and take heed unto your selves from the man whose breathe is in his nostrelles
for wherein he is reputed, though he be very man and therefore despised, yet is
he of the Lord only regarded. Again in the Psalm lxxxviii. We do read I
have sworn to David my servant, for ever will I prepare thy sede and will
stablish thy seat from generacio^ to generacio^. And in the Psalm. cxxx. most
playnelye. The Lord has sworn to David and will not deceive. I will set
upon thy seat the fruit of thy womb the which place holy Peter alledginge
to the Jews. Acts.ii. does name it the fruit of the loins of David
forseinge by the spyryte that such an Article of our faith which should be
so much impugned, had neade to be payneted with most plain words. And
what can be more plain I pray you to declare him too have been very flesh
and very manne, then thus to have named him too have come of thee seed of
thee loins, and forth of the women of David. And if you do stycke of the
word and name of a man, read.iii. kings.ii. chapter. Thou shalt always
have a man to sit in thy seat over Israel, and in the end, the seat of
David shall be stable before the Lord for ever. So that this may be
suffycyente too all them which with any thing will be satisfied, that the
Messiah and sauyoure promised is very man. Who so will search mo scryptures
let him read the.vii. of Esaye where is playnelye Prophesied that he shall be
borne of a Virgin, in the iiii. Chapter he is called the branch of the Lord
and the fruit of the earth, where both his natures are touched.

Like as our Prophet does most plainelye painte him forth in boothe
kinds, also saying that he should be borne in Bethlem, a village of small
reputacion, because it was able too make but a small noumber in the musters and
taxes when the people were noumbred by hondrethes and thousands as was then
used, and we do use the same still to this day. The which words of our
Prophet that he should come forth of little Bethlehem to rule over Israel
doothe declare his mannehode like as the words following. His coming forth
is from old, from everlasting utters his Godhead. For only God has been
from everlasting. Thus is your Messiah painted unto you God and manne, O
unbelieving nacyon. The stone which you do refuse being folishe builders is
made the chief cornor stone of God his holy buildinge. Esaias did also utter this
unto you in most plain words saying. A child is born unto us, a son is given
unto us, upon his shulder shall be the kingdom, and he shall be called
marvelous, the counsel geuer, the mighty God, the everlasting father, the
Prince of Peace, of the multiplying of his kingdom and of his peace there
shall be no end. He shall set upon the seat of David and upon his kingdom
to set up the same and too stablyshe it in equity and righteousness from
hensforthe for evermore. Esaye.ix. Hear is he named a child borne, which
should be king, which oppresses his manhood. All the other words do most
playnelye describe the pore and propertyes of his God head, who so shall
worthelye ponder them, and if nothing can serve to satyfye your styffe
stomachs, onles you have the high name of God Iouah ascribed to our Christ
your Messiah as some of you impudently can answer, Vouchsafe to read the
Prophet Jeremy in the.xxiii. chapter and there you shall most plainly find it so.
Lo the days shall come faith the Lord and I will raise up to David a rightuous
branch and he shall reign king and prospere. He shall do judgment and
justice in the earth. In those days shall Judah be saved, and Israel shall dwell
boldly and this is his name wherewyth they shall call him Iouah Sidkenu, by
interpretacion God which is, which has been, which shall be by whom all
things have their being is our ryghteousnes for so much is comprehended in
the Hebrew Iouah as was said in the first leaf. And this is the high name
which the Jews do agree, never to be given to any creature. Therefore we do
conclude against the^ that our Christ is God the only creator, of who^ al
creatures have their essence, substance, and being as this word imports,
Again where as it is written Psalm.c.ix. The Lord said unto my Lord sytte of
my right hand whiles yt I make thine enemies thy fotestole. And Christ our Lord
demands of your Doctoures and Pharyses, if Christ were David son as the
scriptures compelled them too confess. How then calls David him lord by the
spyryte so long before? And if he be Dauides Lord how then is he his son?
The which questyon has vexed your brains which deny him too be God
this.M.ccccc. years. Therefore fall down and worship our Christ as God,
like as the.xc.vi. Psalm does teach you, that all the angels of heaven shall
worship him, and you shall understand not only this questyon, but al those
same places of the Psalms and Prophets, which you do now read with a veil
and myste before your eyes Psalm.xliiii.lxxxviii, cix.cxxxi. Esa. iiii
vii.viii.ix.xi.xxviii.xl.xlii.xlv.xlvi.xlix.lii liii.lxii.
Jeremy.xxiiii.xxx.xxxiii. Ezech. xvii.xxxiiii.xxxvii. Daniel. ii.ix. Mich. v.
Agge. ii. Baruch. iii. Osee. xiii.vi. Joel. ii Amos. ix. zacharye. iii.xiii.
Malache. iii. Jonah the figure of Christ his death and resurreccion. Which
places I do note for ye godly, that they may se Christ to have been the
shoot anchor of the Prophets* and chyefe mark of their Prophecyes.

What shall I need to bring forth any place of the new Testament? saying
that stands hollye upon this doctrine that Jesus Christ is God and manne,
and by this you may know the spirit of God says Saint Ihon. Every spirit
which confesses Jesus Christ to become in the flesh, is of God. Ihon. iiii.
And every spirit which does not confess Jesus Christ to become in ye flesh, is
not of God. And this is the spirit of Antechrist says Saint Ihon. And before
in the third Chap. Who is a liar but he that denies Jesus too be Christ.
This same is Antychryste which denies boothe the father and the son. And
who so denies the son, neither has the father. Therefore embrace the son
and receive him with a kiss least he be angry and you do perysh forth of the
way. Psalm. ii. We do know that the son of God is come, and has given us hearts
to know him, which is true and we are in this truth, in his son Jesus
Christ. This is the true God and everlasting life. i. Ihon. v. We do confess
with S. Paul that Christ is borne of the Jews, as touching the flesh which
is God in all things to be praised for ever. Romans ix. We do profess this faith
which holy Ihon Baptyste preached. That our savior Christ, though he did come
after Ihon as touching the carnal nativity. Yet is he far mightiar then Ihon,
and Baptiseth us with the holy Ghost, and with fire. His fan is in his hand to
pourge his flower, and he will gather his wheat into his barn, and burn the
chafe with vnquenshed fire. We do believe that at his Baptyme the holy Ghost
did come down invisible form upon him, and a voice was heard from heaven,
saying: This is my beloved son in whom is my delight. Matthew. iii. and.xvii.
Mark.i. and.ix. Luke iii. and.ix. and all the Gospel of Saint Ihon written
for the same purpose against the Ebeonites. Again Romans.i.viii.ix. and.xi.
Corinthyans.v. Galathyans.iiii. Philippians.ii. Collossians.ii.i.
Timothe.ii.iii. Tytus. ii. Hebrews.i.v.

If the testymony of one of your Rabbynes, O Jews, or of your phantastycal
Prophets, O you rennagates, Anabaptystes seem great unto you. Let the voice of
God from heaven, the testemonye of all his holy Prophets, Patriakes, Martyrs,
Apostles, doctors and faithful witnesses of all ages, be greater and of more
wayghte unto you. Let your own salvation be more dear, then the deuyles
delusion. Let the author of truth be heard, and banysh the author of lies. The
Lord God says by his holy Prophet Ezechiel. Ezechiel. xxxiiii. I alone will
feed my flock, and straight he adds, My servant Dauyd shall feed, so
that you may see that boothe these are but one, whose feeding you must
desire, if you be not of the lost sheep for there is no way to God the
father, but by Christ, which is hear called the servant Dauyd, neither
can any manne come to Christ the only shepehearde of sowles, unless the
father draw him.

A Prayer.
Wherefore O Lord God and heavenly father, the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, the God of Jacob, which dyddest promise unto Abraham, that thou
would be the God of his seed for ever. Which haste promised also too
subdue Moab and Esau, that is to say, all heathen miscreauntes too thy chosen
Israel, and to gather under one shephearde thy servant David Christ our
savior all they scattered sheep both of the Jews and Gentyls, that there
might be one sheppehearde and one fold. Mercyfullye behold thy flock
among them, boothe dyspersed and scattered, erryng, wandering, and going
astraye with perverse minds and erronyous opinions, far from thy foulde, not
knowinge as yet nor regarding the voice of thy son the only good shepherd,
which did give his soul for his sheep. And draw them, we beseech the, home
again to the fold of thy son Jesus Christ, without who^ there is no
salvation, no comfort, no health, no hope, no stay of conscience. But
imserable wandering from error to error, and in in the end utter
desperacion. Have mercy therefore of thy miserable stray sheep for their
shepherde sake, for thy praise sake, and for the glory of thine own name for
the amplyfyinge and enlargyng the kingdom of thy son Christ who is declared
God all ready in the flesh by his manifest miracles, justified in spyryte,
seen of the angels, preached among the people, believed upon in the world and
received in glory, and shortly shall come in the same glory to make his enemies
his footestole. So be it.

Now to our Prophet from whom we may seem to have made over long a
digression, same that this wicked time requires it.

Therefore will he give them. The Text


He will give them to the Babilonians and Romans to be vexed, oppressed, and
evil entreated. And then when all seems most miserable and desperate, shall
this child be borne, which shall gather together this scattered people, this
is it which we labored to declare in the.iiii. Chapter. How Messiah should
come in a time most miserable, when the scepter should be taken from Judah and
given to a foran Tyrant as it was given to Herod a Romayne at the coming of
Christ. And ever before was it in the hand of some of their own Princes, either
of their kings, either of their Machabees, either of their cou^salours whom
they called Sanhedrin, How be it Herod having the whole nation, suspected, did
take away all their officers, and set in his captains. But here is promised a
new delyuerance when this child comes, a restoryng and gatheryng of the
children of Israel together. Which we do understand to be already begone,
when he did come into the world in flesh, to preach the glad tidings of his
kingdom, in opening his fathers great mercy and good will toward us
most vile and wretched sinners, and too make of us Gentylles (which were
lykedomme and dead stones, touching the knowledge of GOD) children unto
Abraham, and true Israelytes. To make us which were not his people to be
accepted as his people, and then shall it be most perfitely fulfilled in the
end, when there shall be but one shepeherd and one fold The Text


And he shall stand and feed in the strength of the Lord, and in the high
name of the Lord his God, and they shall return, for now shall he be
magnyfyed to the ends of the earth.

Loo, the power of Messiah it shall be, no fleshly or humane power, but it shall
be the power of the euerlyuynge Lord, and the hye name of God, wherein he shall
feed his flock as Christ says in the.x. of Ihon: I am the good shepherd and
I do know mi sheep, and I am known of mine, even as the father knows me even
so do I know the father, and I do lay down my soul for my sheep. No man
takes it from me, but I do lay it down of my self.

I have power too lay it down, and I have power too take it again. My sheep
do know my voice and follow me, and I do give them everlasting life, neither
shall they perysh for ever. Neither shall any man take them forth of my hand. My
father which gave me the^ is greater then all, and no man can take them forth
of my fathers hand. I and my father are al all one.

Who can bring a more clear exposicion of the feadynge and power of Messiah
the^ he here does himself. Neither may it trouble any scrupulous conscience
that ye prophet names him (his god) for so says Christ that his father did
give him this sheep, meaning, as he being first in the form of God without
all wrong, equal unto God, did make him self of no reputacio^ like unto man,
in ye form and shape of man, so did God give him all things, and was named
his God. As he was man humbled and brought down even too very death wherein
he cried bearing our myseryes, and fealynge the wrath of God against us
for our sins, Eloi, Eloi. My God, my God, why haste thou forsaken me,
wherefore also God has exalted him to the highest authoryty and given him a
name which is above all names, that in ye name of Jesus al knees should bow
of heavenly things, of earthlye things, and of infernal spyrytes. And all
tounges should confess that Jesus is the Lord too the glory of God the
father, lo the manhood in that he calls his God and receives of the father
and Godhead of Messiah in that all knees shall bow and worship him, like as in
the.xlv. Psalm. He is thy Lord thou shalt worship him. Where as in
Deuteronomi.vi. it is written thou shall worship the Lord thy God only. And
they shall return, The Text
for now shall he be magnified to the ends of the earth.

Hear is the promise of the restoring of Israel and magnifyinge of the
kingdom of Christ rehearsed, which is more at large set forth in the latter
end of the last Chapter of Esaias the Prophet and Ezechiell.xxxvii.

And herein shall be peace. The Text
If Assure shall come into our land, and if he shall come to tread in our
palaces, we shall raise against him.vii. Pastoures and.viii. Princelike men,
and they shall feed the land of Assure with the swearde, and the land of
Nimrodde with their own sweard points. And shall deliver us from Assure if
he come into our land, or if he tread upon our borders.

In this raygne and glorious kingdom of Messiah shall be peace. And as the
Hebrewe demonstratiue Oz serves because it is of the masculyne gender. This
Messiah is this peace and peace maker unto us according to the saying of the
Apostle. He is our peace which has made two people one, and has broken
down the wall, which was a stop betwixt us, taking away the strife even the
law of the commandments standinge in decrees by his flesh. For to make
us.ii. boothe in him self one new man, making peace and reconcylynge both
in one body by the cross taking away all enemyte by it. And thus did come
and preach peace to the gentiles which were far of and to the Jews which
were near. Ephesi. ii. Loo this is the peace whereof we should rejoice, that
we being justified by faith in him have peace with God. Romans.v. and by him
are pacyfyed, things heavenly and earthlye. This short sentence doothe
insynuate so great a mysterye like as doothe the outewarde enemy, and
outewarde delyueraunce folowinge importe and signify the wonderful worekes of
Christ in his church This peace was it that Aaron was appoyneted by God too
wyshe unto the people in all his blessings. Numerye. vi. A like promise of
peace is made. Leuiticus.xxvi. I will give peace in your borders you shall
steape and no man shall afraye you, I shall take away evil beasts, and the
swearde shall not goo through your borders. You shall persecute your enemies,
and they shall fall before you. Five of you shall put to flight an hundredth, and a
hundredth shall pursue ten thousand. Your enemies shall fall with the swearde
in your syghte. Which is like this promise of the destruction of Assure, and
the land of Nimrod, which are boothe one thing. For this Nimrod was the
begynner of the kingedome of Babylon the chief city of the Assirians, and
under the destruccyon of him and his land is insumate the destruccyon of all
Tyrauntes and enemies, boothe spyrytuall and temporal. Against whom the
Lord our God at his appoyncted time rayeseth up.vii. for one too destroy
them and has always viii. foulde so many too help his elect, as the
enemy can have to hurt the^. Yea, God of his mighty power, and stretched
out arm, can bring al his enemies to utter confusion in the twynkling of an
eye, as it is most manifest in many places of the old Testament. So that the
power of ye enemy can be reckened but a.ix. or.x. part a very small thing
to the power of the faithful. As does appear most not ablye.iiii.
kings.vi. by Heleseus which saying his city Dothaim beseged with many
Garrisons of sowgioutes, bids his servant not to be afraied, forther is mo
with us says he then with them, and prays for the openinge of his servants
eyes. And lo, they were opened and he did see the hill full of horse and fyrye
Chariots round about Heliseus. And the Lord at the prayer of this manne of
God, did smite all the Sirians with blindenes and caused them so to be led
by the Prophet unto the king of Israel, whose destruccyon they sought. The
like power of God against the Assirians is red.ii. Re. xix. ii.
Chronicles.xxxiii. Esaias.xxxvi. and many such pastoures and Princes has the
Lord set up for the delyueraunce of his in all ages, especyallye to beat
down Assure. He sent Cirus his anointed, in whom we may see a figure of
Christ. Esaias. xlvi. and of the delyueraunce by Messiah, read.
Ezechi.xxxvi.xxxviii.xxxix. Whereby as by all the other, thou may understand
the spirytual delyueraunce from al helly powers.

This Phrase of.vii. and.viii. betokens abu^dau^ce and plenteth of captains
like as ye xi. chap of Eccle. you may read the same. The feadinge with
thesweard and the swearde points, is a manyfeste Ironye and scorn of the
enemies alludynge too the name of pastoure and feadynge.

And the remnaunte of Jacob shall be in the myddeste of many people, The Text
as thee dew from thee Lord, as the drops upon the herb, which looks
for no man neither trusts in the children of men.

Loo.ii. goodlye propertyes wherewyth God beautyfieth this chosen Jacob this
scattered, and despised people, faith have they, how far soever they be
scattered abroad, which looks up to the heavens, not regardyng the help of
any manne, no more then does the dew which falls down upon the herb,
without the aid of man. And like as the dewye drops after great heat does
cheryshe the grass: even so they do bring forth woorckes of mercy, pyty,
comfort and refreshynge, to the people among whom they do live and are
conuersaunt. These be the two tokens of the true Jacob, but these remnantes of
Jacob must be tried with the fire. As zachary says.xiii. I will bring in the
third part of Israel by fire, and will try them like as silver is tried, and
fine them as gold is fined. This is the remnaunt which are saved by free
eleccion, as Saint Paul says. Romans.xi. Chapter, and how the remnaunt of
Israel shall be watered with pure water from heaven, and thereby look up
toward heaven to keep and fulfill the laws of their Lord, and so increased and
wax glorious, read Ezechyell.xxxvi. Chapter.

The Text
And the remnaunt of Jacob shall be among the people, like the Lion amongs
the wi^d Beasts, and like the Lions whelpe among the flocks of sheep,
which when he comes by, doothe tear in pieces and trample under his feet,
and there shall be none to deliver. Thy hands shall be lyfted up upon thine
ennemy, and all that hate the shall be rooted up.

This is it that Jacob did Prophecy of his posterytye in the latter days to be
fulfilled. Genesis.xlix. showing to his children that which God had opened
unto him of Judah, whom he names to be like a Lion, a Lioness, a Lions
whelpe, to utter his power among men. As the Lion is called the chief
among the beasts, he shall destroy his enemies and bynd his colt to the
vine, and wash his garmente in the blood of the grape.

Whereby is uttered the great power and glory that he has prepared for his
chosen Jacob after he have made their enemies their footestoole, which all
the Prophets do make as the chyefe mark and end of their Prophecyes, for
the comfort of the chosen Israel, as is at large before written, and
wonderfullye set forth in Ezechiel. xxxvii.xxxviii. and.xxxix. Chapter

And it shall be in that The Text
same day says the Lord, and I will destroy thy horse forth of the mydd^st of
thee, and break thy charyots. I will destroy thy cytyes, and overcome al thy
municions. I will destroy thine enchauntmentes, and thou shalt have no
sothlaiers. I will destroi thine Idols and thine images, forth of the mids of
thee, and thou shall not worship any more the work of thine own hands. And I
will pluck up thy groves forth of the mids of the, and I will destroy thy
cities. And I will be avenged in my wrath and fury upon the people which has
not heard me.

Although this prophecy be by many expounded of the Jews, yet had I rather to
take it, as spoken of the Hethe^, and so it very well agrees with all the other
prophets, which strayghte after the deliverance of Israel from amongs the
heythen, does always threaten a terryble destruction to their enemies. Of
whom so ever it is spoken, we must mark for what cause it is spoken, to teach
us that syn is the cause of destruction to al kingdoms. The trust in
charyotes, in horses, in walled cytyes and strong holds. In enchauntmentes and
Idols, are the cause of God his wrath, indygnacion and heavy dyspleasure.
Especially Idolatry, enchantment and couniuryng, which are the spiritual
fornicacion, these are the crimes that God hear and every where does threaten
to avenge in his wrath and fury. Deuteronomy. iiii vii. And through the whole book.
Iosue xxiii.xxv. Did he not wo^derfuly destroi xxiii. thousand of the
Israelytes upon one day by their own pristes and Leuits, for Idolatry? Exodus
xxxii. Did not God give them into their enemies hands, for following the ways
of the Hethen? Judges.ii.iii.iiii.vi.viii.x. Does he not threaten always to
take the^ of the face of the earth, and destroy the^ for it? Exodus, Leuiticus,
Numeri, Deuteronomi, and in all the Prophets? Does not God appear unto Solomon
afterward and declare ye same unto him.iii. Re. ix. saying: that if Israel
should worship strange gods he would take him away and make him a by word
amongs the heathen. And when it should be demanded why God had destroyed this
people whom he had chosen, this should be answered, because they have
worshipped strange gods, therefore has the Lord brought upon us all this
evil.iii. kings.ix.

This we know now living especially in this realm and se and ar taught to be
most true by the mouth of God in our time as was Solomon. But a great part
of us have Idolatrye hid in our hearts as had Solomon, and none of us do
earnestlye repent of the Idolatry by us committed, no more then did Solomon,
therefore shall we suffer shame with Solomon and our posterity shall be despised
as it shall be taught more at large. Now for the strong doctrine and
spiritual fornicacion of enchauntemente and coniuracyon, of sothesaying, or
diuinacion, on less it be spedelye stopped by the will of God, workinge the
care of such things in the heart of our king and counsalers, it shall shortly
braste forth so far among us as it did among the Jews a little before
their last destruccyon, whereof Josephus writes Ant. xx. cap. iiii.xi.xii. yt
they did forsake the true Prophets of God, and sought after Sorcerers and
soothe sayers. So says Esaias, that the Lord had forsaken his people the
house of Jacob, because they were more full of enchauntementes then was the
Arabians, and as full of sothsaiers as the Philistines and with strange
doctrine they had satisfied their selves. Esaye.ii.

So can I come into no corner of this realm where I find not, or hear not
of some of these. In Oxforde and in Cambridge, where God his holy word should
banyshe this blyndenesse, there be masters for ye nonest, which after they have
studied Astronomye, which after they have studied Astronomye and come to the
judicials of Astrology and found some experiments true and some false, when the
placynge of the Planettes in their appointed houses, and their aspectes and
respects will not serve their fond purposes. Then loo must they enter in too
Necromancye, and call some dead spirit forth of his grave with the bind of a
swalow or a cat (...) please ye devil to accept that lewd sacrifice and hear
have they infinite supersticio^s of times, of words, of places, of the
putrefactyon of that blood, and other like madness which I am a shamed too
rehearse and sorye too remember, considering that manne was made by God to
bear his image, and therefore too look and to do service to no such vile
creatures, especyallye to his auncyente enemy the Devil, for whose
acquaintance all these Coniurers has such care and makes such preparacye,
with watching, with fasting, with crossynge, with.M cccccc. supersticions,
obseruacyons, for the destruction of their own souls, as no man will for their
own salvation.

They say they use good words the great name of God Jehovah, Adonai,
Otheos, Sotor, Manuel, Sabbath and I wot not what. So did our Coniurers in the
kingdom of the Romyshe Ante christ use some good words and the like names
about the coniurynges, of Belles, of salt, of water, of oil, of wine, of
bread, of Palms and such like, but they did mixed therwyth many blasphemies,
yea and the good words whatsoever they did speak, were never applied to that
purpose which God appointed but too these their own imagined phantasyes of
conjuring God his creatures, which always has been accounted abomination
before God. Deuter. xviii. For look how far the heavens are from the
earth, and so far are my ways from your ways, and mi thoughts from your
rhoughtes, says the Lord. Esaye.lv. yea too the sinner says the Lord, why
doste thou take my name in thy mouth? Psalm.l. That these open evil doers and
manifest transgressors against God his holy commandment, ought rather
too tremble at the magnyfycente majesty of God his holy name, then thus
lewdlye too allege it in their charms.

These Cambredge coniurers have scolers in the countries abroad, which seeks
how to have familier spirits, which they do term too have a Be in a box
to teach them to play at the Dice and Cards, and other lewd pastimes. And
some must have Marcurius well placed to help at a pynsh, when they can
find no monye under crosses, to bring it by some other vnshamefull shyftes.
Some must have Venus in her favorable aspecte coniured into an aple to will
the sauoure of women. Some must have Saturn for wisdom, Jupiter for honors,
Mars for battle, which ar the very Deuelyshe delusyons wherewyth the Devil
blyneded the Babylonyans Egiptians and Cananees. And in our Popyshe time
brought in like dyshonoure of God in our George of Engeland, our Lady of
Walsingham, our Daruelgadder of Wales, whereby we must understand that
there is one old enemy of ours, the oulde Serpente which has enuyed the
honor of one God, and labored too draw us therefrome, even from the
beginning, which with holy words and glorious names, and far fetched
terms, seems too utter his wisdom like an angel of light. as Paul
warns. But mark the end of them which suffer them selves, by him too be
deluded, desiring the devil too give the^ of his Counsel. Our first Parents
were by this craftye Serpents subtle Counsel, driven forth of Paradyse and
adjudged to death with all their posterity. Genes. iii. King Saul counsayling
with the sothesayer the wise womanne, whom only he had left in his land,
was slain with his iii. sons the day folowinge.

So much doothe it aduayle too ask counsel of the dead for the living or
of the wicked spirits which do transform them selves into the likeness of
the dead, as was hear in this place of Samuel. For as the devil has no power
of the good souls, so can he not stir them too give answer, but as we
have said he can transform him self into any likeness that he may
myghtelye woorcke in these children of mischeife.

But marcke the end I say of al nacyons, which do leave the Lord, and his
holy word for such delucyons. In hope to get some thing thereby to
satisfye their dyuelyshe minds. Some for the love of women do try it, and
other some for the grydy desire of goods do practice it, with many other
things, which were to long to tell now. Was not this one of the greatest
crimes wherefore Egipte was scourged and plaged? Esaiah.xix.

Wherefore was the Empire of the Chaldees destroyed? and proud Babylon brought
down? Esaias answers. All the evils did come upon the O Babylon for ye
multitude of thine own charms and the stobbourne of malice of thy couniurers,
for thou haste comforted thy self in thy disceatfulnes and haste said: no man
sees me. Thine own conning and thy wysdo^ have disceiued the. Therefore shall
trouble tal upon the, and thou shalt not know from whence it shall arise. Do
you belief that God tells truth O you coniurars? What is there but you can
know it, if it please your great master the devil? But the Prophet says
again to your contrary. Mischeife shall fall upon the which thou shalt not
be able to put of. A sudden myserye shall come upon yt or ever thou be aware.
Wherefore now go to the coniurers and to the multitude of thy wytches, whom
thou have been acquainted with all from thy youth, if they may help the or
strengthen the? Thou haste been wearied with the multitude of thine own
counsels. Now let thy heaven gasers thy star starers, thy Moon markers
stand up and save the from the things which shall come upon the.

Behold they are stuble, the fire has burnt them, they cannot deliver their
own souls from the power of the flame, and so forth too the end. Are not the
Philistines and Canaces always charged for these crimes, to have had their
worthy desolacyon? As for Israel Esaias says plainly that God old forsake it for
this, Esaias.ii. and did lay the line of Samaria upon Jerusalem therefore, and
the burthene of the house of Achab and did raise it as it were a writing
table.ii. Re xxi. ii. Chronicles.xxxiii.

Yea when the Lord will utter his anger against them, he calls them
charmers children. Come hither says he by his Prophet you charmers
children, you aduouterous seed. Esaye: lvii. Abroad in all places of England
whereas I have tarried, have I heard of wise men and wise wemenne, which can
tell of things that are lost, and can say many sayings for childrene, and
cattle, which are forspoken and have blessings to say over certain herbs
as over vernine and dil, if they be gathered betwixt the mary days. And about
women with child, they can say our Lady with the white smock, thy side
smock, and such mad charms.v. C. are used in the countries, which the
spyrituall eyes might espy, if they had not their Greek name for naught. And
our Preachers should pluck away our polytycall magistrates should punysh, for
the Lord says: that these are the things, and not the handlynge of the
chalyce wherewyth the people are polluted Leuiti. xix. You shall not declyne to
the charmers, and of the wytches ask nothing, lest you be polluted by them.
Again Leui. xx. The soul which looks after any sothsayer or charmer to
commyt fornicacion with them, I will set my face against that soul, and I will
destroy him from the mids of his people, says the Lord. Again. Deuteronomy.
xviii. the Lord commands when thou entrest the land which the Lord thy
God gives the, beware thou do not follow the abhominacions of that people. Let
none be found among the which caryeth his child through the fire, or that
asks of the charmers, either that observes dreams or days and times, or of
them which do mark the flying and crying of birds, or of any enchaunters, or
of any devil couniurar or any soythsayer or any that have familiar spirits or
any wise men, or wise womenne. either any that asks council at the dead,
for who so doothe these, he is abhomynable before God, and for these
abhominacions the Lord thy God does root them forth before thy face. Loo
with how sore words and threatenynges the Lord God detesteth and forbids
all the kinds of these deuelishe inuencions, whereby men do run a whorynge
from God too abuse his creatures in spiritual fornicacion.

These things have I written occasyoned by our Prophet of this spyrituall
fornicatyon, Idolatrye and all kind of diuynacyon which we call so the
saying, prophecyinge, charminge, enchauntement, wytchcrafte, Magyke,
Astrologye, Necromancye, Chiromancy, Geomanci, or what other name so ever ye
devil shall inue^t to drive us from god to vain creatures, for the Devil has
ever this one woorcke in hand but he deceyueth the simple with the shyfte of
his deskante by vanytye of words.

And I do warn all people to repent kings, Lords, Bishops, Commons For
none can excuse them selves of that spyrytuall fornycacyon with the late
deposed Idol that Waser Cake. Nay shall I call it deposed which is scantlye
transposed without any fervent zeal or sign of repentance? We have not
fealte Moises to make us drink ye bitter ashes thereof with tears. We have not
had Iehu to avenge God of his enemies the Priests of Baall. ii. kings.x. We
have not wept and wailed, and torn our garments for very anguishe of our
hearts. We have not cast away the ornaments of our old idolles, and the
vessels that served them as did ye good young king Josiah. We have not destroyed
the sacrificers and steiers of our Christ, as young Josiah did with the
Priests of the high places with al charmers, witches, and enchaunters? To be
short. We have not earnestlye repented with mourninge and fasting for these
abhomininacions as did the Ninevites. Therefore as Olda answered too the good
king Josiah, that the Lord would show of his mercies unto him, because he
did cut his clothes, and wept when he heard the threateninges of God
against his countries. Nevertheless he would bring al those euilles upon
that place and upon the inhabitauntes of the land: because they had forsaken
God, and worshipped strange Gods, prouokinge God unto wrath in all the
works of their own hands. So can our people and contrye nothing at all
repentyng of their former evil, but still ever more and more prouokinge the
wrath of God upon them, Some by the desire they have to their old Idolles,
Some by their Sorcerers, Charms, Enchantmentes, soothesayinges: Many by
adulterye, lascivious wantonness, and fleshlye lybertye, and all by ambicion or
covetousness, pillinge, pollinge, and brybynge-from their brethren. Look for
none other thing, unless they unfeignedly, forthewith show the worckes of
repentance, but miserye, calamity, destruction, famine, darthe, diseases,
pestilence and theswearde in the end of foraynenacyons. Yea which is most
terrible of al, we do feale the wrath of God so kendled among us all ready,
that we are like Pharao, hardened in our sins even plaged contynuallye with
the increase of new vices, and new dyleases following. Was there ever such
inuencions in any world for polling of the people? was there ever such
shameless whordome? such wedlock breakinge? Can it be denied that Paul
writes to ye Romans, because they have changed ye glory of ye God immortal
in ye lykenes of mortal and corruptible creatures. Therefore has God given
them to follow the lusts of their own hearts in uncleanness, with shame to
abuse their own bodies together. Read the Chapter to the end, and you shall
see the wrath of God grievously kindled, in that all the vices there named, as the
punishments of sin by sin are most euidentlye fallen upon us. And we may
feale the saying of the Prophet Ose to be most true, The spirit of fornicacion
has deceived you and you have gone a whoring from your God. Therefore shall your
daughters be harlots, and your wises be whores.

O merciful Lord lead us not into this grievous temptacion, that our sin
should be punyshed with the increase of syn, by the geuyng over of us
miserable sinners to our own lusts. For who can be able too beat his
sins, if thou straight observe them O Lord? Make us not like Caine, Pharao,
and Judas which did heap sin upon sin. But give us hearts like the
Ninevites too repent for our sins. Have pytye upon our young King who^
you of thy mercy did wonderfullye vouchsafe to give unto us at what time we
waited worthelye for thy sore scourge, whom thou dyddeste fashyon and preserve
in his mothers womb, and bring forth into this light, with like marvel of thy
almighty power. Whom thou haste defended and kept with thy mighty arm, this
time of his infancye, from domestical and for an enemies. Under home in his
weak and most tender age thou haste caused to shine forth the clear light
of this Gospel, which has bet down the Idolles and Idolatrous aulters,
through out his ^ealme, whereby among the Papists, Turks and Jews thou
have made thy Britains to be bruted. How be it all this have thou so wroughte
under a young child, that the glory might come holy unto the and to no man
mortal.

For the glory of thy name therefore and for Jesus Christ his sake whose
honor we do seek, and kingdom we desire, have mercy upon him most
mercyful father. Make him faithful as David, zealus like Hezechiah, repenta^t
as Josiah and to his people the professoures and maynetayners of thy truth
against all papists Tuckes and Jews, against al ye powers of Antichrist
Grant thy manyfold and great mercyes that they may abhor their own
wickedness, and the wyckednes of their forefathers, and walk now like the
children of this great light, the children of thy kingdom. Grant we beseech
thee, O most mercyful father, unto al them which do profess the truth of thy
Gospel, unfeigned repentance of al their syns, fast confydence upon thy great
mercyes, the renewing of their lives according to the truth of thy word, which
they do profess, that they may exhort one another to walk in thy light saying
with the Prophet Osee. Come and let us return unto the Lord, for he has
begone and will heal us, he will stryke us and make us whole. Grant this O
Lord God that thy name be not evil spoken of among thy enemies So be it.

The.vi. Chapter.
Hear now what the ever living Lord says: The Text
Arise and contend with the mountains, and let the hyls hear thy voice.
Hear O ye hyls the judgment of the lord, by whom al things have their
being: and you strong foundacions of the earth, give ear, for the lord has a
quarrel with his people, and with Israel, he will try him self. My people what
have I done to you? or what grievous thing have I appointed the? answer unto
me. Because I have brought the forth of the land of Egypt, and from the house
of bondage, I have redeemed thee, and I have sent Moses, Aaron and Miriam
before the. O my people, remember I prai the what counsel Balake the king of
Moab did begin, and what Bileam the son of Be or did answer him from Siftim
unto Gilgal, that thou myghtest know the ryghteousnes of the lord.

After the sore threatenynges of the Gentyls the prophet returns to reprove
Israel, the elect and chose^ people of ingratitude and unthankfulness, calling
as it were heaven and earth to witness, as in the first chapter, and Esaias.i. And
first he says: Give good ear for you shall hear the euerlyuyng Lord the
almyghtye, by whom all things were create and do consist, speak playnelye
unto you, content to humble him self so low as to open his quarrel, to utter
the causes of his wrath, and to try him self in your own consciences to be
faultles.

The Prophets of all ages, they are here commanded to contend and strive
with the mountains and mighty me^ of the world, so is it their great labor,
peril and danger to cause the^ by any means to here the word of God. Therefore
was it said in the last verse of the fyft chap. I will be aduenged in my wrath,
and in my fury upon the people that has not herd. So that to harken to the
voice of God is better the^ any sacrifice. Therefore is hear so often bet into
the Jews heads, Here what ye lord says. Let the hills here hear O ye
mountains, thus ye prophet warns as it were a Bedle or Cryar of the common
place to keep silence, and to give dylygent harkning to the voice of the
almighty. He warns the earth and all that therein is, even the very foundacions
thereof to give good ear. Shall man then be deaf and stop his ears? The Lord
calls the heavens, and they obey. The earth from nothing, and straight it
was present. The ragynge seas and rough floudes, do harken to his
commandment. Dare man deny to hear his Lord, by whom he lives and has his
being? shall he be brutysh and without understanding, when all brute beasts are
obedyent to the lords commaundmente? Did not Balaams Ass both speak and
understood when the Lord called and commanded?

O man, wylt thou not hear him with out whom thou art not? Do thou not
fear to fall again into dust and ashes, when thou art at his voice so dull and
insensible? Or ca^ thou forget his benefits by whom thou have thy being? Yea
this Lord calls the things that be not, as though they were already He makes
the dead hodies to harke^ to his voice. How dare thou O man, turn away and
not give care, seeing the breath of thy body is in his hand? He sleieth and
gives life.

See how the Lord doothe humble him self to thine infirmyty and weakness.
He is content not only too speak unto thee which art but duste and ashes,
full of syn, but to show his quarrel and as it were too pleate his cause with
us, that he might be found true and all men liers, and therefore justified
in his words and overcome when he is judged. Let al men therefore tremble
before his face and cry unto God, to give them ears that can hear, and eyes
that can se and the^ say with David I will hear what the Lord speaks.

The Lord calls into their remembrance, and therewith their benefits of
old their deliverance, How he plaged the Egiptia^s and preserved the^, How he
made the^ passage through the red sea, and drowned their ennemies, How he fed
them with Manna from heaven, not sufferynge their garments too be old, nor
their shoes torn for ye space of.xl. years in the wilderness: he gives the^
the good meek and louinge captain Moses to guide them, Aaron to preach his
will unto them and to pray for them. Miriam a Prophetisse, a comfort too the
womenne in their long iournye Exo. dye through out.

And when king Balacke had counsel to hyre Bilham to accursse the says the
Lord, I did turn thy curs into blessyng, who being thus disapointed did take
new Counsel of Bilham too entice the people by flatterye too Idolatrye and
fornication, thereby to provoke my wrath against thee, wherefore I plaged the
until I had slain.xxiiii. thousand. When Pinhas the Priest styrred with the
zeal of my glory slew Duke zambrye the captain of the tribe of Simeon, and
Cospye the daughter of Sur, the chief Prince of the Madianits and through ye
zealous enterprise, caused mi wrath to cease. Nu. xxii.xxiii.xxiiii.xxv

In Sittam did I stay Balacke, and Bilham. I caused Moses too destroy the
Midianites without mercy, and did give unto you their gods cattayle and
substance. Numeri.xxxi. In Gilgall I did take away the reproach of Egipte
from you. I caused you to be cyrcumcysed and did give you of the fruits of the
promised land. Iosue. v. Al this did I for the, that thou myghteste know my
ryghtuousnesse, that I would keep my promise, notwyth standing this manyfolde
wickedness. The like rebuke of their ingratitude maiste thou read Esaias.i. Eze.
xx. Now if we would hereby in our wicked time learn to behold the in estimable
goodness of God toward us, and our unthankfulness against so loving a Lord: We
might fully perceive and see most euydently the wonderful mercies of our
heavenly father, calling us to repentance which has not only given us bodily
benefytes as he did unto Israel, but he has delivered us from the helly
Pharao, from the curses of Antichriste, from the sea of erroures and erronions
opinions, and caused us to eat the heavenly Manna, the flesh of his own
son, thereby to give us life everlasting. O the unspeakable goodness of our
heavenly father, and woe to our sturdy stomakes stifeled in evil.

The Text
With what acceptable thing shall I present the Lord? Shall I bow my self
before the high God? Shall I come before him with brent offerings, with calves
of one year old? Has the lord his pleasure in M. of rams either his delight
in.x. M. streams of oil? Or shall I give my first borne for mine iniquity,
eue^ the fruit of my womb, for the syn of my soul? I will tell the man what is
good and what the Lord requires of the: eue^ to do judgment, to love mercy,
and to walk reverently before thy God.

Because yt here is so just occasion offered to declare what is ye true worship
of god, and which is the false and untrue. I desire thee gentle reader to
suffer me somthyng to declare this dout, because it has troubled the
consciences of many in all worlds. And also that it may be a testimony and
wytnes unto ye worlds end of our conscience toward God and his true worship,
which have written or spoken against the false worship of the Romysh
Antichrist. Wherein first I pray thee to mark and consider how the conscience
stryke^ with the fear of gods judgments seeks some stay, and evermore
would have succor against his heavy indignacion, but unless it be quieted and
settled by ye truth of God his holy word, it renueth astray from god more and
more. and at length follows fond imaginacio^s. As the Hethen before the law
given, did stay their children to please God as they ymagened. Wherefore the
Lord did drive the^ forth of their contries, and did give them to Israel in
possession and warned the^ of heythrush abhominacions.

The Jews after the law of Moises was given, not understanding the end of
their Ceremonies, did heap up infynyte sacrifices. Unto who^ God says die
Esaiah: he yt offers unto me an Ox is like him that stays a man, and he
that kylleth a beast as he that brayneth a dog. And he that Offers
sacryfyce as he that Offers swynes flesh, he that remembers incence as he
that offers unto an Idolle. These things have they chose^ in their ways
and in their abhominacions their soul is delyted.

Our Papists not understanding, or rather not regardinge what our master
Christ had taught us. Mat. xv. that in vain we do worship God teachinge
the Doctrynes, the Precepts of men. Had set up a new holiness, even
their hoole relygyon in outewarde Ceremonies of days and times, of candelles
and Belles, of towchynge and of handling, of blowynge and kyssyng, creapynge,
knealynge and knocking, of gyrdles and garments, of geuynge to their Idolles
and aulters fine ornaments, of buylding of Chapels, chauntryes and Abbayes, of
gaddinge to Walsingham, to Canterbury, to Compostella, to Jerusalem, to fetch
James shells, Walsingham Kings, Becketes Broches, and pardon Beads, where
upon must be said I wot not how many lady Psalters. And always ten Aue
Mary's to one Pasternoster, or elsse al was marred, and infinite other mad
inuencyons of man's idle brain. By the which maddynge of man's head in all
ages, which I have but lyghtelye touched, we may perceive that no test can
be found for man's soul in our own inuencions. But the farther manne wadeth
in his fond intentes and fantastical imaginacion, the farther he slydeth from
God, unsure that he has done any thing acceptable in the sight of God.
Therefore must we which are servant and creatures, learning our own weakness by
ye fall of others, turn to our master, lord and creator, to know what his word
commands in ye agony of conscience and considering that the turni^g from the
creator to creatures has been the ground of al Idolatry, every man choosing to
himself the Idol of his own heart. Some the son some the Moon, some the.vii.
stars, some Saturn, some Jupiter, some Mars some Venus, some Marcurye, And
dotinge farther, some have worshypped Calfes, some Cocks, some Serpents, some
Dogs, some Asses, some Gotes, And in our Popyshe wickedness we our
selves, have worshypped stocks and stones, and given divine honors almost to
all manner of creatures, a vile wafer cake did we honor as our God in deed,
and when that was lift up betwyxte the Priests fingers, we said we did se
our maker, and knocked and kneeled, crowched and kyssed without all measure.
And the Priest when he did eat it, thought he did receive his maker, and made
so many fond gestures ioyened with infinite supersticions that thereby we may
marcke, if we have nothing elsse too lead us that the fayened and false
worship of God has no end not stay, can never tell where too consyste,
doothe always disquiet and never satysfye nor quiet the conscience. Therefore
for the love of our own souls, of the quiettinge of our own conscience, let
us unfeignedly repent of al our falsed gods and feigned worship of God,
and knowledge that there is but one God which brought the children of Israel
forth of Egipte from the house of bondage, and has delivered us the
spiritual Israel from the Egypt of sin end erroures from the bondage of
the devil, Death and hell, and brought us into the lybertye of his children,
by the death of his own son. And by his holy spyryte poured into our
hearts does teach us to cry father father.

Let us knowledge (I say) that this Lord our God is but one God, whom we
must love with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our strength,
him must we fear, and him only must we worship and in his name only may
we swear. By the which words we may learn that ther^ is but one God
only, who only ought to be worshypped, feared, loved, trusted and hooped
upon, which the words of swearing in his name imports.

This our God then whose worship we do teach is that almyghtye power,
which made heaven and earth by his word and by the same through his
spyryte doothe govern al creatures therein. Saving Israel, and drowning Pharao.
Saving his chosen of free mercy and grace, and condempnynge the wicked
hypocrytes by just judgment. This our God is a spyrite, as Christ our
aldermaster teaches us, and they which worship him, must worship in spirit
and truth. Ihon.iiii. And seeing he is a spirit, pure from bodyly corrupcion,
and therefore having no need of our bodily service. His true worship can not
consist in bodily exercise which lasts but the time it is in doing, but in
the inward holiness of the heart which evermore increases and spryngeth forth
into life everlasting. Such a worship therefore our Prophet teaches, which
arises and springs forth of the secret reverence and fear of God, his
sacrate magesty, which is not seruyse, but child like, whereby we are not only
affrayed to dysplease God our father, but also prompt and ready, like obediente
children to express in our living, Judgment and merci, the two special
propertyes and greatest show of his image which appears unto his creatures.

Prouer. i.
Therefore is this fear called the beginning of wisdom, and the spyryte of
fear. Esaa.ix. begins the work which the other sprytes of wisdom and
understanding, the spyryte of counsel and strength, the spirit of knowledge
and true holiness and accomplisheth and fulfilleth. So that this spirit of
fear does go before in all the hearts of them which God does choose to
worship him in spirit and truth, making them afraied to do homage and
worship to any thing save their Lord God only, either any otherwise then
he requires and commands. Afraied evermore to do any thing wherein they do
not know his open pleasure. This fear was in Cornelius before he had the perfect
knowledge of God, and in the men of Israel unto whom Peter did say. O
brethren and children of Abraham and they among you which fears God, unto
you is the word of salvation sent, and in ye Psas. ciii. Eue^ as the father
has mercy of his children, so has the Lord mercy of them that fear him,
and the merci of the Lord is for evermore upon them which fear him.

The cause is that they which do fear the Lord are always ready with heart
and mind to do things pleasant unto him, and to abstain from the contrary.
His displeasure do they fear like loving children. If their heavenly father
be pleased they do rejoice, if he be offended they do cry for mercy, so that
of him they do teast in prosperiti, of him they do hang in adversity,
according to his own commandment by his chosen vessel David. Call upon
me in the day of thy trouble and I shall deliver the, and thou shalt worship
me. So that this inuocacion after some interpretoures is the true worship of
God. And surely saying Paul. Romans.x affirms that who soever calls
upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. No man can deny but an
eareneste calling upon God comprehends the true worship which God
requires and contains in it perfyte religion, because it has faith the
ground of all virtues, for how can they call upon God which do not
believe in him? Romans.x. And they which do call upon other creatures
has affiance trust and faith in those things, elsse would they never call
upon them. This faith spryngynge of the first part which was the fear
and reverence of God his high Majesty, supplyeth the second point of the
worship of God which requires a knowledge of God. For how can we believe in
him who^ we have not known. Romans x. Hereby do we give glory and worship
unto God, that is too say: we knoweledge him too be true in all his promyses.
And because without faith it is impossible to please God, this faith makes us
suer that we do worship him as we should, and certifieth us that we be
the children of God and that our woorckes are acceptable in his syghte.
Hereby did Abell in his sacryfyce more truly worship God then did his brother
Caine. Abraham also and his wife Sarai by faith were the true worshyppers of
God and received the promise. Elizabeth also gave more glory and worship
unto God in that she believed his promise, then did her husband zachary, who
because he doubted was stricken dumme whiles the child was borne.

Shortelye too conclude, this faith is it that causes true worship. For
whatsoever comes not of faith the fame is sin. And because faith comes
of the hearing of the word of God only and of no man's fansy, we may boldly
pronounce that al such worship as is set up by man's imaginacion without the
scriptures of God is without faith, and therefore synneful, and consequently
abominable in the sight of God, whether they be sacrifices before the law, or
in the time of the law or Ceremonies sense the law ceased.

The third and last part of this worship stands in unfeigned love toward
our neighbor, without the which our Master Christ commands too lay
down all sacrifice, before the alter, and first go and be reconciled. Mat. v.
And without this he despises all sacrifice saying by his Prophet Ose I will
have mercy and not sacrifice and the knoweledg of God, rather the^ brent
offerings. And by the Prophet Esaias of them that has not this love, your
incense is abhominacion unto me. And when you shall lift up your hands, I
shall turn away mine eyes, for your hands are full of blood, which last
words are more plainelye understand by saint Ihon saying: He that hates his
brother is a murderer, who for the uncleanness of his hands has no part in
the kingdom of God. And where as other which are not spotted with their
neighbors blood but are cleansed by the blood of the Lamb are the very
temples of God wherein he will be worshipped, these bloody Cain^tes which
loves not their brethren, can be no temple for Christ, wherein he will
dwell and reaste, but for the Devil and Antichriste. For this calls God his
Sabbath and reast pleasant unto him. Esaye.xxviii. To refreshe the wearye
which he calls also the refreshinge of his own self. Thus do we keep the
acceptable holy day, and do the worship that he desires when we show
mercy, and comfort the poor and neadye. The which worship is so great,
that he will ask accomptes of none other thing at the day of judgment, but
if we have clothed him, when we did see him naked, if we have fed him when he
was hongry and so forth. Math. xxv. For because these deeds of mercy and
love, doothe presuppose, boothe faith and fear of God. This love therefore
must we bring to the true worshyppynge of God. And as our Prophet in few
words does comprehend all kind of worship, we must do judgment,
love, mercy, and walcke humblye and reuerentlye before the Lord. Too do
judgment may be well understand, to do as thou would be don to. What so ever
thou iudgest that thou would have done to the, that do thou unto other. To do
mercy, is to forgive as thou would be forgeuen, and this heart and mind must we
bring to worship god, and to walk before him. For of this does God make trial
whether we do love him or no. If we do not love our brother whom we se, how can
we love God whom we se not? Iho^.iiii. Then if we do bring unto God, as for
his honor and worship sacrifices, offerynges, or what so ever it be without
the love of god, what do we but declare our selves detestable hipocrites,
dissemblyng to love him, who^ we do not love, to honor him, whom we dishonor,
and to worship him, who by us is blasphemed. Therefore may we not thyncke to
please God with any sacrifyce, or outward show of holiness, but we must
walk humblye and obedyentlyee before the Lord, as Samuel answered king
Saul.i. Kings.xv. Behold, to obey is better then sacrifice, and to harke^
is better then the fat of wethers.

Enok walked thus with God, and therefore was taken up into his presence. Noah
humble and obedient, with faith, fear and reverence: walked before the Lord,
and entered into his ark, when all the proud and dysobedyente world was
drowned. Loathe walked obedyentlye, and durst not look back when he was
taken from the Sodomites, where his wife stobernelye breakyng the commandment
was turned into a salt stone.

Abraham and Sarai may be examples how we should walk humblye, and
reuerentelye, and also faythfullye and obedyentlye before the Lord, which after
promise or commandment, did not regard any thing, not so much as their own
old barran bodies but only looked unto God, geuyng him this honor, worship
and glory, that he was able to fulfill whatsoever he had spoken and
promised. And which ought to be our glass, therein too see the works of
God toward us. Israel so long as they did walk humblye, and obedyentlye
before their Lord, and worshypped him after his word and commandments,
fearyng him with unfeigned and dissemblyng hearts, harkenyng unto his word, and
practiced their lives thereafter. He led them with his mighty arm through
the red sea, fed them with Manna in the wyldernes, destroyed many nations for
them. But when they did swerve from his commandment, and would worship him
after their own inuencyo^s, he plaged them greuouslye, sent them drought,
dearth, famine, pestilence, and the swerd of the Egiptians, Chaldees, and
Romans.

Espicially when God the father sent his own son to call them to his obedience,
and to teach them that their slain sacrifice was of no force in it self, but
only did sygnifye that by his blood and sacrifice of him, being as it were an
unspotted lamb, their iniquity should be forgeuen, and the syn of their souls
washed away, which was sygnified by his baptyme. They walkyng proundly not
humbly, despised humble Christ, boasted them selves to be the children of
Abraham, to be the true Israelytes, to have the oracles, to have the law
written, to be obseruers and keepers of the law, to be the only worshyppers of
god, to know his will, to be guydes unto the blind and all together: but Christ
calls the most holy among them, blind guydes, painted graves, feigned
hypocrites, and false worshippers. And after he was refused and vyllanlouslye
handled, God sends upon them worthy destruction, famine, hunger, pestilence,
and the sword of the Romans which did root them forth, and lay their land
desolate and scatter them abroad unto this day. So perilous a thing it is,
not to walcke humblye before him, but to gad otherwise from him, for the
respect of any creature. For he only can do all, cares for all, knows
all, like as he only has create al unto him, therefore without declininge
too any other must all honor and worship be given. And as he has saved all
them which have thus walked before him with this faith, fear, and love too
declare that there is one God, ever constant and unchangeable, so doothe he
now require the same worship that he did of them before us, which did neither
consyste in holy causes, nor burnt offerynges, as the carnal heithen and
gross Pharyses fancied and supposed, neither in such things wherewith
worldly men are pleased, as gold, silver, precious stones, gaye ornaments,
and rich gifts, cappynge, knelinge, courtesies, to be sought far of at Rome,
Compostella, or at Jerusalem. But to worship him in ye house of hearts in the
chamber of out breasts in the temple of our soul, wherein he has chosen his
mansion. There to worship him not with man's imaginacyon and chosen holiness,
which he calls vain worship, and abhors it. But in the worship
which he appoynteth and commands, that is as his son declares in spirit
and truth. By unfeigned reverence of god his sacrate magesty. By faithful trust
in his vnfallyble promyses. By love not counterfayte toward our neighbors.
Which three frutful branches growyng forth of the man new regenerate by the
spyryte of god, must needs bring forth many spiritual works as
inuocacion, prayer, thankesgeuynge, fasting and mournynges for sins, alms,
and all the works of mercy and pytye. Who so walks in these works, he
truly worshyppeth God, and hereby are the true and false worshyppers known
in sonder, the true church and the chuche of Hypocrytes, because these works
faith, fear and love, was not found in the old world, therefore was it
drowned, because these three parts of the true woorshyppe was not found
among the Jews, therefore were they destroyed. Because these works of true
woorshippe were not found in the popyshe church, therefore is it subverted,
and if they be not shortelye found in our reformed churches, they shall with
like shame be subverted and destroyed. Let us walk humblye therefore before
our Lord, and beware of of our fall. He doothe not suffer his chosen, so
long time as he doothe the reprobate.

The voice of the Lord does cry unto the city. The Text
A wise man will fear thy name. Hear the rod, and who it is which has
appointed the certain time unto it. Is there yet in the house of the wicked
tresure and the false measure? O abhominacion. Shall I iustyfye the wicked
Ballaunce, and the satchell of deceytefull wayghtes?

Her rich men are replete with rauyne, and her enhabytauntes has spoken lies,
and had deceitful tounges in their mouths. Therefore will I make the sick,
stryking the and making the desolate for thy sins, Thou shall eat and not be
satisfied for miserye shall go through thee, thou shalt go unto thy wife, but
she shall he barren, and that which she does bring forth, shall I give unto
the swerd. Thou shall sow, and not reap, thou shalt tread the Olives, but
thou shall not anoint thy self with Oil, and tread the grapes, but thou
shalt not drink thy wine. Because thou haste kept the ordynance of Amry, and
al ye abomynacio^ of the house of Achab, and have walked in their counsels.
Therefore will I give the unto desolacion, and all thy enhabytauntes to be
hyssed and skorned and you shall bear the shame of my people.

The voice of the Lord.

The Lord cries by his preachers, The Text
by his Prophets, by his Apostles, by his Messengers in all ages, and al times
to call us to repentance. He warns of his will and pleasure. He tells which
is true worship, and which is false. And as he says by his Apostle Paul: All the day long have I stretched forth my hands unto an unbelieving people, and
a people that strives against me. Romans x. And by his own son he says:
Jerusalem Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered the together, as the hen
gathers her chyckens under her wings, and thou would not. Math. xxiii.
Which doothe utter the fatherlye care of our God, always calling and crying
upon us. But who hears his calling? who sees his power? who fears his
name? Thusiah does see it, says our Prophet, that is to say, wisdom, or the
wise man will be warned. For so does the Hebrew interpreters expound it. And so
it agrees with ye course of God his worki^g, at al times God calls al. His
sound of his voice goes through the world, yet sca^tlica^ there be one so wise
to repent in ye warning of the.vii. cities. No mo were found fearful of God his
sore threatenynges but only Loath in the destruction of the hoole world, Noah
was only found wise and obedyent. In Jerusalem how few were found obedyent
when the Prophets warned them to repent. In our world God grant some one
wise and faithful man may be found, which may pray for us, as Abraham did for
the Sodomits, and give warning of gods wrath hefore it fall upon our cities.
Hear the rod, the rod of God his great vengeance is ready shaken against
your cities. The time is determined for your punishment. Will you not yet be
warned to lay away wickedness and repent of your evil ways? will you keep still
your evil gotten goods and treasures heaped by extorsion? How can your sins
then ^ee pardoned? My law commands for things wronglye taken to pay four
foulde and five fould. Have you satisfied my law and least your selves so
great treasures?

Nay you are so far from such equyty that of restitucion, that you
maineteyne still your bryberye and extorsyon. You keep still in your houses,
your lean and bare measures, your scant and false Bushelles too provoke my
wrath and indygnatyon upon you. Your measure is scante of Corn and your
chaffer, but it is full of my wrath and heavy dyspleasure.

Shall I iustyfye the wicked ballaunce? Or as the Hebrew stan^eth wickedness
in the ballaunce. If I should leave this unpunished I should seame to
iustyfye and allow all the wickedness that you do use therein. Where
contrariwise, I have commanded the too have just ballaunce and even wayghtes
and true measures. Leui. xix. and in Deuteronomye.xxv. Thou art commanded not
too have diverse wayghtes a greater and a smaller, neither to have in thy house
a bygge bushel and a small, but that thou shalt have a just and true
wayghte, an even and true bushel that thou may live a long time in the land
which the lord thy God gives the. There furthermore art thou taught, that I thy
Lord God do abhor him that does these things, and that I detest al unjust
dealing as a thing abominable, and so doothe my servant Solomon teach the.
Proverb.xx that double waightes and dysceitefull ballaunce abominable before
thy Lord God. How dareste thou then keep in thy house either any false measure
or thereby any evil gotten treasure? Doste thou nothing regard me which
have thy life and breath in my hand?

Art thou nothing moved by my manyfolde benefytes? nothing afraied of my
threatninges, repent, O repent and harken to my Prophets or elsse my rod is
ready to scourge thy wickedness.

The time is determined by me the allmyghtye measurer of times, unless you do
repent, O you wicked Marchaunts of London and and all other cities. But O
wicked world I do know your devises. You do hide up your ware until it wax
sca^t. You do lesson your measures. You increase your prices, too make the pore
your slaves, yet will ye be gospellers Can you worship me and your wicked
Mammon boothe together? Can you serve two Masters? Nay, you are to me
defraudinge and oppressinge the poor as they that slaye the childrene in the
fathers syghte. Thus do you worship me. O you covetous Marchaunts, building
your houses in the blood of your brethrene. There is no faith, no fear, nor
love among you but your riches are repleat wythrauine. The houses of your
Lords, of your judges, of chancellers of your treasurers, of your
receyuers, shortly of all our riches and wealthy are full of the spoil of
the evil gotten goods and either open or pryuy theft and robbery. Can I then
hold my peace and as it were justify your doings? Especiall^ saying, lyinge,
dissemblinge and disceat is so common that from the head too the foot never
one is fautelesse there is not one ryghteous, no not one that I might have
mercy. There is no truth no mercy, no knowledge of God in the earth,
curssinge, lyinge, murder, theft and adulterye has over run all together.
The faithful are wasted forth of the earth. Every manne tells his brother
a lie, with desceytefull lyppes and doble hearts. I will destroy a^ their lying
lips and these tunges that can tell these goodly tales and do think yt they
at able to overcome al with their tunges. But for this oppressyon of the pore
and for their mourninge I will now arise.

And I will make the sick strykinge the with famine, sterilite, barrennes,
battayl, aptiuitie and bondage. Thou shall eat and not be satisfied, which is
the soorest famyn, the woman shall receive the seed, and bring forth no
fruit, the fowlest sterilitie, and if she do bring forth, the swerd shall
devour the^. Thou shall be in such bondage, that thou shall toil and trauail
for other, and have no part thy self, such affliccion, such mysery, such
calamitye shall be in ye myds of the, that thou shall be wasted for thy syns.

Because thou have kept ye ordynau^ces of Amri and the abhominatyons of Achab.
etc. The Text


Loo how peryllous a thing, and how great a plage it is to have wicked kings
and princes to reign over us. For their authority does not harm only whiles
they live, and have their flatterers following and counterfaytyng their
wyckednes, but in the ages long after the^ and the posterity following their
laws are alleged, their rites and customs renewed. So was idolatry always
continued in the.x. trybes from their first king Ieroboa^ to king Amry, who
built Samaria and to his son wicked Acab, who not only alleged the wickedness
of his forefathers unto the people, but adds moreover shamful extorcion and
shedding of innocent blud, sleing Naboth for his vineyard, killing the prophets
of ye lord. The other princes and people following their wicked abhominacio^s
and naughty counsels, iii. Re. xvi.
are here threatened to be wasted and destroyed. The people to be hyssed and
skorned, and the princes worthily to bear the shame of the people of God, by
the^ seduced. zedechiah the last king over Judah may be a terrible example unto
al kings, had first his sons slain in his own sight, then had his eyes
worthily put forth by the Babilonia^s, and so kept in live by daily delusion of
the Chaldes to bear the shame of ye people of god. Yea they are without number
who^ the Lord has more greuosly by his justice thus plaged. As Nebuchadnezer
turned into a brute beast. As Adombezeche the king of the Cananees, and the.lxx
other princes who had their fyngars and toes cut of, and so reserved to their
shame to gather cro^mes under the tables like dogs, besides the.xxx. i. Judges.
Iosue. xii.
kings who^ Iosue hanged and destroyed, and innumerable other both in
scriptures and profane hystoryes rehearsed. Now therefore O Kings and
Princes understand and suffer your selves to be taught and admonyshed, you
that judge the earth.

Serve the Lord in fear in the governance of his people, and rejoice with
tremblyng in the gifts god gives you, for he will have an accomptes how you do
govern his people, and how you do order his creatures Embrace his poor Christ
louyngly in his members, lest he be angry, and you do peryshe forth of the
way. For when his anger is a little kindled, then happy are they that trust in
him. The^ happy are they as the king and Prophet David does teach you which
has not walked in the counsel of the wicked, which has not stand in the
way of the sinner, which has not sytten in the seat of the scornful. But in
the law of thee Lord has had his delight, and in his law does meditate day and
night. For be shall be like a tree planted by the riuersyde, which shall bring
forth his fruit in dew time. His leaf shall not fall, and his work shall
prosper. Where the wicked far contrary shall be like chafe driven with the
wind. Therefore the wicked shall not stand in judgment nor the sinners in the
company of the just. For the Lord knows the way of the ryghtuous, and the
way of the wicked shall perysh. The Lord is no acceptour of persons. But who
so does evil be it king, be it Emperor, he shall peryshe as is hear spoken.

The.vii. Chapter.
WOE is me, The Text
for I am like the gleaners of Summer fruits, and as the branches after the
wine harvest. There is not a Cluster of grapes to eat, my soul desires type
fruit.

Thus does our Prophet bewail the mesery of his people, he compares the good
among them him self, and the other to the gleaners and gatherers after
harvest is ended, and al clean gathered into thy barnes. And the best amo^gs
men to the wine branches wythered, dried, and having nothing upon them,
whereupon the desirous soul might be sasiate, Therefore he mourns and waileth
for the mysery which of necessytie must follow so far spread iniquiti. And he
shows in the verse following, what fruit it is that he seeks. What grapes
they are his soul desires (Biccurah the first ripe fruits) meaning the fore
fathers fist borne and the former age Abraham. Isaac, Jacob, David. These does
Jeremy call Israel, whiles they walked in holiness the first fruits unto the
lord. And hear our Prophet does complain that al this good ripe fruit is
gathered and gone, and nothing left ungathered, but brambles and thorns
which are fit for nothing but the fire even for the fire of Gods wrath, which
shall shortly be kyndled, and no creature shall be able to quench it, or to
abide the heat thereof: For this our Prophet wayleth and cries woe.

The Text
The good perishes forth of the earth, neither is any ryghtuous upon earth.
Al do lie in wayghte for blood. Every man hunteth his brother as with a net.
They labor to make good the evil of their hands. The prince asks, and the
judge for reward, and the great man speaks the destruction of his own
soul, and they draw wyckednes as with a threfolde cable. The best amongs the^
is like a bryar and the ryghteous like a thorn of the hedge. The day of thy
ouersears, the day of thy vysitacio^ is come, now shall they be full of
perplexitye.

Here may we se how the spirit of god is in his holy saints and prophets is
vexed and trobled for our wickedness. i. King.x.
Elias thus wayleth: I have lived long inoughe, O Lord, take away my soul, I
am no better then my fathers. And the Lord calls upon him, and he answers
again. I have been zealous and fervent for the lord of hosts, because the
children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant. They have destroyed thine
altars, slain thy prophets with the swerd, and I am left alone and they seek
my soul to take it away. Esaias. lvii
Esaias says: the just perishes, and no man regards it, in his heart. The good
and merciful are gathered to their graves, Psalm. xii. Psalm. liii.
and no man understands. David cries also: Save us O Lord, for the holy ones
do fail and waste, ye faithful ar consumed from amo^gs the children of me^.
Again, the lord looked down from the heavens, upon the children of Ada^, to se
if there were any ye did under stand, or that did seek the Lord. Al ar gone bak
together, they ar abominable, there is not one that does good, no not one. Do
you know nothing O you worckers of wickedness which do eat up my
people as men do eat bread and calls not upon God? In all these things
that our Prophet and other holy writers does charge you, O Princes judges
and Magistrates, examyne your own conscience, and judge your selves, that you
be not judged and condemned with the wicked. You are here likened to Caine
which did lie in wayt for his brothers blood. You are likened to Nimroth
huntinge your brethrene to catch them in your nets. If you were not such, we
should not hear of such sudden tal and ruin of noble houses. But what
soever you do that must be well done says our Prophet, so stoutlye will
you defend your own doings too make evil good, and good evil as Esaye
says and to cloak your wicked worckes, if you do fear any danger.

The Prince that bears cheyfe rule and may do the most too hyde your
myscheyfe he must be won with gifts, and if he be such one as will receive
the^ he shall have whatsoever he will ask, the judge must have part of that
which is given and the great rich man by this means brings forward his
purpose to the destruccyon of his own soul. Whiles this three fold cable is
thus linked. Therefore does Esaye threatening woo and destruccyon to them that
thus draw inquitie with cables of vaniti and wickedness with carte roopes.
Which counts evil good, and good evil, which do iustifye the wicked for
gifts And says farther. Like as the flame of the fire does devour the
stuble: Esaye.v.
so shall the root of such be like the coals, and their budde be like the
duste.

This similitudes of briers and thorns are brought in for this purpose to
utter the stinginge and prickinge of wickedness. As briars and thrones do prycke
all that handles the^ whiles they do grow, and when they are hewn up they
are good for nothing but to kindle a speadye fire. So says our Prophet
that the best and most rightuous among them are noisome and harmful unto
me^ and fit fire brandes for the furi of God. This shall be known most plainelye
on less we do repent when the days of our visitacion comes (which is at
hand) when affliccion sorrow and carfulness and piety and doutfulnes shall
come upon al flesh, as follows.

Give no credence to thy friend The Text
trust not thy brother keep the door of thy mouth from her that lies in thy
bosom. For the son slaundereth the father, the daughter rises up against
the mother, and the daughter in law against the mother in law.

Behold the sorrow ampietie and doubtfulnesse which follows by just plage
the worldly Tirauntes and evil dooers. They do stynge ano prycke every
manne that medleth with them like thorns, they must of no necessytye
therefore fear, dystrust, and be vndoutefull of every creature as Dionysius
the Tiraunte and such like where of some not trustinge their own wifes were
compelled to search their pryuye chambers nightelye, and their wyfes coffers,
and credit therein barbarous and cruel sougioures. Other durst not trust
their own daughters, but fearing all other creatures refused the healpe of
their Chamberlaynes and other servants. Durst credyte no barboures to shave
their beardes, but used the help of their Daughters whiles they were young to
shave their beardes, but when their daughters did grow to more age and years
wherein they were able to dyscerne their fathers doings, the fear of their
own conscience like Canites for the crueltye they had showed to other, would
not suffer the^ to commit the^ selves to their own flesh and blud, to their
bowels which did come forth of their own bodies. But said within them selves
as did cruel Cain. Eueri one that can find the opportunity will slay me, and so
with their own hands they were compelled to swing of the hear of their own
beards with brenninge coals. This is the great and grievous plage that the
almyghtye threatens to lay upon the wicked. To make him like a boylynge sea
which can have no rest, whose floudes does rage to their own ruin, there is
no peace nor rest too the wicked says the Lord God. Esaias. lvii.
This did appear in Cain after he had killed his brother as it was said
before thinkinge by just iudgmente therefore that every manne should slaye him
that should mete him. And because in our peryllous times there is so many
Canites, it is no meruel though eueri man be afraied of his brother, no man
trusts another, the noble fears ye co^mo^s the commones trusts not the
nobility. These are the last days wherein iniquity does abound, love is
lost, charity quenshed, faith and trust are driven forth of man's
company. If there be any tokens of love showed, it is for some wicked purpose,
either for the clokinge of some vice or the withdrawing-from virtue and
godliness, such therefore we must always suspect. And if thy brother the
son of thy mother as Moises says, or thy son, or thy daughter, or thy
wife that is in thy bosom, or thy friend whom thou loueste as thine own life
be about to persuade the to the worship of strange gods or any such
obhominacion, thou may not only not give credence unto them but to help to
punish them Deu. xiii. If the Emperor should send his Interim into England or
the Pope his decretals that all ye fair promises that the wicked can imagine,
defye them both and deteste their flatterye. If any Frenshe or Scottishe
Lady should flatter for like purpose, she ought most horrible to be
detested and abhorred remembering that Solomon by the flattering of his wifes,
was brought to Idolatrye. Sampson to his own destruction. And infinite other
that have fallen some into one vice, some in an other and ar length to shameful
ends by the flatterye of feigned friends. Beware of flatterers therefore O
kings and princes, for be sure when so ever you shall delight in them you shall
not long continue without shame. The most present poison to a Prince is
flatterye. Beware I ^aye therefore. For Judas when he flattereth most fair,
is most ready too be traye his master. Ioab when he kisseth Amasa and and
Abner and shows most frendshippe is ready to kill them.

Abimelech when he flattereth his.lxx brethrene is all ready through ambicion
appoyncted too destroy them. Dadila when she flattereth Sampson too know his
strength has the Philistines priuilye hid in her house. Absalom does call to
his feast by flattery and there slai his brother Ammon, and withdraws the
hearts of the people by flattery from his father David, and at length dryueth
him forth of his kingdom. Wherein appears the small trust to be had to the
wicked worldlings and crafti flatterers, though they offer great friendship,
though they be our brethren, though they ly in our own boso^s. And hear may we
set before our eyes who ar to be trusted in this wicked world so full of
disceit and who are not. They only which do seek godliness and virtue and
sets much by the truth of the word of God. for this truth is mightier
then women, then wine, then the king, it overcomes all. It conquereth
falshed, it condempneth flattery, it drives away blindness, it causes the
blind to se, the young scoler to be wyser then the great Doctor, it tries al,
it espieth all, it judges, it condemns al. To the author and geuer of this
truth be al glory for ever.

Let us no longer trust to manne therefore or make flesh our arm in this our
wicked time wherein al are given to falshode, to flatterye, to deceit, to
covetous, to ambicion, to lyinge, slaunderynge, to al evils and wickedness.
But contraryewise say with our Prophet every one of us both king and subject.

The Text
I will look unto the Lord. I will trust unto God my savior, and my God will
hear me.

Whether it be in the day of my visitacion when adversity shall come upon me,
or in ye day of prosperity when these flatterers shall follow me. I will regard
nothing but the Lord I will trust to none but to God my savior. The Lord God
is the measurer of mi trouble he can and will hear my cry and deliver me from al
peril. Therefore will I call unto the Lord with the holy king David. Psa. iii.
Psalm. iii.
O God how are mine ennemies multiplied how many does rise up against me.
Many does say unto mi soul: his God shall not save him, but thou O God act the
sheilde over me. My glory and the lifting up of my head. I will cry unto the
Lord with my voice and he will hear from his holy hill.

O thou mine enemy reioise not against me that I am fallen, The Text
I am risen up again, And though I should sit in darkness, the Lord is my lght.
I will bear the displesure of the Lord, because I have sinned against him
whiles yt heaueng my cause and do judgment for me. For he will bring me into
light and I shall se his rightousnes. The^ mine enemi shall behold and be ashamed
which says unto me: where is ye lord thy god? mine eyes shall behold her and
now shall she be trodden under the foot like the mire of the streets.

Three thnges are here to be observed in this humble confession of the sinner
whether thou do understand it in the person of a particular sinner, or in the
parso^ of the multitude of Israel led into captivity. First a consideracion and
know ledgynge of the sins committed against God: and therefore patience to
bear and to suffer what so ever the lord shall lay upon their backs. Secondly
where such as are chastened of the Lord are always of the wicked world
despised, reviled and skorned vniustli, and without cause which does augment
their heaviness. Here is the aduenging thereof, and the judgment of their
innocencye toward their enemies which do persecute them, committed unto God.
Thirdlye here is full and perfect fayhte of God his favor in the mids of the
afflyccions and hope of a comfortable end of them to the glory of god to the
confusion shame and destruction of al his enemies to be learned.

For the first David cries: O Lord enter not thou into iudgeme^te with thy
servant, for in thy syghte no living creature shall be justified. For the
second part he dare be bold to say, judge me according to my ryghtuousnes, and
the xxxv. Psa. through out for this purpose. For the third he says. Though I
do sit in darcknes and in the shadow of death yet art thou with me. So
fyrmelye persuaded of God his favor in the mids of the trouble are the
elect of God, that they say always with Paul, who shall separate us from the
favor of God? shall affliccyon? shall anguishe? shall persecucion, shall hunger?
shall nakedness? shall peril? danger or swearde? Nay thou haste thus
appointed, ordained, and therefore warned us long before. That we should be
slain every day for thy sake and counted like sheep ready to the slaughter,
but in all this we do overcome, by him which has loved us. And as Paul says
in another place, we do glory in our afflyccion, knoweinge that affliccion
bringinge patience, patience brings trial and hoope in the end which is
never shamed.

This lesson of comfort may every pryuate person fealinge him self
smitten for his sin, learn of our Prophet. But farther now he speaks in
the person of the Jews, and of the hole church chosen of God, and the like
things for them may be marked besides the fall of the Chaldees, of
Antechrist and of al Tirauntes persecutoures of the elect people which shall
by the conqueste of Christ their head make all their enemies as their foot
stole, to tread upon them like the mire of the streate as is here prophesied.
Therefore must we bear pacientli a little while, and we shall satisfye our eyes
with the sight of their fall by the just iudgmente of God and venginge our
cause like as they have with out cause unjustly triumphed over us, hated,
oppressed and murdered us, deserving no such cruelty at their hands, for too
the Lord longs vengaunce. And he will perform it. Read the.v. Chapter of
wisdom to the end. For the declaration of all this.

To note also the Phrases of light and darckenesse, light signifies
knowledge and comfort. Esaye.ii.ix.xlii.xlix.lx.lxi. Matthew.iiii. Luke.ii.
Darkness the contrary, persecution, blyndenesse, sorrow. Esaye.xiii.
Lamentacions.v. Micha. iii. Psam.lxix. To se also and to behold the enemy is
to rejoice at the fall of him which the just do for the righteous
judgment which God sends upon the enemy. Psa. liiii, the wicked to
satysfy their malicious minds. Psa. xxxv. The Text


In the day when the hedges shall be buylte, that day shall put away thy
bondage, That day shall come from Assure and the walled cytyes and from the
fortresses unto the flood, from the sea unto the sea and to the mountain Hor,

The contrye of Jury was spoiled, wasted, and destroyed, as ye have heard by
the Chaldees and by the Romans, but like as in the.iiii. Chapter, so is hear
promised a wonderful deliverance of ye Jews, and a miserable plage to come
upon their enemies. There is a day appointed yt thy waste places shall be built.
Amos. ix. Ezechiel.xxxvii. A day when al tyranny call exaction and tribute
shall be taken away. Ezechiell.xxxviii. That day shall thy people which were
carried captive unto Babylon be brought from their strong fe^ced cities,
fortes, castles and holds, wherein they were kept prysonners home again to
enhabit from the strong cities to ye flud Iorda^ and from ye red sea to ye
great sea and so to the hill Carmel and the mountain called Hor. Esaias says of
this gathering together Israel from ye cast I will bring thy seed and from the
West I will gather the. I will say to the North, give and to the Southe hinder
not, bring my sons from far and my Daughters from the end of the earth.

And the land shall be desolate for the enhabytauntes, The Text
because of the fruit of their imagynacyons.

Though this sentence be hear spoken cheiflye of the enemies land, yet is it
generallye true in all lands and co^tryes. The Canances were waysted and
destroyed therefore. The Jews the^ self had their land flowinge with mylcke
and honye, so long before promised to their fathers, made so desolate for the
fruit of their own imaginacions that no man went through it. The Chaldees
were miserably wasted and brought to desolacyon by the Macedonians for the
fruit of their labors? What shall I name the desolations of Sodom, Gomor and
the other city, sor the destruction of the hoole world in the time of Noah.
Do we not read. Genesis.vi. That God did se that the malice of man was great
upon earth and all the imaginacion of his heart was only evil? and therefore
he says he will destroy from the face of the earth both manne and beast,
and Bird of the air. Shall we then walcke still in the fruit of our
imaginacions? One sort in fleshlye pleasures, deliting in wicked womenne, and
mad marriages made for worldly purposes, imagininge how to be gyle both God
and manne, as it were. Another sort too make them self mighty men of great
fame, riches and renoume, imageninge how to begile our young king and to pyll
and poll his poor commons

The third and worste sort are the unsavory salt whereof Christ our
master tells, which should season other, but because they have lost their
sauoure and saltenesse, they are fytte for nothing but the donge hill, and
causes other to stincke by their shameless life before the face of God, not
darringe to rebuke the^, or elsse not regarding them, whiles they do seek
benefices and Bishopryckes, by flattering of their Lords and masters and
blineding the pore commonnes their brethrene.

The.iiii. sort are of these scattered sheep of these despised commonners
which runs hear and there they wotte not where for releife and succor
still wandering after their own imaginacion, and not hearkeninge too the
word of God which byndeth them to obedience. Lo such are the fruits of our
imaginacions in England this dai. The gouernoures despise their God, the
subjects, their gouernoures, the people, the preistes, the priests neglect
their charge over the stock. So now it is come so far that the boy most
commonly dare presume upon his better without order against honesty and al
good disciplyne, O good Lord shall not our land be desolate for such wild
fig trees, barre^ of al good fruts numbe, lame, and void of al virtuous
studyes and honest exercises.

The Text
Feed thy people with thy staf the flock of thine heritage which abides
alone in the woodde in the mids of Harmell let them be fed in Basan and
Gilead as in the old time.

The Prophet saying in spyryte the glorious restorynge and delyueraunce of
Israel, prays for them that the lord would voutchsafe to feed them in the
stead of these evil pastoures which fedeth them selves knowinge most
assuredlye that if the Lord will be their pastor, shepperde and feader, they
shall lack nothing as David does acknowledge Psalm.xxiii. confessing also
with king David that his rod and his staff doothe comfort his stock,
therefore doothe he say, feade thy people with thy rod. And David does say:
thy rod and thy staff they have comeforted me. The flock of his chosen
heritage he names to abide alone in the mounetaynes, because they should come
over Carmel and other mountains, like scattered sheep, one abiding and
waiting for another in that glorious restoringe, which in spyryte he did
foresee which should be like the glorious conquest in Basa^ and Gilead, when
they first entered ye promised land, and Manasse had these twain in
possessyon Joshua.xvii. And our prophet brings in ye answer of the Lord,
fully persuaded that his peticion was already granted.

Even like as in the day of thy delyueraunce forth of Egipte I will show
unto him my wonders, The Text.
The heathen shall be a shamed of their strength, they shall lay their hand upon
their mouth and their ears shall be deaf. They shall lyk dust like the
serpent, and like the worms of the earth. They shall come quaking forth of
their holes. They shall tremble before our Lord god. The shall they fear.

In such vehement Prophecies where ye prophets do seem ravished the change of
parsons, is often used, and therefore I have hitherto passed it as a thing which
may easily be marked by him which with any diligence does read them. In the
first verse Israel is spoken unto both in the first and second person, and in
the last the prophet does so speak of God, ravished by the seruent spirit.
And here is a plain promise of the restorynge again of Israel, with signs
and wonders to the shame, confusion and conde^nacion of the wicked Heythen, as
is more at large set forth. Ezechyel.xxxvi. xxxvii.xxxviii.xxxix.
Ieremye.xxx.xxxi. Esaye.lxiii.

The day of the delyueraunce forth of Egypt, was most wonderful with the
plages sent upon Pharao, and the drownyng of him in the red sea with all his
army, the standing of the waters like walls, the destruction of the cities
without hands, and other great works, whereof the book of Exodus and Iosue
are full.

The days of the spiritual deliuerau^ce from the helly Pharao, as they are
wonderfully begone in our Savior Christ the true Messiah, so shall they be by
him then most wonderfully fynyshed and ended, when all the power of the
adversary shall be destroyied in ye end of the world, when the helly Pharao
shall be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone. Ihon.xix

To lay the hand upon the mouth is a common phrase too keep silence for
shame. Job. xxxviii. That the Serpente lycke the duste and eats the earth,
is the curse of God. Genesis in, and here it is given to the serpents
generation to fall down for fear and creep into holes like worms, Wherein
appears the almyghtye power of God and the weak arm of the wicked.
Therefore does our prophet end with these exclamacions. They shall tremble
before our Lord God. Thee shall they fear O Lord. Again.

What God is like unto thee The Text
which do pardon iniquity and pass over sin for the remnaunt of thine
enherytaunce he has not settled his wrath for ever, but he has pleasure in
mercy. He will return and have mercy upon us. He will tread down our wickedness
under his feet, and cast al our syns into the bottom of the seas, Thou wylt
perform thy promise to Jacob, and thy mercy to Abraham, which thou have
sworn to our fathers from the days of old.

After our prophet has received this comfortable answer from God, he renders
thanks with an admiracion and comparyson of the ever lyuinge God, which has
wrought these wonders the false Gods, which can do nothing. Wherein also he
sets forth the sinful weakness of man which can attain nothing but by
pardon and mercy, according to the Psalm.xxxi. Blessed are they whose
wyckednes are forgiven and whose syns are covered. Again happy is that man
whom the Lord has not charged with syn. David also after the consyderacion of
the great majesty of God makes like comparyson, and asks what god there is
besides the lord. Psa. xvii. And Moses describes the Lord by these
properties. Exo. xxxiiii. saying: O Lord, Lord, merciful and gracious God,
pacient and aboundaunt in pytye and truth. Showing mercy unto thousands taking
away iniquitye wyckednes and sin. etc.

So that God which in his substance is unsearchable by mercy, pytye and
truth, shows him self unto men. Wherein also is comprehended the promise of
Messiah made unto the fathers, by whom this mercy and loving kyndnes should
be showed, and with this he ends, as does the most part of the prophets, to
teach us always to have confydence in God, though the promise do seem
long dyfferred, For he is the god that is true, he is faytheful, he performs
with the largeste that he does promsie, he is also merciful, he is pytyfull,
full of loving kindness, which we do feale in that he did give his own son
to be made man of the seed of Abraham for our sakes, how can he but give
us all things with him? To him therefore let us give all glory. Let us serve
him with fear and tremblinge, walckynge before our God as our Prophet
warns, reuerentlye, doing judgment and louinge mercy all the days of
our life, so shall the woes and cursses threatened unto the wicked be turned
away from us, and the blessings promised too the obedyente children be
most abundantly poured upon us. Grant that we may this do to ye honor
of thy name for thy son our Lord Jesus Christ his sake. So be it.

Praise the Lord.
A prayer for the king.
O Lord euerlyuynge God Lord of Lords, king of kings. Lead our young
king in thy faith fear and love. Teach his heart thy secret wisdom.
Strengthen him therewith timelye before his people perish, for the wicked does
prevail, they do wallowe in their wickedness. Do this for thy truths sake,
which he does profess, Let not his ennemies have the over hand, least they
blaspheming thy truth do say where is his God? what relygyon has he
professed? So be it.

O king by truth thou standeste defend thy truth. By righteouse judgment
thy throne shall be established, by wickedness subverted. Therefore have thou the
swearde by God oppointed to set up the one, too strike down the other Thus
do, thou shall live and se good days.

O you that be subjects under this king of tender age be thanckefull too God
for all his wonders wroughte in his time, knoweledge yt it is God that has
sent him unto us, and has set forth his truth in his weak infancy, and
mightelye defended him from all treasonnes and traytoures rebellyons. Repent
of al former euyls, and pray without ceassynge that the Lord god may
vouchsafe to guide, govern and preserve him long to reign over us with ye love
of Justice Judgment and true holiness. So be it.


