A GODLY sermon preached in the Court at Greenwich the first Sunday after the
Epiphanie, Anno Domini. 1552. And in the sixth year of ye reign of king Edward
the sixth, the right godly and virtuous king of famous and blessed memory. By B.
G.

Imprinted at London by Henry Middleton, for Thomas Man. 1581.

A SERMON preached in the Court at Greenewitch the first Sunday after the
Epiphanie An. Do. 1552.
The Gospel appointed for that day taken out of the second chapter of Saint
Luke the Evangelist, beginning at the 41. verse and continuing to the end of
the chapter. Chap. 2. ver. 41.
every year, at the feast of the Passover.





and acquaintance.














FOR SO MVCH as the whole Gospel, is more full of matter and plenteous in
mysteries, then that it can well be discussed within the limits of one sermon:
I have taken for this time to entreat upon this one sentence spoken by Christ
unto his parents verse. 49. Know ye not that I must go about my fathers
business? being content to omit the rest, taking only so much of the rest, as
shall suffice to declare the occasion whereupon he spoke these words for the
fuller understanding of the same. Ye shall therefore understand that when our
Savior was come to the age of twelve years, giving attendance upon his
parents to Jerusalem, at the solemn feast of Easter, whither they yearly did
repayer at that time of sincere devotion and for the obedience of the law.
After that Joseph and Mary had devoutly passed Exodus 23. 14. 15.
the days of the feast, and were returned home, it came to pass (not through
blind Fortune but by God his proprouidence, that his glory might appear) that
the blessed son Jesus tarried behind at Jerusalem, and while his parents,
either not taking good heed of him, or else going a part in sundry companies,
either of them trusting he had been with the other, they went one days journey
before they missed him. But after he was found wanting, they sought him
diligently amongst their kinsefolkes and acquaintance, but found him not.
Which was undoubtedly unto them a very cross of bitter affliction. So does God
many times exercise his elect and chosen with adversity for their trial, and to
keep them in humility. When they were returned to Jerusalem and had long sought
him with sorrowful hearts, after three days they found him in the temple. Here
by the way me think the holy ghost teaches us a spiritual doctrine, and that
right necessary: So long as we seek Christ in our own kinsefolkes, that is,
our own inventions and devises, we find him not, but to find Christ, we
must accompany these godly persons Joseph and Marie unto the Temple of his
holy word, there Christ is found unto so many as seek him with such humble
spirits and meek hearts as Joseph and Mary did. They found him in the temple
not idly occupied as many are, not mumblinge things he understood not, Sine
mente sonum, a confused sound without knowledge. But they found him occupied
in the father of heaven his business, as all men should be in the temple,
either in speaking to God by humble and hearty prayer, or hearing God speaking
to them in his most blessed word. So was Christ occupied amongst learned men
and apposing them. Where he teaches us to be always as glad to learn as to
teach. It is a probable conjecture that he opened to them the Scriptures which
spoke of Messiah: a matter then in con trouersie. But whatsoever their matter
was, the Evangelist says, He made them all astonished at his understanding and
answers. verse. 47. So the glory of his godhead even then began to shine.

Where we may mark the wonderful power of the Gospel: Even the hard hearted
that will not receive it, yet the bright beams of the truth shining Act. 4.
13. 14. 16.
therein makes them astonished. It causes also the godly to marvel, as Mary
and Joseph, but their admiration always ended with joy. Yet not withstanding
his heavenly majesty made al men to wonder, his mother thought she had some
cause to expostulate with him for the great fear he had brought upon them,
casting them into a doungeon of sorrows, and complaining, said. Son why
have thou etc. She seems to charge him with the first precept of the second
table, that he had not well entreated his parents. But Christ so shapeth his
answer, that he takes away al her complaint. Teaching us how the precepts of
the second table may not be understand in any wise to be a hindra^ce to the
first. Wist ye not that I must go about my fathers business? ver. 49. where
our duty and service to God comes in place, all human service and
obedience, which might be a hindrance thereto, to whom so ever it be, Father,
or Mother, King or Kesar must stand back and give place. Besides this, he
teaches us here a most necessary lesson, for all men to know and bear away,
which is, that his whole life and death was nothing else but a perfect
obedience to the will of his heavenly father, and that he was always most
busily occupied therein: And teaches us, that if we look by adoption to be
brethren and coheirs with Christ of his fathers kingdom, we must also with our
master and Lord yield up our selves wholly to our heavenly father his will
and always be occupied in his business. Exemplum dedi vobis. etc. I Ioh. 13.
15.
have given you an example, that ye should do, even as I have done to you.
Which lesson being so necessary for all christians to be kept, and the breach
thereof cause of al iniquity: I thought it good to pass over other places of
ghostly instruction which this gospel might minister, and to tarry upon this
one sentence. Know ye not how I must go about my fathers business? Intending to
show in order how all estates of men, the clergy; the nobility and the
commonalty, are under the band of this obligation Oportet etc. we must: and
ought of necessity to be occupied in the father of heaven his business. But
first of all mystrusting wholly mine own strength, I crave aid of you by your
denoute prayers.

Prayer.

Conatus rex Christ meos tu dirige semper,

Et mihi sit foelix te duce principium.

Know you not that I must go about^ Luke 2. 49.
my fathers business?

After that our first parents through disobedience and sin had blotted and
disfigured the lively Image of god, whereunto they were created, and might have
lived always, in a conformity to the will of God: Man was never able to apply
himself to God his fathers business, nor yet so much as to know what
apperteined thereto. The natural 1. Cor. 2. 14.
man (says Paul) perceives not the Heb. 1. 3. and 2. 16.
things of the spirit of God etc. Til Christ the very true Image of God the
father did come down and took man's nature upon him. Which descent as he
declares was to fulfill for us the will of his father, that like as by
disobedience Romans 5. 19.
of one man many were made sinners, So by the obedience of one (Christ) many
might be made righteous. What time as he became obedient unto death, Philip. 2.
8.
even the death of the cross. Which obedience lest carnal men should
challenge to suffice for them, howesoeuer their life be a continual rebellion
against God and his holy will (such as there be a great number, and have been
in all ages) Saint Paul wipeth them clean away, Saying Christ has Heb. 5. 9.
become salvation (not to all) but to all that obey him. Let no man therefore
flatter and deceive him self, if we will challenge the name of Christ his
disciples, if we will worthily possess the glorious name of Christians, we
must learn this lesson of our master, to be occupied in our heavenly fathers
business which is to fly our own will (which is a wicked and wanton will)
and wholly to conform our selves to his will, saying as we are taught. Fiat
Math. 6. 10.
voluntas tua, thy will be done: which as Saint Augustine says, The fleshly
man, the covetous, aduouterous, ravenous or deceitful man can never say but
with his lips from the teeth forward, because in his heart he prefers his
own curssed will, setting aside the will of God. Now for so much as the
greatest part of the world have at this day forsaken their fathers business,
applying their own, and are altogether drowned in sin: For, The whole head is
sick and the whole heart is heavy. From the sole of the foot Esai. 1. 5. 6.
to the head, there is nothing whole therein etc. And as Saint Paul says. All
Philip. 2. 21
seek their own, and not that which is lesus Christ's. And I am here ascended
into the high hill of Sion, the highest hill in all this realm. I must needs
as it is given me in commission, Cry aloud Esai. 58. 1.
and spare not: lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their
transgressions. I must cry unto all estates as well of the Ecclesiastical
ministry, as of the civil governance, with the vulgar people. But
for so much as example of holy scriptures with experience of Christ's church in
all ages has taught us that the fall of Priests is the fall of the people,
and contrariwise the integrity of them is the preservation of the whole flock:
And the ministers as Christ says, being the light of Math. 6. 22. 23.
his mystical body, if the light be turned into darkness, there must needs
follow great darkness in the whole body. I think it convenient to begin with
them which seem to have brought blindness into the whole body, making men to
forget their heavenly fathers business. They which should have kept the
candle still burning: these will I chiefly examine in yt business which
Christ so earnestly committed to Ioh. 21. 15. 16. 17.
all pastors before his ascension: when he demanded thrice of Peter if he
loved him, and every time upon Peter's confession, enjoined him, straightly to
feed his lambs and sheep. Wherein we have the true trial of all ministers,
who love Christ, who apply his business. But to consider how it has been
forgotten in the church many years, it might make a Christians heart to
bleed. He that wrote the general Chronicle of all ages: when he comes
Easciculus temporum.
to the time of John the 8. and Martin the second Bishops of Rome about 600
years ago, conferring the golden ages going before with the iniquity of that
time: when through ambition, avarice and contention, the office of setting
forth Gods word was brought to an utter contempt and trodden under foot. In
token whereof the Bible was made ye Bishops footestoole, he falls to a sudden
exclamation and complains thus with the lamentable voice of the prophet
Jeremy Helas, Helas, O Lord God: How is the Lamen. Iere. 4. 1.
gold become so dim? How is the goodly color of it so sore changed? O most
ungracious time (says he) wherein the holy man fails (or is not) all
truethes are Psalm. 12. 1. and 14. 3.
diminished from the sons of men: there are no Godly men left, the faithful
are worn out among the children of men. In that time as it appears both by
this hystory and others, ambition and gredy avarice taught ministers to seek
and co^te^d for livings, who might climb the highest by utter contempt of their
office, and of our heavenly fathers business: And so to make Christ his stock
a ready pray for the devil, who goth about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he
^. Pet. 5. 8.
may devour. Then the Bishop of Rome abusing always Peter's keys to fill Judas
Satchels, dispensed with all prelates (that brought any money) from obeing of
Christ's commission given to Peter, Feed, Feed, Feed, my Lambs and my
sheep, and stretched it so largely, that in stead of feeding Christ his
Lambs and sheep, he allowed them to feed Hawks, Hounds, and Horses (I will
not say) Harlottes. Then in steed of Fishers of men, he made them to become
fishers of benefices Math. 4. 19.
and fat liuinges. He brought preaching into such a contempt, that it was
accounted a great absurdity for a Cardinal to preach, after he had fasciculus
temporum.
once bestred his Moile. But let us see after, how this evil increased. S.
Bernard S. Barnard.
in his time about 200 years after lamented, yt when it seemed yt open
persecutoin of Tyrants and Heretics was ceased in the Church, then an other
persecution far worse, and more noisome to Christ's gospel did succeed,
when the ministers, Christ's own friends by pretense, were turned into
persecutors. My lovers and my Psalm. 38. 21.
friends stand aside from my plague, and my kinsmen stand a far off. The
iniquity of the Church (Says Bernard) began at the elders. Heu, Heu, Domine
Deus, etc. Alas, alas, O Lord God, they Bernard.
are the foremost in persecuting of thee, which are thought to love the
chiefest place or pre-eminence in the Church. This complaint with much more to
long to be rehearsed, made Saint Bernard in his time against the Prelates of
Rome, nothing afraid in the same place (for obscuring of Christ his Gospel)
to call them Antechristes, and for murdering of silly souls redeemed with
Christ his precious blood, he makes more cruel persecutors of Christ, then
the Jews, which shed his blood. If the iniquity of Rome 400. years ago,
was so great, and since has not a little increased, it was high time yt God
should open the eyes of some Christian princes to see the great abuses and
enormities of Romish Bishops, and to deliver Christ's gospel out of
captivity, and to bring down his horns, whose pride (if he might have had
success in his tyranny) began to ascend with Lucifer above the stars. It is
not many years ago, that a champion of his named Pelagius, writing against
Marcilius Paduanus, in defense of Rome, has not been ashamed to leave in
writing, that ye pope, quoda^modo, after a sort does participate both natures,
the Godhead and manhod with Christ: and that he may not be judged of the
Emperor, because he is not a mere man, but as a God upon earth, and God
(says he) may not be judged of man. What intolerable blasphemy is this? If I
had not read it my self, I could scarsly believe any such blasphemy to
proceed from him which professes Christ. Do you not perceive plainly the
hissing and poison of the old serpent, when he tempted our first parents, and
promised they should beco^e like Gods? A vile wretched creature, worms meat,
forgetting his estate, must become a God upon earth. Such Gods shall follow
Jupiter, Mars, and Venus, into the pit of damnation. But some will say, what
should we speakc so much of the Bishop of Rome, is he not gone? his popower
taken away? If preachers would let him alone, the people would sone forget him.
Truly for my part, if I had that gift, strength and calling, I had rather
(though I were sure to smarte therefore) speak against his enormities in Rome,
then to speak of them here. And I think no man bears (at least I am sure no
man ought to bear) any malice or evil will against his person, in speaking
against his vice and iniquity. We fight not (Says Saint Paul) against flesh
and blood, but we fight Ephesians. 6. 12.
against the prince of darkness etc. When any wicked man adversary to God
and his word assayleth us, we must take him for no other but as an instrument
of the devil, and Satan himself to be our enemy and none other: And Augustine.
even as when an enemy assaileth us on horseback, we wish to overthrow the
enemy, and win the horse, which may be profitable unto us: So if the devil
could be cast out of such instruments as he has in Rome, the men would become
profitable members of Christ. But if the devil sit so fast in the saddle, that
he cannot be turned out, we cannot amend it. Yet our duty is to pray unto God
for them, and to hate non of Gods creatures, but rather that which Satan has
depraved. Si forte Deus convertat corda eorum. If peradventure God will turn
their hearts. But notwithstanding their faults ought to be chiefly told them
in their presence, yet not there only, but even here amongst us also, although
it come not to their ears, it is not a little expedient oftentimes to cry and
thunder against their errors and vices. Chiefly that so often as we hear it, we
may give god thanks (as we are most bounden) for our deliverance from yt
captivity of Babylon as Saint Peter him self by ye mind of ancient writers
called it. Examples 1. Pet. 5. 13.
hereof we have in the Scriptures, the song of the Israelites after their
deliverance out of Egypt, and Exodus 15. 1.
afterward when they were delivered by Debora from the tyranny of Sisera: and
after the deliverance from Holofernes, Iud. 5. 1.
by Judith. We must be thankful, Iud. 16. 1.
least for our unthankfulness God suffer us to fall into a worse bondage then
ever we were in. But most of all it is profitable that we may from our hearts
renounce with Babylon all the vices of Babylon. For what did profit the
deliverance out of Egypt to those yt still did carry Egypt in their minds
through the desert? What did it avail the deliverance out of Babylon to those
that did bring Babylon home to Jerusalem? I fear me yet in England a great
many like fleshly Israelites, are weary of the sweet Manna of the Gospel, and
savor of the fleshly Egypt, desiring to live still under the bondage of Phara^.
But most of all it is expedient now for my purpose to speak of that Sea, from
whence so far as ever I could learn, those intolerable abuses have
overflowed, and are come among us: which as yet are great enemies to Christ's
Gospel here in England, making his ministers to set aside his business^* Such
abuses as can not yet be driven away, nor sent home to Rome to their father. I
mean of dispensations for pluralites, and tot quots, with dispensations for
non residents, which avarice and Idleness transported hither from Rome: But for
yt they savor sweet for a time to carnal men, they have so many patrones
they can not be driven away, with other abuses: And because they are accounted
to stand by Law, they are used as clokes for iniquity. These may well be
likened unto those fatlinges which Saul against Gods commandment 1. Sam. 15.
^.
did keep alive, when he vanquished the Amalekites. And truly till there be
ordained some Godly laws, to banish these with other abuses, Gods wrath is
kindled against us to destroy all such as are the mainteiners of them. So long
as it shall be lawful for men to have so many liuinges, as they can get, and
discharge never a one, and so long as men may have the livings to lie where
they will in idleness far from their cure, fatting themselves like the
Diuelles Porklings, and let a thousand souls perish for lack of spiritual
food, God his business shall never be well applied, nor his gospel have
success in England. It is pity that ever it should be needful, to wish
any laws to be made by man to bring ministers of Gods word to do their duty,
being so plainly expressed in God his law. If our hearts were not hardened
more then Pharao, our eyes of judgment more blinded with vnsensiblenes of
heavenly things then the Sodomites, we should tremble and quake more at one
threatening of Gods vengeance against negligent pastors that feed them selves,
that set aside their heavenly fathers business, whereof the scripture is full in
every place, then we should fear all the powers upon earth, which as Christ
says, having power of the body cannot hurt the soul. Oh Lord Math. 11. 28.
how dare men be so bold to take on them the name of Christ his ministers,
and utterly refuse the work of their ministry, by leaving their flock, god
his word being so plain against the^? I marvel not so much at blind baierds
which never take Gods book in hand, ignorance has blinded them, they know not
the price of man's soul: but truly I could never marvel enough at learned
men, which read the scriptures, where their hearts and understanding should
be when they read almost in every leaf of scripture, besides all ancient
writers, their own sharp sentence and judgment, which a whole day were too
little to bring them in. O merciful God, where be their eyes to see? their
ears to hear? do they think there is a God which will be master of his
word? I will let pass how they are called of the holy ghost by most odious
names, thieves, robbers, hypocrites, idols, wolfes, dumb dogs, with many such
like worthy their deserts. I will only declare, which me thinks might
suffice if there were no mo, how the scripture makes them most cruel
murderers and guilty of blood. In the 34 of Ecclesiastictis it is written: The
Bread of Eccl. 34. 22
the needful is the life of the poor, he that defraudeth them thereof is a man
of blood. If this sentence be true in them that defraude the needy of their
corporal food, how much more are they which withhold the food of the soul,
being the worthier part of man, guilty of blood? And therefore God by his
prophet Ezechiel tells them, so Ezech. 3. 10 and 33. 8.
many as perish by their negligence, their blood shall be required at their
hands, as men guilty of blood. Now let them consider if ye blood of Abell one
man cried up unto heaven for Genesis 4. 10.
vengeance against Cain: what an horrible cry shall the blood of a thousand
souls make before the throne of God, asking vengeance against that wicked
Pastor which most cruelly has hungered them to death in withholding from them
the food of life? The gold they lay up yearly brought far of by farmers, their
Rings and Jewels, their fine apparel, their beds they lie in, their meat
and drink, being the spoil of the poor, cry all for vengeance. The stones in
the wall, the timber over their heads cry for Haba. 2. 11.
vengeance. Alas how far are they from excusing themselves with Saint Paul,
saying to the people of Ephesus. I Act. 20. 26.
take you to record this day I am pure from the blood of all men, for I have
spared no labor but have showed all the council of God unto you. But alas
these me^ may rather say, that they have kept council of Gods council. And
where Saint Paul preached publiquly and by houses, these me^ keep silence
least they should disquiet the devil in his forte, of whom Christ says.
When Luke 11. 21.
a strong man armed watches his house, the things that he possesses are in
peace Mat. 24. 48.
etc. They say with the evil servant, My master is long a coming, and so
beats his fellow servants, like cruel murderers and tyrants whose judgment
shall be straighter the^ any Pharao, Nero, or Domitian that ever reigned. But
alas it healpeth nothing to call or cry upon them. They have hardened their
Each 7, 12.

Ioh. 1^. 39.


hearts as an Adamant stone. Lazarus has liene so long buried and stinking in
worldely lusts and sensuality, the preacher can not call him out, nor yet
remove the grave stone. What shall I then do? I must call unto you most noble
Prince, and Christ's anointed.

I am come this day to preach to ye king, and to those which be in authority
under him, I am very sorry they The king being abse^t, these words were added.
should be absent which should give example, and encourage other to the hearing
of Gods word. And I am the more sorry that other preachers before me complain
much of their absence: But you will say, they have weighty affairs in hand.
Alas, has God any greater business then this? If I could cry with the voice
of Ste^tor, I should, I should make them hear in their chambers: But in
their absence, I will speak to their seats, as if they were present. I will
call unto you noble prince as Christ's anointed. Christ's little flock here
in England, whom he has committed unto your chardge which wander by many
thousands, as sheep having no Math. 9. 3^
pastors, they cry all unto you for succor, to send them home their
shepherds, to the end, that for things Gal. 6. 6.
corporal, they may receive spiritual: and to let one pastor to have one only
competent living, which he may discharge. They call upon you to expel and drive
away the great drones, which in idleness devour other men's labor, that after
S. Paul's rule, He that will not labor be not suffered to eat. The little 2.
These, 3. 10. thren, 4. 4. or lament. Ier.
ones have asked bread. Christ's little ones have hungered and called for ye
food of ye gospel a long time and none there was to give it the^. Now they cry
unto you, take heed you turn not your ears from the^, least their blood
Prou. 21. 1^
be required at your hands also, and least God turn his ears from you. Samuel
spoke unto Saul fearful words: Because 1. Sam. 15. 23
thou have cast away the words of the Lord has therefore cast away^ thee
from being king. You are made of God a Pastor, a Pastor of Pastors. When David
was anointed king in Israel, God said, Thou shall feed my 2. Sam. 5. 2.

Psalm. 78. 71.


people Israel, you must feed, and that is, to see that al pastors do their
duty. The eye of the master has a great strength. Your graces eye to look
through your Realm and see that watchmen sleep not, shall be worth a great
number of preachers. They call unto you to awake not only negligent pastors,
but also to take away other enormities, which have followed in heaps upon
those euilles, pluralities and non residentes. If I might have time, I think I
should be able to prove that the great swarm of evils which reign at his day,
have flowed from those founteines or rather puddles: But I will only speak of
the great abuses, which by sp oil and robbery do hide the gospel, how they
have ensued. First of all the dispensations of non residents have brought forth
farming of benefices to gentlemen, lay men, wherein they have found such
sweetenes and worldly wealth, that preachers can not have them, they will be
perpetual farmers. Which Psalm. 80. 1^.
has opened a gappe for the Heathen as David says, or else for cloked
christians, much worse then heathen, who have entered into Christ's inheritance,
spoiled his holy temple, and robbed his gospel. Such seem to make composition
with our great enemy Satan. The idle and idol pastor saying: Da mihi
diuitias, coetera toll tibi. Give to me riches, take the rest to thy share.
whom Satan answers: Si mihi des animas, tu cape diuitias: If thou will
betray to me the souls, take riches for thy part. An other gap has been
opened, for tha^ the learned have not done their duties, no more then the
unlearned: hereby Christ's vineyarde has been utterly spoiled: Patrons see
that none do their duty, they think as good to put in asses as men. The
Bishops were never so liberal in making of lewd priests, but they are as
liberal in making lewd vicars. I dare say, if such a monster as Deruel
Gatherel the idol of Wales brent in Smithfielde could have been well conveyed
to come and set his hand to a bil to let the patron take ye greatest part of
the profits, he might have had a benefice. There is never any question how he
can occupy himself in Gods business. John Gerson.
Gerson a learned man in his time witnesses, that whosoever in that time was
admitted to a benefice in France, must answer to these questions. Scis
u^rumque testamentum: know thou the old testament and the new. and the
ignorant was put back: but with these men it skilleth not if he never opened
the Bible, so much the meter for their purpose, he is not able to speak
against their abuses, but will suffer the^ to sleep in their sin. And will you
see what preposterous judgment they use? For all worldly offices they search
meet and convenient me^, only christen souls so dearly bought are committed
without respect to me^ not worthy to keep sheep. Your grace has sent forth
furueiers, as most needful it was, to see there should be no deceit in
paimente of pensions, and other offices abroad. Would to God you would also
send forth Surueyors to see how benefices are bestowed and used: how Christ
and his gospel are robbed and dishonored, to the great decay of your realm
and common wealth. You should find a small number of patrones, that bestow
rightly their liuinges, seekinge Gods glory, and that his work and business
may be rightly applied, without Simo ny or seeking there own profit. For
first it as almost general, to reserve the ferming to him self or his friend,
and to appointe the rent at his own pleasure. But worse then all this, a
great number never farm them at al, but keep them as their own lands, and
give some three halfpeny Priest a curats wages, nine or ten pounds. Eue^ as
Jeroboam made priests of his own 1. Kin. 13. 3^.
for his hill alters to sacrifice to his calves, that the priests should not
go to Jerusalem. These Icroboams will never let the people ascend to Jerusalem
to find Christ in the Temple of his word. They began first with personages,
and seemed to have some consciences toward vicarages, but now their hearies
be so hardened, all is fish that comes to the net. Gentlemen are persons and
vicars both, nothing can escape them. There be vicarages about London having a
thousand people so spoiled: whereby it may appear what is done further of. Your
grace may find also where gentlemen keep in their hands livings of 40. or
50. pounds, and gives one that never comes there 5. or 6. pounds. Some change
the ground of the benefice with their tenants, to the intent, if it be called
for, the tenant shall lose ^t and not they. Is not this a godly Patron? It
shall appear also, I could name the place where a living of a hundredth marks
by year, if I say Crostwaite and Cheswicke.
not pounds, has been sold for many years, I suppose an 100. save one, and
so continues still. O good Saint Ambrose, if thou had been Bishop there, thou
would never have suffered such Wolves to devour the flock. It may well be
called a deuouringe, for this living in a godly learned pastors hand, might
have refreshed five hundred in a year with bodily food, and all the whole
country about with Gods word: which as I perceive in xx miles compass has
uneath one man to preach and yet no place in England more needful. For boys
and girls of xiiii. or xv. years old cannot say ye Lords prayer. Shall
such injury to Christ and his gospel be suffered in a christian realm? That one
enormitie cries for vengance til it be redressed. What shall I speak? Your
noble men reward their servants with livings appointed for the gospel.
Certainly I marvel that God holds his hand, that he destroys not such
with Nadab and Abihu. Let them not abuse Gods patience, for if they do not
shortly repent, and bestow the livings better, both master and man shall burn
in hell fire. I am not able to rehearse, nor yet any man knows al ye abuses
which the Simoniakes, ambitious and idol pastors have brought unto your
realm. By whose evil example ravenous wolves painted Christians, hypocrites
have entered and defiled the sanctuary, spoiled Christ and his gospel, to the
destruction of his flock. How great enemies, they be to Christ, by keeping
away his gospel, it shall appear, if ye consider what superstition and
blindness remains still among the people, only through lack of faithful
prechers: I pass over much infidelity, Idolatry, forcerie, charming, witch
crafts, coniuring, trusting in figures, with such other trumpery, which lurk
in corners and began of late to come abroad only for lack of preaching. Come
to the ministratio^ of the Sacraments set forth now by common authority after
the first institution, they think baptism is not effectual, because it
wants man's traditions: They are not taught how the Apostles baptized. A
great number think it a great offense to Act. 8. 38.
take the Sacrament of Christ's body in their hands, that have no conscience
to receive it with blasphemous mouths, with malicious heartesfull of all
uncleanness. These come to it by threes of custom, without any spiritual
hunger, and know not the end wherefore it was instituted. They come to the
church to feed their eyes and not their souls, they are not taught, that no
visible thing is to be worshipped. Augustine.
And for because they see not in the church the shining pomp and pleasante
variety (as they thought it) of painted clothes, candlestickes, Images,
altars, lamps, tapers, they say so good to go into a Barn, nothing esteeming
Christ which speaks to them in his holy word, neither his holy Sacrament
reduced to the first institution. To be short, the people are now even as the
Jews were at Christ's coming, altogether occupied in external holiness and
culture, without any feeling of true holiness or of ye true worship of God in
spirit and truth, without the John. 4. 24.
which all other is mere hypocrisy. Many thousands knows not what this
means, but seek Christ still among their kindred, in ma^s inuentio^s, when
they can never find him. As the Mat. 15. 3. 9
Jews preferred man's traditions before Gods co^mandementes, even so is it now.
Men think it a greater offense to break a fasting day, or work upon a saints
day, the^ to abstain from profitable labor and turn it to Bacchus feasts,
exercising more ungodliness that day then all the week, dispising or sone
weary of Gods word. All this with much more comes through lack of preaching,
as experience tries where godly pastors be. It cannot much be merueled, if the
simple and ignorant people, by some wicked heads and firebrandes of Hell, be
sometimes seduced to rebel against their Prince and lawful magistrates,
seeing they are never taught to know their obedience and duty to their king,
and sovereign, so straightly commanded in Gods law. But there hangs over
us a great evil, if your grace do not help it in time. The devil goes about
by these Cormorantes that devour the liuinges appointed for the Gospel, to
make a fortress and Bulwark, to keep learned pastors from the flock: that
is, so to decay learning, that there shall be none learned to commit the flock
unto. For by reason liuinges appointed for the ministry, for the most part,
are either robbed of the best part, or clean taken away, almost none has
any zeal or devotion to put their children to schole, but to learn to write,
to make them prentises, or else to have the^ lawyers. Look upon the two wells
of this Realm, Oxforde and Cambridge, they are almost dried up. The cruel
Philistines abroad, enemies to Christ's gospel, Genesis 26. 15.
have stopped up the springes of faithful Abraham. The decay of students is so
great, there are scarce left of every thousand, an hundred. If they decay so
fast in seven years more, there shall be almost none at al, and then may the
Devil make a triumph. This matter requires speedy redress, the misery of
your people, cry upon you noble Prince, and Christ for his flock cries to
you his anointed, to defend his lambs from these ravenous wolves, that rob
and spoil his vincyard. Whose malicious endeavor, if your grace do not
speedily resist, there is entering into England, more blind ignorance,
superstition and infidelity, then ever was under the Romish Bishop. Your
Realm (which I am sorry to speak) shall become more barbarous then Scithia:
which least God almighty lay to your graces chardge, for suffering the sword
given to you (for the maintenance of the gospel) to ly rusting in the sheath,
bestirre now your self in your heavenly fathers bu sines: With stnde all
these cormorantes by godly laws, which rob Christ's gospel and tread it
down. They eat up Gods people as it were Psalm. 14. 4.
bread. Your grace shall have more true renown and glory before God, to
defend Christ's gospel against them, then to conquer all Aphrica. You shall
do God more service, to resist this tyranny of the devil and his members,
then to vanquish the great Turk. Cut first away the occasions of all this
mischief, dispensations for pluralities and totquots, for non residents,
suffer no longer the tithes of the furthest parts of England to be due to be
paid at Paul's fo^t. Cause every pastor, as his living will extend to keep
hospitality him self. But many thinks them selves excused, for a year or
two, because their livings are taken away the first year: which undoubtedly
does not excuse them for their presence. I had rather beg, or borrowe of my
friends to help me to meat and cloth, then suffer the devil to have such
liberty one year. It is no small number of souls that may perish, by one
years absence. Moses was from the Exodus 32. 1.
people but forty days, and they fell to idolatry. Howbeit, for as much as
the Scripture does allow the minister a living the first year also: He that
serves the Altar, let him live of the Altar: 1. Cor. 9. 13.
and again Thou shall not musle the Ox that treads out the corn: I do not
doubt but after your grace, with the advice of your honorable counsel, have
considered, how much it may set forth Gods glory, how many souls may be
delivered from the claws of the devil, by sending pastors to their liuinges,
the first month, and suffering them to have no cloak of absence, you will
soon restore the first years living, which in my conscience was wrongfully
taken away at the first, as I suppose, by the Bishop of Rome. But I doubt not,
if all were well redressed to this, that this also should soon be amended.
Wherefore here I will desire god, to assist your grace in the advance mente of
his Gospel, which like unto Josias you have helped to bring to 2. Kin. 23. 8.
light, where it lay hid. But yet, it is not heard of all your people, a
thousand pulpets in England are covered with dust, some have not had four
sermons these xv. or xvi. years since Friars left their limitations, and a few
of those were worthy the name of sermons. Now therefore that your glory may
be perfect, all men's expectations is, that whatsoever any flatterers or
enemies to Gods word should labor to the contrary, for their own lucre,
your grace will take away al such lets and abuses as hinder the setting forth
of Gods most holy word: and to withstand all such robbers, as spoil his
sanctuary: trauiling to send pastors home to their flock, to feed Christ's
Lambs and sheep, that al may be occupied in the father of Heaven his
business. And for this your travail, as Saint Peter says, When the Prince of
all Pastors shall appear, you shall receive an 1. Pet. 5. 4.
incorruptible Crown of glory.

And thus far concerning the Ecclesiastical ministry.

But now to come to the civil governance, first, to all of the nobility, The
second part, of civil governors.
magistrates and officers, al these must at al times remember, They must be
occupied in their heavenly fathers business. They The text.
have received all their nobility, power, dominion, authority, and offices of
God, which are excellent and heroical gifts, and if they be occupied in Gods
business, it shall redownd to his glory and the wealth of his people: But if
they fall from his business, and follow their own will, or rather the will of
Satan prince of darkness and father of John. 12. 31.

Ephe. 2. 2.

and Ephesians. 6. 12.


all the children of darkness, then shall all these glorious titles turn them
to names of confusion. For falling unto ungodliness and framing them selves to
the shape and fashion of this world, nobility is turned into vile slavery
and Romans 12. 2.
x bondage of sin, power and dominion are turned into tyranny, authority is
become a swoorde of mischief in a mad man's hand, al majesty and honor is
turned to myserie, shame and confusion: And ever the higher that men be: while
they serve sin, more notable is their vice, and more pestiferous to infect,
as a cancarre, by evil examples: because all men's eyes are bente to behold
their doings. Every fault of the mind is so much more evident, as the paty is
more notable, who has it. For the worthier the person is which offends, the
more his offense is noted of others. Seeing that virtue in all whom God has
exalted is the mainteiner of their dignity, without the which they fall from
it: it shall be most needful for them to embrace virtue, and chiefly
humility, which is the keeper of all virtues, which may put them ever in
remembrance, from whence power is given them, for what end, who is above them,
a judge, an examiner of all their doings, who cannot be deceived. But as
dignity goes now a days, climb who may climb most highest, every man
exalts him self, and tarrieth not the calling of God, humility is taken for
no keeper, but for an utter enemy unto nobility. As I heard of a wicked
climber and exalter of him self, who hearing the sentence of Christ in the
Gospel, He that humbles him self shall Luke 14. 11.
be exalted: He most blasphemously against Gods holy word said, sure it
was not true, for if I, said he, had not put forth nor advanced my self, but
followed this rule, I had never come to this dignity. For which blasphemy, the
vengeance of God smote him with souden death. I fear me a great number are in
England this day, which though in words they deny not this sentence of Christ,
yet inwardly they can scarce disgeste it, else certainly they would never seek
so ambitiously to advance them selves, to climb by their own might uncalled,
never seeking the public weal, but rather the destruction thereof, for their
private wealth and lucre: which causes us to have so many evil magistrates.
For all the while that men gather goods unjustly by polling, pilling usury,
extorsion, and Simmonie, and therewith seek to climb with bribes and bying of
offices, it is scarce possible of such to have wholesome magistrates. S. Bernard
said, Of a bitter root comes a bitter fruit. They enter in at the S.
Bernard.
window (which is used as well in civil gouernemente as Ecclesiastical) and
therefore may Christ's words well be verified, He that enters not in at the
Ihon. 10. 1.
door into the sheepefolde, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a
thief and a robber. And Esaias complainte against Jerusalem takes place among
us, Thy princes are wicked and companions of theefs, Esai. 1. 13.
they love gifts altogether and gape for rewards: as for the fatherless they
help not him to his right, neither will they lot the widows cause come
before them. They will not knowetheir office to be ordemed of God, for the
wealth and defense of al innocents, for the aid of all that be in misery:
the time is come that Solomon speaks of, When the wicked man be are rule, the
people shat Pro. 29. 2.
mourn. When had ever the people such cause to mourn as now, when the
greatest number of all magistrates are occupied in their own business;
seeking rather the misery of the people, then to take it away: rather to
oppress them the^ to defend them, their hands be ready to receive their money,
to rob and spoil them, but their ears are shut from hearing their
co^plaintes, they are blind to behold their calamities. Look in all cuntries
how lady Avarice has set a work altogether mighty men, gentlemen and all
rich men to rob and spoil the poor, to turn them from their livings, and
from their right, and ever the weakest go to the walls. And being thus
tormented and put from their right at home, they come to London a great number;
as to a place where justice should be had, and there they can have none. They
are suitors to great men, and can not come to their speech, their servants
must have bribes, and that no small bribes: Al love bribes. But as such as be
so dangerous to hear the pore, let Esai. 1. 23.
them take heed least God make it as strange to them when they shall call: for
as Solomon says, Who so stops his Pro. 21. 13.

1. King. 3. 16.


ear at the crying of the pore, he shall cry and not be heard. We find that
pore me^ might come to complain of their wrongs to the Kings own person.
King Ioram, although he was one of 2. Kin. 8. 3.
the sons of Achab, no good king, yet he heard the pore widows cause and
caused her to have right: such was the use then. I would to God that all noble
men would diligently note that chapter, and follow the example. It should not
then be so hard for the poor to have success to the^, nor coming to their
presence, they should not be made so astonished and eue^ speechless with
terrible looks, but should mercifully and lovingly be hard and succored
gladly for Christ's love, considering we are the members of his body, even as
my hand would be glad to help my foot, when it is annoyed. O with what glad
hearts and clear consciences might noble men go to rest, when they had
bestowed the whole day in hearing Christ himself complain in his members and
redressing his wro^gs. But alas for lack hereof poor people are driven to
seek their right among the lawyers: And there as the prophet Joel says, Look
what ye Caterpillars had left in their robbery and Joel. 1. 4.
oppression at home, all that does the greedy Locustes, the lawyers, devour at
London. They laugh with ye money which makes others to weep, and thus are the
poor robbed on every side without redress, and that of such as seem to have
authority thereto. When Christ suffered his passion there was one Barrabas, S.
Mathewe Math. 27. 16.
calls him a notable thief, a ge^tlema^ thief, such as rob now a days in
velvet coats, and other two obscure thieves and nothing famous, the rusticall
thieves were hanged and Barrabas was delivered: Even so nowe'a days little
thieves are hanged that steal of necessity, but the great Barrabasses have
free liberty to rob and to spoil without al measure in the midst of the
city. The poor pyrate said to Alexander, we rob but'a few in a ship, but thou
roobest whole cuntries and kingdoms Alas silly pore members of Christ, how you
be shorn, oppressed, pulled, hal^d to and fro on every side, who can not but
lament, if his heart be^ not of flint There be a number every term, and many
continually, which lametably complain for lack of Justice, but all in vain.
They spend yt which they had left, and many times more, whose il success here
causes thousands to tarry at home beggars and leese their right, and so it
were better, the^ here to sell their coats: for this we see, be ye pore ma^s
cause never so manifest a truth, ye rich shall for monyfind 6. or 7. counselors
shall stand with subtelties and sophisines to cloak an evil matter and hide a
known truth A pitteous case in a christian common wealth. Alas that ever
manifest falsehood should be maintained, where ye God of truth ought to be
honored. But let them alone, they are occupied in their fathers business, even
ye prince of darkness. You are of your father the John. 8. 44.
devil: Yet I cannot so leave the^, I must needs cry on Gods behalf, to his
patro^s of Justice, to you most redoubted prince, who^ God has made his
minister Romans 13. 4.
for their defense: with all those who^ god has placed in authority under
you. Look upon their misery, for this is out heavenly fathers business to you
appointed by his holy word. When I come among the people, I call upon them, as
my duty is, for service, duty and obedience unto their prince, to all
magistrates, to their Lords, and to all that be put in authority over them, I
let them hear their own faults. But in this place my duty is and my
conscience upon Gods word binds me, seeing them so miseraby, so wrongfully,
so cruelly entreated on every side, in Gods behalf to plead their cause, not
by form of man's law, but by Gods word, as an intercessor. For as they are
debtors unto you and other magistrates of love, fear, service, and obedience
under God: So are you again debtors unto the^ of love, protection; of Justice
and equity, mercy and pity. If you deny the^ these, they must suffer, but
god shall revenge the^. He stands (says David) in the congregation of Gods.
Psalm. 82. 1.
and as judge among gods. Take heed all you yt be counted as Gods, Gods
ministers vppen earth, you have one God judge over you, which as he in ye same
Psalm sharply rebukes ungodly rulers for accepting of persons of the ungodly:
so he tells faithful christian magistrates, their true duties and business
in plain words, Defend the pore and needy, see that such as be in necessity
have right, deliver the outcast and pore, save the^ from the hands of the
ungodly. Hear have all noble men and christian magistrates most lively set
forth to them their heavenly fathers business, wherein he would have them
continually occupied: would to God the whole Psalm were graven in their
hearts. Truly for lack that this business is not applied, but the pore
despised in all places, it has given such boldness to covetous cormorantes
abroad, that now their robberies, extortion and open oppression, has no end
nor limits, no banks can keep in their violence. As for turning poor men out
of their holds, they take for no offense, but say Their land is their Psalm.
24. 1.
own, and forget altogether that the earth is the Lords, and the fullness
thereof. They turn them out of their shrouds as thick as mice. Thousands in
England through such beg now from door to door; which have kept honest
houses. These cry daily to God for vengeance, both against the great
Nemrothes works thereof, and their Genesis 10. 8. 2.
mainteners. There be so many mighty Nemrothes in England, mighty hunters,
that hunt for possessions and Lordships, that pore men are daily hunted out of
their livings: there is no covert nor den can keep them safe. These Nemrothes
have such quick smelling hounds, they can lie at London and turn men out of
their farms and tennements, a hundred, some 200, miles of. O Lord, when wicked
Achab hunted 1. Kin. 21. 5.
after Nabothes vineyard, he could not (though he were a king) obtain that
pray, til^ cursed Iesabel (as women many times have shrewde wits) til she
took the matter in hand: So hard a thing it was in those days to wring a man
from his fathers inheritance, which now a mean man will take in hand. And
now our valiant Nemrothes can compass the matter without the help of
Iesabel, yet has England even now as great a number of Iesabels, which to
maintain their intolerable pride, their golden heads, will not stick to put
too their wicked hands. O Lord what a number of such oppressors worse then
Achab are in England, which sell the poor for a pair of shoes, of whom if
God should Amo. 2. 6.
serve but 3. or 4. as he did Achab, to 1. Kin. 22. 38
make the dogs lap the blood of them, and their wives and their posterity, I
think it would cause a great number to beware of extorsion, to beware of
oppression, and yet escaping temporal punishment, they are certain by Gods
word, their blood is reserved for helhoundes, Cerberus and his company: which
they nothing fear. A pitiful case and great blindness, that hearing Gods
word, man should fear more temporal punishmente, then everlasting. Yet has
England had of late some terrible examples of Gods wrath in soudeine and
strange deaths of such as join feelde to feelde and Esai. 5. 8.
house to house. Great pity they were not cronicled to the terror of other
which fear neither god nor man, so hardened in sin, that they seek not to
hide it, but rather are such as glory in their mischefe: which makes me
oftentimes remember a writer in Psalm. 52. 1.
our time, Musculus upon Saint Mathews Musculus.
gospel, which meruelled much at the subtle and manifold working of Satan,
how he after the expelling of superstition and hypocrisy, trauelleth most
busily to bring in open impiety. That where as before, hipocrits, men feared
men and not God, now a great number, fear neither God nor man. The most
wicked are counted most manlike, and innocence is holden for beastlines: yet
may we not say hypocrisy is expelled, for as many of these Achabs as signify
they favor Gods word by reading or hearing it, or with prayer honoring him
(as Christ says) with their lips, Math. 15. 8.
their hearts being far from him, they are as detestable hypocrites as ever
was covered in cowle or cloister. I cannot liken them better then to yt Jews,
that say to Christ, hail king of ye Jews. What their painted friend Math.
27. 29
ship is, and how of Christ it is esteemed, S. Augustine sets forth by an
apt similitude: Even as (says he) a man should come to embrace thee, to kiss
and honor thee upward, and beneath with apaier S. Augustine.
of shoes beaten full of nails, tread upon thy bare foot, the head shall
despise the honor. done unto it, and for the foot that smarteth, say, why
treadest thou upon me? So when fained Gospellers honor Christ our head,
sitting in heaven and oppresses his members in earth, the head shall speak
for the feet that smarte, and say, Why treadest thou on me? Paul had a zeal
toward God, but he did tread upon Christ's feet on earth, for who^ the head
cried forth of heaven, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Although Act. 9. 4.
Christ sits at the right hand of his father, yet heth he in earth, he
hungereth in earth, he suffers al calamities here on earth, he is many times
evil entreated here on earth. Would to god we could bear away this brief and
short lesson, that what we do to his members upon earth we do to him: it
Math. 25. 40.
would bring men from oppression, to show mercy, without which no man can
obtain mercy. If they would remember Ieam. 2. 13.
how the rich gluttone was Luke 16. 23.
damned in hell, not as we read for any violence, but for not showing mercy,
they might soon gather how sharp judgeme^t remains for them, which are not
only unmerciful, but also violently add there unto oppression: who are so
far from mercy? a great number. Their hearts will serve them to destroy
whole towns, they would wish al ye people destroyed to have all the field
brought to a sheep pasture. O cruel mercy: it is like to the mercy of a bishop
of Magu^ce in Germany, named Hatto, which as the cronicles mention 500. years
ago in time of a Registrum mundi.
great dearth, called all the poor people in all ye whole country into a great
barn, pretending to make a great dole, but having them sure inoughe, he fired
the barn and brent them all up, saying, these be the mice which devour up the
Corn. This was a policy to make bread better cheap, but for this
unmerciful mercy, God made him an example for all unmerciful men, to the
worlds end. For a multitude of Ratios came and devoured him in such terrible
sort, that where his name was written in windows, walls, or hanginges, they
never ceased till it were rased out. Some peradventure shrink to hear such
cruelty, and the terrible vengeance that ensued. But doubtless there is
almost daily as great cruelty practiced amongst us, by such bloudsuccours as
being infected with the great dropsy of Avarice, always drinking and ever a
thirst, by famishinge poor people, drinkinge up their blood, and with long
continuance therein torment the^ more grievously, then he that burnt them all
in one hour. Now seeing as I said this cruelty, robbery, and extorsion
grows daily to such intolerable excess, and ouerfloweth this Realm, because
it is not punished nor restrained, it is high time for all those magistrates
that fear God, not only to abstain from this evil themselves, but to resist
it also. It is God his business, he has commanded it, and will straightly
require it. Would to God all noble men would be ware by the example of Saul,
he had a commandment to apply Gods 1. Sam. 15. 3.
business: Go and smite Amelecke and have no compassion on them etc. He left
his business undone, spared Ameleck and the fairest of the beasts, but for
this negligence he received of Samuel a sorrowful message from God: Because
thou have cast away the word of the Lord, he has cast thee off also from
being King. Even so in every christian commonwealth, god has commanded rulers
to destroy Amelecke, al extorsion, oppression and robbery, to defend the
needy and all innocents. If they look not to this business, but suffer
Ameleck to live, not only to live but to grow in might, so truly as God lives
he shall cast them of, they shall not be his magistrates. But let it once be
known that not only our most noble king (whose godly example is a Lantern
to all other) but that also al his nobles about him have wholly bente
themselves in his business, to withstand al violence, and to oppress all
oppression, for defense of Gods people, that the wicked Achabs, might know
that God had in England, a great number of Pastors, Patrones, feeders and
cherishers of his people: it should doc that which the fear of God cannot do:
that is, stop the great rage of violence, oppression and extorsion, which taken
away, would pluck from many their vanity in superfluous and monstrous
apparel, in sumptuous building, such as seek to bring paradise into earth,
being the greatest causes of all oppression and spoiling of pore people, which
most vain vanities and blind affections never reigned so much in all estates
in England, as at this day. It was a notable saying of Charles the fifte
Emperor of that Charles the fifte to the duke of Venice.
name to the Duke of Venice, when he had seen his princely Palace, a Paradise
upon earth. When the Duke looked yt he should have praised it exceedingly,
Charles gave it none other eommendation but this. Haec sunt quae faciunt
inuitos mori: these earthly vanities (said he) are they which make us loath to
die. A truer sentence could not well be spoken by any man. I would wish we
should look in all our buildings. When the beauty thereof so increases that
it would grieve us to depart from it, and to pluck down that piece again, and
to remember withal the holy Patriarchs and with S. Paul that we have not
here a continuing Heb. 13. 14.
city but we seek one to come. But truly me think now in England for our
vain delighte in curiouse buildinges, God has plagued us as he did the
builders of Babel, not with the Genesis 11. 7.
confusion of tongues, but with the confusion of wits, our fancies can never be
pleased, pluck down and set up, and when it contenteth us not, down with it
again. Our minds are never contented, nor never shall be while we seek
felicity where it is not. Would God every one would consider what a hell it
should be to all that vainly delighte herein, when death shall with great
violence, pluck the^ from their earthly heaven. Moreover, extorsion taken away,
shall straight abate the unmeasurable excess in costly fare, which goes
beyond the vain banqueting of Sardanapalus or Esopus, I dare not add
Cleopatra, which supped up with a spoonefull of vinegre a perle valued to 50000
crowns. It wuld also abate the intolerable excess in apparel, which causes
us to have robbers in velvet coats, with S. Martins chains. But I must for
lack of time pass over these enormities, which alone give matter enough for
whole sermons: I leave them for other which shall follow, more able to paint
out such monsters in their colors. And here in conclusion I desire all noble
men and godly Magistrates, deeply to ponder and reuolue in their Godly
memory, what acceptable service they may do, chiefly to God, and secondly
to the Kings majesty, and his whole realm, in employing their whole study,
how to resist all such as spoil Christ's people, whom he so tenderly loved,
that he shed his blood for them. Virtue joined with nobility spreads her
beams over a whole realm. And so your diligence in Gods business shall soon
inflame all other to follow your example, that all may occupy them selves in
God the fathers business. But now that I have hitherto charged the
Ecclesiastical ministers, and after the civil gonernours, with all rich and
mighty men with The third part, of the commons.
negligence in God his business, me think I do hear the inferior members
rejoice and flatter them selves, as if all were taken from them, and they left
clear in the sight of God. But if they consider their estate by Gods word,
they shall find small cause to advance themselves. For Gods word plainly
tells us, both that evil and dumb pastors and wicked rulers and
magistrates, are sent of God, as a plague and punishment for the sins of the
people. Job. 34. 30.

Esai. 24. 2.

Osee. 4. 9.


And therefore both Esaie and Osee after most terrible threatenings of God his
vengance for sin, bring in as a most grievous plague of al, that even the
priests, which should call them from sin, shall become so evil as the
people. Which plague Saint Bernard said in his time was come with a va^tage,
for because the priests were much worse then the people. And Amos Amos. 8. 11.
as a most grievous punishment of all other, threatens hunger, not of bread,
but of hearing Gods word. And concerning the civil magistrates, it is plain
in Job, that for Job. 34. 30.
the sin of the people God raises hypocrites to reign over them, that is to
say, such as have the bare names of governors and protectors, and are in deed
destroiers, oppressors of the people, subuerters of law and equity. And seeing
it is so, so many as feel the grief and smarte of this plague, ought not to
murmur against other, but patiently suffer, and be offended with their own
sins, which have deserved this scourge and much more: and study for
amendment, that God may take it away. For if they continu as they do, to
murmr against god and their rulers, as the Israelites did, to provoke daily
his anger by multiplyinge sin in his sight, with envy, malice, deceit,
backbiting, swearinge, fornication, and with utter contempt of his word, he
shall for their punishmente, so multiply the number of evil governors, unjust
Judges Justices, and officers, that as it was Vopiscus
spoken by a iester in the Emperor Claudius time, the images of good
magistrates may all be graven in one ring. God has cause greatly to be
displeased with all estates, when every man should look upon their own
faults to seek amendment, and as it is a proverb lately sprung up, no man
amendeth him self, but every man seeks to amend other, and all that while
nothing is amended. Mighty men and gentlemen, they say, the commonaltie live
to well at ease, they grow every day to be gentlemen, and know not themselves:
their horns must be cut shorter, by raising their rentes and by fines, by
plucking away their pastures, and so by many goodly prete^ces, Lady Avarice
can whisper in their ears. The mean men, they murmr and grudge, and say the
gentlemen have all, and there were never so many gentlemen and so little
gentleness. And by their natural Logike ye shall hear them reason how these
two Contugata, these yoke fellows, gentlemen and gentleness, should be
banished so far asunder: And they lave all the misery of this common wealth
upon the gentlemen their shoulders. But alas, good Christians, this is not ye
way of amendment, Si in^ucem Gal. 5. 15.
mordetis and commeditis. If ye bite and devour one another, as Saint Paul
says, take ye heed least ye be consumed one of another. Histories make
mention of a people called Anthropophagi, eaters of men, which al men's hearts
abhor to hereof: And yet alas by Saint Paul's rule, England is full of such
Anthrop ophagies. Every man enuieth other, every man biteth and gnaweth upon
other with venomous adders tongues, far more noisome then any teeth. And
whereon comes it? Covetousness is the root of all. Every man scratc^^th and
pilleth from other: every man would suck the blood of other: every man
encrocheth upon an other. Covetousness has (...) away the large wings of
charity; and plucketh all to her self, she is never satisfied, she has
chested all the old gold in England and much of the new: she has made yt there
was never more Idolatry in England, then at this day: But the Idols are hid,
they come not abroad. Alas noble prince, the Images of your auncesters graven
in gold, and yours also, contrary to your mind, are worshipped as Gods, and
all that while the pore lively Images of Christ, perish in ye streats, through
hunger and cold. This comes when covetousness has banished from amongst us
Christian charity, when like most vnth ankfull children, we have forgotten
Christ his last will, when he so often before his passion did inculcate love,
love, love, love one another. And herein we show our selves worse then any
carnal sons: Which be they never so unkind, yet always they remember ye last
words of their earthly parents. Nay rather I may say, we are much worse then ye
brute beasts, of whom when we consider, how wonderfully nature has framed
them to concord and unite, to preserve and help one another of their own
kind: it may make us utterly to be ashamed. The Hearts as Saint Augustine
writes, swimming over a narrow Augustine.
sea, in a company together, with much pain can bear up their heads in the
water: for the remedy whereof, every one lays his head upon the hinder part
of another, When the for most (having no stay) is sore weary he comes behind,
and thus every, one in his course, takes pain for the whole herd. If men
endued with reason would learn of these unreasonable creatures, this lesson to
help one another, as we are commanded by Saint Paul, saying, Bear ye one
another Gal. 6. 2.
burden, and so shall you fulfill the Law of Christ. How soon then should Col.
3. 14.

1. Cor. 13. 5.

Philip. 2. 4.


charity, the band of perfection, which seeks not her own, but rather to
profit other, be so spread among all degrees, that our common wealth should
flourish in all godliness. But alas we see that all goes contrary. For whiles
all men, as Saint Paul says, seek the things that be their own, and not
other men's, not the things which Phil. 2. 4.
appertain to Christ: Phila^tia, that is, self love, and love of private
commodity, has banished charity, and love to the common wealth. And if we
should se^ke the cause and ground of all these euille, why God his business is
so neglected among all estates and degrees, I think it should appear to be
ignorance of God his holy will: For if Mary and Joseph so godly and devout a
couple, understood not for a time Christ's saying, Wist ye not that I must go
about my fathers business? as Saint Luke says; they understoode, not that
saying* What meruell is it, if we living so carnally and drowned in worldly
pleasures and framed to the shape of this world, be ignorant in our heavenly
fathers business? And therefore (...) well apply them. But shall we think
this to be very strange: many apply not God his business nor his will, which
yet would disdain to be, counted ignorant there in. But undoubtedly, good
christians, it is an infallible verity, that negligence in perfourming God his
will, comes of ignorance. It is all one to know God and his will, and Saint
John says plainly, He that loves not, knows not God. For if he do Ihon.
4. 8.
know God, he cannot but love him, and love is always occupied in Gods
business. By this rule Saint Augustine Augustine.
proves, we cannot keep perfectly the first precept, to love God so well as
we ought to do, while we are in this mortal life: For all our love comes of
knowledge, but in this life, ex part cognoscimus, our knowledge 1. Cor. 13. 5.
is imperfect. And thus S. Augustines rule grounded upon S. John is true, that
so far as we know God, so far do we love him, and so they that love him
nothing at all, they know him nothing at all. Although they seem to have
never so much windy knoweledge, puffing up their stomach with presumption, as
the Apostle says, scientia inflat, knowledge 1. Cor. 8. 1.
makes a man swell: So that if a man have studied the scripture all his life
long, and learned the whole Bible by heart, and yet hane no love, he is
ignorant of God his will. The poor 1. Cor. 13. 2.
man that never opened book, if the love of god be; shed abroad in his heart by
the holy ghost, he overcomes Romans 5. 5.
him, in the knowledge of Gods will. The Godly Pembus of whom we Pembus.
read in the Ecclesiastical history, when he was first taught ye first verse
of the Psalm, 39. I have said, I will Psalm. 39. 1.
take heed to my ways, that I offend not in my tongue. He refused a long
time to take out a new lesson, judging his first lesson to be unlearned, till
he could perfectly practice it, by an holy conversation. So ought we always
to When Gods word is truly learned.
make our accounte to have learned Gods word, when we have learned charity
and obedience. But this knowledge, though it lack in many learned, yet
ordinarily it comes always by hearing God his word. Romans 10. Faith comes
of hearing, and hearing of the word of God. Wherefore, as I said, their Romans
10. 17.
case is to be lamented, which would gladly hear Gods word, and can have no
preachers. Then may we say, God has abundantly powered his grace among us,
that have his gospel so clearly set forth unto us, and have such opportunity,
y^ there wants nothing but ears to heart. We must have ears Luke 8. 8.
in our hearts to let it sink. But, O man, thrice unhappy and children of
greater damnation, if we harden our hearts, and receive such abundance of 2.
Co. 6. 1.

Heb. 16. 8.


grace in vain. The earth (Says Saint Paul) which after the rain (of Gods
grace) brings forth thorns and briers, is reproved, and is nigh unto
cursing, whose end is to be burned. Would God all yt be in the court, that
will not vouchsafe, having so many Godly sermons, to come forth of the hall
into ye chapel, to hear them, would remember what a heavy stroke of Gods
vengance hangs over all their heads yt contemn his word: and over those in
all places, which had rather be idle, and many times ungodly occupied in wanton
and wicked pastimes, then come to the church, profaning the Sabbath day,
appointed for ye service of God, and the hearing of his word, bestoweing it
more wickedly then many of the Gentiles. Yet if they would come to the
sermons, though their hearts were not well disposed, Gods word might win them,
as Saint Augustine was won by the preaching Augustine.
of S. Ambrose, when he came only to hear his sweet voice and eloquence. O yt
they knew what dishonor they did to Christ, yt esteem him so light, to
prefer vain, nay I say wicked things to the hearing of his holy word. Are
not these they, as Saint Paul Heb. 10. 19.
says, which tread vnderfo^te the Son of God, count the blood of his
testament, wherein he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite to
the spirit of grace? O Lord how can thou hold thy hands from punishing
this unthankfulness? Certainly I think all other wickedness compared to
this, is shadowed, and seems to be less. I would to God we would remember
many times the plagues and tokens of Gods extreme wrath that came upon the
Jews, after first unthankfully they had rejected Christ, and after his word,
when they were destroyed by Titus and Uespatian such a plague as never came
upon any other country. And look on their vices: there reigned avarice,
ambition, pride, extorsion, envy, aduonterie, but these reigned also in other
countries about, where no such vengance did light: but then did God thus
exercise his wrath upon them to the terror of all other, for contempt of his
holy word and for their unthankfulness: which being called so many ways by
his prophets by him self, by the Apostles, still hardened their hearts. This
exceeded all other wickedness in the word. Now if as great unthankfulness
be found in many of us toward Christ, and his gospel, set forth so plainly
unto us: how ca^ we without speedy repeta^ce, but look for the terrible stroke
of ve^gance. God (says Ual. max.) has feet Val. Max.
of wool, he comes slowly to punish, but he has hands of iron, when he
comes he strikes sore. Philip King of Macedonie, Philip king of Matedony.
hearing of one in his kingdom which refused most unthankfully to receive a
stranger, of whom before he had been succored in ship wrack, in extreme
need, for a worthy punishmente caused to be printed in his forehead with an
hot iron these two words, Ingratus hospes, au unthankful guest. O Lord if we
consider, when we were strangers from God, in the ship wrack of sin, how
mercifully Christ has delivered us, and borne our sins upon his body. If
after all this we most unthankfully refuse to receive him, by refusing of his
word, may we not think our selves worthy many hot yrons to printe our
unthankfulness to our shame? And undoubtedly so many as continue thus
unthankful, though it be not written in their forheads, to put them to worldly
shame: yet shall it be graven in their conscience to their everlasting confusion
and damnation, When the books of every man's conscience shall be laid open,
D^^i. 7. 10.
as Daniel says. Their judgment shall be more straight then Sodom and Math.
10. 25. and 11. 24.
Gomorha, which that we may avoid, let us all from the highest to the lowest,
pray with one accord, that God may soften and prepare our hearts with
meekness and humility, and thankfulness to embrace his gospel, and his
holy word: which shall instruct us in his holy will, and teach us to know his
business every man in his vocation, that (as Saint Paul says) every one may
give attendance to themselves Acts. 20. 28.
and to the flock, wherein the holy ghost has made them overseers to rule
the congregation of God, which he has purchased with his blood: that all other
ravenous Wolves may be turned to good shepherds. So that Christ his ministers
may enjoy the portion assigned for the Gospel: that all magistrates and
governors may give their whole study to the weal public, and not to their
private wealth, that they may be mainteiners of Justice and punishers of
wrong: and that all inferiors may live in due obedience, meekely, contenting
themselves every one in their vocation, without murmuring or grudging: that
under Christ and our noble prince his minister here one earth, we all being
knit together with Christian charity, the bond of perfection, may so fasten
our eyes upon our Lode star, Gods word, that it may continually be a
lantern to our feet, to guide our Psa. 119. 105

2. Pet. 1. 19.


ways through the deserte and dark wilderness of this world: that our eyes
be never so blinded with shadows of wordly things, to make us to embrace
false deceitful, and temporal felicity, for that which is true steadfast and
everlasting: that this lantern, which shines now, as Saint Paul says,
tanquam speculum, as thorough a glass, and in a dark speaking, 1. Cor. 13. 12
when that which is imperfect shall be taken away, we may present us to that
clear light which never is shadowed with any darkness: that we may behold
the blessed sight of the glorious trinity, (...). 1. 17.
the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, to whom be all praise, al honor
and glory world without end Amen.

God save the King.

