A knowledge for Kings, and a warning for subjects: Containing The most
excellent and worthy history of the Raellyans perverted state, and government
of their common wealth: no less rare, then strange and wonderful: and most
meet to be published for a special example, in these perylous and dangerous
days.

First written in Latin, by James Glaucus a German: and now translated into
english by William Cleuer Scholemaster.

By special record, this Monument was two thousand years of Antiquity: and
so dusked and forworne with age, that being in a plain written letter, could
scarce be read: And for that it was great pity, that so precious a Jewel
should quite fade out of remembrance I with my painful endeavor have now
renewed it into fresh memory.

Imprinted at London by Richard Ihones. 1576

To the Right worshipful, M. Gryffyn Hamden, of Hamden Essquyer: one of the
Queens Majesty's Justices, of the County of Buckingham. VV. C. wysheth
health, and happiness, in Christ Jesus. ()
IT may seem strange unto you, right worshipful, that you in respect of
diverse, are chosen to be the patron and defender of this work: It is not for
that I would fill your ears with new and strange delites: It is not in that
I would flatteringlye advance you, neither yet to draw you to any purpose
private unto my self: but for that you al ways have shone in the m^ddest of
renowned virtue: your actions testyfying the constant stedfastnes of your heart,
your fruitful fame being witnessed by Christians, and the dear children of
God: that such is the synceritye of noble virtue, dwellinge within your mind,
always gnerdoning your affections steadfastly, do prefix your eyes upon the
eternal cowntenance of Gods mercy: am moved the rather to tell you of the
commen wealth of the Raellyans, an unruly idolatrous people, drowned in
ignorance, stumblinge on the myschife of many syns: had many warnings: many
signs, wonders and tokens were revealed unto them: and all which being the
gentell offeringes of God, to call them out of the stinking dunghill in which
they sleapt: yet in the hardness of their own hearts no ways could there
appear any repentance or amendment of life, until the full purpose of sin
had worn them to the stumpes, by destruction. Idolatry which is the great
grandmother of all syufulnes did conceive diverse desperate children: which
being muffled under the painted v^sarde of their own conceates, or that the
prvuidence of Gods eye sight, lookinge into their vilitye, or that a desperate
beginning could not prosper: but that God over reachinge the wicked with
justice, does pursue the^ to a desperate ending, continuing their impenitencie.
I am sory-right worshipful, that as I purposed to show my inward loving mind
toward you, so to have dealt in such a matter as had belonged to the zealous
gravity of your study: Notwithstanding, right worshipful, accept my inward
mind, for I do not write unto you as I would, but as I may. For when
Alexander the great had through many torments, punished Calistenes, being
subdued (without remorce or pity) to many cruelties, when as other ways he
could not utter his usual accustomed speeches in the noble docume^ts of
virtue, would speak the privy intention of his heart by diverse secret shows.
Once again, I heartily beseech you to accept rather the inward desire of my
mind toward you, then the excelentnesse of the matter: yet the matter is such
that for the feeding delites of the world, is more delectable, then laudable:
yet not being altogether disagreeinge from the laws of virtue, the matter is
both civil and necessary in the politycall government of man's life: Thus
trustinge upon your usual gentleness, in receiving a small talent from a poor
frinde: impute the want hereof, not in the geauer, but in the quantity of the
gift. And herein to yield such acceptance as my inward affection desires,
and not as the work deserves. God our heavenly father preserve you and yours
in that course and race of true godlynes which you have begone to fulfill, and
accomplish the samein the bright Sun beams of his mercy, unto the end, ()

From Colshill, in the Parish of Amersom, the.iij. day of November: By your
worships to command William Cleauer
Scolemaster.
James Glawcus his Epistle to the Reader, translated out of Latin by William
Cleuer.
IN many ieoperdies and great dangers traueling the greatest part of all
Greece, for that I would not come empty home: but bring some strange show
which was never bard of before: and for that my travel should not be
altogether in vain, I being in Constantinople that glistering renowned City,
in the chief Library thereof I found this History of the Raellya^s, written in
Greek, being so strange, rare and wonderful, as a most precious ornament and
Jewel of renown, I have trafyckted if home into my own cuntrye: of what price
it is among the people I know not: but after my transtating it into Latin, the
universities did embrace it. But having much displeasure of the Greacians, for
that so precious a jewel was brought into commen: I could not think my self
in any saufetye, to return any more among them. For they did esteem this
precious History for no other purpose, but for that the high speculation of
Gods wonderful works should not induce the people to any other belief, then
in that false God, in which they believed. Such is always the wonderful
works of God, that through his providence those things which belong to the
advancement of his glory, are revealed by such means as he has forseene to
bend chefelye to his everlasting renown. (.,)

So good Reader farewell.
A compendious Fable showing the substance of the whole work.
OF the first beginning of the Raellians: their building of their religious
Alsephon: and of their Idloatrie to the Ass of Adamant stone, for the choosing
of a King. Fol. 1. Of Harmannus his Oration, in the behalf of the common
wealth, that it was not necessary the country of the Raellyans to be governed
by a King. fo. 5. How Alectros confuted the same Oration, with most excellent
persuasions to the Elders and common wealth of the Land, for the establishing
of a King. fol. 8. The mischievous confused hurley burley, that was in the holy
Alsephon, after the end of the Orations. fo. 14 The mild, and gentle Oration
of the Determyner, for the appeasinge of the people: with courteous rebuking
them, for their disorder before the Ass of adamant stone. fo. 15. How
peticion was made to the Ass, by the Raellyans: the Ascalon watching the
answer of the Ass, the Devil speaking within the said Ass, showed them
how, and in what sort they should choose a king. fo. 17. The Raellians
choosing a king: fortune favoring Hellepatrus, with happiness to make him a
king: how they could not agree in what sort the king should be crowned: they
making new peticions to the Ass, were commanded by the Ass, to go to
Delphicus Apollo. fo. 19. How the Raellians with the Kings consent, sent
Ambassadors with ritche gifts unto Delphicus Apollo. fo. 20. The crown
Garlande, and the golden Scepter, with the Oracle that they received by the
Ambassadors from Delphicus Apollo. fo. 21 The noble royal Coronation of
Hellepatrus king of the Raellyans: with the triumphant feats of chiualry, and
the kings Oration unto his subjects. fo. 23. How the crown Garlande, and the
Scepter, were hanged up in the holy Alsephon: which was a prognostication of
the fatal destruction of the kingdom of the Raellians. fo. 25. How Hellepatrus
(beginning to tax his subjects:) they conspired treason: confederated with the
King of the Hircans, and banished Hellepatrus from his own country, wife, and
children, fo. 26. Of the miserable death of Hellepatrus his wife and children,
being left behind among the Raellians. fo. 27. How Hellepatrus, with his son
Hellidorus, making their refuge unto the land of the Trebonians, for the space
of six years were richly succored: Hellepatrus opening his griefs unto the
king of the Trebonians, was promised to be restored home again into his
country. fo. 29, The v^age and behavior, of the two Kings, in the time of
their banishment. fo. 30. How the King of the Trebonians, with the most
warlike provision, that ever was hard of, restored Hellepatrus unto his
kingdom. fo. 31 Of the hanging of the two Harrroldes: of the apprehending, and
taking of the King of the Hircans: of his sore and terrible punishment, because
he usurped the kingdom of the Raellians: and lastly, how he was miserably
pricked to death with neadles. fo. 32. Of the establishinge of Hellepatrus
again into his kingdom. fo. 33. Of Hellepatrus quiet security, being given to
idolatry, drunkenness, and lechery in his old age, was poisoned to death by
a harlot. fo. 34 The noble Funeral of Hellepatrus, with the Ascalons Oration
of the mortality of man's life. fo. 36 The burning and strange fire, that was
seen in the Alsephon, with a crying voice the night before his Coronation.
fo. 37. How Hellidorus never laughinge in his life, succeeded his Father
Hellepatrus, in the government of the land of the Raellians: the manner of his
Coronation, with his sharp Oration to his subjects. fo. 38. How Hellidorus
revenged his fathers death. fol. 41. How Hellidorus continuing his idolatry,
there arose a Prophet among the Raellians, which not only cried out against
the present Idolatry, of the king and his subjects: but made an Oration upon
the terrible judgments of the hiest goueruaunce: and how the Prophet: with
the true zeal of virtue, brake their Ass of adamant stone. fo. 43 The cyuile
death and punishment, (...) the King used upon his subjects: for vvithholding
away the deeds and writings which specified how the Land was holden,
which was purchased of their forefathers, from the Assyrians. fo. 44. How
Hellydorus lusting after marriage, with shamful concupiscense, was blinded
with an harlot: with the Kings amorous vvanton Letters, and the harlots
answer again.ib. How the Ascalon railing against the Prophet, with many
perverse persuasions, continued the Kings blindness in idolatry. fol. 49. Of the
death of the Prophet. fo. 50. A persecution through the Land of the Raellians,
for believing the Prophets doctrine. ib. How the Ascalon, with the consent
of a vvitch, conspiring together: did steal away the Garlande and the
Scepter, out of the Alsephon, which being the ^o^titude and magnanimity of
the King, and the kingdom, being now lost: the King was married unto that
harlotte Sebona. fo. 53. The marriage of the King unto Sebona: the Asealons
Oration upon the marriage day, in the praise of the Queen. fo. 54. How King
Hellydorus, in the morning after he had lain with the Queen, looking forth of
his vvindowe, did behold an Ass eat Thystles, according to the old
Prophesies of the Raellyans (never in his life before did laugh) fell now to a
laughter, and was turned to an ass. fol. 56. How the King of the Assyrians,
after King Hellidorus was turned to an ass: did conquer the Land of the
Raellyans: and put Queen Sebona and the Ascalou to death, with pricking them
with neadles. fol. 58. The King of the Assyrians ryding a hunting: in a
thicked of thorns, his hounds vverried Hellidorus the king, being in the
form of an Ass, to death. fo. 59 The words that King Hellidorus spoke being
in the form of an Ass, at the very instaunt of death. fo. 60. Of the noble,
renowned, sumptuous Sepulcher, with the Epigrams, that the Assyrians builded
in the vvyldernesse over the carkase of King Hellidorus. ib.
FINIS.
How the Raellyans began their first estate, and of their great Idolatry to
the Ass of Adamant in the holy Alsephon A sancna or holy place of their
religion.
Alsephon, etc.
Whereas the Raellyans inhabyting in a certain desert ground of the
Assyrians, exiled for their disobedience, and dissent of not puttinge on the
natural laws and civil ordinances of the Scithians, were from their
original and natyue country quite driven out.

For as the Scythians were a plain people, ignorant and altogether unskillful
of the pompous magnyficent constitucions of other princes: so were they wholly
directed in the footesteppes of virtue, after the documentes of nature: they
lived in the most playnest simplicity of this life: they were people that
although of small understanding of the eternal governance, yet their lives
and good manners were not the worst: they had in contempt, the device of
noueltyes: As they began with good order, so they continued, and so they ended.
Their clothing was of beasts skins: their diet of the natural fruits,
which the earth brought forth by course of kind.

Among these Scithians, there were some obstinate and unruly people, and such
which would not put on so hard and strait kind of life: were contented
rather then to endure the same, to become banished men, forlorn of their own
country: and to seek their habitation else where. There was a certain
wilderness called Ramanna, which was a waste ground, uninhabited, belonging to
the Assyrians: with the east, bordering upon Aries: upon the south, Carmanill:
upon the west, the Medes: upon the north, the Hircans. These Raellyans were
contented at the first to become tributaries to the Assyrians, not only to
inhabit that ground: but also to plant the same, with all manner of
fruitful increase. But after good space of time, the Raellyans growing to
great wealth, and secure pleasure of all prosperous felycitie, were able to
traffic provision of marchandyze to all countries round about them: did buy
and freelye purchase the privilege of their country and land of the
Assyrians: which they the rather compassed to bring to pass, for that the
Assyrians repined at their wallowing in wealth, and great happiness which the
Raellyans grew unto: as also because the Assyrians began to extort, and with
cruel vexation to oppress them: practysed the spaedier to avoid such
inconvenience which might ensue.

Their own brittle foundation wayed and considered after their own hearts
desire was established, and all things brought to pass, even as they wished
for: they with one consent and agreement, for the more surer fastening, and
grounding of their estate by the counsel and advise of the chiefest and wysest
men of the Raellyans: gathered together with one agreement, to choose a King:
thinking thereby their governance, not only to become civil: but also their
estate better and happyer, and that their country should the rather he
dreaded. And also that they all throwing themselves under the obedience, and
scepter of one man, should become one: whereas every man's opinion bearing
swaye, there was many factions, treasons, conspiraries, which did ensue: one
envying another estate, within them selves.

Therefore as they thought best, to reduce this their popular estate, in one
vnifourme governance: through which determination, great grudging arose, most
part of them, thought it unnecessary to throw their necks under the
governance of one man: and the rather for that before their forefathers had
refused their obedience unto the Scithians, a people of their own flesh, and
blood: And also for that they were called Raellyans, which name came of their
banishment: which if now they should prostrate them selves to a King, might
well again be called Scithians, after their old name, and country, from
whence their offspring issued. And so in continuance of time, the Assyrians
posterity would pretend a title to their governance, and this their estate
should be come very dangerous. Whereas now every man is ready to defend his
own estate, and every man's particular condition of life, is general to all
the whole country. And he that enuyeth either the estate of the country, or
the prosperity of his neighbor, is a plain enemy unto him self, and his
own famylie. This has been heretofore the governance, and therefore seeing
we prospere and florishe, that all countries round about us reverence us,
fear us, and crave help at our hands: why should we so greatly abandone our
great liberty, which has been deryued, from the stout magnanimity of our
forefathers, to be cowardly lost in us their posterity, and children?

These and such like persuasions were in the hearts of the common people of the
Raellyans: Notwithstanding the prudent elders of the country, would not
desist their opinion: but that their country, could not be saufegarded by
any better means, then by electing and chosing of a King.

Now whereas the Scithians having in their countreye, as a most precious
jewel, an Ass of Adamant stone, sumptuously portrayed with gold, and
precious orna(...)es, for adorning and setting forth of the same: These
Raellyans when they first departing from their own country of Scithia, did
steal this Ass of Adamant stone from the Scithians, and transported the same,
into the wyldernes of Ramasa: where nighe adjoining unto a fountain called
Rempollos, in the said wilderness, they builded in the manner of a holy
Sanctuary, a place called Alsephon, which was as much to say in their
language, a place of liberty: In this religious place of liberty, called
Alsephon, they put this Ass of Adamant stone, and by practice they coniured a
lying spirit, within the said Ass, through the event and success, whether
it were good or bad, of any thing that was revealed unto them by this Ass of
Adamant stone, they would obey, and hold it for truth.

This strife between the commen people and the prudent elders of the Land,
for the electing and choosing of a King, for that it could not be otherwise
described: should be ended in the holy Alsephon before this Ass: whereas a
great gathering together was m^de of the wysest people, and best places of the
Land, to yield their voices or consent, for the choosing of a King.

This controversy growing to such a wound, which festered more sharper in
their hearts, then the languishing disease Lossorna does in the joints and
parts of man: yet notwithstanding, such was the reverent fear, and blind
heathnish estimation, both for that custom which ouercasteth and shaddoweth
all things, had forgotten the very beginning of this Ass, held the same in
the worship of a God, the whole multitude durst not but wholly give consent,
both for fear and love: which wholly as this relygious Image revealed the
substance of the cause, so to be content, to establishe their estate.

For as they feared this Image, in respect of the diverse plagues, and
mischiefs that might fall upon their estate and country: even so, for the pure
zeal and blind love of vain worship, not one of them would fall away, or
once wring aside in that duty, that they thought might be done to so holy and
reverent an Image: for health, sickness, riches, poverty, all manner of
earthly increase: yea the renown of their country (as they believed begun)
continued, and ended through this Image.

Wherefore this devise was provided, that all the people, which although they
were of two several opinions in mind: notwithstanding, they should be
gathered all in one, in this holy Alsephon. Where before this holy Image the
Ass, this wounded controversy should be cured: and as herein they were all
content, so the two sorts of people did choose two several Orators, to decyde
their two several causes: the one how that it was necessary, that the land
should be governed by a King: so the others opinion was, that their estate was
now happiest, and therefore most unnecessary to have a King: The common sort
of people did those an excellent Orator, one Harmannus, that should set down
the opinion of the common people: and the prudent Senators did choose for their
Orator, one Alectros: As these causes and opinions were very skylfully handled,
so was the controversy left before the Image, by the Determyner of the holy
Alsephon to be ended.

The oration of Harmannus the Orator, in the behalf of the common people, for
that they would not have a governor.
IMaye not flatter or fable in this holy religious Alsephon, for that this
Image of all blessedness and renown, in the ears, eyes, and hearts of all
the people this day, will reveal the sincere as^eueration of a faithful
Orator, as well for that it stands upon the commodity of a common wealth:
as also for that I speak before this holy Image, in whom only consists
the power and dominion of reuengement, or reward of virtuous demerites, which
if for hier or wages: for praise, or singular estimation, I should exalt
either my self, or the cause, then no doubt I look for ever to be plagued
with the pestiferous plagues that is due to a flatterer, or such a one that
respects his own gains. But if the sincerity of righteous virtue do
witness a good heart, and a holy intention to all goodness: the profit of a
common wealth: the continuance of the old manners of our fathers: the cutting
of, of sects or opinions: the healing of soars: the curing of diseases: the
enriching of my country: the quieting of the people: the bynding of charity:
the protection and defense of good order: and the stopping of the mouths of
evil enemies. Then also not only this holy Image will behold the
innocence of my heart: but the people, whose fervent zeal this day have
chosen me, to be an Orator in their defense (as unworthy of the same) will
give out their showte and cry of consent. Our realm and country was first
begun of the Scithians blood: which although fleshlye nature did join them
to be of natural consanguinitie: yet in manners there was great difference.
For as the Scithians were barbarous, and lived in a sauadge and rude manner of
life, plaging their carkases', both outwardly and inwardly: Our fathers being
of hautie and noble stomachs, having a wonderful and high speculation in the
gifts of nature: so they would not tear their flesh, and pyne their
bellyes, which should be honored. And therevppon it came to pass, that our
fathers refusing their obedience, were banished: and for a monument of renown,
transported this holy Image which has directed and taught them, in all
honorable nobilities, and reverent adorations, unto this day. In this holy
Alsephon, has all good virtues beeneset forth, and taught unto our elders, and
left unto us: why should we thus fall at variaunce then within our selves
for a King?

What shall other bordering countreies here about us report? Some of them will
say that we cannot agree within our selves. And is it not commonly seen,
that kingdoms which is divided within it self, does soonest decaie, and
fall to destruction: and the concord of the people, is the best defense of a
country, and the happiest governance of a common wealth? Our fathers have
brought us to this happy inheritance: why shall we now seek our own woe,
to correct our fathers actions? What shall other countreies say? behold
this kingdom how it alters from the beginning of their fathers: Oh unhappy
children, the cursednesse of your estate, has deserved some great plague from
the first beginning, and now shall be revealed in this generation.

If we have a king, our goods and our possessions are not our own, we shall
be oppressed with taxes as our forefathers were unto the Assirians: If our
forefathers could have endured obedience, why would they have refused their
own kindred and country, the Scithians? why did they ransom their tribute
which they paid unto the Assirians, unto their great charges, not being
grown to the third part of the wealth, as we now ares but because they
would freely at their own liberty enjoy their own goods without
controlement, and make us their heirs freemen?

I pray you, prudent Senators of the Raellyans, hea^ken unto me which speak
before this Image? can there be now an alteration of this our estate? but that
diverse sundry vexations will lurk, and secreetelye lie hid in the hearts of
the people? Do you not know how hard and strange a thing it is to remove
old and ancient customs? Do you not see, the people, through this little
strife, are ready to hold up the sword one against another? which if this
your enterprise do ensue, presently look for utter destruction, in short time
after to follow. It is hard to grafte a wild thistle in a Rosemarie stock:
it is a more harder matter to plant the weak branches of the nettles, in the
high fyrre trees of this wilderness: The growthe of many years has
strengthened the fyrre tree, as the sweet heat of summer has caused the
stinging blossoms of the nettles gallantly to show forth their friseled
faces: so the cold winter has quite withered the same away again. Let us
remember what pleasure the Hircans, the Trebonians, obtained through their
renown they got in living at their ownely bertie? and what mischief and
destruction they fell unto, when as they gave consent to thrust their necks
under the yoke of obedience to be ruled: whereas before, every man did rule at
his own pleasure: This their unhappy estate of life, may make your estate of
life happy: if they in not taking head, may cause you to take heed: If they in
falling to destruction, may cause you to win renown: and keep it. Then
think and persuade with your selves, it is far better to live in the
pleasure of free men to be rulars, then to fall to destruction by slavish
bondage to be ruled.

This, oh holy Image, witness that I have spoken nothing but that which my
heart witnesses to be true, and the sincerity of an unfeigned mind can never
but persist in the same: this (I hope) you all are fully persuaded in the
strength of this my Oration.

Here ends Harmannus his Oration.
How Alectros, the Orator for the Elders, confuteth Harmannus his Oration, and
what persuasions he uses for the establishing of a King.
THe skilfullest cunning that lewd Orators use with fair words, and most
solemn protestations to draw the ears of men to hear them, and the eyes of
men to behold them, and the minds of the people to think upon their nyce
ballauncing speech: as this holy Alsephon being a place of Religion,
subverted thorovve flattering Orators, to be a place of impudent behavior,
through which it is manifest, that orations of renown are turned to shame and
rebuk of An^ vvheras before this Image of all blessedness, which now sounds
both in the ears and hearts of the people, shall be revealed the unhappy
^nrsednesse of a faithless Orator, which both neglects the commodity of a
common wealth, and country: and also his bold desperate careless mind,
daring to incur into the dominion and power of revenge, before this holy
Image, which neither for hyer or wages, for praise or singular estimation,
will reward shameless demerites: It is to be seen before this holy
convocation, that he which boasts either his own wickedness, or
maintains the malicious naughtiness of so vile a cause: I vvishe and desire
that according to des^rtes he may be plagued with the pestiferous plagues
that is due to such a flatterer, or such a one that respects both his own
gain, and the breach of the knot of concord. For surely the sincerity of
righteous virtue will never witness otherwise: but a corrupt heart, and an
unsavory m^nde, a peruer e intention to all impiety, the undoing of a common
wealth, the depranation of the ancient meaninges and manners of our
forefathers: the tying and knitting together of sects and opinions: the
vvouuding of the whole: the breeding of diseases: the impouerishing of the
countreie: the disquieting of the people: the dispersing of charity: the
subversion of good orders: the opening the mouths of evil enemies: then no
doubt this holy Image will behold the corrupt wickedness of his heart.
But the people whose foolish zeal this day have chosen a golden sheathe for
a vvodden knife: a levvd^ Orator in so cauilling a cause most fit: If his
boldness be brasened, and countenance hardened, and their hearts putrified
with stynking stomachs, let them give out their shoute and cry of one
consent: In deed our realm and countreie took their beginning of the
Scithians blood, in which it is most true that fleshly nature, and natural
consanguinitie did allie our forefathers: but in manners our forefathers were
feared, both for their courage and contenaunce: our forefathers vvoulds not
suffer the pinching penury of the Scithians, for that they had a further sight
in the gifts of nature: which was not in respect they refused their
obedience, until such time as the Scithians desired to live rather like
slaves, then to plant their landa, and in putting their countreie to be
fertile with all excellent increase: they being denied of this liberty, of
planting, setting, and in using the commodity of the earth, refused both their
obedience and countreie:

For a monument of great fame, as the Chronicles of our countreie report: the
Scithians did give this holy Image unto our fathers, in remembraunee that they
were once inhabiters of that land: and as some other vvrytors of our
monumentes do say: the Scythians did give this Ass unto our fathers: for
that they should the vvyllinger depart: But do you not know what the
Prophecy of the old Prophet Raellon, which in keeping his Goats in the
vvyldernesse, was wont to sing:

The Prophecy.
Our fathers came from Scithian land,
who on an Ass did ride:
That Ass does prove to be a God,
our noble King discyde.
But when this Ass on thystles feed,
then shall this land in woeful care:
Have want, and wretched need.
IF I do not think this Image able to do every thing, so I should profane
this blessed Image to speak the contrary: but by the vvays to declare the
Shepheardes Prophecy: for this holy Image does know both what has come to
pass, and what shall come to pass: This Prophecy does declare that our
fathers vvoulde that in time, we should have a king: and where it is said,
that an Ass should feed on grass, which is nothing but the possibility
of this Image able to do all things: Yea, able to come from the holy place
Alsephon: not only to destroy this wicked Orator, but also the whole
countreie of the Raellyans. As all things are possible with this holy Image,
so nothing is impossible: we must therefore needs think of great plagues to
be powered upon us, if we do notobeye the voice of this reverent Image,
which has yielded all honorable renown unto our fathers: And therefore it
is our parts to give due adoration thereunto: But it is no marvel that we
thussall at variance within our selves, since that such greedy Cratours do
blow in the ears of the con mon people, both for their own gains, and also
for the raising of tumultes: we may have just occasion to surmise that such
prattling Orators do practice for their own gain, with the confines and
borders round about us: or else to set us one against another, at civil
dissentions: that the wide gappe of mischeuous rebellion may be opened. For
these busy practisers, are deriders and disturbers of kingdoms, and commonweals: to the end, the same might approach to destruction for their own pray:
such is their crafty policy, to pretend a concord to the people, for a
defense of their country: when as altogether they would be contented, that by
such wily sack and siege, to deliver them up to be ra^sa^ked of their lives,
goods, and Country. Our fathers indeed, brought us to this happy
inheritance, but how unhappy would it fall out to their children, if such
unhappy fellows, and lewd Orators, which are the refuse of the people, dare
presume to correct the golden counsel of the wysest of this Realm, gathered
together this day? the one seeking and caring for the wealth of this Realm:
and the other the woeful estate, that either they would continue us in: or
else lead us unto? which although our fathers never before were governed under
a King, is there good reason that we should now be abridged of a kingly
government? As who should sa^e, that every age by succession, is not to be
governed according to the manners of men: Our fathers were but the first
founders of this land, they contented them selves with modesty and patient
contentation: although in their inst quarrel, full of courage, yet other ways
very quiet, and contented: for because they were but strangers, until they
were grown into acquaintance: neither was their land so populous then, as it
is now. And for that we would place and settle our land under a King, is
not to correct our fathers noble actions: but to ratify and confirm them to
become more stronger, and more noble: For had they lived until this day, they
would have done the same. Shall we respect what other countreies do say? for
this establishing of our countreie, in an uniform order, causes them to quake
for fear, least we should increase the confines, borders, and bounds of our
land: In deed, if we should headlong hurl our selves into mischief, in
continuing without a King, in that they might invade our land, our
unhappiness vvoulde make them happy: and our curs^dnesse would cause them to
become blessed: And then secreete spite which has lurked in their stomachs
from the beginning, in envying our prosperous felycitie should deserve, and
offer just occasion to be revenged, to be plagued by them outwardly. If we
have a King, we shall be the happyer assured of our own goods and
possessions: if thorovve injurious vvrong we be oppressed, to whom shall
we make our refuge for redresser or reformation, but only unto the King: if
the King do exact or tax us as our forefathers were, with the Assyrians: we
shall be comforted of the King, with the like hope, of assurance as our
forefathers were of the Assyrians: for as the Assyrians stood bound by
faithful oathe, to defend the tributarie people the Raellyans: So shall the
King in like sort stand bound by outward recognisaunce of oathe, to defend
and maintain us his subjects, and countreie: Our fathers never refused
obedience, for that they came from these own countreie, was for just cause,
in that they would occupy both their bodies and minds, which the Scithians
were never geu^ unto, in setting and planting, the fruits and increase of the
earth: and the Scithians were the poorer, and lived in more slauishe life: for
that they would not plant their countreies with fruits, and exercise their
people with uses and occupations: So the Assyrians perceauing the gentle manners
and good usage of our forefathers, their great pollicte they had to enriche
their land by setting and planting:

And also perceauing how that they began to storishe in worldly wealth, did
offer the free purchase of their countreie, which they did inhabit, and to
ransom their tribute: Which although they were not grown to so full a
wealth, as we are, so was their people fewer: and therefore in all respects
of lesser chardge, and according to the measure of quantity: comparing their
little chardge, and little wealth, to our great chardge, and great wealth:
they might more sauf^lie live at liberty, to enjoy their own: then we are
able, with the best policy, and warlike provision to defend our own. For as
nothing is more in hazard then wealth: so nothing is more feared then wealth:
for as the poor countreies do envy us, so vvoulde they never seek to
conquer us, but for our wealth.

And again, for that they perceiving our florishinge estate of riches, how
do, they fear us? Our fathers did leave us a free possessions: not that we
should diminishe the the same: but with a famous nobility, and honorable
renown increase it.

O you prudent Senators of the Raellyans hearken unto me: which also
vnfay^edlie, and purelie speak before this Image: shall not the alteration of
this our estate turn to the best, both for that our countreie shall be
saufegarded: good laws and constitutions published: our goods preserved: the
people quieted: and reduced to civil subjection? If that envious vexations do
lurk and lie hyd in the hearts of the people? there is no better way to
vnroote old customs, and plant good orders, (such as are agreeing with the
old opinions of our forefathers, particular and necessary to our common
wealth: and so as necessary to endure continually:) then civil authority. It
is not unknown, but that old and ancient custom, being never so strange to
remove, by civil governance it takes place: And where through little strife,
the people are ready to hold up the sword, one against another: their
authority must be made the stranger, and more forceable to endure. I doubt
not but that this happy estate shall both presently and prosperously ensue to
renown: and such as are enemies hereunto, shall utterly in short time be
destroyed: and our estate and common wealth, shall for long time be preserved.
Indeed, the wild thistle for that it choaketh good corn, is to be cut down:
but the Rosemary stock is to be preserved as necessary and wholesome: The
weak stinking nettles are to be cut down: but the fir trees of the
wilderness are to be preserved for a common wealth. If we call to remembrance
the woeful pleasure (as Harmannus wylleth us) of the Hircans and Trebonians,
the miserable penury they brought unto their land, in living at their own
liberty, and myschiefe and destruction: their froward awkarde stomachs did
work in them: for their civil vvarres and horrible dissentions that they
were subject unto, when as they fell at discord with their King? as also such
was their malice, that one of them became odious unto another. Indeed it is
truly spoken, that their unhappy estate of life, may make our estate of life
happy: for if the remembrance of their rebellions, work in our hearts obedience
and duty: if their ignorance, work in us knowledge: if they for disobeying,
and rebelling against their King, came to ruin: let us with obeying,
duetifullie acknowledge our Sovereignty, and may be long and evermore made
happy and prosperous subjects, to win renown and keep it: For in having a
King, degrees of men are known: every man is preserved in his own estate:
the whole land chiefly maintained in a most prosperous safegarde: This you
may well perceive it is far better to have a king to be ruled, then to live
at liberty, one man to destroy another.

This O sanctified Image, witness, even with thy divine strength, and
maiesticall power, that whether Harmannus, or Alectros have spoken either
flatteringlie, for their own private gain and praise, or against thy renown,
or the renown of this land and countreie: presently to be struck with such
infernal plagues, as continues, and rests in thy holiness to strike such
horrible malefactors.

Here ends Alectros his Oration.
Of the great discention and h^rlie burly, that fell among the people in the
holy Alsephon.
PResently after the end of these Orations, there grew such dissension in the
holy Alsephon: on both sides, parts were taken: so that not one man, that was
in the holy Alsephon, could assure himself, to go away with the hope of his
own life. There was for the space of two hours, such a showte, with roaring
and miserable crying of the people: rending their clothes, scratchinge their
skins, pulling their heayrre from their headdes, that the like was never
heard before.

So that the prudent Elders of the land, had verily thought, that present
destruction, and wastfull subversion of their country, had in that woofull
instant run upon them. In the midst of this hurlye, burlye, such was their
desperate perylous mischief: that one Rosmonna, a vyllanous Ruffyan, did run
very vehemently with an edgde tool, in careless manner, purposing to kill
Alectros the Orator: and with the exceeding thrust and strife that was among
them, the holy Image was thrown down: Whereat they being all amassed, kept
silence^, and reuerentlye kneeled down, and with great tears acknowledged
their boldness, and shameless disorder: in that they durst enterprise such
vnreuerent practices before this holy Image: forthwith the Image with the
force of the lying spyrite that was within, was erected and set up again of it
self.

In the end of this controversy, judgment was given by the consent of the
people, that Rosmonna should be hanged. And as touching their controversy,
for that the people were divided, they would for the present time, refer the
arbiterment thereof unto the Determyner of the holy Alsephon: And presently
after, that they with one consent had executed Rosmonna to death, came to hear
the full end, and fynal determynation of this controversy: for they were al
weryed with irksomeness of civil cry and showte of the people with, the
clamorous noise, murmuringes, grudginges, that one of them had against another:
which moved them the rather, and wyllinger to make an end, fearing least their
country would draw to civil wars, and so in the end come to desolation.

The Determyners Oration, for the appeasing of the people.
MY friends and country men: I am sorry, and the inward grief of my heart
plungeth sorrowful tears in mine eyes: First to see you my country men,
friends, and neighbors, to fall at such variance, to hazard your selves and
your goods, in such a matter: about which you need not so much to trouble
your heads, or yet your raginge wits to be discovered, by such grievous.
agonies: whether it be necessary, or unnecessary, this land to be governed
by a King, perceiving the miserable mischief already kindled with the whoate
fyrebrandes of mallyce, in the hearts of the people.

I would rather with wholesome water of good counsel, squenche the same: then
to put the dry sticks of the wilderness to increase it, or the gunpowder of
the Assyrians to cause it more raginglie to flame out.

I humbly beseech you my good country men, to quiet your hearts, and pacify
the grief of your minds: I am sorry that it should be thought, yea, to have
much more so just occasion to speak, that the Raellyans are of such rude
conversation, and lewd behavior: Yea, before this blessed Image so
irreverently, and ryotouslie to behave them selves. If you would not abstain
for your own sakes, for your fathers sakes, or for wisdom sake, which
aboundauntly is grafted with in your noble stomachs: I say, if none of these
things can restrain you: then look up and behold this holy Image, which
has power in one hour, yea, in one moment, to stryke you to death and
destruction: Repent this your vnreuerent careless wickedness: call to
remembrance this Image, which with my consent, shall determine this
controversy: For that it has guided our fathers from the land of Scithia,
and has seen all the actions, deeds, monuments, purchases and determinatio^s
of all those things that have been done, or thought to be done, from the
Reellya^s first beginning until this present day: This Image therefore
knows what is most profitable and necessary for this our country and common
wealth: And as I could reveal the inward affection of my heart: so I will
suspende my judgment, until this Image has pronounced a iudicyall
determination of the same.

Repent good countrymen: repent, be sorye: and no doubt but that this Image,
will both hear and behold you, in the instaunt of his blessed opportunity:
ease your sighs: address your calamities: pacify your dislentions: quiet
your country: send health to your boddies: with comfort stop your eyes, from
those miserable tears that does bleare you with fundrie myseries. This my
countrymen, I hope you be all prefixed in this blessed purpose of quietness,
and to have your cause fully ended and finished, by the mouth of this holy
Image.

Here ends the Determyners Oration.
How the Ascalon of the Alsephon did require an answer from the Image,
whether they should have a King, or no.
AFter the Determyner had ended this mylde and courteous Oration: the people
were not only persuaded unto quiet repentannce, and sorrowful compunction:
but the determination was made, and they all wholly agreede unto the same: The
Ascalon which was the Sacryficer should watch the good leisure of the
blessed answer of the the Image. For he that was always, the Ascalon of the
holy Alsephon it belonged unto his office, not only to watch over the people,
for to espy their fervent zeal toward this Image, but also it was not
lawful for any man to speak unto this blessed Image in any suit, but first
he should come and pay the thirdes of al his increase unto the Ascalon of
which he had taken commodity of a monthe before. And than the Ascalon should
be a mediator for him and utter his cause. And as answer was received, so
answer was made again. And herein, both for appeasinge the wrath and
displeasure of the Image for the former contencion, as also for the stirringe
forward of the Ascalon to be zealous in their cause, they gave of the best of
all their increase, to be sacrificed before the Image: And the Ascalons fees
and duty was doubled: when they had all departed, leaving the holy Ascalon
with his officers in the holy Al^ephon, making humble peticions before this
blessed Image: About the twelfth hour of the night, the Image began
vehemently to roar: thunders, lyghtding^, rain, wyndes, earthquakes, with
many other strange tempests: the like before that instaunt, did never so fore
trouble the land of the Raellyans. The holy Lamp that did daily burn in the
Temple went out, the Alsephon was darkened, the people brought into most
sorrowful calamity, and wretched mysery, thorowout the land: through which
trembling fear, many dyed: hayle stones did drive the Tents of the land to
much ^uyne. After these sore troubles, the Elders of the land proclaimed a
fast, thorowout the country, for the space of twenty days. After the end
of the fast, and sacrificiall idolatries: the holy Ascalon all this time
waiting the good leisure of the Image, at the length, received an answer:
which although it might seem a very delectable answer to^ the Ascalon and the
people, for that the The Deuyls practice first t^ deceive with Idolat^ie wa^ch
hides th world ^t virtue, smellin^ on all vousnesse.
lying spyrite in the Image did deceive them with many idolatries: so would not
leave of, until they were brought to utter subversion: the Image speaking in a
chaungeable voice, sometimes high, sometimes low, sometimes whorse, sometimes
shyrle, after this manner.

This countreie must enjoy a King,
and orders straight they must obey:
Take heed the thistle do not sting,
to work your woeful just decay.
Your fathers came from Scithian land,
this fruitful field for to possess:
They brought a poison in their hand,
one shall destroy both more and less.
When your King shall laugh and smyle, This the poy(...) of Idol(...) tri^
th(...) shall sub(...) u^et th(...) land.

to see an Ass on thistles feed:
Then look for spoil within a while,
to bring your land to wretched need.
The strongest Bull the kingdom win,
Good hap with all the thread shall spin,
Let forty men their Bulls bring in.
The Bull that first in fight does slay,
This land, his master shall obey.
With Scepter sure this kindome take,
For thee thy heir right kings I make.
In the morning very early, all the prudent Elders, with the commons of the
land resorted to this holy Alsephon: some came to make supplycations to this
Image, for the cruel tempests that was the same night before, some came to
hear of the news, which the revelation of the holy Image (as touching their
King) had set forth: and some came for very envy they had against this new
order of choosinge a King, to raise tumultes and mischeuous sedition. But when
the holy Ascalon had read before the people, what the Image had pronounced:
they were then al quiet. Some were quieted for joy, that their purpose was at
an end: some were quieted for sorrow, for that they durst not speak against
the Image. This determination for choosing of a King, was a perfect final end.

HOW THE KING was chosen by the consent of the whole Realm, as well the Elders
as the commons.
THese great troubles being appeased, and quietness established: the prudent
Elders laying their heads together, for the present choosing of their King used
many ways: yet in the end, they agreed and fully consented in one opinion, as
the holy Image had revealed: which for that it was an impossible thing that
every man's Bull should be brought: they were therefore all generally settled in
this one mind according as the Image had uttered: that forty of the
Auncientes of the inhabitours, whose fathers first entered the land, and were
the first founders of their fruits and pleasures which they did enjoy, should
bring his Bull. When they had builded a goodly theatree for the bulls to fight
in, and every man had clodded his Bull with a harness of brass, with long
pikes of pron sticking forth at every place of the said Bulls, nothing was
covered save their horns, mouths and legs, which were at free lybertye: One
Hellepatrus a rich Gentleman of that Country, put unto his Bull between the
skin and the Harness a number of little sharp short needles fastened unto the
inward parts of the Harness: the Bull being both courageous, fierce and
lustye, and also vehemently pricked forwards with the bitter grief of these
needles, came upon the Theater with such admyrable force, that the said Bull
presentlye killed six other Bulls, in the presence of all the Elders of the
Land. Incontinent all the aforesaid Elders made low reverence unto
Hellepatrus, and saluted him King. And as he gave great thanks unto them all:
so with great singing, and playing of sweet Instruments, with all royal pomp
they went to the holy Alsephon to render thanks to the blessed Image. When all
the Elders of the Land. with the consent of the Commons had strengthened the
authorytie of his kingdom: some for fear, and some for lone: then the day of
Coronation was appointed with great provision, and assemblye of people: with
such magnificent and royal pomp as the like was never hard in any kingdom
before: such provision of wines: such store of imbroydered costly garments:
such store of oils: such store of kids: with dates, orenges, pumgranets, yea
that cost could not be thought but provision was made for it. But yet there
rested an other ambiguitie The strife for their Coronatio^ was the eternal
providence.
which cumbersomly did hang in ye minds both of the King, the Elders and the
commons of the land: which was, with what Crown the King should be crowned:
Some said a Crown of Gold: some said of Silver: some said of Brass: some
of Iron: some other said a Crown of Adamant stone imbroydered with Gold: for
Ada mant stone was thought to be ye most precious ornament that their Land was
furnished withal. This doubt increasing greater and greater with what Crown
the King should be crowned withal: they went into the holy Alsephon, where
petition was made unto the Ascalon, to entreat, and make supplycation unto the
holy Image: Both with what scepter the King should be souerainted and with
what crown crowned. The Ascalon made vehement peticion unto the Image for the
space of four nights, and could receive no other answer but this: Let them go,
To Delphicus Apollo.


The Ascalons Declaration unto the Elders concerning the answer of the Image.
After this answer was pronounced, the Ascalon declared unto the elders: that
there was some great secret counsel which lay hid unto the holy Image: for that
he could receive no other answer, but commanded to go, to Delphicus Appollo:
Then the King, and the prudent elders of the land took great consultation of
the matter, and chose two wise learned Imbassadours, with a great garrison of
men to assyst them unto Phocides: where they should ask counsel of the
Oracle. After these two Imbassadours were furnished forwards with speedy
appointment for their return: they coming to Phocides, after some pause had,
with as much expedition as belonged to such a hasty business, they laid down
beneth the foot of the hill Parnassus their gifts and fat of the earth, to be
carried up to the Temple of Appollo, being sent from the King and Elders of the
Raellians, they pitching their pauilion between the fair clear fountain
Helicon, and the hill Parnassus.

The Oracle.
What wallowing wealth have we to yield again?
what pearls or precious gold?
Our skill your hononrs high shall main:
our bliss if we unfold.
At first great grace reveal
in us, some hope behind,
In this your common weal:
your seed great want shall find.
An Ass portraied in stone,
shall reap your kingly state:
With scepter strong shall he behold,
your hapand cruel fate.
When as this Ass does croppe,
the thist'es sharp and keen:
Then falls down the sturdie proppe,
and with had neaer been.
A Garlande gaie on thistles sharp,
on which your fate shall lie:
Which shall be green and nouer warpe,
for moiste or yet for dry.
When that your sober King,
that laughter never had:
Shall give him self to laugh and sing,
which erst before was sad.
Then Venus shows her colloured fac(...)
h^^ fate can not he escape:
Then oak behold a king to day,
tomorro we an^ Ass in shape.
In holy Alsephon hang up this garland gay,
For it shall flourish with gallant green,
until your fatal day.
After the Oracle was finished, the Ambassadors departed to refreshe them
selves, within Hellicon: but on the A costly Palace was ^^ylded over Hellycon,
to lodge strangers.
morrow, they approached near the hill Parnassus, unto the temple Apollo:
where the Oracle commanded them to retire unto the fountain Castatius, where
a Nymphe did deliver into the Ambassadors bands, the Garlande of thistles,
and the Scepter, on which the Ass was portrayed: And forthwith they returned
home, into their own country.

This their speedy journey being at an end, the King not only received at
their hands, the Oracles voice: but also the Garlande, and the Scepter: with
rendering great thanks for their kindness, and richly rewarding them
otherwise.

Notwithstanding, both the Oracle, the Garlande, and also the Scepter, did sore
amaze the king, and Elders of the land: Insomuche that the Elders reopented
that ever they had chosen a king: and the king him self repented that hoe had
taken the government upon him.

Yet for that they had intricated them selves so deep in the matter, they
would not reuoulte, but proceeded in the seriousness of their purpose: and
appointed day of the Coronation. Upon which day he did assure his faith to
his subjects, and his subjects likewise to him.

The coronation of Hellepatrus King of the Raellians in the holy Alsephon.
WHen the day of Coronation was come, the sumptuous stagies were set up: And
with all noble renown the fame of the Theater most costly hanged for the
provision of such a sumptuous and statly assembly. The fowntaine that ran by
the holy Alsephon was for that space converted to run with clear and sweet
wine: such singinge of ditties: such Orations were made in the praise of the
king, such minstrelsye upon shawmes, fluts and Timbrels, that the like
triumphs was never hard or seen before among the Raellyans.

Such feasting and banqueting, that for fine delicatnesse thereof: I can make
no comparison: except among the Alerandrians, in whom all the sweet daintyes
of the world are flowyng: There was carried over the King a Canapy of
imbroidered wrought gold (it is a stately tale to tell) for that present day,
there was never before in any nation, the like famous roialtie comparable to
the Raellyans. The King with all the aforesaid royalty marched toward the
holy Alsephon: which when the King had taken his place, in the presence of all
the Elders and Commons of the Land, began to speak after this manner.

The Kings Oration.
MOst dear Elders and loving subjects of this Country and Land: in whom I
find the faith of subjects: the truth of men, and the love of virtue: which
not only was approved by your generallvoices in choosing me your King: but
also your petitions to this holy Image and Lady Fortune: that I should glister
and brightly shine in their eyes, that of so many excellent personages, co^^ly
courtly ciuilians endued with all the virtues and gifts of honor, by her well
lyking (in me) as in one out of time to be brought to bear the Scepter of this
Kingdom. And although many suppose. I am brought to great joy, and lifted up
to many fold renown, yet many sorrows and cares do approach more nearer me
then all the world does see: A King must not only be careful for his own
estate, but also of his people and country: If the one miscary, the other
cannot do well. The glory of the one is the renown of the other: if the
people be disobedient and unruly, and that neither the fear of this holy
Image, or the authority of their King, or the obedience that is incident in
them selves: how many sicknesses and diseases, does weaken and infeable a
King, even unto death: A King is incombred with the whole governance and
charge of the common wealth, not only for their saufegarde, but also for their
wealth, profit and commodytie, their sorrow is my sicknesses: in me and in
my person, is the whole land and countreie: if I be the mark that every
countreie and nation, or hateful enemy shoots at: how can I think my
self in any happy saufetie? or that I am exalted to such renown, as the
whole land speaks of? As I would be loathe to forsake and leave of, the
good w^ll that Lady Fortune-hath bestowed upon me, so if I may be
discharged and unburdened of this great and weighty charge, which both by
this holy Image: the Elders, and commons of the land: I am brought unto: so I
should have thought my private estate of life to be more saufe.

But seeing it is thus come to pass, and Renown respects not peryls.
that I perceive great wyllingnesse and forewarde zeal, to further the
success hereof: with the like obedience, that both presentlye remains in
you: and (so as the best is always to be thought) like to continue: which as
you do make me your King and governor, and strengthen me with all the
right, title, state and intrest, that is in you: So I beseech you continue
good subjects, do not offer no just occasion that through rigorus justice, I
should alter your obedient opinions, (conceived of me:) For as a King ought to
be a seely lamb, in righteous judgment toward his good people: so he ought to
be a Lion in executinge of justice toward his wicked people: (especially)
when occasion is offered. Although we have received some sharp news, from
Delphicus Appollo, yet I hope all things shall turn to the best: which the
rather will come to pass, through your obedience and duty toward me, in my
administration of rightuous government toward you: I am that King, that this
day most dearly does love his subjects. I beseech, you once again (for no
occasion of my mislykinge toward you) you are the people, of whom I presume
and boldly say, that at this instant, do love me your king: I trust such will
be your, usage and reverent care, that I shall have no occasion offered me to
hate you. I therefore in you, and you in me, are many dispersed members at this
present day of Coronation, knit in one body: If one little sinew of this body
do break, a great infraction is like to ensewe: much more if one joint do
break, the whole body will become decrepite, and lain: such is the knitting
of this body, that if only (...) be rotten, many members are put in hazard
to putrefaction: good subjects therefore let us knit our selves at this day:
that we, our countreie, and goods, may be preserved, our renown well spoken
of: other countreies put in dread of our love and quietness.

Here ends the Kings Oration.
Here shows how the King was sworn unto the Commens, and passed forth the
day of his Coronation, with many pleasures.
AFter the end of this Coronation, the Elders of the Land, did eracte an
oathe of the King: and they cried with a loud voice: Holy Image defend our king.

First they propowned that he should defend the honor of the holy Image
virtuously, and should govern righteously: that neither for favor of the
one, or hatred to the other, he should deny justice: neither by strength power
or aucthority, should extort of them: but with equity to mayntaine and uphold
the Scepter of his kingdom: And lastly, to defend them, from the invasion of
foreign enemies.

This his chardge being at an end: the people showted with loud voice, and
the Trumpets blew, with other instruments ordained for that day and purpose:
Now lastly, setting the Crown upon the Kings head, four several times, one
after another, but in the end they left ye Crown remaining upon the kings
head, still until night. Now after ye fynal end of all these triumphs and
renowned plesures: the king arose, with all the Elders, and departed for ye
present, unto a sumptuous banquet, provided for the day of Coronation: In the
end whereof, the king with the Elders went unto the Theater, where they did
see the young men of all the Realm, show Royal actiuity of many and sundry
Marshall feats of Arms: thus the day being almost spent, and night drawing
on, returned to the holy Alsephon: where they hanged the Garland of Thystles,
which was the kings Crown: and in like manner delivered up the Scepter, and
thanks being rendered unto the holy Image, departed.

Here is showed how the King fell at discord with his subjects: his subjects
confederated with the King of the Hircans, to invade their land: Hellepatrus
the king of the Raellyans, was banished, and restored unto his kingdom by the
King of the Trebonians: with the miserable death that the King of the
Trebonyans was executed to.
AFter this, the king being established It is the greatest policy that may be,
to bridle affection in the governance of a kingdom.
in his kingdom, and confirmed king of of the Raellyans, with all the
assurance that might be: the king being of a hautye and lustye nature, ^oulde
not bear the murmurations of the^ common people: but for very small trifles,
did hang and draw them, with executing them to many other sauadge and cruel
deaths: such was his cruelty, that no king was feared like unto Hellepatrus:
The king seeing his estate sure, his subjects reduced to obedience, and that
all things fell out as he wished for: then he proceeded to enriche his
unperial Crown with lands and lyuinges: at which (generally) the subjects
repyned, and began to repent them selves, that ever they had made him king.
Insomuch, the king with such cruelty began to tax them, and brought sore
yoakes and burdens upon them: as many of them fled from their own country:
so many of them yielded them selves, and set good faces of the matter, although
their hearts were full of cankered mischief, and poisoned malice toward the
king. The king calling all the chiefs and rychest of the land together, in
moving them to resign all their lands and lyuinges unto the imperial Crown
of his kingdom, and to become his tennauntes. At which, they being all sore
amazed, for that every man held, but according to the cusrome of the
country, denied the kings request: The king Hellepatrus taking sore
displeasure, by the advice of some certain flatterers about him, put many of
the chief Elders of the land to death: invaded his own country with such
terrors, that those which would not obey him, were slain, and executed to a
most shameful tyrannous death. Some of them were put to fine: some of them put
to perpetual imprisonment: some of them bonds^aues, and did serve in the
kings Garrison: When in this manner the king had pacified his land with sword
and fire, and with the cruellest terror, that ever was heard of: He then
assuring him self to be most saufest, was most in ieopardie: for those which
were most earnest to make him king, unto those was he a more sharper enemy,
then unto the rest. The cause hereof, was for that, they being so earnest to
have a king, not that they favored any one man to be their king: but for that
every man hoped after the kingdom him self: the king perceiving every man's
greedy desire, gave but certain outward thanks unto them: but did attribute
the success of his good luck unto Lady Fortune, and that holy Image. For as
the King perceived how his people hated him: so he did not squenche their
hatered with lenity, or by any execrable meekness: but with more greater
vengeance and crueller tyranny.

The people had him in such horrible disdain, that whereas they having not
delivered their wrytinges, and ancient monumentes of record, which was
between their fathers, and the Assyrians, when they purchased the land: so
they practiced with the King of the Hircans, that if he would make wars
upon their king: they would not only assist him, but also they would
deliver up into his hands, the monumentes and wrytinges, of the free purchase
of the land, which was between their fathers and the Assyrians.

The King of the Hircans would presently have had the same wrytinges, but they
would not agree thereunto, before he had overcome and vanquished their king,
by battle: through the great secreate suite of the Raellyans, the King of the
Hircans was content to satisfy^ their desire: and appointed an host of twenty
thousand soldiers, to invade the land of the Raellyans: but the people had
so condicioned with the King, that all those Raellyans which would submytte
themselves unto the Hircans, and be content to go in battle against their
King, should be in saufetie both of their lives, lands, and goods: So the
King of the Hircans having landed his great army of men, in the land of the
Raellyans: the Raellyans for the most part, made their refuge unto him: and
submytted them selves, and offered not only their bodies, but their lands and
goods, and all that ever they had, to be at his commandment: Hellepatrus
king of the Raellyans, seeing his woeful misery draw on: his people forsaking
him: his own household servants denying him: his estate to be the most
myserablest of all men: a^nd that speedily his enemies drawing on, had no other
help for him self, but to fly, and to become a stranger in another land:
forthwith fled into the land of the Trebonians, where he dwelt for the space
of five years. In the mean while the land of the Raellyans was governed by
the king of the Hircans, and as the Raellyans lived as they lysted them selves,
to be at free lybertye, so they proved within that space to be very rich and
welthie, and began to abound again withal manner of plentiful pleasures. The
king when he fled, took Hellidorus his son with him: and left Abdona his
wife and other children in the land of the Raellyans: which after the
departing of Hellepatrus, most miserably the Hircans tormented Abdona the
Queen and her children, in most terriblye burning them to death. This
banishment, did not so much vex the king, as the death and loss of his wife,
with the resydue of his children: whereas natural affection did move him to
sorrow: so the remembrance of revenge, did comfort him on the contrary:
Nature and revenge working together, practiced many ways: yet no better way
would serve his turn, then to open his grief unto the king of the
Trebonians: the king of the Trebonians being at mortal detestation with the
king of the Hircans, declared unto the king, how the Elders and commens of his
land, had chose him king, and confirmed the same with as strong and forceable
auchority as might be devised: it was also ratified before a blessed Image in
his land, which their fathers brought from the land of Scithia: how with an
Oracle from Delphicus Apollo, the manner of his Coronation was appointed. And
that both the Scepter and Crown of his kingdom were hanged up in the holy
Alsephon before the blessed Image: which they durst not for fear of eternal
plagues once diminish the same. And as he thought, the strength of his
kingdom, did consist both in the Scepter, and also in the Crown garlande of
thystles. After they had made me their king, and also royally put me in
anthoritie, and also had crowned, and soueraigned me with the aforesaid
Crown and Scepter: I afterward, but demanding their obedience, which was
due unto me: and that they would give me such ryghtes and possessions unto
my imperial Crown, as they promised: they not only denied me of the one,
but they rebelled against me for the other: and practicing with the king of
the Hircans, have driven me from my kingdom, and spoiled me of my lands and
goods: and most greeuouslye have bereft me of my wife and children: for most
traitorously have they put them to death.

The supplycation of Hellepatrus unto the king of the Trebonyans.
O Noble King, that bears the arms of defense, look upon my innocence:
behold my pitiful complayn^: see the wretchedness of my grief: nothing
does rewe my heart to such a terror, and grievous horror, as this wicked
murdering of my wife and children.

The King of the Trebonians answered his pittyfull complaynt in this manner.
Dares that wicked worm of the Hircans,
Feed on the fur trees of the Raellyans?
I Will surely clear and purge thy land, and restore thee to as much
pleasure, as ever thou had in thy life before: yea, and much more: and I
am glad that so good occasion is offered me, against that wynding Snake of the
Hircans: Hellepatrus, and Hellidorus his son were succored, and very richly
mayntained among the Trebonyans. And as Hellepatrus did give him self to great
excessyue drinking, among the Trebonyans: so the Trebonyans were a very
inordinate people in drynking. Hellydorus, although giving him self to an
accustomed order of myldnesse, for that he in all his life never laughed: so he
practiced him self to ye great actiuitie of the Trebonyans: for the Trebonyans
were very active and nymble people, in the feats of Arms, and most strongly
would they fight, when they were excessiuely overcome with drynking: But the
king of the Trebonians, and the people practiced many pleasant devises, to move
Hellydorus to laughter: but such was his myldnes, that it could never be
brought to pass: Whylst the Raellyans pleasure increased, and their estate
began to be sure again: Hellepatrus and the king of the Trebonyans ceased
not to consent, and take great counsel for the restoring of the king unto his
kingdom. And at the last, the king made such provision of ships, and of
warlyke armor: with such a huge host of men, as though they would have eaten
up at on byt, the whole country of the Raellyans, and not by force of arms to
have conquered them.

The kings provision was an host of men of a hundred thousand, and five
thonsand Navy of ships: And having landed, they marched toward the high
country of the Raellyans: which when he drew near, they divided the hoaste
into thr^e parts: The one part the king of the Trebonyans took charge of him
self: the other part, he committnd to Hellepatrus: and the other part to
Hellidorus.

Thus their hoastes being divided into three leuerall parts, went three
several ways: and yet not far one from another: for as one of them went
forwards, so the other host went cross: the one on the right side, the other
on the left side of the army royal. And thus marching^ forewardes, they
killed man woman and child: burnt and spoiled without any compassion.

The king of the Hircans having provided also a great host of men, almost
double to the Trebonyans, for that he had choose the best men, both of the
Hircans, and also of the Raellyans. Pytching from the Trebonyans, in the
dystaunce of ten miles: notwithstanding, the king of the Hircans being very
fearful, both in that he had falsely usurped the kingdom: murdered
Hellepatrus his wife and children: mayntained rebels against their
sovereign king: doubted that the end thereof would be naught: so that these
armies being in array, the king of the Hircans, sent Harroldes to the hoasts of
the Trebonyans, with letters to understand their quarrel: which letters were
in this manner.

WE vnderstade that you have entered this land (you famous soldiers of the
Trebonians, and have utterly spoiled and undone our borderers: killed them, and
burnt up their houses and goods: we are very sorry to give such occasion of
cruelty to any nation: we being here but as guides, helpers and succorors to
this poor country: whereas they were oppressed through a wretched king, one
Hellepatrus, who for his shameful extorcion, they have banished. If your title
be to the kingdom: the people care not, who be their king, so that they may
saufelye enjoy their own. And we Hircans that are their patrones and
defendours, will give up our right to any king that will swear unto us,
righteously to govern them: But thus much we crave of you, that if your
quarrel may be ended with quietness, to take your own asking: Ask what you
will, you shall have it at our hands, so that this seely country of the
Raellyans may be preserved.


AS soon as the Trebonyans had received these Letters, and read them:
forthwith they hanged the Harroldes of the Hircans, and most terribly put them
to death. Forthwith they having this deuyce in their heads, practiced that a
huge hoaste of Elephantes should be put in harness: and a great holow cowpe
of iron, hanged secreatelye about the necks of the said Elephantes: and to
fill the said hollow cowpes, full of ^ybble stones, in the night unawares,
were soddainly driven upon the host of the Hircans: for that they were all at
rest, suspecting nothing, but looking the return of the Harroldes, were
suddenly rowsed with the noise and force of the Elephantes: With amazedness,
taking them selves to flight, were dispersed and slain: (save only the king
of the Hircans) who was taken a live and brought unto the king of the
Trebonyans, who tied a great chain round about his neck, and sent him to
Hellepatrus, l^^ in the manner of a Dog, and bid the messengers tell
Hellepatrus, that he had sent him, the worm of the Hircans, which did deuowre
the fyrre trees of the Raellyans: Forthwith, these three hoasts marched
forward^, and pursued upon the dispersed Hircans: slew, burned and spoiled in
all quarters and places of the land thorowout, so that none went free: that if
he stood in the, destaunce or rebelous disobedience of Hellepatrus, their
lawful king: but he was slain, and his goods brunt. When the king of the
Trebonyans had purged the land, with kylling and burning: thos^ that were left
alive, were myserably scourged with whyppes: and the king of the Hircans
himself, was drawn through the land like a dog, and most myserably whypped
with rods: so in the ^nde of all these torments, the said king of the
Hircans was most myserably^ pry^ked to death with needles: Hellepatrus, and the
king of the Trebonyans went into the holy Alsephon, and rendered humble
thanks for their victory before the Image, where also they saw the crown of
thystles hanging as green as ever it was in the beginning: and the Scepter
gallantly shyning.

These comfortes did put great joy and comfort in the hearts (...) Hellepatrus
and his son: now the king of the Trebonyans would not continue in that
country, but desired to return homewarde: notwithstanding, Hellepatrus was
very desirous to have had him tarryed still, and to have made his habitation
there.

The king of the Trebonyans, wy^ed Hellepatrus to continue great sharpness
toward the Raellyans, for so should they best keep them in order: And so
the king of the Trebonyans departed, but most part of the soldiers of the
Trebonyans continewed within the land of the Raellyans, and did inhabit
there: but always such division was between them and the Raellyans, that not
one of them could abide another. But as the king of the Trebonyans taking his
journey homewarde, passing over the high hills Arnolla, his Chariot by great
mysfortune, breaking, be him self also having a fore fall, brake his neck:
King Hellepatrus understanding hereof, sent unto those hills, where the dead
coarse lay, (for it was but in the borders of the Raellyans) to bring the dead
carkase unto him, which presently as soon as it was brought, ^e buried it, in
the holy Alsephon, and erected a sumptuous tomb over it with these Epigrams
written over the same.

The knot is loosde by death,
Assured friend adieu:
Oh fortunes cruel fate,
Such mischief to ensew:
The truest friend
That liude in open sight:
That ever was,
In war the noblest knight.
Oh faithful friendshippes trust,
A king of worthy name:
That now is turnde to slymie dust,
Let praise blow out thy fame:
A friend most sure,
That never failde:
For to endure,
Thy friendship never quailde.
THis Hellepatrus the King being restored to his kingdom again: lived very
quietly, and suffered both the Raellians and Trebonyans to inhabit together: he
drove the Hircans quite out of the land, and would not suffer so much as a
little child to continue there: the king perceiving the fyckle alterations of
Fortune, did agree very quietly with his Land: the king grew somewhat to
age, and used great company keeping, and given to excessive drunkenness: and
therefore he could not rule them with such puissancie, as before he had done:
the king him self, not only became a great dronkard, but also polluted with
great lechery: of all women, he loved the strange women of Trebonia, for they
were very bewtiful women: so also were they of light conversation. Thus the
king being both drowned in drunkenness, overwhelmed with lechery, indoted
with old age: these three enemies were more crueller, then all the host of
the Hircans. For as the king had been bannished from his countreye, and now
restored again: so now drowned in drunkenness, overwhelmed with lechery:
indoted with old age: being banished from all perfect understanding, there was
no hope to restore him to the perfection of his flagrant fourmer flourishing
wits again. The people of the Raellyans perceauing the kings miserable
estate: the wives of the Raellyans desiring carnal copulation with the
Trebonyans, secreetely in the night as they lay together, did kill the
Trebonians: and by secreate means unknown to the king, did weaken and
infeeble the Garyson, and soldiers of the Trebonyans, which did there
continue: such was the wickedness of these women: that one bewtifull fair Dame,
practysing with the rest, how, and by what means they might quite overthrow
the Trebonyans, and root them out: who showing her self very laciuious, and
wanton in the manner of a nyce harlotte at a banquet, in the presence of the
king, with many songs, and whoorishe dittyes, through which the king was
delyghted, not only with that manner of pleasure, but also with the beauty of
the woman: for as the king was very desirous to hear the woman singe: so at
the great request of the King, she song this Dittye, as follows: and also
did deliver unto the King to drink, a cup full of poison.

Our wise and noble king,
In war a famous knight:
His sturdie strength to pass did bring,
To win his proper right.
So worthy a man as nouer was seen,
The hardiest knight that ever has been.
The dayntiest dishe that man does love,
Or Venus in her shop does sell:
Of all sweet meat that comes above,
Hellepatrus such flesh loves well.
This ready cup of pleasant wine,
With love shall bleare your wanton eyne.
The death of Hellepatrus the King.
THe King receiving the cup, and drinking, presently fell down dead: and
swelled so much that his skyn brake, and his flesh stancke so vehemently, that
he was like to have poisoned all the people round about him: there creapte
and crawled out of the flesh of Hellepatrus, great worms with black beads:
his tongue hanged out of his mouth: his eyes started out of his head: be was
most miserable to behold. After he was embawmed with many sweet Odiferous
spyces: and thereby the strength of his corruptions stayed: then was he
intombed in Lead, and brought into the holy Alsephon, where he was laid,
with these Poesies written upon his Tomb, over him.

The glistering gallaunt flower gaie,
When vvinter comes it fades away:
This life that honors great have got,
So svviftlie comes and go by lotte.
O death which cut this royal king:
Whose life such cruel fear did bring?
Who has obeyed this earth and claie,
When death did come, thou did obeie.
The honors great, where pomp does rest,
So lodgde within thy grave:
The slimie worms did build their neast,
Thy kingly flesh to have,
In wars abroad to serve thou had goodskil.
At home in peace thou wast a stay to hold up orders still.
These lines upon thy rombe shall stand,
That praise may shev^ with glistring fame:
Thou ruldste this noble Land.
THe coarse being laid in the grave, with great mourning, and lamentable
sounding of Trumpettes: with solempnitie accustomable in the death of a King,
the Ascalon of the holy Alsephon, did make the funeral Oration unto
Hellydorus the young Prince, and the people, after this manner.

The funeral Oration.
THis day we being al assembled hither, to finishe a noble and worthy
remembrance of our King: which before this Image, what I speak necessary
to profit your minds with the exercise of virtue, it is the testimony of the
life of this King here departed, and also of the vnfaynednesse of a good heart
in me: the mortality of man's life is plainly seen: that although we
florishe, with never so much renown, and the glory of this life, being
bewtified with many great gifts of worldly pleasures: yet you may perceive the
fynal end hereof, is loss Mortality (...) changed by death, into
immortalitye.
both of these pleasures, and also of this life: you ma^e also perceive,
although we strive to clyme either to a higher estate of life, or to continue
in one estate it self: how or in what sort so ever we live: whether we
strive for more? or whether we content our selves with less? death is the
end of all: contentions, en(...)es, displeasure: yea, the wrath of a King is
confounded by death: our good and evil life, is set forth by death: the one of
them is the star light of virtue: the other is the shadow of corruption and
vice.

What have we to trust unto, whilst we li^e here? some say riches? honors?
kingdoms? power and sovereignty? But I say, our virtuous life being the
demerites of goodness in this life: are the felycities, and joyful happiness
that we find in another life: we have sorrows and pains in this life: but
for our good actions, everlasting renown in another life: Such was the opinion
of immortality.
Then let us live well, that we may dye well: our good death, shows our
good life: our good life is the unspeakable treasure that we are rewarded
with: In this life we have sickness, in another life health: in this life
sorrow, in another life joy: in this life, danger of many worldly
misfortunes, but in another life, the reward of many fortunes.

O how happy is death: this kingdom has been translated unto this King, by
worldly fortune: you might perceive how sinylinglie fortune dealth with him.
In the beginning, what a heap of myseries and troubles she brought upon his
headde, she bannished him from his countreie, and kingdom: And contrary to
the expectation of all the Raellyans, restored him home again to his kingdom:
she has preserved him until this instaunt: What a horrible fact, a wicked
woman, by murthersome practice has committed? Shall I tell whether Fortune
knew of any of these euentes or no? I should but trouble your minds, and
vex your hearts in speaking: And win no commodity unto my self, but
hatered of his posterytie, toward me for ever: wherefore in these judicial
causes, I will use silence, and say nothing: but only this: O young Prince
Hellydorus, in thee is perceived great towardness of vvitte and learning: and
surely the Gods have hid in thy noble stomach, some maruaylous secreate,
which is not for me to entreat of: for which, neither I'or any man lyuinge
could ever in thy life time, perceive thee laughe, or show any token of
gesture, tending thereunto: might I tell the opinion of some men, who say:
that whereas any man having any special gift, no man having the like, that
man is either loved, or feared for the same: I hope upon the best, that all
the people of the Raellyans shall love thee (O noble King) such I hope will
be thy virtues, that we shall all glory in thy noble renowned actions: you
may perceive and learn by this dead coarse your Father, the brittle stay of
this life: you may perceive by your Fathers troubles he had in his life time:
the sorrows and calamities that a King is ordained unto: and by the end and
death of this your dear Father, the danger and perryl, that a King is
subject unto, through malycious subjects:

O noble Hellydorus, let the example of your Fathers troubles, vvarne you: his
good deeds teach you: the untrustiness of Fortune, put the thought of
meekness in your heart: that all the renownes, soueraignties, pompeous
glories, Princely fame, oppression, tyranny is both ended by death, and
rewarded by death.

Here ends the funeral Oration.
Here is declared the sorrow that the Raellyans made for the death of
Hellepatrus: the strange sight that was seen in the Alsephon: and what joy
they made in the end of their sorrow, for the crowning of Hellydorus to be
King.
AFter the funeral Oration of the Ascalon was fynished, the people all fell on
their faces, and threw duste in the air, as the manner of the buryalles of
the Raellyans was. After the end of the buryall of Hellepatrus: Hellvdorus
Hellepatrus (...).
the kings son, after his days of morning were ended, was happily crowned
to succeed his Imperial Crown. And in the night before his Coronation, the
Crown of Thystles did burn all the night long, in the top of the holy
Alsephon: And in the mids of the flame, there was seen a man stryking with a
sword, and speaking: Oh Raellyans, a burden will way you down: this noise
was heard all night long. In the morning very early, the King and Elders,
and the people came to blew this terrible and fearful sight: but it was
squenched of it self, no man knew how: and the Garlande crown of Thystles
flourished as green as ever it did before: the Raellyans did attrybute this
sight to the best, after their delights and affections: some said it was a
triumphaunt sight, to renown the day of a Coronation, but when it was
ouerpassed, they remembered not, neither cared they any more of the matter: but
ascribed all signs, wonders, and tokens to the best, until their fynall
destruction came upon them: Thus afterward upon the same day, Hellydorus
the King was crowned, in the same order, form and manner, as his father
Hellepatrus was: But for that I will not use so much speech in so short a
matter, I will ouerpasse the exceeding tryumphes of the Raellyans, upon the
Coronation day: Yet I think it very necessary to set down the Oration that
Hellydorus made unto the people.

The Oration of Hellydorus the King.
I Am to speak more sharper in all respects, as touching the governance of
this Realm: then ever my Father did, your obstinate disobedience that was to
wards my Father, with the pestilent envy that in all his life time did lurk
in your naughty hearts, does move me to crave of this blessed Image, both to
hear me: and also to be a testimony that it stands me upon, to be both
careful, wise, and more extreme then ever my Father was: careful to behold
your crooked conspiracies: wise to govern so disobedient and unruly people:
and with all extremity to subdue your vvretched envious hearts: When in
steed of loving subjects, are stinging Adders of the vvyldernes: I tell you
plain, I have small trust in any of you all: for I do know when the Raellians
do show great joy and triumphaunt mirth toward their King: then have they
some mischeuous practices most thiefly lurking in their cankred stomachs to
stinge like Snakes, or Adders: But as I will whet my sword more sharper, then
ever my Father did. So I say good people look to your obedience. And if your
practicing mischief be secreate, deal cleanly and vvisely, that I have no
understanding thereof. For if it come to light, I will lay more burdens of
punishments upon your backs, then there were neadles thrust into the flesh and
skin of the King of the Hircans: You banished my Father, I hope your power shall
never be such, that your ability shall reach to do the like unto me: For as I
am not destitute of friends, so also have I just experience of the vilitie of
the Raellians: my Father you poisoned, I hope through the power of this holy
Image, you shall never be able to touch me, with the best finger you have: but
as touching my Fathers death, and the manner thereof: I will not now speak
of so sorrowwfull a ruthe, upon so royal a day: but I hear vvishe and
desire you, to become honest Subjects: I do not desire you, in that I fear
you, but for your own saufegarde: for as you shall find me a quiet King, until
you disquiet me: so in disquieting me, the most cruellest tyrant that ever
reigned: what pleasures or liberty did you get, through your wicked dealinges
toward my father: your vvarres waste your goods, killed your fathers and
mothers, and has brought you their children into most contemptuous ignominy,
to be accounted the most vnrulest people that lives, and thereby grown to be
poorer then your fathers need to have left you: Live well and orderly, I will
promise before this holy Image, never to oppress you with tax nor tribute,
you shall enjoy your own quiet^e: I will defend you from foreign invasion:
I will not misuse you any way: But if your dealinges be contrary: in none of
these will I keep promise: I will also deal on the contrary: O you
Raellyans, remember my words well, and print them, with a punche, of good
understanding iu-your hearts, that they may never be forgotten: that I like a
gentle gracious King, may be careful, pitiful, loving toward you: and you
in all obedience and duty, to be careful, and well pleasing of me: In
this, as in bounden duty, I will be mindful of you: ready to hear your
supplications, and with kingly modesty, to reform al such things as be out
of order.

Here ends the Kings Oration.
Here is showed how the King passed forth his Coronation with feasting, and
active tryumphe, fell sick, and recovering his health, revenged the death of
his father, Hellepatrus.
AFter the end of this Oration, the King departed to his banquet, and the
Actiuities were showed upon the Theater: The King in the presence of the
people, with such puissancie, did show the courage, and Marshal renown of a
king In so much, that he was not only marvelous to behold: but also greatly
dreaded in the eyes of the people.

After thanks was rendered unto the holy Image, and great peticions made: the
king departed unto his Palace, and with a heat and cold that he took, in
showing his renowned chyualrie, fell sick upon a Fever: for which cause took
him self unto his Chamber, for the space of twenty days after, and never
came abroad, nor no man could speak with him: save his Physicians, and such
Gentlemen that were of his privy chamber. After his health was recovered, and
began to be strong again, the reremembraunce of the murdering of his Father
could not be put away: so the offense was neither forgeuen nor forgotten: For
as he had the woman in hold, which had so shamefully committed this murder.
So he upon the recovery of his health, fell to the examination of this naughty
woman. And she upon her straight imprisonment, and strayghter examination:
apprehended the chiefest of the Elders of the land, with their wives: which
when the king had fullye known, and with perfect instruction was acquainted
with their murthersome practices, did not incontinently send for them, by his
men of war: fearing least they having any ynkling hereof, would fly into
another Land: for no man was privy to the examynares confession, save only
Hellidorus him self: did after a courteous manner in the way of friendship,
send for them, and their wives, one after another, to come and speak with
him. which so soon, as any of them made their appearaunce, were presently sent
unto prison without further examination.

And thus he dealt with all of them. one after another, until he had
apprehended every one of them, when these devises were accomplished: the king
upon very prudent pollycie, sent for all the nearest kindred and friends of
these murderers, and talked unto them after this sort.

The Kings words unto the murderers kyndred and friends.
MY friends and subjects, I thought it good and necessary to send for you
being Raellyans and wise men, and as I hope trusty subjects: Such reports
have been given out. of your obedience: which moves me to presume of that
good fame and honest report that is spread in all places of this Land, of your
true and just dealinges, toward this Imperyall Crown: For which cause I am
persuaded, that not for the dearest kyndred or friends that you have among the
Raellyane, will aducnture your lives, lands, and goods, for their sakes:

If in treasons toward this Crown, there were any such of your kyndred and
friends, to be found guilty, would take their parts: Or that their deaths
should cause any sorrow to pearce your haries, they being perfectlye known,
and once found Traitors. You know my father your late king of famous
memory, was most traitorously murdered, and shamefully put to death, do you
not think it was plain and presumptuous treason? yea, such a murder is not to
be suffered among common persons, much less in a King: do you not think the
doers hereof are worthy to suffer the strayghtest death that may be devised.
And the people answered:

O Noble King, if their kindred were never so dear unto us, we vvoulde do
the best that lies in us, not only to apprehende them: but also to put them
to death. HEllidorus spoke again, indeed they are not only of your near
kyndred, but also of your very friends, and such which you of all men and women
have had in greatest acceptance. And I of my own prudencie, have apprehended
them already: which if they can clear them selves, from that which they be
apprehended of: they shall be as free, as ever they were. And also I will
recompense them for their unjust imprisonment. Wherefore for that they are
your kyndred and friends, you shall be assistants in judgment with me, when
they are arraygned to be guilty of this murder or no: These men durst not
deny the King his request: they were very sorye that they should be urged
thereunto: partly because some of the^ were not scarce clear from the murder:
other some hanged back for kyndred sake: other some, for ignorant simplicity,
not knowing what belonged to such a soddaine provocation, would gladly have
revolted, not only their promise if they durst, but also to have They had ^te
faces, (...)t cold ^rtes.
dispatched them seines quite from the matter it self: But such was the
policy of the King, that the death of so many of the best, would seem more
terrible to the rest, and he less grudged at them therein, for that they were
condemned and adjudged by their own kyndred: surely, surely there lay as
much secreate mischief in the hearts of these, their kindred toward the
King, as in the murderers them selves, but they durst not utter it: this woman
that was principal unto this murder, was first brought before the King, and
the Elders: and her examination being read: the other forthwith were sent for,
one after another: the matter being nearely systed, and thoroughly tried to the
uttermost, they were al found guilty, and adjudged to dye for the murdering
of king Hellepatrus: This was the death of the wicked woman, from the toes of
her feet, unto her sholder parts, one joint was cut peecemeale, one from
another: There was two thousand men and women of the Raellyans, that were put
to death in another manner, as this: Whoate ouens were heated for the same
purpose, and the men were put therein: there were near adjoining, whoate
furnaces of boiling lead, wherein the grave women were cast, a most lamentable
ruth, in the presence of many weeping eyes, were skalded to death.

This terrible justice of the King, did stryke such a horror in the hearts of
his subjects: that they not only feared the kings presence, but also they
were in doubt to speak of him: thus the king through extremity, obtained
quietness: and through wisdom and policy ruled his kingdom, he kept them
in such obeence and awe, that of all Princes that were then living, Hellidorus
was of his people most feared.

How the King put many to death, for concealing the vvrytinges that were
between their forefathers, and the Assyrians, when the Land was first
purchased: And also of a Prophet that ryseth among the Raellyans, and cries
out of their Idolatrous Image, the Ass, in which was all their trust: The
said Prophet is put to death, by Hellydorus the King.
HEllidorus having squenched the natural revenge of his fathers death:
established his kingdom, and subdued his people to great fear: then they began
by little and little, to inquyre after the monumentes and wrytinges that were
between their forefathers, and the Assyrians, for the purchasing of that
land. The secreate inquisitours of the King, handeled the matter in such
sort, from one to another, until the matter was apparent, where and in whose
custody the wrytinges remained. As many suffered death for concealing the
matter, so many suffered death for the conuaying of them: and he in whose
custody they were found, suffered a most strange and straight death: Thus,
as the King could get nothing at their hands through gentleness: so he had
what he would, through croaked crucluesse. And lastly, they so much obeyed,
and reverently f(...)ed him, that Hellydorus could not so soon be named among
them: but they would make low courtesy, and low submission of their bodies:
the King being both in riches and Royal pomp, with great sovereign fear:
in so much that he thought him self the saufest king that lived. In the
myddest of these securyties, and blind knowledge of the eternal goueruaunce
from about: having no other understanding, save only in that dombe Image the
Ass, which stood in the Alsephon: which their forefathers brought from the
land of Scithia: there arose a great Prophet, in the land of the Raellyans:
of what country, nation, stock, or kyndred he came of, or out of what place,
no man understood: This Prophet lived in a most straight kind of life, he
eat of the green Fig leaves of the wilderness: his garments were of a
skin of an unknown beast: his Orations and outcryinges, were not only for
the present wickedness of the king and the people, but he also told them that
their present destruction was hard at hand: that for Idolatry and worshipping
of a dombe Ass, would cause their king to be turned to an Ass: and the
kingdom of the Raellyans to be confounded, and inhabited of another people.
The king hearing hereof was sore amazed both at the boldness, and earnestnes of
this Prophet: feared his estate in which he stood in: knew not what to do:
for that many opinions, sects and factions did swar^^e in the Land, through
the doctrine of this Prophet: Some of the people did not believe of this
Image, which their forefathers brought from the Land of Scithia: Some of them
hated the Ascalon: some of them could not abide to come within the Alsephon:
almost none of them could abide the King: Such was the estate of the
Raellyans, that of a thousand men, there was a thousand opinions, one contrary
to another: The king being very desirous to ^alke with this Prophet, sent for
him, and entreated of him for that he hard that he was a Prophet, and outeryed
of the voices, and ^^l^hie actions of the Raellyans, would declare unto him,
his present estate in which he stood, with the destruction that was immynent,
and hanging over his head: For in deferring his wickedness, the terrible day
of vengeance would be worse: but in the amending his life, he might become
the better liver: and teach his people such virtue, as best stands for the
saufegarde of his countreye, to appease the displeasures and angers, that are
ready, and at hand for their destruction: for how can we amend those vices,
of which we are persuaded to be virtues, and no vices. The Prophet desired the
king both to harken to his counsel and warning, that might best sauegard
himself, and profit his country.



The Prophets Oration unto king Hellydorus.
IF that long continuance has brought the showers of fruictfulnesse, over this
whoale country: whereby you vvallowing in such pleasures, and voluptuous
ryotof your bodies, do neglect the blasted my series, that your minds are
darkened vvithall, in the night of ignorance: which if your bodies be
satisfied, and your minds unquiet, your bodies out of danger, and your minds
in danger: your bodies quiet, and your minds out of quiet: how can you
accoumpt your pleasures happy? your joys reastfulnes? for your minds do
premeditate the actions of your bodies: yea, your mind is the teacher of your
bodies: and that which your mind purposes, your bodies do bring the same in
action, how can your bodies do good and perfect affectes, when your mind
being full of filthy and lewd endeavors, replenished with al defectes:
ignorant of that which it ought to know? how can your boddies bring in
practice the perfection of goodness, or the knowledge of virtue: if your
minds lusting after wickedness, do rule your bodies: then virtue is drowned,
and overwhelmed with the darkness of sensuality.

I tell thee O King, thylande is full of Idolatry, they know not the reach
of the hiest governance. And if they vvorshippe a doltishe God, an Ass: in
which is the spirit of lying and er^ror, how can there be any light, or
bright shine of felicity? for an Idolatrous God, can not rule the mind,
although in the blind purpose of fantasy, that God miraculouslie, can
deceive your mind: for as the highest eternal governance suffers your mind
to be led: so the same governance, can both ransacke your mind, and break
your God to a thousand fitters. But if your mind were in the knowledge of
that eternal governance, as it is not: neither does that knowledge come to
any, but to those which before are destined thereunto: so having that
knowledge: neither your dombe Ass could allude you: nor your manifold vices
seduce you to the top of vengeance, and mountain of wrath, and then headlong
to throw you to destruction: but such is the practice of the lying spirit of
error, first to blind you in Idolatry, and in the worship of a false God,
which shrowdeth the high pathe of virtue from our eyes: to lead you to
wallowing lust, and such filthiness which the body desires. Wherefore the
lying spirit does first win and intyce the people to Idolatry, to the end
they should not know any other righteousness: until confusion were hotely
powered upon their headdes, least that the true righteous eternity opening the
wings of comfort, should draw them, from the dongeon of fleshly vices:
which is diffycult to be done in you, for that you are settled in old custom
and long usage of wickedness. I say, O King Hellidorus, consider how many
troubles have nearelie touched thy fathers estate, and thine, in this Realm
and countreie of the Raellyans* how hath^ this come to pass, but only for
lack of the aid and succor of the chief eternal government, whose breath
is able to kill thee and all the whole land: thou vvylt say, thou and thy
fathers hitherto have prevailed in all your tribulations: will you attribute
the cause hereof, to your own vvarlilce policy, learning, riches, friends,
great hoastes: but it is not these things that have delivered you: although
these things might be instruments, that you work by the hiest governance,
did suffer your deliverance to be wrought, for that a heavier, and more
intolerable confusion, should overthrow and destroy you: Although thy
Father Hellepatrus escaped the hands of the Hircans, yet was he delivered into
the hands of a shameful harlotte to be poisoned to death: As your dombe Ass
is not able to deliver you, so neither can he help you: but the eternal
governance can do both, that is, help you, and deliver you: the inward
invocation draws repentance from the heart, it is virtue that is given from
above, and no man can repent without this virtue: where the mystes of sin
have overwhelmed this virtue: there the highest governance has no inward
work, and this being Security (...)ne.
dismembered with lewd lust, there is no actual application: first leave thy
blind zeal in worshipping this Ass, enter into the secreates of thy heart
for remorse, Chastisement for (...)e.
adioyne an inward speculation, which shows a more bryghter light in an
howie, then ever thy father, or thou did see in all your lives before.

The end of the Prophets Oration.
AFter these words of the Prophet, the King was very wrathful, and full of
malice, such a boiling heat of veration was kyndled in his heart, that
inwardly he chafed at the Prophet, and at the last brake forth in these words.

Thou have the name of a Prophet: The kings words.
such a bold talker as thou art, with busying thy self in such things, as
do not belong unto thee, may work thy own we: thou think to win
credit, and get honor in this country, among the Raellyans, thou art
deceived in thy own thought: but take heed lest thou win the displeasure and
wrath of a king, and so death unto yt wretched writhen carcass of thine: For
although thou can boldly pratle unto me, yet I do not believe thy doctrine,
nor relygion: so neither will I condemn it, before the Ascalon of the holy
Alsephon, disputes with thee: who is better seen in such matters then my
self? Forthwith the king commanded the Prophet to be brought into the
Alsephon, where the Ascalon and the Prophet, in the presence of the king and
the people talked together.

The Ascalon spoke unto the Prophet after this sort.
Perceiving the great sedition that is sown in this Realm, by a false
Prophet: the sects and scysmes increased: that not only it behooves our
sovereign Lord the King, to look unto him self: but it stands upon my
office and duty, to confute such falsities and opinions, in the honor and
glory of this holy Image, which our fathers brought from the land of Scithia,
and has preserved our country and people, with the fruitful increase of all
plenteousnesse: this is necessary to the people to be spoken: to take heed of
such lying fellows which vndercreepe our governance: for whosoever speaks
against this holy Image, speaks against the king himself: and whosoever
touches the soueraygnty of the king, is a traitor, and worthy to dye. After
many of these thundering words of (...)e Ascalon: the Prophet began to
speak: the king commanded to stop his mouth: and the more the king cried,
stop, stop, stop: so the Prophet cried the more: O wrathful vengeance, that
will shortly be due unto the Raellyans: and with mighty force, the Prophet ran
unto the Image, the Ass: and forceable upon a soddaine, brake it to many
pieces: The king foaming, roaring, and crying: hold him, hold him: commanded
the Prophet to be tied and bound: for that (as he said he was some mad fellow
out of his wyts. But the people in the like manner, were at such contention,
that one was ready to kill another, some belde upon the relygion of the Image:
some held upon the doctrine of the Prophet: none of them all loved the king,
except the Ascalon: whose commodytie consisted upon the sacrifice of the
Alsephon. The king and his garyson without further judgment, did cut the
innocent Prophet to a thousand pieces: and such was the wickedness of this
tyrannous murder, that he which might have a hacke at the innocent flesh of
this holy Prophet, thought he did good service to that idolatrous Image, and
their tyra^nous king. Even presently upon the Vnseasonablenes of the weather
causes scarsitie.
death of the Prophet, there arose lyghtnings, tempests, the fruits of the
earth were burnt with wild fire: A great famine did arise through out the land:
many people through the scarcesity thereof myserably without compassion dyed.
Shortly after these verations and troubles: as the Prophets death not being
forgotten, so many continued steadfast and believed on his doctrine: for which
doctrine, the king used great persecution thorowout the whole Land: The death
of the Martyrs Persecution.
were in this manner: their skynnes were flaine from their flesh: they most
quietly and patiently forsaking this life. After the end of this cruel
tyrannous persecution: he thynking his Land quite purged and ryd from the
blemishes of the Prophets doctrine, for that some of them were subdued by
death: some by banishment, and some by conversion: so thinking his kingdom to
be established more surer then ever it was before, grew to his old security and
wickedness of life, deuowred in tyranny, and drouned in idolatry: for yt be
peeced the broken idolatrous Ass again to worship: through which idolatry he
was poisoned in the filthy stinch of al horrible vices and corruption that in
steed of innocence, cruel tyranny and all oppression were planted in his
ha^te.

Here is showed how the King fell in love with one Sebona a harlotte, married
her: and was turned to an Ass: and how the Assirians did repossed the Land of
the Raellians by conquest.
AFter the King wasin his old custom of idolatry and all other corruptions,
the land pacified, and prefixed in the wicked obedience of that peeced God,
the broken Ass: the King also in doting in love, was led with variable
affections: led with the nordinate lust of bewty: hunting in the wicked
concupiscence of diverse women, was ravished, with the special delectation of
one woman: whereas the fine amorous Ladies of the Raellyans, perceauing the
Kings lascivious inclination, devised with them selves how they might best set
out themselves in sale before the King: Some with gallant imbrothered garments,
and the costly silk of the Hircans: would show them selves, with the flying
wanto^ countenances of Lovers to catch and snare the King with their
abominable delites: some with daunsing, some with singing pleasant Ditties: So
that sundry women had sundry delytes, one contrary to another: whose sundry
contraryeties ouercasted the king, with contrary impolutions. Sebona a
bewtifull dame, and the comlyest creature that ever lived, either among the
Hircans, either among the Trebonyans, or Raellyans the acceptablest of all:
Notwithstanding, she had been the most whore, and shameless harlot, that ever
reigned: this Sebona for bewty, gorgeous apparel, sweet smelles, singing,
daunsing, with all the devises of a lover, most delited ye kings fantasy. This
Sebona in respect of all other women, was a bright burning star in the dark
clouds of Cupids thu^dring tempests: the king neither respecting honesty.
virtue, or immaculate virginity, which are the bands and knots of true
marriage, would in all haste chose this filthy whore Sebona, to be his wife:
whereas she through the counsel of some certain of her friends, was persuaded to
present her self very little in the kings presence: Her bewty would appear ye
brighter, the kings love the whotter, and their purposes brought to pass the
sooner. The King languishing in the heavy agonies of love, wrote unto Sebon a
after this manner.

The Kings letters to Sebona.
O Sebona, the worthy Lover of the Raellyans, which with the arrowe of thy
beutie. have shot and wounded my desire, that al comforts either of my
kingdom, common wealth, riches, possessions, renown, sovereignty, do not so
much pleasure or comfort me, as thy beutie. I that did conquer, am now
conquered my self: I that did worship an holy Image, do now worship beutiful
Sebona: I that did rule a kingdom, am now ruled by a woman: I that did
subject my people and Land, am now brought in subjection my self: O pitiful
Sebona: the Physician of my diseases: the comfort of all my troubles: the ease
of all my griefs, understand my sorrows: fulfill my mind: restore him that is
banished from al pleasures, to find some joy: thy love shall be thy renownathy
beutie shall be thy pleasures and wealth: the comely nesse of thy body, shall be
rular of this Land and country. Let me receive some comfort again of these
earnest letters: or else if I be forsaken my svveete Sebona: as thou before
have vvounded me, so presently now have thou killed me: as thou have
punished me, so now have thou brought me to utter destruction. Hear the
pitiful cry of a King, that desires to revvard thy Love in making thee a
Queen.

The end of the kings letters.

AFter these letters were received by Sebona: that whore, and filthy harlot,
had counsel by her near friends, neither to send, or go, or write: or by any
means to give ye King any comfort of his letters, for as they surmysed, the
King practysed rather to satissye his affection and voluptuous lust, then to
tie himself to yt immaculate renowned, glory, virtuous marriage: and in
estraunging her self in the matter, the kings earnest desire would both
increase toward her, and also would the readyer indue her in the estate of ye
kingdom: which if she would laciuiously answer the kings wanton letters, the
king would use ^er as a harlot, to serve his present affection, and also
suspect her light behavior to be the lewder. But the king perceauing her
contemptuous strange Love, or rather whorish polycie, neither in sending unto
him, neither answering his letters, or yet in comforting his amorous agonies,
with her presence, began not only to hate her, but also utterly to renounce
her: which partly might proceed of his kingly stomach, partly of his
voluptuous lust had with diverse other infamous harlots squenched in the
stinking lake of concupiscence: so it came to pass that Sebona and her friends
were very sorry, for that their polycie, was pretudiciall, both to the king and
them selves: to the king in not having his purpose, and to them selves, both
for that they had lost ye kings favor, and the commodity that might have
risen thereby: they thought they would not omyt so happy opportunity being
ofred, for a lowering countenance. This Sebona who had been the Ascalons whore
of the holy Alsephon, practiced with the aforesaid Ascalon, what was to be
done. The Ascalon respecting the famylyaritye that had passed between them,
the Ascalon could not deny Sebonaes request, considering also that if she were
preferred, his renown would be also increased: practiced with an old woman
that was a witch, and also in time past Sebonaes bawd: for which cause
wyllinger to further the matter, and with the best endeavor that consisted in
her, to do good unto Sebona: By sorcery (this old ryuen witch) did
understand, both where ye government of the kingdom, and the preservation of
the king did consist: which was in the green Garland that hanged up in the
holy Alsephon: which so long as the Garland hanged there, no evil fate, or
unfortunate condition of life could approach the kings person: but so soon as
ye garland was deflowred, the kings renown, riches, honor, glory, po^pe, fame,
were fully and wholly in the power of the^ that had gotten the same the Ascalon
neither respecting the holiness of the function, the office of the place,
neither the sanctimonyall reverence due to the place: nor the fear of the holy
Image: nor his duty to the king: or yet the commodity that might redown to the
commonwealth: practifed with this filthy whore Sebona to ravish this holy
Alsephon with sacrilege, and to steal this flourishing green Garlande of
Thistles. And as soon as they had burned the said Garland of thistles, the
king perceived a force to go from him: in the audacity of his countenance: of
which before he was bold, became now shamefast: in his strength: of which
before he was mighty, was now weak: in his stomach: of which before he was
coragious, was now full of cowardnes: in his wisdom: of which before he was
prudent, was now foolish. Thus the king in ye eyes of al men, was marue^lously
altered, and his complexion changed: so that in steed of a king, you would have
adjudged him a prisoner: in steed of a rular, you would have adjudged him a
wretch: in steed of a knight of arms, you would have adjudged him a ca^^^fe
of calamity. The king being thus bestract of all the parts of his body: his
friends, and servants that were about him, marueyled at his sudden
alteration: some attributed ye cause thereof, unto some priu^e disease in his
inward parts: some said it was inward thought: some said it was ye force and
cruelty of love, which vehemently perplexed him, for ye beutiful Sebona: Thus
as every man's judgment was ready, so every man had an inward lyking or
dysliking of ye king: some spoke as he would have it: some spoke for yt the
kings saufegard was their commodity: and some spoke indifferently: Thus every
man's affection being bewrayed, in ye mydst of al which conflicts, Sebona and
her friends understanding ye kings great affliction and heaped miseries which
more and more without consolation increased, was persuaded to write unto ye
king: whose letters by the advice of the Ascalon were in this sort.

MY right sovereign gracious Lord, as Sebonaes letters to the King.
one unworthy of the favor of a king, did from your majesty receive most
acceptable letters: by which I not only perceived your gracious opinion
conceived of so unworthy a wretch as I am: but also the fervent flames of
Love, which the vnsquenchable fire of Cupid, had ragingly kindled in your
gracious mind. And also since that, understanding the great alteration and
abatement that is fallen upon your grace, the emptiness of such a hungry tree
as I am, not worthy to be fed by such a sweet bark, and delectable rind,
as the bright personage of so comely a gentleman, may be ashamed to present my
self before your grace: my unworthiness considered. But chiefly I feared your
letters were rather the dalying pleasures of a King: then the faithful
affection of love: which since understanding the great anguishes of lurking
love, that have assaulted your royal noble heart: I sorrowed, and was in a
heavy hate with my self: for that I had not long before this have answered
your worthy writings: not deserved to be written, to such a unthankful
creature as I am: Although fear and shamefastness have skalded my heart, that
I durst not write in time: so I trust my letters do not come to so worthy and
favorable a king out of time: which if any sorrow of sickness be fallen upon
you, and the Physician of your health and surgeon of your soars.

The end of Sebonaes letters unto the king.

AFter the king had received Sebonaes The King sent for Sebona.
letters, was somewhat come unto him self. and revived with a little pleasure in
the myddest of so many sorrows: lying upon a couch of downed sylke, desired
one of the Gentlemen of his privy Chamber, to speak with Sebona: which said
Gentleman brought Sebona in the kings presence, who spoke unto her in this
manner.

The Kings words to Sebona.
THe hatred that I conceived of thee (inestimable Voluptuous Love is (...)de.
sweet Sebona) is the fault that I have much offended thee with all, both for
that Dame Nature has skilfully approved her cunning in thee, so rashly to
attempt an immaculate chaste virgin of shamefastness. As also to assault thy
love which is the virtue of renown, spronge from the tree of honest life, no
easy or common Love speedily obtained: for such are the gifts of a virtuous
Lover, not readily won like unto every light Lover, which utter them selves
to sale in the shop of dishonest life.

As I am to crave pardon at thy hands: so I am to renew my earnest suite of
vnsquencheable love toward thee: which as I must needs confess, since my
letters written unto thee: but within these few The end of the Kings words.
days, the increase of love is grown most fertyle in my heart toward thee.

AFter the end of these and such like speeches between the king and Sebona,
they concluded upon marriage: the day was appointed: the solempnity provided
for: the active feats of arms readily set forth: stages and theaters
addressed: commedies, tragedies, sonnets, sweet music were upon the marriage
day, before the kings person, to delyght withal, set forth: Now when the
marriage day was come: the king and Sebona the Queen, with glorious pomp,
ryding toward the holy Alsephon to be married by the Asealon, before the
Image: which having entered the Alsepho^, perceauing the want of the Garlande,
inquired of the Asealon, where the crown Garland was? The Ascalon answered, it
was conveyed by some evil disposed person. The kings courage was sore abated,
his heart waxed frosen, his mind altered, his color came and went: there was
such transformation in him, that you would have thought present death had
besieged him: but notwithstanding, for that their coming was to be married, the
solempnization thereof was finished in this sort: The manner of the Raellyans
(...)ages.
The Ascalon did cut an apple in the myddle, and delivered one half to the
king to eat, and another half to the Queen to eat: Forthwith the people
cried with a loud voice: Holy Image save the King and Queen: such was the
Raellya^s order. And also for old acquaintance that was between the Queen
and the Ascalon: the said Ascalon would pronounce an Oration in the praise of
the Queen, which was after this manner.

The Ascalons Oration in the praise of the Queen.
THe nobility and sovereign renown of the king, with all the condition of his
worthy virtues, is neither unknown to me, nor the people: for that we have
had great and long trial of the same: since that it is a needeles thing to
trouble you, with that you understand already. So at this present time it
does not, but in the way of remembrance, belongs to my office to speak of
the same: I being appointed the holy Ascalon of this blessed Alsephon, will put
you in duty of the solempnization of this marriage, which is between a King
and Queen, the like was never seen in this land before: for that obedience
bynding us, both to render thanks, and with great joy of hearts to triumph:
are also much bound to set forth this present day, with the greatest renown
that may be either thought or done: for that Hellidorus our king has married
so vertucus a Queen, a virgin of unspeakable chastity, the flower garland of
this land of the Raellyans, am not to desist to praise her, both for that our
king has recovered his health through her: our land is guerdoned through her:
our people renowned through her: other nations put in fear through her: O Sebona
most sovereign Queen: thy bewty was the Physician of our King: thy bewty is
the bulwark of this land: thy wisdom is both the subjection, and direction
of the people: Shall not this land of the Raellians through this worthy Queen,
obtain double royalty? is not this Sebona Queen of the Raellyans, the
flagrantes flower that ever sweetly and delicatlye sprung up among the
Raellians? as she has vowed her chastity to one man, so she shyneth in the
eyes of all men: As she is to be beloved of all men: so she loves but one man:
and yet hates no man: O precious jewel, the rareness hereof astonieth the
hearts of all men, and yet comfort the heart of one man: renown is her
victory: beauty, is her praise: estimation, the duty of her flourishing fame:
can any tongue set forth her deserved praise? beutie? renown? comlynes? all the
qualities which decorate her with inestimable sovereignty? So my heart is not
able to think any virtue comparable to the same. As touching this Garlande
which hanged up in this Alsephon, and now taken away: the want hereof O king
let it not amaze thee: for this holy Image which delivered the beutifull
Sweet poison.
chastity and virtuous wisdom of this Sebona, Queen of the Raellyans into
thy hands, will also deliver that Traitor which took this flourishing
Garlande crown away out of the holy Alsephon? O king Hellidorus, as this
wor thy Sebona does garnishe thy land with all the flourishing flowers of
fame: so is she deckte with the pleasures of Venus odyferous smelling garden.
O king beutifie her again with love, sovereignty, condign renown, wealth,
fame, flourishing pleasures, mete and fit for a Queen.

The end of the Ascalons Oration.
AFter the end of the Ascalons Oration, the King and Queen repayring unto
their Court and princely Palace, where the sweet banquets of al pleasant
dishes were ordained, the day passed out with feasting, daunsing, iustling,
and all active feats of arms, mete for such a day and place: although in the
midst of al these delyghts, the king was in another world: both for that
diverse deadly signs gave out the unhappy luck of some adverse mischief that
banged in the clouds of a fatal Prognostication: as well for that the kings
Elephants, Mules, Camels, roared and cried all that day long, on which they
were married: the stones in the streets slew up in the presence of the king:
the ^auens and other byrds of the air, flew round about the king: besides all
this, the kings mind was plunged within the infernal lake of terrible
perturbation: when night was come, yt king with a faint heart and wan
countenance, washed in the basen and lauer of unlusty life: all his former
joy, courage, stoutnesse, vain love: was turned to anguish of heart, pains,
sighs, and bitter tears: rested with his Queen that night, in the bed of
vnrestfulnesse, and joined together in the copulation of carfulness: and
kyssed each other with the lyps of traiterous desolation: when it began to wax
toward day, the unhappy pleasures of the night being spent: the king being
weryed with the doleful delyghtes, slept the woeful sleep of destruction: And
dreamed that he saw in a fair Meadow, The kings dream.
near a river side, an Ass eating thistles, having a golden Scepter sticking
in the hinder parts of the said Ass: wearing a flourishing green garlande,
between his long wide ears: There was a white rough Bear, pulling the said
garland and Scepter from the head and hinder parts of the said Ass: and the
said Bear also did kill the said Ass, and suck out the blood of the said
Ass, until her belly was filled so full that it brake, and her guts hanged out
of her belly. In the end, there came a The carren Crows, or the A^^^^ans how
rude. The Eagles, or the As^^^^ans them selves.
great flight of carre^ Crows, yt fed upon the Ass: and another flight of
Aegles that did quite devour and eat up the she Bear: At this terrible
dream, the king in many troubles of mind, did wake: and as he was telling of
his doleful dream, of the fynal finishing of his life: so ^e perceived Titan
gave out her unhappy luck and unfortunate mischief, yt ruthfully in the
instant of one thought, was behight unto king Hellydorus: In this apparent
twinkling of the day light: arose out of his weryed touch, and beholding the
smelling pleasures of the morning, did see the sorrowful sight of his fatal
end, which was to be performed and finished vp^n him, from the first Original
beginning and foundation of the land of the Scithians. Hellydorus in beholding
this aforesaid morninges pleasure, behold an Ass cropping and eating of
Thystles: at the sight whereof, never laughing in his life before: did now fall
out to a laughter: Which laugh(...) wonderful sight of the Queen and the
officers of the Court, continued for the space of three nights and days. And
somewhat then he changed his voice to the braying of an Ass: which braying
continewed for the space of sixteen days and nyghtes after. In the mean
while, by a Metaphorical transmutation, nature began to change his shape:
first his head, then his ears: and lastly all the parts of his body to an
Ass: After this his being in the full form of an Ass: wandered from the Court
unto the thick wooddes, and desert places of the wilderness. This King.
Hellydorus being changed, from his Kingly roabes, into an Asses skyn: from
his crowned Garlande, into Asses ears: from his comely proportion, into the
form of a very Ass: from his kingly manners, into the manners of an Ass: the
Queen by the counsel of the Ascalon began to take the governance of the
Realm upon her: but the people fell in hatered with her, and would not
obey: Whereupon incontinent, through this wretched amazedness, they made
cyuile invasion one upon another: insomuch that the Assyrians came and
conquered the Land of the Raellyans, from whence it was first deryued. So, the
Assyrians lamenting the unfortunate hap of Hellydorus: and for that noble mind
they perceived always to be in him: in revenge whereof, they persecuted
Queen Sebona and the Ascalon, to a most terryble death: for they were pricked
to death with needles, as the king of the Hircans was, and their dead carkases
were thrown like carren into the wilderness to be deuowred of the Fowls of
the air: the Land of the Raellyans was inhabited of the Assyrians, for ever
after.

How Hellidorus was heard to speak after he was an Ass, and there was
deuowred of hounds: the Assyrians for the love that they did bear unto him,
did bury his carkase in the form of an Ass: and builded in the midst of
the wilderness, a very honorable Tomb over the same.
THe King of the Assyrians having conquered the Land of the Raellyans, drive
out and dyspersed the people, the Land was fully impeopled with the Assyrians.
The king of the Assyrians, after his being settled in the kingdom: on a time
for pleasant recreation, did ride forth a hunting into the wilderness:
bychaunce in the said wilderness, in a great brake of bushes, his hounds
found an Ass, which they coursed and bayted so sore, before any succor could
draw near: that the said hounds had drawn the guts out of the Asses bellye:
the braying of the Ass, and the noise of the hounds, heing heard of the King
and his nobles, drew near: perceauing it was an Ass, took up the hounds:
and the Ass being half dead, spoke unto the king of the Assyrians in this
sort.

The words of King Hellidorus, when he was an Ass.
O King of the Assyrians, I am Hellydorus that was once King of the Raellyans:
hear me: which although I am in the form of an Ass: yet have I the mind of
a man: O idolatry did deuowre me and my Land: the blood of a holy Prophet
does cry out against me: O my tyranny is turned to myserie: O my heavy fate,
I was deceived by a wicked woman, and subdued to wretchedness: the forgetting
of the eternal governance, and the blind worshipping of an Image, which was an
Ass, has transformed me from a man to an Ass: O King of the Assyrians, as
thy hounds have wounded me to death: yet honorably bury my dead carkase:
which although it be the shape of an Ass, yet it is the carkase of King
Hellydorus, which has a penitent heart. Presently dying, the king of the
Assirians did burye the dead carkase, and builded a very rytche gorgeous Tomb
over it, in the myddest of the wyldernes, with these Epigrams written over the
same: and an Ass portrayed in Adamant stone upon the same.

The verses written over King Hellydorus his Tomb.
Ah cruel fate, O noble King,
Subdued by natures kind,
Although in shape thou art an Ass:
Thou wast a man in mind.
Though wretched treason did translate,
By steightes of Venus lust,
Such was the hap and fruitles fate:
In thee to be discust.
A noble king durst Nature race,
The guerdon of thy right,
To change a king to be an Ass:
Which did appear so bright?
This king was beat with cruel rods,
Before his fatal day,
In glorious pomp and wallowing wealth:
There is no hope or stay.
FINIS.

