TO THE RIGHT Honorable, and virtuous Lady, the Lady Anne, Countess of
Warwike.
Our Lord and master (Right Honorable) foretelling the state of the world in
the latter days, ^ith, it shall be as it was in the ^ime of Noe. They eat,
they dra^ke, Luke. 17.
^^ey married wives, and gave in ma^iage, unto the day that Noe went into the
Arc: and the flood came and destroyed them. Likewise also as it was in the
days of Lot: they eat, they drancke, they bought, they sold, they planted,
they builte. But in the day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and
brimstone from Heaven, and destroyed them all. This prophecy must needs be
fulfilled, and in the one part it is already in our eyes. For men's hearts were
never more generally, and of all sorts, set upon riches and pleasures, then
now toward the coming of Christ to make the dissolution. I hold it therefore
the duty of all Gods faithful messengers, most instantly to warn their
Christian people, to beware, least they also be carried away with the stream
of this common infection. Hereby was I moved to make special choice of the
Book called Ecclesiastes, for to expound the same unto that people which I
teach, being wholly framed for the purpose, to draw men from the vanities of
this world. It was set forth by that noble king Solomon, who was the wisest,
the richest, and highest in royalty and honor under the Heavens. He made the
greatest trial, and had the deepest experience in all the chief and most
precious things of this world. He was led also by a higher spirit then his
own, being a worthy Prophet of God.

After I had finished this book, and my Sermons noted by one that did write, I
was requested to pervse and to perfect them, in some better sort for the
Printe: Which as leisure served I have performed in one part. If that weak
measure of gifts, which the Lord has bestowed upon me, bring any good by this
travail unto the Church, I shall be glad: and ready to bestow some pains,
(if it please God) about the rest.

I am bold to offer this unto your Ladyship, as a token of a dutiful and
thankful mind, for so honorable favors as I have received from the right
Honorable my Lord the Earl of Warwike, and from your Honor. I am also
encouraged hereunto, with this, that your Ladyship has long time continued an
earnest lover, and zealous professor of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ.
My earnest prayer is, that God will continue and increase the same, with all
heavenly gifts, and virtues of his holy spirit, to the glory of his most holy
name, the good of his Church, and your own eternal joy. Amen.

Your H. most dutiful to command, George Gyffard.

The first Sermon.
Ecclesiastes. Chap. 1. THe words of Ecclesiastes, the son of David, king in
Jerusalem.

2 Vanity of vanities, says Ecclesiastes, vanity of vanities, all is ^itie.

3 What profit remains to a man all his labor, in which he labors ^der
the sun?

4 One generation passes away, and other comes, but the earth abi^th for
ever.

5 The Sun arises, the Sun go^ down, and hastes again to the ^ace where
it did rise.

6 The wind goes toward the South, compasses about toward the North.
Compassing, compassing goes the wind, and the wind returns by his
circuites.

7 All floods run into the sea, and yet the sea is not filled, whether the
floods run, from thence they speedily return to go.

8 All things are weary, man is not able to utter it, the eye is not satisfied
with seeing, neither is the care filled with hearing.

9 That which has been, is the same that shall be, and that which has been
done, is the same that shall be done, neither is there any thing new under the
sun.

10 Is there any thing of which it is said, behold this, this is new? it has
been in the ages that were before us.

11 There is no remembrance of former things, also, of later things which
shall be, there shall be no remembrance with those that come after.


Ecclesiastes. Chap. 1.
THe words of Ecclesiastes, etc.

This Inscription of the book shows whose doing it was, when it is said,
they be the words of Ecclesiastes, the son of David, king in Jerusalem, this
was king Solomon. They be his words, and his writing. He set it forth for an
instruction of Gods people in all ages.

If any will object, that here is no proper name mentioned, and all the kings
of Judah were the sons of David: why might not this Ecclesiastes be Ezechia,
Iehosaphat, or some other of the godly kings, before, or after them. I
answer, that the son of David, which wrote this book, was he that did
excel in wisdom all that were before him in Jerusalem, (as it is expressed
in the 16. vers^ of this Chapter,) and therefore could b^ no other but Solomon.
For of him God says, 2. Chro. 1. Because thou have asked 2. Chro. 1.
wisdom, wisdom is granted unto thee* and riches, and honor, so that there
has not been the like among the kings tha^ have been before thee, neither
after thee shall there be the like.

It may be demanded, why he does not, (as in the Proverbs, and in the Song
of Songs, which he made of Christ and his Church,) call himself by his
vsual^ name, Solomon, by which he was be^ known: but does take a strange
name* not used elsewhere in all the Scriptures* For through this book he
calls himself in Hebrewe, Koheleth. In deed, this is somewhat to be stood
upon: and I will briefly show you the reason of it, which is to be gathered
from the signification o^ the word.

The Greeks did translate this word Koheleth, Ecclesiastes, and that is in ou^
English tongue, a Preacher: and therefore we say in our translation, the words
^f the Preacher, and so it should be the ^ame of an office, or function, if we
take ^t in that sense. But we never find any Prophet, Priest, or Teacher, in
all the whole Bible, called Koheleth: and doubt^esse, if he had meant to call
himself a ^reacher, he would have said, The words ^f Kohel, rather than
Koheleth, which is ^n the Feminine gender.

Kahal is an assembly, and congregation of people, or the Church. Koheleth
might ^ery well carry this signification, to be one that does gather the same
together, or that does speak in the assembly: but that he uses (as I said)
the Feminine gender, and therefore it carries the most ^itte sense, that he
calls himself an Ecclesiastical person, (not as we call them
Ecclesiastical which bear office in the Church Matters) but a person that is
of the Church, or a soul united to ye church, or speaking in the church.
Whereby we may perceive, that this name is a nots for ever of his repentance,
how that he forsook the evil into which he had fallen, and turned again to
the Lord his God. For the holy Scripture does testify, that Solomon did
marry outlandish women, which were Idolaters, they drew away his heart, so
that he sinned, and fell grievously. He was reproved of God for it, 1. Kings.
11.
as we read, 1. Kings 11. He made this book, to remain as a public record of
his return, and therefore he is Koheleth, a person, or a soul reconciled to
God, and to his Church. In this sense we may call him Ecclesiastes.

I know it will be replied by some, that the word of God does not any where
testify, that Solomon ever repented, after his great fall, but leaves it in
doubt: and to prove his repentance by this one title, by which he does name
himself, is but a weak reason. For, let the signification of the name be
certain, yet is it uncertain, whether he wrote this book after his fall. To
this I answer, that he did write it after the long trial and experience which
he had made in all things under the sun, and no doubt, after his fall. For,
touching his repentance, although it be not said any where, in these express
words, Solomon repented: yet may it be proved by necessary consequence out of
the scriptures, that he did unfeignedly repent.

I reason thus. He was one of Gods elect, therefore he returned to his God by
true repentance, seeing it is impossible, that the elect should perish, Math.
24. To Math. 24.
prove that he was Gods elect, I first allege that which was said to David at
his birth, 2. Sam. 12. and which Nehemiah 2. Sam. 12. Nehe. 13.
does speak of him, Chap. 13. Nathan the Prophet was sent to David from the
Lord, willing him to call his name Iedediah, tendering this cause, that God
loved him.

Nehemiah speaking of the fall of Solomon, says, yet he was beloved of his
God, grounding upon those words of Nathan. What a speech were this, to say,
he was beloved of his God, if he were not gods elect? Does the Scripture ever
speak so of any reprobate? God says by the prophet Malachie, Chap. 1. Jacob
have I loved, and Esau have I hated. Mal. 1.
Saint Paul hereupon does argue, Romans 9. and prove that God has chosen Jacob.
Romans 9.
And why may we not reason thus upon these words, the Lord loves him, he was
beloved of his God: therefore he was Gods elect. Then the Scripture leaves not
his repentance in doubt. I will not stand upon this, that he was a figure of
Christ, Psalm. 45. That he was an excellent Psalm. 45.
Prophet, opening high mysteries of Christ and his Church: but I will come to
that which is written of him, 1. Chro. 17. 1. Chr. 17.
where God says to David, I will be his father, and he shall be my son, and
I will not take away my mercy from him, as I did from him that was before thee.

Some will say this is spoken of Christ, for the title is too high for any
Angel, Heb. 1. I answer, that God said of David, Hebr 1.
thou art my son: but yet, as he was the Figure of Christ, Psalm. 2. and so
her^ Psalm. 2.
of Solomon, For this cannot be denied, that the Lord speaks it of that son
of David, which should build the material Temple, which David had in purpose
for to build: and God said of this man, I will be his father, and he shall be
my son, and I will not take my mercy from him. If God did not take his
mercy from him, then he repented. When heir Solomon was dead, his way is
joined with the way of David his father. For Rehoboa^ his son did well three
years, and those three years he is said to have walked in the way of David and
Solomon, 2. Chron. 11. Solomon's beginning 2. Chr. 11.
was good, and so was his end, or else he should not be coupled with David.
And thus we see he was Gods elect, and therefore repented, and became Koheleth.
So that we hold for certainty, that this name which he gives himself, and
this book, are for public note, and record of his repentance, and
reconciliation to God, and his Church.

Thus much of the Anthor of this book, and for what cause he calls himself
by this unusual name. Now we must observe to what end he made it, or what was
his chief purpose and intent in writing: which in few words I may say was
this, even to instruct men how to come unto the true blessedness. A worthy
work, and most profitable unto all that thirst and long for salvation. The
whole work consists of two parts. For he draws men first from the wrong
way. Those that set their hearts upon the riches, the honors, the pleasures,
and the wisdom under the sun, to seek any felicity or good in them, are in
a wrong way. From this he persuadeth: then he sets forth the right way unto
blessedness, which is in the true worship and fear of God. Hereunto he
moves very carefully. We must note, that he begins with the vanity and
misery of all things under the Sun, because no man can worship God a right,
or fear him in truth, until he have learned to renounce the world. Mark well
what our Lord says, No man can serve two Masters, ye can not serve God and
Math. 6.
Mammon, Math. 6. No man can love God, which loves the world. For thus it is
plainly said: Love not the world^, neither the things of the world, if any
man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For whatsoever is in
the world, as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life, is not of the father, but is of the world. 1. Ioh. 2. 1. Ioh. 2.
The love of the world is enmity against God, so that he which will be a
friend of the world, makes himself the enemy of God. Iam. 4. Iam. 4.


In the same place also we learn, that such as love the world, commit who
redome against God: for he calls them adulterers, and adulteresses. It is
because man's heart and soul ought to be married to God, and to be kept chaste
and pure unto him for the lone: now when it does give away ye love unto the
world, and does embrace it as a sweet Lady in which it does delight, it
commits spiritual whoredom. For the same cause the holy Ghost calls the
covetous man an Idolater. Ephesians. 5. His heart should Ephesians. 5.
be set upon God, and it is set upon the world, he should trust in the living
God, and he does trust in riches. What is this but to set up an Idol? The
cares also of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, are thorns which
choke the good seed of life. Math. 13. Plow up your fallow Math. 13.
and so we not among the thorns, says God unto his people, Ierem. 4. By
Ierem. 4.
all these places we may see how necessary it is, that before Solomon do come
to teach men where they shall seek true blessedness, he emptieth their hearts of
the love and care of earthly things: and this is that I said ^he draws men
first from the wrong way. How well he does perform this, we shall understand,
if the Lord do give us ears to hear.

Vanity of vanities, says Ecclesiastes: Verse. 2.
vanity of vanities, all is vanity. Now we come to the matter. For this is
his proposition, in which he propounds and affirms that, which after ward
he manifests and proves by arguments. It contains in it the first of those
two heads or points of doctrine: namely that in all things under heaven, there
is nothing to be found but extreme vanity, and misery, and therefore such as
seek^ the world are in a wrong way. He pronounces this (as we all may see)
with a most vehement outcrie, and as it were with the shril sound of a Trumpet.
The dull heart of man does force him thereunto. For we are all by nature so
earthly minded, so drowned and over whelmed in the lusts and pleasures of this
world, and our ears so stopped with earth, that we can hardly be made to
hear. Nay to say the truth, let him speak never so loud and shrill, to draw
men's hearts from this world, except God work by his spirit, and give ears,
he speaks unto stones. Ponder well in your minds with earnest meditation, the
weight of this phrase, Vanity of vanities, and the same doubled with this
addition, all is vanity, and see if ye can comprehend what the spirit of God
does here utter, concerning the extreme vanity of all things in this world,
for to quench the flames of our mad love toward the same. For I had rather
thus exhort men unto such meditation of his words, then to stand in opening his
pharse and manner of speech. Consider therefore that he contenteth not himself,
to say all is vain, but vanity it self, yea the vanity of vanities.

And seeing our unbelief is such, that we can not give credit unto the word
of God, where it does but affirm, and the spirit of truth does thus far
yield unto us, as to make proof by reasons and arguments of that which he
here utters, let not us be wanting on our parts through careless negligence,
and so heap sin upon sin, unto our greater condemnation. For the more
graciously he applies himself for to heal our souls, we (refusing or
neglecting this bountifulnes) the more we heap up ingratitude, yea the more
just and heavy is our damnation.

What profit is there unto a man of Verse. 3.
all his travel, in which he traueleth under the Sun? Here we have the first
reason, which he uses to prove his proposition. He does not express every
part of the argument, but the assumption only. For the principle upon which
he groundeth, is so clear, that there is no head so dull, but does
acknowledge it: and therefore is omitted. Neuertheless^ for your help I will
note it. This it is, about whatsoever there is labor spent, yea such labor as
carries with it grief, (for he uses a word that signifies labor with
molestation) and no profit arises thereof, there all is extreme vanity and
misery. Who is (I say) such a dullard, yea such a block, that he will deny
this, or call it into question? ask a fool, and he can say, it is vanity to
labor sore and receive no profit thereby: then if it be proved, that man of
all his sore labor wherein he labors and vexes himself under the Sun,
(that is in worldly affairs) receives no profit: shall it not follow that
all these things are vanity, yea even vanity of vanities?

Thus we are to consider of the whole reason: the first part, which is the
ground of this argument, sore toil with vexation and no profit, is vanity.
as I said, is so clear that the blind do see it, none deny it: men do also
feel and find by experience, that worldly things are gotten and kept with
great labor, trouble and molestation. What need he then stay to make any
declaration of that, unless he would light a candle at none? But the other
point, namely that man has no profit of all his labors and vexations, is not
believed, For would the whole world be so mad as to stand to fill a bottomless
tub? We see all the world is busied to get earthly things, if there be no
profit ensuing, it is no better then to fill a bottomless tub. Would men take
such pains to heap up riches, to clime to honors, to fill and stuff
themselves with delights and pleasures, yea even to sell their souls and
bodies to the Devil to come by the same, if they thought there were no profit
remaining unto them? It is therefore out of all doubt, that men do make their
reckoning and cast their account, to receive great commodities and fruit by
their labors: this then being not believed, but called in question, he does
stand to prove it, and this one point being proved, all the argument stands
firm and manifest. And howsoever it seems unto man's blind nature, that there
is profit and commodity to be looked for in the travail for earthly things:
yet because he proves and manifests by two notable reasons that there is
none, he does shake it of as it were in scorn, and says not, there is no
profit, but what profit is there unto man of all his sore travail, where in
he trauaileth under the sun?

He uses in deed diverse reasons afterward, for to persuade men in this point
wherein they are so madly blinded, but I say two, because in the words next
following he uses two general arguments, the one taken from the estate and
condition that man is in which trauaileth: the other from the estate of the
things in which, and for which he does travail. O that men could be brought to
understand the^ aright, that they might see how they labor without all profit
for this present world, they would not vex themselves and destroy their souls
for to get nothing. They would not be so grievously tormented with sorrow and
care, for the loss of the world, forgoyng that which is nothing. But alas how
shall we be brought to believe this? we make account of no gain, but when was
find the treasures of the earth. We feel no loss, but when we forgo them,
this is our madness, until it please God to give us better wisdom, and to
open the eyes of our mind, that we may acknowledge, that the things which are
seen be temporal, and the things which are not seen, eternal. That we may
labor for the true treasure: not for the meat which perishes, but for that
which indureth unto eternal life. Ioh. 6. John. 6.
Beloved, lay up this in your heart, that Gods spirit here affirms: namely,
that a man has no profit of all his sore travail, wherein he trauaileth
under the Sun.

Consider the reason by which he proves it, if ye can come to be persuaded to
believe it, to feel it to be so, ye have attained to a great matter, ye have
greatly profited, your heart is rid and cured of a sore disease, ye have made a
great step toward the kingdom of heaven. For ye shall be delivered from that
which S. Paul speaks, 1. Tim. 6. They that would be 1. Tim. 6.
rich fall into temptation and into a snare, and into many foolish and noisome
lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition: for the love of money is
the root of all evil, which while some have lusted after, they have erred
from the faith, and have pierced themselves through with many sorrows. I say,
if a man be thoroughly persuaded in his heart, that there is no profit of the
travail under the Sun, he shall be free from this danger that all worldlings
be in. Let us see the proufes.

One generation passes away, and Verse. 4.
another generation comes, etc. Here we have the first reason, by which he
proves, that a man has no profit of all his travail, wherein he trauaileth
under the sun: and ye see it is drawn from the estate which man is in. He is
mortal, his days are few, his continuance is short upon the earth: for he
has but the time of his generation, he gives place, and never returns
again, but another generation succeeds. Finally, his estate is more vain
then the estate of other creatures, as it is set forth by comparison in the
verses following. Therefore there remains to him no profit of al his sore
travail, wherein he trauaileth under the sun.

Brethren, we know it is in all men's mouths, we are mortal, we must die,
there is no remedy, we must make our bed, and lie down in the dark: we have
but our time here. Again, where shall we find that fool, which looks to
have any portion after he is dead, of all the things which are wrought under
the Sun? Is there any which is persuaded he shall come again to look upon
his works, to take pleasure in them? Does he think that his riches shall feed
him, or cloth him any more? Doubtless we all know, we must tarry here but a
time, and then death will cut us off. We are fully persuaded, that we shall
never have use of any thing which we possess here.

How does it then come to pass, that (clean contrary unto this their
knowledge,) men set their hearts upon this world, and look for profit by
their labors? There is somewhat that does seduce men, and quench the light of
this knowledge, or else how could it be thus? In deed, there be diverse things
which do seduce men, and quench the light of this knowledge: so that although
they know they be mortal, yet can they not see that this is a sufficient
argument, to prove that all their travail for earthly things, is to no
profit: but they set their heart upon them, and covet them as greedelie, as if
they should live upon ye earth forever.

I will note unto you somewhat which does make men ^^d even against their
knowledge. Here is one great cause, that such a thick dark miste does
compass men round about, that they cannot see a far of, but even at ^and.
They be not able ^o behold eternity, and to look upon that which continues
for ^uer: ^^d that does make them esteem this world, as if it were all in
all. Ten thousand years (in respect of eternity) are but a moment, and as
nothing, if we could well discern, and judge aright.

And behold what account man makes of threescore and ten, they be even as a
world unto him. For these, and about these, for to maintain his estate in
them, he bends all the powers of his mind, applies all his studies and
indeuoures, labors, toyleth, and vexes him self marvelously like a fool.
Then we see, that this natural spark of light, whereby men do perceive they
must after certain years die, and depart from all their labors, is not
sufficient to make the^ wise, nor deliver them, because they are compassed
about with darkness most miserable, which causes them to err, and go out of
the way, as much, as if there were no spark of knowledge at all in ye mind.

It is far more easy, and possible, for a man to see clearly twenty mile
with his bodily eyes, through the thickest mist, then with all the light of
nature, to look beyond this world.

Here come the great wise men of the world to be fools: for, with all the
light of understanding which they have, they ^e not able to look any further,
but upon ^he riches and glory of this world, They ^an not be persuaded that a
man shall receive no profit of all his labor, because he shall die. It is
not within the ^o^passe of their view to look upon things eternal, to value
them, and from them ^o descend to the things present, and by comparison to find
that the glory of this world, though it were for ten thousand years is
utterly vain, and has no profit in it. I say they be not able to do this
without special grace, to meet with this, and to recover men from such folly,
Solomon uses a comparison between man and other creatures, by which it
appears, that besides this that he is mortal, his estate is the most vain
and transitory of many other. The earth that is ^nmoueable and stands for
ever. One generation of men does succeed another, and for a little time as it
were play their part upon it, as upon a stage: some has ^ longer part then
other, but none passes his generation.

What is the life of one man, compared with the continuance of the earth? ther^
be other creatures, as the Sun, the wind, and the waters, whose estate
serves to be unconstant: but yet man is no^ to be compared with them, for they
return again into their former place, h^ passes away, and does never return
any more. The Sun arises (says he the Sun goes down and hastes t^ his
place again. Where it did arise, the win de goes toward the South, and
compasses about to the North: compassing compassing about goes the wind, and
the wind returns by his circuites. A^^ floods run into the sea, and yet
the se^ is not filled, to the place whether ye flood run, from thence they
speedily return^ Touching the Sun and the wind there is no difficulty, we
all see they return again to their former estate, bu^ this last of the
waters, needs exposition They be often displaced, but they mak^ have again
unto their own place, as w^ as the sun and the winds, but not s^ apparently.
But if we mark what the Scripture teaches, we shall see it. In the creation
of the world, God set the waters in two places, Genesis 1. The waters under Genesis 1.
the firmament he laid upon heaps, and called them Seas. The waters above the
firmament he has hanged alost in the clouds: these he carries all over the
world, causes them to drop down and to water the earth. They drop down in
great plenty: part of them fleet into valleys, make a flood, and with all
speed run into the sea. Another part sink into the ground, where they, by
little and little, by drayning, meet together, and by hollow veins of the
earth, from hill^s and mountains, break forth in springs, and make rivers.

These also, though a little stayed after their fellows, run into the Sea.
How comes it then to pass, that in so many hundredth, and thousands of years,
the sea is not filled? This is his reason, by which he proves, that they do
return again into their own place, and do not abide in the sea: for if they
did abide there the sea would be filled. They be drawn up by the sun into
the clouds, and so life is a vapor, that appears for a little time, and then
vanishes. The Prophet David uses a comparison beyond all these, Psalm. 62^
For he compares the state Psalm. 62.
of man, yea even of princes, with vanity it self, and makes it the lighter.
These be his words. The sons of base persons are vanity, the sons of
nobles are deceit. If they be put together in the balance, they will ascend
above vanity. Put all men in one balance, and vanity in the other, and they
will go upward, and be found the lighter. For, the heavier end of the
balance goes down ward, and the lighter ascends.

How comes it to pass then, that men, yea, such as should be wise, and in
deed do take themselves of all other to be the wisest, are so be witched, and
blinded, that they make so great account of their estate in this present life,
as if it were all in all? They think there is profit and commodity of their
labors, and that great, no man can persuade them to the contrary.

Alas, what should I say here? I may well lament and bewail our miserable
blindness, I know not how to cure it. There be so many things that do
deceive, it is almost without end.

Let it be that this word of the Lord be received, man is mortal, he has but
his generation, he passes away as a shadow and never returns again, his
estate and condition is so vain and transitory, that compared with other
creatures, he is far inferior: Yet this conclusion will not be received,
therefore their remains no profit unto man of all his travail, wherein he
trauaileth under the sun, for this sticks fast in the heart Although the
days of man upon the earth be but as a vapor, that appears for a short time
and then vanishes, yea howsoever he pass away and return no more, and is
inferior to other creatures, yet he receives very great profit by his
labors, and that many ways. He has to feed and clothe himself withal, and
to serve other necessary uses.

He comes to have countenance in the world, of worship and honor: his
valiant acts and wisdom, shall be renowned unto all posterity. He does convey
over his honor and possessions unto his son, who is as dear unto him as his
own soul. He shall flourish and prosper in the world. He shall continue the
name and countenance of his father, are not these great commodities, and worth
the travailing for: I answer, that these had need be worth somewhat, for in
deed they be the things for which many thousands do sell there souls and
bodies to the Devil. They be those rocks against which men 1. Tim. 6.
do run and make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, and so drown
themselves in perdition and destruction. The wise men of the world are
poisoned and killed with these baits. The Devil death suggest them, and man's
blind heart receives them even against the truth.

For let us look well into the matter, and we shall find, that there is
nothing in all these but mere deceit: the truth of this sentence shall
continue firm, that there is no profit unto a man of all his labors, wherein
he labors under the Sun. Touching the first, there is some present
commodity in deed obtained by man's labor, for he eats of the labor of his
hands: he has to clothe himself withal. Men are commanded to labor for
that purpose, this being Gods ordinance, In the sweat of thy brows thou Genesis 3.
shall eat bread. Genes. 3.

Moreover, by their industry and labor men do provide somewhat to leave unto
their children, as nature binds them, and the Scripture pronounces such as
do not this to be worse then infidels. Nevertheless here is nothing to
contrary that which Solomon teaches, that there is no profit to a man of all
his sore travail. For he uses a word which Iithron. a profit that remains.
signifies a profit that does remain, and continue or stick by a man. All
present commodities are vain, yea most vain, because they continue not with
men. Again here is nothing to drive men from labor and diligence about
earthly things: but to moderate men's labors, and to correct immoderate and
vain care, which draws men from the study of better things. It is the same
doctrine which Christ teaches, John. 6. Labor not for John. 6.
the meat that perishes, but for the meat that indureth unto eternal life.
And which S. Paul exhorts unto. 1. Cor. 7. Let him that bieth be as though
he possessed 1. Cor. 7.
not, for ye fashion of this world passes away. I may say further, that to
have riches, and honors be good benefits, in this respect also that by the^
men are the more enabled to do good, and so to be rich in good works. But as
worldly men do account, and as they do covet them, there is no good in them
at all: for if a man's substance be increased never so much, he shall carry
none of it away with him, his pomp, says the Prophet, shall not descend Psalm.
49.
with him into the grave, Psalm. 49. She does often and usually follow and
accompany unto the graves mouth, but then returns, and takes her leave. Well
his son he is now aloft, this is as good to the father as if he had it
himself. Yea we see many a miser labor like an horse and almost sterue
himself to make his son rich: he continues the name, the lands, and the
houses have the name set upon them. What a goodly matter is ^his? no doubt this
seems a goodly mat^er, yea so goodly, that it costeth (as I have said) many a
soul. The worldlings ^pare no travail to come to this. Look whatsoever
stands in their way to let, ^hey will tread it down if they can, yea ^uen
Gods truth, all equity, faith, and ^onestie.

This is the vain glory which the Psalm. 49.
Prophet derideth, Psalm. 49. Their mind ^s (says he) that their houses may be
for ^uer, their habitations from generation ^o generation, they call their
names upon their lands. But man is in honor and shall not continue, he is
like the beasts that perish. This their way is their hope and their children
approve their words. They shall lie as beasts in the grave, death shall be
their sheepeheard. This, I say, is it which God speaks touching the vain
glory of blind worldlings, which do more earnestly bend their mind to have
an house and glory in the earth to all posterity, then to seek to know god
aright, to glory in him, to magnify and set up his honor, and so to be
glorified in the heavens for ever, to have their house or name continued, is
but an earthly commodity, and should not be so highly preferred. But let us yet
deal more particularly in this: yt if it be possible, some of our hearts may be
freed from this pestilent infection. Of all his stately palaces and pleasant
orchyards, he is not allowed so much as one corner of an alley, or a gallery to
walk in, after death has arrested him. The body lies in some vaut where it
does rotte: being in the life time a companion of Princes, now peradventure a
toade or snake or some base vermin, sits by as the only companion. The fame
and glory is great, the name is upon the houses and the lands. What does this
help his base dishonorable body? these seem sweet things, but that does
stink. His soul because it did embrace this present world, and so committed
filthy whoredom and forsook God, is in a worse place, whether the body shall
also come. It lies covered in shame before God and his Angels: is it any whit
the ^etter for a blaste of vain praise and ho^our among men? his son
glistreth in ^old, and is clothed in silks, drinks ^weet wine with the
pleasant noise of melody: the Father lies tormented in the dark pit of hell,
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth for ever, where ^e can not have so
much as one drop of Luke. 16.
water for to cool his tongue. He is be^ome most wretched, having lost his
soul for ever, for to get a little earthly glory, and to make his Son
happy.

But how far wide is he also in that? what shall his son or his sons son
find more then he himself did find in these things? let men say or think
what they can, for any good that they shall be able to find, either to
themselves or their children and posterity in wordly things, and so apply
their whole study that way, as to increase riches, to rise up to honors, and
to enjoy pleasant delights: let them glory in their wisdom by which they be
advanced, yet shall they be found stark fools, and this doctrine, vanity of
vanities, all is vanity, shall be found true. Because there is no profit that
does remain unto a man of all his sore travail, wherein he trauaileth under the
sun, seeing death curreth him of after a few days, h^ can never return
again, his place shall know him no more.

Then let this first argument of the wise King Solomon sincke into your minds,
to destroy the love and care of earthly and transitory things: that your hearts
may be free to seek God, and to be set upon heavenly things, in which there is
true blessedness. Lay not up treasure in earth, where rust and moth do corrupt,
and where thieves break through and steal. But lay up for your selves
treasure in Heaven, where neither rust nor moth corrupt, and where thieves do
not Math. 7.
break through and steal. Math. 7. Beready 1. Tim. 6.
to distribute and to do good, that ye may be rich in good works.

Remember what is said by the blessed 2. Cor. 9.
Apostle, He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly: and he that sows
plentifully, shall reap plentifully. The time that ye live here is compared
unto ^he seed time: your liberality, and distributing your goods to the
poor, is the sowing, and scattering abroad: because, as ^ man seems to lose
his seed, when he scatters it, and burieth it in ye ground: and yet it
springs up, and the harvest comes with great increase. Even so, ^o man's
thinking, he does deprive himself of all that he gives away, and yet ^s it
far otherwise, for it brings the greatest increase of all other, by a
plentiful harvest, when God shall give the reward.

He is a fool that has seed, and good ground, and will let the season pass,
and not cast any of it into the ground. The rich man is more fool to hoarde up
gold and silver, so that the rust, of them shall he a witness against him, and
shall denoure Iam. 5.
his flesh as fire: when he might scatter, and sow, and reap life eternal.

Remember also what S. Paul says, Galath. 6. He that sows to the flesh,
Galat. 6.
shall of the sleth reap corruption: he that sows to spirit, shall of the
spirit reap life everlasting. The men that travail for this world, and
provide for the flesh, to satisfy the lusts thereof, heaping up riches, and
bestrowing them to that end which they do, when they labor so earnestly for
the worldly wealth, for themselves, and their children, do so we to the flesh.
Al their travail is for the flesh, and for the maintenance of this vain life.
The harvest that these shall have is corruption. For, both they, and al these
things corrupt, perish, and come to naught.

Such as lay out, and distribute to the poor, such as employ their riches to
advance the gospel, to set forth Gods glory, and to be means to further their
own salvation, and the salvation of others: these sow to the* spirit, there
shall an harnest follow: they shall reap, and gather sheaues of eternal life
and glory.

Behold (beloved) what difference there is of riches laid up in store for the
flesh, and spent thereon: and the riches laid out to seek the spiritual life,
and heavenly treasure. Wise are they which sow to the spirit, respecting
this harue^^, wherein they shall reap with joy: But fools, ^d mad fools are
they, which labor and ^xe themselves for the flesh, to make them^ues and their
children rich, for they all find no profit therein. The end is ^rruption, al
vanishes and comes to ^ end. For, what profit remains to ^an of all his
sore travail, wherein he ^uaileth under the sun? when one ^neration passes
away, and another ge^ration comes.

Al these things are weary, man is not Verse. 8.
^le to utter it, etc. This is the other rea^n which I spoke of before, which
he ^ingeth to prove that there is no profit ^ a man of all his travail. It
is taken ^om the estate of the things in which, and ^r which, man does
travail.

Their estate is vain, and miserable: which is noted in this one word, when
^e says, they be weary. For, it is as ^uch as to say, that all things in
this ^orld are subject unto vanity, and that ^ such deep measure, as man is
not a^e with all the wit he has, to compre^nd, or to utter it. The blessed
Apostle S. Paul Romans 8. does handle and s^ forth this thing notably: how
great t^ vanity is, and how weary all creatur^ be.

The fervent desire of the creatu^ (says he) wayteth when the sons ^ God
shall be revealed. For the creature ^ subject unto vanity, not of it own ^cord,
but for him that has subjected it ^der hope, because the creature shall be ^
free from the bondage of corruption, v^ the liberty of the sons of God. For
^ know that every creature does groa^ and travail together in pain, even ^^
to this time.

Solomon faith, all things be so were that man is not able to utter it. S. P^
says, all creatures are subject unto va^tie, and the bondage of corruption,
and ^ long to be delivered, which shall be at t^ latter day. Their bondage is so
exceedi^ great, that he says, they do groan a^ travail in pain. To say
that the du^ and senseless creatures do groan, a^ travail with pain, is
all one as to sa^ they be so weary, man cannot utter it

Now we see somewhat the sense of the words, let us consider the force of the
reason. He that will find any good that shall continue, or any thing that may
better his estate, he must seek it, and find it in things whose estate is
good and permanent, he must not look for it in things whose estate and
condition is miserable, and subject unto vanity.

For will any seek for light in darkness? As any man so simple, as to look for
blessedness from that which is under ^urse? Who looks for freedom to be given
him of those that are in bondage? Then consider what he says, all these
things are weary, man cannot utter it. All creatures under the sun, both
those yt have life and sense, and those which are without sense, and every one
of them, are subject to vanity, and long to be delivered from the bondage of
corruption. They be so exceeding weary, that they groan and travail in
pain. Therefore, man feeling his own misery, and beggerlines, coue^ing to
find good, to be made happy, or ^t the least to have his wretchedness
mitigated, he must not seek it in things under the sun, for they are not
able to relieve themselves, nor to rid themselves out of the bondage of
corruption, which lies sore and heavy upon them, making them groan.

What is the cause then that men seek for good in riches, in honors, and in
pleasures? Why do they make account that their misery is assuaged, and
mitigated by these? Doubtless there is no cause but blindness, yea intolerable
and lamentable blindness: as they know not themselves, so have they no eyes to
see in what case all creatures under heaven be. For if men could be brought to
see in deed, but what this is, all these things are weary, man cannot utter
it, they would stay, and turn back their eyes, and not so greedely and egarly
pursue, and lay hold of those poor creatures, to seek succor at their
hands. They would say, we are wrong, these are weary themselves, they cannot
refresh us: these are feeble, weak, and transitory, how shall they support and
comfort us? They be in bondage and misery, shall they relieve us? Shall we
lay hold upon them, for to stay upon them, they will fail us. We follow but a
blast of wind, and gape to fill our bellies with the East wind. We go about
to join vanity unto vanity: for we seek help of those which are in misery
as deep as our selves. I say it is an extreme blindness, which causes men not
to perceive this.

What then beloved? there is a natural inclination in us to seek relief and
help. Yea, but let us seek it where it is to be found, even in our Lord God
himself. Seek as fast to lay hold on him, as the worldlings do to lay hold
on riches, ye shall find more than they. Many say, who will show us any good,
says David, Psalm. 4.
Psalm. 4. Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon us. Thou have put more
gladness in my heart, then they had at such time as their corn, and wine, and
oil abounded.

The worldlings are glad when riches increase, but it is nothing to the gladness
which those find, that seek the favor and ^ouing countenance of God. Seek
after things which are eternal, they will never fail ye. The heavens and the
earth that now are, wax old as does a garment, and shall be changed as a
vesture. Psalm. 102. Psalm. 102.
Look with the eyes of faith upon ye new heavens, and the new earth, in
which dwells righteousness, for such has god 2. Pet. 3.
promised, 2. Pet. 3.

In the words which follow unto the 12. verse, he does set forth the same
reason with an amplification: The eye is not satisfied with seeing, neither is
the ear filled with hearing. The mind of man can not satisfy it self nor
rest contented when it has laid hold of all things under heaven. For the eye
it self is a little thing and would soon be satisfied. The ear is shallow
and were quickly filled, but ye mind which sets these a work, is
insatiable. If men were not stark blind, might they not reason thus, when a
man has heaped up all the treasures of the earth, when his wisdom is
increased, and he has attained unto the top of all the honor under heaven,
yet is not his mind satisfied, he coueteth still to see, he coueteth to hear,
he coueteth to have.

Is it not a manifest proof that all things under the Sun, being in that
vain and transitory estate which they be, are not able to ease the misery of
man's mind? the fullness of joys is in Psalm. 16.
Gods presence alone, and at his right hand there is comely pleasure for ever
more. What is then the reason that men do never cease when they have attained
great things, and yet feel no ease? Here is their foolish blindness, they
still seeks for new things, they imagine that by a further and deeper reach,
they shall find some good.

Here come in new devises, new honors, new pleasures, new works, all new. He
meets with this and shows that there is nothing new under the heavens. When
they have gone as far as they can, yet shall not their eye come to see, nor
their ear to hear any new thing. That (says he) that has been, is the same
that shall be, and that which is done, is the same that shall be done, neither
is there any thing new under the sun. Is there any thing whereof it may be
said, behold this, this is new? It has been in the ages that were before us.
O that men did understand this, they would not be so mad as to be still
insatiable touching ye world: their own experience would teach them, that
nothing in this earth can content or ea^e their mind: am I not satisfied with
that which I have seen and heard, or that others before me have attained? Then
shall I never, for there is no new thing to be found out, in which a man may
find good.

Yea but men find out things that be new. That is but our ignorance, for
(says he) there is no remembrance of former things, also of things to come
which shall be done, there shall be no remembrance, with those that shall be
after. There be things which seem new (I speak of such as men seek felicity
in) but it is because they are forgotten: so that the eye is never satisfied,
looking for new things, the ear that does hearken after them: and thus are men
insatiable, but all in vain, for in their new things where they seek^ some
good, they shall find nothing but old vanity.

O then brethren forsake your worldly cares, look upon your selves, ye are
miserable, look upon the creatures, they are in such case as that they can not
relieve ye, look for nothing new among them that may content ye, and settle
your mind to say, I am now eased, it is a vain study there is nothing new,
there is nothing stable. Therefore seek after the blessed God, to know him, to
lay hold upon him, and to possess him, he shall suffice to make ye blessed,
and to content your mind.

The end of the first Sermon.
The second Sermon.
Ecclesiastes. Chap. 1. I Ecclesiastes, was king over Verse. 12.
Israel in Jerusalem.

13 I gave my heart to inquire, and make search in wisdom concerning all that
is wrought under the heavens. This evil travail has God given to the sons
of men, to occupy them therein.

14 I saw all the works which are wrought under the sun, and behold, all
is vanity, and vexation of the Spirit.

15 That which is crooked, cannot be made straight, and that which is wanting,
cannot be numbered.

16 I spoke in my heart, saying, I have magnified, and increased wisdom above
all that were before me in Jerusalem, and my heart has seen much wisdom and
knowledge.

17 And I gave my heart to know wisdom, and the knowledge of extreme madness and
folly. I know that eue^ this is affliction of spirit.

18 For, in the multitude of wisdom there is much indignation, and he that
increases knowledge, increases sorrow.


Ecclesiastes. Chap. 1.
I Ecclesiastes, was king, etc. In the former part of this Chapter we have had
two reasons: the one drawn from man himself, the other from the things about
which he labors, to prove that a man has no profit, nor good at all, which
remains of all his sore travail under the sun, and therefore all is
vanity of vanities.

Now he proceeds forward, to show that he himself made trial in all things
under heaven, and found by full and perfect experience, that in deed, in all
those works under the sun, wherein men do seek some good, there is nothing
else but vanity, misery, and vexation of spirit. This his proceeding is a
plain demonstration, that the disease (I mean of setting our hearts upon
things transitory) has not only taken deep root in us, but is also most
pestilent and deadly. For, if it might easily be cured, what need should
there be of heaping up all manner of proofs, and persuasions to draw away our
hearts? And if it were not most deadly, why should there be such care taken
about it?

Solomon did know right well by the holy spirit of the Lord which guyded him,
that all which can be said, is little enough in this case: nay, the most are so
bewitched, that it does not help them at all. But the proof which is brought
from one man's experience, may seem to be over weak and slender to move all
men in the world: even the Princes, the rich, the wise and valiant, and to
persuade them to cease from seeking good under the sun, for what is one man
to try out all things to the full?

In deed least we should think thus, before he come to note what trial he
made, and so deliver unto us what he found, and what can be found, he speaks
somewhat of his own person, what he was, and of what ablenes, and diligence.

If it be such a man which sets forth his own experience, as was thoroughly
able to search out every matter, and also did it, and that in such sort, as
all the men in the world (if they would join together) cannot come nigh him,
then may we be persuaded by his experience. For, he is a fool that will think
to find that which he could not. Now in very deed, such a one was Solomon.

First, he was a king, as he says, I Ecclesiastes was king. If any in the
world be able and fit for this work, they be kings. For they possess the
flower of all wherein there seems to be any good. There can be no experience
of that which a man has not. He was king over Israel in Jerusalem. This Israel
was Gods chosen people, which he had magnified above all nations under heaven,
and this was the city of the great king, even Jerusalem.

Here is a king higher then all ye kings of the earth. This man is not idle,
but gives himself to search out the works that are wrought under the sun,
to see what was in them. Yea, but he might find naught in some, and yet in
other some there might be that which he saw not. Let no such thought rise in
your mind, for look whatsoever is done, or that all Princes in the world are
able for to do, yea, and all me^ whatsoever, he did search it. For so he says,
that he gave his heart to search out all the works which are wrought under
heaven. Do not think, that ye can light upon any one thing worth the
search, which he has not searched.

It may be further objected, he that searches so many things, how can he do
them all well? To this he says, that he did search by wisdom. He was not
deceived, for wisdom guided him in every part, God gave him both wisdom and
honor, and riches above all earthly creatures. He is a man even made fit of
God himself, to find out, and to tell us what is in all the works which are
wrought under the Sun. Let us believe him: let us not follow the vain
fools of the world which give no credit unto him, but seek to find good where
he could find none. He says, it is an evil travail which God has given to
the sons of men to be occupied in. He says also, he beheld all, and all is
vanity and vexation of spirit.

Do men I pray ye believe this? Why do they then set their whole heart night
and day upon things that be transitory? They labor, but bring not any thing
to pass worth their sore travail: they be vexed and tormented in vain, (God
having in his justice for sin laid this evil travail upon Adams children)
for he says, that which is crooked cannot be made straight, and that which is
wanting cannot be numbered. There is imbecillitie in man's works, and that so
great, that he can not make that straight which is crooked: there is such
imperfection, that the wants and defects are infinite. If he look upon the
creatures, if he look upon him self, or upon the success and event of
matters, all is crooked, he toileth but can not reform it in any.

All the creatures are weary, subject unto vanity, and unto the bondage of
corruption, they groan and travail in pain. Man labors in them to build
and set up some sure work, but it will not be: for they decay, alter, and
perish. He can by no means withstand or remedy this crookednes: his skill and
his power do utterly fail him herein. Man him self is more crooked, his mind
depraved, full of utter blindness, the passions and affections most vile and
corrupt, the body base and subject unto all diseases and incombrances: yea
both mind and body every way in such crookedness as is unspeakable. There is
nothing straight in him, all goes crooked and perverse, he works upon
himself, and can make no part straight. For all the humane Science and wisdom
under the heavens (if it were possible for one man to attain and possess it)
is not able to give him any spark of true light and knowledge of God, nor to
cleanse or rid his soul from any one drop of that devilish poison wherewith it
is infected and depraved. Wise men might well, and did seem to have made
themselves much straighter then the common sort, but in very deed their
crookedness remained still within.

I speak not of such as are regenerate by Gods holy spirit, but of those who
were led only by the light of nature. All their riches, their honor and
power not able (they imploing their travail) to ease or recover their bodies,
to rescue the^ from the gout, or from an ague. The success of things is so
cross and unlucky, they foreseing what they can, their ignorance by which they
take many times the wrong course, man's skill being so imperfect, does cause such
infinite defectes, that Solomon beholding this in all the works wrought under
the sun, he does pronounce that all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

How clear is this, man has such imperfections, wantes, and errors in his
works as can not be numbered, all is crooked within him, without him, and about
him, and he can make no one thing straight: therefore all his labors are lost,
they be vain, and miserable, carrying with them so sore affliction and vexation
of the mind. Thus has he in general pronounced, what he found in all the
devices, studies, and works, which are wrought under heaven.

Now he proceeds unto particular declaration: for he goes from point to
point, showing that in all the excellentest things under heaven, wherein there
is any appeera^ce or hope of good to be found, there did he make search. And he
did begin first of all with wisdom: Because in very deed, of all things
transitory, she is the flower. It is she that makes men to differ most one
from another, and to excel.

It falls out oftentimes, that stark fools are rich, and in place of great
honor. The brute beasts do enjoy delight and pleasures, as well as men: but
neither beast nor fool can possess wisdom, but only the wise man. If there
be any true worthiness, felicity, excellency, or good to be found in the
creatures under the sun, it is in wisdom: therefore he says, I applied my
heart to know wisdom.

It may be said, that wisdom, (even humane wisdom of which he now speaks)
is high and deep: who can search into her treasures? who shall find, or be
able to value what she can afford? Most true it is, that wisdom is no easy
thing to try. He must be no fool nor simple person: but he must possess her,
and that in exceeding great measure, which will discern what her riches and
pleasures be.

Mark therefore what he says, before he does tell that he applied his heart
to know wisdom. I said in mine heart (says he) behold, I have magnified, and
increased wisdom above all that have been before me in Jerusalem. Also, my
heart has seen much wisdom and knowledge, because God had endued him with
greater wisdom and knowledge, than any man under heaven, he does gather
thereby, that he was the fittest for this purpose. He does encourage himself,
and makes it known unto all, that he was thus set forward. He searches not
at adventure, he searches not in the dark, he has his rule and his candle in
his hand, even the light and direction of wisdom her self. The wisest man
under heaven searches out wisdom: yea, I may say more, let the wisdom of all the wise men in the world be laid together, it comes short of his.

Some have been greatly wise in the course of the heavens, some in the
knowledge of nature in all creatures here below, some subtle Logicians, some
eloquent Orators to persuade; some politic in making laws to govern Cities
and commonwealths. Others have been famous and renowned for the skill of other
noble sciences, as every man's heart led him: some to one, and some to another.
In all these he has surmounted the^ far, if they were laid together. He saw
more, he did know more, and could tell more then all they. He was in deed the
wonder of the world. The Queen of Saba wondered at his wisdom, until there was
no spirit in her, 1. Kings 10. Confessing 1. King. 10
that she did not believe that which she heard of him, until she came and saw
it with her eyes, and moreover, that the one half was not told her. He
excelled the fame that went of him. Then behold, here is the man which must
tell us what good is to be found in all the wisdom and skill of this world.
He did abound in all manner of wisdom, and thereby gave his heart to know her.

Moreover as he was wise, so he took a good and perfect way to make a full
search. It is expressed in these* words, I gave my heart to know wisdom, and
the knowledge of extreme madness and folly. This is certain, that every
thing is most perfectly manifested and known, by the contrary. As for
example: A man could never find so well the comfort and benefit of the light,
if he were not sometimes compassed about with darkness. We best feel the
sweet, when we have first tasted the sower. Health is more comfortable after
grievous sickness, the pure white shows the brighter, when it is set by the
black: even so wisdom shows the greater glory, when extreme madness and
folly are set by her.

For this cause Solomon (to the end he might behold this goodly lady wisdom in
her full beauty, and commodity,) sets by her extreme madness and folly.
For together with the sight of this evil favored and deformed bedlem, with
all her inconveniences, the view of wisdom does set her out most excellently.
All her brightness, all that she has to delight, or to benefit, are
displayed. We may see then what ladde him to apply his heart to know extreme
madness, or all kinds of madness, (for he uses the word in the plural
number) and foolishness. It was not any love that he bare unto them, but to
find out the perfection of wisdom through the knowledge of these. For by the
vglines of madness and folly, the pleasant countenance of wisdom is more
delightsome and amiable. The harms, the inconveniences, and mischiefs which
grow from those, to the annoyance of all mad raging fools: do make known and
manifest, what good, what treasures and commodities this wisdom does bring
unto him that does possess her.

May we not think that Solomon did now behold as it were an Angel in
brightness and glory, which might fill the mind with consolation and
happiness: but mark what he pronounces in the next words following: I know
also that this is affliction of spirit. What can be more plain? There is a
show of good to be attained by humane wisdom, and men are wonderfully allured
and drawn in hope thereof: but when it comes to the proof, they have lost
all their labor, there is naught but a mere illusion, the good is vanished.
What do they find in steed thereof? Look what he fonnd, even affliction of
spirit, shall they find any better.

It may seem very strange and absurd, that this wisdom, which has always
been so extolled, magnified, and honored of all nations in the world: so loved
and embraced of kings: so set forth and bewtified with all the jewels and
ornaments that might be by the skillful and learned of all sorts, should thus
be abased, as to be made but an illusion and a vain deceit, which in steed of
good so sought and hoped for* does bring nothing but affliction of the spirit.
The wise men of this world have in all ages thought their labors abundantly
recompensed by wisdom.

Solomon which had more then they all, pronounces, that it has nothing but
affliction of spirit. How comes such contrariety of judgment? Doubtless
from their blindness, they saw not that which he saw. Their eyes were daseled
with present glory and commodities: he beheld that it could not further a man
unto true blessedness in the kingdom of God. He did behold the weakness and
imperfection which is in it, being unable to make that straight which is
crooked, especially in the depraved heart of man. So then let all her friends
set her out to the uttermost of their skill, and paint forth her praises in the
freshest colors that they can: yet shall the sentence of this one man prevail
against them. He did know her more perfectly then all they, he gives the right
sentence, they are deceived. They say there is great good, he says I know that
this also is affliction of spirit. And he renders a reason thus: for in the
abundance of wisdom, there is abundance of indignation, and he that
increases knowledge increases sorrow.

He that would be in felicity, must not seek it in sorrows and griefs of
mind and body: but in things that are sweet and pleasant. Happiness is in
joy and consolation, bitterness and anguish are contrary thereunto. Then must
it needs follow, that all those are deceived utterly, which seek felicity in
humane wisdom. Because the more wisdom abounds, the more does indignation
abound (as he did feel) and he that increases his skill, it is with sore
travail, and it is full of sorrows. There may be many causes of trouble and
disturbance of the mind with indignation where wisdom does abound. For he
shall see that there is no end, but an infinite trouble, question upon question
will arise, the wants and the auknesse of matters will torment.

Again, with what infinite travail and care of mind and body, is knowledge
come by? how have men studied and wearied themselves all the days of their
life, to get knowledge? who is able to express the pains which the
Philosophers did take, and yet none of them able to excel in all, but in some
pieces as their affections chiefly drew them. He that will be a perfect
Logician, to have the full use of natural reason in perfect rules, it is not
the work of a few days, nor yet of a few years. It must be with long
travail, even all his life, and yet he shall come short. Cosmographers, in
describing all parts of this world, the heavens, the earth, and the things
that be in them, have no small work in hand. Come to these which search to
know the nature and properties of all creatures, where shall they ever come to
see toward an end of their travail? They be in a bottomless sea with out
shore. How must those study, how many histories, volumes, and books, must
they turn over, which will come to be sound Politikes, to be furnished for
the government of Cities and Commonweales, and for the wars? Look unto all
others which travail in any science, and the pains of such as will excel in
deed, are wonderful. Here is travail, here is care, here is indignation,
here is wearines and grief upon grief, here is no end, here is no perfection
attained, here is no settling, or quieting of ye mind, all does vanish as
smoke, there remains no good at all.

Thus we see the sentence of the wise man himself, concerning all the skill and
knowledge under the sun. I know flesh and blood will here rise up. Wisdom
will not suffer this disgrace, but will plead for her self.

First it will be objected, that this is a weak reason, there is no wisdom
attained unto but with sorrows, therefore wisdom is vanity, and vexation of
spirit. Men may go through infinite labors and greefes willingly, to enjoy
so precious a jewel. Their labors are well spent, they be fully recompensed.
To have the estimation and honor of a wise man, is no small benefit. Knowledge
fills the mind with delight, so that it forgets the sorrows sustained in
trauayling.

I answer, that there are no labors, nor sorrows sustained for true
felicity, which can any thing impair the same, the joy of that will surmount
them all: it is most happy labor that is so spent. But in these things there
is no true joy, but a shadow. It is the love of vainglory that has carried me^
forward to take such pains, and so sore to vex and torment themselves. All
their joy and comfort rests in this, that they may have fame and glory in
this world. If this glory be ^aine and transitory, how does it recom^ence
their labors and greefes? If there ^emaine no good, is not all vanity, and
vexation of spirit?

Let us examine it in some particu^ars. Cicero and Demosthenes were eloquent
Orators: how wise, and how sweet was their speech? They could delight the ^are,
and persuade the mind. But can their eloquence now persuade, to have their
torments mitigated, or to be let out of the prison of hell? Alas, what can
their smoothe tongues benefit them now? their fame does them no good. Solon
and Lycurgus could make wise laws, and make men partakers of great freedoms,
but they can purchase no infranchiseme^t to themselves, from the miserable
bondage of eternal destruction. Aristotle could dispute subtillie, let him now
show his cunning to acquitte himself. Julius Caesar, Scipio, and Hanniball,
were expert and valiant warriors, but what can their sharp swords help them
now? They could overcome men, but not devils.

We may see that all the pains an^ vexations to attain worldly skill, are n^
way recompensed but utterly lost. The parties have but deceived themselue^ with
vain glory and pride, they have made great account of that which is nothing
worth. For it is not any good tha^ they have found, which made the Philosophers
and great wise men so to labor, but an opinion that their glory should never
be darkened, and that this glory was the chief thing to be sought.

It seems so still unto men, and that it is a most abject nature which can
not taste it. In deed unto such as can not see far of, as S. Peter speaks.
2. Pet. 1. 2. Pet. 1.
but have the beams of their sight determined within the limits of this
world, it must needs be all in all, and the thing which they do thirst after.
But if they could see thus far, that all this glory shall do a man no good,
when he goes down into the dark pit of hell, it would alter their mind. For
he which passes through that gate must leave his train behind him, he must
put of his robes of honor, and lay aside his weapons of war.

This will some say is nothing to the purpose, these were Heathen men whom ye
have named, they knew not God. A man may have all this glory, and the glory of
heaven also, as many have had. That is most true, that a man may have the glory
of this world, and the glory of heaven also, and that some have had both, or
else were it wide with David, and Solomon, and many other. But yet we must note
this, that those be no other then as Heathen, which delight and glory in the
pomp of this world, and account them fools which cannot (as they say) taste
this glory.

Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his
strength, nor the rich man in his riches. But he that glories, let him glory
in this, that he has understanding and knows me, etc. Ierem. 9. Our Savior
speaks Ierem. 9.
in this wise of those which seek the glory of this world, Ioh. 5. How can ye
John. 5.
believe which seek glory one of another, and seek not the glory which
comes of God alone? Whereby it is manifest, that such as set their hearts to
seek the honor that is of men, be Infidels. The godly men, as king David and
others which had the glory of this world, made it not their delight and
glory, but gloried in the Lord. Yet it will be said, that this doctrine is
absurd: For is not wisdom and knowledge in the noble Arts and Sciences, the
gift of God? are they not helps then, and furtherances to approach nearer unto
God, and unto true glory? I answer that they be good gifts of God, and where
the corrupt nature of man does not hinder, they be helps unto higher and better
things.

But Solomon does not dispute what this wisdom is in it self, but whether a
man can attain any true felicity by it? Which he denies, for though it
benefit a man for the present, as touching worldly commodities, yet it is no
true good because it is transitory and does vanish. It is gotten with sorrows
and vexations, so that a little sweet is mixed with a great deal of sower. It
is never perfect, neither ca^ it make that straight which is crooked. It is so
far from bringing a man nearer unto God, that it casts men further from
him, as the state of man is now. For it sets up man in pride, and to glory
in himself. It is so blind touching spiritual and heavenly mysteries, in
which God reuealeth the knowledge of himself unto salvation, that it is not
only not capable of them, but does blasphemously and madly condemn them to be
foolishness, as the holy Apostle teaches. 1. Cor 2. the 1. Cor. 2.
reasons and cogitations which come from the wisdom of this world, or from the
flesh, are compared unto holds and munitions, and high things which exalt
themselves against the knowledge of Christ, which the Gospel must throw down
when it turns me^ unto God. 2. Cor. 10. 2. Cor. 10.


And therefore the same Apostle says, 1. Cor. 1.
that God has made the wisdom of this world foolishnes: that he does destroy
the wisdom of this world, willing that he which will be wise, become a fool,
that he may be wise, 1. Cor. 4. Not that a m^ 1. Cor. 4.
can empty himself of the wisdom tha^ he has attained, or that he is to
reject ^^ utterly: but that he must not stay upon it, nor rest in it, nor
glory in it, nor let ^^ blind him: but acknowledge that ther^ is a higher and
a more excellent wisdom, even the wisdom of God, which shewet^ the way unto
true blessedness. Trust i^ the Lord with all thine heart, and lean^ not to thine
own understanding, says the holy Ghost Prou. 3. For in deed, the corrupt
Prou. 3.
nature of man is made so wonderful proud by knowledge, that it despiset^ and
treads down the truth. Nothing seems glorious or excellent unto the wise
of this sort, but their own skill. All must be measured by that, and look what
soever does not square with it, is condemned.

From hence it comes, that among the prudent after the flesh, few are called
to inherit the kingdom of God, as we^ are taught 1. Cor 1. It is so hard a
thing 1. Cor. 1.
to bring them to be fools.

It will be replied here again, that this is more absurd then the former,
namely, to confess that even humane wisdom is Gods gift, a thing therefore
good and commendable, and withal to affirm that it does not bring men nearer
unto God, but casts them further back. Can a good thing be the cause of
evil? I answer: that a good thing cannot be blamed justly to be the cause of
evil. We do not affirm that the knowledge and skill of all that is under the
Sun, is in it self the cause that men are carried further from God, but
man's corrupt nature is the cause which does pervert and abuse it, as it does
the best things of all unto destruction. As for example, the law is good, Romans
7.
the commandment is holy, just, and pure, says the Apostle. And yet it is
called the ministry of condemnation, the letter that 2. Cor. 3.
kills, and the strength of sin. Is that which is holy and ordained for
life, made 1. Cor. 15.
sin, or the cause of sin, or death? Look how the Apostle answers, Romans
7. Romans 7.
Sin does take occasion, and works all manner of concupiscence by the
commandment.

It took occasion by the law, and seduced me, and sieve me. Yea, he shows
that sin through the law does become out of measure sinful. And what shall
we say further, does not the vile nature of man abuse the grace of God it
self? Why does the Apostle say, shall we continue in sin that grace may abound?
God forbid. To. 6. Why does he give this admonition, Romans 6.
brethren ye are called unto liberty, only make not your liberty an occasion
to the flesh. Gal. 5. but that there is so vile corruption in men by nature, as
that they will make the less regard of committing sin, because sins are
freely pardoned by the blood of Christ. Shall we then marvel that the
wisdom of this world, though in it self good, do not bring men nearer unto
God, but carry them further from him. Yet how will some man say?

First thus, the more a man is lifted up in pride, and does glory in him
self, the further he is removed from God. For God abhors the proud, and
beholds him a far of, yea he does set himself against him, or resist him
as S. Peter teaches. It is not possible for man by nature 1. Pet. 5.
but to be puffed up, and to glory in natural understanding. And therefore we
see that men which are of great wisdom for the direction of earthly things, in
laws, in policies, and in arts, do so much glory in themselves as if they
were the flower of men, so long as they be not regenerate. Then also they be
the hardest of all other, to be brought for to yield to the heavenly wisdom.
For they be full and rich already. Who shall admonish, who shall teach, who
shall instruct or control them?

Here will great displeasure be taken. For will some wise men say, this
doctrine does tend to the destruction of all the noble sciences: for who will
take the pains if he may not have the honor? Nay to hear that they do
carry a man further from God. It will also be the overthrow of commonwelths.
For where shall become our wise politikes, and valiant warriors? If honor be
brought into contempt, then farewell al. We shall have none but fools and
cowardes. Will men adventure their lives if it were not for glory will they
study if they may not have praise? Is not this such a mischief as is
intolerable? I answer, that in very deed, to overthrow commonwealths, or to
destroy noble sciences, is a mischief intolerable. But to say that it will be
so, unless men may seek the praise and glory of the world, is a reason not
good among christians.

Among Turks or Heathen where there is no other thing to lead them forward, it
might well be allowed: among us it is to be accounted as flat Atheism: we are
to seek the glory of God, and not vain glory. I may reason thus: If a Pagan
would take such pains in study, for skill and wisdom, and adventure his life
in the wars for the glory and praise of me^. How much more ought a christian
man, to do the like to glorify and serve his God? God says he will honor
those which honor 1. Sam. 2.
him: their glory shall last for ever. The other which sought for to glorify
themselves shall lie covered in shame, when their vain praise shall vanishe:
There have been men as wise and poli^ike for government, and as valiant for
war as ever any other, which sought not the praise of men, but with true
fear ^o serve and glorify their God, as Iehosua, David, and Solomon, with
many others. And it is a bad mind of those which will not allow humility,
because they (...) it makes men fools and cowards.

Let us see then, when as Solomon does affirm that in all the wisdom under
heaven there is no good, there is no fe^icitie, there is naught but vanity and
affliction of spirit, he does not condemn the skill of this world, but does
set it in the due place. It is profitable for the affairs of this life: it may
be an handmaid to do service unto the true heavenly wisdom. But when she is
set up as a judge and controller in heavenly matters, or as Hagar does advance
her self, and despise Sara her Lady, that is grievous. All this is wickedly
performed, when men do glorify it, rest in it, covet to be advanced by it,
despising in respect thereof the true knowledge of God. And herein behold the
wickedness of men: the knowledge of Philosophy and worldly wisdom is so
highly esteemed, and so bewtifull and precious in their eyes, that they have
more delight in it by many degrees, then in the heavenly knowledge. This does
appear by their studies.

How sweet unto them are Tullies orations, and Aristotels politikes, when as
the Psalms of David, the Proverbs of Solomon, or Paul's Epistles, are but as
dry chips. These are neglected, there is no pain or travail vndertake^ about
the^, there is no sweetness in them. About the other for the wisdom of this
world, there is unspeakable toil. Books upon books, volumes upon volumes,
study upon study, and happy men if they can so come to excel in some one
thing. For why? they suppose, they have gotten feathers of gold to make them
goodly wings for to mount aloft in this world. For the wealth and glory of this
world is in their eye, the chief matter.

Alas poor vain men, that they had the wisdom to consider well what is here
spoken, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity: yea even wisdom it self. For it
brings much sorrow both to body and mind, and can but advance in this
world, the shape of which passes away. It would make them alter their
studies, and divide them so, that their chief labors would be for the
heavenly wisdom. For beholding the vanity of all the glory under the sun,
it would cause them to set their hearts upon the true glory, and to seek for
it ten times more carefully then for that. Which the Lord give us grace to do,

Amen.
The end of the second Sermon.
The third Sermon.
Ecclesiastes. Chap. 2. I Said in my heart, go to now, I will power forth
with mirth, therefore take thou pleasure in that that is pleasant. But behold
also, this is vanity.

2 I said of laughter, it is mad, and of mirth, what is it that she does?

3 I sought in my mind to draw out my flesh in wine, and leading my heart in
wisdom, and to take hold of folly, until I saw whether this be the good to
the sons of men, which they are to do under the heavens, the number of the
days of their life.

4 I made my works great, I built me houses, I planted me vineyardes.

5 I made me gardens, and orchardes, in which I planted trees of all manner of
fruit.

6 I made me cisterns of water, to water therewith the wood, springing up with
trees.

7 I gate me menseruants, and maideseruants, and had children borne in the
house: also, I had possession of cattle, and flocks, great above all that were
before me in Jerusalem.

8 I heaped up for me also silver and gold, and the peculiar of kings, and of
the provinces: I gate me men singers, and women singers, the delights of the
children of men, all manner of harmony.

9 And I was great, and increased above all that were before me in Jerusalem:
also, my wisdom did abide with me.

10 And whatsoever mine eyes desired, I withhelde it not from them, I kept not
back my heart from any joy, but my heart rejoiced over all my labor, and this
was my portion of all my travel.

11 I looked then unto all the works which my hands had wrought, and unto the
travail in which I travailed to do, and behold, all is vanity, and vexation
of spirit, and there is no profit under the sun.

12 Then I turned to behold wisdom, and extreme madness and folly, for, what
shall the man do that shall follow the king? even that which is done already.

13 I saw that there is profit in wisdom more then in folly, as there is
profit in light above the dark.

14 The wise man's eyes are in his head, but the fool walks in the dark.


Ecclesiastes. Chap. 2.
ISaide in my heart, go to now, etc. We have already seen in the former
Chapter, that Solomon, first of all, searched out wisdom, and found no good
therein, but sorrows. Now therefore, he turns to seek elsewhere. And first
unto plesures, which he staieth not in, but by and by detesteth. And so he
comes to a third course, which is this. He mixed wisdom and pleasures
together. But he does conclude, that although he found in this way some good
in both, yet not such, but that he saw all to be vanity, and vexation of
spirit. For the good be found, is but for the present time.

But let us come to his words for that former, he stirs up himself unto
delights and pleasures, to see whether there be in them the felicity that me^
shall have under the heavens. And to the end we may understand that he
searched even to the bottom of al pleasures and delights, he uses a speech to
express the same as vehemently as might be. For he does not say, I will give
my self to pleasure, which might be done with some moderation, and so he
should not search deep enough: but he says, I will power forth with
pleasure* that is, he will* wholly give over, or power forth himself, or his
heart unto pleasure. And so he wills his heart (even as it were letting lose al
ye raines) to take pleasure in that which is pleasant. This is very needful to
be considered, because our nature is addicted unto delights and pleasures, and
men do greatly covet them, imagining that there is felicity in them, they be
so sweet unto the flesh.

If Solomon had but tasted, or used moderation in pleasures, we might have
said, what can he tell how great good there is to be found in delights? But when
he poured forth, and gave over him self wholly (for the time) unto them,
what doubt remains, or can remain? He was a great king, wanting naught, but
having at will and commandment what he would for all lawful delights. No other
king in the world able to do ye like. He put forth himself, and did what
might be done. And now having proved, mark what he says: Behold, this also
is vanity.

He stays not here, in pronouneing all carnal delights and pleasures to be
vanity, but shows also, that he did eue^ ldath them with contempt and
indignation.

I said (says he) of laughter, it is mad, and of mirth, what does she? Being
marvelous wise, it grieved him exceedingly to be carried so far awrie, and
out of the way, as to be made a fool, a mad man, or a beast. Now he saw that
pleasures, (which he understands by laughter) do in deed make those even
brutish, and mad fools, which are given over unto them. That is the cause why
he says laughter is mad, which is not to be understood only what it is in it
self, but what it makes men. It carries men which are poured forth
thereunto, even to the forgetfulness of God, and to quench all light of true
understanding in them. Thus then he reasons: felicity, or good, is not to be
sought in that which makes a man forget God, quenches the light of reason,
turns him into a beast, or makes him mad. But carnal pleasures do all
these, when a man does pour forth him self unto them, therefore they are to
be despised, abhorred, and rejected.

A wise man may well say of mirth as he does: what does she? as if it should
be said, she does mar at, leads clean awry, and leaves no good. In this
point there is little credit given, or like to be given unto Solomon. For
almost the whole world does give over it self unto vain mirth and pleasures.
There is such a sweetness in them unto the flesh, that ye shall scarce find
the tenth man, among noble or base, which does not think himself even after a
sort happy, if he may enjoy even the scumme or dregs of them.

I speak thus, because in comparison of Solomon's pleasant delights, all the
pleasures which the common sort of men attain unto, are but eue^ as the
scumme. And what is the cause that we can not believe him, but do still follow
after carnal pleasures, as greedily as ever hungry fishes do catch at the
bait? Surely this is the cause, men are fools, and so it greeueth them not to
be made beasts or mad men, as it grieved him being wise. Is this the way to
happiness? O miserable blindness. Men are now (as the holy Apostle prophesied,
they should be in the last days) lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God.
2. Timoth. 3. Let us 2. Tim. 3.
take heed of it, seeing it is but a vain illusion, and no more but as the
dream of a sick man. He dreameth that he sees pleasant sights, and hears
goodly songs which delight him, but when he awaketh, he is in his bed full of
pain: pleasures for the time carry men on as happy, but in the end they
shall find they were deluded.

I may here reason by comparison after this sort: If lawful mirth or that
which is indifferent in it self, do make men to become mad and base minded,
when they be given over thereunto, not keeping moderation, for power forth thy
self and thou shall become mad, how much more shall filthy and unlawful,
or impure delights make them brutish? for we must not think that king Solomon
did pour forth himself unto unclean mirth: but unto such pleasures as are
deemed honest. And they that are carried away with these become mad, and base
minded, their felicity being all one with the beasts. Then we know not
whereunto for to like^ those which make a sport of sin, and sport themselves
with wickedness. Some of them delight in pride, painting forth themselves by
all the ways and means which they can, that they may seem goodly in the eyes
of men. Others follow gluttony and drunkenness, cramming and stuffing their
bellies like swine. Others solace themselves in whoredom and uncleanness, these
be their sweet delights. Solomon did not give himself to such pleasures.

These be more then mad, for they drink in poison only because it is sweet,
even the most pestilent and deadly poison and bane, both of soul and body:
therefore it is said, the fool makes a sport of sin. Moses is commended
for great wisdom, Hebr. 11. When he did refuse Hebr 11.
to be called the son of Pharoes daughter, choosing rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season, esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches, then the Hebr. 11.
treasures of Egypt. I would all kings, princes, nobles, and great men of the
earth, did know that which king Solomon does teach in this place. Yea I would
all men did consider it a right. The^ should we not have the deuisers of vain
delights so much made of, we should not have so much cost and so much time
spent in vain mirth.

I will now proceed unto that which does follow, being the third search that
he made to find good. He says he took upon him to dra^we forth his flesh in
wine (that is to my sweet delights and pleasures) for wine being one of the
chief delicates, is as a part used for the whole. But he would do this (as he
says) leading his heart in wisdom and taking hold of folly. That is he will
join wisdom and delights together. The study of wisdom did carry with it
as much increase of indignation and sorrow, as of knowledge, so the more
knowledge, the more sorrow, and being transitory how should it bring felicity
or good, yea even for the time present? felicity, as was said before, is a
sweet thing, it is not in griefs and vexatio^s. To come then unto pleasures,
there may be felicity in them, for they are sweet and delicate, they bring
delight. He powers forth his heart unto them, they make him mad. If
felicity be to be found in brutish madness, they can afford it.

Whether shall he seek now, he has failed in these two former? he does
therefore take a third course, and does make a mixture, and join them both
together. The pleasures and delights shall assuage, and delay the sorrows
which go with the increase of wisdom: and so the bitterness of them shall not
be felt. Again, wisdom shall be as a bridle to moderate the pleasures, to
avoid the foolish madness, which other wise they do bring. So that now he goes
about to prove what is in these, when both those former evils are salued. He
will neither be besotted, or made abrutish fool by the one, neither tormented
by sorrows with the other. Here ye see a most excellent wise way, and in deed
as we shall see afterward, ye good that is to be found is in this course.

It may be said, that he, joining them thus together, the one might be an
impediment to the other. For either his abou^dant wisdom would not suffer him
to take pleasure (filling him full of morositie) or else his great pleasures
could not but carry him awrie from wisdoms lore: therefore mark what he
says, for in deed neither of them hindered the other. His pleasures should be
to the full, and whereas he professes, for he would draw out or continue his
flesh in wine, that is in delights. He would also lead his heart in wisdom,
and take hold of folly, then pleasure shall not make him mad: we have seen
before why this is added, that he would take hold of folly.

And so here he does let us understand, that in both these together he waded
deeply, yea most deeply, until (as he says) he might see whether this be the
good that the sons of men are to enjoy under the heavens, the number of the
days of their life, whether a man may find good under the heavens in wisdom,
and delights mixed together?

Thus having declared the purpose of his mind, he shows how he did practice
the same. For look what served for honor, for royalty, and magnificence, he
set it up. Nothing was omitted which might minister comfort and joy, in lawful
and honest delights. Wisdom also showed her self every where in all his
labors. For, according to the power of a king, and the same the greatest in
glory, riches, and wisdom under heaven, he made his works great and
magnificall. He did build fair and stately Palaces, goodly houses, none such
(in every respect) to be seen in the world. He planted vineyardes, he made
him gardens and orchards, in which he planted al manner of fruitful trees, even
of all the best fruits that could be gotten in the earth. Into these the
pleasant sweet streams of fresh waters, were divided by conductes, or pipes,
into cisterns, for to water the trees and plants.

He had (as he says) great riches, above all that were before him in
Jerusalem, He had a great family, of men servants, maidseruants, and children
born of them in the house. He had store of cattle, as, of sheep and oxen. He
heaped up gold and silver, and. the peculiar treasures of kings, and of the
provinces: even such treasures as none but kings and potentates are able to
possess, for the great price of them.

Furthermore, he had the sweetest melody that might be: for he had men
singers, and women singers, and (as he says) the delights of the children of
men, all manner of musical harmony: which is translated in our english bible,
a woman taken captive, and women taken captives. The words be Schiddah, and
Schiddoth Now, Schadad is to spoil, and lay wast, but here it is unfitly taken
in that sense, of a woman, or women taken captives. He spoke of men singers,
and women singers, and then no doubt he adds the music of the instruments,
which was used together with their voice. And to note that he had not common
music, he says, the delights of the children of men, harmony, and harmonies:
as much as to say, all manner of harmony, and noyses of music, the sweetest
instruments that might be, being joined together. And the words which he uses,
do very fitly express the matter, because in the harmony of music, many
diverse soundes meeting together, are (as it were) wasted each of other, and
do make all one tune. And so he calls it Schiddah, and Schiddoth.

Thus we may see, that there was nothing under the heavens, either beutifull
unto the eye, sweet and pleasant to the taste, or delight some unto the ear,
but he had it. And for the same purpose he tells more then once, I was great,
and increased above all that were before me in Jerusalem. But does he (as he
purposed) enjoy pleasures, and yet lead his heart in wisdom, for that is the
thing he professed to undertake. He affirms that he did. His delights did not
carry him into foolish madness, for he says, verse 10. yet my wisdom did abide
still with me. But did not his wisdom withholde him from taking solace? In no
wise, for he says, All that mine eyes desired, I kept not back from them, I
witheld not my heart from any joy. Behold then, as he purposed, so does he
bring to pass. He joins wisdom and delights together. Mirth and laughter
shall not make him mad. He will not so forget himself, to be carried with
sensuality and voluptuousnes, as to be made a beast. His wisdom did still
continue with him, and guide his heart.

Again, he did not vex himself with indignation and sorrow, for the
multiplying of knowledge, and so withdraw him self from pleasures. For,
whatsoever his eye desired, whatsoever his heart wished for in any lawful
mirth, he was able to have what he would, he did not deny the same.

See then how he was lifted up touching all the excellent things under the
sun. He did flow, and swim in wealth, in pleasures, in honor, and wisdom.
He had all that heart can wish. If these things be able to relieve, or to ease
man's misery, he is happy by them. He wants not, nor is not scanted. Let all
kings and princes now look upon him, and harken what he says, for he comes
now to tell what he found in all these.

He confesses in deed, that in this way he received commodity. And first
touching the delights, that he withhelde not his heart from any joy. He says
it was his portion of all his labor. Whereby he does us to wit, that there
is no more to be had but for a temporal profit. He is to have but his part,
and then when he has left all behind, another does take his part: and so
along still from one to another. There is no man which will maintain, that
after death any one is the better sor the delights which he lived in. For the
present time there is profit, being used in such sort, as that they do not
quench the light of the mind, and drown it in security, and other filthy
sins. For God has given men ye lawful use of his creatures, not only for
necessity, but also for delight and pleasure. As he has appointed that we
shall labor and travail, so also we are to take part of our labors, it is our
portion under the sun. But withal we must observe, that when he says, this
is my portion of all my labor, he does speak as of a small thing, and not to
be wayed or esteemed as the chief and principal matter which man is to seek.
For it is as if he had said, my labors are great, I have no more for my portion
but delight and pleasure for the time.

For when he does well way what this portion is, he makes it nothing. He had
as much joy and pleasure as could be had in all earthly creatures: and does he
say, Have I no more for my portion but this? Does he make so light of the
matter? There be multitudes, which if they could come but unto the tenth part
of his glory, riches, and pleasures, would not set so light by them. They
would think their labors well bestowed, and take the^ selves very happy men,
if they might but swil themselves in the dregs of those pleasures which he did
swim in. If some man had but one of his goodly houses, it would cause him to
look aloft.

It shows that this noble king had a far better sight, to discern and
judge of these earthly things, then men commonly have. For the world is
blind, and countes it gain to live deliciously for a season. He says in the
next words, I looked unto all my works which my hands had done, and unto the
labor which I had travailed for to do, and behold, all is vanity, and
vexation of spirit, and there is no profit under the sun.

Then we see, his portion was not such, but that all still was vanity. A
worthy thing to be considered of all men, that he could enjoy to the full the
good which is to be found in all things under heaven, and yet see so clear that
all is vanity, and veration of spirit, and no profit at all. For he does
now speak of some profit which remains. Then we might see by him, that if we
had our portion in all the best things under the sun, yet it shall not make
us one iotte the nearer unto happiness: yet foolish people wilsay, he has all
things at will, he is happy.

Let us here make comparison. The great magnificall works of king Solomon,
with all his royalty, and glory, and pleasures, are vanity, and vexation of
spirit. What is then to be thought of the works of meaner persons, yea, let
it be even of kings? Their works are not comparable unto his. All his have
vanished, and shall not theirs? He found no good, and shall they find any?
Behold then, a man set up in the height and top of all excellency for this
world, who also having made search every way to the full, to find good, does
proclaim, and cry out aloud unto all other whom he beholds from aloft,
striving below, and laboring themselves even out of breath, to clime up unto
him, that they do but lose their labor, and weary themselves in vain. For
when they have gotten even to the highest degree of wealth, of dignity, and
pleasures, they shall find naught but mere vanity. There is no credit given
unto this, which shows, that the worldlings are too too shamefully besotted
and be witched, for they labor as earnestly to clime aloft in the world, as
if the fulness of joy and felicity were thereby to be attained. They have
nothing the like care to seek the kingdom of God, where in deed alone is the
true blessedness. They spill both body and soul, to come by that which can do
them no good at all. They build their houses in blood, in craft and deceit,
with briberie, extortion, yea with all manner of unjust dealing, have they
increased their riches.

If they could rise up as lawfully as Solomon, it were much nearer, yet all
vanity. What is their misery then, which they have doubled by their wicked
covetousness, and ambition? If they look to go beyond Solomon, they be mad*
If they look to be equal with him, they be fools, they shall never come nigh
him by many degrees. If they think to find good, then it must be in the
scraps, whereas he could never find, but denies it to be in the full
furniture of the table.

This might stay our course when we run so greedily and ambiciously after the
world. If we had the grace and wisdom but to be think us, that we are told by
one which has proved that all is but labor lost. We run from God whom we
should seek and stay upon: and follow after that which can not help us at
all. We lean upon a broken staff and stay upon a reed. If God give us riches
and honor, use them to his glory, account of them as things transitory. We
must set our hearts upon better things. If I could be equal with Solomon in
glory and royalty, I perceive by him it were naught worth. Why should I
deprive my self of ye ioies of heaven, by a likerousnes of that which is
utterly vain? I can not serve God and Mammon. I can not delight in this world,
and delight in God also. He that does but desire to be rich falls into many
noisome lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. 1. Tim. 6.
I will first, as I am commanded, seek the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness. I will not labor for ye meat which perishes, but for the
meat which indureth unto eternal life. Unto this I say we be admonished.

Then to conclude this point, I wish that kings, princes, nobles, rich men, and
all other would take the view of Solomon's works: his stately palaces, his
pleasant gardens, and orchyards, his gold and silver, with all his honors and
delights: and with all mark well and believe that he says, all is vanity and
vexation of spirit, there is no profit under the sun. This would do them much
good: they should not be drowned and swalowed up in earthly cares and
pleasures. Now he comes to the other part. I turned (says he) to behold
wisdom, and madness, and folly. It may be demanded, did he not behold
wisdom before, comparing her with madness and folly, why does he then now
turn to behold her again? He did behold wisdom before, and did search her
out by her self, and found much indignation and sorrow. Now he does behold
what commodity he received by her being mixed with delights, she guiding his
heart, through pleasures. And because he speaks of every thing so resolutely,
before he do proceed any further, he preuenteth an objection, for it might be
said, who is Solomon that we should stand to his sentence, is his experience so
perfect above all others?

To this he makes answer, what shall the man do which shall follow the king?
that is, which will search out matters which he has searched. And he adds,
even that which they have done already. But the phrase of the Hebrew tongue
does bear to say, eue^ that which is done already. As if he should say, let
any man what soever he be under heaven, take upon him to follow me, and to make
trial in any one thing, he shall not go beyond me, he shall do no more then I
have already done. When he says who is the man, it is to show that he is not
to be found. All kings, princes, rich and wise men in the earth joining
together can not match him. God made him even for the purpose, such as he
never made any before nor after him.

Then I saw (says he) that there is profit in wisdom, more then in folly: as
there is profit in light more then in darkness. The wise man's eyes are in his
head, but the fool walks in the dark. He showed before that to take delight
in his travail (his heart being guided in wisdom) had some commodity in it,
but yet all vanity, it was but his portion for the present time. So now he
declares that he did also find profit in wisdom being thus tempered,
nevertheless all is but vanity, as he shows by reasons.

But first see, how he does lay open the commodity of wisdom above folly, by
a comparison. It is so much more beneficial and good, as the light is above
the darkness: compare then these two, the light and the darkness, and ye
have the difference of the other. It is not in every man's power to match
wisdom and folly together, for how shall men judge of that which they know
not, nor never saw? they are acquainted with folly, but wisdom is hid from
them. For this cause he gives a rule which is common. All men can tell what
profit there is in light above darkness. And he shows that thereby we may
take a just measure what profit there is in wisdom more then in folly, when
he says it is as in the light above the darkness, Well then let us hold us
to the rule, which he gives to take the true measure and to scanne this matter
withal: because there is no man that possesses wisdom: but some has one
piece, and some an other more then the common sort.

But we enjoy the light and are deprived thereof eftsoons by the dark: this
is common to the fool and to the wise. He that walks in the light does not
stumble, for it shows him his way. He that goes in the dark knows not
whether he goes, he steppeth into the ditch. The light is comfortable, and
shows unto a man many cheerful and delightsome things. Darkness is
doleful and uncomfortable, covering the beauty of all goodly things, when a
man is in the midst of them. By the light men see to order their work and
do it well: In the dark they ca^ do nothing but mar that they take in hand.

We see that the eyes are ye light of the body, they be placed above in the
head as in a watch to were, and so behold round about and a far of. If there
be any good to be gotten they show where the way lies toward it. If any
danger approach, they tell how to shun and avoid the same. To this he
co^pareth the wisdom of the wise, when he says, the wise man's eyes are in his
head, but he likeneth a fool to a blind man: the fool (says he) does walk
in darkness. Then we may see his mind is this, a wise man touching ye matters
of this world (for he speaks here but of the worldly wisdom, which can see
no iotte beyond worldly affairs) has his skill and knowledge for a light,
even, as ye eyes be in a man's head.

The benefit hereof is such, that it ordreth all his ways. He does eschew
dangers, mischiefs, inconveniences, and every hurtful thing. He procures
commodities on all sides. He has delight and pleasure in the work of his
hands. The fool is blind, and if he have not one which has eyes to lead him,
falls into the ditch on every side: he dasheth his head against every post:
he wrappeth himself among bushes and briers, and is rent and torn: If he
struggle out, he is never the near, because he is by and by in new dangers.
Thus we may see what is the prosite of wisdom above folly. Let us note here
then first, that Solomon does not condemn humane wisdom, but commends it
as a thing profitable, when it is rightly used, as containing it self within
the compass of worldly matters. For when she medleth with heavenly and
spiritual things, she is above her reach, she does step out of her own
shop: though she be as a clear eye for this present world, yet for heavenly
things she is stark blind, and a very mad bedlem, condemning the wisdom
of God and spiritual 1. Cor. 2.
mysteries to be folly, because they agree not with her.

Let us also mark in this place, that it is little marvel, though the wise
men of this world make wonderful account of their wisdom: they take pleasure
in the commodities which they reap thereby. They laugh slilie to see others in
the briers and plagued through their folly. But this is above their skill, and
herein they err, that when a man for to keep a good conscience* falls into
dangers and miseries in this world, they judge him a fool. Al their wisdom is
to keep this world, the loss of it they esteem madness. It is far of from the
wisdom of flesh and blood to teach a man to deny himself, to renounce ye
world, and to take up his cross. And this is the only way unto true
blessedness.

For the son of God said, that such as will be his disciples, must do that.
Math. Math. 16.
16. The great wise men of this world, whose wisdom does abound and ouerflow,
even as the waters in the sea, delighting in the excellency of things present,
do together with the foolish, hate and persecute extremely Christ's true
disciples. For the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God: Because it is
not subject unto the law of God, neither in deed can be. Romans 8. God does
destroy the wisdom Romans 8.
of this world. 1. Cor. 1. He has given 1. Cor. 1.
Christ to be our wisdom: and in him are all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge. Col. 1. His doctrine destroleth that Col. 1.
wherein the wise do most glory, and therefore they do account it most absurd.
Few such wise men are called to be partakers of Gods glory. 1. Cor. 1. they
follow the 1. Cor. 1.
world, they heap up riches, they seek countenance and glory.

Moreover, we must beware that we do not misunderstand Solomon in this place,
when he does speak of wisdom, comparing her to the light, and to the eyes in
the head. We may not judge that he does speak this of craft and subtlety,
but of such knowledge as is good in* it self, and in the right use does bring
commodity: now a days, though there-be few wise men (for it is attained with
great and long travail) yet there be many that think themselves wise, and are
offended if men do not so deem them. When as in deed the greatest part of
their wisdom, does rest in a naughty dissembling craftines and falsehood. They
have no skill in good sciences, and yet because they can with subtle shifts
and very cousening tricks over reach other, they glory much, and take
themselves to be the only politikes of the world. These men are none of those
of whom he speaks, when he says, the wise man's eyes are in his head, this
kind of skill is gotten without sore travail and sorrow. It is an easy thing
for man's corrupt nature to put in practice this devilish art: who can not
feign, lie, and dissemble?

Well, these are to be put out of the number, and sent among the fools, least
they might glory, and say, we be the men of whom Solomon does speak: We have
our eyes in our head. No, no, your subtle wilines is oftentimes a snare or a
net, a pit, or a trap to catch your selves. He catches the wise in their
craftiness. 1. 1. Cor. 4.
Cor. 4.

Moreover, we may learn this in continual experience, that a man whose policy
is craft, is suspected in all his doings, and thought to dissemble, even when
he means simply, and without fraud. Away then all dissembling and false, not
wise men, but fools, Ye will reply, that there is such deep craft and
dissimulation now practiced in the world, that (unless a man do meet with it
with the like) he shall never go through. For some are not ashamed to say,
that he which will live in these days, must dissemble, and use craft For
private affairs, and for public business in government of commonwelths, if a
man do not use craft, if he do not fain and dissemble, he shall be made a fool,
he must study with subtlety to repel subtlety, and so fashion himself to
the manners of the world.

Alas, is wisdom become so weak, that she cannot defend her self against
falshode? Certainly, there is no false packing in the world, but wisdom is
able both to epsy it, and to encounter it. Make a difference therefore (my
brethren) beetwixt these sorts of men. Count not the wisdom of this world to
be fraud and guile. No; it is simple and plain, the other is but the abuse
thereof.

Thus far have we seen what Solomon found in pleasures and wisdom joined
together, and in all his royal and magnificall works, which served for honor
and delight. There do remain the reasons which he brings to prove that not
notwithstanding the good that ensues from either, yet all is vanity in both.
I will not now deal with them, but if it please God, the next time.

Lay up I pray you (brethren) in your hearts, his doctrine here uttered.
Meditate alone by your selves upon his glory* riches, and delights. Consider
his great works, and his wisdom, and remember well what he found in them all.
Be not so unwise, as to imagine ye can go beeyonde him, yea or to come any
thing ni^ to that he had* Strive not to clime aloft, suppo^ing ye shall be
better then below. But remember how he cries out unto you from aloft,
affirming that ye do but lose your labor, and torment your selves in vain. If
ye do this diligently, ye shall not be like the miserable worldlings, for of
all men they be miserable, which covet to be rich, and set up in the world. The
Lord bless your meditation herin,

Amen.
The end of the third Sermon.
The fourth Sermon.
Ecclesiastes. Chap. 2. I Know also that one condition befalls to them all.

15 Therefore I said in my heart, it befalls vnvnto me as it befalls to the
fool, why then do I labor to be more wise. And I said in my heart, that this
also is vanity.

16 For there shall be no remembrance of the wise, and of the fool for ever: for
in the days that shall come, all that is now shall be forgotten, and how dies
the wise with the fool.

17 Therefore I hated life, because the work which is wrought under the Sun,
seemed evil unto me* for all is vanity, and vexation of spirit.

18 I hated also my labor, in which I labored under the sun: for I shall
leave it to the man that shall be after me.

19 And who knows whether he shall be wise, or a fool, and yet shall he rule
over all my labor, wherein I have labored, and wherein I have showed my self
wise under the sun, this also is vanity.

20 Therefore I turned away, to make my heart to be without hope, concerning all
the labor wherein I have travailed under the sun.

21 For there is a man whose labor is in wisdom, and in knowledge, an
equity: and to a man that has not labored therein must he give his portion,
this also is vanity* and a great e^il.

22 For what ha^h a man of all h^ travail, and grief of heart, wherein h^
has travailed under the sun?

23 For all his days are sorrows, an^ his travail grief: his heart also taken
no rest in the night, this also is vaniti^

24 There is no good to a man, b^ that he eat and drink, and delight his
soul with the profit of his labor. I saw also this, that this is of the
hand of God.

25 For who could eat, and who could have unto outward things more than I?

26 For, to a man that is good in his sight, God gives wisdom, knowledge, and
joy: but to the sinner he gives pain, to gather, and to heap up, and to
give to him which is good before God. This also is vanity, and vexation of
spirit.


Ecclesiasies. Chap. 2.
I Know also, etc. In the former part of this Chapter, we have seen how he
searched for good in pleasures and wisdom mixed together, and in all excellent
and magnificall works, which served for either of them. We have also heard
what profit he found this way.

Now comes he to show by reasons why yet all is vanity, and first for
wisdom. It has profit in it above folly, as much as the light has above
darkness: but yet there remains no good by it. For the light of the sun
which we do now enjoy, does serve but for the present use. For when death
comes, and the eyes be cloased up, what good remains, can it make a man
happy? Even so is it with humane wisdom, it does a man much good for a
little time: but afterward, as the blind man, and he which has his eyes, are
made alike: so the wise and the fool meet together, and are made equal in one
condition. For that reason he brings, I know also (says he) that one
condition befalls to them all. If all the wisdom under the sun can
advance the possessor thereof no more, but that he must meet in the self
same condition with the fool, yea even with the most dullarde which lives,
what profit does remain?

See I pray you, how he reasoned in himself about this point, I said in my
heart, it befalls to me as it befalls to the fool, why then do I labor
to be more wise? I said in my heart, that this also is vanity. What a goodly
gift was this: yea, what a grace of god in him, that he could in his mind have
this consideration: it came not from the wisdom of flesh and blood, for that
does blind men, and puff them up in a vain opinion. They imagine themselves
to be petie Gods in comparison of the simple mean people. It does not enter
into them to say in their heart, what good shall all my wisdom do me? The
fool shall be in the same condition, the same shall befall unto me, which
befalls unto him. Shall I glory in that which cannot exalt me one step above
the poorest, the simplest, and vilest fool?

To what end should Ilabour so much to abound in wisdom? It is mere vanity,
seeing no good comes thereby. It is the best way for me to seek for that
which will stick by me, and advance me unto glory perpetual. This wisdom
perishes, and all the glory of it does vanish in a moment. I say, if men had
the grace to reason thus with Solomon, it were a goodly matter. Some will reply
here, and say, that the wise man leaves a fame behind him, and is renowned for
ever, and therein his condition is not all one with the fool. True it is in
deed, that many wise men leave a fame behind them, and some few leave in
record such testimony of their skill, that their praise continues.

But alas it is so poor a remembrance, and so vain a thing, that he says,
there is no remembrance of the wise, and of the fool for ever: in the days
that shall come all that is now shall be forgotten. Thus we see the wise man and
the fool wrapped under one couerlet, over whelmed in oblivion. Solomon
beholding this in his mind, loving and favoring wisdom, being himself very
wise, and despising folly, he cries out with great disdain, and says, how
dies the wise with the fool? Whatsoever advantage he has in his life time,
at his death he is made even with the fool.

It may be objected, that if this be a sufficient reason to prove that wisdom
is vanity, because the wise dies as the fool: then the same reason may hold
against the true, heavenly, and spiritual wisdom. For the true knowledge of
God, and his fear do not so privilege any man, but that he dies as others
do. What has the godly man at his death more the^ the wicked? I answer, that
here is the difference: the wise man for this world has had all that he can
have by his wisdom. It for saketh him when death comes. There remain no
matters in the world that is to come, wherein he may employ his skill, or have
any use of his knowledge. Thus does his wisdom vanish and come to an end at
his death.

On the contrary, then begins the fruit and commodity of the heavenly
wisdom when a man dies. For the knowledge of God which is here but in part,
shall be perfected in the life to come, and shall never vanish. That man shall
reap endless fruit by his wisdom. Out wardly, for his departure from this
world, he differs not from the fool, but with God there is a great
difference. Having told us how he reasoned in himself about the wise man and
the fool, thus by death made equal, now he utters what effect it wrought
in him. I hated life (says he) because the work that is done under the funne
seemed evil unto me.

By this manner of speech, he declares a wonderful misliking which he had
conceived in his mind of the state of this present life: partly for that the
wise and the fool end a like, and it befalls to the one, as it befalls to
the other, and they do meet together in an equal condition, and partly for
that which follows in this chapter. He takes such displeasure, that it
should be all one with the fool as with him, that he is weary of his life,
yea he hates this life. For all the work that is wrought under the sun,
seemed evil unto him, because al is vanity, and veration of the spirit. A
notable place to teach us whence it comes that men can so well away with this
present life.

If they were not fools and blind, if they had wisdom to discuss, as he
deeth here, though they had all his glory and riches, they should abhor this
life and be discontented with it. Such as be in trouble and vexation, pressed
with poverty and other grieuances can be content to depart: but how grievous
is the remembrance of death unto such as have abundance and live in pleasures?
If they be wise in this their love of present life, if they be right, Solomon
was a fool, and went wrong out of the way, for he is of a contrary mind. He
saw the vanity of this life to be such, that he hated life.

It may be demanded whether he did well in this, that he says he hated life:
for life in it self is a precious thing, it is Gods gift, for which we are to
give him great thanks: and how should he say he hated life? We must not take
it that he hated life it self, but the things which are annexed unto it: as
vanity, vexation of spirit and misery. These are inseperably annexed unto
this present life, and therefore he names the life it self, which he can not
enjoy without these. Our Savior says likewise John. 12. he that loves Ioh.
12.
his life in this world shall loose it, and he that hates his life, shall
keep it unto eternal life. Tush will some think, Solomon was over wise, his
wisdom made him full of morositie, it did hinder him.

If I had but the one half, or a quarter, yea the hundredth part of that which
he had, I would live merrily, I would I might live until I hated my life, or
were weary of it. To such men I say, if he were over wise, they come as far
short. He had not so much, but they have as little. It were well for these
Epicures, if they had some hundredth part of his wisdom, with the like portion
of those things which he possessed: which because they want, they are like unto
the ox which is fed in sweet pasture, he is wanton and kicketh up his heels,
there is no thought of the butchers ax. These look for no judgment to come.
Set this before your eyes, labor not to find a pleasant life here: But rather
learn of this king in ye midst of all abundance to meditate, to search out
the vanity of all these things, and so to draw our hearts from them. Before
this present estate do mistike us, we can not sigh and groan for a better.
Which those do that have received the first fruits of the spirit, as we are
taught Romans 8. Romans 8.
Let not deceivable things blind our eyes Whosoever he be that does not
mistike this present estate, yea hate life, in comparison of eternal life, he
shall never taste of the joys of heaven.

Thus he has concluded touching wisdom. Now he comes unto those his great
works, which served for honor and pleasure. He had his portion in them for
the time: but he does show by reasons that there was nothing in them but fore
and extreme vanity: these be his words. I hated also all my labor in which I
labor under the sun. As he hated life, so he hated all his labor, and why?
because he must leave it unto an other man.

It may seem that in this he went too far: for should that grieve him:
nature does teach men to love their children and posterity, and so to provide
for them as for their own bowels. That makes men travail so willingly to get
possessions, which they may convey unto their children, and being done with
equity and moderation is a thing very commendable. Is Solomon then become
unnatural, that it grieueth him because he has labored for his son? For he
says, I hated all my labor, in which I labored under the sun, because I
shall leave it to the man that shall be after me. We may not take it so. For
doubtless he had natural affection and love to his children. But here is his
grief, and this is that which does stick so nigh him, and causes him to hate
his labor, that he can not tell whether the man whom he shall make his heir
and leave all his works unto, will prove wise or a fool. He must have all,
though he be a fool. He must rule over all his labors wherein he has
labored and showed wisdom.

This is the vanity. Here is the sore and grief. He showed exceeding great
wisdom in all his works, he delighted in wisdom, he disdained folly: and
now can he not tell whether all his works wrought in wisdom, shall come into
the hands of a fool. And in deed his son Rehoboam did not prove very wise,
when he forsook the counsel of the old men, and followed the counsel of the
young men. And when he forsook the way of David and Solomon, (that is, the way
of the Lord) and set up Idolatry, and false worship. 2. Chro. 11. It is a
thing which 2. Chr. 11.
comes usually to pass among men: that the father is wise, and the son a
fool. But let it be that a man perceives his son, (unto whom he shall
commit over all his good and possessions) is wise, yet he does not know what
his son or his sons son shall be. For it does fall but that certain
generations are wise in their worldly affairs, and do increase their
substance: and after rises up a fool, and he does scatter and wast his
patrimo^ie. For we must not restrain his words to the next heir, when he
says, I shall leave it to the man that shall be after me: and who does know
whether he shall be wise, or a fool?

Mark one thing then in this place. If those works which are wrought wisely,
have no certainty in the heirs which succeed, but may come into the hands
of a fool? and do very often: what shall we say of those houses and lands
which are gotten unjustly, and by hard dealing: as by covetousness, by
extortion, by bryberie, by deceit, and violence? He does not mean that such
men as come by their goods so naughtily, do she we themselves wise in their
labors, for wisdom is with vprightnes and truth. What marvel is it then,
though such possessions do come to naught, for by the just judgment of God
they come into ye hands of fools? couetouse ambitious fools gat them, and
prodigal riotous fools do spend them. Yea, but we see such goods and
possessions stand as firm (to man's thinking) as the earth, co^ueied from heir
to heir, for hundreths of years in continuance.

It is so no doubt, but here is our weakness which can not see that five or
six hundredth years is nothing. It is a little prolonging of time, but it
passes as a shadow. Their houses, their memorial, and their glory perishes.
If we did live but a thousand years we should see much concerning this point.
We live three score and ten, and in this we see somewhat. For there be many
whose works we see are with fraud and blood: and in the very next heir are
consumed to naught in short time,

By this the Lord does teach us, what shall be the end of those other, which
seem to stand as fast as the mountains, and to endure all storms and
tempests which do arise? thus might we see what the insatiable greediness of
man comes unto. Man walks (says the Prophet in the Psalm) in a shadow,
he disquieteth him self in vain: he heapeth up riches and can not tell who
shall gather them, for oftentimes it falls out that ye riches which he has
heaped up, come not only into the hands of a fool, but of a fool which is
not of his kindred.

Shall we then so hate all labor as to give it over, is that Solomon's purpose?
No, in no wise. It is not his meaning, that a man should not travail for his
posterity, because his son may prove a fool. But he would not have men so
to labor, and so to set their hearts as upon a matter of value. Labor in such
sort as about that which is vain and transitory, serving but for present
necessity. Judge and esteem these worldly things to be most vain and
uncertain: let them not hinder better things. Labor and possess, but yet as
though ye possessed not. 1. Cor. 7. Labor because God will have ye to 1. Cor.
7.
eat bread in the sweat of your brows. But yet see and know that all your
labors are subject unto vanity. And so may ye come to that which he says,
I hated all my labor. Set your delight and love upon the labor for the
spiritual and true treasure: lift up your minds to seek heaven and heavenly
things.

Well, he goes yet a step further, and says, Therefore I turned away, to make
my heart to be without hope, or to despair, concerning all my travail under
the sun: for so he speaks. This turning away, is the turning away of his
mind, and affection from his works. For, to the end he might search duly,
be set his delight for a time upon them. Now, to draw away the same more
forciblie, he causes his heart to despair, or to have no hope to receive any
good in all his sore travail, wherein he travailed under the sun.

Here is an example for all wise men to follow, even by deep meditation, and a
full insight into things, to persuade their hearts by sound reasons, that they
may never hope for any good to remain of their worldly trauails. For if men
did this, they could not be so blinded with a vain hope, and carried away, as
if the commodities were incomparable which they shall reap by their labors. Men
are blind herein by nature, and the devil does blinfolde them: he will not let
them see that which made Solomon turn away, and make his heart despair of his
labors. And to see what are other men's works in comparison of his. He does
(as it were) fish in the maine sea, and they in little ditches. If his nets
come up emty, how then?

Touching this matter he has hitherto spoken of himself, now he does
amplify it by a kind of comparison. It is taken from the meaner sort of men,
there is none of them, but if he have labored in wisdom, knowledge and
equity, but it may grieve him, that he must leave it to another man which has
not trauayled therein, for his portion. This he says is vanity, and a great
evil. For by this it comes to pass, that one man trauaileth, and another
receives all the profit and commodity. The father, to make his son rich,
so turmoyleth and pyneth himself, that he has no pleasure of his life: the
son, when he is a father* does the like for his child, and so every one
defraudeth himself. For he demands, what remains to a man of all his
travail and grief of heart, wherein he has travailed under the sun. And
mark how he joins grief with man's travail. For he adds in the next
words, that all his days are sorrows, and his travail grief, his heart also
rests not in the night.

He does in few words paynt out a miserable condition of such as be
worldlings, and greedy of gain. A covetous man has tortures and sorrows
sufficient in him. They cannot gather riches, and keep them, but with sorrows
and greefs. Yea all times, and continually, for he says, all their days are
sorrows. It agrees with that which I alleged out of Saint Paul 1. Tim. 6.
when he says, that ye love 1. Tim. 6.
of money is the root of all evil: which while some have lusted after, they
have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.
But this which he adds last, goes beyond all, that the heart does not lie
down, or rest in the night. The night is made for rest, when men have on the
day time travailed and* wearied themselves, the body cannot endure without
rest. Now when that is laid down, the heart or mind does not lie down, but
walks about all the night long.

It is the cheef part of man, but in this respect, in worse case then the
body, that it walks al about, and takes no rest in the night. In the day
time it is busied, and sets the body a work: if the body could hold out,
it would also, and never rest: but it cannot, and therefore in the night the
heart does wander, and follow the business alone.

Here is great instruction for covetous ambitious worldlings, if they might
have their eyes opened: certainly they be stark foles which covet to be rich.
If they were not blind as stones, they must needs feel that which he
utters here, and have these thoughts in themselves. I desire, and I labor to
gather riches, all my labors are full of greefes and sorrows. I have such
hindrances and losses, and meet with so many cross matters, that it vexes
and disquieth my heart. I have such care to increase and keep that which I
have, that my heart rests not in ye night. I have so many enemies, and that
great men, which lie in wait to pluck me. I am to buy a piece of land, for
which I must disburse a great deal of money, if I lose it, I am even half
undone: If the title should not be good, or if my euide^ces should be made
vnskilfullie, there is such crafty dealing in the world, that I shall be sure to
lose it. This troubles my mind day and night, I cannot sleep quietly, I
labor all the day, even while my bones ache. When night comes I am afraid of
thieves. For, my cattle, my corn, or my money lies in danger. My heart, when
I lie in my bed, is either upon my goods in the fields, or devising where I may
light upon some good bargain. I have light upon evil creditors, and crafty
dealing fellows, I am afraid I shall never come by mine own. But why do I go
about to reckon up all particulars, a man were almost as good take upon him to
number the stars. My sorrows and cares are infinite. I dream of thieves, I am
troubled in my sleep with this and that business. I perceive that my heart never
lies down, never takes any rest, but when my body is a sleep, that walks
about. In the morning (my body being refreshed) I am carried abroad again so
long as I am able to endure. My sorrows do last continually, and have no
end, I am a night-walker, what shall I get? When I have labored, and heaped up
all that I can, another which has not trauayled therein must have my portion.
I have dealt wisely to get riches, which I leave behind me in great plenty.
It may be they shall come into the hands of a fool, which will scatter them
abroad. What a wretched fool am I, thus to tormente and disquiet my self in
vain? Grief, and care, and sorrows, and toil night and day, and no good
remain. I wish it from the very bottom of my heart, and I do instantly beg
it of God, that men's eyes might be opened, to see clear in this point, and
that they would deeply meditate upon this doctrine. For I do not hope to see
any great fruit of the gospel, so long as men be so greedy of this world. Ye
shall see hot professors of gods word, both of prechers and people, which in
few years setting their hearts upon riches, become cold enough.

Alas, it is not possible they should continue upright, unless we will imagine
that the scripture is not true, which says, Ye cannot serve God and riches.

And here again give me leave to reason a little by comparison. King Solomon
hated life, hated all his works, turned away his heart, to make it despair of
his travail, in the midst of riches and honor lawfully gotten, cries out
that all is vanity, sorrows, and greefes, and continual vexation of mind,
and no good remains. What shall we think then of such as get their goods
unlawfully? Many do scrape, and catch on all sides, so they may lay hold,
they care not how, whether it be by violence or by fraud. Yea they pluck it
eue^* from the poor and needy, from the fatherles and from the widow, for
such wretched men there be many in these days.

Now, beside all such miseries and sorrows as he has spoken of, accursed are
such riches, yea, the heavy curse of God hangs over those men, which clime
to wealth and honor that way. For sake it people, forsake it, and deal
uprightly every man with his neighbor. If ye have either house or land yt
comes not rightly, or any goods evil gotten, restore all to the true
owners. Will thou appear before thy judge, or dare thou come into his
presence to hold up guilty hands? Will thou damn thine own soul for a
little worldly wealth? For, how will thou escape damnation, if thou have hidden
stolen gooddes among thy stuff? If thou have not repented, how will thou be
saved? If thou reserve that which thou know to be none of thine, how do
thou repent?

At this I cannot but wonder, how men dare (when they die) make gift to their
children of evil gotten goods? I do not marvel to see men deceive and
defraude one another while they live. The nature of man is so licourish of
gain, and the devil leads men on in a forgetfulness, that they shall ever
be brought to make any reckoning. Again, they be so afraid that they shall
want to serve their necessities before they die. But when they lie sick, and
can see no remedy but death, knowing they must come to judgment, and would
feign be saved, and therefore do cry for mercy: I say it is very strange,
that they will then depart, and carry the stolen goods before the judge, and
damn their own souls. For many a one does remember even at that time, this
same house, or such a piece of land is none of mine. My father gatte it, and
held it unlawfully in my knowledge, it is such a man's, if he had his right.

I remember I did deceive many, and oppressed them: I have hindered them for to
enrich my self. I have taken unlawful gain: I have griped the poor that
sold for need, I have sold them hard peniworthes. Well God have mercy upon
me, I will not restore it, I will give it to mine heir. How horrible is the
estate of these men? How wretched are they which grow great and feed upon
bryberie? it is best to keep thy hands unspotted from one penie of wrong
gotten goods: but if thou have dealt unjustly, repent, restore it, and leave it
not behind thee among thy substance, when thou go to judgment. For the
judge will send to thy tent and fetch it, and lay it before thee: thou shall be
found guilty, and not able to answer. Thus I conclude then, there is no good
remains to a man of al his works wherein he has dealt wisely and uprightly,
though his goods so gotten be many and his honor great, yet after al his
sorrowful days he must forgo all, an other must have that which he has
travailed in: those goods and honors evil gotten are much worse.

Upon occasion of these former reasons he does repeat again, what is all the
good which a man can have of his labors: that is to eat and drink, and to
delight his soul with the profit of al his labor. He says before in this
chapter, that he withheld his heart from no joy, and that was his portion of
all his labor. He had nothing else. And now he tells that it is al, which
any man can have by his travail. For by eating and drinking, and delighting
his soul, he means all the use of man's works, and of his riches. Let a man
take part of them while he lives, and use them in such sort, as that his
sorrows and dexations may be mitigated. We may not take it that he stirs
men up here unto excess, unto gluttony and drunkenness, or to become
belligods and Epicures. Neither is it his mind to show here what the flesh
judges: for the next words do show that he speaks of a good thing. For else
how should it be said, I law that this is of the hand of God? it is Gods gift
unto a man, when he can eat and drink, and delight his soul with the good of
his travail.

Ye have seen before how he condemned eating and drinking, and pleasures,
when a man does power forth him self unto the^ riotously: they make men mad,
and to become beasts. But God has made and ordained many things not only to
serve necessity, but also for pleasure and delight of his children, which they
be to use moderately and wisely. They differ much from the carnal man. For he
does delight his soul in eating and drinking, forgetting God, and drowned in
these things. But they solace* themselves so in these things, that their
hearts delight is not drawn from God. For they behold his blessing, favor
and good will in the creatures of which they take their part: And this in deed
is of the hand of God. The delight which the Epicure has in filling his belly,
is nothing being compared with this. It is but as the beasts do. God must be
our delight, we may not delight in the creatures further then thus, that he
has given them us as our portion here. We rejoice in the Lord, when we
rejoice in them so.

The other sort are far from this. For they do delight themselves, and imagine
that they take their part, as Solomon says, but if the remembrance of God come
in the way, all is marred: their pleasure is in vanities and sins. Do but
speak of death, of the day of judgment, or of Gods displeasure against
sinners, and they take it evil, and be angry. They say it is no time nor
place to speak of such matters, they came to be merry. Kuffians and riotous
beasts solace themselves and are merry, but yet it comes not nigh this gift
of God. This is in no man's power, but where the giver does bestow it.

Some man has great plenty, and does grudge at his own belly, this man is
miserable covetous, if clay would nourish him, he would eat it to spare his
substance: yea, he would eat worse for need.

Another has abundance, and says to his soul, eat, drink, and be merry,
thou have goods enough laid up for many years. Why does not this man right?
He is covetous, and stays upon the riches, he delights in them. Read the
12. Chapter of S. Luke, and there ye shall see how our Souiour sets him out,
pulling down his barnes, and building greater.

This then is Gods gift, with peace of conscience with joy in God, for a man to
take his part, and to delight himself in his labors. This is not in every man
which has riches. For if a man stay upon them, their torment is never ended,
they can never be satisfied. For, when he has all, his stay is doubtful and
therefore he seeks to heap up still, supposing that in greater abundance he
shall quiet his mind. O says one, if I had but two hundredth pounds of good
land, by the year, I would be fully contented. It falls out that he has
two and two, and as his goods are increased, so is his mind more grupple. He
is less satisfied then, when he was poor. Let us stay upon God, and use that
he gives with a chereful mind. The worldlings do rejoice, but it is a mad
joy: for there be stinges within in their conscience, which do mar their
mirth. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is
heaviness, Prou. 14.
Pro. 14.

It may be said, how could Solomon tell this? he might know his own heart, but
could he judge of other men? To this he makes answer: Who could eat, and
who could have unto outward things more then I? As if he should say, I know
there is no man under heaven, which can of him self, or by any gift of nature
that is in him* eat and drink, and delight his heart in his labor, for if any
man were able, it was my self: but I could not, therefore I am sure no other
could, unless it were given him of God, eue^ by a work of grace. I was rich,
I was in honor, I had wisdom above all other, I had as little to care for as
any, and yet could not I do this without a special gift and grace of God.

The next verse does more clearly lay open this matter, by expressing the
cause on both sides. For (says he) to the man that is good in his sight, God
gives wisdom, knowledge, and joy: but to the sinner he gives pain, to
gather and to heap up, to give to him that is good before God. The Lord is
gracious and bountiful unto whom it pleases him. The man that finds favor
in his sight, or upon whom he sets his heart, he receives from him all
blessings. For unto him he gives wisdom, and knowledge, and joy.

He speaks not here of the worldly wisdom and knowledge, of which he said
before, in the multitude of wisdom is much indignation, and he that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow. For we see, that the wisdom and knowledge
whereof he speaks here, have joy accompanying them. This is the knowledge of
holy things, the fear of God, the trust, and delight in him. From hence does
spring the contempt of this present world, the treading down of immoderate
cares and sorrows about it, and the free use with joy and gladness of all Gods
benefits. This is it of which it is said in the Psalm, It is in vain to rise
up early, and late to take rest, eating the bread of sorrows, he does surely
give his beloved sleep. There he calls it sleep, and here he does call it
joy. For he speaks not of that sleep of the body, so much as of ye quietness
of mind which the godly man enjoys, whether he be rich or poor.

Let us observe further, that it is not only Gods gift, to use the things of
this world aright, with sound comfort, but also a special gift of wisdom and
true understanding, whereby the man is directed.

As this is Gods mercy to the good, so the contrary, that is, to be a drudge
in the world, to be vexed, molested and formented with cares, to eat the bread
of sorrows, for to heap up, and increase riches, is a punishment and
judgment of God upon wicked men. For he says, that God gives torment or
pain to the sinner, to gather and to heap up. And as the other is wisdom, so
this is folly. The good man (through the true knowledge of God) despises the
world: the worldly man is blinded with folly, and tormenteth himself for the
world.

It is true that a penalty is laid upon all Adams children, that with the
sweat of their brows they shall eat bread: but the blessing of God does
assuage the greeuousnesse thereof, unto the faithful. His curse (as we may
gather by this place) does double it upon the wicked. For when it is said,
God gives him pain, it must needs be more than common.

A very notable place to be considered of all men: to teach them whence all
molestations do spring, for the mainteining of this present life. We see many
have a sore burden upon them, and are troubled in such wise to get their
living, that they be even weary of life. They put to all the travel of their
bodies, and study and devises of their minds, to wind out, but all will not
serve. They grudge and murmr, they catch on every side what they can lay hold
of, they deal deceitfully, they use cousenage, but never the near. What do
they say at the last? this is an hard world: they have not the wisdom to see
that God does accurse them. And why? Because they be wicked sinners.

Others there be which know no end of their goods, and of those Solomon does
here particularly speak, which yet notwithstanding are never satisfied: they
have so much care to gather and still to heap up, that they defraud their own
souls of good, they do not enjoy that which they have. The world is full of
these: a man that looks upon the^ would think them jolly fellows: they can
not do amiss, they have plenty. Ask how does such a man: answer is made,
he can not but do well, he does live at his hearts ease: he may dispend
five hundredth pounds by the year. When as nevertheless his heart is in little
ease: for cares do pinch him: he does still turmoile him self for to heap
up more: he does rob his own belly: he does grudge to lay out any thing
upon himself: because he is looth to diminish his substance.

This punishment (which he in blindness can not perceive) has God laid upon
him. For he is worthy to be thus punished, being one which has let go the
fear of the Lord. Thus we see that the righteous judge does punish the
contempt of his laws, both in this world and in that which is to come. Now the
vexation and trouble both of body and mind, which men do sustain: in the
world to come, the everlasting pains of hell. It is not against this doctrine,
which is said to the rich glutton in hell, thou receiuedst good in thy life,
and Lazarus pain, and now contrariwise he is comforted, and thou art
tormented. For this rich man which was so daintily kept, both for his apparel
and diet, thought he received good (when it was no more but such pleasure as
brute beasts enjoy) which he had in all his abundance: and wanting faith to
rest upon God, he was not without his cares: for riotous men, and delicate
Epicures, be very covetous and greedy of gain: for if they had a sea of
wealth, they are in doubt it will be dried up.

How happy are those which find favor in Gods sight, which have a portion in
this life, and afterward inherit eternal glory. This is it which Saint Paul
says, godliness is great riches, which of it self does being contentation,
and is fully sufficient: for it has the promises of this life and the life to
come. There is an other thing which he says is a vanity, which God also
does lay upon the wicked: that they with vexation do travel to gather riches
(not for themselves) but to give unto the righteous. They have labored, but
full little do they know unto whom the fruit of their labor shall come. The
Ass does carry great weight of treasure upon his back, but not for him
self, or unto any use of his own, but for his master. Even so these do
groan, and are burdened, and carry the weight until they bring it where God
will bestow the same. Thus he has laid open what me^ find in worldly
possessions. Let us carefully remember his doctrine.

The end of the fourth Sermon.
The fifth Sermon.
Ecclesiastes. Chap. 3. TO all things there is an appointed time, and a time
to every purpose under the heaven.

2 A time to be born, a time to die: a time to plant, and a time to pluck up
that which is planted.

3 A time to slay, a time to heal: a time to break down, and a time to
build.

4 A time to weep, a time to laugh: a time to mourn, and a time to dance.

5 A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones: a time to embrace,
and a time to be far from imbrasing.

6 A time to find, a time to lose: a time to keep, and a time to cast away.

7 A time to rent, a time to sewe: a time to keep silence, and a time to
speak.

8 A time to love, and a time to hate: a time of war, and a time of peace.

9 What profit has he that woorketh, of the thing wherein he trauayleth?

10 I have seen the travail that God has given to the sons of men, to
occupy them therein.

11 He has made every thing bewtifull in his time: also he has set the
world in their heart, (except that which man cannot find out,) even the work
which God works from the beginning to the end.

12 I know there is nothing good in them, but to rejoice, and to do good in
his life.

13 And also that every man eat and drink, and see the commodity of al his
labor: this is the gift of God.

14 I know that what soever God shall do, it shall be for ever, to it can no
man add, and from it can no man diminish: for God has done it that they
should fear before him.

15 What is that, that has been? that is now: and that that shall be has now
been: for God requires that which is past.


Ecclesiastes. Chap. 3.
TO all things there is etc. If we were not very dull scholars, blind and
earthlye minded, there is enough said in ye two former Chapters, to persuade us
thoroughly, that man's estate under the sun, when it is at the best, is most
vain and miserable. But seeing our naughtiness is such, that we fasten our
love, and put our trust in things transitory, although we know them to be
such: the wise man goes on with further persuasions to recover us (if it be
possible) from this accursed and damnable way. He made trial in him self,
being the ablest man that ever was, in the knowledge and use of all excellent
things under heaven: and proclaims that there is nothing but vanity, and
affliction of spirit.

We shall now have the inconveniences, evils and mischeefes, which he observed
to fall upon other men, which he was free from, (the first which he now
deals in excepted) and which in deed do make this life exceeding miserable.
For if Solomon with all his glory, in the midst of his great riches and
pleasures, found no good, what shall we say of the life of those, (which are
far the greatest part of the world) that in the stead of his delights, are
laden with evils? I suppose there is no man so simple, but can reason thus: If
the life of Solomon were vexation, what is the life of other men? He was free
from many greefes that light upon all other.

These greefes did he observe, and some of them he notes. But first he uses
one general argument, as the ground and foundation thereof, which does also
serve for confirmation of his former discourse: which (as I said) he himself,
and all his works are subject unto. It is taken from the time: all things under
heaven are in time, and therefore changeable with time. No marvel therefore,
that al creatures, all works, studies, endeavors, councels, and desires, be
vain, and no profit remaining, seeing time eats them up quite.

To all things (says he) there is an appointed time, and a season for every
purpose under heaven. All things under the sun, or, as the holy Apostle
speaks 2. Cor. 4. the things which are seen, are temporal: and for this
cause they alter, they vary, they change, they succeeds one another, there is
nothing but a continual turning, and tumbling up and down of all, even as
times do turn and alter. There is nothing constant and durable, but it has a
season, and then the contrary thereunto has the time also, and expels it.

It were infinite to gather every particular, but he gathers so many as may
lead us to the contemplation and sight of all the rest. There is a time to
bring forth or to be borne, and a time to die. These two are set the one
against the other. A man, and each living thing has a time when it comes
forth into the world, and after certain days or years that turn about, the
time for death does come. Who, or what can withstand this? The like is for all
works yt are wrought: there is a time for their making, there comes a time
for their marring. We must take this by the way, that he does not mind to
show what is lawful and right to be done, but what is done by change of time.

Men plant trees, which grow and live many years: but trees wax so old, that
they be plucked up again. There comes a time of slaughter and killing, and a
time to heal the wounded. The mightier sort build great houses, and so strong,
as it seems they should continue for ever: but they wear out with age, and
the time comes when other do pluck the^ down, and build new. Thus is it in
all works under heaven. There is nothing but continual doing, and undoing
that which was done before.

Even so comes it to pass in all man's affections, and desires in his works,
and in the success of matters. There is prosperity, health, and good
success. The^ does he rejoice and laugh, then does he dance and skip for
joy. Adversity follows in her time, then does he weep, then does he mourn
and lament: this we al know by experience. But because he says, There is a
time to dance, I must speak some what of that. There be some which maintain
daunsing, and these be their words: We can prove by the Scripture yt daunsing
is allowed, there is a time (says Solomon) to dance. I noted before, and they
which observe well the course of things here spoken, shall find it true, that he
disputes not what is done lawfully, but what is done. But I will not hold
them in this straight, I will grant in this one particular of dansing, that he
speaks of a thing lawful: yet shall ye see that they do foully abuse gods
word in the sense they allege it. There are more kinds of daunsing than one.
If they will have this Scripture serve their turn, they must show that such
daunsing as is used now a days: wanton dansing, by which men and women nourish
and feed their fleshly lusts, is here mainteyned. By such dancing sin is
much increased, God is not glorified by it.

Are they not then ashamed to make Gods word allow it, and so to be contrary to
it self? For Gods word does condemn chambering and wantonness. Romans 13. Romans
13.
If any reply, and say we can do it with a chaste mind, only for recreation,
and in sober manner, when at a marriage such mirth is to be used. I answer,
that such are not to be so disalowed as the rest.

But yet with all we must take this, that every one is to have regard not
only of his own chastity, but also for the preservation of the chastity of
all other. If thou do that which is a bait to stir up, and kindle evil
lusts in other, thou do break the rule of love, thou do hurt thy
neighbor, therefore take heed how thou dance. But let this pass, that we may
go on: There be many works of me^, which in their season are wrought and have
their time, when their contrary succeeds and they vanish: There is a time to
cast away stones, and a time to gather stones. This is not to be restrained
unto the particular expressed, but may represent many actions of man's life
which he does, and undoes of him self: for the mind does alter and change
often with the times. There is a time to embrace, that is for marriage, and
there is a time to abstain. He notes diverse other things, as a time to find,
to lose, to keep, to cast away, to rent in pieces, and to sewe together, to
keep silence, and to speak, to love, to hate, of war and of peace.

What do al these, and a thousand such like, but show that we are shut up in
time, the times do change, and we are changed in them. We have good speed, we
have evil speed, we make, we mar, we alter, we change, we love, we like, we
loath, we mislike, we are in quiet today, tomorow in trouble, we never cease
turmoiling, and can make nothing stand constant, either within us, as in our
minds, or without us, in our works. Whereat he breaks forth into an
exclamation, what profit has he that works in the thing wherein he
trauaileth? If we could fasten the eyes of our mind, upon this which he has
set forth in some particulers, even to behold the variableness, the
alterations, the change of all creatures, of all works, of counsels, devises,
enterprises, events, affections, and desires, we should see that in deed there
is no profit remaining of all the sore travail wherein men forment themselves.
When peace lasts some clime up in honor, some build, some plant: as we see
the little Ants busy to cast up their hill, a man does spurn it with his foot,
al is scattred, those that were in the top, are cast down with the lowest.
Eue^ so when the wars do come, there is a new face of al things, there is
casting down from dignity, breaking down, and rooting up, yea many grievous
and horrible spectakels do every where appear.

Here may we consider again, the admonition which our Savior does give, Math.
6. Lay not up for your selves treasures in earth, where moth and rust do
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal. But lay up for your
selves treasures in heaven, where neither the moth nor rust moth corrupt, and
where the thieves do not break through and steal. Here may we also remember
what S. 1. Tim. 6.
Paul says 1. Tim. 6. Charge those that are rich in this world, that they be
not high minded, and that they trust not in uncertain riches: for as all other
things have but their time, so is it with riches. There be many ways for men
to lose them, as times do fall out.

It is needless to make rehearsal in the particulars: but I will rather put
you in mind of that exhortation which the holy Ghost makes, Pro. 23. Weary
not thy Prou. 23.
self says he to be rich: cease from thine own understanding. Will thou cast
thine eyes upon them, for straight way they are not. For riches make the^
wings, they fly away as an Egle toward the heavens. The rich man does keep
them but as a bird in a cage, the door is no sooner open, but they whip out and
are gone: they mount up toward the heavens, that is, where the owner can not
follow to lay hold of them again. O ye rich men can ye pull the feathers, or
clip the wings of your riches? can ye make them as tame fowls to tarry with
ye for ever? they be uncertain, they have but their time, do what ye can to
make them sure.

I may say the like for honors and dignities, for beauty and favor, yea for
all things under the sun: they have but their time, and the^ come to naught.
Look up then unto the eternal and ever living God, he is before and after all
time, he is always the same. Seek for to possess him for your inheritance:
with him there be durable riches: he will never fail ye. Pray unto God to
teach ye to number your days, that ye may apply your hearts unto wisdom. For
to your selves, and to your works there is but a time. It is not in vain that
the prophet says, teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts
to wisdom. For though the times be thus apparently variable, and inconstant,
yet men are folishly blinded. For it will be said, that although a man live but
a time, yet his works may continue long. For there be some whose houses and
auncetrie have continued five hundred years, some say they can show for a
thousand years. These have stood as mighty Cedars, yea as the mountains
themselves in the midst of all storms and tempests. They continue for all
the broiles that have been in the reuolutions of times: Men may make their
works so strong, that they may stand for ever. What a goodly thing is it, if
their posterity may flourish in honor for a thousand years.

Alas poor fools, who is able to make sound or due proof of a thousand
years? there be many which set up their bristles and look a loft, if they can
find that their auncetors have been men of worship, and continued five or six
hundredth years: let it be a thousand, how little a part have they of it. Their
fathers days did not profit them, nor theirs on the other side do them any
good. They have not learned that a thousand years are but as yesterday. They
are but as a watch in ye night when they be past: yea even as a tale that is
told. We see also that the mighty strong kingdoms and monarchies of the
world, had but their time and are fallen. And shall any man be able to make his
works so sure, that they shall not have their time to be broken down? men do
reach at such a thing, but all in vain because the state of the world shall
continue still the same, the times shall fall out as they have done. The wise
men of the world do read the histories of former ages: they see examples set
before them of all sorts, which do as it were in a glass represent unto them
the truth of this doctrine.

For they see that all the mighty kings with their nobles and wise counselors
have labored in vain: their thoughts, their counsels, their works, together
with their glory, are vanished and come to naught: what profit have they of
all their travail, more then to be pictured in the Catalogue of kings? and yet
these labor still, as if their works should stand for ever. Either they be
deceived with this, that their wisdom and policies shall be able to do more,
or else they be persuaded amiss, that the times to come will not be so
variable. For out of al doubt, if they were thus persuaded, the mighty men and
men of renoune that were before us, did as much as was possible by power or
wisdom to be done, that their works might be dureable, and yet we see all is
gone. The changes and alterations of times have ouerturned them quite.

This variableness of time will continue still: they would not for a thing of
naught cast away themselves, I mean by setting their hearts so upon this world
that they lose eternal glory. And if they yield thus far, that the men of
former ages did as much as they can possibly do, but they think the times may
be better: let them consider that which Solomon here adds, concerning this
variablenes and change of times. For he does note diverse points touching this
matter.

First, that God himself has done it. I saw (says he) the travail which God
has given to the sons of men, to occupy and busy them therein. It is not
the wheel of blind fortune, whereby al things are so tossed and turned here
under the sun. It comes not by chance or adventure, that man and al his
doings are subject to the changeablenes of time. It is God, the maker and ruler
of heaven and earth, that has given or appointed unto man, to toil himself,
and to be busied in this sort.

All men must be occupied, therefore the old things decay, or be destroyed,
that new may be done. If there were no decay, nor no undoing of things done in
former ages, there would have been enough done long ago, to suffice all that
should follow. But as he said, there is a time to plant, and a time to pluck
up that which is planted: a time to break down, and a time to build. Some
undo and destroy, as falt as other set up. Thus shall it continue to the
worlds end, because God has thus decreed, and set it upon the children of
men. The wise man beholding this, with other things before mentioned, was clean
out of hope, that any of all his goodly works, wrought with such wisdom,
should continue: For who can withstand Gods decree?

Secondly, he shows that this is done of God by a goodly, excellent, and just
dispensation, he utters it in these words: he has made every thing bewtifull
in his time. We have seen certain particulars, whereby he declared that
every thing has his time, and their contraries succeed. A time to be borne,
a time to die, a time of war, a time of peace, a time to love, a time to
hate. Go through all things under heaven, and it is so.

He says also, that God has set it thus. It might arise in men's minds, how
can these things come from God, are they beseeming his government? Many things
are ugly, and horrible to behold. He affirms that he has made them all be
wtifull in their time. In the outward appearance there be a thousand evil
favored sights in the mischeefes, the miseries, and calamities that light upon
men: there be monstrous exploites, loathsome to be spoaken, whereby men are
oppressed, and their estate made miserable. Come these from Gods appointment?
Can it agree with his holy government? Yea (says Solomon) how so ever the
outward appearance be, if men had eyes to see, if men were lightened with Gods
spirit, it should be apparent unto them, that all these deformed mischeefes
and calamities, are not only sent from God for just cause, but also very
bewtifull in their time.

I must here enter into some particulars, that it may be clear, for I know
this doctrine will seem strange to the ignorant sort. He said before, that
there is a time of war, and a time of peace. The one of them, that is to say,
the time of peace, is bewtifull. All men see the beauty of peace and commend
it, for then m^ increase and prosper. They plant Orchardes, they buyld fair
houses. Then kingdoms and cities do flourish. But can this be said of the
other, namely, of the time of war. Is it a bewtifull sight to see men slain,
to have their blood run in the streets? Is it pleasant to behold fair houses
broken down, Cities and towns burnt and consumed, the Corn fields and
Orchardes laid wast and destroyed? Is it delightsome for men to look upon the
savage barbarous Soldiers, when they take their wives and daughters, even the
sober matrones, and bewtiful virgins, to ravish and defile the^ even before
their face? Can any take pleasure, when the swords, the daggers and spears,
are thrust into the young infants, the little babes, eue^ their daughters and
their sons, their tender bodies cast forth into the streets, and troaden
like mire with the horses. Is not this lamentable? Shall we say that God has
made these bewtifull in their time? He says so, and we must believe him. In
like sort he said, There is a time to cast away stones, and a time to gather
stones together: a time to find, a time to lose: a time to keep, a time to
cast away. The one part, that is to gather, to find, to keep, may seem
bewtifull, but not their contraries: As for example, a man gathers goods,
heapeth up riches, builds houses, and purchases lands. His son does come
after, and he adds double and treble, he goes beyoond his father. It
continues thus for certain generations, until the heaps are great: at last
their steppeth in one that scattreth all abroad. He is a ruffian, he is
riotous, he is a dicer, he haunteth harlots, and so consumes all that his
Auncetors did gather. Is this bewtifull? is this a good sight? I might go
through a number of particulars, but these may suffice to lay open the doctrine
which Solomon does here teach. I will make these manifest, and so we may judge
of all other contraries, which in their times fall out by Gods providence, how
he has made them bewtifull.

I know it will be said, how can these things be bewtifull? Is riot, whoredom,
ruffian lives, dicing, or wasting goods and patrimony, bewtifull? are
murders, bloudsheds, cruelties, rauishings of matrones and virgins, wasting
and burning all pleasant things, comfortable to behold? These and a number more
are ugly, horrible, and doleful to behold. They be sins even of Heathen men
condemned. God is holy, just, pure, and righteous, he abhors and condemns
all sin and wickedness, how can it be said, that he does make these
bewtifull in their time? shall most foul sins be bewtifull, or shall we say
that God does approve them?

I answer, that neither does God approve sin, neither is sin bewtifull of
it self at any time, and yet this stands true, he has made every thing
bewtifull in his time. We must therefore distinguish thus: God is the Aucthor
of all actions, but the sin of the actions comes not near him: For he is
infinitely holy and pure, and hates all wickedness. He does in his providence
use as instruments, both men and devils, to bring the works to pass, and the
sin cleaves only unto them. The actions are good as they be from the most
blessed and holy God, but these instruments do sin, and are justly
condemned. Moreover, if we respect the sin it self, it is fond, it is
loathsome, it is sorrowful to behold: for who can behold the rauishment of
women, the murdering of men and children, the burning of cities and towns,
and not power forth tears? Who can see theftes, robberies, and spoils, yea
all kind of wickedness in such manner committed, as if all the Diuils in hell
were losed, and walked upon the earth in man's apparel, and not mourn? In this
the things are not bewtifull.

But now in an other respect, if we behold, we shall see they be all be
wtifull in their time: and that is, as they be sent as just and due punishments
from God, as the execution of his wrath, and vengeance for the wickedness of the
world, and for the trial of the faith and patience of his servants. Look in
the time of peace what security there is, what unthankfulness, what pride,
what abusing of all Gods creatures unto riot and excess, and ye shall see,
that the sword, the famine, the pestilence, and al kind of miserable vexations
are justly sent of God, and in that respect are bewtifull in their tune. We
see how many do get their goods, with covetousness, with unjust dealing, by
extortion, briberie, and deceit, usury, unmercifulness to the poor, yea even
to the widow and the fatherles, do fill many men's purses.

Is it not a just revenge from God, and a due execution, and in that respect a
thing bewtifull, that a ruffian, or an unthrift, do rise up and riotously wast
the goods that have been so naughtily gotten? The Lord God does in
righteousness govern all nations and people of the world, and punish their
ingratitude. His own children offe^ding do not escape. The example of David
may suffice: he committed adultris with Barseba, he caused Vrias her husband
to be slain with the sword: the thing displeased the Lord exceedingly. He
sent Nathan the prophet unto David, to show him his sin, and also the
chasticement that God would send him for the same. The sword shall not depart
from 2. Sam. 12.
thy house for ever.

I will raise up evil, says the Lord, against thee out of thine own house: I
will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbor: which
shall lie with thy wives in the sight of ye sun. Thou did this thing
secretly, but I will do it before all Israel, and in the sight of the sun.
This was the punishment threatened, let us see how the Lord did bring it to
pass. First Ammon the son of David defiles his sister Thamar. Abshalom for
revenge being an other of David's sons, and brother unto Thamar by the mother
also, does slay Ammon his brother. Afterward, ye same Abshalom does gather a
power of men, and seek to thrust his Father from the kingdom. David is
constrained to fly from Jerusalem, leaving some of his wives there: thither
comes Abshalom, and by the counsel of Achitophel causes a tent to be
spread, and in the sight of all the people, went in and lay with his fathers
wives. Here is Gods punishment upon David as he before threatened. Ammon did
commit abominable incest: Abshalom, besides his murder, his treason and other
enormities did commit the like incest with his fathers wives. The Lord says he
did all this.

But as I said before, the actions were his but not the sin. The sin did
cleau^ unto the men, and to the Devil which drew them into it, unto whose hand
the Lord had justly given them over. These sins in themselves are foul to
look^ upon, but as they be punishments sen^ of God upon David for his offense,
the^ were bewtifull in their time. Thus man we judge of all the evils, the
calamitie^ and mischiefs, which in the variablene^ and change of times do
light upon me^ He has made them all bewtiful in the^ time. We must come to the
third poin^ and that is that God uses men as his i^struments, and by them as
by the mea^ he brings in all those evils, which (...) punishes the
wickedness of the world withal, and shows his glory, except in that which
he works himself extraordinarily and immediately: his words are expounded
diverse ways by diverse, but I will translate them even as they stand, thus: He
has also set the world in their heart (except that which man can not find) even
the work which God works from the beginning to the end. When he says, God
has set the world in their heart, he expounds what he means by the
world, even the work of God, which he works from the beginning to the end.
That is to say, even the whole work of God, for the turmoiles that be among
the nations of the world: saving that he has made an exception by the way, for
he puts in, except that which man can not find. We have seen before how he
sets down every thing to have his time and season.

He expressed sundry particular parts of contraries, by which we may be
induced to behold al things that are done under heaven, which he calls the
world: and because Gods providence directs all, he calls it the work which
he works. This world (because the things be so universal and so many) or
this whole work of God, has he set in man's heart. For men do work it all,
except that which man finds not out, which God has reserved to him self. As
for example, he has at all times so governed the world, that he does many
things of him self without the means of men, both in deliverances of some
particular persons, and also in preservation of his whole Church. He has
showed great wonders above man's reach. He does send dearths and famines, and
pestilences to plague and punish the wicked. These and such like excepted: It
is in man's heart to do all the rest. All the labor and turmoile of doing and
undoing, of making and marring, setting up and destroying, we see is in the
heart and mind of man. The prosperity, the adversity, the good success, and
the evil success, yea all the mischiefs, dangers, inconveniences, and evils
yt make this life miserable are wrought by men.

It is not needful that I should stand to declare this by particulars, it is
so evident in every man's knowledge. We are compassed about, both we, and our
works under the sun, with ten thousand evils, which the heart of man has in
it for to do and accomplish. We are subject unto all the judgments which God
sends extraordinarily. Our life therefore is nothing but extreme vanity and
misery. There is in it no good yt remains.

But as he does again repeat that he saw that there is nothing good in the^,
but to rejoice and do good in his life. Also, that every man eat and drink,
and see the commodity of all his labor: this is the gift of God. I need not
stand upon this, being expounded before, more then this, that he wills men to
rejoice, and to do good in their life. Which I take here to be referred unto
the true joy in God, with the partaking of the creatures in such sort as I
showed already. Not as the gluttons, ye drunkardes, the epicures, and such as
be given over unto fleshly lusts.

This gift of God, as he calls it, is not given unto them, they take pleasure
like brute beasts: but when they remember death, or the judgment seat, they
are pricked within. They be like the sea that rests not, but foameth out
mire, there is no peace to ye wicked, says my God, Isaie. 57.

The fourth and last point now remains, which is, that God has (by an
unchangeable decree) done all this which he has showed of the variablenes of
all things in time, and with time. There is at one time doing, at another time
undoing. There is good success to day, and as evil to morrow. Now mirth, then
sorrow: prosperity, and adversity. This has God so appointed, that it
cannot be altered. Mark what he says, I know that whatsoever God shall do,
it shall be for ever* to it can no man add, and from it can no man diminish.
These words be effectual, and plain, to teach us, that God almighty which
has made ye world and does govern it, has compassed about, and shut many
up in vanities, calamities and miseries, which are innumerable, even as it were
within walls of brass. There is no way to wind out, no way to alter any
thing, either to add, or to diminish. No man can change that which God has
determined. He has in his manifold and unsearchable wisdom set this course
and order in the world, to continue to the end. No thing, no purpose whatsoever
under heaven, shall have more then the season, and then give place.

By this we may be taught to behold the madness of the children of this world,
they strive and endeavor against God, no wiselier, then if one should run his
head against a thick wall of brass to break through it. They apply all
their study, wisdom and power, to make their estate firm unchangeable, and
not subject unto vanity.

What inventions and devises there be, to make themselves glorious in the earth
for ever: what hope to make their posterity flourish, and their works (for
the greatness of them) to stand even to the last day. Alas poor blind men,
they forment themselves in vain, for God has decreed before what shall become
of them, and of all their thoughts. He has set al under time to pass away,
and will they go about to alter his purpose.

Here is comfort to the godly, when he says, all that God does shall stand
for ever, to it can no man add, from it can no man diminish. For this does
teach, that things fall not out at the will and pleasure of men, but are wholly
ordered by God himself, which causes all things Romans 8.
to work together for the best to those that love him. The world does rage, ye
mighty tyrants are in a fury, and do threate^ destruction to the church.
Many troubles and miseries arise, it seems there will be no end nor measure:
so strong they be which trouble all, that they appear to have the whole sway
of the earth at their commandment. But when they have done what they can, they
go not one jot or one hair breadth beyond that which God had before
appointed.

Herein the world is like the sea, in which God has laid the waters upon
heaps. At the stormy winds the waves thereof arise, they swell, they rage,
they rore, they foam, and threaten to over whelm the earth, and to drown all.
But God has set the shore, he has appointed them their bounds and
limittes, which they cannot pass. Hither shall you come, and not further, here
shall thou lay down thy proud waves. The devil stirs up the tempests, and
sets all in a broyle upon the land. The waves do threaten the heavens, the
tyrants are so proud to enterprise great matters: but Gods providence and
decree, that is, the shore, further they cannot proceed, for he says, I know
that which God does shall be for ever, to it can no man add.

The next words in the text do show to what end and purpose God does all
this: and that is, that men should fear before him. A most worthy end, both
for his glory, and for ma^s good. He ought to be feared and honored, and it
is true blessedness unto those which do it. Behold then the excellent wisdom
and goodness of God, which brings light out of darkness, and life out of death.
He has set man in this vain estate, transitory and full of calamities, to
draw his mind up to his God, to fear, to worship, and to depend upon him,
seeing under heaven there is nothing to stay upon, there is nothing to help or
comfort.

What dulnes is in us when we find that all is like a sea of misery? if we
look upon the ages past, or the time present, and when we are told it shall be
so in the time to come, yet cannot our hearts be drawn away from it unto
God? He does it that we should fear before him, but we perceue it not. He
leaves us nothing here that is worth the casting our eyes upon, because we
should turn them unto him. He is constant, always the same, but the works of
man decay, and new are set up in their stead. He demands what it is that
has been, and makes answer, that which is now: and yt which shall be is that
that has been, for God requires that which is past. All things are either
past, present, or to come. Men in times past did labor, they are all set a
work that live now, and those that rise up after us shall do the like. They
that went before, their works are decaid and fallen, we do but the same
again. Those that come last, and fall to it a fresh, when our works are
vanished, shall do nothing but that which has been done before.

Thus all turns round as a wheel, which he expresses further in these
words, God requires that which is past. This is not Fortunes wheel, it is
God, when men turmoyle, which so orders the matter, that they can do no more
but that has already been done. For when he says, God requires, it is as
much as to say, God brings back again that which is past.

Oh poor creatures what do ye? Open your eyes and behold with deep meditation
that which is here set before you. Consider the works of the ages that are
past, what is become of them? what shall then become of your works hereafter?
God has decreed, and no man can alter it, that this estate of things shall
continue to the end. Turn then unto him, fear him, and forsake these
vanities, and ye shall be blessed for ever.

The end of the fifth Sermon.
The sixth Sermon.
Ecclesiastes. Chap. 3. Moreover I have seen under Verse. 16.
the sun, the place of Judgment, there is iniquity, the place of justice,
there is wickedness.

17 I said in my heart, God will judge the just and the wicked, for there is a
time for every purpose, and over every work there.

18 I said in my heart concerning the order of the children of men, that God
has given them dignity, and to see to, they are beasts to themselves.

19 For the condition of the children of men, and the condition of the beasts,
is even as one condition to the^. As the one dies, so dies the other, for
they have all one breath, and there is no excellency of man above the beast:
for all is vanity.

20 All go to one place, all was of the dust* and all shall return to the
dust.

21 Who knows the spirit of man, that it goes upward, and the spirit of the
beast, that goes downward to the earth.

22 Therefore I see there is nothing good, but that a man rejoice in his own
works, because that is his portion: for who shall bring him to see what shall
be after him?


Chapter 4. SO I turned, and beheld all Verse. ^^^
the oppressions that are wrought under the sun, and beheld the ^eates of the
oppressed, and none comfort them: and lo, the strength is of the hand of
those that oppress them, and none comforts them.

2 Wherefore I praised the dead, which are now dead, above the living, which
are yet alive.

3 And I count him better tha^ them both which has not yet been: for he has
not seen the evil works which are wrought under the sun.

4 And I saw all travail, and all perfection of the work, that this is the
envy of a man from his neighbor. This is also vanity, and affliction of
spirit.


Ecclesiastes. Chap. 4.
Moreover, I have seen under the sun the peace of etc.

I noted the last time, that he would show some particulars of the evils and
mischeefes which he observed* to fall upon others, which do increase the
miseries of this life. Now he comes to them, and first begins with the
oppressors, and the oppressed. God has made all the inhabitants of the earth*
of one blood. He wills them to dwell together in concord and love* to deal
justly, uprightly* and with equity* and none to hurt, but to do good each to
other. But all this is gone, through the corruption of our nature, and we are
given to oppress, to spoil and devour one another like savage beasts.

For to meet with this, and for ye preservation of mankind the Lord has
ordained the civil power, he has erected the seat of judgment and justice
upon earth, he has put his sword into ye hands of Judges and ruler ^ to right
that which is amiss. They are by duty of their office and place to rescue
the innocent, to deltuer the oppressed, and to punish the wrong doers; This
does bring much ease and quiet unto the Inhabitants of the earth: for without
it, no society, or common wealth can stand. There would be nothing but
theeuing, killing and spoiling. If this were not some what at all times
perverted, there might be much more comfort and releef to the oppressed. But it
falls out as he says, I have seen under the sun the place of judgment,
there is iniquity, the place of justice, there is wickedness. The wicked should
there be punished, and the innocent rescued, and it falls out contrary. The
Lord complayneth of this Psalm. 82. How Psalm. 82.
long will ye judge unjustly, and accepts the person of the wicked? He cries
unto them to judge the fatherles and poor, but they hear not.

I know some take it that Solomon does not speak here of the judgment seat,
but by the word place, understands as much as to say, in stead. Then is it
thus, that the people in place, that is, in stead of justice, do injury and
wrong one another. I could yeald unto this, but that he speaks in this
manner, the place of judgment there is iniquity, which agrees rather to a
very place, the^ to say in stead. But it may be objected and said, where did
Solomon behold this corrupting of justice in the very seat of judgment? was
not he the 2. Sam. 12.
chief Judge in his kingdom? Did he, or could he behold such a thing in
his his own days, and not remedy it? I answer, that he speaks not of that
which he had seen in one kingdom, or at one time, or which he beheld so much
with outward sight. But by an inward light and knowledge he beheld this great
evil in all dominions under the sun, and at all times.

He did know right well the great corruption of man, that tyrants should often
sit upon the highest seats of judgment. And moreover, that though the king
him self be just, yet his substitutes, and such as are put in trust under him,
would pervert judgment many times. For when they should look uprightly into
the cause, they be drawn awrie by manyrespectes: for there be many things
which have force and strength in them to draw a man awrie from ministering true
instice. Sometime a gift does blind their eyes, for the Lord says, a gift
does blind the eyes, and pervert the judgment of the wise. Sometime they
accept the person of the wocked, for some friendship, if not toward them, yet
for some friend which entreats that favor may be showed, as it is usual in
weighty causes that great men write unto Judges, and then down goes the
innocent very often, unless the Judge be of great courage, and fear God.

Sometime there is hatred toward the person, for religion. When the judge is
corrupt in opinion that way, as it falls ont often, because many judges are
so addicted to the study of worldly matters, and so wise in their own
estimation, that they must have Gods matters squared by their rule: the wisdom
of the flesh is their rule. Sometime fear carries awrie, when as some great
person of honor does speak or write in favor of the guilty. The Judges
would be loath to displease such, and so in the place of judgment there is
iniquity: judgment comes forth wrested, as the Prophet complains. This
increases greatly the misery of the life present, when as we lie open
continually unto a thousand oppressions, where our refuge should be, there we
oftentimes find discouragement. The profane and wicked man does deal with
the innocent even at his pleasure, the rich does injury the poor, and when
they rome before the judges, or those that should minister justice, even as if
the power were set up for countenance of the ungodly, they are praised: the
other are rebuked and checked.

Alas what shall men do, where shall they seek comfort? is not this life
miserable? the world is ever full (and never more then at this day) of
oppressions, injuries, wrongs, and violence, and the place of justice that
should right it, does often increase the same. Who is he that has a peaceable
mind, but had rather lose a great part, if he might choose, then go to the
law for to seek justice? how many are undone, by going to law, how many are
there which with long suite and great expenses ca^ never attain to their
right? If he be rich or mighty that does the wrong, let him take away house or
land wrongfully, we do account it folly for a mean man to seek for justice.
The world is miserably corrupted this way now, what remedy, what comfort?
Doubtless none but that Solomon does set forth in the next verse, I said in my
heart, God will judge the just and the wicked: for there is a time for every
purpose, and over every work there. The Lord has made all men to dwell
together upon the face of the earth: he is the judge of the whole world: he
is a judge by nature: he is justice and truth it self: he can not do wrong
unto any: he must needs rescue and deliver the just, and execute vengeance
upon the wicked.

Hereupon Solomon does gather, beholding withal the confusion of matters under
the sun, that there shall be a day of general judgment, when as all both
good and bad shall come to their account, and when as every man shall receive
according to his deeds. It shall not ever be thus: Violence, oppression, and
injuries have but their time, and there is also the time for justice, as he
says, there is a time for every purpose. The last clause of this sentence may
be taken diverse ways, as namely, that the judgment shall be over every work:
or thus, he that is over every work is there. The sense both ways is true,
and tends to one purpose: for it is most certain by the scriptures that
every work both good and bad, shall be brought unto judgment, and it is God,
who is over al, that shall judge.

Let us here learn of the wise man, when we behold oppression and perverting
of justice, to gather assuredly that there is a time when things shall be set in
better frame. Let us not be cast down and discouraged, when we suffer wrong,
and can find no help at the seats of judgment, and places of justice: for the
time comes when the high judge will take our cause into his hand. Because
matters now go so far awrie, be sure there is a day appointed for better
order. It ca^ not stand with Gods justice that matters should thus go clear
away.

The wicked do not reason thus: but because the Lord does let them alone, and
men do escape with foul factes, they be the bolder, even as if God did not
regard Psalm. 50.
the thing at all. This I say: is a wrong collection, for that God now winketh
at oppression, and at ye perverting of judgment, it is a strong reason to
prove that he has set a time unto which he does reserve all causes, we shall
all come there both the oppressor and the oppressed. Let us proceed to that
which follows: I said in my heart concerning the order of the children of
men, that God has given them dignity, and to see to* they are beasts to
themselves. This sentence is hard and difficult, by reason of some words in it,
which may be construed diverse ways, and therefore no marvel though it be
understood diversely.

But to let pass how it is translated in others, I will show the cause why I
take it thus, as I have set it down. First, here is one word, Dibrath which in
the Psalm. Psalm. 110.
110. is used for order: in this sentence of the Psalm, the Lord has sworn
and will not repent, thou art a priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech. This I take here to signify the state and order of ye children
of me^. Here is an other word, and that is Barar, which signifies to choose,
to purge, to declare. I take it here in the first sense or the second, that God
has chosen men or purged the^: that is to say, he has set them up and adorned
them with dignity and honor, and yet to see to they be beasts to themselves.
For choice men, set up in dignity, are called in the holy scripture Berurim,
which comes of the same word Barar. And the Scripture says Psalm. 49. Man is
in honor, but shall not continue, he is like the beasts that perish. So then
touching the state or order of the children of men, God has given them
dignity and honor, but yet they be but as the beasts to themselves, as he
shows by reasons afterward. This is spoken to pull down the pride and
loftines of man's nature, which does so glory of an excellency here in ye
world. For look well upon it, and we shall see, that this honor and dignity
does not continue, but man becomes even as the beasts. The beasts have no
order among them, they have no magistracy, no seats of justice or such like.
But the stronger do oppress the weaker, the wild do pray upon the tame, there
is no place of refuge or succor among them.

Among men, this is a goodly dignity, a goodly order, that God gives the
civil power, princes and judges, and men of honor. There are laws, there be
orders, there is authority to restrain wrongs and oppressions, that they may
not be as ye beasts to devour one another. Yet do they partly in this become
beasts to themselves, when the stronger do push the weaker, and when the seat
of judgment does uphold wickedness. Men are cruel and savage beasts one to an
other many ways: but chiefly in death their dignity does vanish, and they
differ not from the beasts that perish, as I alleged before, Psalm. 49.

Therefore he says, the condition of the children of men, and the condition of
the beasts, is even as one condition to them: as the one dies, so dies ye
other, for they have all one breath, and there is no excellency of man above
the beast, for all is vanity. All go to one place (says he) all was of the
dust, and all shall return to the dust.

Thus we see he proves them notwithstanding their dignity, to be as the
beasts, because the event falls out to be all one, no difference at all
appearing. To day a judge, a ruler, a mighty king, to morrow all one in
condition with the vilest beast. Both die alike, age, or some sickness or
hurt, does cause the body to pine and languish, strength fails, they
abhor meat, and yield up the breath. The same also is a like, for both have
nostrels to draw in the air, both man and beast gasp, and yield up the same
after one sort: the beast does rotte and turn to dust, and so does the man,
for both were made of the dust, and both return to the dust. In all these here
is as he says, no excellency of man above the beast, for all is vanity.

Thus we see man is in honor, but does not continue, he is like the beasts
that perish.

The holy Scripture when it will abate man's high stomach, does put him in
mind, that his breath is in his nostrels, he is but dust and shall die, and
return to dust. Now because this foolish vain glory that men have in
themselves and in the vanities of this world, cleaves so fast, Solomon urges
the matter* very sore, when he makes no difference at al, nor no excellency
of man above the beast.

Let men consider well of this, and it must needs make them less esteem the
glory of this world. Now if they have riches and be a step or two in honor
above other, it fares with them as if they were of an other kindred, yea as if
they were petie gods. But if it could enter into their mind to think, I have
honor and dignity, and glory here in the world. I am set up above the common
sort, but shall this difference between me and them continue? Surely no: I
shall be made equal with the basest men, yea which is more, I shall differ
nothing at all from the vilest beast. I shall have no excellency above a
dog. His breath is as my breath, we draw in all one air. He and I shall
yield it forth a like, I shall die as he dies. My carcass is now deintily
led, lies soft, is decked with rich apparel, and is honored: It shall be
as vile and as rotten and loathsome as his: we both return to dust, that body
which now is honored, within few days if a man come to it, he must stop his
nose. Why do I then seek to glorify my self in this vain estate* ^* Why
do I not tread down these vanities, and seek the glory that is of God?

I say if we could with this noble King, enter thoroughly into such
considerations, the vain world should not so bewitch us, and carry us from
God. For who is so foolish to labor most for that, which within a short time
can not make him differ from the brute beasts?

But it may be objected, that this is hard to say, there is no excellency at
all of man above the beast, when death comes, seeing the beast does wholly
pearish: but man has a soul which does not die, but lives, though the body
turn to dust?

This objection does Solomon prevent, when he says, who knows the spirit of
man, that it goes upward, and the spirit of the beast that it goes down ward
to the earth? As if he should say, though it be most certain that man has a
spirit which dies not with the body, but returns to God that gave it, (as
he speaks afterward in the last chapter of this book,) and that the beast
has no other spirit or soul, but such as dies with the body, yet this makes
no difference between them touching this present^ world. For whereby can any
man gather, in the death of man, that he differs or has an excellency above
the beast? I there be, it does not appear: neith^^ does it therefore touch
the state of the world. Such as die in the Lord are blesed, and do in that
respect far excel the beast. But touching this world (about the vanity and
misery whereof Solomon disputes) there is no difference nor excellency, nor
privilege above the beast. For the men which have embraced this present world,
they have a soul in deed that lives, but it were a thousand times better for
them, if they had not, but did wholly perish as the beasts. Here is no color
of matter in this sentence, to uphold the wicked opinion of those detestable
monsters, which denis the immortality of the soul. When they allege this
saying of Solomon, ye see it is but wrested.

Again, here is no cause to move us, for fear least we should strengthen that
wicked opinion, to take it that Solomon does here show what he judged by
humane wisdom: for humane reason has not so judged, that men differ nothing
at all from beasts after death. The humane reason is so blind, that it will
not be brought to make such a proof as this, that man does not differ from
the beast, because all is vanity, as we see he says a little before in this
discourse.

I say therefore it is out of all doubt a matter propounded by Solomon, through
the due contemplation whereof, the proud and lofty mind of man may be brought
down, that he may thirst for a better estate, and seek it: that he may less
regard these transitory things, in which his condition does fall out very
soon to be all one with the beasts. And here we may remember by the way, how
abject and base the proud minds of men be which know not God. They be as
lofty in conceit, as if all fortitude and magnanimity were in them: yea they
would seem to be gloriouse, and yet look well upon the matter, and ye shall
see they have bowed down themselves to a base condition? when their heart is
set upon earthly glory, which can not long lift them up above the beast. In
deed this is the valiant mind, to despise, to tread down the vain pomye of
this world, to esteem basely of things transitory, to long for that blessed
estate in which there shall no baseness approach. And in which it shall not be
said, man is in honor, and shall not continue, he is like the beasts that
pearish.

If the sons of great Princes, which are borne to honor and dignity, should
be so basely minded, as to let go all regard of their birth and place, and
choose rather to be shepherds, or Plowmen, it would be wondered at. But when
God calls us to a far greater glory, and we esteem it not, but set our
minds upon the beggarlie pomp of this world, it seems no marvel at all,
yet the truth is, that these latter are much more to be wondered at, the^
those other, they be baser minded. Let us go for ward, it follows in the
next verse, Therefore I see there is nothing good, but that a man do rejoice
in his works, because that is his portion: for who shall bring him to see what
shall be after him? He has uttered this diverse times, in which he affirms,
that there remains no good unto man of all his travail after death. To
rejoice in his works, to take part while he lives, is all the portion that he
can have of things under the sun, for he shall never be brought again so
much as to have the sight of any thing that shall be after him. God has ordained
that we shall have the use of his creatures to serve for present necessity,
which we may rejoice in, not like gluttons, epicures, or riotous folk, but by
them to have our hearts lifted up to the geuer.

Man's nature is not only able to do the former, namely, gluttony and
excess: but is prone thereunto. But this later is the special gift of God, as
he taught us in the second Chapter: such as have not this, have no portion at
all of the riches and goods which they possess, be they never so wealthy:
Unless we will account it a portion which differs not from that which brute
beasts do equally enjoy. For they take pleasure in sweet pastures they have
their delights. Contrariwise, such as have a portion in the creatures,
reioising in them, as by them being lifted up to rejoice in God, are not
hindered, though they have little. For it is written, a small thing which the
righteous have, is better then the great revenues of the Psalm. 37.
wicked, Psalm. 37.

It follows, I turned and beheld all the oppressions that are wrought under
the sun, etc. I noted unto you that he deals with the oppressors, and
oppressed: and having first propounded what he beheld the state of man's life to
be in that former, now he comes to that other. When he says he beheld all
the oppressions that are wrought under the sun, it confirms that which I
taught you before, namely, that it was not with bodily sight, but with inward
contemplation of mind: he did find that even under the best kings it could
not be avoided, but that in the kingdom there would be oppressions. For such
as be put in trust to execute justice, do soon swerne, the corrupt nature of
man is such: then how can it be avoided where a wicked Prince is set upon the
throne? If the king himself be as a devouring Lion, what will his of^icers and
ministers be? This did Solomon view thoroughly, and therefore says: turned and
beheld all the oppressions that are wrought under the sun.

We may learn by his speech here, when he says, I turned and beheld, for it
does us to wit, that he fixed and been the eyes of his mind even wholly,
for the time, upon the oppressions that are wrought. He applied all the force
of his wisdom and knowledge, to search this thing aright: and so did he ^^ al
other matters which he made trial of.

This was a wise man's part; the eyes of a fool are in ye corner ^ of the
world, as he ^aith in the Proverbs* He looks all abroad, upon all things
at once and so has no d^p^ight into my thing. For* as it is in things subic^
unto our bod^ sight, when we look with our eyes br^^^ upon all, (...) nothing
but superficially, or in a glimse upon the (...), so is it with the mind, for
the consideration of every particular vanity and miseri^ in the state of this
life.

The wise heart ^e^^^th and takes note of every thing particularly. But the
fool goes thro^gh all* looks round about, never furneth his eyes from one
to another, to fasten them, and so knows nothing perfectly. God has set
men in the world to be taught by all things, but the most are wonderful
negligent, not only about things here spoken of, but also in the holy word of
God.

Many are content* to read now and then at their pleasure certain chapters
slightly, but who are they, or where are they almost, which d^o labor in
deed to find out the will of God from point to point? who does give himself
with deep meditation to study the word of God? Is it marvel though all be
full of fools, if we respect true wisdom? we have no promise to be wise unto
God, unless we search for wisdom, and dig for it as for hid treasures
Prou. 2. Be diligent Prou. 2.
then brethren; and God will bless ye: ye shall epsy all the vanity of this
world: ye shall be delivered from it, and find the way to true blessedness. God
has promised to bless the diligent, seek and ye shall find. Next let us
consider what he found touching oppression, Behold (says he) the tears of the
oppressed and none comfort them: and lo the strength is of the hand of those
that oppress them, and none comfort them.

What a miserable condition is this, that oppressions are always so many and
so grievous, and none to comfort the oppressed. Where there is strength and
might, there they wrong the weaker, even as the stronger beasts do push and
harm the febler? there be multitudes of poor men in the world, whose wives
and children, through oppression of the rich, have scarce bread to put in their
mouths, or rags to hang upon them. The landlords set such rent of their
grounds, that they labor and toil like horses, spend their strength, and can
get nothing, which be the tenaunts. This is a cruel part, for they do even
as it were, eat the flesh, and drink up the blood of these and of their
children. And yet there is greater cruelty, they pluck away from the widow
and fatherles that little which was left them. If there be but a cow, they will
have it: let there be two or three poor babes, from whose mouths they snatch
away ye milk, it does not move them. If there be a litl^ commodity of house
or land, what devises they have to wind it in, and to wring it away: they go
as nigh as to the bed which they lie upon.

This savage cruelty exercised every where upon the weak by those that are
strong, does cause many a salt tear to be shed. The smart is great, they may
weep to ease their heart a little, but there is none to comfort them. The Lord
does look upon it, and will be revenged. For if this shall be heard, Go ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his Math. 25.
angels, for when I was hungry ye gave me no meat, etc. How shall they escape
which do snatch away the meat from the hungry? take heed all you that hold
away other men's houses and lands, because they be not able to wage law with ye.
Take heed you that grind the faces of the poor, and gripe them with hard
bargaining. Take you heed also, that accept the person of the mighty, or judge
for reward.

The judge of the whole world does lay up al these things in store against the
day of vengeilie. Lay aside your cruelty; Iam. 1.
visit the father less and widow in their distress, dea^ your bread to the
hungry, help them to their right which suffer wrong, and then shall ye have
none of these tears of the oppressed against ye* which Solomon beheld under
the sun* Princes and great men (...) whose place ye (...) in. Is it not Gods
seat* has not he said ye are gods? ^e ought to be like him: He does not
abhorpe the poor. He is the father of the fatherl^s, and judges the wid^
case. He has set ye up to be eyes to the blind, le^^ to the lame* and arms to
the weak* He give this in charge, open thy mouth for the dumb, deal in the
cause of the poor, deliver the Prou. 31.
oppressed* judge the fatherless and widow^breake the ^awes of the wicked, and
deliver the pray out of his teeth.

If ye would execute this thoroughly, it should not bes^^d, I behold the reares
of the oppressed* and there is none to comfort them. The rich men ^ men of
countenance are let in by and by when they come, the poor man is thrust back:
some gentleman does take away his land from him, to his utter undoing, he is
not able to go to the law: he would make his case known to the prince, who
will do it for him? he may well go and weep in a corner to himself. If he
had any thing left he were even as good give it away as seek remedy, vules he
have some friend. How w^e thy a matter were it, if princes and great judges
would make the entrance for poor men easy vntothem, by appointing such as
should attend for that purpose, and that they would not be weary of the
trouble. It would stay many oppressions, for they would be ashamed to do them,
if they thought it should come to be scanned: and so should God be highly
pleased.

But to know what the state of the world has ever been concerning this, let
^^^heare what Solomon adds* Wherefore I praised the dead, which are now dead I
above the living which are yet a liue^ And I account him better the them both
which has not yet been* for he has not seen the evil works which are
wrought under the sun. He does esteem the miseries, so many and so great
which fall upon men by oppressions, that ^e commends the state of the dead,
above the case of those which remain alive: yea he does account him best at
ease which has not been. The dead, though they be now rid and freed, and in
that respect better then the living, yet because they have passed through the
calamities of this life, and borne their burden of them, ^e makes them
inferior to those which are unborn, because they have not seen the evil
work that is wrought under the sun.

He sets this life before us, as a sea or goulfe full of storms, unquietness
and troubles, death is as it were the haven and landing place, where men are
set free. But they are most at ease which never came in it, they have not felt,
nor tasted of these bitter blasts, nor been tossed with us. This being true,
what shall we think of those which seek feliciti^ and good in this world? But
it may be said, how can this be true which Solomon speaks? The wicked goes
through many troubles in this world, yet when he is dead and freed from them he
is not in better, but in worse case, feeling assuredly, that he is damned. The
godly, although of all other the most miserable in this world, (if we respect
only ye weight of afflictions) yet they be in joy after death, are happy that
ever they were borne, and therefore it can not be said, that he which has not
yet been is better then they. I answer, yt Solomon does not respect any thing
in this comparison, but that which is under the sun. He does prove that under
heaven, there is naught but vanity.

He does not in this place meddle with that which is out of the world: that is,
either with salvation or damnation. We see the men that seek good in ye world,
do set those respects also aside: so that he deals now within their
compass. Is this true, that respecting ye miseries of this world, the dead be
in better case then the living, and he that has never been borne better at
ease then they both? Is it not then also true, that he said, vanity of
vanities, all is vanity, there is no profit to a man of all his travail under
the sun? Why then do men set their heart upon this miserable life? what will
they find in it?

The next sentence sets forth another evil which might make this life
unpleasant, when he says, I saw all travail and al perfection of the work,
that this is the envy of a man from his neighbor, this also is vanity, and
affliction of spirit. We have heard how miserable he judged this life by
reason of oppressions: now he speaks of that which adds further misery.
It is but a small thing which man has allotted him here, even to rejoice in
his works, and yet he ca^ not enjoy the same quietly, or without vexation. God
gives skill in all manner of works which are wrought under the sun. The
greater gifts he gives, the greater perfection do they show in their works
that have them. It is (after a sort) to be injurious to God himself, when men
do not give the due praise unto such men that do so excel in gifts of
skill. They should be honored, and have matter to rejoice, but they be enuyed.
The more perfect they be, the more does envy repine. This springs from
vainglorie, and covetousness withal.

Men would be praised, and have the chief fame and profit of their science.
If God have given more perfection unto an other, it greeueth them, they
deprave, and disgrace all that ever they can. From hence do flow forth many
annoyances, which make this life grievous.

To conclude then (beloved) ye may see also out of this portion of Scripture
that I have now handled, that the vanity and vexation of this life is very
great, and shall ever continue. God give us grace to consider of it, and to be
so much further drawn from things transitory.

Amen.
The end of the sixth Sermon.
The seventh Sermon.
Ecclesiastes. Chap. 4. THe Fool foldeth together his hands, and eats his
own flesh.

6 One handful is better with quiet, then two handfuls with toil and vexation
of spirit.

7 And I turned, and beheld a vanity under the sun.

8 There is one, and there is not a second, also he has neither son nor
brother, and yet there is no end of all his labor, also his eye is not
satisfied with riches: and for whom do I travel and defraud my soul of good?
This also is vanity, and this is an evil affliction.

9 Two are better than one, because they have a good reward for their labor

10 And if they fall, one lifts up his fellow: but woe be to him that is alone
which falls, seeing there is not a second to lift him up.

11 Also, if two lie together they have hear, but how should one have warmth?

12 Also, if one be to strong for him, two shall withstand him, and a threefold
cord is not easily broken.

13 A poor child that is wise, is better then an old king which is a fool,
and knows not to be admonished aany more.

14 For he comes out of the prison to reign, when this is borne poor in his
kingdom

15 I saw also all the living which walk under the sun, with the second
child, which stands up in his stead.

16 There is no end of all the people, also of any that has ruled over them,
those that come after will not rejoice in ^im: this also is vanity and
affliction of spirit.


Ecclesiastes. Chap. 4.
THe fool foldeth his hands, etc.

This king goes forward in opening the vanities of this life, which make it
miserable The last time we heard what he beheld among the children of men
touching oppressions, in which they show themselves so cruel beasts one to
another, that they make ye state of the living worse than of the dead. Also, of
the envy which lights upon those that are wise, perfect, and prosperous in
their works. In these he has included many of the harms which one does to
another. It were enough to make our present estate naught, if there were no
more but the injuries in body, goods and name, which we lie open unto
continually, and must bear from others. But this is not all: for if there were
none to hurt us, we are ready to annoy our selves, and that many ways. Three
sorts are here brought in, which are their own fo^s, and which heap miseries
upon themselves: the slothful person, the miserable niggard, and the wilful
conceited man. He begins with the slothful, because he had spoken of the
perfection of travail in the former verse. Let a man travail with wisdom and
perfection, he shall be envied: let him cease and be slothful, it is his
destruction, as we shall understand by that which is here taught. There be
harms on every side. The fool foldeth his hands, this is spoken of the
slothful or idle person. It may be demanded how we know that he speaks
this of ye idle, seeing he does not name him: he says not ye slothful, but
the fool foldeth his hands. The fool co^prehendeth mo then sluggards and idle
persons: I answer, that the description is of a sluggard very plain and
manifest. For whereas God has laid this upon Adam and all his sons, In the
sweat of thy brows thou shall eat bread. Genesis 3. And he that will not labor,
must not eat. 2 Thessalonians. 3. He has also given hands to that purpose. He that
works is said to lay to his hands, and the works are called the works of our
hands. Contrariwise, he that is idle is said to fold together his hands. It may
then be demanded why he does not name the sluggard, but use so general a
name as fool? It is for special causes, for the idle which foldeth his
hands, is almost a fool alone. Again: In the Proverbs he says, the
sluggard is wiser in his own conceit, then seven men that can render a
reason. He takes himself the wisest of many, that he does spare his body,
when other take pains, and he is deceived, for it is to his great misery and
destruction. The holy ghost does of purpose set him forth to be clean
contrary unto that which he boasts of, and that does nippe sore.

For so deals S. Paul with those which let go wholesome doctrine, and give
themselves to vain speculations. He says they be vainly puffed up and know
nothing. 1. Timoth. 6. What can grieve such men more, then when they do look
to be accounted the wisest of all, and to know more then any (he says) they be
puffed up and know nothing. So the sluggard seems to be very wise, and
therefore he notes him by the word fool, as by his proper name, for he has a
chief place among fools, ca^ there be any greater folly, then to bring so
great misery upon himself, that he eat his own flesh. We all do know that
it is a great extremitis which canseth a man to bite and eat the flesh from his
own arms. With such does he compare the idle, because he does devour
himself. It will be said, it has been seldom or never heard that any has
lien still with sloth, and fed upon his own flesh. We may not so understand
Solomon, that the sluggard does in deed eat his own flesh with his teeth, but
denoureth himself with such misery, that it is all one as if he did. For as
he speaks in the Proverbs, yet a little sleep, yet a little slumber, yet a
little folding of the hands, together (there we may see who the fool ^s which
is described by folding his hands) and thy poverty comes like a trauellor,
and thy necessity like an armed man: by this he tells that poverty both
come upon the fool that foldeth his hands unawares, and necessity takes hold
of him so strongly, that it can not be withstood. For the trauellor comes
unawares, and the armed man comes strongly.

He says also that the sluggard shall be clothed with rags, and in very deed
what follows idleness, but shameful beggerie? he does want, he does hunger,
he does use deceit and cosenage, yea he does steal. He comes to the
stocks, to the prison, to the whippe, and to the gallows, his wife and
children are beggars. Does not this man now eat up his own flesh? is not this
a right fool, may he not be so called as by his proper name? the world does
swarm full of these fools, they be in every country, in every city, in
every village, yea it is certain they be almost in every family, and many
together in some house. For many have a glory to bring up their children in
idleness and vain pleasures, this is gentry among a number. From hence
spring so many ragged r^ges, so many (...), and she as be now a ^aies.

Let all men take (...) and be warned by this, that the fool foldeth his hands
and ea^eth up his own (...). Bring up your children to labor, and honest
travail, rich men's s^ it a disgrace, and an attain^^^ to their blood; to do
any honest work. If he be a gentleman, though he have not two g^^a^es by the
year to spend, y^^ he may not labor. He must spend his time in pleasures
from morning to night, from the beginning of the week to the end, and all the
year long, as any pastim^ grows in season. These take not themselves ^^ be
of his house to whom it was said, In the sweat of thy brows thou shall ^ate
bread. They come of greater houses then to wor^e with their ha^^^, or to give
themselves to honest travail or study.

An other ^^rt have b^ene soldiers: a man shall he^^e them ^i^^r^ great oths,
and with him hanged, that will ^uer work again after he has once served that
way: these will follow harl^ts and the di^^, (their hands be not folded up
from such things) and can also take a purse by the high way side. Other ther^
be which have been brought up at home, but yet the plow and the cart, or their
^^^^ations b^ to mea^e for them, they ^a^e ^earie of them, and they must be
s^ruing men, and in that course of life they loiter and are unprofitable. If
they ware old or be turned out of service, they be in misery, they begg^ or
steal. Thus we may see, that there be many of these fools which ^^ld up
their hands, and eat their own flesh.

It is (beloved) a cruel thing for a man to donour himself, to eat up the
flesh of his wife and children^ and this d^^th he that is ^louthfull, because
God has ordained that by the labor of our hands we must nourish^ our selves
and our families. God has set us here for a few days to labor truly and
painfully for our living. H^^e care of this ordinance, and remember what is
said of the slothful* One handful is better with quiet, than two handfull^
with toil and vexation of spirit.

This sentence may be understood two ways: for either Solomon sets it down
as a doctrine, and then the sense is this, that it is better to have a smaller
portion of riches with moderate care and travail, then to have great
abundance with toil and vexation of spirit: and that is very true, and then
is it set down as the mean between the slouthful and the miserable drudge,
spoken of next: or else he speaks in the person of the slothful, showing how
he persuades himself unto idleness, that he had rather fare thinly and take
his ease, then to weary himself with labor, for to get riches. It is a true
saying, when it is applied against an over greedy desire or riches: yet is it
a bad reason, as the sluggard uses it, to his purpose. For, he carries
himself by it, not unto moderate care and travail to provide things
necessary, but in deed into idleness, and beggeris. He says, One handful,
(that is, a little,) is better with quiet rest, than two handfulls with labor:
But he has not that one handful at his will, for the slugga^^ lusts, and
has nothing, Prou. 6. Let it not seem strange, that the idle do abuse a true
saying to color their lazines: ye shall find it so in other vices. The
prodigal ruffian beholds the couetbus niggard, and what says he? There is a
miserable caitife, he makes his money his god. I will never (says he) be a
slaus to my purse, I will make gold my servant, andiso he pours forth so
long as he has any, and that riotouslie, where there is no need. The coustous
man looks upon him, O (says he) yonder bea^^ follo weth his pleasure, he is
an vnthrist, he is worse then an Infidel (says the Scripture) which provides
not for his family.

Thus do men with true sentences seek to color their sins, and are carried
into extremities, and so does the idle fool here. He sees men labor, and
take pains for their sustenaunce, and to provide somewhat for their children. O
(thinks he) these are foolish men, they vex and weary themselves, I had
rather have a cup of beer and a morsel of bread with ease, then to have all
their good cheer with the pains which they take. This no doubt, is a sweet
reason unto flesh and blood, which shunneth labor, and is prone unto idleness
and lust. It causes thousands to seek easy occupations. Brethren, withstand
this temptation, remember that God has laid upon every man that he shall
travail carefully in his vocation. As no man ought to set his heart upon
riches, so ought all to beware of slouthfulnes, for it is a folly that
brings great calamity in the end.

Thus have we seen one sort of men that plague themselves: now follows
another. I beheld a vanity under the sun, there is one, and there is not a
second, etc. He describes such a man as punishes himself with extreme care
and labors to heap up riches, and ca^ never have his eye satisfied: yea such
a one as is a nigard to his own belly, and does even grudge to bestow any
good thing upon himself. When a man has a wife and children, brethren or
kindred, there be some bonds of natural affection, which may move him to lay
up some what to give unto them. When it is so, there seems to be a just
excuse, (as in deed it is comme^dable where measure is kept) but this is to be
wondered at, that there should be so cruel a sickness in our nature, that a
man being alone, having no son, nor any kindred to provide for, is yet so
insatiable, that he can never think he has enough, but does continually
whippe and torment himself with thoghts and sorrowful cares, and with pains and
nigardly pinching.

He does also give us to understand, how blind and foolish this man is. For,
he has not the wisdom to think in him self, for whom do I toil, and
defraude my soul of good? If a man could but reason thus in his heart, I have
plenty of riches, I have no child, I have no near kinsman, for whom do I
torment my self with care to get riches? Why should not I enjoy part of them my
self? It would a little ease him of his burden. Peradventure it will be said,
there be few thus miserable. If a man would seek, he should hardly find
ten such in a whole shire: why then does Solomon bring it in to declare the
misery of this life, seeing it lights but upon here and there an odd
person? I answer, that in deed there be few to be found which have no
child, nor nigh kindred, and yet are extreme needy, and of a miserable
nigardlines. But we must understand that he speaks of a common infection. It
is in many thousands, but he does declare it, chu^^ng such a person to set it
forth in, as in whom the disease is broken forth, and has nothing to cover
it.

Shall we think, that to want children and kindred, do breed this vile
malady, nay that does but detect it: As the world does swarm full of idle
fools, so is it certain, that there be thousands of these miserable hard men,
which moyle in the world as base drudges, to get and heap up riches for their
children, which if they had no children, yet their disease would remain with
them. He says this is vanity, and this is an evil affliction. And doubtless
who can deny but that the life of such men is most miserable.

Now because this miser, though he be among men, yet lives (if it may be
called a life) unto himself, as he says, he is one, and his mind cannot
admit any fellow in that he possesses, in which he pincheth his own belly,
and says it nay even when it cries unto him for somewhat. He will set forth
further evils and inco^ueniences of his life by showing the good which comes
of the contrary, that is, the society and fellowship of life. Two are better
than one, they can do more work, and many works together which one cannot, and
so they have a good reward for their labor.

There be many commodities in laboring together. Companions are in society, if
one of them fall, his fellow lifts him up. But he which is alone and does
fall, woe be* to him, there is no help for him. If two lie together they are
warm, but one alone can not be warm, if any do set upon one and would be to
strong for him, two will be able to resist: and a threefold cord is not easily
broken. Where men are linked together in society and friendship, they be
strong and can not easily be iniuried. By these his meaning is to show the
manifold mischisfes which the worldly drudge coveting to live by himself, does
fall into.

Let us note thus much, that men are dissociate and live a sunder, greediness
of wealth is a great cause of it. They can not abide that one should have any
gain by another, they will bestow nothing upon any to norish love. And thus
they draw evils upon themselves, and make their life full of miseries. Where he
says of the worldly drudge, that there is no end of all his labor, also his
eye is not satisfied with riches, though he have neither son nor brother, I
fear many will take none but such to be covetous: least any should be deceived
in taking this to be the only description of a covetous man, I will stand
somewhat upon it. In deed it is the description of a covetous man, but yet of
one that is in a deep degree of covetousness, yea of an extreme miser and
drudge. A man may come certain degrees short of him, and yet be couetouse, and
so couetouse that she Scripture calls him an Idolater, making riches his
trust* and so his God, he shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

First, if a man have many children for which he is bound to provide by his
travail, and to teach them to work, yet to have an insatiable desire for
riches, to toil without end, is condemned, it is a savage thing, to live
(which many do,) without society of neighbors, as ye shall see many so
covetous that they admit no companions. I will say further, though he do not
defraud his soul of good, but do feed of them, yea though he come to be after
a sort satisfied and have enough, yet he may be couetouse: for covetousness is
not only in the greedy desire of having more, or in pinching the belly, but
chiefly in trusting in riches. God has given us our life, he has commanded
us to travail for sustenance, but yet so as that we depend upon him, and know
that he does feed us, and maintain our life. Faith in him, is she keye of our
store house, if we stay upon riches, as though our life were maintained by
them, be guilty of covetousness.

Our Savior says, take heed and beware of covetousness, Luke 12. and then
for example brings in a man, whose garners brought forth such stoare, that
he had not room to lay it up: he pulled down his barnes, and builded
greater, and then he said, Soul thou have enough laid up in store for many
years, eat, drink, and be merry. Thou fool, this night shall they take away
thy soul, etc. Here is one ye see, does eat, drink, and is merry; has
enough for many years, and yet condemned as covetous. The wretched drudge here
described by Solomon, goes far beyond this, and yet this is not excused*

We have now in our days, it may be, but here and there one, which fitly in
every respect agreed with this description. For though there be many that
cannot be satisfied wish goods, that never rest toyling, that rob their own
bellies, yet few of them be without children or kindred.

Well, let it be they differ some what, yet they be but base drudges. Of the
last sort, that is, such as stay and trust upon riches, there be infinite: for
all are such, until God work in them the regeneration. Ye shall hear many
say, I thank God I am not conetous, If I were sure to have enough but to live
withal. I would have less care, and take less pains. It is in some sense,
and as some speak it, as much as to say, if I were sure that Mammon my God
were so great to keep me, I would wish no more. These men are afraid their
riches will not suffice them and their posterity. For they imagine that their
children can not live but by them.

It will here be objected, that it is lawful and requisite to make provision,
and to lay up for the children: and daily experience does teach, that such as
have little or nothing left, do full ill. I answer, we must so lay up, that we
yet trust not to the riches which be uncertain, but to the living Lord. Our
life depends upon him, and so do the lives of our children. And where it is
said, they do full il which have little or nothing left them, that is through
unbelief. Is it marvel though the Lord suffer thousands of such as trust in
riches, to be deprived of his blessing? They fail of riches, and have no God
to stay: upon, and so do pilfer and steal. But such as fear the Lord, and
trust in him, shall ve fed in the time of dearth. I have been young, and now
am old (says the Prophet) yet saw I never the righteous forsaken, and his
seed begging their bread.

We see also many left in wealth that come to beggerie, and thousands left
with nothing, which come to be well able to live. The parents which provide that
their children may have provision made for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof, do often give them a knife to cut their own throat. For they be
idle, and riotous, and learn no good trade to get their living. If that be once
spent which was left, they must beg, or steal. Thus I have stood somewhat
largely, least any should take none to be covetous, but such as to whom in
every respect the description here made by Solomon does agree.

We must now come to the third sort of men which do plague themselves. We have
dealt with the idle, and with the miserable couetouse: there remains that
fool which is wilful and conceipted. He describes him in these words, that
knows not to be admonished any more. He has such an opinion of his own
wisdom, and is so addicted to follow his own brain, that let never so good
counsel and admonition be given, he will not follow it. To make manifest how
great the harm and damage is, which this man does draw upon himself, and
the mischiefs and snares into which he falls, Solomon does very excellently
set it forth by comparison.

This fool (for so he terms him) let him have all the advantages that may be
to such an one, yet shall they not deliue^ him. Age is a great matter to be
regarded, and a great help to go through, because it has seen much. Riches
and honor, and authority especially when they be with the greatest, as in
kings, must needs do exceeding much. But yet all these, that is, age, riches,
honor, power or authority, shall not be able to deliver the wilful conceipted
fool, that knows not to be admonished, any more, from miseries and dangers,
no though he be a king.

This is the cause why he says, better is a poor child that is wise, then an
old king which is a fool, and knows not to be admonished. And to show how
vn^esistablie this fool casts himself ^owne, or how little those things
shall ^elpe, namely his years of experience, ^is riches, honor and power, he
sets ^ne that wants all these in better case. For a poor child has not
experience: he ^anteth power, for both tender age and ^ouertie bring contempt.
He has nothing ^ut wisdom, and that wisdom but of a ^ild, yet is he better
the^ the other. Thus are we taught what mischief hedstrong folly does carry
with it.

But I must here make the matter a little plainer. It will be said, what is
this to declare the vanity of life present. We shall seldom find such a king,
and if it fall out oftenner, yet does it touch but a few. I answer first that
when this is a king, all the whole realm does smart for it. A wise king is a
great blessing unto all his subjects. On the contrary such a fool as is here
described to be wilful, and not knowing to be admonished by wise cou^sellors,
does not only harm himself, but wrappeth all his kingdom in calamities.
Great men draw many with them, they fall not alone.

Secondly, I answer that Solomon does not mean to speak this only of a
king, but by way of comparison to include all other degrees of men. For thus
must we reason, If an old king that is a fool, and knows not to be
admoninished any more, be through his wilfulnes and headie conceit, in worse
case then a poor child, then other men of less power and wealth, though
they be noble and rich can not be safe, and how shall the inferior sort of
people then escape, I mean such as be wilful?

Thus we see how it concludes all sorts of me^ that be addicted to their own
will, and be so wise in their own eyes, that they will not be counseled. Now
let us see the difference between them, by which is laid open the harm which
he does to himself. The one he says (which is the poor child) comes out
of prison to reign, also the other (that is the king which is a fool, and
knows not to be admonished) is borne poor in his kingdom. Here is
wonderful difference: the one out of poverty and affliction rises up into
princely estate: the other does fall down from his dignity and power into
calamity. We have example of this in holy scripture, poor Joseph was sold for
a bond man, he was cast into prison, and from thence he was lifted up to be
ruler over all Egypt. Sedekiah did not humble himself before Jeremy the
prophet at the mouth of the Lord, 2. Chron. 36. and therefore he was cast
down. All wilful fools are not kings or princes, and so can not fall so
high. But miserable are the plagues if we behold them, among the children of
men, which are wrought by wilful conceipted fools. It is a common sickness,
every man almost is wise, and many are so full with the opinion of wisdom,
that they despise good council, and good admonition. Look what they set upon,
they go through with it in a guard, they plague others and undo themselves,
they be unrecoverable.

For in the proverbs Solomon speaks thus: If thou braie a fool in a mortar
with a pestle among wheat, yet will not his foolishnes depart from him. This is
to be understood of the simple fool, there is no tawing that can bring him to
any pass: instruction or stripes and all will not serve: a fool will be a
fool still do what ye can. In an other place of the Proverbs, he says thus,
see thou a man that is wise in his own conceit, there is more hope of a
fool then of him. Ye see he leaves little hope of a fool, when braying in a
mortar will not serve. What hope is there then of this other kind of fool,
that is of him that is wise in his own eyes, whom he affirms to be the
harder.

In this place he is called a fool, not that he is so selie as to want common
sense, but because there is no greater folly then for a man to be wise in his
own eyes. There be many of these fools which be crafty fools, they be deep
in fetches, suspicious, vaineglorious, and proud. It is not possible with
words to express what inconveniences and plagues these bring unto countries,
towns, and families where they bear sway: ye shall see them like unto
unbridled coltes. It is no marvel though Solomon did behold these, and bring
them in as a part of the plagues which are under the sun. There be an
innumerable rabblement of idle fools, which fold up their hands, and eat their
own flesh. There be many misers which turmoile without end to heap up riches
for they can not tell whom: they pinch their own bellies. There be also as we
may well perceive, if we look upon the quarrels in law, and contentions among
societies and companies, that there be also very many conceipted fools, all is
full of fools, the whole world is troubled with fools. If there be mo sorts,
they are not here mentioned, because these three are sufficient to be brought
forth upon the stage.

Learn out of this place a necessary lesson, when ye be to choose any to bear^
office of government, either alone or together with other, take heed that ye
make not choice of such fools, that is of such as be wise in their own
estimation. Such men will trouble all, the more wit they have the more
dangerous ye shall find them, the more wilful and headie, and the further of
from receiving admonition. Men can live no pleasant life but where there is the
comfort of society. Miserable therefore is the condition of this present life
through the multitude of these three sorts of fools, which are most noisome
to themselves, and bring vexation unto others.

Let us go forward, I saw (says he) all the living walking under the sun with
the second child which stands up in his stead. This is to be understood of
the succession of kings, and great men of the earth. He spoke of an old king
that is a fool, he does in contemplation behold him thrown down from his
throne, and forsaken of all his subjects, He does also* behold them, even all
the living that walk upon the earth, walking, or joining themselves with ye
new king, whom he calls the second child that stands up in stead of that
old fool cast down. He names him a child, because he had made the
comparison between an old king that is a fool, and a poor child that is
wise. The fool falls from his honor, the child comes out of prison for to
reign. He calls him the second, because he spoke but of two.

What then? shall the state of this second child, this wise king, be ought
save vanity? Doubtless no. The sickness of the people is such, that he shall not
be delighted in but for a time. Those that come after will not rejoice in him.
He says, there is no end of all the people, that is, no stop or stay, they
never come to rest in any that have been before the^, which may be said, those
that have been rulers over them. The people delight still in new kings, the
sun rising is honored above the sun setting: and so the wise child
coming to reign, finds nothing but vanity, and sore vexation of spirit.

The end of the seventh Sermon.
The eight Sermon.
Ecclesiastes. Chap. 4. TAke heed to thy feet Verse. 17.
when thou go unto the house of God, and be ready to hear, rather then to
offer the sacrifice of fools, for they perceive not that they do evil.


Chapter 5. BE not rash with thy mouth, neither let thy heart make have to
utter a thing before God, for God is in heaven, and thou art upon earth,
therefore let thy words be few.

2 For as a dream comes forth by the multitude of business, so the voice
of a fool by the multitude of words.

3 When thou vowest a vow to God, be not slack to pay it, for he is not
delighted with fools: perform that thou have vowed.

4 It is better not to vow, then that thou should vow, and not perform it.

5 Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, and say not before the
angel that it is an error, why should God be angry at thy voice, and destroy
the work of thy hands.

6 For as in the multitude of dreams there be vanities: so in the multitude of
words, but fear thou God.


Ecclesiastes Chap. 4. 5.
TAke heed to thy feet, etc. I did show you (beloved in Christ) that the
purpose of king Solomon in this book is to teach me^ how to come to true
blessedness. I did also note that it consists of two parts. For first he
labors to draw men out of the wrong way, that is, from setting their hearts
upon any thing under the sun, to seek good therein. And this has he dealt
in from the beginning of the book unto this place, as we have seen.

Now by way of digression cutting of that, he touches the other, that is, ye
right course unto blessedness, which is in the true worship and fear of God.
Our miseries be many and great, we feel it so: here is a wholesome medicine to
ease and cure* us, if we take heed and apply it well. There is none of us so
dull, but knows that f^licitie is in god, he is the fountain of happiness. We
have this also engraven in our minds, that such only are blessed as be in Gods
favor, and therefore he must be worshipped, and his displeasure must be appeased.

These points Solomon does not touch at all, for he needed not: but how to
seek God aright, and to worship him as he may accept and be pleased, that is
the thing. For when it comes to this, men fail and are foolish: they seek
him, they worship him, feign they would have his anger appeased toward them,
and be in his favor, but they do it so fondly, that they be never the better
but the worse. Let us therefore be taught here by Solomon, how to avoid so
intolerable a mischief, which we be all ready is run into.

Take heed to thy feet (says he) when thou go to the house of God. When
thou go to seek God, o^ to worship him. For God did appoint a special
place for his worship, the Temple in Jerusalem. There he did so rea^ale him
self, that he was said to dwell in it among his people: it was called his
house. Here they were to offer gifts and sacrifices unto him. This Temple, and
all the worship in ceremonies which was (...) unto it are taken away. For they
were ordained but while Christ should come and finish our redemption, and
therefore he said to the woman at the well, John 4. Woman believe me, the hour
comes and now is, that neither at Jerusalem, neither in this mountain ye
shall worship the father. And again he says, that the true worshippers shall
worship in spirit and truth. God reuealeth himself in all nations of the
world, and men are to worship him every where.

But yet nevertheless these words do stand still unto us. We have Gods house
where he is chiefly to be sought and worshipped, even the public assembly. For
God has ordained shepeheards and teachers to call the flock together, and to
^eed Ephesians. 4.
them, Ephesians. 4. There is special promise made of a blessing in the public
assemblies. Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in
the midst of them. Matthew. 19. The holy Math. 19.
prophet of God did stagger when he beheld the prosperity of the wicked, and
the affliction of the just, Psalm. 73. He could Psalm. 73.
not tell how to be satisfied, until he went (as he says) into the sanctuaries
of God, there God resolved him of his great doubt. We must therefore go to
Gods house to seek such blessings, and to worship and praise God together. No
man can be a right worshipper of God in private, that does not frequent the
public assemblies, where God speaks to his people. We must all of us, if we
be wise, go to Gods house: but that is not enough, mark what he gives in
precept: take heed to thy feet. This must needs be a borrowed speech: for we
may not be so simple, as to understand it of the bodily feet. He does not set
down a charge to will men to look how they step in the way when they go to
the Church. It is to be understood of the heart and mind, approaching to seek
and worship God.

It is therefore as much as to say, when thou will seek God and worship him,
take heed how thy heart and mind do come, for thou may go awry. There is a
right way, and there is a wrong way: if thou go in the right way, thou art
blessed: if thou go in the wrong way thou do mar all, thou shall kindle
Gods wrath against thee. Then next he does in general express which is the
right way, and which is the wrong. The one is in these words, draw near to
hear. The other in these, rather then to offer the sacrifice of fools, for
they perceive not that they do evil. Solomon does in a word set down that
which Moses and the Prophets do so much and so often urge, namely that the
true worship of God has for the ground and foundation, sincere obedience.
Harken to the voice of the Lord thy God in all that he commands thee: thou
shall walk in his commandments, his statutes, ordinances and laws. Thou
shall add nothing unto his word, thou shall take nothing therfro.

In this place he says, draw near to hearken: that is to be understood that
we must give ear unto yt which God speaks: for there ought to be no voice in
Gods house but his own. It is high sacrilege for any other voice but Gods to
be uttered there. And Christ says he is the true sheepeheard, his sheep
hear his voice, but a stranger they will not hear. The true and faithful
pastors, when they preach, uttering nothing but Gods word, it is not their own
voice, but his. There is one law giver, which is able to save and to destroy,
we have then one sovereign Lord and King, even the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords: and first we must begin with this, to give ear unto his voice. We know
not how to worship him: we may not worship him after our own devises, for of
such he says, they worship me in vain, teaching for doctrines men's precepts,
he has prescribed fully and perfectly in every point, how we shall worship him.

We are therefore willed to draw near to hear. For if we fail in this, and
will be worshippers, not regarding to hearken, we fail in the foundation and
go awrie out of the way in all that we do. Therefore herein, take heed to
thy feet when thou go to Gods house: to hear and not to do, is not worth
ought. Be ye doers of the word and not hearers only, deceiving your selves.
Iam. 1. And our savior says, if any hear my words and do them not, I will
liken him to a man that builds his house upon the sand* great is the fall of
that house, Matthew. 7. Math. 7.
The holy Scripture does not account it worth the name of hearing, unless a man
be a doer.

Moreover, this is to be well observed when he says, draw near to hearken,
for it teaches that the true worshippers must have a ready and cheerful
mind to hearken. Love and reverence to their God, does make them delight in
his voice, and not that only, but the benefit which we receive by his word,
he does beget us by it, to be his children, as S. Peter says. We are borne,
not of mortal, but of immortal seed, the word of God which indureth for
ever. Of his own good will (says S. James) has he begotten us with ye word
of truth: therefore let every man be swift to hear. By hearing the holy word,
we become the sons and daughters of God. If we be swift to hear, and
keep, happy are we. For our Savior says, Blessed are they that hear the
word of God, and keep it. To make this yet more plain, why we should draw
nigh to hearken, I will speak some what more of the new birth which is wrought
thereby. We are all die nature the children of wrath, in as much as we be borne
in sin. All that is in us is but flesh, that is to be crucified with the
lusts and concupiscences. This mortification of the flesh through the spirit,
is called the putting off the old man. This is wrought by learning, God has
appointed his word for to purge us. All our uncleanness is to be cleansed away
by the pure word. Ignorance, heresy, errors, darkness, and unbelief, are
expelled by it.

Then further, there is the true image of God to be set up, which is called the
putting on of the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness. The blessed spirit of grace breathing life and all good things into
our souls, does it by hearing the word. It is therefore the sweet food of
our souls, the Preachers are called Shepherds, which feed the Lords flock.
We may well see there is no coming to seek God, and to worship him, but this
way. This is the right way, take heed to thy feet for to walk in it, draw
near to harken. Learn by the word of the Lord how thou may worship him
aright.

I will come now to the other part, which is the worship disalowed, called
the sacrifice of fools. In old time, before the coming of Christ, God
instituted many ceremonies and sacrifices, which did shadow things to come.
These was the Church then to be exercised in. Not that he esteemed the doing of
those outward things so much, or accounted his worship to consist therein: but
he regarded the inward faith, and integrity of heart.

Those outward ordinances were but for helps to further faith: and true
godliness. When they offered slain beasts in sacrifice, Christ was represented,
and withal, the offerer did declare his faith and repentance thereby. This was
forgotten, or not regarded of many, and so they offered their sacrifices,
omitting the chief use, as though they had done the Lord a pleasure. This we
may see by the Psalm. 50. And many are the complaints Psalm. 50.
of the prophets against such worshippers. They neglect the holy doctrine of
God, and be ignorant and unskillful in his ways, for which he calls the^
fools in this place. He does wish men to take heed of it, because these fools
do nothing but sin, when they come to worship God. All that they do is
accursed and abominable, yea even their prayers and whols worship, yet (he
says) they do not perceive that they do evil. Their blind devotion to seek
God seems to themselves a goodly ie well, and that is one great part of their
folly. Thus we see the sense of his words.

Now will I come to apply this doctrine more particularly, that we may know
who they be that err, and how miserable their estate is. And first I will
begin with the church of Rome and all Papists. This doctrine does overthrow
them, for this being true, they can not be the Church of God. There is no
drawing near to hearken to the word of God among them, they have banished it
and buried it. God speaks not in their synagoges, but the devises of men are
set up: therefore all their worship is the sacrifice of fools. They do sin,
they be abominable and accursed in all their doings.

It is a vain excuse when they allege, we worship none but the true God, we
worship Christ. When ye see it plain that a man may go to Gods own house
where his word is purely taught, and seeks to worship the very true God, and
yet offer the sacrifice of fools, if he give not ear to be taught in the holy
doctrine. How much more then where God speaks not, but men's abominable
inventions are set up. Let not this seem hard, but mark our Savior does
cite out of the prophet Iesay, Math. 15. This people Math. 15.
draw near me with their lips, and honor me with their mouth, but their
heart is far from me, in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines
men's precepts. There be a thousand abominatio^s among the Papists, which make
their worship to be the sacrifice of fools, but if there were no more but
this, it does overthrow them.

I will come now to a second sort of men which deny popery, and yet care not
for drawing near to hearken. They can not away with the preaching (at least
wise) with the true preaching of Gods word* I can not tell what I should term
them, but our land does swarm full of them in all places. These cry out for
prayer in Gods house. There is (say they) so much preaching that there is no
time for prayer, good prayers are hindered. Yea (say these) the prayers be
better then all their prattling, for so it pleases them to term preaching, by
which God speaks unto us.

In deed prayer is a special part of Gods worship, but if a man do not pray
aright, though the prayer in it self be most excellent which he utters, it
is the sacrifice of a soole, it is turned in to sin. Let us consider the
causes. The holy Ghost wills, draw near to h^arken, when a man will worship
God. And great reason, God is our sovereign Lord, whom we are to serve. He is
our king and lawmaker, whose will we are to obey and none other. He is our
sheepeheard whose voice we must hear and follow John. 10.
him. My sheep hear my voice John. 10. He has appointed and given pastors
and Ephesians. 4.
teachers to feed his sheep, Ephesians. 4.

How can thou without contempt of Gods majesty, yea without rebellion
against the king, and renou^cing thy shepherd, neglect to hear his voice?
Thou art a blind fool, thou art so ignorant, that thou do not understand
the Lords prayer. Thou would have God hear thee speaking thou know not
what, and thou will not hear what he says. What reason is it that God should
regard those which regard not him? Read the first Chapter of the Proverbs,
and there ye shall see how wisdom complayneth against these ignorant fools,
and denounces vengeance, I cried, and stretched forth my hand, and ye
regarded not, but despised my counsel, ye shall cry when your destruction
comes, and I will not hear.

If this doctrine do seem hard, hear Prou. 28.
what is written Proverbs 28. He that turns away his ear from hearing the
law, even his prayer shall be abominable. Is not this plain enough, to she we
that God abhors the prayers of blind ignorant persons, which care not for
his word? What shall we say then of persecuters of Gods word? they must needs
be worse, Our Lord and Savior does Math. 7.
call them dogs. Such as do not regard the precious and heavenly doctrine,
he does liken unto swine which care not for pearls, but tread them in the
mire. Such as have the holy things of God offered them, and do persecute the
bringers, he compares to dogs which turn again and rent them.

Consider now beloved, how woeful is the state of all these? The men which do
not hearken to Gods voice, but to superstitions inuentio^s, those that despise
and set light by the preaching of the word, or hear, and do not obey it: such
also as be persecuters of the same, all their prayers are turned into sin,
they offer the sacrifice of fools, God does abhor them, and all their
doings. Destruction and misery come upon them, they cry unto God but he does
not hear them, they be never the better: yea, they do increase their sin by
praying. For (as he says here) they do evil.

I know it will be here replied, that the Scripture does promise, that he
which calls upon God shall be heard, and at what time soever a sinner does
repents him of his sin, all his wickedness shall be done away. This must needs
be true, but yet we must understand, that the prayer and repentance which are
allowed before God, proceed from faith, which is Gods gift, the work of the
holy ghost, and not in a man's own power. Whatsoever Romans 14.
is not of faith is sin, Rom 14. which is all one with that which our savior
does teach John 15. Where he John. 15.
compares himself to the true vine, and the faithful to the branches. The
bra^ch can bring forth no fruit except it abide in the vine, no more can we
do any thing except we abide in Christ. All that is of our selves is corrupt,
yea even prayers. Nothing pleases God but that which proceeds from ye spirit
of Christ, which those only have that are graffed into him by faith. And this
is by the word, as he says in the same place, if ye abide in me, and my word
abide in you, ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you.

Wherefore brethren, receive this instruction of Solomon, Take heed to thy
feet when thou go to Gods house, and draw near to hearken, rather then to
offer the sacrifice of fools. Bow down with reverence, with fear and
trembling, to hear the voice of your God, and to know and obey his will: then
cry, and he will he are you, your prayer shall come up before him as sweet
incense. Otherwise ye shall be but fools. Let us proceed to that which
follows. Be not rash with thy mouth, neither let thy heart make have to utter
a thing before God: for God is in heaven and thou art upon earth, and therefore
let thy words be few. The former verse did give us instruction, that in seeking
to worship God, we must give ear and hearken to his voice.

Now in this he gives rules how we are to speak unto him. For in Gods house,
the Lord God speaks unto us, and again we speak unto him. He speaks when
the faithful sheepheards do declare his word. We speak in prayer, in
thanksgiving, in making promises and vows. Look what he speaks it is to be
accepted, because he is most holy, and nothing can come from him but that which
is pure and good. Contrariwise we be corrupt, and all that we speak is foolish
and vile, unless it be ordered by his holy spirit. Therefore we must be taught
of him how to speak: we may not come at adventure before the Lord to speak
unto him, for he is a great king, and we are poor and base worms. He is full
of glory, power, and heavenly majesty, we are dust and ashes. We ought to
consider therefore into whose presence we come, and unto whom we speak: and
this is it which he says, God is in heaven, and thou art upon the earth.

Our Savior* prescribing unto us a form of prayer, leads us unto ye same,
when he wills us to say, Our Father, which art in heaven. The necessity of
this precept is to be esteemed from our disposition, how rude, how vnreuerent,
and how unmannerly our hearts be, when we speak to the Lord. We door not in
such sort speak unto an earthly prince, no no^ to a man of mean worship. But
to avoid this rudenes, and to come with due reverence, yea even with fear and
trembling* before so high a Majesty, he wills each man not to be rash with
his mouth, nor to let his heart make haste to utter a thing before God, where
reverence is set a part of him to who^ he speaks, a man does hastily and
rashly babble whatsoever comes into his mind. But when he does carry great
reverence, he does not speak but with fear and tre^bling, advisedly waying
whatsoever he does utter. When we come to speak unto ye God of glory, how
wicked a thing is it to come irreverently, and yet men do it, and as boldly as
it were to come before the meanest man upon earth. Nay there is no man would
take it well, but think he were mocked and despised as a fool, if men should
speak so unto him, as they do unto God. It is true that there be some outward
signs of reverence, as kneeling or vowing, which is meet, but God does look
upon the heart. They babble and utter words with their mouth which they
understand not, or speaking them, their mind is upon other matters. This is a
foul contempt of Gods majesty, a sin which shall be punished with the
vengeance of eternal ^re. He that is rash with his mouth, and does let his
heart make have to speak unto God, does not reverence his glorious majesty:
and yet ye see how such blind and gross hypocrites do glory in their vain
babbling, even when they know not what they say.

Let us consider beloved how to eschew this evil; how shall a man frame
himself, that he may not unadvisedly and rashly speak unto God, but with
reverence which is due, yea with fear and trembling? I will show ye. First
consider deeply, of that he says, God is in heaven. Consider I say what a
great and glorious God he is. His majesty and power are above the heavens. He
is just, holy and good, a hater of all iniquity and uncleanness: the
fountain and giver of all good things: loving to the faithful, and a most
terrible God to the wicked. Then look upon thy self, remember that he says
here, thou art upon earth. Thou art weak, base, sinful and miserable. What
art thou to come before him? how will thou speak unto him? wherein shall thou
be regarded? consider thine unworthiness, cast down thy self in humility,
with ye sense and feeling of thy sins and beggerlinesse. Look what he does
promise to give, crave it earnestly with steadfast faith, and with a groaning
spirit. Not thus when they come to speak unto God, are rash and foolish,
they imagine that the very babbling of words is a service of God, and as the
blind Papists thought, if a man did one day say more then his ordinary stint,
God was in his debte: and we see how the foolish pardons are granted from the
bishop of Rome, with condition that a man shall say over seven or ten Aue
Mary's, and so many Pater nosters.

Solomon gives warning to beware of this: Be not rash with thy mouth, neither
let thy heart make have to utter a thing before God. To perform this there is
need of deep meditation before a man pray: the unskillful and untaught in
Gods holy word, can not meditate any thing but corruptly, and after the rotten
brain of flesh and blood in vain imagination, and therefore they can not pray
aright: they cast forth their words and desires unadvisedly, they come rudely
before God, because they know not him nor yet themselves. By his heavenly word,
the Lord does reveal himself unto us, by the knowledge and light thereof we
behold his glory, we are carried unto a wonderment and admiration of his
excellency, we reverence him, we tremble before him. As by the word we behold
God, that in him is life and all good things, so by the same we see and know
our selves, that we be very corruption and misery: we be poor, naked, and
void of all good things. He is the bottomless fountain of holiness, life and
joy: if we will have ought, we must draw it from him.

This may lead us to humility, to hunger and thirst for his heavenly gifts:
hunger and thirst be such things as no man can endure, but will speedily cry
out for relief. The hungry and thirsty soul does make as great have unto
God, and does vehemently cry out to be refreshed: such does God call for, such
only does he hear, all other do not pray, but babble. The prophet Iesay
chapt. 55. does in the Iesay. 55.
name of the Lord proclaim, Come to the waters all that be a thirst. The
blessed virgin in her song, says, that he fills the hungry with good
things, and the rich he sends away empty. Those be called rich which feel
not their misery. And Christ says, Come unto me all ye that travail and be
heavy laden, and I will refresh ye, Math. 11. Again by the word Math. 11.
of the Lord, we see what he has promised us. For we must ask according to
his will, and not after our own fantasies and destres: we must also ask in
faith and not waver, or else we shall receive nothing, Iam. 1. Which can not be
but where we Iam. 1.
have his promise: we must give him thanks and praise with unfeigned hearts.

All this is to be done as he wills in few words, for it follows after he
had said, God is in heaven and thou art upon the earth, therefore let thy words
be few. The faithful soul does cry continually unto God: for being in
continual need, it watches unto prayer. But yet the words are few. On the
other side, the blind and foolish, as our Savior shows Mat. 6. use many
words, much babbling, Math. 6.
and vain repetitions, for which they think to be heard. They wish and desire
even as their blind fantasy does lead them: they speak they know not
what, they multiply words upon words, babbling upon babbling, supposing that
they do a great good thing to please God. We are warned ye see, to take heed
of such rashness.

What are now all the prayers, the vows and thanks giving of the Popish
Church? What is all the babbling of long prayers, either public or private,
where the word of the Lord is not opened to the people? Can they have those
former things which I noted? Is it possible that they should not be rash in
speaking unto God? They think if they have tumbled over their stinte and full
number of prayers, all is well, they lay on tongue, they cannot tell what,
neither do they much care, their heart is blind and wicked. When they have
cast behind their backs the word of the Lord, and have filled themselves with
lusts and vain pleasures, forgetting God, yet they must for fashion sake,
have half an hour to ^umble over a sort of prayers, when the heart is drowned
in security.

These be fools, yea these bewray themselves to be fools, for he says, that
like as a dream comes forth by the multitude of business, so the voice of a
fool by the multitude of words. Look how a man's mind which is earnestly
busied in the day time, does dream of it in the night* and so out of the
multitude of business the dream does disclose it self, even so by many words
the voice of a fool is bewrayed. We do account the^ fools which are full of
words, and prattle unadvisedly of every matter: and what reason is it that we
should not, as it is here said, take them to be fools which do so unto God?
What shall we say then of all the popish worship, and of the Papists which do
babble many words which they do not understand? what shall we think of those
also which will have prayer with so many words, and so many turnings in and out
in the public assembly, when thou vowest a vow to God, etc. This is another
part of Gods worship, about which he does instruct. We speak to God in
prayer, and in thanksgiving: so do we also in vowing vows: for we make a
solemn promise to God either to do some good thing, or else to forsake some
evil.

In old time some of the kings of Judah did cause the people to swear, that
they would serve the Lord and clean unto him, and renounce the worship of
idols. Holy men of God in their afflictions did vow and promise to God, that
when he should deliver them, they would openly declare his praise. We have in
baptism vowed to consecrate our selves, even our souls and our bodies to God,
by renouncing the devil, the world, and the flesh. If we go back from this
our vow, how can we come rightly to Gods table? for there we do also renew
the same: we bind our selves with promises unto God. There be also particular
vows and promises, as every man has cause. If we feel our selves slack unto
good duties, we are to stir up our selves, and to bind our selves by some
earnest promise to God. If we be inclined to any vice, we are to do the like
When we be in distres and seek help at Gods hands, we promise upon our
deliverance to be thankful and obedient. We must take heed in all these that
we be not rash with our mouth, nor let our heart make have to utter a promise.
We must be well advised what we swear and promise to God. What a fault is it
accounted in such as will promise much unto men, and perform little? do not
all despise such persons? the fault is much greater when there is promise made
unto God and not performed. He wills therefore that he which has vowed be
not flacke to perform his vow: they be vain fools which make promise and pay
it not: and God is not delighted in fools, God is delighted in his true
worshippers.

Vow therefore and perform. For he says, it is better not to vow, then to vow
and not to perform: we are to vow unto God, and therefore it is evil not to
vow: but it is a greater evil to vow, and not to do that we have vowed. Men
are rash and afterward do repent, then seek they to excuse the matter that
they did ignorantly: but this will not serve, for he says, Suffer not thy
mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, and say not before the Angel that it is an
error: why should God be angry at thy voice and destroy the work of thy
hands. He that rashly makes vows to God, may very well be said to suffer his
mouth to cause his flesh to sin, that is himself, a part being put for the
whole. As often on the contrary, the scripture does use to put ye soul for the
whole man. There is no excuse before the Lord Christ, who is the Angel he here
speaks of, when he says, say not before the Angel it was an error, for he is
called the Angel of the covenant, Malach. 3. Make Malach. 3
what excuse thou can to excuse thy rashness, yet Gods wrath shall be kindled
against thee, he will plague and punish thee: he will (as it is here said)
destroy the work of thy hands.

It is a lamentable case, why will thou cast thy self into it? again he uses
a comparison: In the multitude of dreams (says he) there be vanities, so in
the multitude of words. We see he likeneth those foolish vows made to God,
unto dreams, which are but vanity, but fear thou God. Know thou well unto
whom thou speak, and be well advised, and keep thy promise. Thus we see
briefly what is to be observed in our vows which we make unto God. Let us
consider in some particulers who break these rules.

And first for our general vow in baptism, we have promised to consecrate
both our souls and bodies to the service of God in true holiness, by
renouncing the devil and all sinful lusts. Then all such as despise Gods
truth and walk in darkness after the flesh, have besides al other there
sins, this great burden upon them, that they be vowbreakers, they have broken
their faith, and promise made unto God. It had been better for them never to
have vowed, then thus to deal, they be in a bad case.

Secondly those offend (as we see it usually come to pass) which in great
affliction make promise if God deliver the^ they will glorify him, but are
false. For God does will us, Psalm. 50. Call upon me Psalm. 50.
in the day of affliction, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.
When a man has lewdly spent his time, in riot, in drunkenness, in wantonness, in
envy, hatred, and malice. If God strike him with grievous sickness, that his
bones seem to rattle in his skin, and that he fears death, then does he
tremble, then does he desire that God will have mercy upon him, and then does
he make vows and promises: If God do restore me to health again, and give
me life, I will never be the man I have been. I have lived a naughty life, I
have dishonored God, I have despised his word, I will harken to his voice,
and leave my naughty vices, and live to Gods glory. How well were this, if men
did as they say. But mark, and ye shall find the most part^ so soon as ever
they be recovered, and can but crawle out, fall again to their former ways,
and be as evil, or worse the^ ever they were before. What shall we say of
these men, are they not grievous offenders? I have observed some very wicked
livers: God has stricken them, and terrified them, so that with tears they
have confessed their ungodly behavior. They have promised and vowed, if God
would restore them, to become new men. They have recovered, and become as vile
in sin as before. God has stricken them again, and they have died in fury
and rage, without any appearance of grace, or remorse. Does not this show that
Gods wrath is heavy against such faithless vow breakers?

Let men (as he says) fear God. Let them take heed how they dally with him,
for sure God will destroy such, and all the work of their hands.

Moreover when he says pay that thou vowest, he condemns all those rash
vows which are not agreeable to ye rule of Gods word, which be not to his
glory, or that be not in our power. For such vows are not to be performed.
King He rod promised with an oath to the daughter of Herodias, yt he would give
whatsoever she should ask, to the half of his kingdom. She asked the head of
John the Baptist, it had been much better for him to have repented of his rash
oath, and not have performed it, then to shed the innocent blood of so great
a servant of God. Iephtha vowed when he went to war, that if the Lord should
give him victory, at his return that which should first come out at his doors
to meet him, should be the Lords, or else he would offer it for a burnt
offering. Meaning, that if it were such as might be offered in sacrifice, it
should: if not, it should be consecrate to the Lord. What warrant had he to
make such a vow? how should it be to Gods glory? He was punished, for his
daughter (being his only child) first met him, and though it were grievous, he
did with her as he had vowed: she was let go a time to bewail her virginity,
and then put a part to the Lord, and restrained from marriage, for so they
thought it must be, and it is said she knew no man: and by a decree the
daughters of Israel went year by year, four days in the year, to talk with
the daughter of Iephtha: for it is too hard to charge a faithful man with
slaying his daughter in sacrifice. Many have been deceived in so thinking, the
Church of Rome will have men and women vow virginity. Our Savior says all men
are not able to do so, to live unmarried, but those to whom it is given. To
the same effect teaches Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 7. They again reply and say, let
1. Cor. 7.
a man ask, and he shall receive.

But this is true against them, that he which receives that he does ask,
asks that which God has promised to give him: or else, if he take upon him
yt which God does not promise to make him able to perform, he may ask, and
not receive, for he tempts God, and commits a grievous sin. And we may
see by lamentable experience, how God has punished such rash vows: when the
stink of that horrible filthiness which was committed every where by monks,
friars, nuns, and priests, is not yet out of our noses. All such vows are
abominable. Vow according to Gods holy will, to his glory and praise, in yt
which he has promised to inhable us by his grace to perform, and pay it.

It is a sin not to vow such things: it is a greater sin, to vow and not
to perform them. I will here end, not entering into that sea of foolish, rash,
and indiscreet vows, which upon every occasion both men and women do take
upon the^, not considering to whom they speak. God of his mercy open our eyes,
and keep us from this rash dealing with him.

Amen.
FINIS.

