POEMS, BY HENRY GLAPTHORN.

Sustineamque Comam metuentem frigora Myrtum,
Atque ita sollicito multus Amante legar.
LONDON, Printed by Richard Bishop, for Daniel Pakeman; and are to be sold at
his Shop, at the Rainbow, near the Inner Temple Gate. 1639.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JEROME, Earl of PORTLAND.
My Lord,
DEdications, from some Writers are mere Customs; from others Complements;
but from me neither: my Muse being yet too young to be authorized by Custom,
to intrude upon a Patron, (this being the earliest flight of her ambition:) and
my Reason too old to suffer me to be guilty of Complement to one so furnished
with all Reality and VVorth as is your Lordship. My motive, Sir, to this
audacious error is only the pretense of my respective duty; and for that
cause, will (I hope) merit an indulgent pardon. What you shall here find set
down, were the Maiden-Studies of a Muse, which aspires to no other Fame than
your allowance: nor can my self atchieve a greater quiet to my soul, nor aim
a higher glory, than to see my self by your free acceptance of this trivial
Sacrifice ranked amongst

The humblest honourers of your Name and Family: HENRY GLAPTHORNE.

Upon the Duke of York his Birth-night at Richmond.
To the PRINCE, and the rest of his MAJESTY'S Children.
BLessings surround this Presence: To begin
Our votes to You without a prayer, were sin
Against our religious loyalty: could our care
And zeal transform our very souls to prayer;
'Twere a just tribute due to You, who are.
The best of Princes; each of You a Star
That gilds our British Orb with rays more bright
Than was in Paradise the worlds first light.
Hark! whence this sudden harmony! the Spheres
Strive to divulge their duties; there appears
A general joy in Heaven; this night has hurld,
In stead of darkness, gladness ore the world;
Has calmed the sea, on which the Tritons play,
And Sirens sing, for joy; not to betray.
But why this triumph? 'Twas because this night,
Sweet Prince, Your Birth did beautify the light;
Adjudge a second Column to sustain
The glorious building of your Fathers reign,
To be our second Hope, the cause that we
Do pay our vows to this Solemnity,
In wishes, which a Mother might befit,
Or a full Lover in his zeal of wit.
May all Your lives be one continued Youth,
Attended on by health, mirth, beauty, truth.
May You live free from dangers, nay from fears,
And grow in graces as You do in years:
Shoot up like infant-Cedars, straight and even,
Till Your brave Heads aspire to neighbor Heaven;
While we, with a most humble flame inspired,
Live to behold Your worth, and to admire't.
Entertainment to the Prince Elector at Mr. Osbalston's.
PRotect me my best Stars! A sudden fear
Seises my faculties; there is something here
Surely includes divinely now I see
A power inferior scarce to Majesty;
Claims my Prerogative; which, since to You,
To Whom he place is consecrate by vow,
I do resign with freedom; blessed Delight
For this shall change her Tempe, and invite
The jocund Graces hither, to erect
Their Palace here, Mirth being the Architect:
Favonian winds shall with as mild a breath
As is expired by spotless babes in death,
Here one continued summer still display,
Making this seem a new Arabia.
But whence assume I this Prophetic rage?
Rapt with whose sacred fury, I presage
This happy Omen? It Is your smiles inspire
(Gracious and Noble) with Aetheriall fire
My frosty soul (so as Promethian heat
Gave the cold clay warmth, masculine and great).
Thus for my self. The places Genius now
For your Inviter, who by me does vow
His heart your humble Sacrifice; since Heaven
Accepts a grain of Incense, that is given
With a true zeal, better than pounds of Gumms,
Or Alters smoking with fat Hecatombs
From feigned Devotion: He does hope Your eyes
Will dart a beam to fire his Sacrifice;
Whose quickening luster, like the Sun may bring
Upon the place and him, a constant Spring.
To Lucinda, upon the first sight of her Beauty.
Encountering her, I thought the morning Star
Had left the Nabatbeans, till on her
My wondering eyes with a more perfect sight
Gazing, beheld, that Venus was but bright,
She glorious. To venture to compare
Her cheeks to Lillies, Sunbeams to her hair,
Were to allow her mortal: far from me
Be so much sin against beauties Deity.
Tell the wild Indian that with prostrate breast
Adores the Sunrise in the gorgeous East,
His labor's lost; it is needless any more
To fish for Pearl or Diamond on their shore:
Nor Pearls, nor Diamonds, Rubies, or the rest
Of Metaphors, by which are often expressed
Our common beauties, nere can hope to be
Graced by being used as an Hyperbolie
In her delineation. 'Twas the light
Of her br^^^t eyes deprived mine of the sight
They once enjoyed: those fools who sought to make
A Star of ^^^^nices hair, might take
Hers for a Planet, fix it, and never fear
To dazzle Phoebus luster in the sphere.
Lucinda described.
There Is not an eye that views Lucinda's face,
But wondering at the perfect grace
That does within that model rest,
Esteems her most transcendently above
The power of Fancy, Art, or Love,
Truly to be expressed.
To say each golden tresse that does adorn
Her glorious Forehead might be worn
By Juno or by beauties Queen,
Were to profane her sacred threads; for they
Could not such precious Locks display
On the Idalian Green.
They are then gorgeous ornaments, and be
The upper branches of that tree
Which easily does men entice,
Believing it the tree of life, to say
That they have found a ready way
To the long lost Paradise.
Her Iv'rie Forehead curious Nature has
Created for the milkie path;
By which the covetous gazers seek
To find a passage by her tempting eyes
Without their souls entire surprise
To the Apples in her cheek.
Those suns of brightness which so far outshine
Humanity, that their divine
Luster persuades us, it is no sin
To think each as a Seraphin does stand
To guard that blessed forbidden Land,
And the fair fruit within.
Of which her lips like swelling Grapes appear,
The sweetest children of the year,
In Natures crimson liv'rie dressed,
And by her balmie breath, to ripeness brought:
They smile, then blush, as if they sought
Strait softly to be pressed.
Then (as two full Pomegranates) lower grows
Her breasts; such wonders sure as those
Will force nice mis-beliefe to know
That miracles as yet unceas'd remain,
Since there does flourish in each vein
Violets on stalks of Snow.
But these (though true descriptions) are so far
Beneath her worth. I have a War
Within my pensive soul, to see
So many wondrous rare Perfections dwell
In one, yet find no Parallel
In spacious Poetry.
To Lucinda departing.
OH! stay Lucinda, and let fly
A thousand loves from thy bright eye,
By which inspired I will express
Thy beauties, my fair Shepherdess.
Thy Cheek, loves Tempe, where does grow
Warm Roses in soft beds of Snow.
This wonder (Dearest) is to tell
The world, the art Beauties miracle.
The envious Panther, at thy breath,
Excelling his, does sigh to death;
And at the luster of thine eye
Stars wink, are buried in the Sky.
The amorous Thorn (that does intwine
In pricklie arms the Eglantine,)
When thou thy brightness do display,
Blossoms, and makes even Winter May.
The wanton Sirens that beguile
With flattering accents, at thy smile
Chaunt lays as harmless as the Dove,
Or Red-brest when she courts her Love.
But all these glories could not fire
My frostie soul with big desire;
The Cause that made Lucinda mine
Could not be humane, she is divine.
To Lucinda weeping.
VVEep not Lucinda, 'lesse you mean
To purge the world from filth, as clean
As are your thoughts: too rich a prize
For earth, is such a sacrifice.
Such tears as yours, suppose young May
Does to the flowers each morning pay.
Such tears must sure all eyes entice
To think your eyes Loves Paradise.
Oh! they have emptied Natures Store,
Made Snow, and emulous Crystal poor:
Your tears may justly claim pretense
To be the balm of Innocence.
But least such Gemmes should be confined
To earth; behold the amorous wind
Catching them, fixes every one
In heaven, a Constellation.
But since (my dearest) thou will weep,
Thy tears for holyer uses keep;
When plagues upon the earth are hurld,
Let fall one drop, 'twill save the world.
To Lucinda. A New Years Gift.
DRraw that black vail, (my fair one) do not shroud
Those eyes in silken mists, or in a cloud
Of waving Curle: be merciful, appear
Like thy bright self, and bring the infant Year
Into the world; old Time her Mother's run
Into so dull a Lethargy; the Sun
Is frozen in his couch, and cannot rise
Til thawed by the temperate virtue of thine eyes,
Those soft and gentle Stars, whose pure and clear
Rays, from the Chaos would have forced the year.
Up then, Illustrious Beauty, gild the day;
Change Januarie into youthful May.
See the cold earth does Winters liv'rie shift,
Offering the fresh Spring as your New Years Gift;
While the pale Couslip does the Primrose call
To wait on You at this new Festival,
Created by your beams: the Winds invite
The nimble winged messengers of light,
The early Lark, and chirping Thrush to tune
Their notes as cheerfully, as when in June
They softly whisper to the azure sky
Of a clear day, a beauteous Augurie.
How trivial is a Poets force! I can
Teach birds to admire you, the rich Ocean
Tender its mines of Pearl, the Earth salute
Thee with its choicest metals, flowrs and fruit.
Impose a tribute on the Sun, force Stars
To Adore you more than erring Mariners
Do them in Tempests. But when I impart
An offering on the Alter of my heart
To thy commanding Deity, I can pay
Naught but a wreath of Myrtle or of Bay,
A Poets humble sacrifice; unless
My wishes (which realitie express,
Though unperform'd) may guiltlesly aspire
To die the Martyrs of your sacred fire.
May all the happiness Heaven can confer
Be acted on your lives fair Theater:
May you be chaste as beautiful; mischance
Never disturb your peace, not in a trance:
May you live long, and healthful: may no page
Of your lives volume, have a line for Age
To write his ghastly name in; but when Time
Grows old and sickly on you, and does clime
With eager feet, your hill of youth, may all
His steps be slip'rie, may he backward fall
Beyond his fates recoverie, till he bring
Your fading minutes back into the spring
Of strength and beauty, til your cheek does wear
The fame bright luster that adorns this year.
Which I do wish the power of gentle Fate
May to my Love and yours make fortunate.
To Sleep, upon Lucinda laid to rest.
HEnce ugly Image of grim death; how dare
Thy saucy boldness venture on this fair
Epitome of heaven? Do think that she
Participates of frail mortality
In such a drowsy passion? (Fool) go stretch
Thy remiss wings ore some poor aguish wretch,
Some withered Hag, whom for her youths loose sin,
Just Heaven has destined to be kept within
The prison of her bed; from her be gone:
The light can suffer no privation.
Were thou not stupid, deaf? did thou not hear
When she enriched her pillow, how each Sphere
Strived to express its duty, which should be
Prime Quirister, in whistling harmony
To th'Citizens in Heaven, who at that call
Invited Saints to chant a Madrigall
Devoted to her silent rest? The Air
Grew clear and pleasing, every cloud so fair;
Heavens forehead wore no wrinkles, violent floods
Kissed the smooth pebles, and the woods
With their Inhabitants conjoynd in this,
T'afford her senses a sweet Extasis.
Did thou not see how every glorious Star,
With their pale Mistress Moon, to wait on her,
Officiously contracted their dim light
To Tapers, that at opening of her sight
They might new gild their Rays. The Indian which
Had nere been poor, had he not first been rich,
Dives for unvalued Pearl, and fears to rise
Till he can borrow luster from her Eyes
To polish his dull Merchandise. Oh she!
The Abstract of all which wild Poetry
In its loose raptures taught, wherein her rest
Invites the Winds (as when the Phoenix nest
Is by their flavor fired) to mix their breaths
With hers, so precious, that (abortive Death's
First child) dull Sleep, like to the Nightman, must
By stealth enjoy it: see the parched Dust
Turns to Assyrian odors, and does skip
Like an enamored Fairie to her Lip,
Where Venus Roses grow. Rest safe, my Sweet,
Till Sylvans wake, and till the Muses greet
Thee with their choicest harmony; till night
Acknowledge all that it injoyes of light,
To thee the Queen of Splendour, whose bright Rays
Renewes in me the more than Halcion days
Love in its Primitive pureness wore. Then rise,
And let mine draw new Influence from thine Eyes.
To Lucinda: inviting her from her Chamber.
(doom
What means this absence (fair One)? What sad
Impose you on your self, that one poor Room
Includes your glorious Beauty? Is the Air
Less wholesome here, the Sky less clear, less fair?
Or to enrich that, have you taken a pride,
Meaning to impov'rish all the Rooms beside?
The little Birds that by the Window fly,
Wanting your presence, straight fall down and die:
And I, who easily could have fixed your Name
A Planet in the Firmament of Fame;
Who could have dressed your head with Lightning, and
Hung at each Hair a Starrie Diamond;
Who could have sent the cunning Boy to seek
His last lost Arrow in your polished Cheek;
Who could have raised a Mount upon your Lip,
On which (like Fairies) all the Loves should trip,
And added to your Breath such a perfume,
As ever spending, never should consume:
Who could have fetched the Indies (both) to deck
Thy well-form'd Iv'rie Palace of your Neck;
And like a cunning Painter, have expressed
The Worlds perfections in your Globe-like Breast:
Praising each Feature so, till every part
Appear your Face, and Conquered every heart.
I for a wreath of Willow cast away
My flowery Chaplet of the greener Bay:
Dipping my Pen in tears, what ere it be
That I would write, it proves an Elegy.
You must expel this Sadness; You, whose light
Eclipses that pale Virgin of the Night,
The solitary Moon, whose every Ray
Transcends the clearest luster of the Day:
You in whose eyes sit flames, which can beget
Themselves a living Spheer in every Wit:
You that are All Women can be, and more
Than Youth and Beauty ere disclosed before:
Who do resemble Heaven so near, You Would want
Only the Name (not Nature) of a Saint.
You with a smile, can like the West-wind bring
An unexpected Summer on the Spring;
And with one Beam, or comfortable Glance
Ravish my soul into so high a trance,
That Your bright Head shall hit the Stars, and fly
To Heaven of the swift wings of my Poesy:
While I, with equal fear and hope possessed,
Tender my Heart your Sacrifie, and rest
Your Servant.

To Lucinda. He being in Prison.
REceive these lines from your imprisoned Friend,
As the last Farewell which his hand must send
To greet your Eyes, from which mine borrowed light
To guide my wandering Fancy to the sight
Of Mortals wonder, in your Essence: Love
First darted Rays from those bright Stars to move
Me to admire your Beauty: But again
To make old Nature proud, as when my Pen
Flowd with mellifluous Epithites, to show
The glorious shape she fully did bestow
On your unequaled Frame. To say your hair
Are nets of Gold, whose Tramels might ensnare
The King of gods; or that your Iv'rie breasts
Are Balls of Camphire, sweeter than the nests
Where the Arabian Phoenix does desire
To burn her self; (as I have done, in fire
More precious than her Funeral flames) would add
New griefs, so powerful as would force me mad
(Were I of stronger temper). Since I Have lost
Those rarities bought with the pricelesse Cost
Of my unvalued Liberty: which now
I must forgo for ever; from the Vow
You made before the Hierarchy of Heaven
(Which now I summon witnesses how even
My Love has been) I free you; If you hear
That wilfully I perished, one poor tear
(I ask no more) shed, and my Soul, when Death
Has robbed my carcass of its loathed breath,
Shall pray, that you hereafter may possess
A Friend that loved your Memory no less
Than I, who spite of Fortune will be blessed
That once I was termed Yours; though now I rest
Forsaken. --
To Lucinda, revolted from him.
'TWas I who made thee Beauteous before;
You might have sat regardlesse at your door,
Or past the Streets (as other Women do)
Without salutes, or being congee'd to:
When now each eye that sees thee, does admire
To view a mortal Creature to aspire
So near the Heavenly Essence: every tongue
(Since I set out thy Excellence among
Men of ingenuous Spirits) strives to raise
Thy Name beyond the name of Praise.
Nature did well (I must confess) to frame
Thee of her choicest Matter; for the same
You stand indebted to her, and it is fit
You should acknowledge thankfulness for it.
The Orient Pearl new taken from the shell,
Though It be as precious in it self, to sell,
Cannot so fitting and commodious be
As when it is polishd by a Lapidarie.
The glistring Diamond shines not to the sight
Till by the Mill and Cutter it is made bright;
You had as much implicit Beauty (true)
As now you have, when first I did you view;
But like a Diamond clouded ore with Dross,
It gave small luster, cause unknown it was:
I polished it by giving it a Name;
Beautie's regardlesse, till adorned by Fame.
But Oh the Faith of Women! Can there be
Evasions found for such Apostacy
As is in you? What Penance can abridge
Such an Impiety, such dire Sacrilege
Against Love's imperial Godhead, to resist,
Contemn his Orgies, which by me his Priest
He did enjoin, by his own powerful Name
You should observe with a religious Flame?
And you had vowed to do it, swore that I
Should offer up to his great Deity
Your heart; which Love himself would not despise
(But beg for such a welcome Sacrifice,
More precious than the sweet Panchayan Gumms,
The Phoenix Pile, or fuming Hecatombs).
But as a vapor which the flattering Sun
Attracts to the pure Ayrs middle Region,
Under pretense to give a new Star birth,
And throws a fading Meteor to the Earth;
So fell your Heart from Love's unspotted Throne
By your intemp'rate violation
Of Vows to me; in which if you persist,
Mercy will blot you from her candid List,
As a prodigious Monster, and firm Truth
Blush at a perjurie so black in Youth,
So white as yours: at which the Rose-cheek'd Morn
Might once have borrowed luster, and unshorne
Apollo brightness: Oh! why should there rest
Such falsehood, such unkindnesse in a Breast
Whose superficial figure does outgoe
In witness Lillies, or untrodden Snow?
Ungrateful Woman! what unborne offense
Can give a specious Shadow, a Pretense
To thy unhallowed falsehood? what strange Cause
Thy sudden change, this alteration draws?
Perhaps now I have set thy Beauty forth,
With all the Attributes expressing Worth,
That when I did but speak of thee, or write,
Fancy and Love daunc'd in each Epithet.
Some other Suitor, who to please your ears,
Purchases Raptures, which his dull brain bears
As Parrots what is taught them, who can speak
But by tradition, has surpised your weak
Imagination; and does proudly boast
In gaining that which me most labor cost.
Or else perhaps your overcurious eye
Has spied some new unknown deformity
In me; or 't may be possible you think
(Which is most likely) that the Muses drink
Is quite exhausted; that my weary Quill
Wants moisture to explain your Praises still,
In that full way, that over-liberall strain
My Genius used at first your Love to gain.
If this be it, I Will fill the Daphnean Quire
With a fresh Chaunter, snatch bright Phoebus Lyre
From his swift Fingers, and once more rehearse
Thy worth in such a strange mellifluous Verse,
That sweet Propertius shall his Cynthia tell
Thy Praises do her Luster far excel;
Gabius shall weep that his Lycoris name
Is now surpassed by thy immortal Fame:
And (my great Master) Ovid shall confess
Corynna's shining Beauty to be less
Than thine; since he, for his Corynna's sake
Did only three Books of Loves choice Art make;
But I for thine will such Conceits devise,
That after no Invention shall arise.
Yield then, and let us riot in the Sweets
That in Youth, Love, and glorious Beauty meets;
That all the gods may envy to behold
Us over-doe their Fables; Dana's Gold
Be counted Dross, and Laeda's Swan appear
Black as a Crow, when whiter Thou art there.
First shall my Lips with an unvalued Kiss
Suck from (those fragrant Mountainets of bliss)
Thy melting Lips, more sweetness than the Bees
Extract from Roses, or Hyblaean Trees,
When to the Air their tender wings they yield,
And with their mouths depopulate the field.
And then descending to thy Iv'rie Neck
My wandering Fancy shall my dull Lips check,
That they ore-slipt thy Cheek; thence they shall fly
With hot propension to thy flaming Eye;
Thence to that smooth, that polished plain of Snow,
On which thy Breasts (those Hills of wonder) grow,
Where little Cupids dance, and do contend
Which of them first shall venture to descend
To the Elisian Valleys, that do lie
'Twixt them and that rich Mine of purity,
Thy slender Waste. What does remain below,
It Is fit that none but you and I should know,
When like a venurous well resolved man
I sail through yourunfathom'd Ocean
To Loves safe Harbor; I Am too modest (Sweet)
With wide expressions of our Loves to greet
Thy willing ears, since I for my part mean
In Action, not in Words to be obscene.
Unclose those Eyelids, and outshine
The brightness of the breaking day;
The light they cover is divine,
Why should it fade so soon away?
Stars vanish so, and day appears,
The Sun's so drowned in the morning's tears.
Oh! let not sadness cloud this Beauty,
Which if you lose you will nere recover;
It is not Love's, but Sorrows duty
To die so soon for a dead Lover.
Banish, oh! banish grief, and then
Our Joys will bring our Hopes again.
Epithalamium.
THe Joys of Youth, and what the Spring
Of Health, Strength, Happiness can bring,
Wait upon this Noble pair.
Lady, may you still be fair
As earliest Light, and still enjoy
Beauty which Age cannot destroy.
May you be fruitful as the Day;
Never Sigh but when you Pray;
Know no Grief, but what may be
To temper your Felicity.
And You my Lord, may truest Fame
Still attend on your great Name.
Live both of you espoused to Peace,
And with your years, let Love increase.
Go late to Heaven, but coming thither,
Shine there, two glorious Stars together.
Epithalamium.
THe holy-Priest had joynd their Hands, and now
Night grew propitious to their bridal Vow;
Majestic Juno, and young Hymen flies
To light their Pines at the fair Virgins eyes;
The little Graces amorously did skip
With the small Cupids from each Lip to Lip;
Venus her self was present, and untide
Her Virgin zone, when lo on either side
Stood as her Handmaids, Chastity and Truth,
With that immaculate guider of her Youth,
Rose-colour'd Modesty; these did undresse
The beauteous Maid, who now in readiness,
The nuptial Tapors waving 'bout her Head,
Made poor her Garments and enriched her Bed.
While the fresh Bridegroom, like the lusty Spring,
Did to the holy Bride-bed with him bring
Attending masc'line Virtues; down he laid
His snowie Limbs by a far whiter Maid.
There Kisses linked their Minds; as they embrace,
A Quire of Angels flew about the place,
Singing all Bliss unto this Pair for ever,
May they in Love and Union still persever.
Upon a Gentleman playing on the Lute.
STrange miracle! Who Is this that wears
The native Liv'rie of the Spears;
Transforming all our sense to Ears?
Surely it cannot be a sin
To think there is, or may have bin
On earth a heavenly Seraphin.
That granted, certain 't must be he;
In any else there cannot be,
Such a Celestial Harmony.
When glorious He with swift pursuit
Touched the soft Cordage of his Lute,
The Genius of the World was mute.
Amphion so his hand let fall,
When at th'inchantment of his call
Stones danced to build the Theban Wall.
Arion sure, when he began
To charm the attentive Ocean,
Was but an Emblem of this Man,
Whose numerous Fingers, whiter far
Than Venus Swans or Ermines are,
VVag'd with the amorous strings a War;
But such a War as did invite
The Sense of Hearing, and the Sight
To riot in a full delight.
For as his Touch kept equal pace,
His Looks did move with such a grace;
We read his Music in his Face.
Live Noble Youth, let Heaven inspire
Thee with its own eternal Fire,
While all that hear thee do admire.
Love.
LOve's a Child, and ought to be
Won with smiles: his Deity
Is clothed in Panthers skins which hide
Those parts which kill, if but espied;
Hates Wars, but such as mildly led
By Venus are to pleasures Bed;
There do soft embraces fight,
Kisses combat with delight.
Amorous looks, and sighs discover
What be fits a timorous Lover.
But who ere to Love does yield,
Mars his Spear, nor Pallas Shield
Can save from ruin; for Loves Fire
Once enkindled by desire,
Blown by thoughts impetuous blasts,
It for ever burning lasts.
The Sphere to which it strives to fly
Are humane hearts that seek to die;
These (like fuel) Loves fire cherish,
Till they to ashes burn and perish.
To a revived Vacation Play, Prologue.
IT is a dead Vacation; yet we see
(Which glads our souls) a wel-set Company
Adorn our Benches: We did scarce expect
So full an Audience in this long neglect
Of Court and City Gentry, that transfer
In Term their Visits to our Theater.
The Country Gentlemen come but to Town
For their own business sake, to carry down
A sad Sub-poena, or a fearful Writ
For their poor Neighbor, not for love of Wit.
Their comely Madams too come up to see
New Fashions, or to buy some Raritie
For their young Son and Heir, and only stay
Till by their Sheepshearing they are called away.
The Courtiers too are absent, who had wont
To buy your Wares on trust, they are gone to hunt
The nimble Buck in the Country; and conceive,
They give you Interest, if you but receive
A haunch of Ven'son, or if they supply
Your Wives trim Churching with a Red-Deer Pie.
Few Gentlemen are now in Town, but those
Who in your Books remain uncross'd for Clothes,
Who, when you ask them money, are so slack
To pay't; their answer is, What do you lack?
You are our daily and most constant Guests,
Whom neither Country business nor the Gests
Can ravish from the City; it is your care
To keep your Shops, 'lesse when to take the Air
You walk abroad, as you have done to day,
To bring your Wives and Daughters to a Play.
How fond are those men then that think it fit
T'arraigne the City of defect of Wit?
When we do know you love both wit and sport,
Especially when you have vacation sor't.
And now we hope you have leisure in the City
To give the World cause to suspect you witty.
We would entreat you then put off awhile
That formal brow you wear when you beguile
Young Chapmen with bad Wares; pray do not look
On us, as on the Debtors in your Book,
With a shrewd countenance; what we act to day
Was for your sakes; (some think) a pretty Play;
Nay we our selves almost presume it good
Because we hope it will be understood
By your capacious Brains, which know to get
Wealth, and for that cause we cannot doubt your Wit;
At least we dare not, since wee'r bound to say
All those are witty come to see our Play.
For Ezekiel Fen at his first Acting a Man's Part. PROLOGVE.
SUppose a Merchant when he lanches forth
An untried Vessel, doubtful of its worth,
Dare not adventure on that infant Piece
The glorious fetching of a golden Fleece
From the remot'st Indies. It Is so with me,
Whose Innocence and timorous Modesty
Does blush at my own shadow, prone to fear
Each Wave a Billow that arises here;
The Company's my Merchant nor dare they
Expose my weak frame on so rough a Sea,
'Lesse you (their skillful Pilots) please to stear
By mild direction of your Eye and Ear
Their new rigged Bark. This is their hopes and mine
Promise my self; if you like North-stars shine,
I like a daring, and adventrous Man,
Seeking new paths in the angry Ocean,
In threatening Tempests, when the surges rise
And give salt kisses to the neighboring Skies,
When blustering Boreas with impetuous breath
Gives the spread Sails a wound to let in Death,
Cracks the tall Mast, forcing the Ship (though loath)
On its carved Prow to wear a Crown of sroth;
Will face all perils boldly, to attain
Harbor in safety; then set forth again.
To Mr. Charles Cotton.
YOu that are he, you that are only he,
Who are what every noble Soul should be,
The Abstract of Mankind, who truly can
Contract Wits spacious Orb into a span;
Have stock enough of goodness to restore
What erring Nature ever lost before.
It Is not the greatness of your Name or Blood
Makes me adore you, it is because you are good.
The Wits Maecenas can without a storm
Of trivial words, even actuate and inform
With spritly soul that matter which would lie
Lost like a lump, without a memory
Or life t'ingender Wit. Think there can be
In me (dear Sir) no seeds of Flattery.
Rapt with an holy Zeal, I needs must sing
Your ample Worth; and when I touch a string
Of my Phoebeian Lyre, chaste Daphne shall
Tender her Bays to deck the Festival:
Devoted to your merit, Bacchus then
Shall with his richest Nectar-swelling Pen
Indue me with such Wine, as I do think,
At least I wish, that you this night may drink;
Pure blood of the rich Spanish Grape which may
Make you immortal, and atchieve the Bay
Poets by drinking aim at. May there be
In your carouses, Wit and Company
Fit for your dear enjoying; may the wealth
Of noble Wine enrich you with a Health
Great as my wishes; while forgotten I
By your Commands, banished that Company
I so admire, in my Archaick bed
Sigh like a Girl, whose precious Maidenhead
Is ravished from her; till your future view
Banish that pensive sadness, and renew
The happiness of
Your Servant.

To my Friend, Advice.
IN Natures Annals Mans's the perfect Story,
And you of man had been the perfect glory,
Had not the error of your giddie youth
Sold the Inheritance of that noble truth
Entaild on glorious manhood: you who are
In your desires so much irregular,
That your Ambition is to have your May,
Your flower of Youth spent in the fruitless play
Of gaining Female favors. In your blood
Live flames, (which felt) yet are not understood;
Continual Aetnaes in your veins nere cease
To burn, yet do by burning even increase.
What pleasure find you in a foolish Kiss,
Or wanton look, that you do place your bliss,
Your minds Elisium in an amorous glance,
Or Priapeian night-work, such a trance,
A dream, a nothing? Can that be the sum
O joy that you should aim at; to become
For that an Idiot; to enthrall your heart
To one whom nature made your weaker part,
Your household servant; to adore her hair,
Make of her face an Idol, which though fair,
Is but a painted Sepulcher within
Containing rotten ashes of black sin,
Relics of soul corruption! oh! reclaim
Those sordid thoughts, and let a nobler aim
Be your minds Object, be the final Cause
Of your youths Actions; Let not Cupids Laws
Govern you wholly: For your female Creatures,
Enchanting Devils clad in humane features,
Earths needful evils; Women, they whose name
Divided, does most perfectly proclaim
Their bad Condition; they, whose Beauty must
Be to men firebrarnds to enkindle Lust;
They are that sweet and undigested meat
That does consume all those that dare to eat
The too delicious Banquet; Bells that sings
One tune at Weddings and at Buryings;
Serpents whose cunning carriage can entice
Another Adam out of Paradise.
They Are all extremely good, or fraught with evils:
If good, best Saints; if bad, the worst of Devils.
Pardon me (sacred Woman-hood) that I
Who Have raised your Beauty to a Deity,
Who know you good and virtuous, that you can
Excel in worth as well as feature, Man;
That I should for the love I bear this Youth,
Injure the innocence of your matchless truth:
It Is to reclaim his follies: Let him see
How bad the worst of your frail Sex can be.
I Will expiate this crime hereafter, pay
To your chaste thoughts my own yet Virgin Bay;
How much am I your friend then, that dare choose
To hazard the fresh honor of my Muse
For your dear sake; that with one loving breath
Giving you life, betray my self to death?
But this is friendships duty, and I must
Rather to you that to my self be just.
Oh! Noble Youth, when you with judgment shall
Read all the Texts not held Canonical
In women's Legends, when you shall behold
In Times successive Volume, what is inrol'd
Concerning them, how many leaves are spent
Upon their Lives, and each a Monument
Speaking the mischiefs that of old did rise
From the intemperate glances of their eyes:
And when Times Herald Fame shall usher in
Those whom Antiquity brands for that sin:
Bring Helen forth and the lascivious Boy
Wrapped in the flames (themselves did cause) of Troy:
When fair incest'ous Myrrha you shall see
Groaning within the entrails of a Tree;
View wanton Lais, who so often did sell
Her beauteous youth, a horrid Fiend in Hell;
Or Tyrian Dido with big rage possessed,
Opening the white doors of her Lovesick breast
To let in wilful death; Or when you shall
Read modern Stories more Authentical
Then Poetry has taught: You shall survey
Those Monsters, Nero and Caligula,
Naked and trembling; then with guilty fear
Insatiate Messalina shall appear;
Then the two Queens of Naples, who in Name
Were parallels as well as in their fame,
Whose appetites could never be withstood (blood.
Till their own bloods quenched their own heat of
When you have seen these, turn your eyes and look
On that fair paper, that unspotted Book,
Where happier Stories flourish: and behold
Inscribed in Characters of purest Gold
Those glorious Names that Fame records to be
The immaculate Champions of blessed Chastity;
Selfe-murdred Lucrece, 'twill a Saint express,
And damn foul Tarquin for's lasciviousness:
Chaste Arethusa there displayes her Beams,
That shine, though drowned in lustful Alphey's streams.
Daphne, that Phoebus hot pursuit did shun,
Looks brighter now than the lascivious Sun.
But vain are all examples; since even we
By Reasons Mistress, wise Philosophy,
In Ethics are instructed that we must
Think each thing wicked which we know unjust:
And what more dire injustice can there be
Than to our selves a want of Charity?
But I Am too serious now, and must excuse
The over-bold instructions of my Muse:
I know dear friend, you are so maturely wise,
You can see vice, though clothed in the disguise
Of virtue; and it is needless then to preach
Doctrine to you, who abler are to teach
Than be instructed: but my Pen does move
Only by true directions of my love,
From which if you receive the least offense,
I must appeal to the Court of Innocence
From your harsh Censure; since what I have said
Was not to chide you, Friend, but to persuade.
Virtues reward is Honor, and though you
Wear no more Titles than descend as due
From your brave Ancestors, yet to your Blood
It Is an addition (Sir) to be thought good.
You, whose demeanor bears that equal port,
You Have won the love, not envy of the Court;
That can observe the form and Laws of State,
Gaining men's emulation, not their hate;
That with a noble temper can decide
The diffrence 'twixt formalitie and pride,
That your indifferent actions are as far
From b'ing too common, as too singular,
So that with glorious freedom you direct
Your Will to what it ought most to affect.
You in whose Nature (as two Suns) arise
The Attributes of Bountefull and Wise.
You that are Valiant, (as Fames eldest Child
Honor) yet teach even Valor to be mild.
You that (in brief) with certain judgment can
Be perfect Courtier, yet be perfect Man.
It Is no Poetic flattry that does raise
My eager Muse up to this height of Praise.
Big with an holy and Prophetic rage,
In Fames great Book, I in an ample Page
Will fix the Annals of your Worth, which shall
When other Names are held Apocryphal,
In that eternal Volume be annexed
A fair Appendix to that glorious Text.
But now (Great Sir) it is time that I excuse
The too audacious errors of my Muse,
And by my humble wishes strive to win
A full remission for its daring sin.
May you enjoy what ever Strength and Health
Can yield of pleasure; or unbounded Wealth
Can without riot purchase: may you be
As free from others envy, as you are free
From its desert: and may you (which long since
You had) grow great in the favor of your Prince.
May not mischance invade your souls blessed peace;
But may it even as it consumes, increase.
And when decrepid age shall slowly creep
Over your Youth, and to eternal Sleep
Confine your eyelids; may you then expire
Blessed as a Martyr that does Court the Fire.
Poets are Prophets Sir; and things indeed
Happen, when they but wish they may succeed.
Upon the right Honorable RICHARD Earl of Portland, late Lord High Treasurer
of ENGLAND. ELEGY.
HOw dul's my Faith! 'twould pusle my belief
That there could be room left on earth for grief,
Did not the Worlds great Genius seem to power
Its very eyes out in a plenteous shower,
As if it meant its moisture should create
Another Deluge, spite of powerful Fate.
The Stars are mournful grown, and do conspire
With unaccustomed tears to quench their fire.
The Sun himself looks heavy, and puts on
(In spite of Light) a sad privation, (breath
Since Noble PORTLAND's fall, whose glorious
Was too too precious to be stolen by Death.
Grim Tyrant hold thy hand, if thou 'lt employ
Thy unresisted Shafts, let them destroy
Only those petty subjects, whom their Fate
Never produced for Pillars of the State;
The Kingdom well may spare them, and their loss
Would rather be a blessing than a cross.
There Is multitudes that only seek to be
The ends, not raisers of their Family,
To whom thy Darts (their Patrimony spent)
Would be most welcome Cures of discontent.
Ambitious Fury! It Is thy only aim
To vanquish those same true born sons of Fame
That rise by noble merit; such was he
To whom my Muse does pay this Elegy.
He who though placed in Honors highest seat,
Strived rather to be counted Good than Great.
Into whose Essence (all conceived) that State
Did its own soul even transubstantiate:
Such were his Counsels, so supremely wise,
They always conquered where they did advise.
His Judgment too so strong, and so mature,
What ere it promised, seemed to be secure:
Yet 'twas with such a moderation mixed,
That as on Law, so 'twas on Conscience fixed.
All Is actions were so even, they nere did force
The great man's Envy, nor the poor man's Curse.
Such was his Life, so temperate and just,
It nere knew Malice, nor commerc'd with Lust.
What sudden trance surrounds me? what extreme
Passion confines my senses to a Dream?
I feel a lazy humor slowly creep
Over my Fancy, charming it to sleep,
Or rather, that (entranced) it might supply
Great PORTLAND's Hearse with a fit Elegy.
Now a Poetic fury brings me on
To mount to Fames eternal Mansion,
Where upon Marble Seats I did behold
Those glorious Worthies so renound of old
For prudent Counsels, who were held the health,
The very life and soul of the Commonwealth.
There the mellifluous Cicero did shine
Bright with the spoils of vanquished Cataline;
And as his Motto, ore his Throne there hung,
Arms yield to Arts; let Swords give place to the Tongue.
There Roman Fabius sat, who wrought the fall
(By his delays) of Punick Hanuibal.
Amongst other foreign Statesmen, there appears
Those of our Nation, who for many years
Did in ambiguous Fortunes frown and smile,
Uphold the Fate and Glory of this Isle.
There that great Marshall Pembroke did sustain
The reeling Pillars of third Henry's Reign,
And of this our English heaven advance
Himself the Atlas against invading France.
(After a numerous Company) in his Pall,
And other holy Robes, Fame did install
Illustrious Morton, that composed the Jarre
Betwixt the House of York and Lancaster.
There Sackvile, Cecill, Egerton, were placed,
On whom as I stood gazing, Fame in have
Approaching, did command them to prepare
For PORTLAND's welcome to that Theater
Of ever-living Honor; and to me,
Go sing (quoth she) this Worthies Elegy.
Straight (as the Muses Priest) I did obey,
And began to touch my Instrument, when they
Leaving their Thrones, with an unanimous voice
Welcomed the Sage Lord, and did give him choice
Which Seat he would accept; but modest he,
Repaid their Courtesy with Courtesy,
Till Fame her self installd him, and did give
His merit this Inscription, which shall live,
As his great Name, unraz'd: Here PORTLAND lies,
That was as truly Just as he was Wise;
Cautious, yet full of Council; Mild, yet free
From seeking idle Popularitie;
To Goodmen gentle, to the Bad severe;
Loved Virtue for its self, and not for Fear.
This Fame inscribed, and this shall deck his Hearse,
While there is Time, or memory of Verse.
On Sir Robert Ayton, late Secretary to her Majesty. ELEGY.
Tears are all Great men's Obsequies, when they
Break from the glorious prison of their Clay;
A thousand fluent eyes their losses mourns,
As if they meant to drown them in their Urnes.
If then this sorrow customarie be,
How many eyes should be wept out for thee?
Admired Ayton! every mournful breath
Lamenting thine should sigh it self to death,
As proud to wait on thy pure Soul, which fled
To heaven so swiftly; none did think thee dead,
Till the loud Bell (Deaths Trumpet) did proclaim
Thy flight to immortality; then Fame
Herself put on Griefs Liverie, and sung
Thy weighty loss, till she had lost her tongue
In that sad use, as if she meant to have
A Tomb for all her Story in thy Grave.
Thou, who when living, Truths example stood,
To teach Great men how to be Great and Good;
Nay, to be Wise and Learnd, to act each part
Of their Lives Scene, with Virtue and with Art,
Which thou made Virtues Handmaid, and with skill
Managed thy Greatness, without Greatness ill.
But Sorrow does distract me, and my Zeal
Of Grief for thee does (with the practice) steal
Away my Muses Faculties, and now
Deaths Emblem (Cypress) hangs upon my Brow
Heavy as thy cold Marble; else ere this,
My pregnant Muse, big with an Extasis
Of Wonder, had endeavored to set forth
The unexpressive glory of thy Worth:
It had displaid thy Learning, which was such,
That it (in justice) may compare with much
Admired Barclay, or be said to side
With Wit-excelling Buchanan, (the pride
And glory of thy Nation) 'Twas so known
To both the Kingdoms, each would gladly own
Thee as their Offspring, but ours (grieving) must
Only be happy to preserve thy dust:
Which as if Fame had meant it should inherit
The glory due unto thy living Merit,
This unaccustomed Honor to it brings,
To mix with sacred ashes of our Kings.
Good, is in Subjects Kingly, and in thee
All Graces strive to make an Unity
Of pious goodness; many flames so meet,
And curle into one Pyramid, then greet
Their subtle Sphere; in Aytons equal Breast
Dwells all that could for Virtue be expressed.
So that the brightness of his Lives just glory
Shall shame the Bad, be to the good a Story.
Upon the Noble Colonell-Generall Buroughs, slain at the Isle of Ree. ELEGY.
ADmired BUROUGHS! though to deck thy Hearse
Thy Merits challenge a tenth Muses Verse;
Though, if thy Valor just reward should have,
Mars should turn Poet, write thy Epitaph:
Yet let not thy blessed soul (Heroic Spirit)
That now in heavens great Army does inherit
The Civick Garland, Laurel, and enjoyes
More glorious triumphs than the Romish toys
Used to grace happy Conquests with, despise
This, though no Hecatombe, yet a Sacrifice,
Which the well-wishes of a bleeding heart
Offers as Fun'rall flames to thy desert.
To say thou were Wise, Valiant, and the rest
Of those good Attributes thy Worth expressed
TO include in it, were nothing; 'twere more fit
That some sweet Genius some Ovidian Wit
Should study for new Epithites to express
Thee as thou were then living, that is no less
Than Master of those Gifts, which here related
Would make old Nature proud she had created
A work of so much wonder, that pale Death
Has lodged thee now (Illustrious Soul) beneath
A pile of Marble, whose hard entrails weep
Over thy cold ashes; and since yron-sleep
Has closed thy eyelids, let thy silent Grave
Retain with thee this for thy Epitaph:
Here lies a Colonel, slain by fatal Shot;
Who lost his Reg'ment, and a Kingdom got.
Upon the right Honorable, the Lady Elisabeth Rich. ELEGY.
Why looks the day so dull? why does't appear
As if it were contracted to a Tear?
Or rather had put off essential Light,
To shroud its Luster in eternal night?
The Clouds are drowsy, as they meant to sleep,
Or rather pregnant (with salt Dew) to weep.
It Is past the Morning now, Day needs not power
Its precious moisture on each amorous Flower;
The Violets want not liquid pearls to adorn
Their azure ears, nor from the beauteous Morn
Does the pale Couslip or the Primrose seek
A Crystal Gemm to hang upon its Cheek;
Their pride does wither, they hang down their heads,
As if they would intombe them in their beds.
The Sun-aspiring Lark under his Wing
Hanging his head, seems now to sigh, not sing.
What should portend this sadness? why should mirth
Seem thus of the sudden to be fled from Earth?
No Comet has appeared of late, no Star
With blazing brightness threatened Death or War.
The Cause then of this sudden change must be
Beyond the reach of wise Astrology.
(My Fancy has 't.) This alteration falls
Only at Beauties, Virtues Funerals.
These are no common Obsequies, since She
(Illustrious Lady) is enforced to be
The Cause of these lamented Rites, by proud
Imperious Death confined into a Shroud:
She that was so superlatively Good,
Her Virtue was her Honor more than Blood:
Whose Innocence and Love was all her Care:
Who was as purely Chaste as She was Fair:
So full of noble Carriage, that her Life
May be the Figure of a perfect Wife.
Look here you curious Great Ones, here does ly
A Glass for you to dress your Actions by.
'Twas not the name of Ca'ndish, so allied
To Worth, that could in her beget least Pride;
Nor did she boast her Title, being led
A glorious Bride to hopeful Rich his Bed.
Gentle as Summer Evenings, or as Air
In its first native Purity; and Fair
As was the Beams of the Created Light,
Before it ever had conversed with Night;
Humble as Vot'ries, that in Prayer expire;
And Chaste as those who never know Desire
Was this Religious Dame; who nere can die,
Since her own Fame has writ her Elegy.
Upon the death of his Sister, Mrs. Priscilla Glapthorne. ELEGY.
Happy Arabians, when your Phoenix dies
In a sweet pile of fragrant Spiceries!
Out of the Ashes of her Myrrh-burn'd Mother,
(That you may still have one) springs up another.
Unhappie we! Since it is your Phoenix nature,
Why could nor ours, our only matchless Creature
Enjoy that right? Why from the Mothers Urne
Did not another Phoenix straight return?
Oh! there is a reason; 'twas cause Natures Store
All spent on her, is now become too poor
To frame her equal, so that on her Hearse
My trembling hand shall hang this Fun'rall Verse.
Virtue and Beauty, none can boast to have,
They both are buried in her silent Grave;
Who was Loves, Truths, Beauties and Virtues Pride;
With her Love, Truth, Beauty and Virtue did.
Upon the death of Mrs. Susanna Osbalston. ELEGY.
I Pree thee leave me, Grief; if thou will stay
Within my panting Breast, show me the way
To present death; or force my eyes to shed
So large a flood of Tears, as may be spread
Like a transparent Crystal Sheet upon
Her Grave, that so no other worthless Stone
Aspire to adorn her Monument. Oh She!
Who was what every loyal Wife should be:
She in whose living Character was writ
A modest Sweetness clothed in harmless Wit:
Not like those ayrie Dames that only strive
To keep their Faces, not their Fames alive:
That prey upon their Husbands wealth, consume
Whole Sign'ories in Painting and Perfume:
That only make an Idol of their Will,
And hate all Good, 'cause they account it Ill.
No, she was pleasing, void of least Offense;
Was fully Wise, yet full of Innocence.
But oh! how I undo my self! I now
Must pull my Laurel from my wrinkled Brow,
And wreathed in deathfull Cypress, sadly call
My Muse to wait upon her Funeral.
Light thy sick Tapers, pensive Muse, and come
To wait her Death, and thine own Martyrdom;
For neverbe invoked to write (by me),
When hers is writ, another Elegy.
Now in that silent Tenement of Death,
The Church, go sing in a soft Swan-like breath,
A Requiem to thy memory; and there
Drown every word thou utter'st with a Tear:
But let them be such Tears as may express
Not Sorrow, but a joyful Extasis.
And You (dear Sir) in whom there does survive
So much of her, she needs must rest alive
In your yet bleeding memory; You that know
How much each tributarie-Grace did owe
To her unmatched Perfections; how that she
Was Virtues, Beauties just Epitome:
How that her Eyes were Spears in which did move
The equal Orbs of Chastity and Love:
Her Cheeks two fields of purity, where grew
The Rose and Lilie, mixed in the mutual hue
Of Smiles and Blushes; how each outward part
Did speak the richer luster of her Heart,
Her Minds intensive glory. When you think
Justly on this, her Grave no more shall drink
Your frequent Tears; but fraught with noble Mirth,
You Will soon divest your Soul of all that is Earth
About it; say, 'twas justice to transfer
From this dull Region such a matchless Star,
And fixed in the Crystal Heaven; you will then confess
Your constant Love to her appeared far less.
In Grief than Joy; for sorrow spent for this
Her happiness, is envy to her bliss,
Not charity t'her memory; yet my Verse
Shall hang a lasting Hatchment on her Hearse,
My Laurel deck her Urne, in which does lie
As much as of Mortality could die.
You Sir, who then best knew her perfect Life,
Ought to rejoice, not grieve for your dead Wife.
SYLVIA. A FRAGMENT.
AS DAMON thus did 'plaine,
Behold a Cloud (out of the foamie Maine)
'Gan to arise, and over-looke the Earth,
Scorning the Sea (from whence it took its birth)
As dull and ponderous; still it mounts up higher
With azure Wings, as if it meant t'aspire,
Spite of commanding Natures free Consent,
To place 'bove Air the watery Element;
Whose vain ambition, from his calid Sphere,
When nimble Fire, the chief and supreme Peer
Of Elements, beheld; his servent Ire
Increased his fury, adding Fire to Fire,
Making him hotter than the eighth degree,
Which is prescribed him by Philosophy;
And calling to his accident, the Heat
That by him sat upon a brazen Seat;
Which (...) like Aetna, when Typ^^us breath.
Threatens to blow up the Sicilian earth.
He bad him quell that over-daring Foe,
Who still made have to his own overthrow.
Heat strait obayd; and wrapping up in Smoke
His horrid Flames, a speedy passage took
Into the fiery Regions, and with force
Of rays more ardent than the Suns bright Horse
When they ore-turn'd their Masters purple Carr,
And drowned in Po, the ventrous Waggoner,
Drew up the willing Cloud, that strived to fly,
With Icarus to its own Tragedy.
Just as a Load-starre, whose attracting force
Does cause the Iron leave its native Course,
And mount to it; so did Heats powerful might
Enforce the following Cloud, till it had quite
Passed the first Kingdom, and was upward gone
Into the pure Ayrs middle Region;
Then back with speed, the Heat began homeward fare
And left the Cloud to the mercy of the Air;
Whose subtle body being light and dry,
Could not endure the Clouds moist quality.
(Clouds and all heavy Meteors, Rain, and Snow,
Hail, and the like, are Bodies mixed, that grow
Out of the Earth, and watery Element,
Which by their nature ponderous, still are bent
Down to the Center, but the Air and Fire
Of more pure substance, seek to force them higher
Toward the Sphere, that in their downfall thence
They may triumph, and show their Eminence
Over those dullerbodies; but the natures
Of these two gross, yet fully simple Creatures
Will not permit ascension, they attract
Therefore these Meteors upwards, which compact
Of humid Vapors, needs must seek to bow
Downwards again): Our Cloud then which was now
Left by its hot Conductor, straight was cast
By the enraged Air with greater have,
To kiss the Center (than a Parthian Bow
Can shoot an Arrow, or a Mortar throw
Deathfull Granado's): in its way it struck
Upon the Firmament, and there b'ing broke,
Its watery substance did obscure the Plain
And gawdie Heaven with Clouds, which sought again
To join in one, and fill the buxome Air,
Just as you have seen a Painter on a fair
White Table drop some little spots of Black,
Which running here and there, at length does make
One Color in the Grownd-work; or as when
Two numerous Hosts of wel-resolved men
Meet in the Field, and with the murderous Smoke
Of their Death-sending Muskets, strive to choke
Their bloody facts from view of lightsome day,
The Sulphur flying many a several way,
At last does mere, and dim the Crystal Sky:
So did this Cloud, now many, by and by
One Cloud again; which when the Rose-cheek'd Sun
(Who had but half his daily labor run)
Saw from his shining Chariot, on he speeds,
Driving amain his Nectar-glutted Steeds
Through the dark Welkin, now he 'gins to call
On Pirois, now on Aethon, then lets fall
His angry Whip upon their sweaty backs,
Now pulls the Raines hard, which again he slacks,
That they might have more free and open Course
T'expell the Cloud, which scorning the Suns force,
With pitchie mists did so obscure his light,
That day seemed turned into Cimmerian Night.
Then straight the Cloud out of its watrie Store
Showered as if godly Pyrrhus age once more
Had been approaching, when blew Proteus drove
His flocks to see the Mountains, Fishes clave
Unto the Elmes, before a noted seat
For harmless Turtles. All the Winds did meet
In hostile opposition; Auster fought
With Lybs, and he with Boreas, who from out
His rapid throat cast gusts, and did display
His wings as wide, as when Orythia
Was by him ravished: Thunder from the Sky
Like to lovd music, made a Harmony:
With the Winds whistling shrilnesse, Seas did roar
Rising in frothie Mountains, that the Shore
Trembled for fear, lest the impetuous Waves
Should pass their Limits, and become the Graves.
To the adjoining Meadows: And our Swain
Damon, who erst in Tears began to plain
His Kala's loss, now let that salt dew fall,
To solemnize his poor Flocks Funeral.
For lo big-swelling with the late-falne Rain
Tyber broke ore his Banks, and ran amain
Into the Meadows, where our Shepherds kept
Their Woolly Charge, which presently was swept
Down by the greedy River, as we see
A Town beleagur'd by its Enemy,
When by an on-slaught it is surpised and taken,
Both old and young are by the Martial Train
Of the Victorious Soldiers murdered: so
Dealt the enraged River; to and fro
It ran, and bore down all; the tender Lambs
That then were sucking of their milkie Dams,
Ere they could wail their deaths with one sad bleat,
Were swallowed up, yet hanging on the Teat.
Nor did the Flocks horn'd-Leaders brazen Bell
Serve him for ought, unless to ring a knell
To the Folds drowning: 'twas in vain to strive,
For the poor Shepherds now to save alive
Themselves was all their study; to a Wood,
Whose top had long a mark to Seamen stood,
They trembling fled, when straight the Cloudy Sky
'Gan to clear up, and Phoebus lightsomely
Again to shine; the Muses of this Grove
To chaunt their sylvan Madrigalls, and move
The Stones to listen, and the lofty Trees
To bow their dewie heads; the busy Bees
Leaving the hollow Oaks which the late Rain
Had forced 'em enter, now began again
Their little thighs with juice of Thyme to fill;
But the amazed Shepherds trembling still,
Could scarce give credit to their wondering eyes,
(Such power has fear if thoroughly it surprise
Our soul and senses) they beheld the Wood
As't had been water; thought each plash a flood,
And every drop that from the boughs did fall
They thought a tear shed for their Funeral.
In this amazement standing; to their sight
An object was presented, naked quite,
Save that her snowie Smock did compass in
Its white embraces, her far whiter Skin.
They saw bound to an Oak so rare a Creature,
As seemed to be the work on which old Nature
Had spent her best Materials.
Not Cytherca, when she naked rose
From the Seas watery bosom, did disclose
Half of her Beauties; not the nimble Maid,
To whose swift Feet so many Suitors paid
Their heads as tribute; nor the Wood-nymphs Queen
When she was bathing by Acteon seen,
Showd like to her; by whom Pigmalion might
Have taken a Pattern, and have framed a right
Model of Beauty: her attractive Hair,
Bright as the Sunbeams, drew the enamored Air
Gently to waft it; and her Pearls of Sight,
Though drowned in Tears, cast forth a glittering light,
That through dark Sorrow shined; the winged Boy
Leaving his Mothers Fountains, came (...) enjoy
Those Crystal Wels, whose pure drops could redress
Sooner than Nectar, hot Loves thirstinesse.
The Naiades, and tripping Fairie Elves
Repined to see in their own Woods, themselves
So far surpassed in Beauty; and the Grove
Thinking't had been Sylvanus fairest Love,
Brought thither all his Offspring, with pretense
To do his Gods beloved Nymph reverence.
First did the Thorn most amorously begin
To twine about her, yet nere pricked her skin;
Then aged Palms, and Victor-crowning Bays
Halfe-withered (at her Eyes all quickening Rays)
Came and renewed their freshness; and the Yew
Unkind to weary Passengers, at view
Of her, lost all his poison; and the Tree
Whence Venus Minion in his Infancy
Was by the Wood-nymph taken, did presume
To borrow sweetness from her breaths persume;
Here did the Cedar meet the stately Pine,
And it the Cypress, seeking to intwine
Their bushie tops, which Arbour-wise did run
To shade her Face, and robb the amorous Sun
Of his desired Kisses; all the Wood
At view of her, as much amazed stood,
As when the Oegrin Harpists cunning hand
Gave life to Mountains, forced Panchaya stand
Shaking her Balmie Tresses. Had the deep
Sighs she expired not showed that life did keep
In her a happy residence, the Swains
Would have imagined that her azure Veins,
Her Iv'rie Neck, and swelling Breasts, the rest
Of her Dimensions, not to be expressed,
To Have been Diana's Statue, there erected
To be adored; but when they had respected
Her sighs, and saw her living as sh' ad been
Some Sylvan Goddess, or the Nymph whose green
Scepter commands the Forests; they askd' grace
For offering entrance to that sacred place.
The bashful Virgin, from her weeping eyes
Shot glittering Rays hot Loves Incendiaries,
Teaching Days Tapor a more glorious Shine
Than Diamonds give to Jet, when they intwine,
At them the frozen Waggoner might thaw
His Chariot axel'd with congealed Snow;
And the slow moving North-Star having felt
Their temperate heat, his Isicles would melt,
And being affrighted at the sight of men,
Called up the blood into her Cheeks again
Which fear had made depart thence; blushing red,
As does Aurora when she leaves the Bed
Of old Tythonius; saine she would have got
Into the Wood, took Daphne from the hot
Pursuit of lustful Cynthius; the Oak
She often besought to lend its Bark to cloak
Her from their view, (...) when she saw how vain
Her wishes were, she then began a main
To beat her Breasts, and from her radiant eyes
To send a shower, whose drops were of more price
Than those which conquered Danae: As she thought
With plaints and grievous sighs to have besought
The Shepherds to unbind her; from the thick
Of the green Wood, came running toward her, quick
As some Numidian Lion from his Den,
(Half-starv'd with hunger) to his prey, three men
Three Monsters rather, clad in Weeds of hair,
Save that their Legs, and Arms, and Necks all bare,
Looked rougher than their Garments; to the Maid
Then bent their cruel steps, who humbly praid
The Heavens for pity; on the Villains went
Toward the Oak with a most damned intent
To ravish her; the Trees that by her stood
Began lament; the light Nymphs of the Wood
Implored the chaste Diana to defend
Her wretched Votresse; and the Birds did tend
The Air with dismal screetches; Phylomell
In mourning accents framed her voice to tell
The Vengeance due to Ravishers: the Fite
That burned their entrails, blown by soul desire,
Made their eyes sparkle, yielding horid sight
Unto their fact, whose blackness did affright
The blushing Sun, who bid his golden head
And seemed to suffer an Eclipse through dread
Of that dark deed; and now they did begin
With sacrilegious hands to touch that skin,
Which soft as Lydian Silk, did even entice
Love there to build his choicest Paradise.
When the enraged Shepherds, who beheld
Their monstrous purpose, with stern fury filled,
Ran to her succor; as a Bear, whose young
Is stolen away, or as a Wolf among
A flock of Sheep, when by the Pastors care
He Is hindered of his prey; just so did fare
The disappointed Letchers; and with cries
Whose hideous sound lent thunder to the skies,
They rushed upon the Shepherds, who prepared
For all incounters, stood upon their guard,
And with their hooks, which sometimes used to catch
The tender Lambs and bleating Ewes, they watch
To meet their blows, and strength with strength repel;
All struck together, yet not one blow fell
In vain to the ground; the sweat and purple blood
That trickled from them, dimmed their sights, yet stood
The fight in equal balance; now the Swains,
And then the Wood-men had the odds; their pains
Seemed not to make 'em weary; these did fight
Spurred on by lust, and these in justice right.
Now 'gan they grapple, and with all their force
Strived to oerthrow each other; no remorse
Of their own harms, could move their angry minds
To come to parley: fury when it blinds
Our souls, is such a passion; not the rage
Of hungry Indian Lions, when they wage
With ravenous Leopards battle for their prey,
Was like to theirs; fierce Bears and Tigers may
Be held as mild; the British Mastiffes sight
With his courageous Irish opposite,
The Dragon armed with plates of strongest Male,
Against Jove's Bird; the Sword-sish and the Whale
Were models of this combat; till at length,
Might overcame, Virtue gave place to Strength:
The Shepherds breathless were; their angry foes
Waxed more courageous, and did seek to close
With their half-vanquish'd enemies: as a Steed
Who having run with over-hastie speed
Most of his Race, does, ere it fully end,
Tire; so the Shepherds who did rashly spend
Their spirits at the entrance of the Fray,
Ere it was done, had none to spend, yet they
With courage held the Fight up, till by force
Mastred, they fell, each with a wounded Corse
Striking the earth now when they could no more
Strike their inhumane foes. The savage Bore
That in revenge wrathful (...) sent
To spoil the Chaledonian Continent,
When he had drawn the valiant Dardans blood,
Could not triumph more; they insulting stood
Like to so many Goshawks ore their prey,
Ore the poor Swains; what then could Sylvia,
(So hight the Nymph) expect, but present death,
Or ravishment? Which to prevent, her breath
She sought to stop with her gold (...) hair,
But when it came into her lips, it there
Amorously hung, spite of her force, to suck
Myriads of melting kisses; see the luck
Heavens had ordained to save her; with her cries
And with the late-fought Combats Ecchoing noise,
Drawn to the place, arrived an armed Knight,
Who to avoid the fearful tempests might,
Had taken the Woods for shelter, just as they
With barbarous outcries were about to slay
The honest Shepherds, whom when he did view
In that apparent peril, straight he flew
Upon the lustful butchers, and his Sword
Dealt deathfull dole amongst 'em; they afford
Him blows for blows, and dangerous fight maintain
Till his strong hand victoriously had slain
The fiercest of them; then the other pair,
Like to a stone that through the subtle Air
Flies from a forcing sling, so fast they fled
Into the Wood; the Shepherds almost dead
With wounds and bruises, joyfully did rise
To thank their Savior, who had cast his eyes
Up to the Tree where lovely Sylvia stood,
Bound like the Tyrian Damsel when the stood
Sent up a Whale to eat her. This strange sight
So full of wonder, filld the courteous Knight
With admiration, and desire to know,
Both who she was, and who had used her so.
And hasting forward to the holy tree,
He gently 'gan to loose her bands; but she
Who in the Idea of her frighted thought
Saw nothing but her foes, imagined naught
But present Rape, gave up her Virgin breath
From whence she had it, and enrioh'd foul Death
With the most precious flavor: not the Boy
Now turned a Flower whom, Phoebus did destroy
With his Sledg-casting; nor Orithia's fair
Sister, sweet Proeris, whom the name of Air
Brought to her ruin; nor Jove's beam burned Love
In death appeared so amorous. As a Dove
Trus'd by a Falcon gently takes the stroke
Of Death; so did she. The broad spreading Oak
Erst proud of its fair Captive, sadly now
Began lament, and mournfully to bow
His aged head, to kiss her liveliest Corse;
The Wood-nymphs mournful plaints did even enforce
The neighboring Rocks to weep; our Shepherds tears
Watered the earth: in her sad death, appears
His Kala's loss to Damon, so that he
Wept both for hers, and Kala's Tragedy.
But all their woes were nothing to the plight.
Of sorrow seizing on the gentle Knight,
When he beheld her perish; that his grief
Made him forget to tender quick relief
Unto her fainting; yet at last he ran
Unto a neighboring fountain, and began
To catch the glyding water, which did meet
His laboring hands, thence leapt into her sweet
Though dying face, she only in a swound,
And not quite dead; the saving water found
Means to recure her, (for it is sure the (...)
Of sudden traunces, which possess a Creature
Only when Feate does call from every part
The lively blood to aid the fainting heart,
Again to vanish, when the blood is called
By some quick motion to the parts appalled
For want of it;) She therefore in this guise
Handled, unseald (forthwith) her death-clos'd eyes.
As the transplendent Guider of the Day
Obscured by clouds, more brightly does display,
When h'ath ortcome them, his all-piercing light;
So did the blazing Comets of her sight
Dart now more lucid clearness, every beam
Of it deserving to have been a Theme
For all the Poets. Not the Cyprian Rose
Or silver Lilly, what can we suppose,
Was like her Cheeks? Hyperbolies must needs
Fail to express that which it self exceeds
All Metaphors: in them the blushing Red
Strived to appear, and back unwilling fled
To give that place to the more powerful White:
Judge but what fullness of sincere delight
Rapt the late fearful Knight when he did see
Her live again; he hasted to the tree,
And kindly cheered her timorous heart; the Maid
Could scarce believe her ears or eyes, which paid
Joy a most welcome tribute; to unbind
Her cords he hasted, while the mossie rind
Of the broad spreading tree did strive to cleave
To her fair skin, as if it had rather leave
Its mother Oak than her; beneath the shade
Of a thick Fig Tree she before had laid
Her light silk garments, which the Shepherds brought
To cloth her with; the loving vestures sought
To fly unto her body; soon as she
Had put them on, with blushing modesty
She thanked the noble Champion and the Swains,
Who for her sake had undergone such pains
As merited requital; but a look
From her sweet self both Knight and Shepherds took
As a reward sufficient; they would feign
Have asked her name, but durst not; how she came
To be distressed so; but lest she should chance
With thought of it to fall into a Trance
Again, they would not crave't; She humbly prayed
The Knight and Shepherds, she might be conveyed
By them home to her Fathers house, that stood
Under the covert of that lucklesse Wood
Where she had run such danger: Straight way they
Leaving the cursed Villains corpse a prey
To meager Wolves, the leavie Grove forsook;
She being their Guide, a beaten Path they took
Into a Meadow, where the Flowers did strive
With eager motion, which should first revive
From their late drowning, that they so might meet
With dewie lips the beauteous Virgins feet.
Caetera desant.
FINIS.

