THE Knowledge of Things unknown.

Apperteyning to Astronomy, with necessary Rules, and certain Spears
contained in the same.

Compyled by Godfridus super palladium de agricultura Anglicatum.



Imprinted at London, in Fleetestreete, beneath the Conduite, at the Sign of S
John Evangelist, by H. Iackson. 1585.

Ptholomeus.


This is unknown to many men, though they be known to some men.

Here begins the Book of Knowledge.
Sunday.
IF the Natiuitye of our Lord come on a Sunday winter shall be good, Ver
shall be windy, sweet and hoate, Vintage shall be good, Oxen waxes, sheep
shall be multiplied, Honey and milk, and all goods shall be plenteous. Old men and
women shall dye, peace and accord shall be in the land. Also the Sundays of each
year in the hour of the day, or of night, to do all things that thou will
begin it is profitable. Who that been born shall be strong great and shining. Who
that flies shall be found.

Monday.
If it come on the Monday, Winter shall be meddled. Verre shall be windye and
good, Summer all dry or even the contrary, if it be rayny and full of
tempest, Vintage shall be in middle assise. In each Mondaye of the same year, in
the hour of day, or of night, to do all things that thou will begin it is
good, dreams pertayneth to effect. Who that is borne shall be strong. Who
that flies shall soon be found, theft done shall be proved. He that falls
into his bed, soon shall recover.

Tuesday.
IF it come on the Tuesday, winter shall be good. Ver shall be wyndie, Summer
shall be good, Vintage shall he trauaylous, women shall dye, ships shall perish
on Seas. In each Tuesday of the same year, in the hour of day or of night, to
do all things that thou will begin it is good. Who that is borne shall be
strong and covetous, dreams pertayneth to age. Who that flies shall soon be
found, theft than done shall be proved.

Wednesday.
IF it come on the Wednesday, winter shall be sharp and hard. Ver shall be
wyndye and evil, Summer shall be good. Vintage shall be good and traueilous,
good wit thou shalt find, young men shall dye, honey shall not be earnde,
Berers shall travail, Shipmen shall travail in each year. In each Wednesday
of each year, to do all things that thou will begin it is good.

Thursday.
IF it come on the Thursday, Winter shall be good. Verre shall be wyndye,
Summer good, Vintage good and plenty shall be Kings and Princes perameter
shall dye. And in each Thursdaye of each year, to do all things that thou
will begin is good. Who that been boane shallbe of fair speech and
worshipful. Who flies shall soon be found, theft done by a wench shall be
proved. Who that falls in his bed rather other latter often was wont to
recover.

Friday.
IF it come on the Friday winter shall be merueilous.

Ver windy and good, Summer good and dry, Vintage plenteous, there shall be
dolor of the air, Sheep, and Been shall perish. Otes shall be dear. In each
Friday of each year, to do all things that thou will begin, it is good. Who
that been borne shall be profitable and Lech^rous. Who that flies shall soon
be found, theft done by a Child shall be proved.

Saturday.
IF it come on the Saturdaye, Winter shall be dyrke, Snow shall be great,
fruit shall be plenteous, Ver shall be wyndye, Summer euel. Vintage evil by
places, Otes shall be dear, men shall wax sick, and been shall dye. In no
Saterdaye of that same year, whether it be in the hour of day or night, to
begin every thing uneath it shall be good, but if the course of the moon
bring it thereto, theft done shall be found, he that flies shall turn
again to his own, they that is sick shall long wayle, and uneath they shall
escape, that they ne should dye.

Here follows of the birth of Children.
ON the Sunday, who that is borne, he shall be great and shyning. Who that
is borne on the Monday, to begin all things he shall be good, who that is borne
on the Tuesday, he shall be covetous, and he shall perish with iron, and
uneath he shall come to the last age, to begin all things he shall be good.
He that is borne on the Wednesday, he shall lightly learn words. He that is
borne on the Thursdaye, he shall be stable and worshipful, and to begin all
things is good.

He that is borne on the Frydaye, he shall be of long life and lecherous, and
to begin all things it is good. He that is borne on the Saturday, he shall
seldom be profitable, but if the course of the moon bring it thereto.

Here begins the nature and disposition of the days of the moon, with the
birth of Children.
The first day.
IN the first day of the Moon, Adam was made to do all things it is
profitable, and what ever thou will to do good, and that thou see in thy
sleep, shall be well and shall be turned into joy. If thou seemeste to be
ouercommen, never the latter, thou shalt overcome. A child that is borne
shall soon wax, and be of long life, and ritche. He that falls sick shall
long wayle, and he shall suffer a long sycknesse, it is good to let a little
blood.

The second day.
JN the second day of the moon. Eve was made, to do an erand it is good and to
do all things it is profitable, to buy and to sell, and to fly into a ship to
make away, to sow seeds, theft done shall soon be found. Whatsoever thou
shall see in sleep, soon effect it shall have, whether it be good or euel, to
let blood it is good. A child that is borne soon shall wax, and he shall be
a lecherour or a strumper.

The iii. day.
IN the third day of the Moon, Cayn was borne, of all things that should be
done, it behooves thee to abstain, but only that thou will not that it wax
again, it is good to draw up roots in the yard, and in the field, theft done
shall soon be found, whatsoever thou see in sleep it is naught, who that is
borne menlyche shall wax, but he shall dye young. A sick man that faleth in his
bed shall travail, and he shall not escape, to let blood it is good.

The iiii. day.
IN the fourth day of the moon Abel was borne. ^hatsoeuer thou doste is good
in each travail. The dreams that thou see has effect, hope in God and
counsel good. A child that is born he shall be a good creature, and much he
shall be praised. A man that falls sick, either soon shall be healed, or
soon shall dye, it is good to let blood.

The.v. day.
IN the fyfte day of the Moon, do nothing of errandene of work, to make
sacrament, it is not good. Who that flies, bound or dead he shall be showed,
the dream that thou shalt see, shall be well. After that thou has seen, it
shall be. Beware ware that thou leese no counsel. A child that is borne
shall dye young. He that falls in his bed soon shall dye, to let blood it is
good.

The.vi. day.
IN the vi. day of the Moon, to send children to schole it (...) good, and to
use hunting, the dreams ye thou shalt see, shall not hap in good, but beware
that thou say naught to any man. Thy counsel do not discover. A child borne
shall be of long life and syckly. A sick man uneath shall escape, to let blood
it is good.

The vii. day.
IN the vii. day of the Moon, A bell was slain. He that falls sick shall
dye, he that is borne shall be of long life and good to let blood, and to take
drink it is good. A dream that thou see, long after shall be. Who that
flies shall soon be found, and theft also. To buy sooyne, to tame beasts, to
clip heirs, and to take all manner of norishing, it is good. A sick man if he
be medicined shall be healed.

The viii. day.
AND in the viii. day of the Moon, whatsoever thou will do is good, all
things that thou will treat, to go in counsel, to buy Manciples, and
beasts, foldes of sheep into an other place, to change it is good, to set
foundamentes, to so we seeds, to go in a way. A child that is borne shall be
sick, but in all days he shall be a purchasour, and he shall dye young. A dream
shall be certain, and soon shall be. If thou see sorry things, turn then
to the east, he that waxes sick shall live, theft shall be found, to let blood
it behooves in the midst of the day.

The ix. day.
ANd in the ninth day of the Moon Lameth was borne, to do all things it is
profitable, what thing thou will enter to make, it is good, and shall profit.
A dream that thou see shall come in the day following, or in the second
day, and thou shalt see a sign in the East, and that shall apere in sleep
openly, within xi. days shall come, a child borne in all things, shall be a
purchasour and good, and long of life. A sick man shall wail much, and arise.
Who shall be chased shall not be found, and who that is oppressed shall be
comforted, presume thou not to let blood.

The x. day.
ANd in the tenth day of the Moon was borne the Patriarch Noe. Whatsoever
thou will do, shall pertayne to light, Dreams be in dayne, and within iiii.
days shall come with out perrill, a child that is borne shall enuyron many
countries, and he shall dye old, whatsoever be lost shall be hyde, who that
is bound shall be unbound. Who that flies after, shall be found: Who that
falls in travail, without perrill shall be delivered, who that falls into
his bed, he shall long abide, to let blood it is good.

The xi. day.
AND in the xi. day of the Moon, Sem was borne, it is good to begin works, to
go out to seek, to make wedding. A dream within.iiii. days shall be
fulfilled with out perrils, and such it shall appear after that thou see. A
child that is borne shall be of long life, and religious, and loueable, he
shall have a sign in the forehead, or in the mouth, or in the eye, and in
latter age he shall be made better. A wenche shall have a sign that she shall
be learned with wisdom, to go into a way, it is good and to change foldes
of sheep from place to place, he that is syck, and he be long sick, he shall be
healed, each day to let blood it is good.

The xii. day.
AND in the xii. day of the Moon, was borne Canaan the son of Cham, nothing
thou shalt begin, for it is a greenous day, a dream shall be certain, to
joy to thee after that thou see within ix. days, it shall be fulfilled. To
wed and to do errands it is profitable, that is lost shall be found. A child
that is borne shall be of long life, angry, and honest, a sick man shallbe
grieved and arise, who that is taken shall be left, theft soon shall be found,
to let blood at even it is good.

The xiii. day.
ANd in the thirteen day of the Moon, Noe planted Vynes, and in each day
Vynes been made, to plant Vines it is good, after that thou see, thy dream
shall be, and with in four days, it shall come to gladness, but take heed to
Psalms, and to Drysons. A child borne in adversity shall be let, he shall be
angry, and he shall not be long of life. Who that is bound shall be loosed,
that is lost shall be found. Who that waxes sick long time shall travail,
and uneath shall be saved but dye. To wed a wife, it is good. It is good each
day to let blood.

The xiiii. day.
THe xiiii. day of the Moon, is a good day and a glade. Noe blessed all
things that shall be done, what soever thou will do, and shall come to thee to
heal. A dream within six days shall be, to make wedding it is good, and to
go in the way. Axe of thy friend, or thine enemy, and it shall be done to
thee. A child that is borne, shall be a traitor, the sick man shall be
changed and rise, and shall be healed by medicine, to let blood it is good.

The xv. day.
ANd in the xv. day of the Moon, Tongues were divided, do no work, begin no
erand, for it is a grievous day. A sick man shall long travail, but he shall
escape. A dream that thou see nothing shall noy, but soon shall come. A
child borne shall dye young, that is lost shall be found, to let blood it is
good.

The xvi. day.
ANd in the xvi. day of the Moon Pythagoras was borne, the author of
Philosophers, to buy and t^ sell it is good, to tame Oxen and other Beasts. A
dream is not good after long time it shall come, and it shall be harmefull, to
take a wife and to make wedding it is good, foldes of sheep from place to
place to change it is good. A child that is borne shall be of long life, but he
shall be poor, forsworn and accused. A sick man if he change his place, he
shall live, to let blood it is good.

The xvii. day.
IN the xvii. day of the Moon, it is evil to do an erand, a dream that
thou see, after long time shall be, or within xxx. days. A Child that is
borne shall be sely, he that is sick shall be much grieved and arise, that is
lost, shall be found, to send children to schole, to be wedded, and to make
medicine, and to take it, is good, but not to let blood.

The xviii. day.
AND in the xviii. day of the Moon, is good for all things to be done,
namely to begin houses. And to set children to school, dreams are good, and
shall be done within xx. days. Who that sickness has, shall soon rise or long
be sick, and then recover, theft then done shall be found. A knave child
then borne shall be vnouercome and eloquente, proud unpeaceable, and not long
life. A maid child than borne, shall be chaste, laborous, senyaunte, and better
in her hinder age, they shall both be marked above the knees, not so hardye
thou to let blood this day.

The xix. day.
IN the xix. day of the Moon, is not full good, ne full evil, dreams shall
come within xx. days, who that has sickness shall soon rise, if be take
medicine, theft than done, shall not be found: A knave child then borne,
shall be true, benynge, fleight, wise, ever wax better and better in great
worship, and have a mark in the brow. A maid child then borne, shall be
right sick: save not paid of one man, that day is good to bleed.

The.xx. day.
AND in the Twentye Day of the Moon, Isaac blessed his Son, what ever thou
will do is good, a dream that thou see shall appear, but say it to no man,
to make wedding is good, to buy a manciple, it is good, to build houses it is
good, to change foldes of sheeepe from place to place, it is good, and to tame
beasts and to so we seeds. A child that is borne, shall be a fyghter and he
shall have many aryuynges, that is lost shall be found, to change been it is
good. A sick man shall long wayle or soon arise, to let blood on even it is
good.

The.xxi. day.
ANd in the xxi. day of the Moon, Saul was borne, first King of the Jews, a
dream is true, and to joy shall pertain within iiii. days. A child that is
borne shall find much evil, he shall be a thief, and witty, he shall be a
traitor, and traueilous, Esau took the residue blessing of his father, it is
good to heal swyne, and other beasts, it behooves to abstain from gamyng
things, to go in the way it is good. A sick man shall be sick and arise,
theft shall be found, let no blood neither day nor night.

The xxii. day.
IN the xxii. day of the Moon Joseph was borne, it is a day of holiness, if
thou do any errand, thou shall find it grievous, dreams shall be certain and
shall come to joy. A child borne in all days, shall be a purchasour, merry,
fair, religious, and leperous. A sick man both late is confyrmed, and healed.
Been to change from place to place it is good. A sick man shall be sick and
be healed, to let blood all day is good.

The xxiii. day.
IN the xxiii. day of the Moon, Benjamin was borne, Son of the right side,
the last son of the Patriarch Noe. What ever thou will do is good. A dream
that thou see, shall turn to joy, and nothing shall noye, and other while
it was wont to fall within eyghte days. To take a wife it is good, to make
weddinges, to set foundamentes, to open new earth, to tame Beasts, it is
good. A child borne, shall be outcast, and many lettinges, he shall make, and
in sins he shall dye.

A sick man shall be sick, and arise, it is good to let blood.

The xxiiii. day.
IN the xxiiii. day of the Moon Golyas was borne, a dream that thou see
signifies thy heal, and nothing shall noye, a child borne shall be
compendious, and shall do wonderful things. A sick man shall languishe and
be healed, to let blood before the third hour it is good.

The xxv. day.
In the xxv. day of the Moon, our Lord sent signs into Egipte by Moses,
and in each day he passed the red sea, he that makes sacrament, shall dye in
a perrillous death, beware dread to come, the dream signifies hard things,
and within x. days it was wont to come. Early then bow thine head into the
East. A child borne shall be an evil man, many perrilles he shall suffer. A
sick man shall sustain iniurye, and uneath shall escape, it is good to let
blood.

The xxvi. day.
IN the xxvi. day of the Moon Moses dried the red Sea. In the day Ionathas
the son of Saul was borne, and dead is Saul with his sons, thou shalt
begin nothing, the dream shall be certain, and shall be turned into joy, to men
Pilgrims it pertayneth to beware of spies, of thine ennemies. A child borne
shall be full loueable, but neither ritche nor pore. A sick man shall travail
and arise, it he have the Dropsye, he shall dye, to let blood a little it is
needful.

The xxvii. day.
IN the xxvii. Day of the Moon, our Lord rayned Manna, to the children of
Israel, what ever thou will do is good, be busy, for a dream that thou see
was wont to come, either to good or evil. A child borne shall be of long life,
and most loved. and menelyche strange, neither rich nor pore. A sick man
shall rise to life, he shall be holden in much langoure, but he shall be
healed, foldes of sheep from place to place to change it is good, to let blood
on even is good.

The xxviii. day.
ANd in the xxviii. day of the Moon the days be fighting Tabernacles been
fixed in Desarte, what ever thou will do is good: a dream that thou see
shall turn into joy, and shall come welfullich. A child borne shall be much
loved, he shall be holded in sickness, a sick man that fasteth in infyrmitye,
soon shall be saved, to let blood in the evening it accords.

The xxix. day.
ANd in the xxix. day of the Moon, the Jews went into the land of beheast.
Herod the King cut of the childrens heads, begin nothing, the dream shall be
certain, and good gladness and joy it signifies, an errande begone, it is
good to fullfyll, to take a wife it is good, but nilte thou not to make dowers,
ne write Testamentes. A child borne shall be of long life, wise, and holy, and
meke, to fish, and hunt it is good, a sick man shall not grievously be sick,
but escape, it is good to let blood.

The xxx. day.
ANd in the xxx. Day of the Moon, Samuel the Prophet, was borne, whatsoever
thou will do is good, a dream that appears to thee certain, and within
ii. days thou shalt see, and thou shalt find a red sign in the East,
within ix. days. A child borne shall be of long life and profitable, and well
measured in each thing. A syck man shall nigh come to death, in no manner let no
blud. These and many other pertains to men after as the course of the moon
follows.

Here ends the nature and disposition of the days of the Moon with the
birth of Children.
And here follows of Saturn and what Saturn is.
Saturn, what is Saturn, he is the first Planet and the wickeddeste, and he
vnbeginneth the Zodyacke but once in thyrtye years, than follows it forth in
the Zodyacke by xii. signs, that Saturn reigns in each signs ii. years
and a half, in.vi. signs he reigns xv. years. And in all the xii. signs
he reigns even xxx. years, and right as there are twelve signs in the
Zodyacke, so are there twelve months in the year, each sign to his month.
Wherefore beware before, and make purueyaunce therefore, and look when Saturn
reigns in the iii. winter signs, that is to say, Capricorn, Aquarie, and
Pisces, and so long those vii. years and half a year, shall be scarsenes and
dearth of corn, fruit, Beasts, and all other things, for in the.iii. years
signs he has might and most power to fulfill his malice if he be not let
by neighborhood of any good planet.

What the Thunder signifies in every year.
THunder in January sygnyfyeth the same year, great wyndes, plentye of corn,
and battle peradventure also. Thunder in February, sygnifyeth that same year
many men, namely rich men, shall dye in great sickness. Thunder in March
signifies that same year great winds, plentye of corns, and debate amongst
people. Thunder in April, signifies that same year to be fruitful, and
merry, and also death of wicked men. Thunder in May, sygnifyeth that year,
need, scarceness, and dearth of corns, and great hunger. Thunder in June,
signifies that same year, that woods shall be ouercasten with winds, and
great raging shall be of Lions, and Wolves, and so like of other harmefull
Beasts. Thunder in July, signifies that same year shall be good corn, and
fruits of Beasts, that is to say, their strength shall perish. Thunder in
August, signifies the same year, sorrow, wayling of many, and of most hot
things, and also many shall be sick. Thunder in September, signifies that
same year great wynd, copye of corn, that is to say plenteous, and occasyon of
folk, that is to say, much falling. Thunder in October signifies the same
year, great wind and scantnesse of corns, of fruits, and trees. Thunder in
November, signifies that same year, to be fruitful, and merry, and cheap
corn. Thunder in December signifies that same year, cheap corn, and of
wheat, peace and accord among the people.

This Chapter following declares what are the evil days, and forbodd en in
the year. And also which be the best bleeding days in the year.
Wit thou well that in every month be two evil days, one in waxing of the
Moon, and another in the wanynge. The Kalenders shows them, and their hours
openly enough, in the which days, if any folk take sickness, or begin
any new thing, it is great grace if ever it fare well, or come to good end.
Also there are fyftye Caniculer days, that is to say, for the xv. Kalend. of
August, to the Nonas of September, in the which days it is forbidden by
Astronomye to all manner of folks, that they let them no blood, ne take no
drinks, and also good it is to abstain then from women, and they should great
leches know and keep, and teach to other men. For why all that time reygneth
a star, that is called Caniculacanis in latten, a hound in English, now of
this foresaid star Canicula, the foresaid fyftye days, are called Caniculer
days, that is to say hoar days, and biting as a Bytch, for the kind of the
star Canycula, is boiling and brenning as fire, and biting as a bytch whelp,
that time the heat of the sun, and of the star, is so dowlcet and violent,
that men's bodies at midnight, sweates as at midday, and swells lightly,
blows and brenneth, and if they then be hurt then be they more sick, then at
any other time, and right nearer dead. In those days all venomous Serpents
creeps, flies, and gendreth, and so they ouerset hugely the air, in seeding
of their kind, so that many men are dead thereby, there again all the so ^^er,
namely those days, a fire is good, night and day, and wholesome. And seethe
such meats, and take heeds of great violent meats.

Also from the xviii. Kalend of October, to the xvii. Kalend of November, look
thou take no cold, for then the powers of man, of earth, and of althings else
setten. And they may not (...) again till the evil Kalend. of a plil,
wherefore such things as thou take within the powers, thaffection ye shall
with hold till they open, truly it should less harm thee to take cold at
Christmas than then.

To know how a man shall keep himself in health.
IF thou will keep thee long in health then hold this rule, that is to say,
fly anger, wrath, and envy, and give thee to mirth in measure, travail
sadlye, so that thou sweat not to much in the Summer, and namely the
Caniculer days, fly al manner of strong drinks, and hot spices, brenning
meats namely to have them vsandly. Fast not to long at morue. Suppe not to
late at night, eat not hastelye, nor eat but little at once, and that that
thou eatest, chew it well, every time that thou eatest, rest a little rather
after, fleepe not thou under meal, namely but of these iiii. months. That is
to say, May, June, July, and August. And yet the less that thou stepest then
the better it is: to sleep well in the waxing of the night, and be earlye up
in the morning, tymelyer the better. And, every day beware of wicked mystes,
that none enter in thee ^asting, for thereof comes great pe^tilences and
great heat. And in great ^old and in pestilences eat much garlycke every
day.ix. Safforne chyues, it will do thee much good. Eat ynnough in winter,
eat enough in Ver, but eat but little in Summer, look thy meat be well
seasoned in Harvest beware of fruits, for they are not good, if it be given
thee for medicine, of all manner of meats, sodden is the best, eat not to
many hot spices, nor eat but little at once, for better it were to eat.vii.
times on the day, then once thy fill, flesh is more nourishinge then fyshe,
eat not to much sour meats nor salt, for they will make thy bones sore:
look thy drink be not to new, ne to old, sweet powdered meats be most
wholesome. Of al things take measure, and no more, for in measure restes
Virtue. And that Saints did hold them to.

To know what perrillous days, come in the change of every Moon.
IN the change of every Moon be ii. days in the which, what thing soever is
begone, late or never, it shall come to good end, and the days be full
perilous for many things.

In January, when the Moon is iii. or iiii. In February.v. or.vii. In
March.vi. or.vii. In April.v. or.viii. In May viii. or. ix, In June.v. or.xv.
In July iii. or.xiii. In August.viii. or.xiii. In September.viii. or.xiii. In
October.v. or.xii. In November.v. or.ix. In December.iii. or.xiii.
Astronomers says, that vi. days in the year are perilous of death. And
therefore they forbid men to be let blood on them, or take any drinks. That is
to say.

The third day of the Month of January. The first day of the Month of
July. The second day of the Month of October. The last day of the Month of
April. The first day of August. The last day going out of December.
These vi. days with great dillygence ought to be kept, but namely the
latter iii. for all the veins are then full. For then whether man or beast be
knit in then, within vii. days, or certainly within xiiii. days they shall
dye, And if they take any drinks within xv. days, they shall dye. And if
they eat any goose in these iii. days within xl. days they shall dye. And if
any child be borne, in these iii. ^atter days, they shall dye a wirked death.

Astronomers, and Astrologyers, says, that in the beginning of March the
vii. night d^ the xiiii. day, let thee blood of the right arm. And in the
beginning of April, the xi. day, on the left arm. And in the end of May
iii. or v. day, on whether arm thou will. And thus of all that year, thou
shalt sykerly be warish from the Fevers, and from the falling gowte, and from
the fyster gowte, and from loss of thy sight.

Bial magest in sent loqui of Ptholomei.

Each man's body is ruled by a certain sign of the Zodyack.

Wherefore as says Ptholomens in the place of bone. If thou be sick in any
limb, do no medicine unto that lymbe, when the Moon is in the sign of that
lymbe, for it shall rather hinder, then fourther. And namely flee blood
letting, at that time of those lymbes. Thus shalt thou know which signs
reigns in which lymbes.

The Bull reigns in the neck and in the throat over all.

The Gemuse reigns in the shoulders, arms, and haudes.

The Creues or Lobster, reigns in the breast stomach, and limbs, arteries,
the mylte, heart, liver, and gall, and those iii. be the signs of Ver.

The Lion reigns in the back, side, bones, sinews, and gristles.

The Maid reigns in the womb Myddryfe, and Guts. And also she reygneth,
other while in the stomach, lyner, gall, and mylte, and other nut^ise limbs,
beneath the middrife.

And the Crab in the heart, lunges, and arteries, and other small lymbes,
about the middryfe, and those three signs are in Summer.

The Ballaunce reigns in the nauill, and in the reigns, and the lower parts
of the womb.

The Scorpyon reigns in the bladder, in the arse, and in other preuy harne^s,
and in the maryes.

The Sagittaries ^e^^neth in the thyes, and buttockes* and these three are
signs of harvest.

The Caprycorne reygneth in the knees.

The Aquarie reygneth in the legs and ancles.

The Fyshe reygneth in the Feet, and those three be the sygues of winter.

Saturn, Iupster, Mars, Soll, Venus, Me^^^y, and Lund.

Saturnus is cause of death, dearth, and place.

Iupster is muse of long peace, rest, and virtuous living.

Mars is cause of ^yn^s debate, and war

Soll is cause of life health, and waring.

Venus is cause of lusty love, and Lechery.

Mercury is caise of much speech, Marchan^^ ^eightes.

Luna is cause of moystones great waters and vyolent floudes.

Saturn hour is good and strong to do all things that asks strength
only, and to naught else save to battle, for it is wondrous evil, that
man or woman, that has that star Saturn to his plannet, he is melancolyous,
black, and goes swiftelye, he has a void heart, wicked and bitter as
wormewoode, he will lightlye be wroth, he is ian^ous, witty, covetous and
yrerons, he eats hastily and is false, and most what loving to lie, and has
shining eyes as a Ent, he has in the forehead a mark or a wound, of fire, he
is poor, and his clothes are rent unto a time, and thus he has open signs
and all his covetous is by other men's possessions, and not by bys own.

Jupiter hour is good in all things, namely to peace, love and accord. Who
that has this star to his Planet, ^he is sang^^, ruddye, and goes a large
pace, neither to swifte, nor to soft, his stature is seemly, and shyninge hes
has a fair vysage, louelye semblaunce, fair lyppes, fair hears, and a
shining broad face, fair b^vies, his clothes are good and strong, he is
sweet, peaceable, and soft.

Mars hour is evil, and not full evil, it is better by night then by day.
For it is Masculyne on the night, and Femynine on the day. It is good to do
any thing, but with great strength, by night it is good to enter battle,
and also by day, but not so much good as by night. Who that has this star
to his Planet, his making is of good defense, and often times his face is red
with blood, his face is small and sotell, and laughinge, and he has eyes as a
Catte. And all the days of his life, he will accuse many men of evil, he
has a wound of a sword in his face, he is most Colericke. And thus he has
open signs.

Soll hour is worste of all other hours, no man in this hour may do his
will save Kings, and Lords, and that with great strength. Who that in this
hour enters battle: he shall be dead there. Who that has this star to
his Planet. He has sharp eyes, great speech, and wicked thoughts in his
heart, he is wicked and auarous, neither white nor black, but betwixt both,
he has a mark in the face or a wound, and has a wound in his body of fire,
and he is right wicked and grudging in his deeds.

Venus hour is good in all things, and it is better on night than on day,
ever till myddaye, at midday it is not good, for the sun covers it. On
Sunday the ix. hour is Venus hour, sue not then to any Lord ne potestate,
for if thou do thou shalt find him wroth. Who that has this star to his
Planet, namelye if he be borne by night in Venus hour, he is white and has a
round face, little foreheade, round beard, he has a myddle nose, and myddle
heeres of eyes, he is laughing and lentigious, and he has a mark in the face,
his making is fair and plain, and often times his nether lip is greater then
the over. And who that is borne, under Venus, when she is not in full power, he
has a sharp nose and somewhat crooked, fair heeres, soft eyes of running
water, the is a singer, he longs much of games, and loves them well, and his
tales he sweet.

Mercurious hour from the beginning to the middle, is good in all things,
and from the middle to the end it is hard, and it is not much better on
night then on day, and each time of the night and day he stands before
the Sun or behind, therefore he has his power much more by night then by
day, from morn to the fyfte hour of the day, he has his power, and from
thence to the nynth, he has no power. Who that has this star to his planet,
he has a sharp stature, and a sharp long face, long eyes long nose, great
heeres of his eyes, and thick, narowe forehead, long bearde, thynne here,
long arms, long fyngers, long feet, long hatrell of the head, he is meek
and loueable, and he will do each thing to certain space, he is more white
then black, and often times right white, and he has great shoulders. And
who that is borne under Mercurious, when he is not in his full power.

That is to say. From the first hour of the day, to the nynth, he is black
and dry, he has crowded teeth, and sharp, he has a wound in his body with
fire, he is scorged with wandes or smitten with a sword, and men says on him
an evil name, of evil tales, and of manslaughter.

The Moons hour is right good and right evil from the fourth day, to the
xvii. it is good, namelye to all those that are borne in it, and from the xvii.
day to the xx. day, it is somewhat good, but not so good: and from the xx.
day, to the xxvii. day it is evil, namely to all those that are borne in it.
Who that has this star in his Planet and borne therevnder, when it is in full
power, he has a plain face, and pale, sometime lentigious, and does his
wills to men, he has somewhat seemly semblaunce, and he is rich, he has
mean stature, neither to long nor to short, he has strayghte lyppes, and
hollow eyes. Who that is borne under this star, when it is not in full
power, he has a strayghte face and dry, and malicious, he has little teeth,
and Albugine, that is to say. A white strike in the ear.

The nature and conditions which is found comprehended in man.
NAturally a man is hardye as the Lion. i. Prue and worthy as the Ox. ii.
Large and liberal as the Cock. iii. Auaricious as the Dog. iiii. Hardy and
swifte as the Heart. v. Debonayre and true as the Turtle Dove. vi. Malicious as
the Leopard. vii. Pryue and tame as the Dove. viii. Dolorous and guilefull as
the fox. ix. Simple and mild as the Lamb. x. Shrewde as the Ape. xi. Light as
the Horse. xii. Soft and pitiful as the Bear. xiii. Dear and precious as
the Olyphant. xiiii. Good and wholesome as the Unicorn. xv. Vile and slothful
as the Ass. xvi: Fair and proud as the Pecock. xvii. Glotonous as the Wolf.
xviii. Enuyous as a Bytch. xix. Rebel and inobediente as the Nightingale. xx.
Humble as the Pigyon. xxi. Fell and foolish as the Oustrich. xxii. Profitable
as the Pysmyre. xxiii. Dissolute and Vacabounde, as the Goat. xxiiii.
Spiteful as the Phesaunt. xxv. Soft and meek as the Chiken. xxvi. Moveable
and varying, as the Fyshe. xxvii. Lecherous as the Bore. xxviii. Strong and
puissaunte, as the Camel. xxix. Traitor as the Mule. xxx. Aduysed as the
Mouse. xxxi. Reasonable as an Angel. xxxii. And therefore he is called the
little world, or else he is called all creatures, for he does take part of
all.
Here follows the description of the four Elements, and of the iii.
Complections.
I Do thee to wit that in each man and woman reygneth each planet and every
sign of the Zodiac, and every prime qualities, and every Elemente, and every
complexion, but not in every like, for in some men reigns one more, and in
some reigns another, and therefore men be of diverse manners, wherefore good it
is that we see shortly the kind of those primes qualityes, and so forth on
the others.

Of the four Prime qualities and what they are.
Four Pryme qualityes there be. That is to say, moystenesse, hotenesse,
dryenesse, be two contraryes, and therefore the may not nigh together without a
mean, for the hotenes on the one side binds them together, and coldness on
the other side. Also hotenesse and coldenesse are two contraries, and therefore
they may not nighe together, without a mean, for the moystenesse on the one
side, byndeth them together. And dryenesse on the other, moystnes is cause of
every thick substance, and of every sweet taste. And there again dryness is
cause of every thin substance, and of every sour stinking taste. And also
hotenesse is cause of enery red color, and large quantitye. There again
coldenesse is cause of every white color and little quantitye.

Combyne. That is to say knitte these four Pryme qualityes, alter these iiii.
combinacions, that is to say, knittinges, and then they will hold iiii.
Elements, that is to say. The Air moist and hot. The Fire hot and dry.
The earth dry and cold. The Water cold and moist. The Air and the Earth,
are two contraryes, and therefore they may not nigh together, but as Fire
byndes them on the one side between them. And the water on the other side
between them. Also Fire and Water, are two contraryes, and therefore they may
not nigh together, but as the Air between them byndes on the one side. And
the Earth between byndeth them together, on the otherside. The Fire is sharp,
subtle, and moveable. The Air is subtle, moveable, and corpulent, and dull.
The Earth is corpulente and thycke. The Water is moveable, corpulente and dull.
The Earth is corpulente, dull, and immovable, right as an eggeshell, Vingose
a thinskin. And that skin Vingose the white, and in the middeste of the yolke,
is a little tender hole, right so the fire Vyngose the Air, ten times more,
and ten times. Then the Air Vyngose the Water ten times more, and ten times
tymer then the Water, The water Vyngose the Earth ten times more, and ten times
timer than the Earth. In the heart of the Earth is the Senter of the world.
That is to say, the middeste point. And in every Senter is hell. And there
again about the Fire, are the stars, and about them is heaven Christalin,
that is to say, waters of all bliss, departed in ix. ordes of Angels, then
is Heaven in the higheste rownes, and largest. And there again is Hell in the
lowest, narowest, and straightest.

Right as there be iiii. Elements, so there be four Complections, according
in all manner qualityes, to these four Elements.

The first is Sanguine, that is to say blood, gendreth in the lyuers, lymbe,
and like to the Air.

The second is Choler, gendred in the Gall, and like thereto. And it is
according to the Fire.

The third is Melancholye, gendered in the mylte, and like to the dregs of
blood, and it accords to the Earth.

The fourth is Flumes, gendered in the Lunges, like to galte, and it accords
to the water. A Sanguyne man much may, and much coueyteth, for he is moist and
hot.

A Chollerycke man, much coueyteth and little may, for he is hot and dry.

A Melancholious man, little may and little coueyteth, for he is dry and cold.

A Flumaticke man, little coueyteth, and little may, for he is cold and moist.

A Sanguine man is large, loving, glade of cheer, laughinge, and ruddye of
cloure, steadfast, fleshlye, right hardye, mannerly, gentle, and well nourished.

A Choloricke man is guilefull, false and wrathful, traytoures, and right
hardy, quint, small, dry, and black of color.

A Melancholyous man, is enuyous, sorry, covetous, hard, and false, holdining,
guilefull, dreadful, flothfull, and clear of color.

A Flumaticke man is slomery, sleepy, slow, sleightfull, and much spetting,
dull, and hard of wit, fat vysage, and white of color.

Of the iiii. quarters of the year, and of the iiii. complections, and what
they are.
IN the year be four quarters, ruled by these four complections, that is to
say. Ver, Summer, Harvest, and Winter. Ver has iii. months. That is to say,
March, April, and May. And it is sanguine complexion. Summer has also iii.
months. That is to say, June, July, and August. And this quarter is choleric
complexion. Harvest has also iii. months, that is to say, September,
October, November, and this quarter is Melancholius complexion. Winter has
also iii. months. That is to say, December, January, and February, and this
quarter is flumaticke complexion.

Each day also these four complections reigns, that is to say, from three
after midnight, unto ix. reigns sanguine, and from ix. after midnighte, to
three after midday, reigns chollorick, and from iii. after middaye, to xi.
after middaye reigns Melancholy, and from ix. after midday, to iii. after
midnight reigns fleume.

Also in the four Quarters of the world reigns these four complections.
That is to say, Sanguyne in the East. Chollericke in the South. Melancholy in
the West. And fleume in the North.

Also the four complections reygneth in four ages of man. That is to say.
Choler in Childhode. Sanguine in manhood. Flume in age. And Melancholius in
old childhoode. If from the birth, to xiiii. year full done, manhood is from
thence to xxx. year age. From thence to l. year. And old from thence to
lxxx. year, and so forth to death.

Also these four complections reigns in four parts of man's body.

Choler reygneth in all the soulet limbs, from the breast upward.

Sanguyne reigns in all small limbs. Also from the middrife to the wesand.

And Flume reygneth in all nouryshing limbs, also from the reins to the
middryfe.

And Melancholy reygneth in all the limbs, from the reigns downewarde.

Wherefore every man's urine is cast in four, that is to say, Corkill,
Superfice, Myddest, and ground, every party of the urine to his part of man's
body. And therefore to four things in every vryne we must take heed, that
is to say, Substance, quantitye, Choler, and content, three Substaunces
there are: That is to say, thick, thin, and middle.

Thick Substance betokens much moystnes.

Thin substance betokens much drynes.

And myddle substance betokens temporaunce.

Also iii. Quantityes be in Vryne. That is to say, Much, Little, and Mean.

Much quantitye betokens great cold.

And little quantity betokens great heat.

And mean quantitye betokens temperaunce.

Also take heed to the taste whether it be sweet or not.

Sweet taste betokens health.

And other taste betokens syckenesse.

Also in Vrynes be xx. colors, of the which the first ten betokens cold,
and the other ten betokens heat.

The x. colors that betokens cold are these.

The first is black, a dark cole and comes of lived going before.

The second like to lead, and those two betokens mortifycation.

The third is white as clear water.

The fourth is lacktike, like to whay.

The fyfte is caropose, like to graye russet, or to Camels hear.

Thy sixth is yelow like to salow leaves falling of trees, and those iiii.
colors betokens indigestion.

The seventh is subpale, that is to say not full pale.

The eight is pale, like to some sodden flesh.

The nynth is Subsitryne, that is to say, fulsitryne.

The tenth is sytryn, like to a ponysiter, or to right yelow flowers.

And these four colors betokens beginning of digestion.

Now we have seen the colors which betokens cold. So we will see the
other ten which betokens heat.

The first is Subrife, that is to say, not full ruff.

The second is ruff, like to fine Gold.

And those two colors betokens perfect digestion. So the vryne be middle
of substance, myddle of quantity, sweet of taste, and without contents.

The third is subrife, that is to say full read.

The fourth is read, like Saffron durte.

The fyfte is subrugund, that is to say not full rubugund.

The syxte is rubygunde, like a strong flame of fire. And these four colors
betokens passing of digestion.

The seventh Ynopose, like to white wine.

the eight is Kinanos, like to rotten blood. And these two betokens adustyon.

The ninth is green, as the colestocke.

The tenth is black, as a clear black horn. And this black comes of
green going to fore. And these two betokens adustion and death.

In Vryne be eyghteene contents. That is to say, Serkell, Ampull, Graynes,
Clouds, Scume, Atterer, Fatnes, Humer, Blood, Gravel, Here Is, Scalos, Bran,
Crynodose, Sperme, Dust, Eskes, Sedymen, or Ipostas.

The Serkle, shows all the qualityes of the head.

Ampull, that is to say creme, shows also the brain disturbed.

Graynes betoken of remne, and glutte.

Clouds shows vice, of the small limbs.

Scumme, that is to say foam, shows ventositye, and often the Iaundyes.

Atterer that is to say quiter, shows vice of the reygnes. The bladder, or of
the liver.

Fatness as oil drops, shows wasting and dissolucion of the body, namely
of the loins.

Humer, like glet, or like drestes, of blood, or rotten Gall, it shows vice
of the middrife, or above or beneath.

Blood shows vice of the liver, or of the reigns, or of the bladder.

Gravel shows the stone.

Here Is shows the dissolution, of the fatnes of all the body, of the reigns
namely.

Scalos and branne, shows the third spyce of Feueretyke iniurable.

Sperme, that is to say mankind, shows to much lechery. Dust shows the
gowte, or a woman conceived.

Eskes the preuye harneis to be greened.

Zedymen, that is to say, clods in the ground of the vryne, or breaking upward

The Cyrkle is called Ipostas. That is to say, the ground, and it has most
sygnyfycation of all and namelye of the lower parties.

Of every man's body, be four principal lymbes, that is to say, soulet
limbs, small lymbes, and norishing limbs, and gendring lymbes.

Sowlet lymbes, be the brains, and all that are there about, down to the
wesand.

Small lymbes be the heart, and the lunges, and all that be about them,
betwixt the wesand and the middrife.

Nourishing lymbes, be the liver, Mylte, Gall, and guts, and all that be
about them, between the Wesand and the Middryfe, and the Reygnes.

Gendring lymbes, be the reygnes, bladder, preuie harneys, and the lymbes
about, fro the reygnes downwarde.

Also here follows an A.B.C. Whereby thou may know of what Planet every
man is.
AE. 1. I.S. 1. B.K. 2. Q.R. 2. G.L. 3. D.M. 4. C.D. 6. V. 2. L. 7. F. 8. P. 1.
X. 9.

Depart this by 9. unto a hundred. And 1. or 8. be over, then the Sun is his
Planet, if 2. or 9. be over, then Venus is his Planet: If 3. be over, then he
is of Mercury: If 4. be over then he is of the Moon: If 5. be over, then he is
of Saturnus: If 6. be over, then he is of Iupyter: If 7. be over, then he is
of Mars.

Adam. 31. Andren. 12. Aldon. 25. Nufos. 12. Benaster in is. 92. Becus. 9.
David. 9.

Also here follows another A.B.C. to know by, of what sign in the Zodyack
every man is, that is to say, under which sign he is borne, and to which
sign he is most like. Also here by thou may know his fortune, and the
momente in the which he shall dye. Also here by thou may know thy fortune,
and infortune of many things, Towns, Cities, and Castles.

A 2. B 2. C 20. D 41. E 5. F 24. G 3. H 20. I 10. K 13, L 42. M 12. N 22. O
21. P 21. Q 24. R 27. S 22. T 91. V 13 X 20. Y 20. T 7,

If thou will know by this A.B.C. any man as it is said before, take his
name and his mothers name. And also if thou will know of any Town, by this
A.B.C. as it is said before, then take that Towns name, and the name of the
Cyttye of Jerusalem, for that is the mother of all Towns, and then account the
letters of the names, by the number of this A.B.C. and when thou haste all
done, depart it by 28. and if 1. or 2. be over, then that that thou seek
longs to the Weather: and if 3. or 4. or 5. be over, then that that thou
seek longs to the Bull, and if 6. or 7. be over, then longs it to the
Iemuse, and if 8. or 9. be over, then longs it to the Crabe, and if 10.11. or
12. then longs it to the Lion, and if 13. or 14. then longs it to the
Virgin, and if 15. or 16. be over, then longs it to the Balance, and if
17.18. or 19. then longs it to the Scorpyon, and if 20. or 21. then longs
it to the Sagitarie, and if 22. or 23. then longs it to the Caprycorne, and
if 24. or 25. then longs it to the Aquary, and if 26.27. or 28. then longs
it to the Fyshe.

Another Alphabet.
Depart any thing in 7. by the proper name of these letters: A. will tell,
which of the 7. it is, by the over number divided by 9.

A. 3. B. 4. C. 2. D. 2. E. 2. F. 4. G. 2. H. 5. I. 3. K. 5. L. 6. M. 25. N.
25. O. 12. P. 13. Q. 15. R. 8. S. 13. T. 2. V. 23. X. 98. Y. 56. Z. 34.
To know the weather that shall be all the year, after the change of every
Moon, by the Pryme days.
SVndaye Pryme, dry weather.
Monday Pryme, moist weather.
Tuesday Pryme, cold and wind.
Wednesday Pryme, meruaylous.
Thurseday Pryme, fair and clear.
Friday Pryme, fair and foul.
Suturday Pryme, rain.
A Rule to know upon what Letter, what hour, and what minute, as follows.
Pryme upon hora mynutes.

A 29. 9. B 4. 5. C 13. 1 D 20. 18. E 18. 12. F 21. 4. G 13. 20.

EVermore thus reigns these feuen planets. First reigns Saturn, then
Jupiter, then Mars, then Soll, then Venus, then Mercurye, and then Luna,
Saturn is Lord on Saturday, Jupiter is lord on Thursday, Mars is Lord of
Tuesday, Soll on Sunday, Venus on Friday, and Mercury of wednesday, and Luna on
Monday. Saturn Iupyter, Mars, Soll, and Mercury, is masculine. That is to say
Mankind, Venus, and Luna, are Feminine, that is to say womankind. Saturn,
Mars, and Luna, are evil Planets, Iupyter, soll, and Venus, be good Planettes,
and Mercury is chaungeable.

On Saturdaye the first hour after midnighte reygneth Saturn, the second
hour Jupiter, the third hour Mars, the iiii. hour Soll, the v. hour Venus,
the since hour Mercury, the vii. hour Luna. And then again Saturn the viii.
hour, and Jupiter the ix. hour, Mars the x. hour, Soll the xi. hour, Venus
the xii. hour, Mercurye the xiii. hour, and Luna the xiiii. hour. Then
again the third of day time. Saturn the xv. hour, Iupyter the xvi. hour,
Mars the xvii. hour, foll the xviii. hour, Venus the xix. hour, Mercury the
xx. hour, and Luna the xxi. hour. And then again the iiii. time, saturn the
xxii. hour, Iupyter the xxiii. hour, Mars the xxiiii. hour. And then
begins soll, in the hour after midnighte on the sunday, Venus the second
hour, Mercury the third hour, Luna the iiii. hour, saturn the fyfte hour.
And so forth hour by hour, and Planet by Planet, in order as they stand.
Each Planet to his own day, reygneth evermore certaynely, the tyrste hour,
the viii. hour, the xv. hour, and the xxii. hour. And so fourth evermore one
after another. And next after that reygneth the Planet that is next in order,
as thus, Saturn, Iupyter, Mars, Soll, Venus, Mercurius, and Luna.

Of the most best and profytablesse days that be in the year, to let blood.
IN ye beginning of March that is to say, the vi. and the tenth day thou
shalt draw out blood of the right arm.

In the beginning of April, of the left arm, and that in the xi. day, for
the sight. In the end of May, of which arm thou will, and that again the
Fever, and if thou so do, neither thou shalt lose thy sight, nor thou
shalt have no Fevers, how long thou lyuest.

Quot retinente vita et non mortis Imago Si semperfuerint viuens morietur et
infra.

Goodhap. Mishap. Mishap. Best. 1. 13. Sorrow. 2. 14. 24. 3. 16. 26. 4. 17.
23. Best. 6. 18. 27. Dearth. 11. 8. 10. 20.

Est vesper Eplaton deampulle. Philosophy.

Vita. 5. 19. Heaviness. 7. 21. 28. 9. 22. 29. Vita. 12. 25. 30. Joy. 15. Vita.
Joy. Joy.

Collige per numeroes aliquid cupis esse phandre Iunge simullatum feriaque
Diem.

A. iii. B. vi. C. xii D. xx. E. xxvi. F. xxv. G. iii. K. xv. L. xxi. M. xv. N.
xxii. O. xx. P. xiiii. Q. xvi. R. iiii. S. xxix. T. xxviii. V. iiii. X. vi. Y.
vi. Z. iii.
Sunday. xiii. Monday. xviii. Thuesday. xv. Wednesday. xxv. Thurseday. xi.
Friday. xv. Saturday. xxvi.
Thus ends the Spear of Platon.

WHo so ever in the vii. day of March lets him blood in the right arm,
in the leuenth day of April in the left arm, he shall not lose the sight of
his eyes.

And in the four or fyfte last day of May, in both arms be letten blood, he
shall have no fevers.

Whosoever in the first day of each month falls into any infyrmitye, the
third day ensuing is to dred, which if he pass, he shall escape till thirtye
days.

Who so falls in the second day, is to dread which if he pass, though he
long be sick, he shall be delivered.

He that falls in the third day, at next shall be delivered.

He that falls sick in the iiii. day, he shall be greeuouslye to the
xxviii. day, which if he pass, he shall escape.

He that falls the fyft day, though he suffer grievously, he shall escape.

He that falls in the sixte day, though he seem to be healde, never the
latter in the fyfte day of the other moon, he shall be dead.

He that falls in the vii. day, without grief he shall be delivered.

He that falls the viii. day, if he be not whole at the xii. day, he shall
be dead.

He that falls in the ninth day, though it be with great grief, he shall
escape.

He that falls in the x. day, without doubt he shall be dead.

He that falls in the xi. day, he shall be delivered the next day.

He that falls in the xii. day, but if he be delivered within two days,
within xv. he shall be dead.

He that falls in the xiii. day, till the xviii. days he shall be sick,
which if he pass, he shall escape.

He that falls in the fourteen day he shall dwell till the xv. and so he
shall escape.

He that waxes sick the xv. day, but if he recover within xviii. days, he
shall be dead.

He that falls in the xvi. day, though he be grieved till xxiiii. days,
till the xxviii. days he shall escape.

He that falls in the xvii. day, he shall dye the x. day.

He that falls sick in the xviii. day, soon shall be healed.

He that falls in the xix. day, also shall escape.

He that falls syck in the xx. day, in the v. day he shall escape, but
nevertheless, in the month following he shall be dead.

He that waxes sick in the xxi. day, but he run into perrill of death
within x. days of that other month, he shall be delivered

He that waxes sick in the xxii. day, but he run into peril of death
within ten days of that other month, he shall be delivered.

He that falls in the xxiii. day, though it be with greeuousnesse of pain,
in the other month, he shall be delivered.

He that falls in the xxiiii. day, in the xxvii. day he shall be
delivered, but nevertheless in the month following he shall be dead.

He that falls sick in the xxv. day, though he suffer a little,
nevertheless he shall escape.

He that falls in the xxvi. day, though he suffer to the outpassing,
nevertheless in that other month, he shall be delivered.

He that falls in the xxvii. day, it manasseth death.

He that falls in the xxviii. day, it manasseth death.

He that falls the xxix. day, little and little in that other month, he
shall be delivered.

He that falls sick in the xxx. day, it is doubt whether he pass any of
these.

Also he that waxes sick in the xxxi. whether he shall escape, it is
unknown.

Here follows the nature of the xii. Signs.
ARies is hot and dry, nature of the fire, and governs the head and face
of man, and is good for bleeding, when the Moon is in it, save in the party
that it governs and rules Taurus is evil for bleeding.

Taurus is dry and cold, nature of earth and governs the neck and the knot
under the throat, and is evil for bleeding.

Gemini is evil for bleeding.

Gemini is hot and moist, nature of the air, and governs the shoulders, the
arms, the hands, and is evil for bleeding.

Cancer is indifferent for bleeding.

Cancer is cold and moist, nature of water, and governs the breast, the
stomach and the milte, and is indifferent, neither to good nor to badde for
letting of blood.

Leo is evil for bleeding.

Leo is hot and dry, nature of fire, and governs the back and the sides,
and is evil for blood letting.

Virgo is indifferent for bleeding.

Virgo is cold and dry, and nature of the earth, and governs the womb, and
the inward parties, and is neither good, nor evil for bleeding, but between
both.

Libra is right good for bleeding.

Libra is hot and moist, nature of the air, and governs the nauill, the
reins, and the low parts of the womb, and is very good for bleeding.

Scorpio is indifferent for bleeding

Scorpio is cold and moist, nature of the water, and governs the members of
man, and is neither good nor bad for bleeding, but indifferente, between both.

Sagittarius is good for bleeding.

Sagittarius is hot and dry, nature of fire, and governs the thighs and is
good for bleeding.

Capricornus is evil for bleeding.

Capricornus is cold and dry, nature of earth, and governs the knees, and is
evil for bleeding.

Aquarius is indifferent for bleding.

Aquarius is hot and moist, nature of air, and governs the legs and is
neither good nor evil for bleeding* Pisces is indifferente for bleeding.
Pisces is cold and moist nature of water and governs the feet, and is
neither good nor evil for bleeding, but indifferent.

No man ought not to make incision nor touch with iron the members governed of
any sign, the day that the Moon is in it, for fear of the great effusyon of
blood that might happen: Nor in likewise when the sun is in it for the great
dangers and perrill that might follow thereof.

Here follows the Anathomye of the bones in man's body, and the number of
them, which is in all ii.C. and xlviii.
IN the top of the head is a bon that covers the brain, the which Ptholomeus
calls ye Capital bone. In the scull be two bones, which been called
parietalls, that holds the brain close and steadfast. And more lower in the
brain, is a bone called the crown of the head, and one the one side and on
the other, been two holes within the which is the pallays or roof bone. In
the part behind the head been iiii. like bones, to the which the chain of the
neck holds. In the nose ben ii. bones. The bones of the chaftes above be xi.
and of the neither iaw ben ii. above the apposite of the brain, there is one
behind named collateral. The bones of the teeth be xxx. eight, before iiii.
above, and iiii. underneath, sharp edged for to cut the morsels, and there is
iiii. sharp ii. above, and ii. underneath, and ben called conines, for they be
like conies teeth. After that been xvi. that be as they were homers or
grindinge teeth, for they chewe and grynde the meat the which is eaten and
there is iiii. above on every side, and iiii. underneath. And then the iiii.
teeth of sapyence on every side of the chaftes, one above and one underneath.
In the chin from the head downewarde been xxx. bones called knottes or joints.
In the breast before been vii. bones, and on every side xii. rybbes. By the
neck between the head and the Shoulders, been ii. bones named the sheres, and
ben the ii. shoulder blades. From the Shoulder to the Elboe, in each arm is a
bone called the Adiutor, from the Elbow to the hand bone, every arm ben ii.
bones, that been called Cannes, in each hand been viii. bones, above the palm
been iiii. bones which been called the Comb of the hand. The bones in the
fingers in each hand xv. in every finger three. At the ende^ of the ridge ben
the huckle bones, whereto been fastened the two bones of the thighs, in each
knee is a bone called the knee plate.

From the knee to the foot in each leg, ben ii. bones called canes or
marybones. In each foot is a bone called the ancle orpin of the foot, behind
the ancle is the heel bone in each foot, the which is the lowest part of a
man. And above each foot is a bone called the hallowe bone. In the plant of
each foot been four bones. Then ben the combs of the feet in each of the
which ben five bones, the bones in the toes in each foot been the number of
xiiii. Two bones ben before the belly, for to hold it steadfast with the two
branches. Two bones ben in the head behind the ears, called oculares, we reken
not the tender bones of the end of the shoulders, nor of the sides, nor diverse
little gristles and speldres of bones for they be comprehended in the number
aforesaid.

Here follows the Flubothomy, with the names of the veins, and where they
rest, and how they ought to be letten blood.
HEre I do you to wit, that the vain in the midst of the foreheade would be
letten blood for the ach, and pain of the head, and for Fevers (Lytargy) and
for the megrime in the head.

About the two ears behind is two veins the which be let blood to give
clear understanding, and virtue of light hering, and for thick breath, and for
doubt of Meselrye or Leprye. In the temple been two veins, caled the Artiers
for that they beat, which ben letten blood, for to diminish and take away the
great replection and abundance of blood that is in the brain, that might
noy the head and the eyes, and it is good against the gowte, the megrime, and
diverse other accidents that may come to the head.

Under the tongue been ii. veins, that been letten blood for a sickness caled the
Sequamy, and against the swelling and apostumes of the throat, and against the
Equinancye, by the which a man might dye suddenly for default of such bleeding.

In the neck ben ii. veins caled originals, for that they have the course and
abundaunce of all the blood that governs the body of man, and principally the
head, but they ought not to be letten blood without the counsel of the
Physician, and this bleeding avails much to the sycknesse of Leprye, when it
comes principally of ye blood. The vain of the heart, taken in the arm
profyteth to take away humors, or evil blood that might hurt the chamber of
the heart, or the aperteinance, and is good for them that spitteth blood, and
that been short winded, by the which a man may dye sodaynely for defaulte of
such bleeding.

The vain of the liver taken in the arm swageth the great heat of the body
of man, and holds the body in health, and this bleeding is profitable, also
against the yelow axes, and Apostume of the liver, and against the palsy,
whereof a man may dye for default of such bleeding.

Between the master finger and the leth finger to let blood, helped the
dollors that comes in the stomach, and sides, as botches, and apostumes, and
diverse other accedents that may come to these places, by great abundance of
blood and humors.

In the sides between the womb and the branch, been two veins of the which
that of the right side is letten blood for the dropsy, and that of the left
side for every sickness that comes about the milte, and they should bleed
after the persons be fat or lean, take good heed at four fyngers nighe the
insicion, and they ought not to make such bleeding, without the counsel of
the Physician.

In every foot been three veins, of the which three, one is under the ancle
of the foot named sophan, the which is letten blood for to swage and put out
diverse humors, as botches and apostumes that comes about the groines and it
profits much to women for to cause their menstruosity to descend, and delay
the Emerodes that comes in the secret places and other like.

Between the wrestes of the foot, and the great toe is a vain the which is
letten blood for diverse sickenesses, and inconveniences, as the pestilence that
takes a person sodaynely, by the great superabundance of humors, and this
bleding must be made within a natural day, that is to say, within xxiiii.
hours after that the sycknesse is taken of the pacient, and before that the
Fever come on him, and this bleeding ought to be done after the corpolence of
the pacient.

In the angles of the eyes, been two veins, the which been letten blood, for
the rednes of the eyes, or watery or that runs continually, and for diverse
other sicknesses that may happen and come by over great abundaunce of humors
and blood.

In the vain of the end of the nose, is made a bleeding, the which is good
for a red pympled face, as been read drops, pustuls, small scabs, and other
infections of the heart, that may come therein by to great replection, and
abundaunce of blood and humors, and it avails much against pympeled noses,
and other like sicknesses.

In the mouth in the gummes ben iiii. veins, that is to say, two above and two
beneth, the which ben leten blood for chaufing and canker in the mouth and for
toothack.

Between the lip and the chin is a vain that is letten blood to give a
mendement unto them that have an evil breath.

In each arm been iiii. veins, of the which the vain of the head is the
highest, the second next is from the heart, the third is of the liver, and the
fourth is from the mylte, otherwise called the low liver vain.

The vain of the head taken in the arm, ought to bleed for to take away the
great replection and abundance of blood that may annoy the head, the eyes and
the brain, and avails greatly for chaungeable heates, and swelling faces and
red, and for diverse other sycknesses that may fall and come by great
abundaunce of blood.

The vain of the mylte, otherwise called the low vain, should bleed against
fever tercians and quartaynes, and in it ought to be made a wide and a less
deep wound then in any other vain, for fear of wind, that it may gather,
and for a more incenuenience, for fear of a smowe that is under it, that is
called the Lesard.

In each hand been three veins, whereof that above the thombe ought to
bleed, to take away the great hete of the visage, and for much thick blood and
humors that been in the head, and this vain delayeth more then that of the arm.

Between the little finger, and the leche finger, is letting of blood that
greatly avails against all fever tertians, and quartaynes, and against
flumes and diverse other lettinges that comes to the paps and the milte.

In the thigh is a vain, of the which bleeding avails against doloure of the
genitoures, and for to put out of man's dody humors that been in the graynes.

The vain that is under the ancle of the foot without is named Sciot, of the
which bleeding is much worth against the pains of the flancks, and for to make
avoid and issue diverse humors which would gather in the said place, and it
avails greatly to women to restrayn their menstruosity when they have to
great abundance.

Thus ends the Flubothomye.

BE it to understand, that there be in the year four Quarters, the which be
named thus, Vere, Hyems, Estas, and Autumnus. These ben the four seasons in
the year, as Pryme time is the spring of the year, as Februarye, March, and
April. In these three months every green thing growing, begins to budde
and floorishe.

Then comes summer, as May, June, and July, and these three months every
herb, grain, and tree, is in his kind, and in his most strength, and beauty,
and then the sun is at the highest.

Then comes Autumn, as August, September and Detober, that al these fruits
waxen ripe, and been gathered and housed.

Then comes november, December and January, and these three months be in
the winter, that time the sun is at the lowest, and is at the time of little
profit, as we Astronomers say, that the age of man is lxxii. year, and that
we lyken but one whole year, for evermore we take six year for every month,
as January, or Februarye, and so forth. For as the year changes by the xii.
months into xii. diverse manners.

So does man change himself xii. times in his life by xii. ages, and every
vi. times vi. makes xxxvi. And than man is at the best, and also at the
highest, and xii. times vi. makes lxxii. and that is the age of man.

Thus must you count and reckon for every month vi. year, or else it may be
understand by the four quarters, and seasons of the year, so man is divided
into four parts, as to youth, strength, wisdom, and age. He so to be xviii.
year young, xviii. year strong, xviii. year in wisdom, and the fourth
xviii. year to go to the full age of lxxii.

Here follows to show how a man changes xii. times, even as the xii.
months does.
HE must take the first vi. year for January, the which is of no virtue nor
strength, in that season nothing on the earth grows. So man after that he is
borne, till he be vi. year of age, is with little or no wit, strength, or
cunning, and may do little or nothing that comes to any profit.

Then comes February, and then the days longs, and the sun is more
hotter, then the fyeldes begin to wax green. So the other vi. year till he
come to xii. the child begins to grow bigger, and is apt to learn such
things as is taught him.

Then comes the month of March, in which the labourour sows the earth and
planteth trees, and edyfieth houses, the child in these vi. years waxes big
to learn Doctrine, and science, and to be fair and pleasant and loving, for
then he is xviii. years of age.

Then comes April, that the earth and the trees is covered with green
Flowers. And in every party goods increases abundauntly. Then comes the
young man to gather the sweet flowers of hardiness, but then beware that the
cold wyndes, and storms of vices beat not down the flowers of good manners,
that should bring man to honor, for then is he xxiiii. year of age.

Then comes May, that is both fair and pleasant, for then Birds sing in
woods and Forestes, night and day, the sun shyneth hot, as then man is
most lusty, mighty, and of deliver strength, and seeks plays, sportes, and
manly pastimes, for then is he full xxx. years of age.

Then comes June, and then is the sun at the highest in his meridional, he
may asce^d no higher in his stacion. His gleamering golden Beams rypeth the
Corn, and then man is xxxvi. year, he may ascend no more, for then nature
has given them courage and strength at the full, and rypeth the seeds of
perfect understanding.

Then comes July, that our fruits be set on sunning, and our corn a
hardening, but then the sun begins a little to descend downwarde. So then
man goes from youth toward age, and begins for to acquainte him whyth
sadness, for then he is come to xlii. year.

After that then comes August, then we gather in our corn, and also the
fruits of the earth, And then man does his dillygence to gather for to find
him self, to maintain his wife, children and his household, when age comes
on him, and then after that vi. year, he is xiviii. year of age.

Then comes September, that wynes be made, and the fruits of the trees be
gathered: And then there wythall he does freshly begin to garnishe his house,
and make provision of needful things, for to live with in winter, which
draws very near, and then man is in his most steadfast and covetous
estate, prosperous in wisdom, purposing to gather and keep as much as
should be sufficient for him in his age, when he may gather no more, and
then is he liiii. year of age.

And then comes October, that all is into the aforesaid house gathered, both
corn, and also other manner of fruits, and also the laborers plowe and sow new
seeds on the earth for the year to come. And then he that naught sows,
naught gathers, and then in these vi. year a man shall take himself unto
God, for to do penance and good works, and then the benefits the year after
his death, he may gather and have spiritual profit, and then man is fully the
term of lx. years.

Then comes November, that the days be very short, and the sun in manner
gives but little heat, and the trees losen their leaves. The fields that were
green, looks hoare, and gray. Then al manner of herbs been hyd in the
ground, and then appears no flowers, and then winter is come, that the man
has understanding of age, and has lost his kindly hete and strength, his
teeth begin to rotee and to fail him. And then has he little hope of long
life, but desires to come to the life everlasting, and these vi. years makes
him lxvi. year of age. Then last comes December, full of cold, with frosts,
and snows, with great wyndes, and stormy weathers, that a man may not labor,
nor naught do. The sun is then at the lowest, that it may descend. Then
the trees and the earth be hid in snow, then it is good to hold them nie the
fire, and to spend the goods that they gate in summer. For then man begins
to wax crooked and feeble, coughing and spitting and loathsome, and then he
loses his perfect understanding, and his heirs desire his death. And these
vi. year makes him full lxxii. years, and if he live any longer, it is by
his good guiding and dieting in his youth howbeit, it is possible that a man
may live till he be a C. year of age, but there be but few that lives so long,
till they come to a hundred year of age.

Hereafter follows the Rutter of the distaunces from one Port or country to
another, and first of the compass of England.
THe Compass of England round about, is iiii. M. iii. C. and ix. miles.
Venis does stand from Flaunders East and by South viii. C. miles.

And next course by the sea, from Flaunders to Iaffe, (is this.) From Sluse to
Calays is lxx. miles. From Calays to Buchefe lxxx. miles. From Bucheffe to
Lezard ii. C. lx. miles. From Lezard to Capfenestes, six hundred l. miles.
From Capfenester to Lisbone, is two hundred and lxxx. miles. From Lisbone to
Cap S. Vincente to the stractes two C. xl. miles. From the stractes the
Iebalter, unto the I Will of Sardine xi. C. miles. From Malfitana in Sardine, to
Inalta, is iiii. C. and lx. miles. From Inalta by the course of Sarogora and
Sicill, to sail to Iaffe in Surrye, is a M. viii. C. miles. From Iaffe to
Baffe in Sypre, to the Castle Roge, is ii. C. xx. miles. From Castle Roge to
Rodes, a hundred. miles. From Rodes to Candy ii. C. l. miles. From Candy to
Modon, three hundred miles. From Modon to Corsue, three hundred miles. From
Corsu to Venis, is eight hundred miles.

THE length of the costs of Surry, of the Sea costs, is from the gulf of
Ermony, to the gulf Dalarlze, next the South and be West, from Lazarya to
Rise, is three score and five miles. That is to understand, from Lazary in
Ermony to Soldin, that comes from the river coming from Anthyoche lxx. miles.

AND from Soldin, to the Port of Lycha, next unto the South fyftye miles.
From Lycha to the Port of Tortosa South l. miles. From Tortosa unto the Port
Trypoll south l. miles. From Bernet to Acres south, and be west lxx. miles.
From Acres to Port Iaf, south, and be west lxx. miles. From Port Iaf, to
Port Delezara, south, south west a C. xxx. miles. From Damyat Lariza in
Surrye, to Damiat in Egypt C. lxxx. miles. From Damyat to Babylon Alchare,
lxxx. miles. From Damyat to Alexandre, a hundred x. miles.

THe length of Mare Mayor is from the Gulf S. George in the midst of the
gulf that is betwixt Trapasant Sanastopoly to the port of Messembre west,
from S. George a thousand lx. miles. The breadth of the west end, is from the
bras S. George of Constantinople, upon the river of Danabes next the North,
from S. George Brase, five hundred lx. miles.

FRom Pero to Caffa, in Tartary, Northeast vi. C. miles. From Caffa to the
stractes, of the Taken, Northeast, a hundred miles. The Gulf of Taken is about
six hundred miles. The Capt of Caffa is about six hundred miles. From the
Head of Taken to Sanastopoly, four C. miles. From Sanostopoly, to Trapasonde*
by West ii. C. l. miles. From Trapasonde to Synopya, next^ to the south iiii.
C. xxx. miles. From Synopya to Pero, next the West, southwest ii. C. xxx.
miles. From Pero to Messember, next the Norwest ii. C. xxx. miles. From
Messember to Mancro, North, Northeast, a C. ix. miles. From Mancro Castro, to
Danobia, Northeast a C. xxx. miles. From Danobia to the stractes of Caffa next
the East. ii. C. miles.

The compass of the Islands.
THE I Will of Sypre, is about five hundred miles. The Isles of Roobes, is boute
an C. xxx. miles. The I Will of Lange is about foure^core miles. The I Will of
Necrypont, is about three hundred miles. The I Will of Cecilya, is about seven
hundred miles. The I Will of Sardyne, is about seven hundred miles. The I Will of
Mayorke, is about two hundred miles. The I Will of great Brytayne, is about two
thousand miles. The I Will of Irelande is about a M. vii. C. miles. The
principallitye of Murre, is about vii. C. miles.

Thus ends the Rutter of the distaunce from one Port or Country to another.
Jmprinted at London, in Fleetestreete, beneath the Conduit, at the Sign of S.
John Evangelist, by Hugh Iackson. 1585.




