A BRIEF Discourse of certain Bathes or medicinal Waters in the County of
Warwick near unto a village called Newnam Regis.

1587

THE benefits no doubt are great and manifold which almighty God of his large
bounty and exceeding goodness of late years has plentifully bestowed upon
this little soil of England, since the prosperous reign of our most gracious
Sovereign, wherein the Gospel has sincerely and freely been preached* in
whose time many and strange events have happened, to the great benefit of this
country. For who have not in admiration our long continuance of peace and
tranquillity, our neighbors all round about us being in continual wars? Who
does not marvel at our plenty and abundance of all things? It is miraculous
in the indgement of the world, that so many strange stratagems practiced by
evil disposed persons, as well to subvert our quiet estate, as to take from us
our most Sovereign Lady and Queen, far beyond the capacity of man, as it
were with Gods finger and power only, have been from time to time overthrown
and brought to naught. Infinite more tokens may particularly be recited, by the
which men may justly gather arguments of Gods well pleased mind with the
government of our most gracious Queen; amongst the which the bathes and
medicinal waters of late years discovered in sundry parts of England, are
not of least moment: for most men yet living can witness of many rare and
strange cures done by sundry wels heretofore unknown: which may make
manifest to the world that God is well pleased, and in that respect has
blessed this our country far more than other nations: and are as it were
plain arguments, to bring other princes to embrace the Gospel, to root out
all superstition and idolatry, to plant in their countries true religion out
of Gods book, and above all things, to seek Gods glory and his kingdom. And
it is not altogether a vain conjecture, to think that God in these days
miraculously revealed wels and springs of medicinal waers never known before,
to work effects strange and marvelous in our sights, thereby to induce all
men to for sake such puddle pits which man's devise has dug, and drink
only of the clear fountains of his word, thence only to fetch remedy for
our diseased souls. The bathes of Bathe and Buckstan for their antiquity and
long proof in times past, are of great fame, and no doubt as of more efficacy
than others, may justly most be accounted of: nevertheless many other waters in
England of late years discovered, have the testimony of experience by sundry
effects, and rare cures done by them, to have no small medicinal power, as by
the events in sundry diseased people receiving remedy by them, has been
made manifest. Amongst the which the wels in Warwickeshire nigh a village
called Newnam Regis, have had most credit, by the use of which great numbers
of people have found help beyond their expectation, which yet living, do and
will bear testimony thereof: and no doubt many and rare virtues and qualities
are in them far beyond common waters, as will appear by diligent search of
their minerals. If any shall object or seek cause, why so many and so strange
events supposed to be done at the first by these waters, the like are not now,
nor have not of late years been performed. Surely this came not by means of
defects in the nature of the waters, but rather by the great abuse of them, For
at my being there, I found great concurse of alsorts of people affected with
sundry and disside^t diseases, which all in one manner used these waters, both
inwardly and outwardly, without counsel or any just consideration, carried
away with opinion, as it seemed, that the faculties and virtues of them, were
supernaturally given from God without any ordinary means, and so the use of
the same not to depend of any order or advise of Physic, but that it was
sufficient by any means to use them. Much like unto the superstition of our
forefathers, which in old time accounted their pilgrimages, and the vowing of a
penie to some one saint or other, or the dipping of a cloth in bathe waters, to
be sufficient for the curing of any of their maladies. And by these means the
natures and qualities of these bath waters not considered, nor the
constitutions and temperaments of the parties weighed, many received more hurt
than good. For in truth every medicinal water does not cure every infirmity,
nor every man is to use every bathe: but these things are to be
distinguished, and so considered of by the learned, that the bathe may be apted
to the disease, and be agreeable to the party diseased. And amongst our
countrymen, this is in truth a great fault: that when a thing is known to do
good to many, we straightwaies generally proceed in the use of it, without
respect of difference of parties or of affects, as if one shoe might serve for
every man's foot, that we cease not from abusing of the same, until many bad
successes have bred discredit to the thing: as of late has appeered by the
abuse of Mechoacan and diverse other Indian and foreign medicines. The
consideration heerof occasioned me to think it not altogether a vain labor,
to write somewhat of the most famous bathes and medicinal waters in England,
wherein I traveled as well in those of Bathe and Buckstan, as in others. And
have an intent to publish the same, But upon occasion of the marvelous effects
a few years past done by those wels in Warwickeshire, not only heard but also
seen by my self, through persuasion of some of my friends, I spent more time
in trial and examination of them, than in the others, and so did wholly put
mine endeavors for the discovery of their minerals, natures, and properties,
and withal to set forth in what diseases and bodies the same are most
convenient, not omitting the true use of them, when they are either inwardly to
be droonken, or outwardly to be applied. Which in very deed I did accomplish,
even when these wels were first revealed, but I did forbear to impart that I
had done to any my friends, for that I was certainly informed, that an ancient
learned man of my familiar acquaintance, intended to write and publish the same
argument: who for his deep learning grave judgment, and long experience, would
no doubt have performed it in a far better sort, had not those his endeavors
been prevented with untimely death it herefore the expectation of that promised
intent now void and made frustrate, I having of late occasion to peruse again
those my travels, and notes of my meditation of the asore said wels in
Warwickeshire, and imparting the same to some of my friends learned in the art
of physic, was by them persuaded to digest in order these my conceits, and
greatly encouraged to communicate the same to many, whereby they which
hereafter mean to use these bathes, may the better be informed how with
judgment and discretion to proceed in the true use of them, and the learned
may be occasioned further to examine the minerals and causes of their effects,
whereby I doubt not but that the fame of them may be restored to their former
credit. In regard and consideration heerof, and the rather that I may by this
my enterprise be an occasion and means to stir up the devotion and liberality
of such well disposed persons as are forward and zealous in furthering all such
good intents and purposes, I thought it not amiss by publishing this brief
discourse, to signify how good a deed it may be that some cost were bestowed
about these wells, that the same may be more commodious to such as have
occasion to use them. For at the first, all medicinal fountains are as naked
springs, unhandsome to use, until some such personages have by Gods providence
been stirred up charitably to adorn the same with all conueniencie. And as in
other countries, men are greatly to be commended for their diligent cares in
making all things about the bathes convenient for the bathers, so truly some
defect hereof is and may justly be found in this our realm of England. For
they which have traveled, do find the bathes in Italy and in diverse parts of
Germany far better ordered, than any here in England, and do find fault that
even these our ancient bathes of Bathe and Buckstan are so slenderly left
without any great addressing of things necessary. Much more therefore these new
discovered springs which are yet utterly unfurnished, do require the help of
some able and well disposed, for their ornament and good devises meet for them
which shall use them. And for as much as the purpose of mine attempt in this
little pamphlet, tends only to the public benefit of my country, I most
humbly request, that as that mighty Persian disdained not a cup of common water
offered to him by a mean person, so your L. will vouchsafe to accept as a
testimony of dutiful affection this little treatise of medicinal waters,
which I present to your L. at this time, invited by the common usage of all
men, in token of a good and prosperous new year, resting a continual beggar
to the almighty, to send you long and prosperous life, with increase of all
honorable preferment.

Your Honors most humble to be commanded WALTER BAILEY.

A brief discourse of certain Bathes or Medicinal waters, in the County of
Warwick, near unto a village called Newnam Regis.
IT is well and truly said, and upon very sufficient ground and reason, by
Aristotle the chiefest learned of all the heathen Philosophers, that Philosophy
proceeded and took his beginning from wonder and admiration. For whereas in
truth it is always seen that we doubt, and are altogether ignorant of the
hidden causes of such events and things, which astonish and amaze us, the wit
of man being naturally endued with an insatiable desire of knowledge, bends
all his force and industry to attain the perfect discovery of all such
secret matters, never ceasing or surceasing painful travels with earnest
search and inquiry, until he be fully satisfied and thoroughly resolved
touching al causes and circumstances belonging to such effects as seemed
strange, whereunto when he has attained, the woondring cease, the mind
being satisfied with the apprehe^sion of the causes. Wherefore that assertion of
Pythagoras, that The beginning of Philosophy is to wonder at nothing, as
Schegkius reports, does not carry so good probability: the verity of that
affirmation rather takes place after Philosophy is attained, than in the
beginning. For we are not occasioned to search out the causes and grounds of
things known which are not strange unto us. No man laboreth about ordinary
matters, each man trauelleth to learn, hear, and know the causes of strange
events, and of haps vnvsual. So that we may justly conclude with Aristotle,
that admiration and wondering gave occasion of Philosophy, without the which no
man is stirred with desire of knowledge: and after the wit of man is satisfied
with understanding of the causes which breed astonishment, the woondering
cease, and the mind is maruellouslie pleased and delighted with the
knowledge thereof. And as the verity of this position is abundantly confirmed
in great variety of natural effects, which by means of their strangenes have
been occasion to the learned in all ages to exercise their wits for the
understanding and apprehension of them: so amongst all other things natural
bathes by means of their diverse operations and virtues in curing of sundry
maladies and diseases, have vehemently incensed and stirred up all dilligent
students which bestow their times in inquiry and search of natural causes,
earnestly to pursue the knowledge of their mysteries, not ceasing until they
have thoroughly conceived and apprehended all such intricate difficulties as
unto them appertain. And of this very particular matter we have had a
domestical familiar example offered unto us within these few years here in
England. For it happened not long since in Warwickshire, near unto a Village
called Newnam Regis, that a certain husbandman occupied in lopping of trees,
chanced to receive a grievous wound in his hand, whereupon he repaired
presently to a fountain which was not far off: after he had washed and cleansed
the wound very well with the water, he presently found al pains of his hurt
assuaged, and in short time the wound thoroughly closed and healed, that he
needed no further help by the art of surgerie, which effect he imparted to his
neighbors, as a strange success: and it so amazed the hearers, that after,
another having a deep wound in his heel with a sieth, came to the same
fountain and recovered and was made hole only with the lotion of the same
water. These and such rare cures done by these wels, astonished all the
inhabitants thereabout. And the fame hereof occasioned great concourse and
multitudes of diseased people to run into those parts, and many received help
of their infirmities, as is verefied by the testimonies of the worshipful. So
that the fame heerof confirmed now by often experience, was at length so far
spread, that such as were diseased, almost out of all parts of this land, came
to those waters for remedy: whereupon all men having the novelty of the matter
in admiration, many in that they had not observed such strange things to be
done by common water, supposed some secret virtue to be imparted from God to
these wels, whence such rare cures were miraculously performed far beside and
beyond the ordinary course of nature. The learneder and wiser sort instructed
with the grounds of natural Philosophy, after they understood the reports to
be indeed not altogether fabulous and vain, but to carry much truth; to
satisfy their woondering cogitations gave themselves to a farther search, to
find out the true and natural causes of these events. For as it may be
accounted mere impiety to detract any thing from the omnipotent power of God,
to think his hand so shortened, that he is not as well able to produce things
miraculously now in these our days, without the mean of natural causes, as he
did often in times past: so without derogation of Gods power I trust, we may
affirm, that in these our latter days, God for the most part does in his
actions put natural means as instruments, of which the Philosophers do
consider as natural and inferior causes. For if we shall say that God without
any natural course, supernaturally does produce all things, we shall subvert
all the grounds of Philosophy and spoil nature of all actions. Rather in mine
opinion we are to embrace that saying in Genesis, that God does cease from new
creation of things, having given to them a nature and power, by the which they
stand and fall. For if these second causes, as barren in themselves, should
continually receive faculty and power from the almighty, that otherwise they
might not be means in Gods works: besides that, we shall take away all
generation and corruption in this world, we must imagine that there is daily a
new creation of things, from the which God long since has ceased, as we read
in the holy scriptures, when he did put all things created under a law,
giving them a virtue and faculty, that the same might increase and multiply.
This considered, I hope it will not be accounted impiety, by reasonable
discourse to search out the natural means which God has placed as causes of
events. Heerupon having heard the credible reports of rare and sundry cures
done in diverse persons by those Warwickshire wels, the strangeness and wonder
thereof caused me to repair thither, the better to learn the verity and
truth of that I heard. And after I had a few days observed the success and
event of things, and seen as much with mine eyes as I had before hard with
mine ears, I was in truth induced to believe that there was in those wels some
more secret and hidden qualities than are found in common waters, and so was
stirred up to inquire and to find out some natural cause of such effects.
Wherein surely I was at the first greatly discouraged, considering how hard a
matter it has always been accounted amongst the learned, to find out the
minerals of medicinal waters. For where many learned men have written of
Bathes, and bestowed much labor to find out their secret natures and
mysteries, they have left in their monuments so dissident and diverse opions,
that hardly two writers do deliver like judgment: such repugnancie of one
matter, does argue the hardness and difficulty of the same. And indeed the
beginnings of all fountains, specially of those which are medicinal, are
deeply seated and situated in the bowels of the earth, and the deep caves of
hills, that nature may seem thereby to have an intent to hide the mysteries of
them from the knowledge of man, which happily may be cause that after men have
much labored to understand and explain all causes and circumstances
appertaining to Bathes, yet always some thing happens, whereof sufficient
cause was not given, whereby the authors have daily added to that, which was
first expounded, and after many discourses, other events have fallen out,
wherein man's wit could not in all points be satisfied, which has given cause
to many of all ages to attribute the operations of bathe waters unto the divine
powers. For we read much written of the Bathes of Jupiter in Lybia, and of the
Baths dedicated to the sun as of a divine nature amongst the Troglodites, the
Bathes of Hercules accounted also a god, are much spoken of. The like
superstition has creped in amongst Christians, for in the late ignorant age,
men have dedicated some bathe waters to S. Anne, others to S. Gregory, others
to S. Nicolas, others to S. Wynefride, others to S. Rumboll, and so others to
diverse other saints, through ignorance unskillful of the causes of the
faculties of such waters, they supposing the effects done by them to come by
the grace of some saint, did yield divine names unto the bathes. Wherefore seeing
it is apparent that the search of the secret natures of Bathes in all ages has
been found very hard, and much has troubled the learned, I trust men in this
our time will not take occasion to carpe and reprehend my labors, if I now in
this discourse hap to pronounce of these late invented fountains, assertions
contrary to some others opinions, or if I shall not now in this little pamphlet
sufficiently explane the true minerals of these bathes, or else shall with some
show of probability establish some things which herafter may be found other
wise. For we find that where many writers in ancient time have largely
discoursed of sundry bathes in Italy, yet the natures and causes of the same
do seem not sufficiently discussed, but that in this our time late writers do
disallow of many positions of the former authors, and brag of better
explanations found out, that a man may suppose it to be an impossible matter
thoroughly to discourse of the conditions and circumstances of bathe waters.
Therefore let it not be accounted strange if learned men do differ in opinion
in consideration of these Warwickshire so late known bathes: and the endeavors
of men are to be allowed though many imperfections appear in a thing not yet
sufficiently tried, which happily hereafter in time may be better established.
And upon this ground trusting of the well acceptance of my good meaning in
this treatise, I have taken encouragement to deliver mine opinion and knowledge
of these Warwickshire waters as follows.

The Minerals from which the waters of these wels are supposed to draw their
virtues.
FOr the better discovery of the secret faculties of these waters, I have
taken certain quantities of them, and distilled them: I have likewise examined
them by filtrings and euaporations, and have always observed and found in the
end, after perfect separation of all the waterish parts, that there remains a
certain residence, in color whitish, and in taste somewhat salt, which being
put upon a glowing hot iron, does forthwith become cleerer and whiter. And
although this be a property common to the Limestone, Plaster, and Alabaster,
when they are mingled in bath waters, yet I am persuaded, Limestone
that only the Limestone, and neither of the other two, enters the mixture of
these waters, because neither Plaster, neither Alabaster are commonly found
near unto these wels, but the Limestone is there frequent every where. And
furthermore Plaistrie waters are accounted unwholesome to be droonken, but
these are found healthful, and very commodious in diverse affects for them
which often use them. I have also farther probability hereof, for that there
is in these waters some stone juice: for it is ordinarily observed, that if
there be drowned, in them either wood, or any other such like solid substance,
it is after a short time covered and ouergrowne with a kind of hard crust like
a stone: for in very truth such things are not made stony, but outwardly
imbrued with a stony crust. Moreover, whereas the aforesaid residence or
grounds is found in taste to be salt, it is to be surmised that either salt or
Niter have place in this mixture. But because it is the property of salt, if
it be put to the fire to crackle and leap, and this residence being so used,
does only sparkle without any noise making, I would think it more probable,
to refer it unto Niter, than unto salt, and for Niter.
this cause the rather, for that I have often noted it to have greater
acrimonie, and to pearce the tongue deeper, than salt is commonly wont to do: so
that it is euidant, that Limestone and Niter are in substance in these waters:
The conjectures of other things supposed to be mingled are not so manifest, yet
there is great probability, that some portions of Alum are in these Allume.
waters: for that it is observed, that if the water of these wels being heat,
and cast upon new pewter vessels, they will yield to them the color or
tincture of Alum. Moreover, if you die common water with any black color,
and power the same upon the sediment of this bath, the dark color of that
water will wax brighter and more clear; and this effect by all writers is
accounted proper to Alum. There Iron.
is no small suspicion, that some parts of iron also are mixed with these
waters. For daily much iron ore is found euerywhere in places near adioining.
And hard by these fountains, a kind of clay is found of color like to rustie
iron. Likewise if you cast strong vinegar upon the grounds of these waters,
being separated by such means as is aforesaid, you shall see the dross
floting in the top to resemble iron. But besides all these probabilities I am
the rather induced to credit, that this metal has place in these waters,
for that the use of them is daily seen to be very profitable in affects of the
Spleen, Reins, and Bladder: for I my self being there present, am an eye
witness, that one, which by long obstruction had a scirrous spleen many years,
by the use of these waters recovered his perfect health. Likewise I did see
another, which being subject to a strangurie, by means of a stone in his
bladder, when no other help could serve, the drinking of this water brake the
stone, and the man was in short time healed. The like success have I there
seen in diverse other affects, as namely in women's whites, in the gonorrhaicall
passion, and in all inward exulcerations, both of the reins and the bladder, so
that I may boldly conclude, that these baths are not utterly void of iron: and
I could heartily wish that they did more abound with this metal, for many
excellent effects which were consequently to be expected heerof.

The general qualities and temperament of the water of these wels.
FOrasmuch as the mineral which bears the chiefest swaie in these waters, is
the Limestone, after the which we find as ingredients of inferior sort, and
less portions, Niter, Iron, and Allume: it evidently appears that these
waters have great force and faculty to dry, and somewhat to cool. For the
Limestone (as Agricola writes in his book of minerals) has a drieng
quality, which is increased by the mixture of the Niter, Iron, and Allume,
which all have force to dry, so that I may reasonably conclude, that this bath
dries to the farthest of the second degree, how beit the cooling and
refrigeration extends not so far, for that the excess of this quality is
mitigated and repressed by the heat of Niter. Alum also is supposed to have
in it some hot parts, notwithstanding the parts which heat, are not so many nor
so great, that the same may be comparable or equal to the cooling portions of
all the rest, but that we may instly conclude, that these bathes do in faculty
dry strongly, and somewhat cool. Touching the second faculties of the
minerals of these waters, we find iron to have an astringent and corroborating
force, very convenient in diseases of the liner and spleen: Niter, to be
abstersive, resolving, discussing, extenuating and cutting of gross and
clammish humors: and Allume not only to be astringent, but also to have force
to absterge and cleanse: so that hereof the discreet physician may plainly see
the causes why these waters do manifestly cure wounds and ulcers as well
external as internal, and do good in many other infirmities. Neither is it
to be marueled that these waters do heal sicknesses which are contrary and
repugnant: for by this discourse it appears, that they stand of contrary
things differing in qualities, whereby they may produce contrary and dissident
actions.

Particular diseases which may be cured by the use of these waters.
Whereas the use of these waters is generally convenient in such maladies
which are hot and moist: they must needs in special do good in inflammatio^s of
the eyes, in excessive bleeding, and ouerlarge flux of women's terms, in their
whites, in the gonorhaical passion, in shortness of breathing, and in sundry
pectorall diseases, in obstructions, and other affects of the spleen, in
gouts, in suffusions, and diverse like imperfections of the eyes, in difficulty
of hearing, in weakness and loathing of the stomach, and overmuch laxitie of
the gums, being used as a lotion, in the cholicke passion proceeding from
sharp humors, in the bloody flixe, in the worms, in the pissing evil, in the
stone, in the hemorrhoides and egresse of the fundament, in the headache,
rheum, and in affects of the nerves and sinews, and likewise in such
deformities as happen unto the skin, as ringwoormes, scabs, and external
ulcers. And the truth of the premises, common experience has confirmed unto
us.

The use of these Wels.
COncerning the use of the waters of these wels, I do not doubt, but that in
time, farther experience will best teach the true use of them. In the mean, we
have sufficient proof, that the same do good both inwardly dronken, and also
outwardly applied. Therefore it shall not be amiss to mention some convenient
rules and orders for the use of these Bathes, according to the precepts of our
ancient writers, set down to be observed in all Bathes, which may easily be
applied to these waters as occasion shall serve. First, therefore that we may
the better know when, and in what diseases these Bathes either inwardly are to
be dronken, or outwardly to be used by lotion, it is to be understood, that
Bath waters do only good to these parts, by the which they do pass, and which
they foment; as Fallop notes in his book de aquis medicatis. And bathe waters
are said to foment the parts of the body, not only such as they do in
substance touch, but all others to whom they do impart their vapors, and
faculties. So that outward parts of the affected, do receive good, when by
lotion they are washed with these waters, the inward parts take most comfort
by drinking of them: so the bowels, and those members are best cured, by which
the waters do pass, or at the least do impart, their vapors and virtues:
wherefore when the same are taken to cure the diseases of the lungs, liver,
spleen, reins, kidneies, bladder, etc. there must be singular heed taken,
that the waters may be brought to pass through the body by these parts
diseased, and so may be avoided by the vrin, which will be done by adding some
thing to the bathe water, according to the affect and the situation of the part
affected, as shall be made more manifest hereafter. In the mean let us consider
what things are to be observed in the drinking of bathe waters.

Certain things to be observed before the drinking of the water of these
wells.
WHen the drinking of medicinal waters is thought expedient, we are to observe
some things before we take them, some whilst we are drinking of them, and also
some other things after they are fully received. Concerning the first, the
discreet physician is to be co^ferred withal, whether the use of these waters
be convenient for the present affect and disease or no: because every bathe
water is not a remedy for every sickness: but the learned physician will
easily satisfy any man in these points, by comparing the nature and conditions
of the disease, with the faculties of the water. The physician likewise is to
be consulted, whether the party himself which purposes to use these
medicinal waters, be for other respects in case apt to receive them: for they
are not without good consideration to be offered either unto children, or unto
old persons. The habit also and state of the body is to be regarded, for it
fortuneth sometimes that some one part may receive good by the bathe, and
others may be hurt: as if a man has hot kidneies, to temper them with these
waters may be thought convenient, yet if the constitution of his body together
with his stomach be cold and weak, in such case these waters are not rashly
to be ministered. Likewise if the patient have an ague, we may not but with
great warines counsel these waters. And where it is needful that the party
which drinks of them, do in reasonable sort exercise himhimselfe, during the
time he drinks, it is not convenient to advise the same to one which can by
no means exercise his body. It is also diligently to be provided, that suchas
use the Bathes be not inwardly subject to obstructions, and that the veins be
large, and the ways open. For if the veins be very little, that the bathe
water cannot pass, many inco^ueniences thereof may ensue: therefore diligent
care is to be had, that the veins be large, and the passages open. The
consideration of the time to drink bathe waters is not of lest moment. For
albeit some are of opinion that medicinal waters may at al times be dronken,
notwithstanding it is of the best learned concluded, that the winter season is
altogether unfit to drink any medicinal water. And where all such waters are
found in their fountains actually, either hot or cold, it is best to use the
springs actually hot in temperate seasons, as in the spring and the fall of the
leaf. They which are actually cold are taken with best success, in hotter
weather. So experience has taught us that these Warwikshire wels, which are
both actually and potentially cold, are dronken with most commodity in the
hottest time of the summer, and that the hotter and drier the summer time is,
the more wholesome, and of the better effect these waters are. I am not
ignorant that in consideration of the time to use bathe waters, the learned do
dispute whether the same may be ministered in the leap year, for that our
authors heerin have written diuersely, and pronounced contrary opinions, it
seems to me not necessary by long discourse heerof, to detain the reader:
only this I say, as I do not think but medicinal waters may be used in leap
years, when great occasion urges, so for my part I would not rashly counsel
any to use them in the leap years, unless great cause do urge the use of the^.
It is an old observation that in rainie weather bath waters are not so
wholesome: whereby we are to think that the constitution of the air present for
this our purpose is not to be neglected, wherein the Italian writers are so
curious, that they do admonish that no man should drink bath waters in moist
seasons, nor in moist places: in which respect they do dissuade the drinking of
the waters of Aponum at the fountains. Much more then, we ought to be careful
heerof, in taking of these Warwickshire waters, for that this our country is
much more subject to blustering winds, rain, and storms, and also because
these waters are actually cold in their fountains. Wherefore I do in anywise
advise my countryme^ which have in purpose to use these wels, to forbear them
in wet and rainy seasons: for the rain water being compounded and mixed with the
other, makes them either altogether unwholesome, or at the least less
profitable, and effectual, than otherwise they would be. Last of all, this
precept is general, that before the drinking of any medicinal waters, they
which are to use them, ought to have their bodies well prepared and purged:
surely I think it most necessary, that we in England omit not the like
practice upon the like occasion. For whereas we do abound commonly with many
and corrupt humors in our first veins, we must diligently see that these be
thoroughly removed: and here in this place I cannot pass over with silence the
ordinary practice of some of our physicians, which think it sufficient to send
their patients to the Bathes with some one slight purgation, where as in truth
we are not to stand upon, once, twice, or thrice purging of such which are to
drink medicinal waters, but to see that their bodies be exactly purged. And
where this precept is accounted most necessary in all Bathes and countries, we
ought very religiously to observe the same here in England, and the rather
when these waters are dronken, which do spring actually cold, and for that
cause with more difficulty do pass thorough their bodies which receive them.

Of the manner of drinking medicinal waters, and what things are to be observed
whiles they are dronken.
FIrst in the morning let the patient after he is risen, before he takes this
drink, use some light exercise, as walking, or such like, until his inward
heat be well stirred up, and then let him discharge himself of all
excrements, as perfectly as he can* which being done, let him take his drink,
but in such sort, that he quaffeth not up all the whole quantity which he is to
take, at once: but let him divide it into diverse draughts, and so drink it by
little and little, walking somewhat between every draught, and yet having this
regard, that within the space of an hour and a half, the whole quantity
which is prescribed unto him be received. For by these means his stomach will
not be ouercharged, but will be well able to digest the whole quantity of
water received in such sort, that it will be the sooner perfectly dispatched
through the body, and the party apt and ready to take fresh at his ordinary
season.

2. Secondly it is meetest to drink these waters in the morning the stomach
being empty.

3 Thirdly, I think it very necessary, that after the water is all dronken,
the sick man have good regard for the hour and time, when he is to take his
meat. And whereas this cannot be certainly determined, and set down, because
of the secret and unknown variety of diverse bodies, it is diligently to be
considered, whether the greatest part of the water received that morning be
already past through him, for if either the whole or the greatest part of the
water be rid out, he may securely take his meat. The like he may do also
although neither of these two happen, if he find his urine which at the first
came from him waterie and whitish, to be now somewhat citrin and of higher
color, for this is an evident sign that nature has reserved the residue of
these waters unto certain uses, and that she will expel them either the next
night or the day following. In like manner if nature disburdening hirselfe of
these waters by siege, does manifestly cease from so doing, the party which
receives them may safely take meat. But besides these observations, commonly
and for the most part, the distance of four hours is accounted to suffice
between the taking of the bath water and dinner.

4 Whereas diverse would not have this drink to be taken every day, but every
second day: I can not in any wise consent with them, for by means of a day of
intermission, nature would prove idle and remiss in discharging hirselfe of
this burden, whereas otherwise if she be daily stirred up and provoked by daily
drinking of the water, she will be far more painful and diligent in ridding
and avoiding the same out of the body, and therefore I do more commend the
drinking of them every day, then every other day.

The quantity of water which is to be dronken, and how in diverse cases it is
diversely to be used.
IN drinking of medicinal waters no certain quantity can be set down which
may serve generally for all men, but the discreet physitio^ which knows
thoroughly the qualities of the bath, the constitution of the sick party, and
the nature of the disease: may easily prescribe a fit and convenient quantity.
After that this is determined, ancient authors would have this to be observed,
that the sick party should begin his drinking in lesser quantity, and so
proceed increasing it daily until the first portion be doubled, at what time
he is to diminish it again, until he return by little and little unto the
quantity, which he received the first day: as for examples sake, if six
pintes be appointed, the greatest quantity to be drunken, they would have the
patient drink the first day three pintes, the second day four pints, the
third day five pints, and the fourth day, six pints, and to proceed no
further, but to return by detracting from this quantity daily by little and
little, as by drinking the fifth day five pints, the sixth day four, the
seventh day three, and so to give over. Although this was the custom among
the ancient, yet in this our country and in these bathes, I think it not
convenient so religiously to observe this order. For where as we are not
accustomed to drink water, we are not to charge our stomachs with such great
quantities of the same: How beit our diseases oftentimes require such quantity
of it, that if we should surcease to drink of these waters, after we have
risen to the doubling of the first dais quantity, we should reap either little
commodity by the same, or none at al. Wherefore use and experience has taught
us to begin heerin, with a less quantity, and to increase it daily, not only
to the doubling of the first portion, but far beyond, until we come to that
which the nature of the disease exacteth. For as I have oftentimes observed in
the drinking of these Warwikshire waters, when the greatest quantity which we
purpose to give for one day, is eight pints, so we begin not with four: for
almost no man is able at the first to brook so much, but rather we begin with
two pints, or at the most with three, and so go forward every day, adding one
pint, until we come to eight, (not standing upon the proportion of doubling)
beyond the which quantity, I will not counsel any man to adventure. If there
be any man that has so strong a stomach, that he is able to receive four
pints the first day: I do not dislike, but that he may begin the first day
with four, and so following the manner of the ancient writers, proceed until
he come to the double quantity: but because I have observed that the most part
of men are not able to receive so great quantities, my advise is, rather that
they take a less portion the first day: as namely two or three pints, and so
from thence ascend until they come to eight. And this have I found to be the
safest kind of using these waters: which although it passes slowly through the
body, so that in many days it is not rid out of diverse, before they come to
the drinking of four or five pints in a morning* yet do I find no great
inconvenience to follow hereof, because those parties purging in the night
season very liberally by urine, do no doubt discharge great quantity of this
water withal. And for that I noted alwais, that these waters do easily pas
thorough man's body, when they are dronken to the quantities of four or five
pints in a morning: I have oftentimes appointed such as have had strong
stomachs, to begin the first day with four pints, and so according to the
custom of the ancient, to double, until they come to eight, and from thence
by little and little to descend, until they return to four. I must confess,
there have been diverse, whereof I have known some, to have dronken ten pintes
in a morning, and some twelve: but for my part I can not in any wise either
commend, or like of these excessive quantities. For whereas these waters are
both actually and potentially cold, such over liberal drinking of them has
brought many to such extreme coldness of stomach, that they have been driven
for a long time after to use Aqua vitae and hot things to recover their former
heat and strength again. Wherefore it is safest to consist in a mediocritie,
and never to adventure to drink above six, or at the uttermost eight pintes:
and when the diseased party is come to the greatest portion, it is not good to
persist any time in the same, but straight, even the next day, to descend to a
lesser quantity: and when by an orderly descending he is come to four, or to
three pintes, let him by and by give over, although he began the first day with
two pintes, for otherwise nature will hardly be able to avoid those less
quantities which are last taken. Whereas Fallopius would have us to drink all
medicinal waters actually hot, and would have such for that purpose to be
heat, which in their fountains are found cold, I can not in any wise like of
this his advise: for all men for the most part can better both receive and
contain these waters cold, then hot, especially when any great quantity of
the same is taken. Furthermore in heating of such bath waters, many of the
mineral spirits are altered and euaporated. I do better therefore allow of
drinking these waters actually cold as they are taken out of the springs.

It shall not be amiss to mingle for diverse purposes, some things with these
waters, when they are to be drunken: as for example, when we will have them
easily to pass through the liver and the reins, the adding of sugar, or some
convenient iulep, by means of their sweetness, will be occasion of their
speedier conueyance unto the farther distant places of the body. So likewise,
when we will have these waters to have free passage thorough the guts, we may
add some little quantity of salt unto them, for hereby they will the better
loose the belly: hereof I have had in these waters good experience. For at my
being at these fountains, a certain man well known unto me, coming to these
wells for the cure of a Strangurie, caused by a stone in his bladder,
wherewith he was long time troubled, and drinking daily great quantities of
this water, he fell into a loosenes, avoiding the water by his belly: which
when I understood, I caused him to mingle sugar to every draught of the water,
by which means, the water had passage by urine, and so the party received
cure of his infirmity.

At the same time, it fortuned another man to drink plentifully of this water,
and avoiding the same by urine only, grew to be very costiue and much bound in
his belly, who requiring of me remedy for the same, I advised him to add to
every draught, such a portion of salt, as might make the water a little
brackish, whereby his belly was well loosed, without the help of any other
means. So that for these aforesaid respects, it shall be always expedient to
season this water with one or both of these two condiments: and surely the
stomach does better like and endure these waters by these mixtures.
Notwithstanding such men which have their conduits so open, that they need no
such help, for the easy conueyance or passage of the water through their
bodies, we may prescribe this water sincere and simple without any such
mixture, except either the party affected, or the disease shall require the
same. How long and how many days the diseased person is to continue the
drinking of these waters, it is easily known by the quantity which is
prescribed: for so many days only are to be spent therein, as by increasing
and diminishing the whole prescribed quantity of the water (according to the
manner aforesaid) may be received, which is accomplished for the most part in
ten or twelve days.

There is no man so rude and ignorant, which knows not that those which mind
to reap any benefit by these bathes, ought for the present time especially to
feed upon such meats as yield good juice, and are of easy concoction, whereof
there are diverse sorts in daily use, which to rehearse in this place were
superfluous. But one precept of the learned Fallopius I can not but here
commend, who advises us in this case to feed more liberally at dinner, then at
supper, because (says he) an ouerlarge supper oftentimes in the night
following ouerchargeth the stomach, and so the next morrow leaves such
crudities in that part, that the party is unready to receive the water at his
due hour: for those crudites must be co^cocted or avoided before the party may
drink the bathe water the day following: so necessary it is to make a light
supper. Wherefore the usage and manner of our countrymen in England is utterly
to be condemned, which whiles they are using the bathes, have no regard to
frugality of diet, but both in their dinner and supper so far exceed, and
swerve from this former rule, that it is not to be marvelled at, that there be
so few in our country, which ordinarily receive any commodity or health by
means of the bathes. I admonish them therefore to be more sparefull in their
diet, and so they shall gain health to their bodies, and comfort to their
pursse.

Things to be observed after that the drinking of these medicinal waters is
fully past.
IT oftentimes falls out that the diseased persons which have used medicinal
waters, do not presently find the profit and commodity acquired by them, but
long after when they have left the use of them, and are gone from the bathes;
so that many times they go thence with sorrowful hearts, supposing that they
have not received that goodness which they hoped for, yet many days after,
perhaps not before the space of a month be expired, they feel what good the
bathes have done to them: whereby we are to conjecture, that the virtues and
qualities, of the bath waters do remain a long time in the members and parts of
the body, yielding strength unto them, by which means the commodities obtained
by the bathes do appear long time after the use of them: in which
consideration it is requisite, that they which have used medicinal waters, do
for a good season after, carefully and orderly govern themselves, that the
virtues and properties of the waters may be reserved in the body, until they
have don their effects and operations. Therefore it is to be wished, that all
bathers, after the use of the bathes, for a good season do keep a good diet
in feeding upon meats which are easy to be digested, and do breed a good
juice: as after the taking of the bathe waters the party may not feed too
sparefully, so he must beware of ouergorging: let him therefore keep a mean
in his feeding, give himself to pleasant disports, and not overmuch to expose
his body to cold aier, but keep himself reasonably warm. And above all
things he must eschew lascivious and venerious sports, which the learned do
forbid after the use of bathes by the space of a month, as a thing most
pernicious.

FINIS.

