A MASTIF WHELP with other ruff-Island-lik Currs fetched from amongst the
Antipedes. Which bite and bark at the fantastical humorists and abusers of
the time.

In earnest i will but jest


Imprinted amongst the Antipedes, and are to be sold, where they are to be
bought.

To my very loving Friends, GF. RN. WS. RG. IF. IG. Gentlemen of the Innee
Temple.
REnoewned flattcapps (worthy sprighted men)
Accept (but do it with thanks) fruits of my penn
Protect with tongues (for tongues are lawyers helps)
My toothles (though much seeming-bitten) whelps
Protect em wagges, and when their teeth grows long
They shall with teeth' protect each Lawyers tongue
D^fend em waggs, and when I come from war
(If you will stand fort) I mean ^oe ^urse
I Will have you called too'th bar.
Ever yours Willyam Goddard.

TO THE READER.
EXpect noe fine phrase from a Souldyers penn
For (Reader) we the bluntest are of men
Our Elloquence we utter with our swords
Making our deeds to pollishe over our words
But if thou likst a harshe vnpollisht vain
Why then read over this infant of my brain
It knows not how to fawn, it wantes his wits
To clawe the back, like true-bredd parrasitts
Its' like (as it is) the Mastif whelpe which bites
Those whom it plays with, more then it delights
It is noe lewe to please a ladies sight
It barks too loud, it would wake her in the night
If thou affectst a right-bredd dog forth' Bear
Then keep this whelpe: this dog such beasts will tear
Or would have Raynard hunted to his denn?
Heel hunt him to it and fetch him out agenn
Heel seazs upon the wolf, (so bitten's he)
Noe beast this dog will dread that he cann see
Heel hunt the hogg, and shall not need be feared,
For heel descrie eatche knave with in thy yard
If thou can like a Curr which is so ruff
Then take thou this^ he'es full as feirce as tuff.
W. G.

The Mastiffe Whelpe.
Satire 1.
Go Mastiff Whelpe disdenn thy self a while
With sullen sport make thou thy masters smyle:
Be wanton: yet amidst thy best delight
Not only bark, but make as if thoudst bite
Grynn, snarle, and on thy best friend look so grym
As if thoudst at one snapp devouer him.
Satire 2.
THou penn of mine do not with myld-calme rymes*
Sooth-vp th'abuses of these barbrous times
But like a Lion come thou ruf and feirce
And with black boy strous storms these men-beastes pierce
Let thy ruff galls be such as make them search,
And scudd to find a safe place where to pearche
Blaste-black their hues who against gods sacred dyetie
Has belcht the pitch-black-blazes of Impyetie
Dread not the greatst: thart licenst penn to do it
But if he open lies, I chardge the shoot,
Spare not to say there is noe such villainy
As is Deathe-staringe-cruell tyranny
Scorn thou the troubled ensigns of pale fear
Do It souldyer-like with bold and lively cheer
Whith bussinge whispers flye-blowe not the ear
But what thou do, with boldness let, tappeare
Go boldly penn, go bluntly guie th'asault
And lashe each man according to his fault.
Satire 3.
GAllants you will be Dyinge this Christemas
I Will Pray that either of you well may pass
I pray now perdon me, for this doubt I
That some of you at this time Ill will die
And then my noble waggs (excuse me hoe)
There is a thing calls on you, Westward hoe?
Dye well (madd waggs) and here I will presadge
To gold (if feynds bar not) you will have passadge.
Satire 4.
SOlus the student takes on him such state
That sure the gallants Lordefyd' of late
My Goldsmith is quoth he the best in the town
And none could Shr^dd my Tailor ere putt down
Push, push quoth he, look on my rapy'rs guylt
None like my Cutler fashons out a hilt
If others talk of Barbers, he'ele cry tutt
Away it is mine that has the exlentst cut
What do I prate? he may use this word my
For sure the wait on him which watchful eye
But shall I tell you how? and cease to jest
Oh! it is with Seriannts Solus to arest.
Satire 5.
Now fpitefull Fortune do the worste you can
Yet Jack will rise to be a gentleman
Did not Iacks Lord lean on his shoulders late
Chock him on the chynn, stroke him on the pate
Lendinge Jack smyles when Jack speaks but a word
Ah here be hopeful greaces from a Lord
Who er'es a wynner, yet if Jack have th^se
I cannot see how Jack cann rise and leese
Satire 6.
SVrveyinge Summus scorns to tell a lie
Yet he cann number all the stars ith sky
He Will tell how many gras-blades grows ith lands
Heel justly number all the ocean sands
How many hours it is since the world begann
He reckon cann: and count the moates ith sunn
These by his Art cann he do exlent well
Yet in's own purse he nere could twelve pence tell.
Satire 7.
A Stromus, every night on's back dus lie
Surveying of each thing ith starrye sky
He gazeth on the Bear, and Charles his waine
On all Celestial signs that fore tells reign
He'el tell you when th'clipse shall be ith Sunn
This year he'ele tell what next year shall be done
Yet for his life he cannot tell before
The certain times, when is wife means play the --
Satire 8.
WIll Lestas love his book? I faith Sir noe,
Heel be more constanter I hope then so
Has not he vowd' his thoughts too'th good ale pot^?
He knows inconstancy in love's a blott
What Is in a book to yield delight to man?
Just naught to that which is ith ale-howse cann
The Cann has that which whetts the dulled wit
But books holds naught but that which dulleth it
Lestas, be wise, and lie close to thy love
Though freindes do babble, do not thou remove.
Satire 9.
THou Fernydus, away thou wicked man
I scorn to write on thee although I cann
Scudd silver-scraper: rich wretch, hence, away
Thou owst thy gutts a debt, that debt go pay,
Go cloth thy back, its more then half vnstript
Its now, just as i^ were, when thou were whipped
Go broane-bread-eater, think that this my penn
Much scorns to write on water drynkinge men.
Satire 10.
Ask who they be? demand not that of me
Nor I, nor none (I think) knows who they be
To day they will Devils be, but next day then
They Will neither Devils be nor Earthly men
An other day they will Kings unto you seem
The next day (happ'lye) you will them beggars deem
No^ shape, nor form, they ever long contain
Lest be the fools, but that they still maintain
If they nor apes, nor fools, nor Players be
Then who they are I cannot answer ye.
Satire 11.
COtts pluttronells her was appused be
Her was a shent leman all worl was see
Was not her father effer wheare coot freez?
And effer trink coot trynk? was tossed coot sheeze
Was not he make her create pigg foe to yeyld
Killed a create deal a shyaunts in te feyld
Her was a shentleman, all worl was see
Pie Cott, and pluttronells was wronged be.
Satire 12.
PRatus; thou art a Busie-bodie grown
^oo talkatiue 'Pon matters not thy own
What though the Spanyard, Pope, and Devil plotts?
Let em Pratus: they do not deal with Sotts
The States are wise, they cann see fire in smother
It is not sects cann part the tone from the other
They Will hold in peace: it is not their public foe
Shall take t'h advantadge of a partinge blow
And therefore man, of thy own busnes prate
They Will hold their friend which helps them hold their state.
Go busie-body'd foolish-pratinge mome
Busy thy body, on thy wife at home:
Get her with child: it is high time she had one
Joined thirtye years? it is a shame thast none
Let states alone: thou needst' not them to teach
They arc to wise to make their foes a breach
Satire. 14
COmfort thy self old Mops, and do not weep
What need'st thou woman such a whyning keep?
Thy sonn's as well as any man in the land,
Why all he did, was bidd a man but stand,
And told him coin he lackt; there is those do worse,
Then bidd an honest man deliver's purse.
He spoke him fair, and took but what he had,
Then what need'st' weep old girl? what art thou madd?
Come: cheer up Less, for it is a general thing,
That youth (do what thou can) will have their swinge.
Satire. 15.
Quoth hom-bred Hodge wudd god above c'had put Will t'zchoole
C'hadd la're than a groate, c'had larnt him but his Zaltar
C'hadd than done well enough, c'hadd never been begged a Voole
By maz-la, c'hadd made vmall vurst joockt a halter,
C'has eyes, c'has ears, chas lips, and yet c'his begd a voole
Vath c'ham in vault my zelfe, c'hud never put boy t'zchoole.
Maz wiue Zibb-la, watt ze'st? c'hill to the Court my zelfe,
C'hill try t'an beg the boy; it is but a zaying nay,
C'hill spend vort-shillinges and more a pelf
But c'hill ha my zonn William vrom vm all away.
But ear'ste tou me Zibb? ecche veare me this will come to pass,
Now they have got my Voole, thay'le come and beg my Ass.
Satire. 16.
CAptayue Turne-hir-vpp has not Idle been,
Hott was the service he of late has seen,
Lowe-countreye service affords great danger
So he reports; but greatest to a stranger,
Yet this he says, if one may but believe him
The pay's so good, small wounds would never grieve him.
To his great detryment he lost a joynte,
But Judge where it was: oh! hard at's Codpeece point
(To his praise I speak it) yet heed' not out,
But there took a bigger [aie] as he fought:
For which (brave man) he is feign to keep his bed
And's banckropt turned of all the hair on's head,
Oh! how he banns the wounding whir igig,
For causing him to wear this perrywigg,
Nay never beggar has ever cursed the stocks,
As Captain Turne-hir-vp has done the --
Satire 17.
I Grant it ( Cosmus) that fond love is blind,
And incident (almost) to all mankind,
Yet Cosmus though men's seeing sense dus fail them,
Their smelling sense (me thinks) should much avayle them.
Oh! cry you mercy sir, your Love's a Rose,
And therefore cannot choose but please your nose:
Pray God she dus; but faith I doubt it much,
I fear me Coss, she has a poulcats tutch,
Nay that is not all: I fear she has such tricks
As still her stalk will allwaies have some pricks.
Cut off those pricks; then Cosmus prithee tell.
Whether thy Rose yeildes not a better smell,
Satire. 18
RAlus why did thou hoyst and bear thy sails so high?
That none expected but thou would sail into the sky?
Did think that Eolus would ever prove so kind?
As never jogg thy bark with one ruff blast of wind:
I know thou did; but now poor Ralus thou may see
How safe's the shrubb, over the lofty-towring tree,
Com let this pass: now Ralus think but what thou art,
And quite forgett (as wisdom biddesthee) what thou were,
It is noe matter man what ever thou have been,
Think this! the Owle's not wondered at until he is seen.
Satire 27.
GAllenus thou of late art grown of wondrous fame,
But Gallen; prithee tell me how thou came byth'same.
Report dus p^are, tha'st twenty patients in one day,
And sometimes many more; so prating fame dus say,
Yet ask him who they are that comes so fast to thee,
His answer is, that femall creatures all they be.
Faith Doctor it is well, thy study is to please
The Femall sex, and how their corp'rall griefs to ease
But hark: you had a patient named D^ll I Am sure,
Upon whose body you did do a famous cure.
Indeed (good Gallen) she a right true patient were
You know she putt up much, and very much did bear.
I pray, may but a man without authority
Demand what is become of this same Dorithie?
Oh! she is gone to purge, for late she took a glister:
Faith Doctor you did Ill, you might have done but kist-her.
A pestlence on it, that you would give so deep a touch
And having skill, would ouer-shoot the mark so much.
Satire 20.
THou sai^st Dematas Poets heads are vain,
And to small purpose they do take great pain:
Noe Dematas; vain thy Father was, or madd
To scrape much wealth for an unthrifty Ladd.
Thou art not vain to spend in brav'rie,
All what thy old Dadd got by poling knau'rie.
This is not vain: nor is it vain to pyne
Thy struncke-vp gutts, to trim thy wif^^p fine
No^ Dematas; nor it is not vain to wrack
Tenaunts: loading (with Lordshipps) thy wives back,
These are not vain; but he which beats his brain
To picture out men vain: why, he is vain.
Satire 21.
NIck's deeply learnd, he is skild' in palmestrie,
He Will make young Girls believe he is a God,
And with his chaunting art of Minstrelsie,
He Will make the little waggtayles finely nodd,
Oh! he is most rare to foretell destenies,
Or by his phisnomie to know a knave,
His sable carradge fitts sadd obsequies,
His skillful tricks a conny-catching slave.
Yet all these arts did not so much befrend him
As once foretell that Tiborne Tree should end him.
Satire 22.
NOll has the skill to winn and woe a wife,
Then why should Noll (pray) lead a single life?
He follow plowe? faith sir he scorns it plain
Why Ladies fair will not Noll's suite disdain.
Let but his wench entreat him to sit down,
He will not straight ways do it like a Clown
But off witch's hatt, make's leg, and answer naie,
With I Am as well, forsooth, I thank you say
Naie, Noll ^n's courting, none comes nie him,
They all may learn; push, they must go by him:
Have they the heart to sit by Mistrisse Fraunces?
He has; naie more: he will pinck with pretty glaunces,
The'ile blurt forth this; thei'le swear they do affect her,
And from great perrills the'ile still protect her,
Faugh, faugh: it is stale; it is nothing like to his,
Noll's bold-spirit will serve to give akisse,
And some times Noll will make his long discourse
Of any thing; I, of an old brood-goose,
Or of his mothers henn with' copple crown,
Oh! quoth Noll. non lays such eggs in all the Town.
And then he up and tells how she is ath' kind
Such a henn quoth Noll, (oh)! it is rare to find.
And when to walk disposed is mestresse Frauncis,
Before her like a fore-horse Nolkin praunces.
Cann Courtyers say this is a goodly weather?
Away plain wits, they cann but toss a feather.
Cann Courtyers sighing by their Looues, thus say?
This Rain (alack) is to to badd for hay,
Or thrice in one hour ask them what is a clock?
Fie, their wits to his are dull; I, mere a block.
Yet these from witty Noll extem'pre comes,
Come come, to Noll all Courtyers are mere momes.
Satire 23.
HOw? James a man? his Rapire is not guilt,
He fight? I, when his dublett's wrought with quilt,
Hang him slave, he cannot call a whore a whore,
Nor with a grace break up a sinners door,
He Will say Mall, I pray Mall let me kisseyee,
Or Mistress Marye think how well I wish ye,
Else hold her by the hand and sigh apace,
Or like th'astronomer heel stand and gaze,
Gaping for changes in his Maryes face.
Come hang him doult, bith' Lord he is but a gull,
For wit I never knew an Ass more dull.
Satire 24.
THe Rule's not false that is held in learned Philosophy,
How all the four ellements together dus abide:
Experienced Colcus dus the same now Justify,
Alas alas, too late the'xperience he has tried,
For as he sailed along the Midd'terranian gulf,
Which lies right over Besses equenoxtiall line
(Aye) there he met with such a hott and fiery wulfe
That has consumed quite poor Colcus friggott fine,
Before that Colcus this experience had well tried,
To hear this argument could Colcus never abide.
Satire 25.
WHerein dus Ouids Echo that sweet amorous Nymph;
Excel the Lady Delphis our most heavenly Imph?
As Ouids nymph would still Narcissus last words use,
Like so dus Delphis her sweet Pomus words peruse:
Let Pomus say sweet Dilphis can thou love quoth he?
Then (Eccho-like) she takes the last word [loue] quoth she,
Thy tempting-cherry-lipps sweet Delphis I will kiss
Quoth Delphis [kisse]: so sild' the last word would she mis,
My seggs between thy snowy thighs will I entwind*
Quoth she [^ntwind] thus love with' last words dus she bind.
I Will do as little Cupid bidds his Champions do,
Quoth Delphis [doe,] still unto Pomus answering so
Until by Pomus she had paid her maidens debt,
His last word and her first still oftentimes thus met.
Satire 26.
FEene Mistress Pucis with her sharpe-redd-coul'red nose
One hair-bredth of her height the fixon will not loose,
She trotts so short, she will reach a horse his perfect'st pace,
I, and a wrie-mouth'd Ape to make an Antike face,
Her flippaunt tongue would make a most sence-pleasing sound,
Did not her wyndy-^^ppertaile the music dround.
Satire 27.
What Is a gull, that Jack of gull'^ye is accused?
My hart's enflamed to hear how Iack's abused,
Is he a gull that never will be at stand
To-paye these Tailors all their whole demand?
Is he a gull which bouzeth night by night
With His betters? scorning they should pay a mite
Or is he one that letts a Shorditch wench
The goul den entrails of his purse to drench?
These be noe gulls I Am sure: but if they be?
Then Iack's a gull: For such a one is he.
Satire 28.
Paul lives by's wits, he will swear there is noe such meat,
Yet sometimes bread (with heart) poor Pawle would eat.
Pawles witty diet has made his body fine,
And that is the cause in Powles, Pawle often does dyne.
Where Pawle in lieue of's dinners great expense,
Often dives a hose and pickes out Peters-pence.
Satire. 29.
HAng Tom: what he? he is but a fool to me
For tricks, you all may learn come, I Will teach thee.
Tom dares not look an Emperor in the face:
Hang puling Apes; he wants a manly grace.
Why Tom will blush, if once he tell a lie:
He has no skill in the world^ to cogg a die.
Tom's witt's most blockish; faugh, it is too too course,
I Will wadg my life the gull never yet stole horse,
Noe nor so much (I think) as e're took purse,
He thy Tutor? thou can not choose a worse.
He Will teach the this to groape a wenches plackett,
Hang him Cow, he dares not diue a pockett,
Or milke-sop-like to lead a wench the haie,
Base-harted-babe he dares not make afraie.
Forsake him Nedd: thou shall my scholar ^ee,
I Will learn thee Art my Rogue; be ruled by me.
Satire 30.
CLow^^^ of late a Complete Knight ^as made,
Dares any say, his Sire got's wealth bith' spade?
He Will kill em then; for know you he is a knight,
And all made so; are desperate men to fight.
What e're his Father was, i am sure of it,
He left his son (by far) more wealth then wit.
And wealth (I hope) a gentleman du^ make.
And he that is so; a knight hoods rite may take,
Satire 31.
LArsus toth' Sunn his Mistress does compare,
In deed in bewty she is somewhat rare,
And says from her he has his light and life,
He may be proud that has so light a wife.
Yet La^sus pre thee be not wrath with me,
For rather like the Moon (me thinks) is she.
She'xchangeth often (I speak it in noe scorn)
As thou have light from her, so thou have the horn.
Satire 32.
STeltus? Fallatus makes good use of thee:
Thou art his looking-glass: be ruled me,
Thy looking-glass ( Stelltus) make thou of him,
Then both of you will dressed be neat and trimm.
Looking on thee: (and further 'twill his marriadge)
He prunes out pride, and foole-bredd stately carriadge.
And shaues f^om's lips (a thing betokening wit)
The sta^ring hairs of a bold parrasitt,
Now look in him, and thou shall see it plain,
That drunkenness is one ath' foulest stain.
And see in him how haggedly and lean,
A man is made which uses much a queen.
Look in him man; for this beleeu't that he
Has bettr'd been by looking into thee.
Satire 33.
WAtt me thinks of all men thou should'st' stench desire,
Since fools (as wisemen says) can quickliest quench loves fire
Why could^st not beg or steal from Green on dramm of wit?
And so by blurd-endashed lines have sent her it.
Thou might er'e this have revel'd in luxurious game,
If so tha'dst done and quenched thereby loves burningst flame.
But hark thee Wart? He speaks toth' wind, that learnes a fool:
I^le be noe Tutor, where such dunces comes toth' school.
Satire 34.
YEt Watt I ought not leave thee thus since I do know
From whence the streaming floods of these thy passions flow,
Me thinks I ought to apply some pill to thy disease,
Therefore here be simples, compound them if you please;
First get a pound of Wit, of Couradge, twice as much,
These are excelent simples, I know not any such,
Then take of Place and Tune, of each two handful more,
Seek out for Oportunytie, in gardens there be store,
Of that one handful take; which done, these simples pound,
And thou shall see, thy burning heat they will confound.
But hark thee Watt, If these receipts do add noe hope,
Then (do as old Diogines bidds) that is take a roape.
Satire 34.
LAcritus, thy hart's strait fraught with Jealousy,
If on thy wife, a man but glaunce his eye.
Thou Fermidus, if one but kiss thy dame,
Ath' back of her, thy wand is straight forth same.
Fie, fie, how bitter would be eithers life,
If you should take, as Wittus took his wife,
You Would hardly laugh and smile upon the man,
And ask; has not he over-heat thee Nan?
Consider: Wives can do noe better deed.
Then help their husbands friends at pussh of need.
Satire 35.
LAminus, often times to have asked me,
Why Lambas hanged was? pray answered be,
His neck was short; and had thy head a reatch,
Thou Would soon conceive he hanged but 's neck to streach.
Why fool was thine (as hissen was) too short?
Noe trick to lengthen it, but hanging for 't.
Satire 36.
QVestion Don Lingus but of foreign states,
And you shall see how formally he prates:
Strait heel'e up, and tell, how he has seen,
That stout and famous Amazonian Queen.
Vowing it is the only worthi'st sight,
To see the order of the Amazons fight,
Then forewardes still he will talk of Prester John,
Commending him for a most worthy man,
Protesting that, so soon he came on Land,
He had that gallant warrior by the hand.
Pussh, pussh (quoth he,) this barren Europa
Is nothing like to Aethiopia,
And then he shakes his head, (sighing most deep)
Oh! (quoth he) why did not I my self there keep?
Which done; his Audience straight'ginnes to applaud him.
And though an Ass, yet like a God they laud him.
Yet question him but out ath' English style,
You Will find the Goose never crossed has Native I Will,
Satire 37.
PRince Pluto king ath' stinking stigian Lake,
Finding himself not well, his will would make,
In which, this wealthy and all-worthy man,
In that his Will, to this effect begann.
Quoth he; Imprimis here I do decree,
That Pride my firstborn son a Courtier be.
Enjoining Envy and Ambition still
(As younger brothers should to attend his will.
But as for Sloth and Avarice (quoth he)
Those will I have in learning brought-vp be.
Where Gluttony my youngest son of all,
Shall wait one them, attentive at their call.
But now my daughter Lust, then shakes his head,
Oh! her I Would feign see place't ere I were dead.
Her, her (quoth he), if I could but bestow,
Then I Would not care how soon I went below.
Courtiers are bad: Townsmen are often naught,
And Contrey-men (quoth he) are most untaught.
Therefore on these she is plainly cast away:
Oh! my dear Lust (quoth he,) what shall I say?
Why faith (quoth he,) before shall be quite undone,
I Will see thee made my self an honest Nunn
So putting her amongst holly Nuns to dwell,
His body dies, and 's soul departs to hell.
Satire. 38.
I Tell thee Tom, thou art too plain a Ladd
I; too too gross; a hom-bredd Country Swadd.
I tell thee man, thy wit, that wit of thine
Is muddie, thick, it is nothing nimbly-fine.
With whomsoever thou do chance to walk,
All Is one to thee; of corn or land's thy talk,
Or of the Cows; else of thy flock of sheep,
With such like stuff, a tedious coil thou't keep.
Away plain fool: think Soldiers do delight
In such discourse? thou art deceived quite,
Or think it pleasing to a scholars taste?
If thou think so? a wrong conceit thou have,
And if thou think a Courtier it will please,
Persuade thy self, to him it is much disease.
Dust' hear me Tom? I tell thee thou art too Plain:
Why man? a nimble Wit fitts every vain:
Tooth'Souldier I Would be up with barracados,
Raising counter-mures, breaking Pallazados.
Tooth' Scholar I Would use naught but Rethorick,
I Would up with Sophistry, or ellse with Logic.
As for the Courtier; pussh, I Would mak's mouth watter
I would on's Mistress talk; with him I Would flatter.
Of Courtshipp wholly all my talk should savor,
As tell him how he might attain t'ir favor.
Thus Thomas all their humors I would fit,
But what talk I to one which wants Wit.
Satire 39.
RElcus, thy hart's an Inn, wherein men say
Lies wit; (that most right-worthy guest alwaie)
But honesty were used to lodge with Wit;
Canst' tell me Relcus why he does not it?
One Inn, one board, one bed, did once contain
Those famous, Radiant and bright-shining twain,
But now; Oh now! much I muse and wonder,
What cause they have to put them selves assunder.
It Is rare to see them two, together walk,
But far more rare it is, to see them talk.
Faith Relcus do a charitable deed,
Releive poor Honesty in time on's need,
And Wit and he together reunite,
Bith'deede much may thou merit by this light.
Relodg them Relcus, bigg enough's thy heart,
And in it thou't show a wise and charitable part.
Satire 40.
BVlus to have his Taff'tie Ierkin seen,
Has learnt a trick ath' Butchers Art, I ween,
For as the Butcher having open cut,
His bullocks paunch; dus side from side straight putt.
His reason why each side he setts a part,
Is, cause men should see th'fatt about the harte^
Even just as these beast-slaying butchers does,
So right this gallant (ali- Ass butcher) does.
For on each side on's cloak, each hand he lays,
By which fine slight he bears it back always.
So by that means (maugre his mantles spite)
His satin sleeves and Ierkin shall have light.
In The butchers Art, he has learned more then half.
And can (you see) dress and set forth a Calfe.
Satire 41.
A Right good fellow by his purse is known,
For sildom it will hold a doit on's own.
This Pratus I do know: and more; I t^owe,
I have one rule an honest man to know,
For when I hear men let their judgments loose,
Of any whom they term for some plain goose.
True honesty (I think) in him there lies,
For plains Judged is fool'rie bith' unwise.
But Pratus, now one rule more would I know,
And that same trick I Am wished to get from you.
That Is only this; Sir, how to know a knave,
That kindenes at your hands; pray let me have.
Satire 42.
WHen Souldus thinks ath' Time, how him it fails,
He then (alas poore-man) at Mars straight railes,
Milke-sopp (quoth he) from Venus come advaunce
And in her steed, come lead us men a dance:
Art'not ashamed to be so weak in the joint?
As to be held by her byth' Cod-peice-poynt.
Come, come; let Can^ons to our Meals say grace,
Let bulletts sing to us the Cinquepace.
We long to dance: and once the ^ime were when,
Thou lou'dst the bullet-banquet with us men.
In such like juncquets once thou did delight,
Those were the Cates best pleased thy appetite.
Come, come, foresake thy w^nton Minyon trimm.
But Vulcan bring, since thou have head-peec't him.
Satire 43.
RAlf says that Robin has no manlike face,
Nor cannot swashe it with the swagg^ingst grace:
He is an Ass, a very Ass he says,
A pidler in his oaths; he will swear y-faith,
Or else In-troth, In-de^d, Insooth, or so,
A right pure dunce, that cann say I, or not,
I Will teach him that in one half day he shall
Swear every oath with grace Imperial.
What I (quoth he?) let any do me wrong,
Thus I Will show vigor with my spright-full tongue
I Will vow by Styxes pitch-black hidious streams,
By all the radiant rays of yon'same beams,
By Jove who makes Earthes Canapie to quake,
Or by the ruler of the stidgian lake,
That I will kill him; slashe him; hew the knave.
Or Peece-meale cut him, to devour the slave.
I will not say. Indeed-la sir I Will do it
What I? by Jove I will putt home vntoo't.
Satire 44.
ALL says that Dulcus all in's book delights,
But all those alles are all deceived quite.
For's Ear (but that indeed's but part of him)
To hear (oh! how it goes toth' heart of him)
His smooth tongue prate: rejoices in such measure,
As noe man's Ear (by's tongue) e're reap't like pleasiure.
Oh God! if you did hear the great delight
His Ear dus hear, you would be ravished quite.
For's Tongue too's Ear convaies such words refined,
As'tis not strange he is ravished in his mind.
Satire 45.
GOrgus a good mind bears, in this it is seen,
For look what things ate naught, and baddest been.
Gorgus, to make them good does strive amain,
And in this work does take noe little pain,
The wicked'st lie by baddest tongue er'e fordg'd,
(I; were it by Hells-Maister's self disgordg'd)
Gorgus; (though never so badd) will make it good,
I, and maintain it; to a dropp of blood.
A good mind Gorgus, to make things good of Evil,
Why it is a work contrary to the Devil.
Satire 46.
BEntus, did you lie sucking at the Ale,
You Would not look white, lean, waper-eide, and pale.
You have been sick: your urine (if you please)
I Will truly cast, and tell you your disease.
You were not smaid' at Fontus late downfall,
Noe; to your heart that was right cordial.
It Pleased you that Courtus in's suit was crossed,
And that Marchantus his rich shipp late lost.
Those put you on so blithe a merry pinn.
That you from hearty laughing could not linn.
It was not these, made you look hagged white;
No blear-eyed Benttus; here is the wicked spite.
Lately was Virtus for his virtues graced,
And on bright honors seat for's Virtues placed.
TO was this, thy freindes advaunc'ment bredd thy smart,
This was the shaft, that pricked thy cank'red heart.
Bentus, thou art sick: thy palenes shows thy Evil,
The sor's much doubtful, which is hurt byth' Devil.
Satire 47.
THy hart's enflamed Ardus with this fire,
Of clambring man: feign would'dst thou clamber higher
Yet Ardus, Ardus, observe but well the Time,
And thou shall find, thou take wrong ways to clime.
It Is not the deeds of Arms, thou do repeat,
Can make thee mount one Inch to honors seat.
Nor will the conquering Towns help thee one whitt,
Recount thou these, these throws thee down from it.
Can flatter man? well learn thou but that lepp,
Then thou shall quickly gain the foremost stepp.
Then for the second round, learn Pandrisme,
And thou shall get it straight I warrant thee.
Now for the round, that toucherh honors neast,
This round lies high; more daung'rous then the rest:
Ardus, thou must a Pollititian be,
Skillfull to plott, and pack deep treachery.
Learn these, ( only take heed of Envies Eye,
Then shall thou easly mount, and clamber high.
Satire 48*
Were not for subjects, Kings unkingly were,
For they be they, which propps the kingly chair.
And were it so, that subjects were away,
The Poetts poetry would straight decaie,
As the one by subjeands has his Temples crowned,
So the other by good subjects is renowned.
Since both their states by subjects be vp-held,
That both are Kings it cannot be repelled.
They both be Kings: But the Poetts Realm I find,
Restes in the Climar of a firtle mind.
A mind content, falls to their kingdoms share.
Yet like my Argument most Poetts are
That Is very weak, and most exceeding bare.
Satire 49.
When Scoggin lived, I think in those same days,
Men did not well know how, nor whom to praise
Because (forsooth) a fatt sowse tail he greased
T'applaud his wit, those wittles Graunsires pleased,
But hark ye; say they were but living now,
(which did so praise the greasing of one sow)
How would they praise (naie they would do more then praise)
The fatt-g^es'd-tailes, so daubed in these our days.
It is not only Sowes that greased be,
But Hogs (a thousand in one day) grease we
And grease we still* for greasing of that part
Adds fatt to fatt, and then it is fit to --
Satire 50.
Why Tom quoth Tharsus thou art deceived quite,
I still continewe Courtier by this light
Thou look'dst I should have called: Sir, do ye hear?
Will It please you taste (e're go) a cupp of bear?
Away, away: why hark thee noble Thief,
I Am none of those which feeds on poudred beef.
Nor none of those that keeps a standing house:
Away with Gulls: come; thee and I Will carrowse:
We Will swallow healthes; not of your fulsome bear
T'shallbe noe Earthly stuff; but stuff to nectar near:
Come Tom with Heavenly stuff thy mawe I Will feed
With that stuffes Quintessence which still dus breed.
In man's low breast: high thoughts which still aspire,
And vpwardes mount, as Heavens vp-mounting fire.
A Pox on it Tom, I thus dull humors choke,
And thus confound them with a Pipe of smoke.
Have at thee Tom, Tobaccoe's heart of Oak.
Satire. 51.
ONe of the Nation of that sprightfull French.
Took arms to join in battle with a wench:
Well fell he on; and so well dealt each blow
As at the first he gave an overthrow,
But few there was, which did behoulde that sight,
But Judged the wench would have the worst ath' fight:
Yet she in wars Art very pollitick,
Compells her forces stand: by which same trick,
(Charging again with all; (who at it would not scoff?
Again she (with a Pox) makes him fall off.
His seccoud: (a Nation which shall nameles be)
Fell well on too; but came not off Scott-free,
Yet as the French, at first encount'red well;
But to retrait (Pox on it) at last he fell.
Alas the first so flesht her, as that he,
She Would never eudure, to come off quite Scott-free.
Satire. 51.
THe pampred Horse at Mares never neigheth more,
Theu Lustus at all times does at a --
And as the lustful Stallion strives to be
With every beast (of's kind) his Eye does see.
So likewise Lustus does: but Lord it is strange,
That man should out of reasons bounds so raunge.
The Horse is young, and full of strength his veins,
A beast: he has noe reason to guide's raines.
But he is a man (he should be so at least)
(And ruled with reason, deff'rent from a beast)
An aged man, a man gray-hair'd and old.
Whose withered-shrinkimg Veins must needs be cold,
Whose partched body's from all moisture dry;
Yet sildom times he sees a Wench pass by,
But he with (badd intent) go to her must,
To quench (what should he quench?) a diuelsh Lust.
Oh beastelie man: the beastli'st beast we find,
(If quenched in Corpse) never thirsts in his mind.
Satire 53.
KAmatus being sick through too much drink,
That he should die the holy man did think.
And being more then half resolved to die,
This Epitaph he framed as he did lie:
KAmatus, once a Pearl in each girls Eye,
Now mortiefi'd, here dus that worthy Lie.
Of loving Parents first I took my name
But now to Children I will leave the same
Of s^ymie Earth this flesh first took his frame,
It now retornes to Earth, from whence it came
As for my soul (Oh) she in great delight,
In post to Heaven (with Joy) she makes her flight:

This framed once, then down again he lies,
And turns about, making as though he dies,
With His Eyes close shutt, a while he fast dus wink
When opening them cries whores; fill me more drink.
Satire 54.
YOu Cryttiekes, which inuectiuely do write,
To you whose pens so bitterly do bite,
To yon I speak; of you I ask but why
You how rely do great Lordings so belie?
You prate how Lords vn-mann'd are in this age,
You saie't is well if they have but a page.
Come prating Parretts let your tatlings cease,
And let but this susfice to make you peace.
Do not they Women keep? which every year
More costly are then e're old blew-coates were:
For every man their Graundsires kept before.
These keep three women for it, or rather more.
Contrariewise; 'twas never seen in the Land,
(As now they are) the women half so manned.
Recount but these, you lavish writers large,
And you shall find they are at treble charge,
Satire 55.
THere is noe Land upon Earthes Center known,
Like the English soil, so wond'tous wealthy grown.
That Ieuwell, which all Nations holds so dear,
We tread in dirt; not caring for it here.
Why what is Plain dealing? some this Iem^n dus h^ld,
A Ieuwell far in prise surpassing gold.
But we (it seems) o'rcloyd with it of late.
Hold, and esteem it at a strange low rate.
So low a rate: that it is fetched from's so fast,
As, much I fear, all wil^e fetched at at last.
Satire 56.
VErbositus at words from Latin carved
Dus snatch, as if his wits were hunger-staru'd:
And well he dus; for faith so lean it is grown,
That from Annotomie it is hardly known.
It is so weak, as (truly) I protest,
Fine phrase retoricall't will not digest.
Hark Would by-wise? by good words all applied,
The Ass to be a fool by's own tongue's tried,
Then if the art wise, thy tongue has thee beli'd,
Satire 57.
A Way with him quoth gold-daub'd Thamaccus,
His speechles silence shows he is an Ass,
A Dunce you see, that knows not how to look,
Some braine-beater or porrer on a book.
Tell him ath' mounting Faulcons brave made flight,
Or what mouthed hound makes huntsmen best delight.
Discourse to him of which Dog made a fault,
How Thunder spent, or what made Tyndall hault,
Away, away: away with senceles blocks,
Far better it is to tell it unto stocks.
Thus sh'wes Sir Gold-cold-witted Ass his skill,
And floutes the Poore-ritch-minded scholar still,
Satire 58.
BEfore I marrie'd was to my fair wife,
Oh Lord! how solitary was my life:
But now to be pertaker of my sport,
Gallants to my house (as to a Court) resort:
One cause he would acquinte himself with me.
Takes his occasion my fine Nagg to see,
Another comes to hear my Kennells cry,
The third perhapps to see my Fawlcon fly.
Oh! who would not get apreettie wenche too's wife,
That hates to lead a sollitarie life.
Satire 59.
PVsa is got with child, Sam* do not flatter;
But speak; had not a finger in the matter:
It was Ill hand'led Samwell; for in truth,
The wench says none but Samwell is the youth,
Pox on it Sam; Cradles forth' child to sleep,
With Candles, Soape, and Wasshing, will grow deep.
Besides all this (but this is to thy grace)
In white-sheet thou must wait a Sermons space.
Faith Sam, what luck had thou so well to speed?
As to be graced for thy Masters deed.
Satire 60.
WHen Dick for want of drunken mates grows sick,
Then with himself to work goes faithful Dick.
The butt'rie door t'ymselfe he shuts close,
That done, then goes the pott straight ways to's nose:
A health (quoth noble Dick: each Hogshead than,
Must seeming pledge this honest faithful man.
But straight from kindness Dick to humors grows,
And then too the barrels he his valor shows,
Throwing about the cupps, the potts, and glasses,
And railes ath' Tunns; calling them drunken Asses.
From this to kindness he dus come; and then,
A fresh a drinking Richard fales again,
Never ceasing this same faithful coil to keep,
T^ll under the Hogshead he falls fast a sleep.
Satire 61.
AS Boastus all alone in's Hall did walk,
Thus to himfelfe, did Boastus bravely talk.
Oh! that old Troy (quoth he) had been vnsack't,
I would (I trow) have made the Gretians pactr.
And this right arm the Trojans would have found,
Should soon have beat the Gretians from their ground.
And then his sword about his head he flasheth,
Ah hah quoth he; and then the posts he slasheth.
Then straight he wishes for great Charlemayne,
Or for that never conqer'd Tamberlayne.
Oh! Earth disgorge thy self of Allexander,
I long to fight (quoth he) with that Commander.
Good Grandam let them but appear in sight,
That they may once but taste of this arms might.
And then again too's flashing work he goes,
Wishing that all those posts were dead^y foes.
Would here were Roman Ceasar Romes great King,
In Faith (quoth he) I Would make his Cox-combe sing,
And then he foines and strikes, (without all stay)
Stools, Chaires, Forms, bordes, or what else is in's way.
Still executing's wrath upon those men,
Till's angry wife came in, and rescued them
For in she came, and in her hand a Ladle,
With which she swing'd him well about the nodle.
And why? alas he rockt not well the cradle.
Satire 62.
MEtamorphiz'd Mick: where is thy Target man?
What chaung'd into a lisping Ladies fann?
Is dubb a dubb Bellonas warlike noates,
Chaung'd to fa la la, streind through shrill Evnukes throats?
Art turned from grimm-face't Mars his valiaunce,
To smiling Venus her tempting daliaunce?
Me thinks those legs often harnest with bright steel,
To twind with Nymphs weak limbs no sweet should feel,
Have learned to skipp, smyle, kiss, and look demure?
In The steed of charge or raise a counter mure,
For shame rechaunge, thou maiden-chaunged Mick
Come use thy pyke; tha'st used too long thy --
Satire 63.
Why how now drowsy Dick? what half a sleep?
Come madd-capp; follow me and I will sleep
Thy muddye brains in sparkling Charnico,
Come rise damb'd Rogue; slydd skabb it shall be so,
Why how now Ass? what ayel'st t'ou fool to whyne?
What crying? s'harte this is ex'lent fine,
Thou pul'st, and snul'st: a great piece matter why?
Forsooth by cause thou told'st thy Dadd a lie.
Why horson fool, was it not done in thy drink?
Slidd; thou't prove an Idyeot (sure) I think.
Did ever see me in this pulling pass?
Yet I have called (e're now) my Father Ass.
My wife young Witch, my Mother worne-out Punck.
Well: what a this? they would say but I was drunck.
Come faithful Dick, let us drink, thou must not cry,
Thou't never make Thief, that pul'st so at a lie.
Satire 64.
I Tell thee Jack, amidst thy cupps of wine,
Thou art not brave; thy tongue's not nimble fine.
Sullen thou sitt'st, as seeming discontent.
At thy assotiats Iouall merriment.
Be Iouall Ladd; stirr-vp thy tongue to walk,
A man in's cupps is priueleg'd to talk.
Why leaden-harted-man, why had thou birth
But to consume thy time in sprightfull mirth?
So thy tongue flippant be, care not man
Let it prate; noe matter what it is an.
Let thy comparissons mount up tooth' sky:
Say, what are Kings but men? and so am I
Thou Art not true br^dd, thou dreamest of thy end,
Come, Rouse-vp Ladd, what old-Dadds get we will spend.
Satire 65.
I Grant thee Allexander thon wast great,
And that this crauin world thou once did beat:
Naie more, I do believe and think it is true
That part ath' warlike Gods thou did subdue.
Yet what a this? I mean not blaze thy name
But with a brighter light to daske the same.
The cause why thou great Jove's high Throne have kissed,
I pry thee tell whereon it does consiste?
Thou't say on Conquestes, which with blood thou got'st,
And that by these all others Fame thou blott'st.
Come come, thy greatest great is merely small,
To blown faced Blundulus of stature tall.
Have thou a leg more bigg then any Oak?
Or thigh whose bone will bide a Canon stroke?
Have thou a paunch wherein may Armies h^dd,
As in the Gretian Horse long since there did?
Come, to be short, unless thou have all this,
Blundulus is great, and thou but small I wis.
Satire 66.
THings which of Death do put great men in mind,
Are always not the welcom'st things we find:
Since so; why do we muse they so reject,
All Serving men? and of them not respect.
Oh blame them not; for (faith la) do ye hear?
To see Death; what is he that would not fear?
And what is he that Serving-men should see,
To gape, as wait? but Judge would that was he,
For Just as Death waits only to devour,
E'ne so do they, and have the self same power.
To keep em, then, I pray great men excuse.
For so to think one Death they could not choose.
Satire 67.
Give way Orlando Furious man I say,
(For furiousnes) to Spendus give thou way.
It Is true (Inraged-man) that at one stroke,
(E're now) thou have made fall the sturdi'st Oak,
But what is one Oaks fall? Spendus at one blow,
Whole woodds ath' biggest Oaks dus overthrow.
Orlando: thou art composed of Earth and Aeire,
And of the Cristall running-water fair.
But Spendus (worthy Spendus) I presume,
Is all of fire, for he dus all consume.
Satire 68.
I Will rail at thee Nature; for I find
My body's small, and answers not my mind.
How happs tha'st made me of a Dwarfish stature?
Fie, fie, I tell thee tha'rt too blame Dame Nature.
Why Woman-God, too much thou have wronged me,
For by my mind, a Giant I should be.
It Is great; I wondrous great, then how comes it
That to it my body thou so i will did fit?
Go corrupt Dame; I tell thee I do find
I should have been a Soldier by my mind:
I'em proud, stout, and though I'em nothing covetous,
Yet (Souldier-like) I am ambitious.
What Is in a Soldiers minde's in mine: then why
To my great mind so small a man am I?
Satire 69.
GO Ridus teach Tellatus some true skill.
To make his Beast (while he gets up) stand still,
He dares not mount; Ridus how shall he do?
And when he would mount, then startes she to and fro.
Faith help him Ridus; he must have her manned
He loves the Beast that is broken to his hand.
About it man, thou have the onely'st name,
To make (by riding) wild things truly tame.
Satire 70.
Know you not him with Peacock-spreading-plumes?
That great-bigg-mountaine-looker which so fumes.
He whose Rock-rending-looke grimm Mars would make
(As frozen-synew'd) with could fear to quake,
And make the troubled Ensigns of pale fear,
At sight of it, in his base cheeks appear
Most strange! know you not him? oh mudds foul slime!
Why he is the thunder threatner of our time,
Whyt's razer-witted Clitus; that same Ladd.
Which Godds (er^e now) to speake-to has been gladd,
It Is he whose Hobby-mounting thoughts so sor'd.
That less then Jove none thought he would be adored.
Know you not him? why faith it is wondrous strange,
Yet it is not, cause ath' Man-Gods now great change.
Satire 71.
HOb-carting Tom and's Father's gone to plowe.
Leaving old Madge at home to feed the Sow,
Ka Tom too's Father; Vather earste tou me?
I^ my boy Tom; wat zest? zay on ka he
Maz Vather-la wud God eech had a wife,
Ma thinks eech wudd ha wone rare than my life
Oh boy ka he it is naught, 'twill spoil thy groath,
Twull mare thee Tom; twull make thee vull a zloath,
Nai^ hold tere Vather; wudd tou wud'st not lie,
But whare twull or no la ( ka Tom I^le try,
Ee^h wott well Vath^r eech forgo my zleepe,
While you lie snoring, eech often cry and weep.
While you lie gruntling like a drousie hogg,
Eech madditate, watt eech should send my Iugg.
Zest Vather wat tou wult: do all though it do,
Yet eech shall try my best a wife to woe.
Wilt Tom ka he? but I Would not ha thee yet
Vurst ha thy Land in heart, and then thou art fit.
Land in heart? that is vine ka Tom; Land in varte,
I Will ha a wiue else Dule himself zelue goo't carte
Well Tom ka's Vather; make noe more a do,
And eech my zelfe will help thee one to woe.
Gramercie Vather; zest well like a mon,
Do as thou zest; and eech wull love thee thon.
Satire 72.
WHo would not follow Wars that has his wit?
Which allwaies has such music follows it,
The priuat'st Soldier lying in his neast,
By warbling lullabies is brought too's rest.
Not by your wanton-wench-like Evnukes voice,
But by a heau'nlike thundering Cannons noise.
Unto whose song the trumpett so dus play,
As tweene them both they rauishsence a way,
So sweet's the music, which do follow wars,
That Cities dance, and capers to the stars.
Satire 73.
PRoudus thou art not (so far as I can see)
In outward show, what inward thou may be.
Although thou art all in rags, yet I do find,
Under those rags a whole Imperial mind.
Few big-fast Lords: push, of Lords what do I prate?
Few Kings cann look so bigg as thou of late.
In faith (but I Am to bold) had thou but pelf.
Speak great-smale-man, what would think on thy self?
A man? a Earthly man? noe: thoughts would breed
Thou were engendr^d of some heaunlie seed.
I faith, (but tell me) sometimes dust not guess
That Jupiter unto thy Mother had access?
I know great-thoughted-man by thy looks strain
That such high thoughts, thy brave heart dus maintaine^
Well still look great, and one day thou shall see,
A great purse to thy looks, will answer thee,
Satire 74.
DArtus, if thou would a Courtier learn to be,
Then take a glass; that book shall straight teach thee.
Look in thy glass, and frown, or skowle, or smile
And shall see one do so an other while,
Laugh thou, there is one will laugh: shedd thou a tear
A tear there is oue will shedd; I dust thou hear?
Thy body bow, gape, wink, or nodd thy pate,
Do what thou will, there is one will imitate.
To great men (if thou will a Courtier be)
Thou must do, as thy shadow dus to thee,
Satire 75.
While my apparr^ll was not fine, but plain,
At Assus but this style, could I obtain.
God morrow Sir; How do ye sir to day?
But when in my apparel I grew gaie,
Why then God morrow to your Worshipp sir,
Then Is tongue without a worshipp never would stir.
But look when my apparel was not gaie
I certaien was noe worshipp to have that day
Tailors: sure honorable men you be,
For you men worshippfull can make I see.
Satire 76.
CVntrey Tailors themselves tooth' Court betake,
As the old saying is, but for mere fasshon sake,
They go toth' Court as many Courtiers go,
Unto the Church; that is to see, or so
More matter on it what need I make?
Since up they go, only for fashon sake.
They make the Court (for fashon s^ke) their School^,
Whereby to fasshon out each Country fool.
Satire 77.
WIlt be a Serving-man? thou art not fit,
Thy stubborn pate affordes noe reatching wit:
If thou would so; thou must loose learning than,
That ornament getts small forth' Seruing-man.
But wilt a statesman serve? where is thy brains stretch?
Fie, twill not plott, it is naught; twill not retch.
Wilt follow his young son? fool, away: Fie,
Examine how thou art in quallitie.
Canste hawke, hunte; or haste the hors-mans skill?
Can drabb, dice, drink, or's wenching lust fulfill?
If not? away; away: will be thy cheer,
With this adition, What makes this Ass here?
W^lt wait on's daughter? ah hah, there is a Less:
How Is thy humor? If sadd? then the art an ass.
Can neither dance, nor sing? fool then away
Why quallities is all in all, I say,
If can not music play, or dandle Pearl
Or go (if sent) in private to an Earl,
If can not these do? (credit me or try)
Thou't be reputed of noe quallitie.
Aw^ie thou't turned be, (wantst but those parts)
And held a fool, maugre thy librall arts.
Satire 76.
DE^cend thou monstrous damn'd-deluding Gold,
Into thy fathers black infernal hold,
Pueilas cold-chast thoughts had been vnthaud,
Had thou not been, thou most entising baude
Old Fath^rs lives in sonns eyes were noe moates,
Were not for thee, thou temp'st 'em cut their throats.
Thou true-bred Feynd right make-bare in these years,
It Is thou setst Kings together by their ears.
Varlat avaunt, keep out my sight the adst best.
Else I Will en-dungeon thee in strong-bar'd Cheste.
Satire 80.
COme Lord that would-be, I Will condole with thee,
Cause what thou would be made, will never be.
What though thou never wast' foreseiged Town
With thunder-threatniug Gnnns to gunn it downe^
Or complete armed upon a fitie steed?
Making on every side thy foes to bleed.
Why though thou never did so, yet Lord that would-bee,
Honor in my mind appertains to thee.
Deserves he honor which entrencheth Towns?
And he noe honor which entrencheth growndes?
Me thinks he which in field St. George dus cry,
Deserves noe more, then If's way he did fly.
Come Lord that would^be, get more Cowes and sheep,
And honor will come on you, though you sleep.
Satire 81.
Talk you with Poet-Asse sitting in's seat,
You Will hear him ex'lent, Epigrames repeat,
Demand him whose they be, they runn so fine,
He answers straight, fruits of this brain of mine,
Yet let a well-read Poet hear the vain,
Hee'lle find they came out of a Bastardes brain.
Dust hear me Poet-asse? I Will prophysee,
That when thou art mari'd, thou't a Cockould be:
Thou fath'rest now things got by other men,
What will thou do when thou art mari'd then?
I pry thee good Iack-Dawe give each b^rd's own,
That for a plain Jack Dawe thou may be know^^.
Satire 82.
Bear hence my Septer and my massy Crown,
I cannot bear them but they will bear me down,
Sadd cares and fears attends on them so,
As I their burdens cannot undergo.
Bring me my Hook, my Scripp, my Flock of sheep,
I long again that quiet Realm to keep.
Satire 83.
THe Printer says, good books do baddly sell,
Then mine (cause badd (I'em sure) must needs take well.
but howsoever good or badd they be,
To take-well (Lawyers) let em learn of ye.
Pray teach em it; that part y' are perfectst in,
Teach em take well: for God sake learn em synn.
Satire 84.
IF Vennym'd-mouth'd-fell-bitten Zoylus stir.
Then Whelpe be firce upon that snarling Curr.
Let him noe sooner grinn, but on him fly,
And thou shall see, his way, away he will hie
With His tail 'tweene's legs away he will scudd and gadd,
Only he will bark and howl as he were madd.
Satire 85.
Go churlish whelpe, away go thou and sleep,
And till I call, again, thy kennell keep.
Thou barkest loud; too loud thou barkest Whelpe,
I must have whippetts now, that do but yelpe.
I hunt noe beasts; I Have altered now my wont,
My pleasiur's now the Vermin chase to hunt
Be gone young Curr, yet if foul swyne do rout,
I Will whissle then, and then again come out.
AN APPOLOGIE.
AN Idle humor has possessed my penn,
To writ invectiue against ill humor'd men.
It is not over one, it is general.
That I have sprinck'led this my bitter gaul.
My general meaning's gen'rally to those.
Whose humors, these badd humors do disclose.
Therefore (I me sure) the wise, what ere they think.
If they their faults do see, they will see and wink.
By others how they are taken, or what they say,
I Will take noe care, let them themselves bewraye.
If any says but IUIS ATYRYZE
Asking why men I do pertick 'larize
I answer those, I only feign a name;
All knows this kind of vain requires the same.
I Have done noe wrong, I^ue offered none abuse,
Let them that has so, seek and crave excuse.
FINIS.
DOGS FROM THE Antippedes.
Satire 1.
MY angry Whelpe I Have turned to's kennell now,
Fearing fair Ladies, that he would fear you.
But in his place (I hope to your delight)
Here Is Dogs shall be more pleasing in your sight.
Accept them Ladies, in them thre's no harm,
Each take her Dog, and bear him in her arm.
Satire 2.
LAdies, they say things which be fetched far,
To many of you, still most pleasing are.
I knowing what your humors best require,
Have trauail'd far, to fit your sweet desire.
Cause little Dogs your fancy best do please.
I journei'd for them to Th'antyppedes.
Accept them then, such Dogs they are I wis,
As sweetly will your sweet lips lick and kiss.
Satire 3.
Women I Have done my worst, toth' worst of men.
But now I Will occupy on you my penn.
Pray give me leave to do it: Old Chaucers Jest
With some of you (I knew) agrees with' best
With whom that earnest jest dus best agree
Let them (for baudie phrase) find fault with me.
Satire 4.
MAtchles Mistress, thou pure unspotted Dame,
Had had one spott, I would have shown the same.
But since thou art, as never woman was,
I Will print thee there, where never was printed Less.
Paper's too foul to bear so fair a part,
Therefore I Will print thy praises in my heart.
Satire. 5.
TO lee Morilla in her Coatch to ride,
With her long lock of hair upon one side,
With heart and feather worn in the swaggring'st guise,
With butt'ned bodies skirted dub^^t-wise.
Vnmask't, and sittith' boot without a fann,
Speak: could you Judge her less then be some man?
If less? then this IN me sure you would Judge at least,
She was part man, part woman; part a beast.
Satire 6.
ERe long I think that Deela means to try,
If she like birds in the air can soar and fly.
Few Fowls like to this foul, more feathers wears
For on her head and hands, huge plumes she bears,
And cause she will the easlier take her flight,
She makes her heart and heels exceeding light,
Her heels, with lightest cork this light-one stuffes,
Her heart, (through quills of pride) with wind she puffes.
Oh sure shee^le fly, and thus she will make her flight,
From Lust his land, to Letchr'ies soil outright.
Satire 7.
I Pray you speak is not this time grown strange,
When feeble women unto warriors change?
It Is not the Court dame Lusta does commend,
Her days before seiged Cytties she will end.
Her humor brooks noe Court-like dalliance,
But loves the encounter of true valliance.
Milke-sopps are men which lulls in Ladies sapps,
And dare not bide (like her) loud Culu'ryn clapps.
Per-due she will lie, and sometime Centry stand,
And Kiu'la cry, with fire-lock in her hand.
This is a wench will make all Courtiers shamed,
If once her acts be to their ears but named.
I, this is she which has such service shown,
As now she is an Auncient-bearer grown.
Satire 8.
WHen Gillyan and her Gossipps all are met,
And in the match of gossipping down set,
And plain Mas Parson cutting bread forth' Table,
To tell how fast they talk, my tongue's not able.
One tells strange news, the other God-swerbert cries,
The third shakes head, the fourth alock replies
She on her henns, this on her duckes do talk,
On thousand things at once their tongues shall walk.
So long as Cocks cann tread, and Henns will lay,
Gill and Gills gossippes, will have words to say.
Satire 9.
LIke to a Castle is fair Kitchen Kate,
And like the same, sh' was sacked and ^poyl'd of late,
A Castle's strongly trencht, and fenc't with stones,
Kates corpse as strongly fenc't with good whale-bones.
A Castle has percullize at each gate,
As good a fence as that has bonny Kate.
She has a buske, there is noe device more strong,
That once let down, her Portall takes noe wrong.
Yet vengaunce take her watch, had they not slept,
Kates strongest hold vn-ransakt had been kept.
Satire 10.
FIca's fair: none sees fairer if he winkes,
She Is sweet; as any muskatt when she stinckes
To see her when she reads on her book,
(I mean her glass,) on which she often does look,
Twould make you laugh, naie laugh until you weeepe,
At th'action she unto her shade dus keep,
Now she will smile, now she will gloyt: naie this she will do,
See'le kiss the same, naie seek t'imbrace it too.
Yet watt ye what still makes them two to part?
should I but t^ll't, you would laugh ^till break your heart,
It Is this: when she had smiled and done her best,
Then dus she frown, make mouths, and do the rest.
Which when the shade in the glass dus do the like,
Then she in radge, dus it a pieces strike.
Faith speak, deserves not that glass a knock
That harbors apes, to give such apes a mock?
Satire 11.
WHy hisband (quoth Miss Merchant) where is my Pynck*
Oh God! his haire's not kymmed down I think:
Come pretty Pynck come, thy nowne Mistrisse kiss,
Thy Meyster (Pinck) might thought on thee ere this,
Feth hisband feth; I Am mitch grown in your debt
That my sweet Puppie you would so forgett.
You Are troubled sore: what he ye else te tend?
You leave to hear me chide, else this yee'd mend.
Pre will ye fetch^e kemm and kemm him straight,
Elas sweet Mopps, he is naught to make thee wait.
What, he ye brought it? Feth ye'r such a one,
That less ye'r chidden nothing will be done,
Ebout him pre: Lard how leysurely ye do it,
It seems ye he but little mind vntoo't.
Yet pre now ste: What eyles sweet Pynck to groan?
Oh! Pincke would piss: Pre heue Pinck all elone.
What hes he don't? Pre make him clean again,
End Pinck and I, will vntoth' garden then.
So: Now he is well, but hear ye? when I Am gone,
I pre be ye a gadding straight from home.
Satire 12.
When Minta from her Chamber down descends,
All things below she straight-waies discommendeth,
Queanes (quoth she:) how happs my Kitchen's thus disgraced?
I were not wont to have a spoone displac't,
Then straight tooth' Hall, where if a russhe she spies,
Where have these slutts been brought-vp Lard she cries?
Then faugh she cries: out ont: what is this dus smell?
Must I be served thus? why Maids it is well.
So leaving them, tripping upon her toes,
Into her shopp, t'ir prentizes she goes,
Where if she sees a boy but look a wrie,
Why sauce-box, what stare you on she will cry?
And then she plies her work which is a band,
Which to be hemmed, has hung tenn years in band.
Satire 13
AS Iynn and Pegg did in their Couches lie,
Thus did sweet Pegg young Iynn instructifie,
Why Iynn wutt never leave poring on a book?
Come take a glass, that is fitter on to look,
If thou did know how good books dulls the brain,
Thou Would never thus booke-it while thou liu'dst again.
Do as thy sister Pegg dus, chain in arms
Her sweet-hart bound with loue-linckt-charmes,
Read in his face the pleasing lines of love,
And they thy soul, to sweet delights will move.
Art rising Iynn? I prithee sweete-harte stay,
Hear me speak one word more, and then away.
Thou must not blussh: Why this is maidens chart,
Wee're private girl, we will talk we care not what.
I Will say noe harm, I Will tell thee only this,
What pleases women best, and what it is.
Oh it is man! who does possess a treasure,
Whose taste (for sweetness) has noe measure
A treasure wench: such treasures there are none,
A Iuell it is: oh had thou such a one,
Thou would esteem it at so high a rate,
As never noe Iuell was so pris'd of late.
Unto it (girl) sour is the sweetest honey,
It Is wine toth' heart, but Nector to the --
These were the reasons Margett did aleadge,
Which first did set fair Iynns white teeth an edge,
Satire 14.
IN trothla maids what thouhtes possesses ye,
Just suchlike thoughts sometimes possesses me,
Mine sometimes wanton are: Maids you all know
That we that Maidens are, our thouhts are so.
To see a gallaunt gape (Maids your mouths wipe)
To entertain a fair Tobacco-pipe.
Believe me Maids, my maiden-thoughts it moves
To think of what does pass 'tween two that loves.
It at a word (Oh that I might come at her)
Dus make my Maiden-mouth o're-flowe with water.
Satire 15
SOme thinks that Vardingales that is monstrous wide,
At first invented were only for pride,
But truly none that thinks so as this,
But guess (believe me) too too much a miss,
For they (I certainly it is so surmi'sd,)
For these three reasons were at first deui'sd.
First, for hott girls that subject are to sweat,
It letts up air whereby to cool their heat.
Then for the girl whose bumm stands not right,
(Tough hopper-tail'd) yet that will hide it quite.
But chiefly dus the wench, who through an Itch,
Has got: alas I scratch a --
It Is she I say that wears it not for Pride
For she (god wott) cann never hate too wide;
She must have tricks, (I deal too plain to scoff)
To bear up clothes, else they would rubb plasters off.
Satire 16.
When Seelas Tailor measure came to take,
Of her small body, bodies new to make
They disagreed (yet time did give them leisure)
How she should stand, when he should take her measure*
He Would have her vp-right stand, or else he should
Never fit her body with a perfect moulde,
But she not likeing it, made this reply,
I Will have my body measured as I lie.
And full of bones I Would have my bodies be,
The bones sticht in, and quilted well quoth she.
Now if thou think my bodies thou can fit,
I prithee honest Tayle-hir measure it.
The man mistakeing still her meaning quite
Lies on her more, to have her stand vp-right*
But she (hoping to beat it in his brain)
The second time replies to him again.
Tailor quoth she, I Am sure that I shall find
Bodies made like thine fitting'st to my mind,
Noe other measure for my body take,
But by thy body, my new bodies make.
Alas quoth he those bodies never will fit.
Ah Ass quoth she, that Noddies had but wit
Then might my body, bodies have right good,
And easlye I might have been understood.
'Waie hence (quoth she) thou art some botching Noddy,
That can not measure right a woman's body.
Satire 17*
IF Gossippes once be got to sit and prattle.
It Is needles then to bidd their tongues to tattle.
Woe to their husbands, for alas poor men*
It Is only they shall smart and pay for it then.
One by her troth-la swears how she dus find,
Her husband grown already much unkind,
For let me ask him but a toy to give,
He Will snapp me up, with Lett's learn first to live,
I badd him buie (quoth she) shoes that would creake,
Yet did he not: oh! this would make one speak.
I chardg'd him buie me hose quoth she of redd,
He bought em blewe: I, I, he would have me dead:
I Gossipps I, there is none so matched as I,
Then straight ways put she finger into eye.
At which: Gossipps: says one, you gri^e to soon,
Another tells her, yet it is honny-moone,
A third stepps up: for sooth quoth she they say
That we must hus^ands honor and obaie,
But had we strength, I half the strength of men,
It should be seen quoth she: Ifaith-lathan.
And there she stopps, setting her teeth so close,
As if she feared her madd-tongue would break loose.
The fourth more wise: says weake-ones must toth' wall,
Wee're borne to bear quoth she: le^ts put up all.
And then the bowl, the gossipps bowl ginnes walk,
But that once off: again their tongues must talk.
Satire 18.
WHen as my cream is sour, I straight-waies meet
With sugar which dus make my sour cream sweet,
And when my drink is sour, or that ways blame,
I meet with twenty things to mende the same.
But faith do what I cann, yet for my life,
I cannot mende the sowrenes of my wife.
Yet honny'd terms upon her every hour
I duly power: yet still my wife is sour.
May not I doubt her sowrenes never will fleet,
When such sweet things wantes powere to make her sweeete.
Satire 19.
AT this time Liba tha'dst noe need to weep,
Had had the wit but of a silly sheep,
Could not thou mark whereon that harmeles beast
dus howrely choose to make her daiely feast?
She Is sildome seeue the tale long grass deuowre:
And why? because it is rank and allwaies sour.
But on the short: with which when she dus meet
On that she feeds; and why? because it is sweet.
Ah Liba had ath' sheep but learned this,
Thy tall man had not had thee then I wis.
Faith wench, had but a low man half an hour,
Thou Would tell me all that is tall, are rank and sour,
Satire 20.
I Must distill my wits best quintessence,
To Carractrise the wisdom of wise Prudence,
Her worthy acts are of such noble fame,
As I Will have Hall to Cronicle the same.
You long to hear her deeds? I know you do:
Will you be silent then? well then go toe.
She before her Father, Mother, folks and all,
Settes up her leg ath'mantle-tree in the wall,
Quoth she now Father I Will do wonders great,
The old folks hearing that (with fear) gann sweat,
She seeing that, she bidds them nothing doubt.
For I (quoth she) will only pufft this fire out.
And therewithal she let forth such a --
That half the spacious world (for fear) began start
Oh here is a Girl to live in the Commonweal,
Who cann defend it with her very tail.
Satire 21.
NOthing's hard unto a mind that is willing,
It Is seen by Winda in her nightly drilling,
Hark Musketeers: if Mnsketeers you will make,
And learn all posternes right, her course but take,
She every night as in her bed she lies,
Dus all her posternes, before she e're let flies,
She cocks, she tries her match, she gardes her pann,
Which done, sh'ungardes it, and presents it than,
And with as good a grace as you would desire
She blows her match, and bravely then gives fire.
Then dus she cast about, prune and blow,
Rechardge and to her former posternes go.
Soldiers; Drilling's not hard, If you would do so.
Satire 22.
FOr certain, yet in women there is some sweet,
With which we blinde-men yet could never meet,
By reason natural it must be so.
To prove the same let us to the Bee-hiue go,
Why did dame Nature give the Be a sting?
Some reasons sh'ad to give her such a thing.
And place it in her ta^le (men mark the case)
The pretty Bees sweetst best and ritchest place,
Her reason why she placed it in her tail,
Was this (if my opinion do not fail)
Because that place her treas'rie is: in which
Lies all her wealth: For Bees be sweetly rich.
Now as with stinges dame Nature made the Be,
So women has she made with st^nges we see,
For all their heads (I hope I do none wrong)
Contains stings: If not a stinge, a tongue,
But let us term't a stinge; for it will prick,
And he that strives with it, against thorns dus kick:
They having stinges, noe question if we search,
Shall honny find where those sharp stinges do perch.
Yet as you do, do not, for men you will fail,
If Bee-like for the sweet, you search the ()
Satire 23.
MIlda? since you betook your self to wiue,
I hope you have taken the skillfulst tricks to thrive.
The time was Milda when your slender back,
(To cover it) a gown well-nie did lack.
But now, nor gown, nor nothing else you want,
What can you ask? but straight it has a grant.
Many Maidens, many things would choke,
Had they (as you have) Milda such a cloak.
For do you hear? it may not be denaied
But cloakes fitts wives, when they will not do a maid
Yet Milda faith I speak it to your grace,
You should have chose your cloak with better face.
Satire 24
A Lady fairer far then fortunate,
(In dancing) thus o'reshott hirselfe of late,
The music not in tune, pleased not her mind,
For which: she with the fiddlers fault did find.
Fiddlers quoth she, your fidles tune for shame.
But as she was a speaking of the same,
(To mend the consort) let she did a ()
Whereat the fidling knaves thus did her greet
Maddam your pipe's in tune, it plays most sweet,
strike up quoth they, (but then the knaves do smile)
And as you pipe, we will dance an other while.
At which, away the blusshing Lady flinges,
But as she goes, her former noates she singes.
Satire 25.
WElthus, none of your daughters that I saw,
But half did tempt me be your son in law:
And just but half: For ever I did see,
In eech of them, somewhat to alter me.
Kates Virtues my affection much did move.
But straight her crookedness did quench that love.
Black Sues great portion made me wish her well,
But thinking on her pride my love straight fell.
Besse for her beauty I could much affect,
But Besse wantes wit, that made me Besse reject,
With D^ll for her housseffrie I could hold,
But blame not small men, much to fear a scould.
Ellen for her silence I could love: but
Although I hate a scould, I loath a slutt.
Were Nan noe wanton, she would my humor fit,
But Nan has wantonness unto her wit,
Yet Wealthus give me Nan, for do you hear?
With wantonness (as most men dus) I Will bear.
Satire 26.
SWeet Mistress, I Will not putt thee (thou shall find)
In this my books disgracefulst place behind,
In that place will I toothles Liva putt,
And flout at her, cause she is so rank a slutt.
And Minsa there I Will putt, who eats at table,
As if to eat at all, she were not able.
Her, there I^le put, cause before ^olkes she will not eat,
But in a corner eat up worlds of meat.
Likewise I Will Lica put into that place,
For Cuckolding her man before his face.
But Mistress, you behind I Will never put,
Worlds of wealth, shall never persuade me to it.
Where ^ouers put their loves, there do you look
To be inrouled, and put in my book:
In The middle, and before, (cann I do less?)
There will I put you, my sweet Misteresse.
Where I will write on you; things of delight,
Things fittli'st fitting true-loues appetite.
Satire 27.
ANd pray now why is there noe likelihood
That Agus should do his young wife noe good?
Hear my example, and I Will prove it then.
That none please young Girls like these aged men.
A yong-man having matter to endite,
With many words super^^uous he does write,
Loading the paper with much Idle stuff,
O 'rechardging it with much more then enough.
Whereas an aged man dus never write,
But vntoth' purpose he dus still endite.
What e're old men do do: (I do not flatter)
Toth' purpose it is: they roundly go toth' matter.
And therefore Tatlus, why art such a one,
To think that Agus son, is not his son?
I^st cause the boie is such a chopping ladd?
Or cause he is not hair'd like his old dadd?
If this be all? then thou a fault art in,
Why Tatlus, he is like his mothers kinn,
His mother couzens has: fine proper men,
The boie in favor may be like to them.
Or like his godfathers the boie may be,
That falls out often, although noe kinn you see.
Fie Tatlus, In Faith thou have a slaund rouus tongue,
To do an old-mans yong-wife so much wrong:
Why old-mens breath getts boys, it is so strong.
Satire 28.
LOrd, what mean you Gossipp? pray forbear,
My husband noates your often coming here,
So soon as ever he is got toth' Plowe,
You are here: pray la-bee: what ayle you now?
I will not faith: good-lord you are such a man,
I hope you will rest: he will be here a nan:
You Are such an other: whoo'd think you such a one?
Oh! I hear my husband: pray be gone.
La-bee I say: fie, fie: I pray la-bee,
He Is in the yard, he is crying hutt and gee.
Hark, hark; In Faith I hear him: oh it is sore!
Naibour: sneake out, and I will watch at door.
Satire 29
WHy John quoth Nan, I pray now John forbear:
You Will not a done, In Faith I Will hitt your ear,
Whoo'd be a Chamber-maide? why John? fie, fie:
A done I say; In Faith John Iwill cry,
Pussh, pussh: pray leave, another time you shall,
Why hark; pray hark: In Faith my Mistress call.
She Would rise and make her ready: out alas,
How will she tie her shoes and want her glass?
I Am in a fine case to go to her sir:
Fie John: are not you shamed to keep this stir?
I Would not ha thought you would have used me so,
How is my color? fie how I do blow?
Shame you not to putt me in this heat?
A handkercher: fie, how my face dus sweat.
Well, well* In Faith did not I love you well,
Of this your wagg'rie to your shame I Would tell,
Lord my ruff! set it with thy finger John,
Hark, hark; pies on her, how she rapps for Nan.
Farewell, I Will tell her, she has a waggish man,
Satire 30
I Could allow your suite; but do you her^?
My creditt Sir: my reputation's dear,
What greater blott could to my Credit be?
Then yeilde my love to such a one as ye.
Again you know your master grows of late,
To have a mar'les suspicious Ieolous pate.
H'immagins what has past: and John you know,
We have too open been; it was long of you.
Lett's charie be: my deeds shall then approve,
That like to thee, none shall attain my love.
Satire 31.
PRouda: your Father on his death-bedd lies,
It Is tenn to one, within this hour he dies.
For God-sake Prouda while as he does live,
Go unto him; and his great fault forgive.
He dus desire the same: he pra^es that he
(E're die) to you may reconciled be.
For God-sake Prouda let his latest breath
Make you a mendes: he will seal the same with Death.
Were I a maid, my Father should be bold
To say, and say again that I were old.
Alas your father takes it on his death,
He meant noe harm with vtt'ring of that breath.
He vows, he little thought to woman-kinde,
That saying would have troubled so their mind.
Good young- Prouda, now show your self to aue wit,
And but unto his death hate him for it.
Satire 32.
Widows? your Push, nor Pray Sir stand away,
Noe nor your fie for shame, forbear I pray,
Can make a soldier cease his enterprise;
I tell you widows, soldiers are too wise,
They know that breaches into Towers are made,
To enter them; whereby the Tower t'in^ade.
They know that asking, shall I enter in?^
Is not the way a Tower, or Forte to winn.
Their discipline is such, they use small speech,
But with true courage, falls-vpp intoh' breach.
Where maugre Dangers worste, they will make th'adventure,
And (as true spirits should) bravely enter.
They will not with beseechings pray them yield,
For falls they will take, but they will winn the field.
Satire 33.
Why Matrita, what will it pray boot me?
To blabb, or tell a ^atling tale of thee,
Should I gain ought to say thou love John?
That smooth-chin'd youth thy fathers serving-man,
Not for a thousand Millions I Will report,
That nightly to his bed thou dust resort.
Why, I could tell what tricks he putts on thee:
But they shall never be revealed for me,
The gettings will but little fill my purse,
To tell of thy two children sent to nurse.
Or tell how closely e^'rie thing was wrought,
As how the midwife, blind-folded was brought.
In Faith but Idle I my self should show,
If I should make the world, these secretts know.
Come wench: none shall know it: be noe whit dismaiede,
Some Londonier will take thee for a maid.
Satire 34.
Deep desp'rat danger in this Satire lies,
Cause desp'rat folks it dus annotomize.
It tells what manner chatt, when women mere,
They each the other commonly do greet.
Kate bidds her Gossipp sit, which once down set,
Then fall they unto that, for which they met.
That is to prate as they occasion take.
As each occasion for their purpose make,
Occasion good kind Kate has full enough.
To praise her gossipps fashonable ruff.
Her gossipp sitts not mumm, but sh^e again,
Looks on Kates gown, and much co^mends it then,
Or on her hatt, orelse upon her tire,
Commending (for the fasshon) her high wyre.
Protesting if her husband were noe clown,
She would (e're long) have such a fashon'd gown.
He has enough (quoth she) and then she weeps,
But me (In Faith (the hogg) at hard-meat keeps.
At which; her gossipp Kate comforts her then,
And tells her there is noe best amongst these men.
It Is thought that I quoth she lead a good life,
But Gossipp, gossipp, since I were his wife,
God knows it gossipp (speak to you I may)
I have endured many a stormy day,
And then dus too-kinde Kate a crying fall,
At end of which* she curses mankind all.
Yet faith quoth she why should we fre^t at man?
They Will all be naught, let us do^ what we cann.
I, quoth her gossipp, they be crabby elues,
But letts be wise, and make much of our selu^s.
And then the Custardes fetched to cheer the heart,
At eating which, they will laugh until they --
Satire 35.
MY ruf-rude penn would women feign befrend
Conld it but find one worthy to commend
It finds but one, my Mistres is that one
Else had this barren world afforded none
Yet ne're-seene-shee how shall I set her forth?
Contains in her a treble world of worth.
Satire 36.
AMbitious girl, why altered I my state?
How sowre's my life to what it was of late
While I in Cottadge did my self contain
Poor simple I, knew nothing that was vain
Then might I gam some be with modesty
Yet unsuspected rest, from Ieolosie
The Milk-maydes life, oh happ'ire it is I ween
Then is the life to be an Emprours Queen.
Satire 37.
BEcause madd Girls I know what you love best
Out of my love you see I Have got you pressed
If there b^ faults escaped, I do not fear:
I know with presse-scapt-faultes you use to bear
I love you Girls, then how could I do less?
Then putt you (sin^ I love you) intooth press.
Satire 38.
BY Putting other women intooth press
A kind of love to them I did express
Because that most of them are pleased best
When by their loves they most of al are pressed
But thou my love: (my heart is known to thee)
By none but by my self shall pressed be
All works I write on thee, (If there is noe let)
I will my self those works both print and set
Sweet wench, so styf my love shall stand to thee
As I will set, prynt, press and write on thee.
Satire 39.
WOmen, you term me Idle: I confess,
My Idle works does show I am noe less
But now my Idle work I will lay by
To pray you better occupyd' then I
Ill occupid' I am; and cause it is ill
Otherwise (as you be) occupyd' I will.
Satire 40.
YOu little Dogs, my farr-fetcht merchaundize
My sweetest foystes, my things of highest prize
Hark to the chardge I shall impose on you
Not only hark, but see the same you do
Such as shall use you well: Dogs unto such
Be fawninge on; of them still make you much
If any rates or kickes at you: then hark
At them turn you again, and grynn and bark
But see that you with bytinge none assail
Exceptinge those whoo'd have you lick the tail
Th^s^ ^nelie byte: I that place byte a good
D^^ so your fanges, as if they were all blood.
Satire 41.
CEase whippets now, noe more a barkinge keep
Be quiet Dogs, the Ladies will go sleep
Commit them to their rest; and do ye hatke
If pryvate friends come to them, do not bark
Ava^t you Currs; commit them to their ease
And scudd yon back to your Antipedes.
FINIS.

