A BRIEF Treatice of Election and Reprobation, with certain Answers to the
Objections of the Adversaries of this doctrine: Written by Anthony Gylbie.

Romans 9. I will shevve mercy upon whom I will show mercy, and I will have
compassion upon whom I will have compassion. () A brief Treatise, with
certain Answers to the Objections of the Adversaries of this doctrine,
written by Anthony Gylbie.
Whereas three years ago, dearly beloved, I did write of this matter of
Election and Reprobation, which is called Predestination, in a certain
Commentary upon the Prophet Malachie, by the occasion of this text: I have
loved Jacob, and I have hated Esau.
The which Treatise by the rage of persecution, partly perished, and part did
come of late to my hands: accompting this doctrine so necessary, that upon all
occasions it ought with reverence to be vttred to the glory of God, which so
wonderfully appears in this his rich mercy toward us, whom he chooses
from the filthe of sin, to serve him in righteousness, and to the beating
down of our corrupt nature, which without this, either mou^teth by pride, unto
presumption, or falls by infidelity to desperation. Because that without
some taste of this divine providence in Predestination, there can be no faith,
but either a doubtful wavering, leading to despair, which we have felt in
the Papistrie, whiles we looked to our own weakness and infirmity, not able
to endure one hour in the way of righteousness: or else a vain presumption
of feigned holiness, whiles we behold our own belief and good works, or the
perfection that we do imagine in our own selves, as do the Anabaptists.
Therefore I thought it good according to my simple Talent, to testify this
truth again unto the world, at the Printing of this worthy Table of the
great learned man, Master Beza, which is set forth in French, Latin, and
Italian, and now into English, translated by our brother VV. VVhittingham:
wherein is most evidently set forth before our eyes the chief ground of this
doctrine, and the principal points thereof are so deeply opened, that there
seemed to want nothing that was possible in so few lines to be uttered, yet
for the shortness therein all things can not be contained, but that some brief
lessons for the unlearned (who has not their senses fully exercised with such
deep sentences) may well be adjoined, as every man hereafter shall hereunto
be moved by the spirit of God working in their hearts (that many bearing
witness to the truth of this most profitable doctrine now revealed) the
mercies of God in choosing his children may more and more, day by day be
disclosed: and by the witness of diverse consenting together in one, God the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified. For herein chiefly stands
his praise, honor, and glory, that these his wonderful mercies toward his
Elect may be praised. Now there is no mean more apt, nor doctrine more
convenient to establish the faith of the Saints, than to certify by the
Scriptures, that God has chosen them before the beginning of the world to be
holy to him self, and so written their names in the book of life in the
heavens, that all their salvation rests wholly upon his hands and holy
counsel that can by no means be altered or changed, so that neither death,
devil, nor hell, dare now accuse them that are by adoption grafted in Christ,
who are called of the eternal purpose: because it is God that justifies, and
who dare condemn them? It is Christ that is given for them, and how shall not
all things be given also to them? For them that he knew before, them he
ordained before, that they should be like fashioned to the image of his son,
and whom he appointed before, those also he called, and whom he called, those
also he justified, and whom he justified, those also he glorified, that this
eternal purpose and counsel of God, being once revealed to his Saints, by
the effectual vocation and calling, which is the justification of faith
wrought in their hearts by the holy spirit, they can no longer doubt neither
of Election, Predestination, salvation, or glorification. Neither can any thing
more beat down man's nature, and the pride of his vain heart, than to behold
the majesty of God, making them by grace so far unlike one to the other, who
were both one, altogether by nature the children of wrath, of vengeance, and
damnation: as the wonderful example of Jacob and Esau, of whom the Lord
pronounces that he loves the one, and hates the other, before they were
borne, and the terrible sentence against Pharao, whom the Scripture affyrmeth
that God raised up to show upon him his power, and hardened his heart, to make
his name known, and such like, which euerywhere are set before our eyes to
cause man fall down before God, and to fear his judgments, does declare. But
our Adversaries object against us, that this doctrine is an offense to many,
and that some abuse it to carnal liberty. I do answer, that Christ is a
stumbling stone to many, and all the doctrine of the Gospel is likewise
slaundered by the evil conversation of others: yet may we not prohibit the
sweet flowers from the Bees, because Spiders suck thence their poison, no
more than we may stop the sun to shine, because it hurts sore eyes. But
that it may be the glad tidings of salvation to the assurance of the faith of
the one, and a clear testimony of condemnation of the other, to the beating
down of the pride of man, this glorious counsel of the mighty God, ought unto
all in this clear revelation of the Gospel, to be offered, opened, and
published.

Wherefore by the good will of God, we entende to speak of this great matter,
none other ways, neither in any other sort, then the open Scriptures shall
approve our sayings. Therefore we say with the holy Apostle Sayncte Paul:
Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things unto Christ, like as he has
elected and chosen us in him before the foundations of the world were laid,
that we should be holy and blameless before him by love, who has predestinate
us, that he might freely choose us to be his children by Jesus Christ.
Ephe. j. And though there come some wicked men which were long before
appointed to this judgment, which do turn the grace of our God to
lasciviousness and wantonness, as holy Jude says: yet know we that we are
chosen by Jesus Christ, that the glory of his grace, his favor and mercy
toward us might be praised. For we are the elect and chosen kynred, and
his people by purchase, that we should show the virtue of him which has
called us forth of darkness into this marvelous light.

This people ordained to salvation only believes. Act. 13. For this Elect
people only was Christ sent into this world. To them only is the word of
salvation sent, as Peter says: To the Elect by the foreknowledge of God the
father. 1. Pet. 1. Then to know what this Election of God is, and what in the
Scriptures it does signifye. We describe and defyne Election to be the free
choice of the good will of the Almyghtie GOD appoynting and prescrybyng in the
Book of life before the beginning of the world, whom he will have to be saved
and compted amongst the just. Whom he will have holy and without fault before
him to be his children, by adoption to set forth his glory. This choice, this
choosing, this aforeappoynted purpose and ordinance of God, is aboundauntlye
set forth in the first chapter to the Ephesians. That this comes of the
free will of God and his only grace, freely without our deserving (contrary to
the vain opinion of the Papists and Anabaptists) the same chapter and the
next chapter following does plainly testify. Epe. 1. 2. And most evidently,
the Lord in his majesty, speaking to his servant Moses. Exodus 33. declared
all this to stand of his mercy, saying: I will have mercy upon whom it likes
me, and I will show mercy where it shall be my pleasure, for so is the meaning
of those words, I will have mercy upon whom I will have mercy. Paul also
declaring in this place the work of God beetwixte these two children Jacob
and Esau. Romans. 9. says thus of this free Election, when Rebecca was with
child with one and the same father Isaac, before the children were borne, when
they had neither done good nor bad, that the purpose of God which is by
Election might stand, it was said to her, not for the cause of works, but
by the grace of the caller, the elder shall serve the younger. As it is
written, says he: Jacob I loved, but Esau I hated. Of the book of life,
Moses speaks, Exodus 32. And Christ himself, Luke 10. Saying to his
Apostles: Joy you and be glad, for your names are written in the book of life
in the heavens. And in the 69. Psalm it is spoken against the wicked. Let them
not be written amongst the Just, and put them forth of the book of life. And
against the false Prophet. Ezechiel. 13. He shall not be in the counsel of my
people, nor written in the book of the house of Israel. There be two final
causes also of this eternal purpose of the election, the which Paul rehearses
in the first chapter to the Ephesians, the one touches God, the other
pertains to man. He has Elected us before the foundations of the world
(says the Apostle) that we might be holy and without blame. And this
answers the wicked, which would abuse the mercies of God to their lust.
Again it follows, He has Predestinate us, that he might choose us to be his
children, that his name may be praised. And this stops the mouths of al
our Adversaries that say, that this doctrine is not to the praise of God: so
that they must cease to slander this doctrine, unless they will hinder the
glory of God, and deny the open Scriptures.

Now it is to be noted and marked dyligently, that this word Election is
taken after two sorts in the Scripture, some times as it signifies absolutely
the free choice, will, and appointment of God, without the respect of the
revelation of the word and message of saluatyon. And thus speaks the holy
Apostle Saint Paul of Election, saying of the carnal Jacob: They were
enemies concerning the Gospel for your cause, but concerning the Election, they
are beloved for their parents. For the gifts of God, and his calling are
such, that he can not repent. Even as you once were mysbeleeuers from God,
but now have attained mercy, by their mysbeleefe, that they should attain
mercy also.

This Election expresses absolutely the secret purpose of God, without the
respect o^ ^^uelation of the word, or any of our works followyng. Under this
first kind of Election were those hundredth and twenty thousand, which God
did choose and keep unto himself in Niniue amongst the Idolaters, and the
seven thousand which God did leave for himself in Israel, in the third book
of kings the. 19. chap. Yea, those that yet are not, are thus elect, chosen,
and amongst al nations both Jews in this long blindness, and banishment from
their country amongst the Turks in their Idolatrous wickedness, yea amongst
the Edomites, the Sabees, the Indians, and Ethiopians.

And in the late blyndnesse of the Popish church, wherein we together with our
fathers were altogether Idolatrous, all Hypocrites and counterfaite Christians,
this absolute Election whereby the merciful Lord God did reserve and keep
his chosen unto him in all places, all ages, all countries, without respect of
persons did most evidently appear. Howbeit this secrecy of election must
only be left to the Majesty of God, where, when, how, and whom he thereby
saves and shows his mercy. For, to the blind judgment of man all these
people rehearsed, and such like seems reject, reprobate and cast away as
appears by Jonas condemning the Ninevites, by Elias co^demning the
Israelites, and a long while, until God had by miracle from Heaven delivered
him from that error, unto the chief Apostle Peter, iudgeing all the Gentiles
to be a polluted people far from the favor of God.

The second kind of Election is set forth and known evident and open by the
spirit of God, working in the hearts of the elect and chosen by faith and trust
in God his promises through Christ, teaching us that we are the children of God
chosen to him self by Jesus Christ, from the beginning, and therefore
preparing us to an holy and blameless life to the laud and praise of the
grace of God. The which Election besides the daily experience of our
consciences may be approved by the testimonies of these Scriptures compared
together. Esaias. 59. Romans 8. Ephe. 1. Coloss. 3. and a very brief and perfect
description of this Election. 2 Thessalonians. 2. in these words. We ought to thank
God that he has chosen you from the beginning by the sanctifying of the
spirit and the belief of the truth, to the which he has called you by our
Gospel, to attain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. By this gracious
election was Jacob dearly beloved in his mothers womb, and Jeremy known unto
God before he was fashioned in his mothers womb. Jeremy. 1. And to be short,
all other the eleect of God are thus chosen, sanctified and beloved from the
beginning from before the foundations of the world, from everlasting to
everlasting. For there is no change of time with God, seeing that all things
are present in his sight. For unto him a thousand years are but one day, but
the course and change of times are in us, our deeds, our knowledge, in man's
chaungeable wisdom.

This Election must of necesitie drive down the pride we have of our own
strength, our own power, our own nature, our own free will, our own merits,
our own justification of our own works, and bring us to the feelyng of the
mighty power of God, which works all in all things, to the restoring of all
things in our Christ, both in Heaven and Earth, by whom we are called into
this state, long before appointed according to his purposed pleasure, by whose
power all things are wrought, that we may boldly say with the Apostle, who dare
lay any thing to the charge of the Elect of God? It is God that instifieth, who
is he that can condemn? Who can separate us (which are this chosen Jacob) from
the love of God.

Can affliction? Can anguish? Can persecution? Can hunger? Can nakedness? Can
peril? Can the sword? For I am persuaded, says he, that neither death nor
life, nor Angel, nor power, nor things present, nether things to come, nether
height nor depth, neither any creature can separate us from the love of God in
Christ Jesus our Lord. Lo this is the love where with the Lord loves his Jacob,
whereby we say: O heavenly father, Lord of heaven and earth, it has pleased
thee that thou might show thy great goodness most liberally and freely
toward us, before that we were, and therefore before we had done either good
or evil, without any our merits or deseruings only thorough thy free mercy to
elect and choose, ordain and appoynte us Heirs of everlasting life, and
thereby to make all things perteining to our salvation so fyrme and sure, that
they can not stagger, waver, nor fail. Where contrariwise if they did hang
of our worthiness, we should ever be doubtefull, because every man is a liar,
and all our righteousness is like a spotted clothe, and nothing but
counterfeyte hypocrisy, weyed in the balance of thy severe justice. But the
grace of this thy free Election makes us most certain and sure, seeing no
creature is able to take out of thy hand, O God. Wherefore we do laud and
magnify thy name world without end. So be it.

Now after this doctrine of Election, and love of God toward Jacob, the
hating and Reprobation of Esau must likewise be declared, and though the
adversaries of this doctrine do seem to deny that there is any such
Reprobation of the wicked, yet the words are so plain in Malachie and
Romans. 9. that nothing can be more euidente. For what can be more plainly
spoken for this purpose, then that God should say before the children were
borne, that he hated Esau. What was this hatred, but the Reprobation,
Reiection, and condemnation by God his own mouth of this wicked Esau, like as
in the last verse of the first Psalm, where it is said, that the Lord knows
the ways of the just, (that is) he has them written in his book in the
Heavens, he loves them as is said of Jacob, he has such care over them,
that they can not fall, but unto the glory of God, and their own commodity,
and by the course of the contraries compared together in that Psalm: it should
be added, the Lord knows not the wicked, like as Christ says, it shall be
answered unto them, I know you not: the latter part of the verse is that the
way of the wicked shall perish, so that it appears to be all one, not to be
elected, accepted, and known of God, and to perish, and to be as a Reprobate
condemned. And Felinus forth of Kymhy does note, that that part of the last
verse of the. 2. Psalm: God being angry, you shall perish forth of the way,
does expound this of the first Psalm, so^ that the Election, knowledge,
love, a^^ I favor of God, and eternal salvation ^^^ not be separate: Like as
his anger and hatred, reprobation and condemnation consequently do follow, in
Cain, Esau, Pharao, Judas, the Pharisees, and like obdurate persons, so
manifestly uttering them selves to be of that sort whom God always hated:
The children not of Abraham, but as Christ answers unto them, of their father
the devil, who was a murderer from the beginning, like as his children have
been also ever sith the beginning of the world, and therefore must of
necessity be hated of the most merciful Lord, who is compelled by the order
of his works, to use these wicked rods and cruel scourges, for the
chastisement of his children, doing many times the work strange from his
nature, that he may do his work of mercy, peculiar unto his nature: And than
utterly break, hate, reject, and cast away into everlasting fire and utter
destruction this rod and scurge, like a most merciful father fa^oring his
children and hating the rod. th^^e as he says by his Prophet: Wootion^ Assure
the rod of my fury, and the staff of my indignation, and after promyseth to
break the staff and cast away the rod. Psalm. 10. Suffering in the mean
season yet these instruments of his wrath prepared unto destruction, with
great patience, for this end that he may utter the riches of his glory
toward the vessels of glory, which he has prepared unto glory.

Thus was Pharao the manifest scurge and rod of God, to correct, to chastise,
and to exercise the Israelites, and to spread the power of God through all the
world. Therefore was Moses sent unto him with the rod of God his mighty
mercy, to break in sunder this rod of chasticement. And the Lord said unto
Moses, I have appointed thee to be the God of Pharao, and Aaron thy Brother
shall be thy Prophet, thou shalt speak unto him all that I command thee.
And he shall speak unto Pharao, to let go the children of Israel forth of
his land. But I will harden his heart, says the Lord, and I will,
multiply my signs and wonders in Egypt, and he shall not hear you. And I
will bring mine army and people forth of the land of Egypt, by most great
judgments, and the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord. Exodus 12.

Again the Lord says, Now shall I stretche my hand to stryke thee, and thy
people with a plague, and thou shall perish from the earth, for therefore have
I caused thee to stand (for so is the Hebrew word) that I may show in thee
my strength, and that my name may be renowned through all the earth. Exodus 9.
Then the Lord sends a great hayle, so that feelyng the hand of God the
tenth time, Pharao was compelled to cry: The Lord is just, and I and my
people are sinners, as follows in the same chapter. Yet for all this the
Lord hardens his heart, that he pursues the children of Israel to his
own destruction. Exodus 14. So that resisting the power of God he perishes in
this world, and in the world to come he is appointed to the everlasting fire
prepared for the devil and his Angels by the just judgment of the
almighty Lord: who being refused and so openly resisted, justly does give
over the wicked to their own Reprobate minds, with gredinesse to fulfill
their fleshely desiers and obstinate purpose to prosecute that which the Devil
and the woorlde wills them to do, and so causes them to heap upon their
own heads their own damnation, treasuring and storing up al their life long,
works deserving the wrath of God against the day of his wrath and
vengeance, as the Apostle says to the Romans.

This Reprobation then is the declaration of God his severe justice and just
judgment, against the Serpent and his seed, whom, by the word of his
eternal wisdom he has accursed from the beegynnyng, and appointed too
everlasting torment. The which work necessary for the proceedyng of God his
holy pronydence, Eternal and never ceassing Regymente and governance,
because it is the work of the will of the mighty God, which is the very
law, equity, and justice it self, free from all affections, far from all
fault, crime or sin: It ought to be known unto us all, that all flesh may
tremble, and consider before whom it stands, even before that great Lord
and mighty God, who has power both over the body and soul to cast into hell
fire. To whom no man may say: what do thou? Being like the clay in the
potters hand, or the staff or axe in the hand of the smiter. Who offends
against no law, because his godly will is the law it self, and to know his
pleasure, is to know the law, to follow his will, is to do the law, so that
of necessity this great Lord is so far and free from all sin, that
nothing is good but that which is wrought by him, nothing can be evil that he
works in his creatures. No, the fall of Lucifer ye father of ye reprobate
does utter his majesty, does show his justice, which old Satan and Father
devil, was worthily cast down into the bottom of hell, and eternally
condemned to everlasting pain and torment, because he did so ambitiously and
proudly climb up above his appointed place i^ the heavens. And where the
malice of this old Serpent caused Adam the first man to mount above his
estate* to desire to know good and evil like a God, the marvelous mercy of
God, and inostimable love toward mankind caused and compelled this wicked
work of the Serpent to serve his glory, and to turn to our great commodity
and profit, in that he rayseth of the seed of man another Adam, most innocent
and holy, against whom no Devil, neither any helly power may prevail, by whom
we are not only reconciled unto God, and do obtain pardon for this offense,
but we are borne a new, and as it were again created into greater glory by
far, than we were at the first: for the first man had only a promise to live
in the earthly garden so long as he did not eat of the forbidden fruit, we
have the promise of the heavenly Paradise, and everlasting pleasures. He had
earthly meat and fruit, we have the heavenly Manna which feeds into life
everlasting. He was created to work in the Garden works natural, we are
renewed unto works supernatural, above nature, heavenly and celestial. He
was overcome by the Serpent, we do over come and triumph over the Serpent,
Sin, Devil, Death, and Hell. He had the gift of reason and understanding,
we have the rich wisdom of God his holy spirit, whereby we discern our own
infirmity and weakness, and his almighty power, mercy, and goodness. To be
short, where he did run from God, hid him, and sowed Fig leaves to cover
his shame, following his fond fantasy. We do boldly behold the course of
Gods working in our nakedness, sin, and infirmity, and magnify, renown,
and praise our Lord God, which shows his grace by our sin, which
utters his power by our weakness, his wisdom by our foolishness, which
sets soorth his elect vessels, his chosen Abels, by Caynites the vessels of
his wrath. In which Cayn the first murderer, and therefore manifestly of the
serpents seed, appears evidently the just judgment of the Almighty God,
accursing and condemning in Satan and Cayn, all sins and wickedness. To
utter that he abhoreth sin, and hates it, being so far contrary from his
nature, which is justice it self, contrary from his will, which is equity,
and his law which is judgment: In Pharao a child of the same father,
reprobate, indurate, and accursed, whom God stirred up for the declaration of
his great power and mighty arm, as well in the manyfolde miracles wrought for
his people, which nothing had needed, neither had bin occasioned, if there had
not bin such a tyra^t so indurate and so obstinate, to withstand God and his
servants, as also by the subversion and drouning of him and his people in the
red Sea, a sign and token first of the eternal and inevitable destruction and
damnation, whereunto the wicked are appointed, than of the salvation assigned
and sealed up for the elect and chosen: we do learn heerby also ye power of
God, which the very Sorcerers, the enemies of God were compelled to confess
before Pharao. Exodus 8. We do learn moreover the justice of God, which
justice Pharao him self was compelled against him self, to denounce and
affirm. Exodus 9. And finally we may see expressed most manifestly the
fatherly mercy of the God of Jacob, which did give the king and the whole
people of Egypt a price for his chosen Jacob. Lo the love toward Jacob, and
the hatred toward Esau. What shall we speak of Judas and other, manifestly
reprobate, which are compelled by the testimony of their own consciences to
pronounce them selves wicked, and therefore to fear god his severe justice and
just judgment, and to fly therefrom by the terror of their evil
consciences, which is more sore than a thousand witnesses, against such as God
does leave to their own selves. The which terrible examples, the Elect of God,
having before their eyes, has great cause to praise their heavenly father,
through his son Christ, who has sent them his holy spirit of comfort,
which will never suffer them to be tempted above that they are able to suffer
and to bear.

But where we have two kind of men that be adversaries to this doctrine of
Reprobation. The one sort uttering them selves most manifestly Reprobate,
obstinate, and wilfully wicked, crying and blaspheming: we will follow our
lusts, what need we to care how we live, or* what we do? If we be elected
with Jacob, we shall be saved, if we be reiecte and cursed with Cham, we shall
be damned. These Lucifers, not submitting themselves to the governance of God,
careless what becomes of them, must be bette down with the consideration of
the majesty and mighty power of God, which suffers not one sparrowe to
fall upon the earth without his will and providence, neither one hear to fall
from the head of his elect and chosen, how fiercely so ever they shall rage
against them.

Wherefore (O you Serpents seed) how soever you shall be offended with this
that I shall speak, know this, that as the mighty God has made the
scattered sands able inoughe to stay the raging Seas: so shall your proud
waves of your boiling stomachs and over busy heads, be broken and brought
full low, where and when it shall like the Lord of all flesh by these his
weak vessels. And lisence must you ask, as did your father the devil,
executing his tyranny upon the good man Job, as we read in the first chapter
of that History, before you can lay hands either of body or goods of his
chosen, and therein shall you be limited and appointed (as there appears)
how far you shall be able to extend your violence. For God holds your
hearts in his hand be you never so great tyrants, and can soon cause you to
faint and fail from your fury, turning your hearts round about as him likes
best. And because you thus blaspheme God both in words and deeds, following
your father Lucifer, abusing Gods creatures, and despising his benefytes, his
tollerance, and his long sufferance, which might move you to repentance (as
holy Paul warns) you treasure up for your selves even wrath and vengeance
against the day of vengeance I do fear nothing at all to offend you with my
writing, neither do you pass any thing at all what is written or spoken,
though you use to swear, stamp, and stare for a little space in a furious
rage, when you hear and feel things contrary to your poison. But the
scriptures of God, all good writings, all truth, unto such dogs and hogs are
uttered to this purpose, that they may be a testimony of condemnation of the
light of Gods truth rejected and despised. Therefore for the elect of God that
they may understand the course of Gods working in all his creatures, and
reverence his majesty, and magnisie and renoume his holy name, is this
written. Yet doubtless do I know amongst the chief vessels and chosen
children of God there be many which have not attained to this point of
doctrine of Election and Reprobatio^, whom I am very loath to offend, and
therefore I desire the^ for the love of God to suffer me quietly without their
grief to utter unto other the comfort of my conscience, which I haus hereby
undoubtedly received: like as I have many times harkened unto them in the
contrary First praying thus both of us together unto our heavenly father,
knowledging our own infirmity and weakness. O father in the heavens,
whatsoever we are, whatsoever we have, whatsoever we know, it is only by thy
free grace, for we were by nature the children of wrath, and we are not borne a
new of flesh and blood, either of the seed of man, or of the will of man,
flesh and blood can not reveal the mysteries of thy heavenly kingdom unto
us. But by thy blessed will, are we that we are, and by the same know we that
we know: therefore (O father) do we commit into thy hands only our
salvation. If our knowledge be small, yet we doubt nothing but that we are the
children of thy everlasting kingdom, and therefore by thy mighty power, we
shall grow when it shall be thy pleasure, to a more full and riper knowledge
of a more perfect age, wherein our faith shall be fully able to comprehend and
perceive the breadth, depth, height, and largeness of thy great mercyes, and
gracious promyses. But seeing this power of full knowledge and perfect
revelation, passes all power natural, and remains only in thy power, and
the light of thy spirit (O Lord). Do thou what shall please thee, to open to
us thy servant and children, depending of thy hands, so much of the light of
thy countenance, and at such times as shall seem good to thy wisdom and
fatherly mercy. In the mean time thus restyng wholly upon thee, neither can we
despair, neither will we be too much careful, although we can not attayn to
ye knowledge of many of thy works, neither to the understanding of many places
of the scriptures, but we will confess unto thee the weakness of our faith,
waiting always for further revelation of thy glorious light to be uttered unto
us, when thou shall think of thy Fatherly benevolence and goodness meet and
convenient, knowing most surely that thou will pity our childishe infansy,
and cause the same to serve for thy glory and our great commodity, seeing
that we do err and are childish, as sons before such a Father which can
not put off his Fatherly pity, but rather as thou haste brought us unto thee,
to be the heirs of thy kingdom by the blood of thy natural son, so we be
most sure that thou will lighten us in the end, with the full fruition of
the brighte light of thy contenaunce, that we may see thee and know thee as
this thy son our Redeemer knows thee, yea, see thee our Father, face to
face, and know as we be known. Thus rest we only of thy hand to encreace
our knowledge at thy good pleasure, O mighty Lord and most merciful father.
So be it.

If you can thus submit your selves, good brethren, too the wisdom of God,
working in us weakelinges what him lyketh. All the stomblyng stocks which
might offend you, may easelie be removed. There be two things especially
which do seem too stand against this doctrine of Election and Reprobation,
or of God his governance and providence, for all is one in effect, the one
touches God, the other man. The first and principal is, least that the
wicked do make God the aucthor of sin in the Reprobate, the which doubt, we
may remone four manner of ways.

First, by the authority of scriptures. Secondly, by the testimony of their
own consciences which be the Reprobate. Thirdly, by the nature of sin.
Fourthly, by the majesty of God, which is bound to none of his creatures, to
make him this or that vessel. For the first, Saint James says: Let no man
say when he is tempted, that he is tempted of God, for God, as he can not be
tempted with evil, so neither does he tempte any man. But every manne is
tempted, drawn away, and entysed of his own lust and concupiscence. Then
the lust when it has conceived, brings forth sin. James. 1. And even
thus it appeared in the first fall of mankind. First, though the Lord our
God had warned and commanded the contrary, our old enemy styrreth the
concupisce^ce and lust of the woman, with the goodness, pleasantness and
beauty of the apple, the^ her lust co^ceiuing this, brings forth sin,
entising also her husband to the breaking of God his commandments. Gene. 3.
But contrariwise, says James in the same place. Ia. 1. least you should err
and conceive any evil opinion of God, every good gift and every persite
gift is from above, discending from the Father of light, with whom is no
vareablenesse, nether change into darkensse, that he should give now good
things, now evil, now light, now darkness. No, says the Apostle Paul,
let God be true, and al men liars. Can God be unjust? How shall he then judge
the world? Romans 3. Again, God says by his prophet Ezechiell: I will not the
death of a sinner, but I will rather that the sinner convert, repent and live.
And unto wicked Jerusalem says our savior Christ: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
which slayest the Phrophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee: How
often would I have gathered together thy children, as the Hen gathers her
chickens under her wings, and thou would not. Lo, thy house therefore is
left desolate. Math. 23. Lo, here appears the goodness of the living Lord,
so diligently calling the wicked to him by his word, by his Prophets, by his
messengers, and at the length by his own son, that he cannot in any case be
accounted the aucthor of their evil, nor cause of their fall. But
contrariwise, their own wilful and wicked stobbernesse is the cause of their
evil, and the only occasion of their fall, as it is written: Thy perdicion
and destruction is of thine own self, but only of me is thy salvation. And
infinite scriptures to the same purpose appertayning. That we may say with
Daniel: unto thee O Lord, belongs righteousness, and to us the shame and
coueryng of our faces. Daniel. 9. Secondly. The testimony of the consciences of
the wicked, which shall accuse or excuse them at the great day, which is
always of the force and valor of a thousand witnesses, which is the worm
that shall never dye, but gnawe the wicked for ever. Esa. 46. This conscience, I
say, of theyrs shall condemn the wicked, and what shall God then do? Or
wherein is his dreadful majesty to be charged? Cayne by his own conscience,
is compelled to confess: greater is my wickedness then can be remitted. Thou
castsest me from the face of the earth, says he, and I must hyde me from thy
face. Loo, the just iudgmente of God and his worthy condemnation, openly
confessed. Who dare then blame God? Cayn dare in no wise do it. Neither yet
proud Pharao, who condemned in his own heart and conscience, accuses him self
and his people, and justifies God, delivering all men from this wicked
blasphemy, saying openly: I have sinned now, the Lord is just, and I and my
people are wicked. Exodus. 9. What does Judas? Does he not cry likewise, I
have sinned, betraying this innocent blood. Matthew. 27. And to utter in deed
that thing he felts within his breast, he is compelled to take aduengance, and
execute a judgment most terrible against him self, uttering to all the world
him self most wicked, and that the justice of God punishyng such wicked
traitors and murderers, ought most worthily to be feared, magnified, and
reverenced, throughout the whole world. Like as all the other wicked and
desparate persons, which for anguishe of heart, and terror of conscience, do
murder them selves, does evidently and continually witness unto the worlds
end, that there is a just Lord, the God of judgment, whom they do fear,
and before whose face they dare not appear to accuse him of any sin, but
rather taking the crime, blame, shame, and punishmente, unto them selves, who
worthyly by their own conscience, have deserved it, does thus tormente them
selves, and with violente hands aduenge the sin they have ^ommytted in their
own synnefull souls and bodies. Thus must God always be found just, and
overcome when he is judged, by the testimony of our own conscience, which
shall accuse or excuse us at the great day. Roma. 2. Wherefore let no man be so
foolyshe to say, that God is the author of evil, unless he will be accounted
worse than Cayn, more proud than Pharao, more wicked than Judas, or any other
the Reprobate from the beginning.

Thirdly, the nature of sin being defyned by the authority of scriptures, to
be a thought, word, or deed, contrary to the will of God. For such things only
defyle the man, as Christ our master says, Matthew. 15. and therefore are only
to be accounted sin. No such thought can be attrybuted or ascrybed unto God,
as can be against his will, therefore no sin can be his work. Neither can
he be the aucthor of evil, which therefore is called God, because he is the
aucthor and gyuer of al good, and so far from evil, that he turns all
our evil too some good, our sin to the uttering of his grace, our lies to
the declaration of his truth. No, this is the perfect work master which
works all things without fault or trespass, all other do fail, fault,
and trespass, and sin in all their works, that he may be justified in all his
doings, and al creatures fall down before his face and presence. Who though
he do work al in all things, yet does he work the same to such godly end and
purpose, known only to his majesty, that though we be compelled to say, God
is the author of the fact, yet must we answer: but not of the crime. Because
he is the master of the house, and Lord over the family, and therefore may do
any thing without the blame of his servants.

And like as that which is no fault in the master of the house, is a great
fault many times in any of his servants, because it is the breaking of their
masters commandment: Even so doubtless the self same work is sin in God
his servants and creatures, which to God is no sin, but an ordinary work
appointed for some special purpose, either for the manifestation of his power,
as was the hardening of Pharao, or for the declaration of his mercy, as was the
fall of David, of Peter, of Marie Magdalen, and all other repe^tant sinners.
And wherefore, I pray you, may not this Lord thus use his own servants,
without any blame of sin, seeing that he has created and made them all only
to serve his glory, his justice, and his mercy. Or how can he be unjust, or
the author of any sin, by whom all the world must be judged and brought
to the balance of justice and equity. When the first world shall be condemned
for their sin and iniquity, and we now living shall be judged for our
sins: specially all those which not only do evil themselves, but are
authors and faultors to wicked doers. Romans. 1. Fourthly, The majesty of God
can be subject to no sin, because it can be under no law. And that only is
worthily called sin which is done against a Law, therefore no work that God
does ought to be accounted evil, either that he is the occasion of any
evil, which only is the mind, sense, spirit, and power of the Law,
without whom no law of it self is good. For every good law is the mind,
will, and commandment of God, and what so ever law is not the mind, will,
and commandment of God (as was the laws of the Scribes and Phariseys, and of
the cursed Papists) the same be wicked: who of necessity were set up the body
of Antichrist, to utter their unrighteousness, that Christ the son of
righteousness, the head of his body, in his manyfolde mercies, more plainly
might appear, and shine with more glory. Again to define sin to be the
affection, motion, or operation of any reasonable creature, against the law of
God: his majesty must needs be secluded and excused, who is the law maker,
the creator, no creature, having no evil motion, nor led with any affection,
which might make his work evil. Like as the creature is for the most part
blame worthy, because even when it does the best of all. It is subject to some
affection, either selfeloue, or hatred of some other, yea the Lord God may use
any of his creatures in any work, without the blame of any evil, as well as
the Smith may make his coals to flame, or to quench them, either the same
piece of iron, sometimes his hammer, sometime his tongs or stithy.

Wherefore though very much might be said in this part, that as the potter
may make of one piece of clay what him likes, the Smith may make of his iron
diverse instruments, yet following the godly wisdom of S. Paul, I think it
more meet to beat down man's subtilties, with the contemplation of the
Majesty of the mighty God, pronouncing boldly that such as say (if my lies
and sin set forth his glory, why am I then judged as a sinner, let us do
evil that good may come, and so in their wicked words dare make God the author
of evil) has their worthy damnation already, as Paul says. Romans 3. For of
necessity, which their eyes can not see, such diversity of sin and grace,
of righteousness and unrighteousness, of the contrariety and change of
things, must be in this wonderful creation of heaven and earth, by the high
majesty of God appointed and ordained. For what needed the goodly creature of
light? If there had bin no darkness, or how should this benefit have bin
felt or perceived? what matter or cause of uttering justice might have bin
found without sin and unrighteousness? how should grace have bin showed,
if no wrath had bin deserved? No the mighty God thereby most evidently
utters his majesty, in that he shows how the heavens fall into darkness
without him, the earth into dust, the Angels into devils, the men into sin,
and so finally without him all things to come to naught, that he might be
magnified creating all things, his son our savior renowned, who has
redeemed us all, his holy spirit exalted, who has renewed all us that be his
elect and chosen. Now to what creature is the majesty of God bound and
found debtor of his spirit. If he withholde it from any, his dreadful
majesty may rightly withhold it, for who has given him first, to ask any
thing again of debt or duty? If his majesty do give his spirit, it is of
his free mercy and grace. If the earth fall into dust, if man fall into sin,
that all things may be known to be nothing without God: what blame deserves
God, or who dare accuse him? No, let all flesh fall down before his majesty
and confess: All things does only rest upon thee, O Lord, thou have created
all things of nothing, so that without thee they all do fall to their
original, to show themselves vain and nothing worth, weak, wretched, and
miserable, wherefore if we have any good thing, it comes of thy mercy, if we
have any weakness, sin, or infirmity, it comes of our own concupiscence,
lusts, and vanity, our perdition is of our selves, our sin is of our selves,
only of thee is our salvation, thou made us clay, potts and vessels to thine
use. Do thou with us as thou shall think good in thine eyes, and the shame
shall fall upon our own faces. The second cause which concerns man (whereby
many mistake this doctrine) is that God exhorts man always in his Scriptures
to good, and forbids evil with many terrible threatenings, which things
seems not to be needful (say they) seeing the Elect shall be saved, and the
Reprobate condemned, by decree and sentence given upon them before they be
borne. To this we do answer, that these exhortatio^s and co^munications are
very necessary to both twain, because God leads us men always like
reasonable creatures, not like insensible stocks or stones. And to the Elect
they are most necessary pricks and spurs, to stir the dull flesh toward
his duty, as all good men feels and can bear witness. To the Reprobate
they are testimonies of the good will of the almighty God to them opened and
uttered, but openly resisted, refused, and rejected, according to the saying of
our Savior Christ: If I had not come and spoken to them, they had had no
sin, but now they have no pretense or excuse for their sin. Peradventure
you will answer me: They can not obey unto it. What is the cause thereof I
pray you? because they lack the spirit of Christ to lead them, you will
say: I dare easily grant you, but will they grant this? will they (think
you) submit them selves under poor Christ, and the foolishness of the
cross, and not rather boast and brag their wisdom, their knowledge, and
their upright dealing, and righteousness. Are not these the men that dare thus
boast? We know as well as the Preacher can tell us. Is the spirit of God
departed from us to speak with him? As was said to Micha. 2. of the Kings,
22. chapter. Or as the Pharisees did answer unto Christ: are we blind? To
whom our Savior says again: If you were blind you had no sin, but now
you say you see, therefore your sin remains. John. 9. Thus doubtless they
are so far from the submission and subjection to poor Christ, that
contrariwise they do willingly and naturally follow their father Lucifer, who
did lift him self arrogantly above Christ the son of righteousness, and
evermore fights against Christ, though ye mighty power and high wisdom of
God turns his evil will and all theyrs to his glory and good purposes. None
other ways than bodily and natural darkness, which by the wonderful wisdom
of God, clearly sets forth the bright sunneshine, and yet labors by
continual course to shadow the sun, and to cover the whole earth. Wherefore
the Lord God to drive away this natural darkness from man, exhorts to
justice and equity, which is his nature, and the Image which man ought to
counterfeit. And always commands things thereunto agreeable. And forbids
that he is not, that is to say, iniquity, and dehorteth therefrom by his
Prophets and Preachers, publyshing his will and pleasure, which is the light
and law most perfect to man his noble creature, whom he has made for his
honor and glory, whom he has appointed to bear his Image upon earth, of
justice, righteousness and innocence. But because this Image could by no
creature perfectly be expressed, unless the same were fully replenished with
the self same Godhead, because that all things besidesfoorth had some
imperfection, bewraying their original the darkness, as John calls it, the
Tohu and Bohu, as Moses does it name. The vain vanity and wild deformity,
whence they were by creation altered, recovered, and brought into light and
life, as appeared in Adam falling from truth to lies straight at the
beginning: now of necessity the son of God (who only is good of nature)
becomes man, and takes this office to bear the Image of God invisible.
Colos. 1. And to be the head of that spiritual perfection which was to be
wrought in mankind, by his aforeappoynted purpose, and becomes the first
begotten of all creatures, for by him were all things created both in heaven
and earth, visible and invisible, majesty, Lordeship, rule, and power, by
whom, and in whom al things are created, and he is before all creatures, and in
him all things have their being. And he is the head of the body, he is the
beginning and first begotten of the head, that in all things he might have
pre-eminence. For it pleased the father that in him should dwell all fullness,
and by him to reconcile all things to him self. And to set at peace by him
through the blood of his cross both things in heaven and things in earth: for
even you, says Paul, which in times past were strangers, because your
minds were set in evil works, has he now reconciled in the body of his
flesh through death, to make you holy and blameless, and without fault in
his sight. Seeing then that this can not be denied to be the course of God his
holy working, to drive away this darkness, and to bring man to his light, to
take away sin, and to bring man to a life blameless, the state of
innocence, and his own likeness: shall it not be most uecessarie to have
Preachers and teachers, to tell us this same, and to admonish us whereunto we
be called, seeing of our selves and our own reasons no such thing can be
perceived? Therefore have we preachings and exhortations as Paul says: for
when the world thorough wisdom knew not God in the wisdom of God, it pleased
God through the foolishness of preaching to save them that believed. 1.
Corin. 1. And as he also says of him self in another place: We do preach
this richesse in Christ the hope of your glory, warning all men, and teaching
all men in all wisdom, to make all men perfect in Christ Jesus.

Thus serves then exhortations, dehortations, comminations, and publications
of the laws and will of our Lord God: that he may be known the Lord and
governor over all the things he has created, and the only law maker
amongst his creatures, publishyng unto all that perfect equity and Justice
which ought in no case to be resisted. Whereunto if they can not attain, they
must confess and knowledge their own infirmity and weakness, and submit them
selves under the mighty hand of God, and so doing they shall be received as
children of the most loving and most merciful father, in such degrees of
perfection as he has appointed to the beautifying of the body of his son our
head. So that the Lord God does teach all, and lighten all men that come
into the world both chosen and Reprobate, with such a knowledge as does the
good Prince, which unto all his Subjects proclaymeth his statutes, and
publishes his laws: but like a good and tender father, he leads his
children, regenerate and borne a new, neither of flesh nor blood, nor the will
of man', and guides them with his fatherly spirit in the paths of the same
laws, writing in their hearts what is his good will and pleasure.

In the which course of God his wonderful work, the wicked has no cause to
complain, for as their father whom they do follow is named the Prince of
this world, so they have the world at will, and are rich roysters and welthy
worldlings, trampling under their feet poor Abell, and the despised
Christians: neither will they change their estate with any such, no when they
are called from darkness to be partakers of light, of life, and the heavenly
daynties, laid up in poor Christ, they despise that estate, excusing their
purchases, their marchaundise, and their earthly lusts and delights. Luke.
14. Wherefore in the other world they that here are oppressed shall have
comfort, and the other torment.

Such is the order then of God his working, that by the contrariety of the
Chosen and Reprobate, of Jacob and Esau, of Pharao and Israel, and the
wisdom of God, and the wisdom of the world, he will set forth his
majesty, his power, his divinity, his Godhead, so much as may be known unto
man (that is to say) in his wisdom, justice, mercy, and almightinesse. For
comparing his wisdom to any other wisdom, now appears the contrary,
that it is very foolishness, even darkness compared unto light, death unto
life, lies unto truth, as Paul says: When they accounted them selves wise,
they were made very fools, and changed the truth with lies: the glory of the
immortal God, to mortal and corruptible creatures. They following their own
righteousness could not come to the righteousness of God in Jesus Christ.

Wherefore of necessity God did shut all under sin, that his mercy might
flow over all. And that his mighty power might appear, he has created the
heavens and earth, wherein we do see light and darkness, death and life,
shame and glory, weakness and strength, lies and truth, righteousness and
unrighteousness, to serve to the setting forth of his glory, that man may be
driven to say with Paul: O the depthe of the riches of the wisdom and
knowledge of God. How incomprehensible are his ways? How unsearchable are his
judgments? For who has known the mind of the Lord? or who has bin his
counselor. Or who has given him ought aforehand, that he might be repayed?
For by him, and through him, and in him, are all things, to him be praise for
ever. Amen.

And as this holy Apostle Paul does submit him self to the great depthe of
the wisdom of God, and his wonderful Regimente and Providence, and would
beat and drive down all flesh by the consideration of ye same. So also al our
Fathers from the beginning has laid this the only foundation of their
faith: Wherefore Moses begins to stablish the faith of man at the history
of ye creation, and so forth by the order of God his present governance about
the things made and created. And David for a confession of his faith
pronounces of this providence. Psa. 95. I do know that thou art a great Lord
and a Lord above all Gods. All things whatsouer the Lords pleasure was, he
has made in the heue^s, the earth, the seas, and the botomlesse waters.
Again, by the word of God al things were set in their places, and by the
spirit of his mouth all the powers that be in them. And Paul considering most
deeply, and prououncing most plainly this divine governance of the
creatures, and Godly providence of the creator, in all things for his Elect and
chosen, says thus. Roma. 8. We know that all things work for the best
unto them that love God, who also are called of purpose: for those which he
knew before, he also predestinate, that they should be like fashoned to the
shape of his Son. Moreover, whom he has predestinate, those has he called,
and whom he called, them he also has justified, whoo^ he has justified, those
also has he glorified.

So that this appears to be no new learning or vain doctrine of Gods
providence and Election. But the only ground of faith and certaynty of
concience in all conflictes against the world, the flesh and the devil,
against Sin, Death, and Hell, as the Apostle uses it in the latter end of
the same chapter, and all the Fathers from the beginning has felt it. For how
could Adam by any other work or creature, either by comfort of any other
doctrine, stay his conscience? But in tha^ the Lord God promised to provide
for him, and to save him from his enemy (who once had overcome him) by the
blessed seed, which not by mrrites, but by mercy and grace, and therefore of
his free purpose before appointed, should be sent unto him to break the head
of the Serpent. Why? Should Abraham have left his country and his own fathers
house, if he had not felt this divine providence, fatherly care, free choice,
and Election of him and his seed? By the which lively feeling of God his
careful providence, and free choice, sending him seed when he was past hope of
seed (concerning his dead body and all the works of nature) and by the
stedfastnes of faith in the temptations about the same seed, to be made a
slain sacrifice, other grievous temptations and adversities from time to time
laid upon him, this chosen vessel Abraham is called the father of all
faythul. As by his history appears a fatherly care of our God, for all his
people, both for bodies and souls for wife and child, and all together. And
Isaac his son, that chosen seed, in whom all the Nations of the earth were
promised to be blessed long before the child was borne, has this promise of
enheritaunce given him by favor, that the promise might be sure to all the
seed as Paul says. Romans 14. unto whom and his saythful seed, this free
promise and fatherly Election and Predestination (or what else you will call
it) was again revealed and opened. Genes. 26. in these words: th^row thy
seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. And the lively sense and
feeling of this Election and fatherly care of God for him, did then especially
shine in his heart, when the Lord said unto him: Go not into Egipte, tarry here,
I will be with thee, and will bless thee, and through thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed. Genesis 26. And after that grievous temptation
undoubtedly wherein he was compelled for fear of the Philistines, to deny his
wife and call her sister, and after the manifold contentions with the
Philistines, wherein his God did preserve him, and at the end in the wonderful
miracle of his children, whose birthright was altered by the unsearchable
providence of God, the manifest notes and tokens of the free Election and
choice of God did appear. And Jacob chosen and beloved in his mothers womb,
felt this free work of God his great favor, who had chosen him before he
was borne, and taking occasion of the necessity of his brother, seeks the
birthright', the which God had unto him before appointed and promised,
renouncing the course of nature, then does he leave and forsake his fathers
house, and patiently takes all troubles offered unto him. In the which
oftentimes undoubtedly he feels the heavy and grievous temptations that his
fathers Abraham and Isaac had before (for no creature more often suffers
trouble than the very Elect of God) for the experiment of his faith, whereby
the lively sense and undoubted tokens of his favorable election after many
battles and victories, might be made certain and sure, thorough present comfort
always ministered unto him either by secret inspiration or manifest revelation,
witnessing the singular care of his heavenly father over him his dearly
beloved and chosen child, as his wonderful vision of the ladder and the
Angels descending from heaven does declare, and the other vnsion wherein the
Angel did show him the party colored sheep for his portion, to multiply
and increase his substance: as also when God bids him go into his own
country from this deceytfull Laban, and defends his Jacob from him: And
finally the glorious victory given unto him over the Angel, comforting him
against the fear of his brother Esau, does bring forth unto his heart and
conscience the assured sign and token of the favor of his heavenly father,
first electing and choosing, and after evermore governing, guyding, and
preserning by the free mercy of his divine Providence.

Jeremy also chosen in his mothers womb, as appears in the first chapter of
his Prophecy, where it is said from the mouth of God: before I fashioned thee
in thy mothers womb I did know thee, and or ever thou wast borne I did
sanctify thee and ordained thee to be a Prophet unto this people, then felt
the most lively signs and tokens of his Election, when his flesh repined,
grudged, and feared to take in hand the execution of this great and dangerous
embassage, and the power of God his spirit does touch his heart, and opens
his mouth to the planting and rooting up of all people and kingdoms to break,
destroy, and make waste, and raised him as a fensed town, a brazen wall, an
iron pyller against the kings, priests, and people of the land. Now though
sometimes his flesh does grudge for the burden of his office, and anguish of
heart, as though he had been an abiecte or Reprobate, yet always after the
brunt of temptations uttering his weakness, he finds the merciful
providence of his heavenly father, to take a contiunall care for him, and not
only comfort and assist him, but also most evidently to punish his enemies.

And to be short, all the elect of God are thus chosen and called, guyded, and
governed from their mothers womb, according to the saying of the pryncely
Prophet: Thou art he that take me from my mothers womb, thou wast my
hope, yet when I hanged upon my mothers breasts. I have been left unto thee
ever since I was borne, thou art my God even from my mothers womb. And then
do they feel most sensibly and lively this their Election, when temptations
and adversities does assail and assault them, in the which conflcts of the
flesh, and the spirit, of sin and grace, of light and darkness, they are
compelled to cry and call, to sigh and sobbe before their heavenly father for
the deliverance of this mortal and sinful body subdued to vanity: and though
they do most evidently perceive how they are called from darkness to light,
from love of iniquity, to the hatred of the same, from obedience sometime given
to Satan and to the lusts of the flesh, to the obedience of the spirit, which
sighteth against the flesh, and though, I say, they perceiving this, be not
able to quench these raging lusts, yet do they mourn and daily lament,
calling for the grace of their heavenly father, which lamentations, sighings
and sorowyngs for their sins, be the sensible feelings and lively signs and
tokens of Gods infallible and sure Election. Wherefore whosoever shall feel
these secret sighs and mournings, thereby hating sin and desiring therfro^
to be delivered, considering their own weakness, and wishing always to be of
more perfection, let them with all thanks geeuing unto God rejoice, knowing
that this proceeds not from flesh nor blood, but from the spirit of our head
Jesus Christ, who makes intercession for his afflicted members (who are his
Saints) with unspeakable gronings. Whom though for a time he do permit to be
afflicted, both in spirit and body, as sometimes he did Job, Jonas, Jeremy,
and other: yet at the end he gives unto them most triumphant victory,
according to the everlasting purpose of his divine providence, who is to be
feared, reverenced, renowned and praised for ever. So be it.

Heretofore have we answered generally to them that would make God the autour
of evil, and to them which do say, that this doctriue takes away exhortations
and threatenings, and the preaching of the word. Now by the grace of God, we
will more briefly answer to some arguments which they bring forth of the
scriptures, setting aparte all such cauyllations as man's reason (which in Gods
mysteries can never be satisfied) by ye craft of the devil does excogitate, and
invent. But first we will speak something of good works, and the true
understanding of those scriptures which commend the^ unto us, least we should
seem to dissuade me^ from the same, or extenuate the meaning of the holy
ghost, in such sentences as our adversaries do wickedly pervert for ye
maintenance of man's power against this doctrine of grace and free Election,
which dare affirm that by works they purchase part of their salvation, the
which (as we have said) is freely given by this Election in Christ Jesus
before the foundation of the world was laid.

The good works which are so in deed, that is to say, which proceed of the
spirit of adoption, and the feeling of Gods mercies in electing, calling and
justifying, first of al have this use, ye they declare the power of God to be
in us, and the spirit of Christ, which does conform us to his Image: and this
is the end whereunto we are Elected and predestinate to be conformed to the
image of his son. Romans 8. Elected before the foundation of the world to be
holy and blameless Ephe. (...) created unto good works, which God has
prepared for us too walk therein Epes. 2. These have the reward, as Paul
says, not only of this life, but of the world to come. Therefore says our
savior Christ. Math. 25. Come ye blessed of my father, possess the kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the world. I was hungry, and ye gave
me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink. etc.

Of this excellent commendation and reward of good works, we do learn the
dignity of the same, not of the worthiness of themselves, which are never
able to stand in Gods iugdementes: for our very righteousnesses are, as Esaias
says, as clothes filthily pulluted, but of the dignity of the grace of the
promise of God, who works them in us. For it is God, says Paul, that works
in us both the will and also the work, even of his purpose. Phil. 2. Therefore
all is of grace, not of works, least any should glory. Ephesians. 2. For if there
were any power in our selves, or dignity in the works, then had we some thing
to glory, but now that all is confessed to be of Gods free mercies, and nothing
of our selves, we conclude that God crowns and rewards his own works in
us, that who so glories should glory in the Lord. ^. Cor. ^. And where some
allege this place* Mat. 26. so to commend works that they should be the cause
of the Election and the favor of God, they do not consider the first words:
Come you blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world* Wherein we may note, that they being the blessed and
beloved of the father, are called to the inheritance of the heavenly kingdom,
not won by works, but prepared by the heavenly father for his children before
they did any works at all: Like as the wicked have their place of eternal
torment there named for them before prepared and appointed. And in both twain
the works does only declare what the trees are wherout they spring, and
testify what ye fountain is whence they flow: according as our Savior Christ
says: the tree is known by yt fruit, and a good man forth of the good
treasure of his heart does bring forth good works, and the evil man evil
works. This does James bid us, to show our faith of our works, and says,
that Abraham did thus utter his faith by his works, and Rahab by her works, and
were justified. Where we are compelled with all the Godly learned to expound
the word justified, declared to be Just, or else we do make James contrary
to himself, contrary to Moses, whose sentence he in the same place alleges,
contrary to Paul, and the whole course of Scriptures. And thus must all the
general sentence of works be understood, that by these works wherein God
will have us to walk, we are known to have his spirit to be good trees, and
so judged by our fruits: as is the good apple tree by the apples, not that the
apples make him good, but testify that he is good, and that it has within it
self a kindly power of good juice and norishment. So we feeling the power of
the spirit woorkyng in our hearts Godly motions, and so bringyng forth good
fruits of faith and good works, do confirm our Election and vocation, as
Peter speaks, to our selves and others.

The second use of works is, that God in us by them may be glorified. Whereof
our savior Christ says, Mat. 5. Let your light so shine before men, that they
seeing your good works may glorify your father which is in heaven. And this
is the chief use of good works, the laud and glory of God whereunto we were
first created in the earthy Adam, and now are anew restored by the heavenly
Adam Christ Jesus, to walk in good works, and to be holy, blameless, and
without fault. And to this end that God in them might be glorified, does
scripture commend unto us good works and sets forth the crown of glory to
them that therein are exercised, So run that ye may obtain, says the
Apostle, labor for the crown incorruptible. 1. Cor. 9.

Now because these latter days are the times wherein our Savior Christ did
say, that faith should fail, and charity should wax could, we that have so
clear revelation of Gods great mercyes in Jesus Christ may give no occasion
to the slothful flesh, either in our selves or others: but after the example
of the Scriptures we must always exhort to good works, and so tame our
bodies and bring them into subjection (as Paul says) least whiles we preach to
others, we our selves be found Reprobates. 1. Corin. 9. the which sentence is
evil alleged of the adversaries of Election, as though Paul might have
become a reprobate, or as if yt he had not been certain of his salvation, but
that it should hang of his well doings. For he says first in the same
sentence, I do so run, not as at an uncertain thing, and so fight, not as one
that beats the air: but as he says to the Romans. chap. 8. I am sure that
neither death nor life, neither Angels, nor rule, neither power, neither things
present, nether things to come, neither high, neither low, neither any other
creature, shall be able to depart us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our
Lord. Likewise they allege forth of the second chapter to the Philippians,
that Paul wills us to work our own salvation: but they do not consider
that he straight ways adds, that it is God which works both the will and
the work. And in the chapter before, he says, that it is God which has begone
ye good work, and will finish it. So that such Scriptures may never be
alleged for works, against grace, for to set up our salvation of our selves,
which only comes of mercy in the free Election, whereby we were chosen in
Christ Jesus, and created a new in him, by his only spirit to bring forth
good works. Therefore do we conclude with Paul. Romans. 11. that we are
saved and justified freely by Grace, not by works, for so grace were no
grace, and that all are shut up under sin, that mercy may be upon all,
upon whom it pleases him too show mercy. And for the consideration of
these great mysteries of Election and Reprobation, we cry with Paul: O the
depth of the riches of the wisdom of God. How unsearchable are his
judgments? and how inco^prehensible his ways? For who has given him first,
and he shall be recompensed? For of him, and through him, and for him are al
things. To him therefore be glory, for ever and ever. So be it.

IMPRINTED at London by David Moptid, and John Mather, Dwelling in Redcrosse
street next adjoining to S. Gylses Church without Criplegate. ()


