A glass of the truth.

TO THE REDERS. To the gentill reders and sincere lovers of truth.
YOu shall have here, gentill reders, a small dialoge between the Lawyere and
Divine: wherein if there lack such eloquence, such dryfte of arguments and
conueyance of reasons, as parauenture ware requisite, and as ye shall desire:
yet we shall most entierly pray you, that where we be not sufficient to
supplye the same, to content your self with this our rudeness, declarynge the
pure truth alone: which you shall be right sure to find in this poor
treatise. For here have you no new allegatyon of man's invention or
imagination: but only taken of the scripture of god, of the counsels and
ordinances of the church universal, of most ancient popes and other holy
doctors wryttinges, with the factes and authoryties of blessed men beside,
without wrythinge or wrestynge of any of them: being taken of whom and of
none other I am sure you will say it is to be esteemed for a most assured
truth. Prayenge you most benign reders that tho some would say that they be
not truly alleged, rather to give credence to so many approved universities
which affirm our allegations to be true: than to the asseueration of any
other, specially of some few affectionate persons, which do or may endeavor
to deny the same. And now therefore to tell you the very truth, this same is
the grounded cause why this little work bears his name, which is the Glass
of truth. For it is plainly the same clear glass, within the which ye shall
see and behold (if ye look well and leysurely in it) the plain truth of our
most noble and louinge princis cause: which by unmeet and unkind handelinge
has hitherto had so ouerlonge a stay. The which doutlesse if we well
considre, is much more our hynderance than his. For his lack of heirs male
is a displeasure to him but for his life time: as lackinge that which
naturally is desired of all men to have childerne. But our lack shall be
permanent so long as the world lasts: except that god provide. For tho we
have a female heir, which is both endued with much virtue and grace in many
dootes and gifts, yet if a male might be atteyned it ware much more sure, if
we well perpende and pondre many urgent and wayghtie causes. Amongst which
this one, is depely to be forsene, that if the female heir, shall, chance to
rule, she can not continue long without an husband. which by gods law,
must than be her governor and heed, and so finally shall direct this realm.
But who that should be, with the contentement of the subjects, me thinks, it
were hard to excogitate. For proximitie of blood, is to great a let to some,
otherwise mete for that purpose, except we would be so beestly to put our neck
eftsoon in the snare of this erroneous prohibited error, which is, and has been always detested by the most part of all the famous clerks of
christendom. The punisshement whereof, were to terrible to be suffered, and
also to abominable to be hard of, emonges christen folk. On the other side, to
other some, it were dangerous, lest we should make the^ superiors to us,
over whom, we claim superiority, seeing the manne must rule the woman.
Others outward mete personages our sklender wits can not comprehend. And as
touching any marriage within this realm, we think, it were hard to devise
any condign and able person, for so high an enterprise, much harder, to
find one, with whom the holle realm would and could be contented to have
him ruler and governor. Wherefore we think the establysshement of titles is
not so surely rooted nor yet so entierlye mainteyned by the female as by male.
Which well considered syns the union of all titles do remain and be collocate
in him only, we ought of duty (if our wits may thereto extend) to
excogitate all ways to us possible, how we might atteyne the succession of
heirs male. And that way ones found, erenestly with celerite to put in ure:
in no wise sufferinge this wayghtie and urgent cause to be longer differred or
delayed, by those which do but usurp to them selfs an honor and vain
glory contrary to many general counsels and their own laws also: as more
plainly shall appear in this litell treatise of truth. For else according to an
ancient proverb, Mora trahit periculum.
To long abode is causer of much daungere, we might be much indemnyfyed and
hyndered. Farthermore you shall in this Glass see, how that now it ought to
be ordered after our simple iugementes: so to have a good and perfitte end,
most for his honor and quietyng of conscience, for our great welthe, and for
the prosperity of this his noble realm. And now this same is the truth, of
which scripture says. Magna ueritas, et fortior prae oi^bus, non est cum en
quicque iniquum. 3. Esdrae. 4.
That great is the truth, of strength and power of boue all: with it there is
none iniquite, none ylle dealing, none obstinate and froward babbling, no
malicious backebytynge, no sclaunderous and factious enforsinge. This is the
sole truth left until her self. Without all vain ostentation, without
inuentinge or borowynge of ydell titles and inscriptions, without colourynge
dissembling, pretense and all outward paintynge. Ye shall find here the mere
truth (as we trust) without all malignyng, railing gestyng and detractynge
of them, that of truth no such have deserved: the which it may be your lotte
to see and here some where else. Much more we might induce to set forth and
adourne this Glass of truth before you, save that the process following shall
sufficiently and much better perform the same, to the which I holy remitte
you: evermore most heartily prayenge you godly myldly and without all ill
affection to emprynte well in your hearts this mere and sincere truth, and so
to follow it that you may do a thing acceptable to the pleasure of almyghtie
god, and contentation of our sovereign and prince. And thus fare ye well in god
loving brotherne.

A DIALOGE.
THE LAVYER. We seems, it is wisely and truly said, that the right way is
ever the nerest way: and likewise the plain way most sure, to try all manner
of truth by.


THE DIVINE. I think that it be true, which you speak: but you speak so
obscurely, that I wotte nere what you mean thereby. If you mean it by the
ymitation of Christ, That our savior Christ is the right and plain way.
which bears witness of him self, saying I am the right way, I am the true
way, and I am the perfyt life: thanne are you in the right. And if you mean
the plain way to be most sure, because that Christ says he is the door by
which we must enter in, this your saying can not be amended. whereunto god
him self exhorts us also by his prophet, saying ye christen me^ look ye
judge a right.


THE LAVYER. The better for my purpose. For the cause why I speak it, is for
the great weightye cause of christendom: concerning the kings separation fro
the queen. It is tossed and turned over the hye mountains, labored and vexed
at Rome, from judge to judge, The dangerous and unmeet handelynge of our
soueraygnie rightful cause.
without certain end or effect: being very perilous for his highness, and
much more dangerous (if god help not) for us his poor and louinge
subjects. Which if it had been ordained in the right and due course, that is to
say within the realm, and so by the metropolitan examined and discussed,
That the cause ought to be ordered within this realm.
as law and reason would it should have been, there had ensued in this right
way or this time an honorable end and purpose: to the great welthe of this
realm and quietness of christendom. The lettars whereof what so ever they be,
me thinks ought to be detested of al good english people and subjects.


THE DIVINE. One of the chief lettars is and has be the lawyers opinion:
which would attribute to the pope the heed of their law al manner of power.
How some lawyers to much attrybute unto the pope.
whereby being well descante (as they can well enough) at length shall be no
law, but only his will. For and if he might dispense with gods law, and
all other, and ordren them as he will (as lawyers say that he may) than what
folly were it to observe goddis law or any other, but only inuestigate and
search to know the popes will in every thing, and that to follow accordyngly?
which ones atteyned were the lawyers hoole glory. For who should be set by
thanne but only lawyers / because they extolle his authorytie so hye?


THE LAVYERE. you enserch and follow the french proverb to much.


THE DIVINE. Which is that?


THE LAVYER. Who sercheth fyndeth. Qui search troue.
For surely if without affection we should speak, we lawyeres attribute to
much authority both to our master and to our selfs also.


THE DIVINE. I have hard verily few of your sect so plainly confess the
truth. Nevertheless it is to my great comfort to remember that it is my
fortune to mete with so sincere a man being (as I trust) so entierly my
friend: which is dedicate to truth and not to professyon.


THE LAVYER. I wotte what I should do, but I wotte nere what frailty will
let me do.


THE DIVINE. If will be purely good / the old proverb shall follow. Nihil
difficile uolenti, God will aid the well willer always.


THE LAVYER. That being true, and because you have some thing touched us
lawyers: you give me boldness farthermore to commune with you, and ask of
you, if dyuines be not partly to blame as well as we: that this great cause
goes no better forward.


THE DIVINE. All I can not excuse. For some of us be as heedy as you: The
truth of god with out worldly respects to be regarded
and yet our learning leads us not to it: as youres does you. For we should
only regard the maker of all laws and the mere truth: and not vanities of
this world, nor eke affections.


THE LAVYER. Ye say well friend. That would to our lord the learned men of the
world most specially of this realm would follow this lesson, and use it in
deed. For as I perceive and here, some of them follow more affections and
respects: than gods word only and truth.


THE DIVINE. Who taught you I pray you to hytte so truly the nail on the
heed? I think in deed that if worldlynesse were not looked for, there would mo
agree to the truth than hitherto has: though there be a meruaylous great
nombre that has agreed there to al ready in deed.


THE LAVYERE. That worldly respects may hap to fail them, that trusts
thereto: and where be they than? Me thinks farthermore a great folly in them to
adventure upon so sklendre a ground both soul and body.


THE DIVINE. Truth ye say, where of is great pity, that learned men specially,
regard not more the world to come than the world present: and that they
unite not them self in opinion. Great pity that all learned men be not of one
opinion in this one truth.
Which thing shows a great lack of grace, and an ouermoche addiction to
pryuate appetites, mixed with to much heedynesse and obstinacy. And yet there
is but one truth in this matter.


THE LAVYER. I marvel than, why many thus call this matter disputable, saying
that there is but one truth therein: and why that truth is not embraced and
openly showed by all learned men.


THE DIVINE. As to the first, though some call it so, I se no reason why they
should say so: That this cause is not disputable, as a thing of doubt.
except they would say, that nothing is taken for truth in this world. For I
do esteem, that there be few articles of our faith, the which be approved by
mo autenticke authorities, mo prouable ye invincible reasons / by moo laudable
customs and vsages: than this cause is on the kings side. And syns it is so,
me thinks hit is not disputable as a doubt in law. As to the second I
fear me that lack of executynge in deed of that which we profess by mouth,
is a great lack there unto. For our lives and religyon be many times far a
sondre, I pray our lord amend hit, when hit shall be his pleasure. But as
to the first, because I think hit not disputable, I shall declare you sum
reasons which do persuade me to think so.


THE LAVYER. Mary I pray you let us here mo. For one I have herd al ready,
which me thinks very vehement. If the remenant follow, I shall for my part
be meruailously satisfied.


THE DIVINE. First it is to understand, that according to the saying of the
prophet Dauyd. Verbum dn^i manet in aeternu^. Spal.
The word of our lord god is most sure and ever abides. Syns that so is
infallible, it must needs follow, that it, which he utterly forbyddeth in the
negative, may no wise be attempted. Nullus acci piat uxorem fratris sui, et no^
licet tibi habere uxo rem fratris.
Thanne in this case, that is to say. A man ought not to mary his brothers
wife: It is in the Negatyue forbodden, in the Leuityke both.xviij. and.xx.
chapitres. And therefore in no wise hit is to be attempted / specially with us
that be christen people. A man to mary his brothers wife is forbidden by the
laws of god.



THE LAVYERE. I think this hardde to be assoyled: neuerthe less the law
Deuteronomyke seems to assoyle the same.


THE DIVINE. Nay surely, if hit be well understand. For in the beginning that
law seems to propoune and lymytte certain points and circumstaunces,
without the which that law ware no law: as plainly by the text hit self
it does manifestly appear. Plain circumstances and profes / that the litteral
sense of the Deuteronomy law was to the Iues only.
That is to say, first as when they dwelled together: the second when he
dyed without issue: the third, to suscytate the brothers sede: the.iiij. that
his first son should be called by his brothers name: the fyfte cause and
ground of that law was that the name within the Tryebe should not be
forgotten nor abrogate in Israel: most specially the trybe of Judas, whereof
it was prophesied that our lord should come of. Nevertheless to the intent
that ye might well perceive that this law was trulyer to be observed in the
mystical sense / than in the litterall, and that most specially now by us
christen men: the smalnes of the pain which follows it, declares it full
well, as by the text following you may well perceive. And yet it is left also
to the arbitrament of him that succedeth to take or refuse her at his pleasure
and will: sufferynge a right small and easy punisshement, as tofore: which is
lymytte in the aforesaid chapitre. And to show that it should not be but in the
mystical sense observed by us christen men: Only the mistical se^ce of the
Deuteronomye law is for christen men
and not literally, saint Austen says thus, Every preacher of the word of
god is bound so to labor in the gospel, that he styre up sede to his
brother departed, that is to Christ, which dyed for us: and the sede so
suscytate must have the name of him deperted, that is of Christ: Whereupon we be
called Christians. So therefore we plainly be not bound to keep and fulfylle
this law carnally as by bodily generation after the aforesaid significacion
and taking of it: but spiritually in a truth fulfilled. Holy Isidoure in the
self same manner says as does saint Austen. Saint Ambrose also says, that
the sentence hereof is taken mystically. And as for any example, in whom this
were fulfilled literally, there has been none showed / as he affirms. Now
me thinks therefore (though we make the most we can of it) this law of
Deuteronomi was but a special law, given only to the Iues: as ye may well
perceive by the aforesaid circumstances in the text it self, serving only
for those expressed intentes: which among us christen men another has nor
may be in any wise observed, as taken of that law: but be clearly abrogate,
anulled, and in no wise to be used. For who now a days thinks him self
bound, to suscitate his brothers sede: or to have his son called by his
brothers name? Or who thinks him self bounden now to the groundsell and
very foundation of this law of Deuteronomy, Ipsa basis et fundamentu^ Deuteronomy.
legis.
which is here in this chapitre? As to contynewe the inherytaunces, and to
supporte the names of the trybes in Israel only?

And that this is the full intent and ground of this law: it may be gathered
very well by the very text of the same law: Quando fratres habitauerint
simul, et unus ex eis absque liberis morruus fuerit Deute. 25.
where it says. When brotherne dwell together, and one of them dies
without issue or chylderne. Which makethe a plain argument and sure proffe,
that except he dyed without issue, his wife should in no wise marye the
other. Thanne to have issue for suscitacion of sede and continuance of the
brothers name in Israel (as it well appears) is the cause of this law.
Which also makes it appear evidently, that this law is merely ceremonial,
as that is institute for certain people only / for certain place and
certain time. This Deuterono. law ceremonial which is now clean abrogate.
For I am sure no man will say, that we ought to marye for that intent now
a days. These things be so evident and manifest, that me thinks with out a
man will not se, he must needs perceive, that this law of Deuteronomye / whereof
we speak now, was only made for the Jews: and that we christen men be
clearly (...) servitude and bondage of the (...) of the ceremonies of that
(...) except that he will have Christ (...) fore to comme again, and (...) us
christen men to play the (...) Jews. Beside these profes upon the very
text, the most part of the ancient authors also do declare this law of
the Deuteronomye to be abolytte. And that except both circumstaunces in every
part and also the ground were observed: it could never have served. For they
be so mixed together in precepte, that the one can not well stand without the
other, and duly be kept, as it ought to be. Wherefore this Deuteronomyke law
takethe nothing away my formare argument, nor yet assoyleth any part thereof.


THE LAVYERE. By the feyth I owe to god, you speak felly.


THE DIVINE. Nay, I could speak much more yet in declarynge of that law,
were it not that I promised you to show you the reasonnes, why that this
matter is not disputable.


THE LAVIERE. I pray you, syns we be entered in to this matter, let us have
more of it: to the intent we may try our own conscience the better in it.


THE DIVINE. Syns you needs will have me coughe out all, I will tell you more of
my mind. The Deuteronomie law in this case could ylle quadrate or agree with
the Leuiticall, except the intent and circumstaunces thereof be well considered
as tofore. And also that this term brother in that place be well understand
and co^sydered. Note the taking of this word brother.



THE LAVIERE. Why, I pray you, is there more mystery of that word in the
Deuteronomy, than in the Leuitike?


THE DIVINE. Ye forsooth, for in the Leuitike it can nor may be taken for other
than for the very brother, the text being judge it self. But by the
Deuteronomike, as many takes it: is meant the next of the blood after the
degrees prohibit / though he be but kynsma^. And so it might well stand with
the Leuiticall amongst the Jews. The which interpretacion is well approved
also by the plain history of Ruth. But these things be so hylye entreted in
many other works and treties, that it were but a loss of (...) any more of
it. wherefore (...) now to return to my formar^ purpose, and to declare you
the rest of my reasons.


THE LAVYERE. These in deed have been more entreated on, than the matter which
you have propouned. Wherefore syns it is your pleasure, I pray you go forth
withal. Yet I ensure you I have not hard so profou^dely that other matter
declared in my life, for so short and a brief declaration.


THE DIVI. I am glad though without my desert, that this my declaration
pleases you so well. And now I will go forth with the rest of my mind.

First I esteem the word of our lord god above all things, Verbum dei nec
fallit, nec fallitur. The prohibition Leuitical general for all people. No^
facietis ex oi^bus abhominationibus istis. ta^ indigena q^ colonus, qui
peregrinat apud uos. Leuit. 18.
that another deceyueth nor yet is deceived: which says that no man shall take
in marriage the wife of his brother. And secondely I noote, that he in the same
chapitre commands this not only to the Jews, but as well to all manner of
people: saying these words. You shall do none of these abominations: another
you that be here borne dwellers of this country another any straungere, what so
ever he be, that comes emonge you. Every man that does any one of these
abominations, shall perysshe fro the mids of his people. Omnis ai^a quae
fecerit de abominationibus his quippia^: peribit de maedio populi sui. ibidem.
By these words it may well appear that god does not prohibit these offenses
only to the Jews, but also to al manner of people. For he says, every man who
so ever he be that does any of these abominations, shall perysshe. If god him
self had not determined this law to be moral, he would never have commanded
it to all manner of people. For few places there be (as I think) in scripture
(I may well say) none, which be generally prohibit: that be not also moral.
And it is moreover to be thought that god would not so generally have for
bydden it, so extremely prohibit hit, so horribly to have detested it by his
own words: calling it in some place offense of his precept, The soore word
that god him self uses in gyuynge the prohibitions Leuitical.
in some contamination, in some place a grievous fault, an ungoodly and unlawful
thing, in some place abomination, in some execration: except these were
moral, and except hit were also his very will that folk should generally
forbere and detest them. These words (as seems me) be so fereful, so
terrible, and of christen people so to be pondered, that the weight and
greuousnes of them, can scant, without great grace, be condignely imprinted or
impressed in our hearts. wherefore me thinks we ought all with meke spirits
to call for grace, and to endeavor our selfs by all ways to atteyne the
same: to the intent it might the more habundantly flow in us, and not
obstinately or carnally to withstand it, when many times it is offered us. For
it is a great fault, and a great lack of grace, when men has truth offered
to them: and they wyllfully to withstand the same.


THE LAVYERE. In good faith I never marked this, nor yet understood so
parfitely in my life. For surely it is meruaylously to be noted, and yet with
more reverence to be observed: in so much that now me thinks I perceive a
very shamefastnes to enter into any such act / which except the act were
unlawful, Verecundia
neded nothing.


THE DIVINE. Now ye begin to feel somewhat and to find the truth. For
scripture in the same chaptre confirms your saying, alleginge these words.
No^ reuelabis turpitudine^ uxoris fratris tui, quia turpitu do fratris tui est.
Le. 18.
There is shame in discovering the uncleanness of thy brothers wife. Thou shall
not discover it. For it is the uncleanness of thy very brother. Hereby we may
well perceive, that there is a vileness, a contrariety to virtue herein. For
else we neded not to be ashamed of it. And I do think verily, that who so ever
would maynteyne the other part, can not deny, Contrarium honesto. Turpitudo
ex se.
but that it is against honesty, which is very virtue: but that it is of it
self very uncleanness: It is (as I have rehearsed here by gods own words) a
sore fault. It is contaminacion, abhominacion, execracion. Wherefore I marvel,
that christen men do not tremble to here it, and much more fear not wittingly
to do it, or auisedly to continue in it. For surely there can be nothing of
the spirit of god: Non ex spiritu.
that can induce man to it. If for carnal affections and worldly policies men
should persuade it, how much that were to be detested by a man of pure and
sincere conscience: I report me to any man, that is endued with a perfight and
plain garment of truth. That for any welthe of this world would break or
seek colors to break so hye a precepte of the maker of all worlds. Wherefore
these which we have before rehearsed, being so evidently declared by his own
mouth, as the text hit self does affirm it, when hit says, I am your
very lord, the which commands you this: Ego dominus deus uester Leui. 18.
me thinks that we christen folk ought to judge this cause not disputable,
but all redye judged by the Judge of all judges. Thiscause not now disputable
/ but all ready judged of god.
And so manfullye to withstand in gods quarelle the maynteyners and
supporters of the contrary: Seeing that our master so extremely prohybyteth
and with such abomination detesteth hit.

Other things there-be also, which moves me meruaylously, to think that
this is not disputable. And those be these.

First the ancient authors, Ancient authors.
the which writes of hit. Wherein they in detestynge hit do show manifestly
their opinion and plainly give their judgment in it. For if it were good or
hereafter might be good: they being so hyghly learned and so holy, would never
so greatly abhorred hit. Counsels.
Secondly the counsels for the most part (which speaks of hit) does
utterly dampne hit. Specially (as seems me now) Constance counsel, Consta^ce
counsel.
in disapprouyng the opinions of Wycliffe. For that counsel says, that who
so ever be of that opinion that this prohibition leuiticall, Let no man mary or
otherwise take and use his brothers wife, Nullus accipiat uxorem f^^s sui
Leuit. 18.
with other there: be only prohibitions made by man and not by god, and holds
the same: they incontinently to be esteemed and taken as very Paynemes and mere
heretics by the church. Heresy to mainteyne the contrary to this came.
Farthermore that none, what so ever he be, shall dare other to preche, to
teache, to hold, or in any wise allege any of Wycliffes articles: other of
the.xlv. first condemned, or of the other.CC.lx. articles: of the which this
same before rehearsed was one. Wherefore it may evidently appear now, that this
matter is not disputable, but all redye judged and concluded: syn hit is
determined, that he shall be taken for a very heretyke that holds or
vpholdyng disputes the contrary. The third is, that the hoole consent of all
the indifferente universities of christendom does plainly determyne and
consent, The consent of all indifferent universities.
that this prohibition Leuiticall is not only a thing prohibit by the laws
of god and nature: but also that it is a square and very rule, by the which
christen men ought to be ordered and live by. Syn they take it thus, that is to
say: that this is a precepte and a direction, by which we christen men ought
to live by, and the law Deuteronomyke a thing ceremonial, which is
abolytte: I marvel that folk be not a shamed to call this matter disputable
or to hold against hit. Much more I wondre what ground they have, or would
fordge the contrary of this matter upon: seeing that first it is (as me
thinks) all ready judged by gods own words, by general counsels, by the
hole consent of al indifferent universities of christendom, ye and by a great
noumbre of other learned men: whose scales and hands be ready to be showed. It
is also emonge us christen men imprinted in our hearts in manner (as who would
say) from one to another, fro the father to son, Per manus traditionem
to deteste hit. And doutlesse emonge good folk it has been and is in manner
so abhorred, that scarsely they can find in their hearts to here speak of
hit. So than that I take it an hoole acceptance of the church of
christendom, syn the beginning of the faith. This truth accepted fro the
beginning of the church hitherto.
Wherefore any more to doubt of hit, or to call hit disputable, and not to
repute hit as already judged. I see no ground why, and think it dampnable.
Alas, me thinks that learned men holdinge against this opinion, tho they seem
to be of the church: they be not in deed. For they hold an opinion contrary
to the opinion accepted by the hole church. Wherefore these words of scripture
may well be laid ageynste them, where Christ says. Who so that is not on
my side, Qui non est (...) me est. Math. 12.
is on the side against me. So that by these words verifyed in them, hit well
appears that they be not of Christ's church. Farthermore I am sure that some
of them will say there be diverse cases heresies: which I dare boldly say have
not such ground and fundation in truth: another of scripture, nor of good
authors, ne yet of general counsels, another have benne accepted by the due
order, which comes from one to an other as this has: willing the lay fee
to believe them in these matters, and yet will not they give place them self to
this matter: so hyghlye proved and by so many ways determined. Who can believe
them in their persuasions: when they believe not nor give place to the truth?
Not calling truth that, which fantasye judges truth: but that, which is
approved truth. Therefore me thinks they sclaundre sore the church, or else
much them selfs. As who would say there were no truth therein: when they
so shows them self of contrary opinions. For if there be a truth (as good
men think that there is) it ought universally to be taken, to be preched and
taught for a truth. Omnis doctrina diuinitus inspirara utilis est ad docendum.
2. ad Tim 3.
For all doctrine inspired by god, is good and wholesome to be taught, as says
saint Poule) and not by sinistre affectyons to be hid hyndred and detracted,
like as therein some do. Wherefore to the intent to reduce them to one flock,
to a concord and to one assent: Vt fiat unum ouile. Io. 10.
I think it were necessary that the prince and his people should not give
credence to them in those things, which they on so much less ground so
desire and require to have kept and observed: until they give place to this,
and such other: as scripture does plainly declare and determyne, with like
assent of general councels, and of ancient saints and doctors. And I
think, so that if they might have the one which they be affectionate to, Vnu^
ouile et ^^us pas^^r.
granted them: they would soon give place to the other. And so might there be
made one flock and one sheparde of hit, one heed and gyde and a sort under
him of one mind and concord. The which as for my part, I pray god send us
shortly.


THE LAVYERE. These be wonderfulle things to here, and ought much to move
the hearts of all true subjects: and that specially sin they concern their
kings soul health, his welthe and there realm also. Our bounden duty to
our prince.
Alas, is hit not great pity, the prince having so manifest and plain
grounds for him, he being also so loving to us as he is, so glad and so hearty
to take pains for this his common welthe: that we, which that be his
subjects, should be to him so unnatural, that other for other considerations
worldly, or for reports of sinistre persons, should let to do our very
duty to him? ye and leaving the plain truth, rather to believe maligners
against his cause, which sows more division than obedience: and not
according to our very duties to stycke fastly and surely unto him, which is
in the very right. Tho parauenture he say little, yet may hit fortune that he
marketh all. Wherefore both duty and reverence with fear, is to be had to
him, which is so loving and hearty to us: to the intent that these being
joined both on his part and ours: Malignitye and ill report to be withstand.
we may withstand the malignitie of all backebyters and sclanderers: and
utterly in our hearts conceive, that it is far from our duty of allegiaunce
to believe untrue reports and false malignations against our sovereign. And
herein we ought to emende our fautes, and from hensforthe not to suffer any
such reports: but man fully to withsta^de, who so ever would use them self
to the contrary, other in word or deed. And in this doing, I think there
should be roted the greattest union between the heed and body that ever was
seen or hard of. Which should fulfill and perfyght that wise saying of
Salust. Concordia pnaeres crescunt, discordia maximae dilabuntur. De bello Iu
guithi.
Where is peace and concord, small things encreasyth and comes to much:
by debate and discord where is most, hit soon fails and slydeth away.
Wherefore I pray god send us his light of grace, specially to keep this
between our heed and us.


THE DIVINE. By my truth, I think there can not be a better exhortation,
thanne you have here given us all. For so long as no membre halteth or is in
pain* the hole body must needs be the healer. But now that hitherto we agree
so well, I must be as homely with you, as you have been with me: prayenge you
to assoyle me certain questions of law: like as I have assoyled you in
divinity.


THE LAVYERE. I ware to blame else. But I must pray you first to assoyle me
one question more, which I would feign know.


THE DIVINE. What is that I pray you?


THE LAVYER. Of the power of the pope, in dispensation with the law divine.


THE DIVINE. Of that to entrete at length were now to short a time. And hit
has also been written of by so many authors, that hit ware hard for me to say
any thing therein, the which has not ben said. But yet for your pleasure I
will assaye sum thing, as hit shall occur to my mind. Yet one thing I
must know your will in, ere that I proceed any farther.


THE LAVYERE. What is that I beseech you?


THE DIVINE. Mary sire, this is hit, whether you will that I should show you
whatte the old ancient doctors do say, or what the modernes, which
somewhat flattereth the popes authority, says: other else declare you mine
opinion, taken out of both, which I trust shall not be far from truth?


THE LAVYERE. The ancient doctors and many also of the modernes opinion has
benne declared herin in many other books and warkes: of which I have seen some
both of laten and english. But is there, say you, difference amongst other
of their opinions?


THE DIVINE. Ye forsothe, for some of the modernes smake to much of your law,
in wrestyng of scripture for auauncement of dignite: which the old fathers do
clean forbydde and contempne: and likewise also diverse other modernes. Whereby
you may well perceive that there is some alteration emo^ge them.


THE LAVYERE. That is true. But which think you do best?


THE DIVINE. They that do lest attribute, arrogance rule and dominion to the
spirituality. The pope can not dispense with the law of god and nature

Quare nos tra^sgredimi ni praeceptu^ dei propter traditiones ui^as. Ma. 15.
Scriptura prophetica non est humanae intpretationis. 2. Petri. 1.


For sure hit will be at length else their utter confusion: hit is so
abhominably at this day abused and presumed on. But now to my matter. The
scripture says these words, why do you break or transgress the commandment
of god for your own traditions? And also these words. The prophetical and
holy Scripture is not of man's interpretacion. With this moreover, scripture
must needs stand unloosed. All these ancient authors also, which here
follows, do say, Non potest solui scriptura. Joan. 10. Augusti.
accordingly to holy scripture, that the pope can not dispense with other the
law of god or nature. Saint Augusten, besides other places, in the epistole,
which he writes Ad Glorium Eleusinum, shows that he is under the general
counsel. Wherefore much the more he must needs be under the law of god. Saint
Ambrose in his book de Paradiso affirms the same. Ambro. Bernardus.
Likewise saint Bernarde both in his epistle Ad Adam mona chum, and in his
book de dispensatione et prae ceptis. Holy popes also that were in the old
time, do confess the same: Fabianus papa.

Marcellinus papa.

Vrbanus papa.

Zozimus.


As Fabianus papa in his epistle Ad orientales. Mercellinus papa in his
epistole Ad orientales. Also Vrbanus papa in. 25. q. 1. Sunt quidam. Zozimus
papa in de statutis gentiu^. Where he says that against the statutes and
decrees of fathers, the sea of Rome can another make ne change nothing. Much
less against the scriptures and statutes of god. Damasus. Innocentius
Damasus papa ad Aurelium Archiepiscopu^* Innocentius papa in ca. litteras.
Beside these, other ancient authors confirm the same: as Basilius magnus in
regula monachorum. Basilius. Beda. Isidorus.
Beda in expositione epistolae Petri. Isidorus ca. Si is qui priest. With these
agrees as in one also these lattre divines, Posteriores Theologi.
Alexandre de Halys, Scotus, Occham, Richardus de media Villa, Albertus,
Iacobus de Lauzanna, Altissiodorensis, Franciscus de Maronis, Gerson, Durandus,
Gabriel Biel, Herueus, Bernardus de Trilla, Antoninus Florentinus, Joan. Lupus,
and many mo: which do plainly affirm, that no man can prove that the poope
may dispense with other the law of nature, or the law of god. Wherefore hit
follows well, that this being the law of god (as hit has been both well
and plainly before declared and proved) as me thinks hit is euidente, hit is
easy both to perceive and believe: that syn it is thus grounded on the very
law of god, hit is also indispensable. Now than more over seeing that this
case is also determined as well by ancient authors as by general counsels,
ye and holy popes own confessions: and seeing also that all these does agree
both modernes and other, with the full consent of the most part of all the
Universities and learned men at this hour within christendom, that this case
is indispensable: me thinks greatly that we ought (this matter being so
evidently opened and declared) clearly and holy to believe this: and as true
subjects to stycke with our sovereign and prince, in this his just doing and
laudable act. For (as me seems) it is a sinful and an unnatural al demeinour
of subjects, what synistre labor so ever be made to the contrary, to mysdeme
their prince: that in so weighty a cause he would be seducid, and use
affections. Which hitherto rayning the.xxiij. year over us and more has
showed him self in all his doings but just indifferent and most vpryght. And
I, for my part, The cause of the peoples blyndenesse.
do rather arrecte this blindness of the people, more to ignoranci with a little
to much lightness in credence to light folk, the which goes about to seduce
them: than to any other act of unnatural duty. For I think verily that
there was never prince among us, that ever was better beloved, nor that has
deserved more to be. Wherefore now using the saying of saint Poule,
Hortamuruos. 2. Corynth. 6.
I do exhort you in our lord god, that you his subiectis do exonerat your
selfs of al manner of grou^des or occasions that might bread any unkindness in
his heart toward you. And also his majesty (you with all due reverence so
doing) to continue his well approved zeal and fervent love, always hitherto
showed emonge you, to the intent aforesaid: which is that we may have,
according to Christ's own words, one flock and one heed.


THE LAVYERE. On my faith you have satisfied me both with great and many
authorities, and (as me thinks) also with invincible reasons. I pray god mine
answers to your questions, may satisfy you as well and with as much truth:
as youres has done me.


THE DIVINE. I doubt not but they shall, For your intent, as a man may
judge, and your lernyng also, is of that integrite: that otherwise than truth
can not succeed, so far as the law can say. Wherefore I pray you answer me
first, to this question. Might this cause be hard and ware hit a due course
that hit should be hard within this realm, as in the beginning of this
mattere me thought you said?


THE LAVYERE. Sire, I not only affirm that hit might be: but also I utterly
protest, That this cause ought to be herd herewith in the realm / and
determined.
that hit ought to be so. For as it was ordained in the counsel of Nyce, and
likewise in other general counsels of the world, that every cause should be
decyded where it first began: even so this cause being first begone here in
England, should likewise have been here in England determined.


THE DIVINE. In my judgment ye speak reason: but how shall I know, that you
speak law? For I here sometime in other cases, that law and reason diffre: and
good reason is not always called law.


THE LAVYERE. You say in some part well. For in deed all reason is not law:
but this you may be sure of, that contrary to al reason is no law: tho men
sometime be otherwise borne in hand. And in this case conformably to reason, as
I have begone to show you: hit was provided and ordained in diverse counsels,
that none should be called out of the province. Authorite of counsels.
Which counsels are and ought to be taken for laws establisshed by the assent
of all christen men: which must stand and take effect.


THE DIVINE. Ye name the counsel of Nyce, and other also. Now I pray you, let
us here how they speak herein: that we may be the more sure.


THE LAVYER. First the Nycene counsel says thus. The Nycene counsel. ca. vi.
The old and antycke custom let hit be kept thorowout Egypt, Lyby, and
Penthapoly, so that the bisshoppe of Alexandre have the power of them: for
there is a like custom of the city of Rome. Likewise at Anteoche also, and
other prouincyes let their customs and privileges be kept within their
churches. Look this be kept, Cap. v.
that they which be excommunicate of their bisshoppes: of none other be
received to communion. Forsothe the power or confirmation through every
Province shall perteyne to the Metropolitan. Cap. iiii.


By this it may well appear. that there is or ought to be a special
jurisdiction or power within every province: in ecclesiastical obseruatio^s
and decidinge of causes. But that this may be so much the more plain, you
shall here what ysidoure says to this purpose in the preface of the book of
counsels. Isidorus in praefa.
Hit is manifest (says he there) that such things which chances
thorowout every province? that the Seen or counsel of the same province must
order and dispense them: as it is plain to have been decreed and ordained by
the Nicene counsel. It is read also (says he) in an epistle of pope
Innocence in this wise: Epistola Innocentij.
If any trial of cause besynes or contenty on arise among clerks and lay
men, or betwixt clerks of hyer or lower degree: what so ever they be: it
pleased and has been ordained, that according to the Nycene counsel all the
bysshoppes of the same province be gathered to gether: and so the judgment of
the cause to be fynisshed and have his full end. Thus you see plain what is
the mind of Nicene counsel herein: even so as we have brought hit in for.


THE DIVINE. But sire, syn that Isidoure says that there be mo chaptres of
the Nycene counsel than these which we have and be expressed communely in the
book, of the which he says also that this is one: how is it that you have
brou^ght us in here which is plainly contained there, to confirm this purpose?


THE LAVYER. That have I done truly, because it makes much as seems me, and
I have affirmed no more than may well be take of it. Now if it seem not so
plain to you and other for this purpose: by that yet which is added of
Innocence and Isidoure, it may well and fully appear, that this our purpose and
position is plainly contained among the chapiters of the Nycene counsel, if
it ware holy had: whether that be it or part of it, or no. The counsel
Affricane to pope Boniface, much makes for the same. Yet to satisfy you and
all other the more herein, you shall here how this is also proved and
confirmed by the great counsel of Constantinople, wherein it is written thus:
Conci. constantinopolianum.
It is manifest and plain that thorowout al and every province the
provincial Seen or counsel ought to administre and govern al things there
according to that is diffined by Nycene counsel. Can you or any other think,
but that this is a sufficient proof, that this is the very decree of Nycene
counsel: except you will needs pretend ignorance, other else peruersely
deny both these authors and counselles general? More over the counsel
Constantinopolitane agrees here unto, where it says thus. According to the
canons, the bishop of Alexandre let him gyde only those things the
which be within Egypt. The bysshoppes of the orient let them govern only
the orient. etc. But if it chance them to be called out of their
administration, let them not go: for other ordinances to be made, or for
other dispensations ecclesiastical: but (as is tofore rehearsed) in every
province the prouincyall Seen must order and govern all things, which be
(as it is there understand) mere spirytuall. Whereunto says the historye
Tripertyte, Historia tripartita. li. 3. ca. 7.
that the fathers in the counselle of Constantinople defyned, that if any cause
arose within any prouynce: hit should be fynysshed by the counsel of the same
prouynce. Conci. Calcedonense.
The Calcedonense counsel draws nere after the same, where it determines,
that a cause should begin before the own bishop: and from him to the
counsel of the prouynce. The same counsel decreed, that according to the
fathers rules twice in the year through out every prouynce the bysshoppes
should come to gether: where every thing that came among them, should have
his due correction and order. Farthermore the epistle, which the Affricane
counsel sent to pope Celestine, Epistola co^ci. Affricani ad Celestinu^ papam.
shows well this purpose, and witnesses also the Nicene decree: where thus
it is written. The Nycene decrees most plainly has committed both clerks of
lower degree and also bisshoppes to their own primates. For they most wisely
ye and justly perceived, that all matters what so ever they were, ought to be
finisshed and ended, where they were begone. They understood full well, that
the grace of god will fail no prouynce: by the which the right and equite may
well and wisely be seen of the prestes of Christ, and most fastly and
constantly holden and fulfilled of them. Specially because it is given and
granted to every man: tha^ if he be grieved with the sentence of (...) judges,
to appele to the counsel of hi^ ^^ouince, other else to the universal co^^^ell.
Which laufully can not be denied, but is approved by these words folowinge in
the said counsel. Except that there be any man, which believes, that our
lord god will rather inspire rightuous judgment into a particular person /
than to a great nombre of virtuous and well disposed persons, gathered to
gethers in counsel by his spirit and ordenance. For how can the iugementes
of be yonde the sea, be firm and stable, unto the which those persons, that
be necessari, can not be brought / either because of age, or for many other
impedime^tes? And as for that any Legates should be sent as from thy holiness
side, we find it not ordained or decreed in any counsel of fathers. For in
all the cou^sayles, that we could find of Nycene, we could find no such
thing. The.vij. counsel Carthaginense, and Melitane also says well to the
same in this manner. Conci. Carthaginense. 7. et Mileta.
It has pleased and is decreed, that prestes, deacons, and other clerks of
lower degree, if in their causes they complain of their bysshoppes
judgments: that the bysshoppes which dwell by, here the cause: and such as
shall be taken to the cause, by the consent of their bysshoppes, let them
finysshe all that is between them. But if they think mete to appele, let
them not appele farther, than to the counsels within Affrycke, or to the
primates of their own province. Who that would think that they ought to
appele beyond the sees, let them be take of none within Affrike for christen
men, or as any of their communion.

Over and above all these, the counselle of Antioche decrees in this manner.
Conci. Anti ochenum.
For ecclesiastical causes, controuersyes, business or matters, which aryseth,
to be dissolved and eased: we have thought and decreed to suffice that through
every province, a counsel of the bisshoppes be had every year twyse. The first
to begin the third weke after Easter, the second the first day of Octobre.
And in these counsels must be present with them both priests and diacons,
and all other, which feleth them self agreued: so to tarry and abide the
sentence of the counsel. Another it may be lauful for any, to make these
counselles within them self without the knowledge of their Metropolitanes: to
whom it is certain that it is given and granted to give judgment of all
causes. Beside these counsels Eginius the poope decrees also, Eginius papa.
that if for ouermoche farrenes, vnmetenes of time or soreness of the way, it
be grievous and paynefull to bring a cause to the sea of Rome: that it be had
to the primate.


THE DIVINE. If these be so as ye allege them, and as I doubt nothing but
that they be, it must needs be as ye have said: that this cause ought to be
determined within this realm. For it is not possible that the pope may well
dispense, immute or break these counsels.


THE LAVYERE. You take hit very well. For how may the bishop of Rome or
any other primate, be so bold as to break the canons: the which every one
of them voweth to keep? and solemply professes the same? If he should so do:
The poope voweth and professes to keep the Canons, and may not break the same.
ware he not to be deposed, according to that the counselle Carthaginense
decrees? Who could think that one Bishop might destrue the acts of so
many holy fathers, made with their one assente, according to the profession
of blessed Gregorye?


THE DIVINE. You speak cuyn as the thing it self would have you. Ne dimittas
legem manis tuae. proverb. 1.
For syn it is said by Solomon, Leave not or break not thy mothers law: who
could think, that the church of Rome, which in deed is but a daughter of the
church universal, might destroy the law of her mother? Does not holy Poope
Leo say with an open voice: That though there were now made a greatter
counselle, than was the Nicene: it might not derogate our four counselles. The
poope ought to rule by the law of god and counsels: and can not dispe^ce
against the canons.
Therefore the pope of Rome ought to rule the Church of Rome by the universal
counselles and the law of god: and no wise the contrary.


THE LAVYERE. Sothly as ye say. Therefore he can not dispense against the
canons. For who can dispense with him self? Or who can without fault break
that he has openly professed? Forsothe if he do against this his profession,
he does thereby depose him self / as says the counsel Carthaginense.


THE DIVINE. And well worthy. For because (as says our savior Christ) the
servant is not bygger than the maistre, nor the Apostel or he that is sent
bigger than he that sent him, syn that Christ came not to break the law but
to fulfylle the same: the pope of Rome can nothing do against the law of his
mother the church universal: whose Canons he has professed to keep with
solemn vow, in the which vow he can not dispense with him self, another any
other can, syn he has none superioure in spirituality.


THE LAVYERE. That such is the poopes vow and open profession, besides other
places, appears well by the counsels of Constance and Basyle, and by the book
of bishops which is called diurnus: Iuo Epistola.lx.
as shows the great clerk Iuo in his epistole. Where he is erenest that the
old traditions and customs ought not to be removed or broken by any private
laws or new traditions. For against the statutes of the fathers the authorite
of the sea of Rome can nothing do, ne change. with us (says he there, which
is pope Zozimus saying also) lives and remains antiquite so roted and fast
grounded, that it will not away: Zozimus.
to the which the decrees of fathers has given and establisshed such
reverence. Wherefore the poopes of Rome be or ought to be the kepers or
mainteiners and not the breakers of the holy canons. Thus says Leo, thus
says Bonifacius, and thus says poope Gelasius. Pope Celestine affirms,
Celestinus papa.
that he thinks ylle of the pope, ye the worste that can be: which thinks
that he may ordeyne any thing against the canons.


THE DIVINE. The holy doctors and divines also agrees well with this.
Especial saint August. in the epistle Ad Glorium tofore rehearsed, is plain in
this. Pope Zozimus (as ye know) is clear in it. Damasus papa. Hilarious.
Pope Damasus, Hilarious with other will no breche or transgression of the
canons without an inevitable necessite: the which (as they say) god forbid.
Therefore (as says Gerson) it is an excedyng and an unruly error of them:
Gerson.
the which says that the deliberation or counsel of the pope weyeth above
the delyberation of the church or counsel general. Or that affirms that
the pope is not bound to follow the counsel and obey the same: except that he
will.


THE LAVYERE. Certeynely you come well to the purpose. For the holy counsel of
Constance decrees also the same, in these words. Conci. constantien.
Every man of what so ever state or dignite that he be, ye though he be the
pope: is bound to obey the general counsel: in these things which perteyne
to our christen faith, to the help and extirpation of a Scisme, and generally
to the reformation of the church of god: in the heed and in the members. It
decrees moreover thus, who so ever, of what so ever state or dignite that he
be, ye though he be pope him self: will disdain or refuse to obey the
co^mandementes statutes or ordinances of this counsel, or of any other general
counsel, now made or hereafter to be made upon the premises, or such as
perteyne unto the^: except he amend this fault, ought to be put to due
penance and condingly punysshed: with recourse (if need shall be) to other
helps of the laws.


THE DIVINE. Trewely if this be thus as here you have well induced, as seems
me, hit can not be avoided, but that the Pope ought to conform him self to
the canons and decrees of counsels, and not to dispense against them, and so
much the less he may dispe^ce with the law of god.


THE LAVYER. That can no wise be denied. For between gods law and man's
(says Innocence, of whom we spoke before among other lawiers) there is so
great a difference, No dispensation against the law of god.
that against the law of god may never be dispensed: about man's laws may be
had dispensation sometime: as necessite and vtilite shall require.


THE DIVINE. Well said. But ye lawiers many times speak so erenestly for both
parts / and allege your glosees so thycke: that men unlearned in that faculty
/ can not tell whom to trust. And well I wotte, that in this point some
lawyers say nay. For if they agreed, all the matter should have been or this
time done.


THE LAVYERE. Truly this, as ye say, chances often times among us lawyers,
in deed. But not in that we be lawyers / but in that we be men fascioninge our
knowledge and opinion in law, as it may serve best for our purpose. And he is
called but a slendre advocate or proctour in law, that of one law and text
or other, can not shape arguments fytte for his clyentes part. Herein is no
defaut in the law, but in the abusers of the law.


THE DIVINE. Marye of them that use them self thus, scripture says in deed.
Lacerata est lex, et non peruenit ad finem iudicium Habacuc. 1. a.
The law is lacerate and fynal judgment can not be had laufully. So that this
saying which follows also, be it never so general of it self, may well most
specially be applied to them to. Ois homo me^dax. spal. C.xv.
Every man is full of lyenge. But how shall I trust you than that you speak
law to me in this great cause: rather than them that speak on the other side?


THE LAVYERE. The authorite of general councels, and the very popes own
confessions suffiseth to that. Very natural reason also shall confirm that my
saying to be true. For it is true that like as every private person in his
case has daily his doubt decyded by the judges of his country, Apt
comparison.
and in the common law of the realm the matter is tried by the jury of that
country, and in the popes law no man shall be called two days journey out of
his country: even so have princes in times paste according thereunto obtained
sentences in like case. And if you will take the pain to look over and fully
to considre, the general counsels, which I tofore rehearsed unto you: ye shall
than find that not only it might, but also that it ought so to be. And reason
(as I have showed) is hereunto conformable, that the cause should rather be
hard and discussed, where it may be known plainly / and every point duly
enserched and examined: than where all parties be ignorant in the matter, as at
Rome.


THE DIVINE. Why than does the poope wre^ge to enterprise to know af the
matter at Rome?


THE LAVYERE. So say the general counsels, so does diverse holy popes
confess, so says the university of Parise, so says the university of
Orleance, so says a great nombre of clerks in Italy, so says all that be not
led by affection to say on the other side.


THE DIVI. You show so many counsels, popes assentes, great authorities, and
also so plain definitions of so noble universities, which affirm your saying:
that no man can but think it true that ye say. Wherein certes (as me thinks)
the authority of the general counsels and popes own sayenges gives such
faith to the cause: that it is unreasonable to be denied: specially
considering and weyenge that also the universities say and express the same.
Which of lykelyhode would not distayne their honor and reputacion in the
world, with their great blame rebuke and just damnacion of god and the world:
i^ swaruing fro the truth. I think therefore surely that you say true: and I
marvel much, that the pope agrees not to that truth.


THE LAVY. As to that I can not say. For it were an ill bird, that would defile
his own nest. But nevertheless we se here a truth affirmed by many general
counsels / by many popes, by many other authors, and also by noble universities,
by so many great learned men: and the same is never the more followed, but the
contrary thereof executed, (right not withstanding) against our prince and
sovereign lord. Which pitieth mine heart, and al true subjects I think,
within his realm. Not doutynge with gods grace but that another he nor we
will suffer so prejudicial an injury to be inferred to this realm, and so
pernicious an example for all christendom.


THE DIVI. That is surely so. Wherefore I dout not (god assistinge us) but that
this his realm, will rather stick with him in this his manifest right /
according to their duty: Our duty and obedience we owe to our prince.
than put their necks under the yoke of the pope, or his, at pleasure laws.
For god commands obedience to the prince, and so does he not to the injuries
of the pope: In what the poope is not to be obeyed.
but wills us rather to withsta^de them, as by diverse textes and holy men's
examples, it shall here after appear. God (says saint Bernarde) commands us
to do that is good, Bernardus.
and to leave that is ill. Now if that man, whom he has given p^eminence to and
set him above us, would think to the contrary, and cause us other to leave
that is good, or to cleue to that is ill and forbidden of god: there his
commandment is boldly to be refused. For it is far out of order to break
thyn obedience thou owe to god, for thyn obedience toward man. Wherefore
says saint Augustine. August.
If he that is in power above the, as to whom thou owe thyn obedience,
command the to do any thing, that thou ought not to do: there contemn and
refuse his power. If he bid the do one thing, and god an other: obey god
contempnynge him. If that man byddeth, god forbydde: shall I (says saint
Bernarde) here man, and not here and obey god? Bernardus.
Therefore (as says holy Basile) if we be bid of any man to do that is
contrary to the commandments of Christ: Basilius ma.
there is hye time for us to say, we be bound more to obey god thanne men. I
boldly do affirm (sayethe blessed Simon de Cassia) that the vicare of Christ
is not exempte from the precepts of the law of god, Simon de Cassia.
another can exempt any other fro the same: nor can give license to syn or to do
amysse.


THE LAVYER. All this you speak here, is very well agreing also, with the popes
own laws. For if his commandment (says Innocence) conteyne heresy,
Innocentius
or bethought lykely to trouble greatly the hole church, or that other ill
should happen thereby: a man ought not to obey, though it be comanded under
the pain of excommunication: in the which he falls when that he obeys
not. And if a man be excommunicate (says Abbot) because he does that is
good, Abbas.
or will not do that is ill: the sentence of excommunication is none. where
excommunication is as none.
And if the sentence of excommunication be manifestly unjust: it is as none.


THE DIVINE. Thus the good archebysshop of Canturbery Laurence successoure of
saint Austen, Laurentius Archiepiscopus Cantua.
would for none entretee of the poope nor yet commination of cursinge, assoyle
him whom he had ryghtfully accursed for the maryenge of his mother in law.
Sa^ctus Dunstanus.
Lykwise saint Dunstane would in no wise obey the pope, though he prayed him,
monisshed him, and straightly commanded him to assoyle the Earl, whom he had
before excommunicate for the marienge and reteining of his nigh kyns woman: until
he had put her from him. For this same was evermore in his mouth, god forbydde
that for the cause of any mortal man. I should contempne the law of my lord
god. Even so the good bishop Sampson had rather abyed and suffer al parels
of excommunication, Sampson episcopus.
than to do that he saw he might not do by the law of god. The noble clerk
and good bishop of Lyncolne Roberte Grosthede also wroote unto the pope,
Robertus Lincoln.
which had made (as he knew well) an unlawful request unto him: that
such enforcementes he must needs say nay to, and rebel. Wherefore now if it
fortune hereafter, that the poope or any other spirytuall person would for
sinistre affection or increase of authority interdicte, excommunicate, or
send any inhibition to interrupte the iustenes of this cause, other else the
dew procedynge in the same, according to the diffinitions before: in that case
(as me thinks) both the king, his spiritual and lay subjects also,
should manfully in god withstand them, and stycke in their minds and deeds to
the manfull virtuous and holy saying of all the blessed apostles: which is,
that we ought rather to obey god thanne men. And no doubt but that in our so
doing we shall have like reward of the same our maker: as these holy men and
blessed Bysshoppes had: with moo, the which did follow the same steps.


THE LAVYER. By my faith you speak to very good reason, but I can not say,
that our law agrees to this reason.


THE DIVIN. No, I think that well. But the foundation and very stone, which
you should ground your law upon, does establisshe us, to condescende to the
said reason. For the Church of god has his foundation set upon a firm
and steadfast stone of truth and faith: and not upon the mutable and wylfull
pleasure of Peter's successors. But your law does so much attribute to man
(as modern glosers does expoune) that it would make man, which is but frail
and caduke / directour, governor / and as superior to the very word of god:
which is (as the prophet says) always permanent, what simple wit or
slendre faith would think or believe, that god in setting forth his laws and
precepts, had (as a man would say) so vnauisebly considered and commanded
them, that any wise they should need of man's reformacion, or that he did create
man, to be superior to his word and will? Me thinks verily that it is to
great an arrogance for man so to usurp upon his maker. Wherefore now let this
pass: and answer me (I pray you) to an other question in law.


THE LAVYER. What is that now?


THE DIVINE. This same. If a man should common with you of the law, and ask
you whether the decrees and decretalles (which you emonge you do call laws)
with the opinions of doctors, which writes of them, be directed in their
just execution merely and in all cases by truth or no: what would ye answer?


THE LAVYERE. What would I answer? Mary this do I answer: that the law in
his due course exercised, ought to be directed by truth only.


THE DIVI. And what call ye truth? That? which appears in deed only: or that
by report? And if by report, whether that which some men say and depose, is
true: or only that all men say and holy agree unto, is true?


THE LAVYER. If the deed do appear evidently, what is to be taken for truth.
than it is greatly to be considered and weyed: and if not than it is to be
referred to that which the ancient fathers approved in law, or the assent of
counsels general do say, and affirm to be true and law. And if (as in a
rare case) it fortune some time that the truth can not be fully gathered or
made plainly to appear, than judgments and opinions of doctors, soundyng to
reason so far as man's wit can comprehend, and not discrepant from gods
law: be to be ensued and followed.


THE DIVI. Herein may sometime fortune an error.


THE LAVYER. That is truth. For in the justice of this world that is truth,
which the laws receives for truth, and when the laws receives it, than it
is as truth in the sight and judgment of men: though in the sight of god it be
not so. God sees al with his own eyes: and therefore his justice is most
perfect / and is directed always occordynge to a most perfitte truth. Man
trusts other men's eyes and tounges / and sometime his own sensis, which
may err: and therefore follows and admits instead of truth the lykelyhode
of truth and the lykelyhode approved by the law. Whereupon it follows that
what the law callethe truth, is to be taken for a truth: until the
contrary may evidently appear. For if manne should never take for the truth:
but only that the deeds showed of truth, there (...) seldom appear truth to
men (...) matters. The deed vanyssheth (...) passes over, ne can be permanente
(...) testimony of the truth is preserved by the law: which wylleth faith
to be given to sufficient wrytinges and sayenges in that behalf. And if you
require farther declaration hereof: me thinks that it apperethe well in this
example. Who can show the truth of his own lynadge or parentage, but by
authority of the law, by which law witness proves the marriage of the
personages, and birth of the child upon the woman married? Whereupon the law
concludes the generation of the husband as father: whether it be so in deed
or no. The laufull proof of boly knowledge
And so it is in proof of the truth of carnal copulation and bodily
knowledge. Wherein there is no witness communely that depose of the very act,
but only of the nere circumstaunces precedynge or following the act: as age
of the two parties conueniente and lykely there unto / with conversation in
bed and other place at liberty for that act. Whereupon the law concludethe
for a truth, the act of copulation to have ensued, and so in other cases of
like fashion.


THE DIVI. Why sir, if this be thus, as ye say: than shall it little avail
the queen to allege, That the queen's allegynge to the contrary nothing
avails.
that she was not known by prince Arthur. For sure I am, there be witness, and
(as I have hard say) of the noblest me^ of this realm, that knew prince
Arthure and the queen at the time of their marriage, and knew them both to be
of competent age, feet apt and prone to that natural act: bedded to gether
at sondrye times, living at liberty, in one house being: no let or
impediment in law why they should not, but many prouocations of nature why
they should accomplysshe their natural desire in that be half.


THE LAVYER. I think the queen will never erenestly allege that matter: which
has not only no probabilite of truth / but also that being proved, which you
speak of: that is to say, the marriage, living, beddinge, and conversation
together of her and prince Arthure, a plain conclusion to the contrary.


THE DIVINE. There be many mo specialtes than these: that go nere the matter.
For some men of great house say / and (as I am enfourmed) depose upon their
oath: that prince Arthur did report him self unto them, Prince Arthurs own
reports.
that he had carnally known her. And that at diverse times, to some at one time
/ to some at a another: so that his sayenges were many times reiterate. Which
me thinks gyuethe much greatter faith, in so much that it is not to be
thought, that al these times he should speak for ostentacion and bostynge of
him self only. For at some time of these it does appear by attestacion of
credible folks, whereof some were his servants nere about him at that time:
that he spoke it for mere necessite, demanding and desiring drink
incontinently upon his great labors, in the morning very erely to quench his
thyrste: answering when the question was asked him, why sir and be ye now so
dry? Mary if thou haddeste been as osten in Spain this night as I have been:
I think verily thou would have been much dryar. Another thing there is
more, which has a marvelous apperaunce in it to declare that she should be
known by prince Arthure: and that is this. Incontinent after his death the
name of a prince belonged to him that is now our sovereign lord and king,
except his brother had children: and so without creation or any other
solemnite straight way so to be called thereby. Which if it should not so have
followed, should have been a mere iniurye illated by his father to him: without
some other meruaylous great consideration. So it was his brother being deed,
upon suspicion that she had been with child, and being also certifyed by the
princes counsel, that they and she both thought the same: (...) for what
cause the name of prince was differred our (...).
the name of prince was differred from our sovereign lord that now is by the
space of a month and more, in which time it was likely the truth to be
known. And so me thinks there can be no more vehement nor almost a playner
trial of her to be known, than this: being with all well considered how well
auisedly the noble king his fader did always proceed in all his acts and
deeds. Ye and a third there is also, whereby it can not be denied but that this
her oste^tacion and affirmation is nothing true. And that now is evidently
proved by an instrument called a Brefe, which she by her self or her proctour
produced in publyke judgment before the Legates in her defense: because our
soueraynes counsel found fautes in the bulle, which were sufficient in law
(as lawyers do affirm) though the pope might dispense (as he may not i^dede)
to annihilate and fordo the marriage bitwene the king and her. For where one of
the fautes, which the kings counsel found, was that after the death of
prince Arthur, in suinge for dispensation, the atteyned a bull / whereof the
suggestion was not true: Being in one place (as it was said) in the bull
Forsan cognitam, as who says, may fortune known. Which makes a doubt of
that thing, which she knew well enough before. And thereby it may well be
coniectured, that she feared to tell the trewthe, lest that the pope,
perceiving that she had been known by prince Arthoure, would never have
dispensed with this lattre marriage. Or else in deed if she had not be known,
she neded not to have put in, these terms at all. And thereby emonges other
things the kings counselle thought, that this bulle was subrepticious and
naught: because the true meaning of the supplycatyon was not purely and
trewely declaredde in the same. She thanne fearing that by this fault and
other, which were found in the said Bulle, she should fail of her purpose:
did according as tofore is said, in her defense exhybyte this brieffe:
thinking thereby to take away al these doubtis, which were found in the
Bulle, and specially that of Forsan cognitam. But in this (as scripture says,
obscurati sunt oculi eorum, Both her eyes and her counsels were blinded. For
where they went about to hele some small soores, they opened a great wound: and
in the Brefe confess cognitam, without Forsan: which is to say, that she was
known without parauenture. How the brefe which was purchased for fautes in
the bull manyfestely shows that she was known by prince Arthur.
Which makes (as me thinks) to evident a proof, that she should be known
by prince Arthure / and so plainly shows it that it can not be denied. For
now if ye mark it well, it is confessed both by him and her: though she
list to say now the contrary, and that in judgment.


THE LAVYER. I marvel than, that men will yet doubt whether it be true or no:
that the law approves so for truth, where these probations appears so plain.


THE DIVINE. I will tell you why. Because her grace says her self, that she
was not carnally known, and she says that she knows it better than all the
world beside.


THE LAVYERE. It can not be denied, but that she knows it best of folk now
living. But prince Arthur when he lived knew utterly as well as her grace. Who
having no cause why at that time to say otherwise than the truth, she not
denieng at that time that same, said than the contrary of that the queen now
alleges, when it makes most for her purpose so to say, being witness in
her own cause and party for her own defense / without any matter to iustifye
her so saying: saving only her sole such allegacion. One man's or woman's
saying singular, be he or she of never such dignite auctorite prerogative or
preeminence, How the queen's saying can not prove.
by the law shall not make faith in an other man's cause, which nothing
apperteyneth to him. Wherefore there can be no reason ne law to maynteyne that
the queen in her own cause should have credit and be believed, or yet her
saying regarded in that behalf. And assuredly to speak, it is impossible by
due and laufull proof to prove true this her saying by her self in deed, at
this hour: seeing that she has been known syns. And as for words, it is to
open in law, that the husbands attestatyon making for the marriage is to be
preferred to the woman's denial in that case. So that if there were no more but
prince Arthurs own saying, the law wills that credytte should be given to
him and not to her. And if she would go about to prove it by records, it is to
be considered, How unlikely should be her recordis testimonye.
that they which she would now bring to testifi this, her not to be known:
must be of those which were here present with her. Which were sent than
purposely, rather to testifi the contrary. For it was at that time the thing
which her father and mother both most desired, to here of succession of their
two bodies: and to understand that bitwene them was carnal copulatyon.
Whereby it may evidently appear (what so ever they now say) that they came
than rather to approve the contrary, than that which she would bring them to
testify now. For who can think that they which brought the daughter of their
king to be married unto the son and heir of a king, would than seek for
ways, whereby they might after prove, that she ware not carnally known by him:
that they brought her for? And I reken that another she nor eke her witness can
make in this matter any due prove, admithable in law: seeing also that one of
the parties is deed, who to make answer had as much interest, as she to deny
it.


THE DIVI. I know not your law, but me thinks you speak reason: that we
should take for the truth which is laufully approved for truethe, what so
ever the party say to the contrary. Considering that truth (as ye have
declared) depends upon the true approbacyon in the law, and not upon the
bare demonstration of the act.


THE LAVIER. You take it right. And therefore if my father and mother both
would deny me to be their son: I shall (if I have laudable testimonye) prove
the contrary, al though they will never so ernestly both defend and mainteyne
their denial: alleagynge that they know the truth better than all the world
after, as they do in deed. But their knowledge helps not where no faith is to
be given to the^. And the question is not what they know: but what is to be
bileued. None to be believed in his own cause.

A iuuene cupido credatur reddita uirgo?


And truly no man is to be beleuid in his own matter. And (as one said) may a
man bileue that a maiden acco^panieng with a young man of lust (being no let
thereunto) shall return as she was a maiden? Meaning believe it who that would,
for he would not. Prince Arthurs and the queen's conversation together in bed
and house, being both of lauful age, with these other probations tofore
rehearsed, so clearly sets forth the truth of carnal knowledge: that the
queen's asseueration to the contrary, nor yet her dissembling profes (if she
have any) can blemysshe the same in any upright true or indifferent man's
opinion. Wherefore I meruel that other she or any, that makes pretense of love
toward her, will allege or cause to be alleged so mere an vnprouable excuse,
in so hie a cause. The doing whereof to my judgment has greatly derogate both
her and their credit: not only in this case, but in all other also.


THE DIVIN. These things be so pythily spoken and set forth, that they can
not be avoided. Wherefore sins the truth favors our princis cause so much:
let us his subjects than not omyt another our zele ne yet our obedience to
him according to our allegiance: nor our duty to god in assistinge the
truth, Our office and duty to god and our king.
as is the part and office of a true christen man. For surely we ought by our
alleagiance to defend him and his doings against all maligners, both in
words and deeds. For against maligners god him self exhorts us by his
prophet, when he says. Be not desirous to follow the malignere. Beware
maligners.
Than syn we be forbidden to follow them in general terms and generally
commanded to avoid them: much more he forbyddeth us in that is against our
prince and sovereign. Principi populi tui non maledices. exo. 22.

\ In cogitatione tua regi ne detrahas. Ec. 10.


Alas, what ingratitude, ye and that unnatural were in us, if we should other
wise do? Or how could we will or desire of our prince that point of kyndnes,
as toward us and our causes: which we refuse unto him ward? How might we
desire of him not to be light in creditte / when he hereth complaynte of us:
when we be so light to believe all tales invented against him and his most
rightuous intent? Or how can we be so bold to desire his grace of his most
hye goodness and favor, and to assist us in our ryghtuous causes: when we do
not frankely assiste him, ye and offer us to live and dye in this his just
cause and matter?


THE LAVYER. Me thinks, this matter touches us as much almost as him.
Saving only his conscience. But as for the world, much more. For in his time
no man can interrupt him: Our most loving princis true endeavor is much more
for us than him.
nor there is no besines in title. But afterward if the order be not set by
him or that he dye: it is hard to say, how many shall repent it. Wherefore I
think of both, it is more requisite for us than for him: to have this mattre
at an honorable end.


THE DIVINE. But how might that be?


THE LAVYER. Mary I think that the way might be found well enough, if the
hole heed and body of the parliament would set their wits and good wylles unto
it. For no doubt, but that it ought to be determined within this realm: as
plainly enough it appears before.


THE DIVINE. Surely you say well. For me thinks, the succession of this
realm, ought not to be ordered by forreins. For if it should, and we to
accept the same: they were rulers and orderers of this realm, An abusion
intolerable
and not the king and his parliament. And than doutlesse this realm were as
evil in condition as sclaues of Turks: which I pray god defend it fro. For
seeing that there is nothing to be determined but the fault of being known or
not known, which I think is evidently enough proved already: there is no place
so conueniente to try the truth of that matter as this ^^alme. How the cause
may have his end.
Wherefore me thinks the kings highness and his parliament should e^^^stly
prese the metropolitanes of this realm (there unjust oath made to the pope
not withsta^dyng) to set an end shortly in this. And to take a greatter
regard to the quietyng of his graces conscience and this realm: than to the
ceremonies of the popes law. For by gods law they be bound to the
obedience of their prince, and to seek also the quietation and peacesablenes of
this realm: which ought to be regardyd more than any man's law. Which I
trust they being of such sincerite as I take them of / will not let to do
when it shall be put to them, who so ever say nay: answeringe when need shall
be according to their ancient and virtuous predecessors. Rather we ought to
obey god than men. Magis oportet obedire deo q^ hominibus. Act. v. Per oration.
And thus this little tretise shall make his end. Prayenge the reders that if
any thing be amysse in it, to arrecte it rather to lack of discrecyon than of
good will. And though peraue^ture in opening of the cause some be indirectly
touched, farther may hap than pleases them: we humbly desire them to reken,
that if we could have by our simple wits devised any other way so plainly
and truly to have opened this cause: we would much rather have done it than
thus. But in declarynge the truth we mind to halte for no respect. Wherefore
we pray them to hold us excused. And though parauenture that the wise man's
proverb, The telling of truth bredeth often displeasure, Veritas odi um parit.
shall take effect in us: me mind not (and god before) to spare either to
tell it, or with our lives to maynteyne it: saying that Christ him self
says: I am the very truth, and eterne life. Which abydethe them, Ego sum
ueritas and uita Joan. 14.
that follow the truth. And where as we think, that it is hardely possible for
any man to endite or conueye any work of such sort, that no man shall find
a fault therein specially captious folk and maligners: Against malygners and
raylynge bablers.
Which rather when they have found a right small fault, will go about to
ieste and rail on it / ye though no fault at all, yet rather will so do of all
that pleases them not, than to come to the remanaunt in the iustificacion of
the matter: we most entierly pray you louinge reders, that if any such ye
now or here after shall here of, which would co^tradict or again say this
pore treatise of truth, not to give credence unto the^, till they can prove
the contrary hereof. And that sothly, not by their gestes, their faces and
crakes, which is al out of frame: but (as it ought truly) only by good
scripture, good ancient authors, general counsels, virtuous and holy popes
own sayenges, famous universities, and infinite clerks and learned men's
opinions, concurring with old ancient customs and vsages: and that syn our
savior Christ's own time, as we have declared in this our poor treatise all
ready for our part. And an other thing there is also / which we trust shall
cause you to give the less credytte to who so ever would malign at this
work, The sure pyllars this work leans to.
which is this. That this work stands with virtue and clennes. The which
truth all the contrary part can not deny. And therefore hit ought rather to
be embraced. And doutlesse the contrary thereof is vice and uncleanness, which
ought vttrely therefore to be dispysed. And this sure we are, that diverse of
the most reputed personages in learning, which takes the the contrary part
of that we do, have said to men of great creditte: that if this matrimony were
to be made, they would never condescende unto it, nor ever advise any man to
attempt any such. Whereof we now gather, that they iuged it naught: though for
some respect now i^ this time they do cloak the contrary. For if it were good
or laufull (as now they would make pretense it were) why should they have
said, as tofore is rehearsed? And sins they have confessed so far: this vrge^t
reason must keep them within the list which is this. That thing, which is
ones naught in gods law moral: can never be good, but by his only
alowa^ce: as most part of counsels general and good outhors do determine.
Wherefore in this their so saying, we may well think, that they verily
confessed the effect of this our treatise. Which if they now contrary in
word or bid, or hereafter shall: can not be well taken in indifferent ears,
but esteemed to proceed of to much lyghtnes, or of subornynge, or else of to
great affection and cleuynge to their own opinion. Wherefore, if they so do, we
think, that lyttel creditte should be given unto them. And we doubt not, but
that your minds and affections are such to your most loving prince: that now
syn ye know them, such their sayenges shall nothing hindre his well deserved
estimation among you. And therefore efte sone we most heartily pray you gentle
reders, that another sinistre affection, nor yet malycious report, do hinder
the accepting of this our treatise in your hearts and iugementes: otherwise
than that if you had matters to do before our prince and his counsel, ye would
they should do in your just petitions and causes. For you must remember that
Christ commands us, to do as we would be done to. Where he wylleth it of
each to other emonge us al: will he not that most of all we observe (...),
^^empst our most loving prince and sovereign No dout but so wylleth and
comandeth our savior Christ. In whom fare ye well most gentle reders, ever
to inclyne and favor most the truth.


(...) CVM PRIVILEGIO.


