A DISCOVRSE Of a Discovery for a new Passage to Cataia.

Written by Sir HVMFREY GILBERT, Knight.

Quid non?
Imprinted at London by Henry Middleton for Richard Ihones.

ANNO. DOMINI. 1576. Aprilis. 12.

GEORGE GASCOIGNE Esquire to the Reader.
EVery man that is of judgment, and has a reasonable disposition to the
atteining of any virtue, together with a discretion to use the benefits of
nature, will confess, that we are by as great reason bound to encourage and
commend the industry of the diligent, as to dispraise and punish the sloth or
abuse of the negligent: For if princes do not as well reward and cherish the
well deserving subject, as their Judges and Magistrates are ready to correct
the offendour, the Common Wealth might then quickly be deprived both of the one
and the other: I mean that as fast as the sword of Justice should weed out
the one, so fast the scourg of ingratitude would chase out the other. And so
thereby their dominions might (in the end) become naked and altogether
unfurnished.

We see the good huswife is no less curious to deck her bees hiue, to rub and
perfume it with sweet herbs, to cover and defend it from rain with clay and
boordes, and to place it in the warm Sunshine safe from the Northerly blastes:
then She is ready to wreck her malice on the drones, to smoke and smoulder
them with Bunte and Brimstone, to fray and chase them out by soudain noise, and
to kill them and cast them away, as unprofitable members in her Microcosmos.
Yea, and with melody of Basins and Timbrils will she welcome home her swarm,
if at any time they do (waspishly) go astray, and yet at last return to
their former abiding.

Thus much (gentle reader) I have thought good (Allegorically) to write in the
behalf of the right worshipful and my very friend S. Humfrey Gilbert Knight,
the true author of this little (yet profitable) Pamphlet, entitled A
Discourse of a Discovery for a new passage to Cataia, etc. In whose
Commendation I would feign write as much as he deserves, were I not afraid
to be condemned by him of flattery: which blame (with my friends) I use not
to deserve. But surely, over and besides that, he is a gentleman well and
worshipfully borne and bredde, and well tried to be valiant in martial
affairs, whereby he has worthily been constituted a Coronell and general in
places requisite, and has with sufficiency discharged the same, both in this
Realm, and in foreign Nations: he is also endued with sundry great gifts
of the mind, and generally well given to the aduauncemente of knowledge and
virtue. All which good parts. I rather set down constrained by the present
occasion, then prompted by any vain desire to currie fanoure with my friend:
For his virtues are sufficient to praise themselves. And it shall be a sufficient
conclusion for my praises, to wish that our realm had store of such
Gentlemen.

But as the good Gardener does cover his tender herbs in winter, and cherishe
them also in summer: so have I thought my self bounden somewhat to say in the
commendation of this present Treatise, and somewhat to answer unto the
objections that might be made by such as list to cavil at every commendable
enterprise.

And surely I cannot choose, but highly praise the noble mind and courage of
the Author, who more respectinge the public profit that might ensue by this
Discovery, then the delicate life of a Courtier, well countenanced and
favored both by his Prince and all the Nobility, had prepared his own body
to abide the malice of the winds and waves, and was even ready to have
performed the voyage in proper person, if he had not been by her Majesty
otherwise commanded and employed in martial affairs, as well in Ireland, as
sithence in other places.

You must herewith understand (good Reader) that the author having a
worshipful Knight to his brother, who abashed at this enterprise (as well for
that he himself had none issue, nor other heier whom he meant to bestow his
lands upon, but only this Author, and that this voyage then seemed stra^g and
had not been commonly spoken of before, as also because it seemed impossible
unto the common capacities) did seem partly to mislike his resolutions, and to
disuade him from the same: thereupon he wrote this Treatise unto his said
Brother, both to excuse and clear himself from the note of rashness, and
also to set down such Authorities, reasons, and experiences, as had chiefly
encouraged him unto the same, as may appear, by the letter next following, the
which I have here inserted for that purpose. And this was done about vij.
years now past, sithence which time the original copies of the same have lien
by the author as one rather dreading to hazard the Judgments of curious
perusers, then greedy of glory by hasty publication.

Now it happened that my self being one (amongst many) beholding to the said
S. Humfrey Gilbert for sundry courtesies, did come to visit him in Winter last
passed at his house in Limehowse, and being very bold to demand of him
how he spente his time in this loytering vacation from martial stratagemes,
he courteously took me up into his Study, and there showed me sundry
profitable and very commendable exercises, which he had perfected painefully
with his own pen: And amongst the rest this present Discovery. The which as
well because it was not long, as also because I understood that M. Fourboiser
(a kinsman of mine) did pretend to travail in the same Discovery, I craved at
the said S. Humfreyes hands for two or three days to read and to peruse.
And be very friendly granted my request, but still seming to doubt that
thereby the same might, contrary to his former determination, be Imprinted.

And to be plain, when I had at good leisure perused it, and therwithall
conferred his allegations by the Tables of Ortelius, and by sundry other
Cosmographicall Mappes and Charts, I seemed in my simple judgment not only to
like it singularly, but also thought it very meet (as the present occasion
serves) to give it out in public. Whereupon I have (as you see) caused my
friends great travail, and mine own greater presumption to be registered in
print.

But since I have thus adventured both his rebuke, and mine own reproof, let
me thus much allege in both our defenses.

1 First it is but a Pamphlet and no large discourse, and therefore the more to
be borne withal: since the faults (if any be) shall be the fewer, because the
volume is not great. 2 Also it was meant by th'autour, but as a private Letter
unto his Brother for his better satisfaction: and therefore his imperfections
therein (if any were) are to be pardoned, since it is very likely that if he
had meant to publish the same, he would with greater heed have observed and
perused the work in every part. 3 Again, it comes forth without his
consent: So that he had neither warning nor time to examine, nor yet to amend
any thing that were worthy misliking. 4 Furthermore it treats of a matter
whereof no man has heretofore written particularly, nor showed any approved
reason for the same. So that not only his travail and pain are very
commendable (who out of sundry Authorities would gather one reasonable
conjecture) but also the work is not to be thought bareine, although it do
not fully prove so much as may be expected, since he that plougheth in a
flintie field, speedeth well if he reap but an indifferent crop. 5 And last
of all it is to be considered, that of things uncertain, the greatest Clerk
that ever was could write but probably.
Herewithall, as I have preposterously answered such objections as might be
made against it, So now let me say that a great learned man (even M. Dee) does
seem very well to like of this Discovery and does much commend the Author,
the which he declares in his Mathematical preface to the english Euclide. I.
refer thee (Reader) to peruse the same, and think it not strange though I be
encouraged by so learned a fore leader, to set forth a thing which he so well
liked of.

To conclude, whereas other Cosmographical works do but show us things
already known and treated of, this Discovery does tend to a very profitable
and commendable practice of a thing to be discovered. So that I thought it my
part, both for great good will to the author, and for public perfourmance of
a common duty, to commend a little Be so much comme^dable, to defend it from
the storms of objections, with boords and clay of direct answers: To set it in
the sunshine (as you see) and to ring it out with my best basins, for the
better expressing of such joy and comfort, as I have therein conceived.

All which, together with the friendly co^structions of th'authours travail
and my boldness, I commend (gentle reader) unto thy courteous consideration,
wishinge unto thee, much profit by perusing this treatise, unto the author,
much praise according to his deserts, to my kinsman (who now atte^pteth to
prove the same discovery) happy return, and to my self, some thanks and none
ill will, for my presumption.

So that the Author being thereby encouraged, may be the more willing hereafter
to publishe some other well worthy which he has in readiness, and whereof he
has made me already an eyedwitnes. Farewell.

From my lodging where I march amongst the Muses for lack of exercise in
martial exploytes, this 12. of April. 1576.

A friend to all well willing Readers.George Gascoine.

A PROPHETICAL SOnet of the same George Gascoine, upon the commendable travail
which Sir Humfrey Gilbert has disclosed in this work.
Men praise Columbus for the passing skill
Which he declared, in Cosmographie,
And named him first (as yet we call him still)
The 2. Neptune, dubd by dignity.
Americus Vesputius, for his pain,
Neptune the 3. full worthily was named,
And Magellanus, by good right did gain,
Neptune the 4. full fitly to be famed.
But al those three, and all the world beside,
Discovered not, a thing of more empress,
Then in this book, is learnedly descride,
By virtue of my worthy friends device.
If such success, to him (as them) then fall,
Neptune the 5. we justly may him call.
Tam Marti quam Mercurio.
A LETTER OF SIR Humfrey Gilbert, Knight, sent to his Brother, Sir JOHN
GILBERT, of Compton, in the County of Deuon Knight, concerning the discourse
of this Discovery.
SIR, YOU might justly have charged me with an unsettled head if I had at any
time taken in hand, to discover Vtopia, or any country fained by imagination:
But Cataia is none such, it is a country, well known to be described and set
forth by all modern Geographers, whose authority in this art (contrary to
all other) bears most credit, and the passage thereunto, by the Northwest
from us, through a sea which lies on the Northside of Labrador, mentioned and
proved, by no small number of the most expert, and best learned amongst them.
By whose authority, if I (amongst others) have been moved, to hope of that
passage, who can justly blame me? since every man is best to be credited and
believed, Cuique in sua art credendum est.
in his own professed art and science, wherein he does most excel.

And if I would not give that credit, to those authors which they deserve, but
were so wedded unto my own ignorance, that neither the authority of learned
Geographers, the reasons of wise Philosophers, nor the experience of painful
Travelers, might persuade me to believe a truth: Then might I justly be
accounted self willed (which a learner ought chiefly to eschew) holding for a
Maxim, that, Discentem oportet credere. And knowing you to be one that may
easily be induced to hearken, and yield to reason, I will briefly open unto
you, some few of the grounds of mine opinion, to the end you may the better
understand, that my hope of this discovery and passage, was not so rash, or
foolish, as you heretofore have deemed: but contrariwise, grounded upon a very
sure foundation, and that not unadvisedly, but after long consideration and
great conference, had with such as I knew to be both wise, learned, and of
great experience, as well touching this passage, as the wonderful wealth and
commodities, which might, and would ensue thereby, it being once discovered:
whose abundance of riches and treasure, no man of learning, and judgment
doubts, for that the countries themselves, and their commodities, are
apparently known by sundry men's experience.

But as it is one thing to speak, and an other by reason to confirm, so I will
briefly do my endeavor to prove the same. And have herewithall sent you, for
your better understanding, a rough draught, of a universal Map in the end of
the book, sufficient to explane the matter, with those names only in effect
which are mentioned in this discourse: to the end that by resorting to this
general Map, etc. finding without difficulty, every particular place
mentioned herein, you may the better gather my meaning, and conceive my
reasons, alleged for the proof of this passage, now in question: which I will
prove three ways.

Al which, I have divided into several chapters, which may fully deliver unto
you the whole contents of this work, by their several titles: as follows.
Fare you well from my lodging the last of June, Anno D. 1566.

Your loving Brother Humfrey Gilbert.

The Table of the matters contained in every Chapter of this Book.
Capitulo 1. TO prove by authority a passage to be on the Northside of
America, to go to Cataia, China, and to the East India. Capitulo 2. To prove
by reason, a passage to be on the Northside of America, to go to Cataia, the
Mulluccae, etc Capitulo 3 To prove by experience of sundry men's trauails the
opening of some part of this Northwest passage, whereby good hope remains of
the rest. Capitulo 4. To prove by Circumstance, that the Northwest passage
has been sailed through out. Capitulo 5. To prove that such Indians as have
been driven upon the coasts of Germany came not thither by ye Southeast,
Southwest nor from any part of Afrik or America. Capitulo 6. To prove that the
Indians aforenamed came not by the Northeast, and that there is no through
passage Nauigable that way. Capitulo 7. To prove that these Indians came by
the Northwest, which induces a certainty of this passage by experience.
Capitulo 8. What several reasons, were alleged before the Queens Majesty,
and certain Lords of her Highness privy Counsel, by a Gentleman of great
travail and experience, to prove this passage by the Northeast, with my
several answers then alleged to the same. Capitulo 9. How that this passage
by the Northwest, is more commodious for our traffike, then the other by the
Northeast, if there were any such. Capitulo 10. What commodities would ensue,
this passage being once discovered.
FINIS.
A GENERAL MAP, MADE ONLY FOR THE PARTICVLER DECLARATION OF THIS DISCOVERY.


To prove a passage by authority to be on the Northside of AMERICA, to go to
CATAIA, China, and the East India. etc.
WHen I gave my self to the study of Geographie, after I had perused and
diligently scanned the descriptions of Europe, Asia, and Afrike, and conferred
them with the Mappes and Globes both Antique and Modern: I came in time to the
fourth part of the world, commonly called AMERICA, which by all descriptio^s I
found to be an Island environed round about with the Sea, having on the
southside of it, the frete, or strayte of Magellan, on the West side Mare de
sur, which Sea runs toward the North, separating it from the East parts of
Asia, where the dominions of the Cataians are, On the East part our Weste
Ocean, and on the Northside the sea that seuereth it from Grondland, through
which Northern seas, the passage lies, which I take now in hand to discover.

Plato in Timeo, and in the Dialogue called Critias, discourses of an
incomparable great Island, the^ called Atlantis, being greater then all Affrik,
and Asia, which lay Westward from the Straits of Gibraltar, Nauigable round
about: affirming also that the Princes of Atlantis, did as well enjoy the
governance of all Affrik, and the most part of Europe, as of Atlantis it self.

Also to prove Platoes opinion of this Island, and the inhabyting of it in
ancient time, by them of Europe, to be of the more credit: Marineus Siculus,
in his Chronicle of Spain, reports that there has been found by the
Spaniardes, in the Gold Mines of America, certain pieces of Money, ingraued
with the Image of Augustus Caesar: which pieces were sent unto the Pope, for a
testimony of the matter, by John Rufus, Archbishop of Cosentinum.

Moreover, this was not only thought of Plato, but by Marsilius Ficinus, an
excellent Florentine Philosopher, Crantor the Grecian, Proclus, Proclus page
24.
and also Philo the famous Jew, (as appears in his book De Mundo, and in
the Commentaries upon Plato) to be overflowed, and swallowed up with water, by
reason of a mighty Earthquake, and streamyng down of the heavenly Fludgates.
The like whereof happened unto some part of Italy, when by the forciblenes of
the Sea, called Superum, it cut of Cicilia from the Continent of Calabria,
Iustine Lib. 4.
as appears in Iustine, in ye beginning of his fourth book. Also there
chanced the like in Zelande a part of Flaunders.

And also the cities of Pyrrha, Pliny.
and Antissa, about Meotis Palus, with the City Burys, in the Corynthian
bosom, commonly called Sinus Corynthiacus, have been swallowed up with the
sea, and are not at this day to be discerned: By which accident, America grew
to be unknown of long time, unto us of the later ages, and was lately
discovered again, by Americus Vespucius, in the year of our Lord, 1497. which
some say to have been first discovered, by Christopherus Columbus, a Genuest.
Anno. 1492.

The same calamity happened unto this Isle of Atlantis 600. and od years before
Plato his time, which some of ye people of the southeast parts of ye world
accounted as 9000. years: for the manner then was to recone the moon, her
Period of the Zodiak for a year, which is our usual month, depending a
Luminari minore.

So that in these our days there can no other main or Island be found, or
judged to be parcel of this Atlantis, then those Western Islands, which bear
now the name of AMERICA: counteruailing thereby the name of Atlantis, in the
knowledge of our age.

Then, if when no part of the said Atlantis was oppressed by water, and
earthquake, the coasts round about the same were nauigable: a far greater
hope now remains of the same by the Northwest, seeing the most part of it
was, A minore ad (...).
since that time, swalowed up with water, which could not utterly take away
the old deepes and channels, but rather, be an occasion of the enlarging of the
old, and also an enforcing of a great many new: why then should we now doubt
of our Northwest passage and navigations from England to India? etc. seeing
that Atla^tis, now called AMERICA, was ever known to be an Island, and in
those days nauigable round about, which by access of more water could not be
diminished.

Also Aristotle in his book De Mundo, and the learned Germane, Simon Gryneus in
his annotations upon the same, says that the whole earth (meaning thereby as
manifestly does appear, Asia, Afrik and Europe, being all the countries then
known) to be but on Island, compassed about with ye reach of the Sea
Atlantine: which likewise approves AMERICA to be an Iande, and in no part
adjoining to Asia, or the rest.

Also many Ancient writers, Strabo. lib. 15
as Strabo and others, called both the Ocean sea (which lies East of India)
Atlanticu^ pelagus; and that Sea also on the west coasts of Spain and Afrik,
Mare Atlanticum: the distance between which two coasts, is almost half the
compass of the earth.

So that it is incredible, as by Plato appears manifestly, that the East
Indian sea had the name Atlanticum pelagus, of the Mountain Atlas in Afrik, or
yet the Sea adioining to Afrik had name Oceanus Atlanticus, of the same
mountain: but yt those Seas and the mountain Atlas, were so called of this
great Island Atlantis, and that the one and the other, Valerius Anselmus in
Catalogo annorum et principum, fol. 6.
had their names for a memorial of the mighty prince Atlas, sometime King
thereof, who was Iaphet youngest son to Noah, in whose time the whole earth
was divided between the three brethren, Sem. Came, and Iaphet.

Genesis the 9. and 10.
Wherefore I am of opinion that America by the Northwest, will be found favorable
to this our enterprise, and am the rather imboldened to believe the same, for
that I find it not only confirmed by Plato, Aristotle, and other ancient
Philosophers: but also by all the best modern Geographers, as ( Gemma Frisius,
Muristerus, Appianus, Hunterus, Costaldus, Guyzardinus, Michael Tramesinus,
Franciscus Demongenitus, Barnardus Puteanus, Andreas Vanasor, Tramontanus,
Petrus Martyr, and also Hortelius) who does coaste out in his general Map
(set out Anno 1569.) al ye countries and capes, on the Northwestside of
America, from Houchelaga to C. De Paramantia: describing likewise ye sea coasts
of Cataia and Grondland, toward any part of America, making both Grondland
and America, Islands disioyned by a great sea, from any part of Asia.

Al which learned men and painful travelers have affirmed, with one consent
and voice, that America was an Island: and yt there lies a great Sea between
it, Cataia, and Grondland, by the which any man of our country, that will give
the attempt, may with small danger pass to Cataia, the Moluccae, India, and al
other places in ye East, in much shorter time, then either the Spaniard, or
Portingale does, or may do, from the nearest part of any of their countries
within Europe.

What moved these learned men to affirm thus much, I know not, or to what end
so many and sundry travelers, We ought by reasons right to have a reverent
opinion of worthy men.
of both ages, have allowed the same: But I conjecture that they would never
have so constantly affirmed, or notified their opinions therein to the world,
if they had not had great good cause, and many probable reasons, to have lead
them thereunto.

Now least you should make small account of ancient writers or of their
experiences, which traveled long before our times, reconing their authority
amongst fables of no importance: I have for the better assurance of those
proofs, set down some part of a discourse, written in the Saxon tongue, and
translated into English by M. Nowel Servant to Master Secretary Cecill, Now
Lord Burleighe and high Treasurer of England.
wherein there is described a Navigations, which one Ochther made, in the time
of King ALFRED, King of Westsaxe Anno. 871. the words of which discourse
were these: A Navigations, of one Ochther made in king Alfreds time.
He sailed right North, having alvvayes the desert land on the Starborde, and
on the Larbord, the main sea, co^tinueing his course, until he perceived that
the coaste bowed directly toward the East, or else the Sea opened into the
land he could not tell how far, where he was compelled to stay, until he
had a western vvinde, or somevvhat upon the North, and sailed thence directly
East, along the coast, so far as he was able in four days, where he
was again enforced to tarry, until he had a North vvind, A perfect Description
of our Muscouia voyage.
because the coast there bowed directly toward the South, or at least opened,
he knew not how far into the land, so that he sailed thence along the coaste
continually full South, so far as he could travel in the space of five days,
where he discovered a mighty river, which opened far into the land, and
in the entrye of this river he turned back again.

Whereby it appears, that he went the very same way, that we now do yearly
trade by S. Nicholas into Muscouia, which way no man in our age knew, By Sir
HVGH WYLLOWBE, Knight, Chauncellor and borough.
for certeintie to be sea, until it was since discovered by our English men,
in the time of King Edward the sixth: but thought before that time that
Grondlande had joined to Normoria Byarmia, and therefore was accounted a new
discovery, being nothing so in deed, as by this discourse of Ochthets it
appears.

Nevertheless if any man should have taken this voyage in hand, by the
incouragment of this only author, he should have been thought but simple:
consideringe that this Navigations was written so many years past, in so
barbarous a tongue by one only obscure author, and yet we in these our days
find by our own experiences, his former reports to be true.

How much more then, ought we to believe this passage to Cataia to be, being
verified by the opinions of all the best, both Antique, and Modern
Geographers, and plainly set out in the best and most allowed Mappes, Charts,
Globes, Cosmographicall tables, and discourses, of this our age, and by the
rest, not denied, but left as a matter doubtful.

To prove by reason, a passage to be on the Northside of AMERICA: to go to
CATAIA, etc, Cap. 2.
FIrst, al seas are maintained by the abundance of water, so that ye nerer the
end, any River, Baye or Haue^ is, the shallower it waxes, (although by some
Occidental bar, it is sometime found otherwise) But the farther you sail
West, Experimented by our english fishers.
from Island, toward ye place, where this fret is thought to be, the more
deeper are the seas: which gives us good hope, of continuance of ye same sea,
with Mare de Sur, by some frete that lies between America, Grondlande, and
Cataia.

2 Also, if that America were not an Island, but a part of the conti^nent
adioining to Asia, either the people which inhabit Mangia, Anian, and Quinzay,
etc being borderers upon it, would before this time, have made some road into
it: hoping to have found some like commodities to their own.

3 Or else the Scythians, and Tartarians, (which often times hertofore, have
sought far and nere, Need makes the old wife to trotte.
for new seats, driven thereunto, through the necessity of their cold, and
miserable countries) would in all this time, have found the way to America, and
entered ye same, had the passages been never so strayte, or difficult: the
country being so temperate, pleasant and fruitful, in comparison of their
own. But there was never any such people found there, by any of the
Spaniardes, Portingals, or Frenchemen, who first discovered the Inlande of
that Country: which Spaniardes, or Frenchemen, must then of necessity, have
seen some one Civil man in America, consideringe how full of civil people Asia
is: But they never saw so much as one token, or sign, that ever any man of
the known part of the world, had been there.

4 Furthermore, it is to be thought, ye if by reason of mountains, or other
craggy places, ye people neither of Cataia, or Tartarie could enter ye country
of America, or they of America, have entered Asia, if it were so joined: yet
some one savage, or wa^dring beast would in so many years, have passed into it:
but there has not at any time been found any of ye beasts proper to Cataia, or
Tartarie etc. in America: nor of those proper to America, in Tartarie, Cataia,
etc. or any part of Asia

Which thing proves America, not only to be one Island, and in no part
adjoining to Asia, But also that the people of those Countries, have not had
any traffyke with each other.

5 Moreover, at the least some one of those painful trauellors, which of
purpose have passed the Confines of both countries, with intent only to
discover, would, (as it is most likely) have gone from the one to the other: if
there had been any piece of land, or Ismos, to have joined the^ together, or
else have declared some cause to the contrary.

6 But neither Paulus venetus, who lived, and dwelt a long time, in Cataia,
ever came into America, and yet was at the Sea coasts of Mangia, over against
it, where he was embarked, and performed a great Navigations along those Seas:
Neither yet Verarzanus, or Franciscus vasques de Coronado, who traveled the
North part of America by land, ever found entrye from thence by land, to
Cataia, or any part of Asia.

7 Also it appears to be an Island, The Sea has three motions 1 Motum ab
orient in occidentem. 2 Motom fluxus et refluxus. 3 Motum circularem.


Ad caeli mo^^^ elementa omnia (exceptae terra) mouentur.


insomuche as the Sea runs by nature circularly, from the East to the West,
following the Diurnal motion of Primum Mobile, and carries with it all
inferior bodies moveable, as well celestial, as eleme^tal: which motion of ye
waters, is most evidently seen in the Sea, which lies on the Southside of
Afrik, where the current that runs from the East to the West, is so strong
(by reason of such motion) that the Portingales in ye voiages, Eastvvard to
Callecute, in passing by Cap. De buona speranca, are enforced to make diverse
courses, the current there being so swift, as it strikes from thence, all
along VVestvvard, upon the fret of Magellan, being distant from thence, nere
the fourth part of the longitude of the earth: and not having free passage and
entrance, through that fret toward the West, by reason of the narrowness of
the said strait of Magellan, it runs to salve this wrong (Nature not
yelding to accide^tall restraintes) all along the Eastern coasts of America,
Northvvardes, so far as Cap. Fredo, being the farthest known place of the
same continent, toward the North: which is about, 4800. leagues, reconing
therewithal the trending of the land.

8 So that this Current, being continually maintained with such force, as
Jacques Cartier affirms it to be, who met with the same being at Baccalaos,
as he sailed along the coasts of America, then, either it must of
necessity, have way to pass from Cap. Fredo, through this frete, Westwarde
toward Cataia, being known to come so far, only to salve his former
wrongs, by the authority before named: or else it must needs strike over,
upon the coast of Island, Lappia, Finmarke, and Norvvay, (which are East from
the said place, about 360. Leagues) with greater force, then it did from Cap.
de buona Speranca, upon the fret of Magellan, or from the frete of Magellan to
Cap. Fredo, upon which coasts, Jacques Cartier met with the same,
considering the shortness of the Cut, from the said C. Fredo, to Island, Lappia,
etc. And so the cause Efficient remaining, P^^^^a causa, ponitur effectus.
it would have continually followed along our coasts, through the narrow
seas, which it does not, but is disgested about the North of Labrador, by some
through passage there, through this fret.

Conterenus.
The like course of the water, in some respect, happens in the Mediterrane Sea
(as affirms Conterenus) whereas the current, which comes from Tanijs, and
the sea Euxinus, running along all the coasts of Greece, Italy, France, and
Spain, and not finding sufficient way out through Gibralter, by means of the
straitnes of the fret, it runs back again, along the coasts of Barbary,
by Alexandria, Natolia, etc.

It may (peradventure) be thought, that this course of the sea, does sometime
surcease, and thereby impugn this principle, because it is not discerned all
along the coast of America, An Objection answered.
in such sort as Jacques Cartier found it: Whereunto I answer this: that
albeit, in every part of the Coaste of America, or else where, this Current is
not sensibly perceived, yet, it has evermore such like motion, either in the
uppermost, or nethermost part of the sea: as it may be proved true, if ye
sink a sail by a couple of ropes, The Sea does evermore perform this
circular motion, either in Suprema, or concaua superficiae aquae.
nere the ground, fastening to ye nethermost corners, two gun cha^bers, or
other weights: by the driving whereof you shall plainly perceive, the course of
the water, and Current, running with such like course in the bottom.

By the like experiment, you may find the ordinary motion of the sea, in the
Ocean: how far soever you be of the land.

9 Also there comes another Current from out the Northeast from the Scythian
Sea (as M. Iynkinson a man of rare virtue, great travail and experience, told
me) which runs Westwarde toward Labrador, as the other did, which comes
from the South: so that both these Currants, must have way through this our
frete, or else encounter together and run contrary courses, in one line, but
no such conflictes of streams, or contrary courses are found about any part
of Labrador, or Terra noua, as witness our yearly fishers, and other sailors
that way, but is there disgested, as aforesaid, and found by the experience of
Barnard de la Tore, Ex Nihilo, nihil sit.
to fall into Mare del Sur.

One. and the self same place in the earth, may be both East and West in sundry
respects: so that this Oriental motion of the water, is brought to be circular
(without repugnancie) by the regular course of Primum Mobile.
10 Furthermore, the Current in the great Ocean, could not have been
maintained to run continually one way, from the beginning of the world, unto
this day had there not been some through passage by the frete aforesaid, and so
by circular motion, be brought again to maintain it self: For the Tides, and
courses of the Sea, are maintained by their interchangeable motions: as freash
rivers are by springes, by ebbing and flowing, by rarifaction and condensation.

So that it rests not possible (so far as my simple reason can comprehend)
that this perpetual current, The flowing is occasioned by reason that the heat
of the moon boyleth, and makes the water thin by way of rarefaction.

And the ebbing comes for want of that heat, which makes the water to fall
again by way of condensation.

An experience to prove the falling of this Current, into Mare del Sur.


can by any means be maintained, but only by continual reaccesse of the same
water, which passes through the fret, and is brought about thither again, by
such Circular motion as aforesaid. And the certain falling thereof by this
fret, into Mare de sur, is proved by the testimony and experience, of Barnarde
del la Torre, who was sent from P. del la Natiuita, to the Mulluccae, Anno.
Dom. 1542. by commandment of Anthony Mendoza, then Viceroy of Noua Hispania,
which Barnarde, sailed 750. Leagues, on the Northside of the Equator, and
there met with a current, which came from the Northeast, and drove him back
again to Tidore.

Wherefore, this current being proved to come from C. de buona Speranca, to the
fret of Magellan, and wanting sufficient entrance there, by narrownes of the
strait, is by ye necessity of natures force, brought to Terra de Labrador,
where Jacques Cartier met ye same, and thence certainly known, not to strike
over upon Island, Lappia, etc. and found by Barnarde de la Torre, in Mare del
Sur, on the backeside of America, therefore, this current (having none other
passage) must of necessity, fall out through this our fret into Mare del Sur,
and so trending by the Mulluccae, China, and C. De buona, speranca, maintains
itself by circular motion which is all one in nature, with Motus ab Orient in
Occidentem.

So that it seems, we have now more occasion to doubt of our return, the^
whether there be a passage that way, yea or no: which doubt, hereafter shall be
sufficiently removed. Wherefore, in mine opinion, reason it self, grounded
upon experience, assures us of this passage, if there were nothing else to put
us in hope thereof. But least these might not suffice, I have added in this
Chapter followinge, some further proof hereof, by the experience of such as
have passed some part of this discovery: and in the next adjoining to that,
the authority of those, which have sailed wholly, through every part thereof.

To prove by experience of sundry men's travels, the opening of some part of
this Northvvest passage: whereby good hope remains of the rest. Cap. 3.
PAulus Venetus, who dwelt many years in Cataia, affirmed that he sailed, 1500
miles, upon the coasts of Mangia, and Anian, toward the Northeast: always
finding the Seas open before him, not only as far as he went: but also as
far as he could discern.

2 Also, Franciscus Vasques de Coronado, passing from Mexico by Ceuola, through
the country of Quiuir, to Sierra Neuada, found there a great Sea, where were
certain Ships laden with Merchandise, the mariners wearing on their heads the
pictures of certain birds, called Alcatratzi, part whereof were made of
gold, and part of silver: who signified by signs, that they were 30. days
coming thither: which likewise proves, America by experience, to be
disioyned from Cataia, on that part, by a great Sea, because they could not
come from any part of America, as Natives thereof: for that, so far as it is
discovered, there has not been found there, any one Ship of that Country.

Baros lib. 9. Of his first Deca^. cap. 1.
3 In like manner, Johan. Baros, testifies ye the Cosmographers of China (where
he himself had been) affirm yt the Sea coast, tre^deth from thence, Northeast,
to 50. degrees, of Septentrional latitude, being the farthest part that way,
which the Portingals had then knowledge of: And that the said Cosmographers,
knew no cause to the contrary, but that it might continue further.

By whose experiences, America is proved to be separate from those parts of
Asia, directly against the same. And not contented with the judgments of these
learned men only, I have serched, what might be further said, for the
confirmation hereof.

4 And I found, that Franciscus Lopes de Gomara, Lopes in his history of India.
affirms, (America) to be an Island, and likewise Grondland: and that
Grondland is distant from Lappia. 40. leagues, and from Terra de Labrador, 50.

5 Moreover, Aluerus Nunnius, a Spaniarde and learned Cosmographer, and Iacobus
Cartier, who made two voyages, into those parts, and sailed 500. miles, upon
the Northeast coasts of America.

6 Likewise, Hieronimus Fracastorius, a learned Italian, and traveler, in the
North parts of the same land.

7 Also Verarsannus, a Florentine, having done ye like, heard say at Houchelaga
in Noua Francia, how yt there was a great Sea at Saguinay, whereof the end was
not known: which they presupposed to be the passage to Cataia.

8 Furthermore, Written in the discourses of Navigations.
Sebastian Gabota, by his personal experience, and travel, has set forth,
and described this passage, in his Charts, which are yet to be seen, in the
Queens Majesty's privy Gallerie, at White hall, who was sent to make this
discovery by King Henry the seventh, and entered the same fret: affirming,
that he sailed very far vvestward, with a quarter of the North, on the
Northside of Terra de Labrador, the eleventh of June, until he came to the
Septentrional latitude of 67 degrees and finding the Seas still open, said,
that he might, and would have gone to Cataia, if the Mutiny of the Masters.
and Mariners, had not ben.

Now, as these men's experience, have proved some part of this passage: so the
Chapter following, shall put you in full assurance of ye rest, by their
experie^ces which have passed through every part thereof.

To prove by circumstance, that the Northvvest passage, has been sailed
thorough out. Cap. 4.
Quinque sinsus.

1 Visus. 2 Auditus. 3 Olfactus. 4 Gustus. 5 Tactus.
Singularia sesu, vniuersalia veromente percipi^^^^ur.


THe diversity between brute beasts and men, or between the wise and the
simple, is that the one judges by sense only, and gathers no suertie of
any thing that he has not seen, fealt, heard, tasted, or smelled: And the
other not so only, but also finds the certainty of things by reason, before
they happen to be tried. Wherefore, I have added proofs of both sorts, that
the one and the other, might thereby be satisfied.

1 First, as Gemma Frisius recites, there went from Europe, 3 brethren through
this passage: whereof it took the name, of Fretum trium fratrum. lib. 2. cap.
66.
2 Also, Pliny affirms, out of Cornelius Nepos, (who wrote 57. years before
Christ) that there were certain Indians driven by tempest, upon the coast of
Germany which were presented by ye King of Sueuia, unto Quintus Metellus
Celer, then Proconsul of France. 3 And Pliny, upon the same, says that it is
no marvel, though there be Sea by the North, where there is such abundance of
moisture: which argues, that he doubted not of a Nauigable passage that way,
through which those Indians came. 4 And for the better proof, that the same
authority of Cornelius Nepos, is not by me wrested, to prove my opinion of
the Northvvest passage: you shall find the same affirmed more plainly in that
behalf, Page 590.
by the excellent Geographer, Dominicus Marius Niger, who shows how many
ways the Indian Sea stretches it self, making in that place, recital of
certain Indians, that were likewise driven through the North Seas from India,
upon the coasts of Germany, by great tempest, as they were sailing in trade of
Merchandise. 5 Also, whiles Frederic Barbarossa reigned Emperor, Avouched by
Franciscus Lopes de Gomar^ in his history of India.
Anno D. 1160. there came certain other Indians,upon the coaste of Germany. 6
Likewise, Othon, in the story of the Goths affirms, that in the time of the
Germane Emperors, there were, also certain Indians cast by force of weather,
upon the coast of the said Country: which foresaid Indians, could not
possibly have come by the Southeast, Southwest, nor from any part of Afrik, or
America, nor yet by the Northeast: therefore they came of necessity, by this our
Northvvest passage.
To prove that these Indians aforenamed, came not by the Southeast,
Southvvest, nor from any other part of Afrik, or America. Cap. 5.
1 FIrst, they could not come from the Southvvest, by C. debuona Speranca,
because ye roughnes of the Seas there, are such (occasioned by the Currants,
and great winds, in that part) that the greatest Armados, the King of
Portingale has, cannot without great difficulty pass that way: muchlesse then
a Canoa of India could live in those outrageous Seas, without Shipwreck
(being a vessel but of very small burden) and have conducted themselves to
the place aforesaid, being men inexpert in the Art of Navigations.

2 Also, it appears plainly, that they were not able, to come from alongest
the coast of Afrik aforesaid, to those parts of Europe, because the winds do
(for the most part) blow there Easterlie, of from the shore, and the Currante
running that way, in like sort, should have driven them VVestvvard, upon some
part of America, for such winds and Tides, could never have led the^ from
thence, to the said place where they were found, Nor yet could they have come
from any of the Countries aforesaid keeping the Seas always without skillful
Mariners, to have conducted them such like courses, as were necessary, to
perform such a voyage.

3 Presupposing also, if they had been driven to the west (as they must have
been coming that way) then they should have perished, wanting supply of
victuals, not having any place (once leaving the coaste of Afrik) until they
came to America: nor from America, until they arrived upon some part of Europe,
or the Islands adjoining to it, to have refreshed themselves.

4 Also, if (notwithstanding such impossibilities) they might have recovered
Germany, by coming from India, by the Southeast, yet must they without al
doubt, have stricken upon some other part of Europe, before their arriual there,
as the Isles of Madera, Portingal, Spain, France, England, Ireland, etc. which
if they had done, it is not credible, that they should, or would have departed,
undiscovered of the inahbitants: but there was never found in these days, any
such Ship or men, but only upon the coasts of Germany, where they have been
sundry times, and in sundry ages cast a land: Neither is it like, that they
would have committed themselves again to Sea, if they had so arrived, not
knowing where they were, nor whither to have gone.

5 And by the Southvvest it is as vnposble, because the current aforesaid, Why
the Indians could not come by the Southwest
which comes from the East, strikes with such force upon the fret of
Magellan, and falls with such swiftnes and fury; into Mare de Sur, that
hardly any ship (but not possible a Canoa, with such unskillful Mariners) can
come into our western Ocean, through that fret, from the west Seas of
America, as Magellans experience has partly taught us.

6 And further, to prove that these people, so arriving upon the coast of
Germany, were Indians, That the Indians could not be natives either of
Africa, or of America.
and not inhabiters of any part, either of Africa, or America, it is manifest:
because the Natives both of Africa and America, neither had, or have, at this
day (as is reported) other kind of boats, the^ such as do bear neither
masts, nor sayls, (except only upon the Coasts of Barbary and the Turks
Ships) but do carry themselves from place to place, near the shore, by the
ore only.

To prove that those Indians came not by the Northeast, and that there is no
through Nauigable passage that way. Cap. 6.
1 IT is lykelie that there should be no through passage by the Northeast,
whereby to go round about the world: because al seas (as aforesaid) are
maintained by the abundance of water, waxing more shallow and shelffie toward
the end, as we find, it does by experience, in Mare Glaciali, toward the
East, which breeds small hope of any great continuance, of that Sea, to be
Nauigable toward the East, sufficient to sail thereby, round about the
world.

Quic apud ramrali loco priua^ur, quam citis^^^e corr^mpi^ur.
2 Also, it stands scarcely with reason, that the Indians dwelling under
Torrida Zona, could endure the injury of the cold air, about the
Septentrional latitude of 80 degrees, under which elevation, the passage by the
Northeast, cannot be (as the often experience had of all the South parts of it
shaweth) seeing that some of the inhabitants of this cold Climat (whose summer
is to them an extreme winter) have been stricken to death, Qualis (...)
effectus^
with the cold damps of the air, about 72 degrees, by an accidental mishappe:
and yet the air in such like Elevation is always cold, and to cold for
such as the Indians are.

3 Furthermore, the pearcing cold of the gross thick air so near the Pole,
will so stiffen and furre the sails, and ship tackling, that no Mariner can
either hoise or strike them (as our experience far nerer the South, then this
passage is presupposed to be, has taught us) without the use whereof no voyage
can be performed.

4 Also, the air is so darkened, with continual mysts, and fogges, so near
the Pole, that no man can well see, either to guide his ship, or direct his
course.

5 Also the compass at such elevation, does very suddenly vary: which things
must of force, have been their destructions, although they had been men of
much more skill then the Indians are.

6 Moreover al Bays, (...) and rivers, do receive their increase upon the
fludde, (...).
sensibly to be discerned, on the one side of the (...), or the other, as many
ways as they de open to any maine sea, as Mare Mediterraneum, Mare Rubium,
Sinus Persicus, Sinus Bodicus, Thamisis, and al other known Havens, or rivers
in any part of the world: and each of them opening but on one part to ye main
sea, do likewise receive their increase upon the fludde^, the same way, and none
other, which Mare Glaciale does, only by the West (as M. Iynkinson affirmed
unto me) and therefore it follows that this Northeast sea, receiving increase
but only from the West, cannot possibly open to the maine Ocean, by the East.

7 Moreover, the farther you pass into any sea, It may perhaps be found
otherwise in some one river, by reason of a bare in the entrance or some other
like accident.
toward the end of it, on that part which is shut up from the main Sea
(as in all those above mentioned) the less and less the Tides rise and fall.
The like whereof also happens in Mare Glaciale, which proves but small
continuance of that sea, toward the East.

8 Also, the farther ye go toward the East, in Mare Glaciale, the less saite
the water is: which could not happen, if it were open to the salt Sea
toward the East, Quic quid corrumpitur a contrario corrumpitur.
as it is to the VVeste only, seeing (Every thing naturally ingendereth his
like) and then must it be like salt throughout, as all the Seas are, in such
like Climate, and Elevation.

And therefore it seems, Omne ^^mile gignis sui ^imile.
that this Northeast sea is maintained by the river Oby, and such like
fresshets as Mare Goticu^, and Mare Mediterraneum, in ye uppermost parts
thereof, by ye river Nilus, Danubius, Neper, Tanais. etc.

9 Furthermore, if there were any such sea at that elevation, of like it should
be always frosen throughout (there being no tides to hinder it) because the
extreme coldness of the air in the uppermost part, and the extreme coldness of
the earth in the bottom, the sea there being but of small depth, whereby the
one accidental coldness does meet with the other, and the sun not having
their reflection so near the Pole, but at very blunt angles, it can never be
dissolved after it is frosen, notwithstanding the great length of their day:
for that the sun has no heat at al in his light, or beams, but proceeding
only by an accidental reflection, which there wants in effect.

10 And yet if the sun were of sufficient force in that elevation, to
prevail against this Ise, yet must it be broken before it can be dissolved,
which cannot be but through the long continuance of the sun above their
Horizon, and by that time the summer would be so far spent, and so great a
darkness and cold ensue, that no man could be able to endure so cold, dark,
and discomfortable a Navigations, if it were possible for him then, and there to
live.

11 Further, the Ise being once broken, it must of force, so drive with the
winds and Tides, that no ship can sail in those Seas, seeing our ^^shers of
Island, and the Nevve found Land, are subject to danger, through the great
Islands of Ise, which fleet in the Seas, (to the sailors great danger) far
to the South of that presupposed Passage.

12 And it cannot be, that this Northeast passage should be any nerer the
South, then before recited, for then it should cut of Ciremissi, and Turbi,
Tartarij, with Vzesucani, Chisani, and others from the Continent of Asia, which
are known to be adjoining to Scythia, Tartaria, etc. with the other part of
the same Continent.

And if there were any thorough passage by the Northeast, yet were it to small
purpose for our traffike, because no ship of great burden, can Nauigate in so
shallowe a Sea: and ships of small burden are very unfit and unprofitable,
especially toward the blusteringe North, to perform such a voyage.

To prove that the Indians aforenamed, came only by the Northvvest, which
induces a certeintie of our passage by experience. Cap. 7.
IT is as likely, that they came by the Northvvest, as it is unlikely that they
should come, either by the Southeast, Southvvest, Northeast, or from any other
part of Africa, or America, and therefore this Northvvest passage, having been
already so many ways proved, by disprouing of the others, etc. I shall the
less need in this place, to use many words otherwise the^ to conclude in this
sort, That they came only by the Northvvest from England: having these many
reasons to lead me thereunto.

1 First, the one half of the winds of the compass, might bring them by the
Northvvest, vearinge always between two sheats, with which kind of saylinge
ye Indians are only acquainted, not having any use of a bow, line, or quarter
wind, without ye which no ship can possibly come either by the Southeast,
Southwest, or Northeast, having so many sundry capes to double, whereunto are
required such change and shift of winds. 2 And it seems likely, that they
should come by the Northvvest, because the Coast whereon they were driven, lay
East from this our passage, True, both in ventis oblique flantibus as also, in
ventis ex diametro spirantibus.
And all winds, do naturally drive a Ship to an opposite point, from whence
it blovveth, not being otherwise guided by Art, which the Indians do utterly
want. And therefore it seems, that they came directly through this our fret,
which they might do with one wind. 3 For if they had come by Cap. de buona
Speranca, then must they (as aforesaid) have fallen upon the South parts of
America. 4 And if by the fret of Magellan, then upon the coasts of Afrik,
Spain, Portingal, France, Ireland, or England. 5 And if by the Northeast,
then upon the coasts of Cerecinissi^ Tartarij, Lappia, Island, Terra de
Labrador, etc. and upon these coasts, (aforesaid) they have never been found.

So that by all likelihood, they could never have come, without shipwreck,
upon the coasts of Germany, if they had first stricken upon the coasts of so
many countries, wanting both Art and shipping, to make orderly discovery: and
altogether ignorant both in the Art of Navigations, and also of the Rocks,
Flats, Sands, or Havens of those parts of the world, which in most of these
places are plentiful.

6 And further it seems very likely, that the inhabitants of the most part
of those countries, by which they must have come, any other way besides, by the
Northvvest, being for the most part Anthropophagi, or men eaters, would have
devoured them, slain them, or (at the least wise) kept them as wonders for
the gaze.

So that it plainly appears, that those Indians (which, as you have heard, in
sundry ages were driven by tempest, upon the shore of Germany) came only
through our Northvvest passage.

7 Moreover, the passage is certeinely proved, by a Navigations that a
Portingal made, who passed through this fret: giving name to a Promontorie far
within the same, calling it after his own name, Promontoria Corterialis, near
adjoining unto Polisacus fluui^s.

8 Also one Scolmus a Dane, entered and passed a great part thereof. 9 Also
there was one Salua Terra, a Gentleman of Victoria, in Spain, that came by
chance out of the West Indians, into Ireland, Anno, 1568. who affirmed the
Northvvest passage from us to Cataia, constantly to be believed in America,
Nauigable. And further said, in the presence of S. Henry Sidney (the Lord
Deputy of Ireland) in my hearing, that a Friar of Mexico, called Andro
Vrdaneta, more then viij. years, before his then coming into Ireland, told
him there, that he came from Mare de Sur into Germany, through this Northvvest
passage, and showed Salua Terra (at that time being then with him in Mexico) a
Sea Card made by his own experience, and travel, in that voyage: wherein was
plainly set down and described, this Northwest passage: agreeing in all points
with Hortelius Map.
And further, this Friar, told the King of Portingal, (as he returned by that
country homewarde) that there was (of certainty) such a passage, Northvvest
from England, and that he meant to publishe the same: which done, the King most
earnestly desired him, not in any wise to disclose, or make the passage known
to any Nation: For that (said the King) If England had knowledge, The words
of the King of Portingal, to Andro Vrdaneta a Friar, touching the concealing
of this Northwest passage From England to Cataia.
and experience thereof, it would greatly hinder both the King of Spain, and
me. This Friar (as Salua Terra reported) was the greatest Discouerer by sea,
that has been in our age. Also Salua Terra, being persuaded, of this passage
by the Friar Vrdaneta, and by the common opinion of the Spaniardes, inhabiting
America, offered most willingly to accompany me in this Discovery: which of
like he would not have done, if he had stood in doubt thereof.

And now as these modern experiences, cannot be impugned: So, least it might
be objected, that these things (gathered out of ancient writers, An Objection
which wrote so many years past) might serve little to prove this passage, by
the North of America, because both America and India, were to them then utterly
unknown to remove this doubt, let this suffice: Aristotle. lib. de mundo, cap.
secund.
That Aristotle, (who was 300. years before Christ) named Mare Indicum. Also
Berosus Berosus lib. 5.
(who lived 330 years before Christ) has these words, e Ganges in India. Also
in the first Chapter of Hester be these words, In the days of Assuerus which
ruled from India, to AEthiopia: which Assuerus lived 580 years before christ.
Also Quintus Curtius (where he speaks of the Conquests of Alexander)
me^cioneth India. Also, Arianus Philostratus, and Sidrach in his discourses of
the wars of the king of Bactria, and of Garaab, who had the most part of
India under his government. Al which assures us, that both India, and Indians
were known in those days.

These things considered, we may (in my opinion) not only assure our selves of
this passage, by ye Northwest, but also yt it is nauigable, both to come and
go, as has been proved in part and in all, by the experience of diverse, as
Sebastian Gabota, Corterialis, the three brethren above named, the Indians, and
Vrdaneta the Friar of Mexico, etc.

And yet notwithstanding al which, there be some that have a better hope of
this passage to Cataia, by ye Northeast, then by ye west: whose reasons, with
my several answers, ensue in the Chapter following.

Certain reasons, alleged for the proving of a passage by the Northeast,
before the Queens Majesty, and certain Lords of the Counsel, with my
several answers, then used to the same. Cap. 8.
BEcause you may understand, as well those things alleged against me, as what
does serve for my purpose, I have here added the reasons of a worthy Gentleman,
and a great traveler, who conceived a better hope of the passage to Cataia,
from us, to be by the Northeast, then by the Northvvest: whom I have not named
in this place, because I seek to impngne his opinions, as follows.

The Northwest Passage assented unto.
He first said, that he thought not to the contrary, but that there was a
passage by the Northvvest, according to mine opinion: But assured he was, that
there might be found a Nauigable passage, by the Northeast from England, to go
to all the East parts of the world: which he endeavored to prove three ways.

The first was, The first reason.
that he heard a fisherman of Tartaria say, in hunting the Morce, that he
sailed very far toward the Southeast, The Morce, is a kind of fish which the
Tartarians do often hunt by water and greatly seek to kill
finding no end of the Sea: whereby he hoped a through passage to be that
way.

Whereunto I answered, that the Tartarians were a barbarous people, The
answer, or resolution.
and utterly ignorant in the Art of Navigations, not knowing the use of the sea,
Card, compass, or star, which he confessed true: and therefore they could
not (said I) certainly know the Southeast, from the Northeast, in a wide sea,
and a place unknown, from the sight of the land.

Or if he sailed any thing nere the shore, yet he (being ignorant) might be
deceived by the doubling of many points and Capes, and by the trending of the
land: Albeit he kept continually along the shore.

And further, it might be, that the poor fisherman through simplicity,
thought that there was nothing that way but sea, because he saw no land: which
proof (under correction) gives small assurance of a Nauigable sea by the
Northeast, to go round about the world, Visus no^^mquam (...) obiecio.
For that he judged by the eye only, seeinge we in this out clear air do
account 20 miles a ken at Sea.

The second reason or allegation.
His second reason is, that there was a Unicorns horn found upon the coaste
of Tartaria, which could not come (said he) thither, by any other means, then
with the Tides, through some fret in the Northeast of Mare Glaciale, there
being no Unicorn in any part of Asia, saving in India, and Cataia: which
reason (in my simple judgment) forces as little.

First it is doubtful, whether those barbarous Tartarians do know an Unicorns
horn, The answer, or resolution.
ye, or no: and if it were one, yet it is not credible, that the sea could have
driven it so far, being of such nature that it will not swim.

Also the Tides running to and froe, would have driven it as far back with
the ebb, as it brought it forward with the fludde.

There is also a beast called Asinus Indicus (whose horn most like it was)
which has but one horn, Omne (...) est idem.
like an Unicorn, in his forehead, whereof there is great plenty, in all the
North parts thereunto adjoining: as in Lappia, Noruegia, Finmarke, etc. as
Iacobus Zeiglerus writes, in his history of Scondia.

And as Albertus says, Nulla ratio, ab Ambiguo ceri^ sed (...).
there is a fish, which has but one horn in his forehead like to an
Unicorn, and therefore it seems very doubtful, both from whence it came, and
whether it were an Unicorns horn, yea, or no.

His third and last reason was, The third and last reason or Assertion.
Colmaxes are a people inhabiting the North part of Asia.
that there came a continual stream, or current through Mare Glaciale, of such
swiftness (as a Colmax told him) that if you cast any thing therein, it would
presently be carried out of sight, toward the West.

Whereunto I answered, The answer, or resolution.
that there does the like from Maeotis Palus, by Pontus Euxinus, Sinus,
Bosphorus, and along the coaste of Graecia, etc. As it is affirmed by
Contarenus, and diverse others, that have had experience of the same: and yet
that sea, lies not open to any maine sea that way, but is maintained by
fresshets, as by Tanijs, Danubius, etc.

In like manner is this current in Mare Glaciale increased, and maintained, by
the Volgo, the river Oby, etc.

Now as I have here briefly recited the reasons alleged, to prove a passage
to Cataia, by the Northeast, with my several answers thereunto: so will I
leave it to your judgment, to hope or despair of either, at your pleasure.

How that the passage by the Northvvest, is more commodious for our traffik,
then the other by the East: if there were any such. Cap. 9.
1 FIRST, by the Northeaste (if your winds do not give you a marvelous
speedy, and luckie passage) you are in danger (being so nere the Pole) to be
benighted, almost the one half of the year, and what misery and danger that
were, to live so long comfortless, void of light, (if the cold killed you
not) each man of reason or understanding may judge.

2 Also Mangia, Quingit, and the Mollucoae, are nearer unto us by the
Northvvest, then by the Northeast, more then 2/5 parts which is almost by the
half.

3 Also we may have by the West, a yearly return, it being at al times
Nauigable, whereas you have but six months, in the whole year, to go by the
Northeast: the passage being at such elevation, as it is formerly expressed,
for it cannot be any nearer the South.

4 Furthermore, it cannot be finished without diverse wintrings by the way,
having no havens in any temperate Climate, to harbor in there. For it is as
much as we can well sail, from hence to S. Nicholas, in the trade of Muscouia,
and return in the Nauigable season of the year, and from S. Nicholas to
Cerimissi Tartarij, which stands at 80 degrees of the Septentrional latitude,
it is at the least 400 Leagues, which amounts scarce to the third part of
the way, to the end of your voyage by the Northeast.

5 And yet after you have doubled this Cape, if then there might be found a
nauigable sea, to carry you Southeast, according to your desire, yet can you not
winter conveniently, until you come to 60 degrees, and to take up one degree
running Southeast, you must sail 24 leagues which amounts to 495 leagues.

6 Furthermore, you may by the Northwest, sail thither with all Easterly winds,
and return with any vvesterly winds, whereas you must have by the Northeast
sundry winds, and those proper, according to the lying of the coasts and
capes, you shall be enforced to double, which winds are not always to be had,
when they are looked for: whereby your journey should be greatly prolonged, and
hardly endured so nere the Pole. As we are taught by Sir Hugh VViloughbie, who
was frose^ to death far nerer the South.

7 Moreover, it is very doubtful, whether we should long enjoy that trade by
ye Northeast, if there were any such passage that way, the commodities thereof
once known to the Muscouite, what priuelege soever he has granted, seeing
policy with the Maze of excessive gain, to the enriching (so greatly) of
himself and all his dominions, would persuade him to resume the same, having
so great opportunity, to utter the commodities of those countries by the Narue.

But by the Northvvest, we may safely trade without danger, or anoyance, of
any prince living, Christian, or heathen, it being out of al their trades.

8 Also ye Queens Majesty's dominions, are nerer the Northwest passage, them
any other great princes that might pass that way, and both in their going and
return, they must of necessity succor themselves and their ships, upon
some part of the same, if any tempestious weather should happen.

Further, no Princes Navy of the world, is able to encounter the Queens
Majesty's Navy, as it is at this present: and yet it should be greatly
increased, by the traffike ensuing upon this discovery, for it is the long
voyages, that increase and maintain great shipping.

Now it seems necessary, to declare what commodities would grow thereby, if
al these things were, as we have heretofore presupposed, and thought them to
be: which next adjoining are briefly declared.

What commodities would ensue, this passage once discovered. Cap. 10.
1 FIrst, it were the only way for our princes, to possess ye wealth of all
the East parts (as they term them) of the world, which is infinite: as
appears by the experience of Alexander the great, in the time of his conquest
of India, and other the East parts of the world, alleged by Quintus Curtius,
which would be a great advancement to our Country, wonderful enriching to
our Prince, and unspeakable commodities to all the inhabitants of Europe.

2 For through the shortness of the voyage, we should be able to sell all
manner of Merchandise, brought from thence, far better cheap, then either the
Portingal, or Spaniarde does, or may do: And further, share with the Portingal
in the East, and the Spaniarde in the West, by trading to any part of America,
through Mare de Sur, where they can no manner of way offend us.

3 Also we may sail to diverse marvelous rich Countries, both Civil and
others, out of both their jurisdictions, trades and traffiks, where there is to
be found great abundance of gold, silver, precious stones, Cloth of gold,
silks, all manner of Spices, Grocery wares, and other kinds of Merchandise, of
an inestimable price: which both the Spaniarde, and Portingal, through the
length of their iourneys, can not well attain unto.

4 Also we might inhabit some part of those Countries, and settle there such
needy people of our Country, which now trouble the commonwealth, and through
want here at home, are enforced to commit outrageous offenses, whereby they are
daily consumed with the Gallows.

5 Moreover, we might from all the aforesaid places, have a yearly return,
inhabiting for our staple some convenient place of America, about Sierra
Neuada, or some other part, whereas it shall seem best for the shortening of the
voyage.

6 Beside the uttering of our Country commodities, which the Indians, etc.
much esteem: as appears in Hester where the pomp is expressed, Hester. cap.
1.
of the great King of India, Assuerus, who matched the colored clothes,
wherewith his houses and tents, were apparelled, with gold and silver, as part
of his greatest treasure: not mencioning either veluets, silks, cloth of
gold, cloth of silver, or such like, being in those countries most plentiful:
whereby it plainly appears, in what great estimation, they would have the
clothes of this our country, so that there would be found a far better vent
for them, by this means, then yet this realm ever had: and that without
depending, either upon France, Spain, Flaunders, Portingal, Hamborovve,
Emdem, or any other part of Europe.

7 Also, hereby we shall increase, both our ships, and mariners, without
burdening of the state.

8 And also have occasion, to set poor men's children, to learn handie
crafts, and thereby to make trifles and such like, which the Indians and those
people do much esteem: By reason whereof, there should be none occasion, to
have our country combred with loyterers, vagabonds, and such like idle persons.

All these commodities would grow, by following this our Discovery, without
injury done to any Christian prince, by crossing them in any of their used
trades, whereby they might take any just occasion of offense.

Thus have I briefly showed you, some part of the grounds of mine opinion,
trusting that you will no longer judge me fantastike in this matter: seeing I
have conceived no hope of this voyage, but am persuaded thereunto, by the best
Cosmographers of our age, the same being confirmed, both by reason and certain
experiences.

Also this discovery, has been diverse times heretofore by others, both
offered attempted, and performed.

It has been offered by Stephen Gomes unto Carolus the fifth Emperor, in the
year of our Lord God 1527. as Alpho^so Vlloa testifies, in ye story of Carolus
life: who would have set him forth in it (as the story mencioneth) if ye great
want of money, by reason of his long wars, had not caused him to surcesse the
same.

And the King of Portingal, fearing lest the Emperor would have perseuered in
this his enterprise, gave him, to leave the matter unattempted, This discovery
offered.
the sum of 350000 Crowns: and it is to be intended that the King of
Portingal, would not have given to the Emperor, such sums of money for eggs
in mooneshine.

It has been attempted by Corterialis the Portingal, This discovery attempted.
Scolmus the Dane, and by Sebastian Gabota, in the time of King Henry the
seventh.

And it has been performed, This discovery performed.
by the three brethren, the Indians aforesaid, and by Vrdaneta, the Friar of
Mexico.

Also diverse have offered the like, unto the French King, who has sent two or
three times to have discovered the same. The discouerers, spending and
consuming their victuals, in searching the gulfes, and bays, between Florida,
and Terra de Labrador, whereby the Ise is broken to the after comers.

So that the right way, may now easily be found out, in short time: and that
with little ioperdie and less expenses.

For America is discovered, so far toward the North as Cape Fredo, which is
at 62 degrees, and that part of Grondland next adjoining, The labor of this
discovery shortened by other men's travel.
is known to stand but at 72. So that we have but 10 degrees, to sail North
and South, to put the world out of doubt hereof: and it is likely, that the
King of Spain, and the King of Portingal, would not have sat out all this
while, but that they are sure to possess to themselves, all that trade they
now use, and fear to deal in this Discovery, least the Queens Majesty,
having so good opportunity, and finding the commodity, which thereby might
ensue to the commonwealth: would cut them of, and enjoy the whole traffic
to her self, and thereby the Spaniardes and Portingals, with their great
charges, Why the king of Spain and Portingal would not persevere in this
discovery.
should but beat the bushe, and other men catch the birds: which thing they
foreseeing, have commanded, that no Pylate of theirs, upon pain of death,
should seek to discover to the Northvvest, or platte out in any sea card,
any through passage that way, by the Northvvest.

Now, and if you will indifferently, compare the hope that remains, to animate
me to this enterprise, with those likelihoodes which Columbus alleged before
Ferdinando, the King of Castilia, to prove that there were such Islands in the
west Ocean, as were after, by him and others discovered, to the great
commodity of Spain and all the world: you will think then this Northwest
passage, to be most worthy travel therein.

For Columbus had none of the west Ila^ds set forth unto him, either in globe,
or card, neither yet once mentioned of any writer, ( Plato excepted, and the
commentaries upon the same) from 942 years before Christ, until that day.

Moreover, Columbus himself, had neither seen America or any other of the
Islands about it, neither understood he of them, by the report of any other
that had seen the^, but only comforted himself with this hope, that the land
had a beginning, where the sea had an ending: For as touching that, which the
Spaniards do write of a Biscaine, which should have taught hii^ ye way thither,
it is thought to be imagined of the^, to deprive Columbus of his honor, being
none of their country men, but a stranger borne.

And if it were true of the Biscaine, yet did he but roue at the matter, or (at
the least) gathered the knowledge of it, by conjectures only.

And albeit, my self have not seen this passage, or any part thereof, but am
ignorant of it as touching experience, (as Columbus was before his attempt
made) yet have I, both the report, relation, and authority, of diverse most
credible me^, which have both seen and passed through some, and every part of
this discovery: besides sundry reasons, for my assurance thereof: all which
Columbus wanted.

These things considered, and indifferently wayed together, with the wonderful
commodities which this discovery may bring, especially to this realm of
England: I must needs conclude with Hieronimus Fracastorius, and diverse other
learned me^, who said, that this discovery has been reserved, for some noble
Prince, or worthy man, thereby to make himself rich, and the world happy:
desiringe you to accept in good part, this brief and simple discourse, written
in have, which if I may perceive, that it shall not sufficiently satisfy you in
this behalf, I will then imparte unto you a large discourse, which I have
written only of this discovery.

And further, because it suffices not, only to know that such a thing there
is, without ability to perform the same, I will at more leisure make you
partaker, of another simple discourse of Navigations, wherein I have not a little
traveled, to make my self as sufficient, to bring these things to effect, as
I have been ready to offer my self therein.

And therein I have devised to amend the errors of usual sea cards, whose
common fault is, to make the degrees of longitude, in every latitude, of one
like bigness.

And have also devised therein, a Spherical instrument, with a compass of
variation, for the perfect knowing of the longitude.

And a precise order to prick the sea card, together with certain infallible
rules for the shortening of any discovery, to know at the first entering of any
fret, whether it lie open to the Ocean, more ways then one, how far soever
the sea stretches it self, into the land.

Desiring you hereafter, never to mislike with me, for the taking in hand of
any laudable and honest enterprise, for if through pleasure or idleness we
purchase shame, ye pleasure vanishes, but the shame remains for ever.

And therefore to give me leave without offense, always to live and die in
this mind, (...).
That he is not vvorthie to live at all, that for fear, or danger of death,
shunneth his country service, and his own honor. seeing death is
inevitable, and the fame of virtue immortal. Wherefore in this behalf, Mutare
vel timere sperno.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing.
Cap. 2. C. page 2. Line 6. for Occidental, read Accidental. In the same Cap.
C. page 8. Line 28. for by read and. Cap. 5. D. page, 8. Line, 3. For
Southwest, read, Southeast, cap. 8. G. page, 1. line, 17. for northeast, read
Northwest.


