A Godly, zealous, and profitable Sermon upon the second Chapter of Saint
James.

Preached at London, by Master George Gifford, and published at the request of
sundry godly and well disposed persons.

Imprinted at London for Tobie Cook, dwelling at the Tigers head in Paul's
Churchyard. 1582.

The second Chapter of Saint James, verse. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22.
23 24. 25. 26.
14 What avails it, my brethren, though a man says he has faith, when he
has no works? can that says save him.

15 For if a brother or a sister be naked and destitute of daily food.

16 And one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, warm your selves, and fill
your bellies: notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful
to the body, what helps it?

17 Even so the faith, if it have no works, is dead in it self.

18 But some man might say, Thou have the faith, and I have works: show me thy
faith out of thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works.

19 Thou beleeuest that there is one God: thou do well: the devils also
believe it, and tremble.

20 But will thou understand, O thou vain man, that the faith which is without
works, is dead?

21 Was not Abraham our Father justified through works, when he offered Isaac
his son upon the Altar?

22 See thou not that the faith wrought with his works? and through the works
was the faith made perfect.

23 And the Scripture was fulfilled which says, Abraham believed God, and it
was imputed unto him for righteousness: and he was called the friend of God.

24 Ye see then how that of works a man is justified, and not of faith only.

25 Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot justified through works, when she
had received the messengers, and sent them out another way?

26 For as the body without the spirit is dead, even so the faith without works
is dead.

The second Chapter of Saint James, verse. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22.
23. 24. 25. 26.
I Have chosen this portion of Scripture to interpret, because there is very
great use and commodity in the true and right understanding thereof: and the
doctrine therein contained, is most necessary for all Christians to know.
First, because it does directly and fully overthrow and beat down all
carnal profession of the Gospel, showing that the common and dead faith
cannot save a man. Secondly, because it is the principal pillar which the
Papists do lean unto, and the chief place of Scripture which they do
pervert and abuse, to prove and establish Justification by works, and the
merits of men, and to overthrow the free justification we have in our Lord
Jesus Christ through faith. The hold which they take in this point, is upon
the speeches and phrases which the Apostle does use: as when he says, Abraham
our Father was justified through works. Also Rahab the harlot was justified
through works. Likewise ye see ye of works a man is justified and not of faith
only? Herein ye two Apostles of Christ, S. Paul and S. James do seem to be
flat contrary ye one to the other: for whereas S. Paul says, Abraham was
justified by faith alone and not by works. Saint James says he was justified
by works. Saint Paul says and proves by sundry and invincible reasons, that
a man is justified by faith alone without the works of the law. Saint James
says ye see that a man is justified by works and not by faith only: This
contrariety is but in appearaunce: for they both wrote by one spirit which is
always like himself, and always agrees with himself. The whole blame
therefore is to light upon us that we are so dim sighted as not to see how
these two servants of GOD do iumpe agree together without any jar at all.
I think it needful for this cause before I come to handle the words of the
Text as they lie in order, first to take away this show of discord: If any
man will demand what cause there was which made them to appear in outward
show so contrary the one to the other? I answer, that although there be no
contrariety in the matter it self which they teach, yet the diversity of ye
scholars which they light upon, and the contrary affection of those whom
they instructed, caused them to use a diverse and contrary order of teaching.

Saint Paul having to deal with such as would seek to be justified,
partlye by Faith in Christ, and partlye by their own deeds, or the deeds of
the Law, uses this order, first, showing that we were lost and condemned in
our selves, then next justified and saved through the merits of Christ:
afterward that we are sanctified in him, and must show forth the fruits of
our faith in a pure and holy life. S. James lighting upon another sort of me^
which confessed ye free justification through faith in Christ, yet in this they
were deceived, yt they did not consider, how al those that are justified, are
sanctified, how all those that are in Christ Jesus are new creatures, that
they are newborn, and walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit: that
the true, lively, and justifying faith does bring forth the fruits of
righteousness in a holy conversation. Now because this cannot be removed or
separated from the right and liuelye faith. Saint James goes as it were
backwarde and proves, that where this latter, that is to say, the fruits of
faith are wanting, there faith is wanting, and so his drift is to show that
all ungodly and carnal professors of Christ have but a dead faith, which in
no respect is able for to help or save them. A second cause why they seem so
much to differ, is herein, that men do not mark well how they handle, not
the self same matter, nor have not the same drifte. For Saint Paul labors
to prove, that the true faith does join us to Christ, and thereby save us.
Saint James here beats upon this point, that the dead faith which is but a
bare Image of the right Faith cannot profit a man, this shall appear in the
words of the Text, and also a third cause is, that they do not take this
word justified in the same sense, but diuerselye as it shall be proved
afterward: Now will I come unto the Text. What avails it my brethren though
a man says he has Faith when he has no works, can the Faith save him?
This is his proposition, and the matter which he will dispute upon in the
whole Text following, thus much it is in effect, that it does not avail a man
to say he has Faith, nor it does not profit him to boast and brag, and to
make profession thereof, when he has no good works: the reason is this,
because it cannot save him: mark and observe this well, for here at the first
enteraunce, the blindness of the Papists and their folly, does manifestly
bewraie it self, when as they do not see nor understand, that it is not the
purpose of the Apostle in this place to dispute upon this point, whether ye
true faith does save and justify or not: but to show that such as have not
good works, have not the true faith in them, and therefore whatsoever they
profess, they cannot be saved, for he does not propounde his matter thus, what
avails it though a man have Faith and have not works: but what avails it
though a man say, he has faith and has no works? Whereby it is very manifest
that when Saint James does attribute the name of faith unto this dead Image,
he does it not in proper, but in abusiue speech, and after the manner of those
men which called it faith, when as in very deed it is none, but only a
certain resemblaunce and shaddowe thereof. Thus much for this enteraunce and
state of his disputation, now follow his reasons by which he does prove that
this kind of Faith cannot avail or profit a man, for he does prove it very
stronglye and pithely^. The first of them is taken from a comparison or
similitude which he sets down thus, If a brother or a sister be naked and
destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them, depart in peace,
warm your selves, and fill your bellyes, notwithstanding ye give them not
those things which are needful to the body, what helps it? This is the
sum of the matter: There comes unto you a poor man or a poor woman, which
lacks clothes and sustenaunce, you give them gentle and fair words, God
help ye, God succor ye, and send ye relief: but ye give them nothing, can
this help the poor man, or the poor woman? Shall they not for all your
loving words sterue for cold and die for hunger, if every man should serve
them so, and give them no other alms: why do ye not see then, that as this
alms and liberalytie to the poor which is but in fair speeches is cold and
does not help, so in like manner ye Faith which is but in words and outward
profession of speech, although it be wc never so great brags, is dead, and the^
further why do ye not understand that a thing which is weak and dead in it
self, can by no means have power to give life, and to save. But observe it a
little better, thus the comparison stands, if that liberality which is only
in words be cold or dead, and does not profit the poor, nor make him a
liberal man which uses it: then it follows also, that that Faith which is
only in speech is dead, and therefore cannot save or profit him which has it,
if words only could profit or cause it to be faith, why should not words
also profit the poor man or woman which is destitute? If words only can make
a faithful man, why should not words make a liberal man? If for a man to say
he has faith, be of that power to do the greatest things, as namely to couple
us to Christ, to raise the soul from death to life, to put the Devil to
flight, and to overcome the world? Should it not be able to do ye lesser, that
is to say, so far to prevail with us, and to have such power in us: as to
bring forth good works? Dear brethren, know yt if it be alive and do the
former, it must needs do this: if it do not this latter, then surely it is
dead and can do nothing to save us. This is a most plain and forcible reason
to prove, that the faith of a carnal and worldly Gospeller, is but a dead
show of faith, and therefore he is not justified nor saved, neither can be
justified nor saved thereby: seeing it has no life in it self to work and to
bring forth fruits, it cannot give life unto him, for how should it bring
that which it has not? To set it forth more plainly, thus ye Apostle adds:
but some man might say, thou have the faith and I have works, show me thy
faith by thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works. He shows
here how every simple man which is a true Christian, may be able to deal
against the greatest and most skillful Doctor that is, to prove that he has
no faith if he has not good works, for when he says, Some man will say, it
is as much as if he had said, any man may say, thou have faith, that is, thou
make thy boast that thou have faith, show it by thy works: because faith is
an holy thing, wrought by Gods spirit, and a lively and mighty thing,
therefore it cannot be without holy and good actions. For as a man is known to
be dead, when he does not breath, cannot stir, see, hear, and such like, and
contrariwise, when he does any of these, he is known to be alive: even so is it
with faith, if it can or do bring forth no good works, then is it dead, on
the contrary part, the actions and stirring thereof do show it to be alive.
This is a strong place against all those which do not only vaunt themselves
of a vain and dead belief, but also would leave no mark to know who are of
God and who are of the Devil: Let a man take the^ tardie in any foul vice,
wherein they wallow, and say unto them, ye are out of the way, ye have not the
true belief in God, ye are covetous, ye are a worldling, ye are a drunkard,
and an adulterer or such like, their answer is ready, Who made you able to
judge, can you tell how I believe, will you take upon you to see what is in my
heart, whatsoever you say, I have as good a belief as your self. Mark well
now I pray ye, for here you may learn how to answer such fellows: say thus
unto the^, faith indeed of it self is a secret thing in the heart, but yet
because it can no more be without good deeds, then fire can be without heat:
the Lord does bid us by his Apostle to say unto ye, show me your faith by your
works, and when your tongue is foul and your deeds are wicked, most certain
it is that the heart is unclean, and there is no right faith, for yt does purge
the heart, as S. Peter says. Act. 15. Look but upon men's words and outward
brags of their belief, and ye would think there were such plenty of faith,
yt there could be almost no more, every man does so strongly believe in
Christ. But come to this touchstone and trial which is here given us, show thy
faith by thy works, and it shall by and by carry us so far on ye other side,
when we see such floods of all horrible and beastly sins, yt it will cause us
to think upon this saying, When ye Son of man comes, shall he find faith upon
the earth? For if this be true, as it is most true, because God himself has
set it down: yt the faith which is without good works is dead, and those are
Infidels, which like brute beasts care not but for the things of this world,
and make no conscience of committing all kind of evil works: Do ye suppose
that if the Son of man should now come, that he should find any great
store of faith? Alas, alas, how many are the sinful deeds of the most men,
which show that they have no faith? How few are the good works and how weak
even in the small remnaunt of the godly, which does declare how poor and
slender their faith is? But we must yet proceed further in this matter, and as
it were strike it a little deeper. As men are wily to deceive themselves, so
they will here yet find a hole to creep out at, although they be never so
wicked: for thus they will say. It is true, Gods word says, that faith is
showed forth by good works, well, I thank God, though I have many vices in
me, and am full of infirmities, yet I am not altogether without good works: I
am not so graceless, but at some times I remember God by prayer: I do
according to my ability give to the poor: I am ready to pleasure my friend:
do not these things sufficientlye show that I have faith? Dearly beloved
take heed, for here you may soon be deceived, it is not the meaning of the
Apostle when he says show me thy faith by thy works, that a few scattered
scraps of good deeds, among great heaps of sinful works, and as it were a
few grains of Corn in a great heap of Chafe, should be a true witness of
the same. For it must be showed both in forsaking and renouncing all evil
ways, and also in following after all goodness: for it is without al
controversy yt those which seem to be good works before men are not so before
God, in the man which is given over to commit sin: can yt which is good come
out of the same heart in which ungodliness reigns: either make the tree good
(says Christ) and the fruit good, or else make the tree evil and the fruit
evil: A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, Mat. 12. 33
neither can an evil Tree bring forth good fruit? Luke 6. 43.
Can the same Tree bring forth both good fruit and evil fruit? Does a
fountain at the same place says (S. Iam. 3. 11.
James) send forth both sweet and bitter water? 1. Ioh. 3. 7.
Be not deceived (says Saint John) he that works righteousness is
righteous, he that commits sin is of the Devil. Some man will say, does not
the most godly man that lives commit sin, and does not ye good and the bad
come together from him? The godly are laden with the corruptions of ye flesh, but
yet they do not commit sin, yt is to say, they are not given over, as ungodly
men are to the obedience of sin: they are spotted with imperfections, but they
do not take pleasure therein as the wicked do: although they feel a
lumpishnesse in them unto good works, yet their whole race is applied unto
good works: they would very feign obey their God on both sides, that is to say,
in forsaking all that is evil, and doing all yt which he commands the^.
Contrariwise, the fleshly Infidel does with all his heart give up himself in
the whole race of his life to that which is filthy, if he do any thing which
is good it is but in show, being not done sincerely, nor coming from a good
root: but of self love, vain glory, or such like. He does not any thing
for the Lords sake, but for his own. For love him and ye shall find him ready
to do ye good, cease that, and his goodness does dye. Praise him, he will
praise you again, discommend him although he deserve it never so much, ye
shall not come in his books, be ye never so good. Forget not this then I pray
ye good brethren, when God has set down so plain a rule to try our selves
by, whether we be faithful or Infidells. If we find our selves full of good
works, and our heart does bear us witness that we do them even for love
toward God: well are we, this does declare our faith. But if our evil deeds
abound and our heart be unclean, it is time to look about us, we are in a most
miserable case. I wish of God, that we might often think upon this, and be
careful to show our faith to the world, by our good and pure life. Be not
afraid to apply this to our selves, and also to deal against the ungodly
with it. For in this dissolute age, wherein iniquity has almost gotten the
upper hand, it is most necessary that we use this instrument which GOD has
put into our hands. Thou say thou beleeuest, show thy faith by thy works.
Now follows another reason: Thou beleeuest there is one God: thou do well:
the Devils also believe and tremble. Way this argument well, and ye shall
plainlye perceive that it does nothing at all help a man to say he has
faith, when he has no good deeds: if this kind of faith could save him, then
should the Devils be saved also, because they have the same belief: but
because it is most certain, that the Devils shall not thereby be saved,
therefore it is also as manifest, that those men who have no other belief but
that which they have, cannot be saved. Let us see then how far the faith of
Diuelles does go, Thou beleeuest (says he) that there is one God, or that
God is one, and so thou think this a great matter, not to believe as ye
vain Gentiles which did think there were diverse Gods, and indeed for so far
thou do well: but yet mark what a great matter thou have attained, the
Devils do believe the same, and yet have thereby no benefit or reconciliation
with God, for they tremble when they remember the terrible judgment seat and
the everlasting fire which is prepared for them. This faith of the diuils is
not to be restrained to some one point, but stretches unto the whole doctrine
of Faith. They do steadfastly believe and know that Jesus Christ died for the
sins of the world: this is a sure reason that they know the doctrine of God,
when they seek to deface and overthrow it by contrary errors. When a man
therefore is of a sound judgment in the Scriptures for matters of Faith, and
is able to confirm every point and to overthrow the contrary errors:
though many will say, he is a sound^ man, and he takes himself to be as
great a Gospeller as any other, yet if he have no works, if his faith be not a
liuelye regenerating faith, he may esteem of himself what he will, but the
Lord tells us that he is no more forward then the^ Diuelles, they are as
sound in the knowledge of truth as he.

And if this common and general faith would serve, they should be saved as well
as he. But it may be here objected, that there is great difference between
the faith of Diuelles, and the faith of those men which believe, and yet have
no fruits of godliness in the^. The Devils indeed do believe all matters of
faith to be true, but they do not nor cannot believe, that they perteine any
thing at all to them, they have no hope of mercy: but men although they be
very sinful, yet they are in hope yt they shall be saved. Here is a great
difference therefore, and the faith of such men goes far beyond the faith
of Devils. The Lord give us eyes to see, and hearts to understand, for I
will show that the difference is. That the faith of the Devils is more
perfect: For what is the cause that the Devils have no hope, and the wicked men
think they have hope, is it because they have less faith, nay, it is because
they are more wise, and because they give credit to that which GOD has
threatened against them. They believe that he will power out his wrath upon
them because he has said it: But the wicked men they are more foolish, and
where God has pronounced against them for their sins eternal fire, they do
not believe him, and so indeed their Faith comes short of the faith of
devils: they should believe the Lord when he tells them that all those
which do not turn from their ungodliness when he calls them to
repentance, shall be cast into Hell. But they blind themselves, and will
seem to believe quite contrary unto yt which God affirms: this is not to
shut the door to repentance, but to move men to seek for it while God does
offer himself, for they shall not be able when they will: it is God which must
beget us to himself, and give us the new birth, and sanctify us by his
spirit to bring forth the true fruits of Faith, and not to have such a dead
belief, which does change us no more then the faith which the Devils have,
does change them. For there be very many at this day, who being stuffed as
full of wickedness as ever they can hold, and their words and deeds do
plainly show that they are no more changed then Devils, which will so brag
of their faith and the strength thereof, that if there should be but ten in the
whole Country saved, they hope to be of them: they never understood the
doctrine which the Lord teaches in this place, God give us understanding that
we be not seduced, but that we may seek at the hands of Christ, to give us a
faith which may differ from that which the devils have. Here also shall
appear ye ignorance of the Papists: They would bear men in hand that S.
James does speak of the same faith which S. Paul does, and yt he plainly
affirms it does not alone justify. But (...) here as he said before, what
avails it if a man say he has faith and has no works, can that faith which
is but in words, or the dead faith save him? So now he tells more plainly
what faith it is which he speaks of, which cannot help a man, even that
which the Devil has. Is not that belief which Saint Paul says does
justify, wrought by ye holy Ghost? Shall we be so blasphemous as to say the
devils are pertakers of him? You may well perceive therefore that Saint James
does speak nothing against that which Saint Paul has proved, how Christ
alone is our righteousness, whom we take hold of only by Faith, for he
does but show that the dead Picture of Faith, does not save. Remember well
then what Faith is here spoken of, and the controversy is soon decided. The
Apostle now proceeds to his last reason, which because it is wonderful
strong, he uses as it were a certain Preface unto it, least we should pass
lightly over it, without due consideration. But will thou understand (says he)
O thou vain man, that the faith which is without works is dead? See how
vehementlye he thundereth beer, against the carnal professor, calling him a
vain man, likewise will thou understand, cannot those former reasons satisfy
thee, are they not strong inoughe to persuade thee, or plain enough to teach
thee, I will let thee see such a reason that neither thou nor all the world
shall be able for to gain say, it is so strong and so manifest that it will
stop the mouths of all the cauillers: and force them to confess, will they,
^ill they, that the Faith which is without works is dead: see how meruailously
the holy Ghost does labor to drive us from trusting to this broken staff, and
to force us to seek after the true and right belief, it we have any care to
save our souls. And doubtless daily experience does teach us how needful a
thing this is. For the greatest number of professors think nothing less
needful then to seek increase of Faith, they suppose and they will say, they
believe well enough they feel no want at all, what should preaching do, they
can but be^^^. In very deed this dead says of theirs, seems to them to be
very strong, it cannot be shaken; neither is it tried or tempted, for to what
purpose should the devil much labor to overthrow it: but those which have
any faith indeed, do feel what need there is to use all means to
strengthen it. But let us come to the matter, he proves now by examples, that
the true faith is known by good works: the first example is of Abraham: thus
it is to be opened: ye know that Abraham was an holy man, and a right man
indeed, he was highly in favor with God, the covenant was made with him, that
in his seed all nations of the earth should be blessed: ye will then confess
that he had the right faith, there is no doubt at all in that. Likewise ye must
needs grant, yt as there is but one God, one mediator, so there is but one
Faith, whereupon it follows, yt as many as have such a faith, or yt same faith
which was in Abraham shall be saved, and none else: Ephe. 4. 5 1. Tim. 2. 5
for although every one of ye children of Abraham do not atteine to the same
mesure and strength yt their father did, yet they are like him and have the
same belief. Then I beseech you observe well the second part, wherein is
declared how the Faith of Abraham was fruitful, and did declare and show
forth it self by good works, for he offered his son Isaac upon the Alter.
Whereupon it does also follow that all his children, Genesis 21.
and all the sons of GOD, do declare and show forth their Faith, by their
good deeds: And whosoever they be which do not so, they are degenerates and
basturdes, none of his children nor yet pertakers of any blessing with him,
for their: Faith is dead, and therefore they are not alive, do ye not see
dearly beloved, the marvelous force of this reason, and that it is as clear
as the Son: Here is no starting hole left for a man to hide himself in, nor
to creep out at, but he is holden fast to this, that if he will be saved,
he must so believe, that he declare and show forth to the world by his good
works and holy life, how he walks in the steps of his faithful father.
Abraham. But why does he choose this one work of Abraham before all the rest?
For his life did shine with holy works, he was merciful to ye poor, he
interteined and lodged strangers, he was peaceable with al men, just and true in all his delings: doubtless this did excel al ye rest, and so far pass them,
that it may well enough be mentioned in steed of them all, it did declare a
wonderful faith and love toward God as we may easily see, considering all the
whole circumstaunces of the story. God had called him out of his-nati^^
Country and from his Fathers house into a strange land: he had promised him
a son by his wife Sara, of whom the blessed seed should come, he performed
this promise in his old age, even when Sara was by nature past child bearing,
he had no other child by her, the promise was made in none but in him, Gen,
21. 12
In Isaac shall thy seed be blessed. Each man shall now be driven to confess,
that here was a great trial, when God does bid him take his only son even
Isaac, and go three days journey to the place which he would show him, and to
offer him upon the Altar a slain Sacrifice. How great a grief is it for a
loving father, to loose a son which he loves deerelye, especially when he
has no more sons: then how much grief might this be, not only to see his
son slain, but also to slay him with his own hands: and most of all that
child, in whom the covenant of eternal life was made, because Christ should
come of him, who being dead, all hope of salvation did dye with him. All this
did not withold, but ye faith of Abraham carried so great a love in him and
fear toward God, that he never grudged at the matter nor never made delay,
but went indeed to have slain his son, having bound him upon the wood, and
having taken in his hand the sacrificing knife, to kill him. Then the Angel of
ye Lord from heaven did forbid him. Before ye Lord it was as if it had been
done, because Abraham did fully purpose to do it, then we see plainlye by this,
what the true faith is. But if any man should object and say, this example is
not fit: every man cannot be like Abraham, nor have such a faith as he had, he
was a rare man, few or none to be compared with him. Saint James does answer,
If ye think this example to be too high, and that ye are not to be measured by
it, I will show you another as low:: what say ye to Rahab the harlot, was not
she justified by works, did not her faith declare it self by good works? Can
ye take any exception against this example? Will ye not be ashamed that your
faith should not be like hirs? As the faith of Abraham did utter it self to
the world, so did hirs, whereby she showed her self to be a right daughter of
Abraham, although she were not of his posterity according to the flesh, but
came of one of those cursed Nations, which God had commanded the Children of
Israel to root out and destroy, yet I say she was his daughter, according as
S. Paul sets it forth in the Epistle to the Romans, To. 4. 12.
that he should be the Father not only of them which are of the Circumcision,
but also of those yt walk in ye steps of ye faith of our father Abraham: like
as all his children both of the Jews and Gentiles must do which will be blessed
with their faithful father Abraham. Then we have here ye example of ye father
of all ye faithful, with ye example of one of his daughters, which had been a
poor harlot, what excuse remains, or what can we pretend, shall we not
blush, and be ashamed to say that we believe well, and take our selves to be
the Children of Abraham and the Children of God, when we are no more like him
(then as the common saying is,) an Apple is like an oyster. Christ our Savior
does use this reason against the Pharesies in the Gospel of S. John. If ye
were Abraham's Children (says he) ye would do the works of Abraham: Ioh. 8. 3.
but now ye go about to kill me, a man that have told you the truth which I
have heard of God, this did not Abraham. And a little after, Ye are of your
father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. What would we have
more plain then this? Even the very seed and posterity of Abraham, which
took themselves to be the children of Abraham, (...) the children of God, yet
Christ Jesus tells them plainly they are the children of the Devil, and why?
Because their works were not like the works of Abraham, their belief was not
like his* but it was dead. Shall not we then as boldly say at this day, nay
rather, does not Christ speak as plainly as he did and tells ungodly men
to their face, howsoever ye brag of your faith, it is but dead, and howsoever
ye boast and take your selves to be the Children of God, yet in very deed,
unless ye return from your ungodly ways, and show forth the fruits of a
true and lively faith, ye are the children of the Devil: trust not unto your
vain hope and dead faith, for it will but deceive you. Dearly beloved let us
not be so mad, when God tells us this with his own mouth, as to believe the
contrary and to persuade our selves we shall do well enough although we
continue in our sins. This is a most pestilent craft of Satan, and comes
from the root of Infidelity, as ye may see in our great grandmother Eve, God
had told her and Adam, that what day soever they should eat of ye tree, they
should dye the death, the Devil told her, ye shall not dye, she believed him,
but believed not God, she thought even as the Devil told her, she should do well
enough, or else she would never have eat thereof: we have sucked this poison
from her breasts: when God tells us, if your faith bring not forth good
works, it is dead, it cannot help ye, if ye continue in these wicked deeds,
ye are the children of the Devil, ye must speedelye repent, for ye cannot when
ye would: No, no, says the Devil on the other side, that is not true, your
faith is good enough, go on, ye shall do well, God has mercy in store, ye
may repent afterward. Now the most does believe the Devil in this, and give,
no credit at all unto God: and never seek to try themselves, whether they be
in good case or not.

When the Apostle, says here, that Abraham was justified by works, and that
Rahab was justified by works, etc. We must note that this word justified is
taken diverse ways in ye scriptures, which is one cause (as I noted before) why
S. Paul and S. James seem to be contrary. S. Paul proving that we are
justified by faith, takes it as contrary to this word condemned, for being by
our sins guilty, and to receive the sentence of condemnation, we are in Christ
(into whose mystical body we are incorporate thorough faith) acquit and
discharged, which is called justification: this cannot be by the works of the
law, because there is not perfection in the deeds of any, but even the most
pure are unclean and spotted. Therefore as S. Paul says, they are all under
the curse, Gal. 3. 10.
which hold of the works of ye law, for it is written, Cursed is every one,
which continues not in all things which are written in ye book of the law to do
them: ye reason of this is to be considered in the most holy and pure nature of
God, unto whom no unclean thing can be coupled, no vnpure thing (although it
be but in part) can abide his presence, or have fellowship with him. The word
justify is also taken in this sense, as when a man does declare and show forth
before men, yt he is a righteous person also before God: and that is the
meaning of the word in this place, that look how by faith we are justified
before God: so by the fruits of our faith, we are justified (that is declared
to be just) before men.

For proof that the Scripture does use the word justified in this sense, look
upon the saying of David. That thou may be justified in thy saying, Psa. 51. 4
and pure when* thou iudgest, there it can signify no more but that God might
show and declare himself to be just. In the Gospel of S. Luke. chap. 16. ver.
15. You are they (says Christ to ye Pharesies) which justify your selves
before men, Luke 16. 15
but God does know your hearts. In this saying it is most apparent, that there
is a justifying before men, which the Pharisees in colored hypocrisy did
seek for, but Christ tells them, they were never the better, because they
were not of upright heart before God. The word is also taken in other sense,
which I omit. If any man will now demand, how it can be proved, that S. James
does use it in this latter sense rather then in the former? I answer, that
the very place it self and go no further does declare this thing: for when the
Apostle says thus, Some man will say, show me thy faith by thy works, is it
not apparent, that he speaks of that which is before men, or declared unto
men, and not of that which is before God? In like manner, when he says,
Abraham was justified by works, when he offered his son Isaac upon the Alter.
Does not ye scripture show, that before. God Abraham was justified long before
by faith. If it be objected again, yt if may also be said, how he was before
ye time justified before men, or that he had showed by his deeds unto men, yt
he did fear and love God: and then what should hinder but that it may be
taken for a more full and perfect justification, or an increase thereof as well
before God as before men. I answer, that before GOD a man being justified, to
speak properly there is no increase thereof, for he is fully and wholly
discharged and acquit, or else it is no justification. But because we have
received the grace of justification, but in part and not in full measure,
therefore our justifying before men is more and more declared by degrees, as
good works do more and more abound in us, and so Abraham was by this one
work more justified before men, the^ by all ye rest of his deeds, and therefore
it may well be set down in steed of al ye rest: we see here then yt because
by the scriptures this must needs be taken for an increase of justification in
our father Abraham, yt it must necessarily be understood of that justification
which is before men: ye see now ye meaning of this text and the drift and scope
of the Apostle is laid open unto ye, but my chief purpose is yet behind, and
that wherein we are to be wrought upon yet remains, which is a more
particular application and handling of this doctrine. For we must not pass
away thus with ye matter, unless we mind to take small fruit thereby. Ye will
confess these things which I have handled to be true, as of necessity we are
forced thereunto, we cannot but grant ye the holy ghost has given a perfect
touchstone, then I am to exhort you in the name of God, and as ye tender and
love the salvation of your souls, to give attentive heed a little, and not to
let this thing slip away from ye, do ye grant that the faith which is without
works is dead? And that it is no better then the faith of devils? And yet will
ye still suppose, that idolaters, swerers, railers, adulterers, covetous
worldlings, and griping usurers, and such like are in good case, or continuing
such, can hope for mercy? Do ye confess yt there is but one true faith,
which was the faith of Abraham and Rahab? Do ye also acknowledge that the same
faith in them did show it self by good deeds? And will ye still accept it for
a sufficient proof of a good and sound testimony of a true belief, when any
man can say, I do hurt no man, I live uprightly and pay every man his own, I
have always ben reputed and taken for an honest man, what would ye require
more of me, I live as my neighbors do, I trust God will hold me excused,
although he have no regard of any obedience to the word of GOD, to consider
wherein his glory does consist, nor yet any care of men, to profit either
their souls or their bodies: but contenteth himself with this, if he do
them no good, to do them no harm.

I will show you deerelye beloved, how these sorts of people are deceived by
two foul errors, which this text does most strongly overthrow: the first is
this, that they look but unto me^, and restrain their duty unto them,
whereas they should chiefly look unto that which they owe unto God, and then
to that which belongs to their brethren: the second is that they suppose
themselves bound no further but to abstain from hurting, without regard of
doing the duties of love, wherein one man is to profit and further another.

As concerning the first of these both the example of Abraham, and also of
Rahab, do manifestly convince them: because the fruits of their faith or the
works whereby they were justified, did not so much respect man as God, for in
Abraham there appears only a love toward God, for whose sake he was
contented to forget ye affection of a father, and to show that although he
loved Isaac dearly, yet he loved God more, so yt if we feel our love to the
Lord our God, to be so small that it cannot prevail with us, to kill and
mortify the lusts of sin, and vain plesures of the flesh: how shall we
persuade our selves that we are like Abraham, which had denied the love of
himsefe so far, that he did never grudge, but would willingly have killed his
son. Rahab after she had made confession what she did believe concerning the
God of Israel, for the same Gods sake, for the true religion, and for the
Church or people of God, took the messengers and did hide them, to the hazard
of her life, and all yt she had, affirming to the king when he sent to seek
the^ that they were departed. Does not this improve the faith of those which
for the religion of God are so far off from hazarding their lives and goods,
that they dare not be seen when never so little danger does arise, wherein
are those like unto Rahab, which will turn with every wind, and a man cannot
tell what religion they be of, they will be sure to row with the tide, and
never to strive against the stream: do such now justify themselves like
Rahab, have they such a faith as she had? No dearly beloved, they are as yet
very Infidells and love themselves, and the world, more then they love GOD
and his truth, this thing then is most evident, yt the true belief does make
all those yt have it, ready and willing to loose their lives and their goods
for ye gospel, this must not seem to be a strange doctrine, when as our
savior tells us in sundry places yt he yt does not forsake al, and take up
his cross and follow him cannot be his disciple. Well, we must therefore be so
hot and zealous in the profession of true religion, that it cause us to forget
our own state and commodity: we must have so burning a love to Gods truth,
that nothing may be able to quench the same: We must not stagger and vary,
because we shall endure trouble. Let us conclude this point, wherein it is
proved yt they err and are deceived, which do not make account of keeping
religion pure, of loving it before all other things, and so of giving to God
his due honor. Remember yt from hence ye are to fetch the first part of ye
true description of a godly man, and the trial of the justifying faith which
is but one, and therefore works alike, in all which are pertakers of it though
not in the like mesure, and with all mark how far ye holy Ghost does differ in
setting forth a righteous man, from ye common manner of worldlings: whereas he
takes it to be ye chief work, which respects God himself and his truth:
they pass over that and count it no matter though a man be an Idolater, or
superstitious, or a swearer, which does not reverence the name of God, so yt he
be a friendly man to his friend and such like, how great an enemy he be to ye
word of God, it skilleth not: these are brute beasts without understanding, very
Atheists, which will say plainly they can see no difference between the papists
and the professors of ye gospel: both because they are not able to judge of
doctrine, and also yt they look but unto men: now let us come to ye second
thing wherein they err, and which this text does confute sharply, they suppose
as I told ye, ye men are to have no farther regard, but to this, not to hurt,
passing by all those duties, wherein they are to do good unto their brethren:
not duly considering how ye law of god, does not only bind us to abstein from
hurting our neighbor, but also does most straightly tie us to do al good deeds
unto them, so that he is guilty before God, not only which commits that
which the law forbids, but also which leaves the thing undone, which the
law enioyneth. Now then because the true faith brings us to have care to obey
God wholly. S. James requires that a man should show his faith, not only by
leaving yt which is evil, but also by the performaunce of yt which is good: for
thus he says, show me thy faith by thy deeds: and that faith which is without
works, is dead, here by ye way observe by comparison, how far of are those
from grace, which swarm full of unclean vices, and their whole race is nothing
but a continual sinning: whereas this is evidently here proved, yt such me^ as
carry a great show of vprightnes, in refraining from sundry vices, are still
without testimony of true belief, because their holy deeds do not appear,
for when as ye holy scriptures do testify, yt ye heart is purified by faith, yt
those are borne again in the new and spiritual birth, that they are new
creatures, and have a new heart, and a right spirit, created and renewed in
them, it must needs be that they are prepared unto every good work, they have
not only put off the old man with his corrupt lusts, but have also put on ye
new man, which is created in righteousness and true holiness: and as they
have walked in darkness, so now they walk in the light. There is one step yet
further in this matter, I trust that as ye will confess this, that if those do
not believe well, which have no good works to show, although they be in some
things upright, and much more the foul and filthy livers, which dishonor God
and his truth, so ye will also be brought to see, that those miserable men are
yet further off, which bark against this holy doctrine, and cannot abide that
a man should say to the wicked and ungodly, thou art in the way to hell, thou
shall dye the death, if thou return not from these evils. They may thunder
and rail against men and say they utter damnation: but let them look, if
they can quench the light which the Holy Ghost has given in this text. Let us
return to the former matter again. We must not only abstain from evil,
but also do good: there be many likewise deceived in this doing good,
restraining it to the baser and lesser part: they look but unto the bodies of
their brethren, and suppose they are to have no further regard but of them, to
relieve and ease the miseries of the flesh, let the soul be never so blind,
never so sick, in never so great danger of eternal destruction, they have no
pity of that, which does bewray that they see no further then this life, they
have no true love nor pity in the^, for then would they love the souls of
men, which are so precious, they would pity the woeful misery that they be
in. For how absurd a thing is this, yt one should be careful to ease the
calamity which lasts but for a day, and not respect that which is eternal,
I must therefore here again admonish ye, that such as will have proof of
their faith by good works, must exercise the same as well to the souls as to
the bodies of men, and because therein does stand the greatest love of all
other, they are therein to show themselves most earnest. There is no more
excellent note of faith, and of the true fear and love of God, then when a man
is grieved, and mourns to see men out of the way to life, running headlong
in their sins unto destruction, and when as he does in love and pity
admonish them, and seek by instruction to draw them out of the snares of the
Devil. On the contrary side, he can never say he has any drop of grace,
which delights and sporteth himself, at the lewd and wanton behavior of
other men. Judge dear brethren these Cockbraines, which cannot be merrye, but
at the sinful and profane speeches of vain men: do they show the fruits
of Faith? Those abominable beasts, which delight to make me^ dronk, to the
intent they may laugh: are they of God, or of the Devil? We must diligently
exercise the contrary, laboring to draw one another to God: and to convert
their souls which go astray: which is the special and chief good work that
we can do unto men. To feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, to visit ye sick,
and those which are in bo^ds, to open as it were the bowels of mercy and
compassion, to all that are in misery: are very excellent and glorious fruits
of faith: and have great promises of reward, in ye holy Scriptures, yet are
they not comparable to these, when the soul is sick in prison, and in the
chains of Satan, to visit and relieve it. When it is pining away, for want of
heavenly food, to minister unto it: when it is full of grievous sores and deadly
wounds, to give wholso^e medicines and salues unto it: to mourn with the
bowels of pity and compassion for it. From hence it arises that al true
faithful hearts do sob and groan with sorrow, when they see men left without
instruction, and when they behold the desolations and ruins of the Church, it
does pinch them even at the heart, it causes bitter tears to flow out of
their eyes, when they behold any famine and dearth of the food of life: and
when they see them run from Sea to Sea, and from the one end of the land to
the other to seek for it. When they see the young man and the beautiful virgin
perish for thirst, he that shall deny this, or stand in doubt thereof, never
knew as yet, what the use and benefit of the word is, nor yet what that love
in the spirit is, which the Lord commends unto us. I might here stand long
in perticulars, to show the cruelty of those Parents, which suffer their
children to be without the knowledge of God, and to perish in their sins. For
one of the chief fruits of their faith does stand in this which the Apostle
commands, Ephe. 6. 4.
Fathers provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them up in the nourture
and instruction of the Lord. For those which have the riches and wealth of the
world, the Holy ghost says, 1. Ioh. 3. 17
He that has this worlds good, and sees his brother stand in need, and
shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? If
this be true, that the rich men of the world, do not love God when they will not
part with their riches, to relieve ye miserable carcass of their brethren:
then doubtless it is a more strong argument against them, when as so many
souls perish for want of good and pure instruction, which by their wealth they
might procure, if they did not make more account of their riches, then of the
salvation of men. Gods word pronounces them blessed, which imploye their goods
to feed the poor, then how much more blessed a thing is it when they are
employed to the ministering of spiritual food, which never perishes? But let
us come to those which have the charge of souls, what is the principal good
work, which they are to show their faith by: and wherein they are to declare
their love toward Christ and his Church. Simon Ioanna love thou me, Ioh.
21. 15
Feed my sheep, feed my Lambs, feed my sheep. When as therefore the
hireling, the idle Drone, and the Idol shepherd have the flock of the Sheep
and Lambs of Christ and do not feed them, or at the least do so feed them,
that they are never the better: where is the faith which they boast of, is it
any other then the dead faith and the faith of Devils? Whosoever therefore
will have the testimony of his faith in this calling, he must execute the
office as the Scripture binds him.

Is it possible that he can give credit to the word of God, and be of a right
belief, and not regard this? The rest of his good deeds whereby some man will
say he does show his faith, are no good deeds: for if he did them of love
toward God and his brethren, would he not then do that, wherein his love to
both should most of all show it self? Can he love God, and hate God? Can he
love men, and hate men? Or can he love God, and not regard to do his will? Or
can he love men, and not care for the salvation of their souls? O my
brethren, who cannot say to such a man: Show me thy faith by thy works. Who
will be so blind as to think such are in good case?

I will now draw toward an end, only by this place exhorting every man,
while God gives him time and abilytie, to give himself to the exercise of
good works, and the service of God.

And dear brethren, what should make us so slack, considering how short
our time is, and how great reasons there are to persuade us, as first to begin
with that, which is taught in this place: is it not a marvelous blessing to
have the witness of our faith? Is it not a miserable curse to be without the
true peace of conscience, and to abide still in doubt? Does not GOD promise us
also, although we can deserve nothing, but when we have done all that we can we
are still unprofitable servant, that all our good works shall be rewarded,
Ma. 10 42
even to a Cup of cold water, which is given for his sake? Make ye bags
which never wax old, Luke 12. 33
or treasure which never fails in heaven, etc. Shall not the promise of
reward move us? Go further, how dear and precious ought the name of our God
to be unto us, how much ought it to delyght us to hear it magnified, how much
ought we to abhor to see it stained and dishonored? Is not his name honored
when those which call upon him, are fruitful in good works. Herein says
Christ is my Father glorified: Ioh. 15. 8
that ye go, and bring forth much fruit. Also he says. Let your light so
shine before men yt they may see your good works and glorify your father which
is in heaven. Mat. 5, 16.
Is not Gods name dishonored by the evil conversation of those which profess
his word? Romans 2. 24
Says not S. Paul, The name of God is evil spoken of, through you among the
heathen? Ought not the Gospel to be dear unto us? Is it not in the mouth of
ye greatest number of worldlings, when they see ye evil deeds of professors?
Lo these are your Gospellers, here is their holy doctrine, these are they
which hunt after Sermons, ye may see what they are, and what their teaching is,
they have as few good works as other men, they are all in words. O wretches,
shall not these things move us to let the world see our faith and love toward
God by our good works? likewise is there any greater love which can be showed
toward men, the^ when they shall be moved by our good deeds, to glorify God
in ye day of their visitation, when our godly deling shall cause them to
confess that it is an holy religion which we profess, and so give ear and
join themselves unto the same? Happy man which by his holy life is a mean to
draw others from their evil ways: and to bring the^ to be scholars in ye
same school that he is. Contrariwise, what a woeful and miserable wretch is
that which slaundereth and dishonors the holy word by his sinful life,
which drives other from it, and so thrusts them on headlong to destruction.
O uncharitable man, shall not the blood of such in some sort be laid to thy
charge, when thou driuest them from the Lord and his truth, as much as lies in
thee, and driuest them headlong to destruction. I might proceed to many
perticulars, but then I should be over tedious. The Lord plant these things in
our hearts, and give us grace to continue in all goodness to our lives end,
to his glory, and our eternal comfort. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Thomas East for Tobie Cook, dwelling at the Tigers
head in Paul's Churchyard. 1582.


