SATIRYCALL DIALOGVE OR A SHARplye-invectiue conference, between Allexander
the great, and that truly woman-hater Diogynes.

Imprinted in the Lowcountryes for all such gentlewomen as are not altogether
Idle nor yet well, OCVPYED.

bewteous: to the all-Illustrious, and most puissaunt creatures of the Earth,
WOMEN: Willyam Goddard, sole desirer of th'yncrease of your bewtyes, and
chief adorer of your goddes-like virtues, (with all reverence to your
Angelical sex,) commendes to your protection this harsh unlearned DIALOGVE.
Stars of this earthly heaun, you whose essence
Composd was of man's purest quyntessence,
To you (to virtuous you) I dedicate
This snaggy sprigg, hewed from a crabby pat^
Wherein (Celestiali bewties) you shall see,
How old Diogynes extolleth ye.
We men, do love to see our selves vp-raisd
And Iocond are, o hear our own selves praisd
But (oh you springes of Wisdom) I do find
That is a thing most hateful to your kind.
Yet old D^ogynes did see your worth,
Such worth he saw, as needs heed paint it forth.
Accept his love; for all the Cynnicks deeds
Out of true zeal unto your sex proceeds
With rev'rent zeal, as high as th'azurd skies
Your virtuous deeds, the old man magnifies.
Contrary wise, he with a bitter penn
Invectivelie, does write against bad men
Comaunding them, that what so e're they do,
They always should example take by you.
Badd are these men, such is their perverse kind
They burn all books, wherein their faults they find
And therefore (earthly aungells) my desire
Is you will protect this, from consuming fire.
The euer-faythfull honourer of your celestyall Sex Willyam Goddard.

To the senceles Censurer.
RAsh Reader* read my book, and when it is read
Disdaynefullie through 't over thy muddy head
Thy condemnations peale a both sides ringe:
Rash men are priviledgd t'saie any thing
And therefore (hare-braine) read, criemewe dislike:
My spleen swells not when fools with bables strike.
Pack hence precision: cry'st it is obsceane?
Diue deeper shallowe pate: know what I mean
Know what I mean? alas! what hope have I?
Since carpers minds have but a poreblynd eye
Yet to prevent thy censures thus much know
Whollye this book was made, folly to show
And he which lays open times abuse, and vice
Are sildome blamed of men Indicious wise:
At which I ay'md; and therefore duncepate hence
Or look for lashes for thy rude offense.
William G.

A SATIRYCALL DIALOGVE OR A SHARPLYE-INVECTVIE CONFERENCE Between ALLEXANDER
THE GREAT* and that Truly woman-hater Diogynes.
Allexander. WHy how now Cy^nick, what dust do a days That thou in tubb art
coop't-vp thus always?


Diogynes. What do I do? not dance from house to house
To bibb in wynes sweet Juice, each dambd ^orrowse
Nor do I gallop it from place to place
To veiwe each fair bewitching painted face
Nor studdye how, this populous world to wynn
My studdy's how, to beat and conquer synn
I studdye not wherewith my gutts to cramm
On what so ere I feed, well pleased I am.
To mee's all one the fyn'st and grossest meat
So't wholesome be, I nere ear what I eat.
With in my selfs a world, and it is true
I howrlie fight, all that world to subdue
And these fell-fighters be the enymies,
That rebell-like, against me daily rise
Vain Pride (my chiefest foe) the leading has
Of these feirce-foes: loathd, drunkenues and Wrath
With Averice, Sloathe, Gluttony, and Lust,
Encounter hottlie eu^ie day I must
To beat down these, I daily do devise:
To this end, I use strentgh and policies:
I studdy not, nor trouble I my wit
How I by flattery should be fauouritt
Unto great Allexander. I would refuse
To be that monarchs self, If I might choose.

Allexander. THou would not; would?

Diogynes. I would by Jove I vow

Allexander. ALas (poor silly snake) why what art thou?

Diogynes. WHat thou art not: I am an honest man
And then (I hope) the more unlike thee than.
I am noe Courtyer I, for once by chance
I with an other man's fair wife did dance
Yet Icie-vayned I (vnsett a fire)
Did freeze most coldlie, in loves hott desire:
I did indeed: but do you hear me hoe?
Was e're hott-blouded Courtyer frozen so?
I am noe Lawyer I, for once there was
A poor man praide me undertake his case
Quoth he, pray vndertakt and you shall have your fee
Though you sit dumb, and nothing speak for me.
But I refusd it I: yet hark you hoe
What Lawyer ere refusd, and tempted so?
I am noe younger-brother, bravely sprighted
For once a vsring golden Ass (be nighted)
Quite laden, with his full stu^t treasure baggs;
By me that dreaming drudge, all feareles laggs
Yet honest I (vntempted with this sight)
Though empty mavd, at this bait would not bi^e
Hence capring Courtyer ask you who I am?
Go, get you hence, s^udd quick from whence you came.

Allexander. CYnnick you are to sharp did you but know me
I am assurd more reu'rence you would show me.

Diogynes. How? I show reverence? noe, understand
That Allexander getts none at my hand.

Allexander. IN faith Diogynes thou haste not been,
In all thy life, where any thing thou have seen.
If thoudst but travail and some fashions see,
Thoudst answer none, as now thou aunswerst me.

Diogynes. Have I not trauayld? ha? yes yes I trow,
(Spruce fellow) thou haste never trauaild so.
Where I have been, there is few harh ever been
But yet men say noe wonders I have seen,
Why once I saw, a rit^h-left heir to weep,
When Is old dadd took his everlasting sleep.
Once did I see a bewteous maid (it is strange!)
Live twenty years, yet not that title change
Once did I see a wife in mourninge weed
Shedd tears over her husbands course indeed
I once did see a Cytizens fair wife
Live at the Court, he leading else wher'es life
And he (ins wit) noe wiser then an ass
Yet was he brow'd, more smothe then smothest glass
Once did I see a King gives foes the foil
And gave his souldyers leave, to take the spoil
And lastly once I was in such a Court
Where 'bout the King, noe flattrers did resort
Where I have been, oh furelie none have been,
Then why say you, noe wonders I have seen?

Allexander. WHy faith Diogynes me thinks these are,
No^ things (as thou would make em) wondrous rare
The like in every place and realm I see
Th'^re common, man, they ordynarie be.

Diogynes. THose ordynarie things? I faith sir noe;
These things, are the ordynarie things, I trow
To see fair bewtious ladies now a days
Refuse to take at once both prick, and praise
Of both the i will not accept, for still those men
Which gives the one, shall the other have agenn.
The other things? why! those are wondrous rare
These ^e the things that ordynarie are
^o see how Lords shake-of their serving men
And how their ladies take them on again
Holding emin (unto their Lords unknown)
To ride in private, with them up and down
T'see m^rcers ^ookes fild-vp with courtyers names.
To see your min^yng bewteous cyttie dames
Have always some one gallant of the court,
(As knisman to them) to their house resort.
To see, a plain kind man love none so much
As he which gives his pate the cuckolds tutch
These; these are ordynarie man: also
This things is as much ordynarie too
To see your riteh old country squires to wedd
Their chamber maids unto their servaunts bed
But first themselves to take the maydenhead
Then place them in some cottage nere at hand
To have their service, ready at comaund.
Thou saydst the first were ordynarie things:
Away away: why man to see on Kings
How Danger plain, cloathd smoothly-smiling Daunger^
Wayteth on them, attending like noe stranger
But like some smyling, countenanced friend
Only to give too's Prince, his fatal end:
Thoult say perhaps, this is noe common thing
But thoud'st un say it again were thou a King
What things are common, and not common be,
Thy shallowe reatch, cannot conceive I see.

Allexander. NAie fie Diogynes infaith thou art,
In thy conclusions still a dram, to tart
I pray thee let me so prevail with thee
As ride to Allexanders court with me
Twill mend thee much, and I will undertake,
The King shall bid thee welcome for my sake.

Diogynes. Unto my Tubb, let Allexander come
I Am in a Palace, when I Am in this home
Let those that list, unto thy King resort,
It Is not my list: what should I do at's court?

Allexander. AS others do; in spending of smal^ pelf,
Thou maiste in time to honor raise thy self.

Diogynes. I cannot fawn, my tongue too rustie is;
I bashful am; I Am nothing boldly rude
I rather choose Court delecates to miss
Then with a brazen face my self ty'ntrude:
In tubb (coop't-vp) I will live ever mude
And ever live upon sour garden woortes
Er'e Ile' a flattr'er be, and follow cortes
I cannot turn my tongue to praise and laud
A soone-lamb'd prick-eard proud-feerce fi^y steed
I cannot Fyndalls full deep mouth applaude
Nor swaere the greate-mans grew hound has best speed
When he does play the slowe-slugg cur^ indeed
Though some cann do it, yet such is my sour kind
I never could, though it gall's his sweld pust mind
I cannot tell the great fool he is wise,
Nor t^ll foul ladies, they are wondrous fair
I never applaude above heauns-spangled skies
The curld-worne tresses, of dead-borrowd hair
Like Northern blaste I breathe my crittick air:
I am noe Mimyck ape, I loathe and hate,
Each light-braind, giddy-head to Imy tate
I cannot brook, to suck the livings blood
Of these old Vsrer's ritch-left prodigalls
I nourish not with such sweete-bitter food:
I hate to rise by other men's down falls
I know it is Ill though other think it is good
Though some do think such papp all sweet to be
Yet I do not; it poison proves to me.
To make short work, I never loud' vain sportes
And therefore I Am unfit for Princes Courts?

Allexander. DIogynes, thou art deceived quite
In vanities Kings take the least delight
I Will undertake none shall respected be
(If thou will follow him) better then thee
Come to the Court, and then in seeing him
Thou also maiste, take veiwe of ladies trymm
Me thinks, he is too dull and sadd of spright
That in a bewteous dame takes noe delight.
Why he that is mary'd is in heaun all night.

Diogynes. THere let him be, for I had rather dwell
A thousand times, a single man in hell
I am assurd that ther'es noe Devil cann
(Like to a wife) torment a mary'd man.
I Will none of them, I Am ever worse a year
When once I do, a woman's tongue but hear
It galls my gutts when I a woman see
I Will not once come, where such strange creatures be
Come hold your tongue, and prate no more to me

Allexander. NAie good Diogynes be not so quick
I hope yet 'ere I die, see thee love sick

Diogynes. LOue-sicke? why I do love these women so
As I Am so fond, I know not what to do
Such is my love unto the femall Kind
As were I Empr'our of thyn fernall lake
But women, none with me should favor synd
One man into my Kingdom I do you not take
Ide' send my servaunts our, to scarch and see
To bring all women in the world to me.

Allexander. BYth mass Diogynes thou loust em well
Were thou the King and governor of hell
Thou would I see advaunce the women kind
There is noe want of will had to thy mind
Were thou (I see) the prince of that fair place
Women, (only) with thee should be in grace
I see thoudst very carles be of men
I see thoudst women have, to attend thee then.

Diogynes. I that I would, and this they should be bold
I Would careful be they should not freeze with cold

Allexander. I faith Diogynes I doubt thou have ever
Been privatelie a vild laciuious liver
Or never haste been yet (I greatly fear)
Where any one fair vertuou^ creature wear.

Diogynes. NOr nere will look to be: I am too wise
To think that virtue cann remain in vice

Allexander. Were thou at Court, thou would alter then thy mind
When women thou did see, so wondrous kind
Forsake this Tubb, it is solliterie Ill
And how to court fair ladies, learn the skyll.

Diogynes. Now, by the lustful fire, hott boiling veins*
Of that same wanton great god Jupiter
I am un skild in these speech-pleasing strains
To court a wenche when I come unto her
I Am then an all-mute dumb and surly sir
I cannot lispe, nor cann I courtlike say,
When I do women woe, I runn my way.
I cannot singe, nor cann I turn my tongue
To chaunte a Syren-charming quau'ring dittye
When I these bewties chance to come among
My lead-sade-sable looks must move their pity
All what is in me then, is all vnwittie
I want these warbling noates to wynn their loves
Nor cann I pricksong set, which better moves
I cannot music it, nor finger fine
A sweete-cleare-throated, care-charme instrument
I Am not posseste with such sweet parts devyne
Whereby to cause, fair bewties merryment
T'ynchaunt their ears nothing cann I invent
And well know I, that women take delight
In these same instruments, both day and night
I cannot dance, no^ with my sprawling heels
Cann I the ny'mble cutt-heele caper kick
My sullen blood an other humor feels
To woe a wench, I want the wanton trick
I am a milksopp then, I then am sick
Again, strenghes moisture in may veins is skant,
Which women after dancing must not want.
And therefore pry thee fellow let me rest
Of all these worldly Courts, my Tubb's the best.

Allexander. DIogines, my meaning is mistook
I would not, that your Tubb be quite forsook
But for your recreation now and then
Youd' go too the Court, from court to your tubb again.
Mistake me not, it will for your good tend
A wiseman always lysten will too's friend.

Diogynes. NAie would you would these complementes forbear
For Courtyers freindshipps, I did never care
Ye^ should I choose a friend, a Courtyer than
I would make ^hoise-of, fore another man:
By this example I will plainly prove
That like to courtyers, none do truly love
Like to apparel they do love their friend
To what (like that) do they their loves extend:
Like clothes they love their freindes: why that is true
Just like em, cause they nere love clothes but new:
Pack hence, for such love should I find of you.

Allexander. NAie fie Diogynes you cann (if list)
Forbear to play this crabb-sowre satirist
I pry thee Cynnick broach thy milder brain
And let thy words runn in a sweeter vain
In others natures too too much you markst,
Against their faults too rusty ^ond you barkst
I do dislike it I, I pry thee cease
Thoud'st gain more love, if thou did hold thy peace:
Turn courtyer man, come, be thou pollitick wise
He best wynns love, that best cann sooth-vp vice.

Diogynes. THen Ile' wynn hate: nor King nor Clown Ile' spare
If they with vices vennym poysned are
If with Prides swellinge tympany I find
Their hearts are once puft-vp; I Will speak my mind.
Let Us pate be crowned, with hundred thousand crowns
Let cruel death, succeed his wrathful frowns
Yet (if in him) loathd filthy synns I see
He shall not (in them) sooth'd-vp-be, by me
I cannot soothe; I am not that ways wi^e:
Who lives not in virtue, dies in vice.

Allexander. THou say well Cynnick, for I hold this race
Of oyld-tongu'd flattrers, to be dangerous base
The cankerd rust, does not the Iron frett
So fast as these, do in good natures eat
The stately oak a longer time would live
If to the Ivy, he noe trust did give
But as the Ivie', 'boute the oak entwyndes
To work his fall; so't fares with flattrers minds.
But whether in discourse, shall our tongues walk?
I came not here, of court affairs to talk
I came to see, thy manner kind of life
And t'aske thee, why thou getst thee not a wife.
Faith get thee one, I would not lie alone
If all the world could but afford me one.

Diogynes. A wife? why for my life I cannot see
How man, with woman, ever should agree
When men go backward, and go down the wynd
It frettes, cuttes, galls, and greiveth sore the mind
When women backward grow* and downward go
Their spleenes, with laughter tickles then I trow:
Since their two natures, are so contrary
I muse how tweene them, cann be sympathy
A wife? oh fellow tha'rt a young man yet
Ther'es much sour sauce, belonges to that sweet bitt:
Who would be troubled with the yawling noise
Of a harsh-whewling young childs whympring voice
Again, to see em fligger, smile, and play
Does make me greiue as much an other way
When they do simper, I do sighe; for then
I mind the miseries, theyl see (ere men.)
Twould cut my heart to hear a babe cry dadd
Oh give me meat: when it is not to be hadd
He that does wiue, for pleasures sole intent
It Is tenn to one, but soon he will repent.
Who would be bound to scrape, pinch, carke, and care
For brattes, (perhapps) that got by others ate?
Not I: Ile' none of this thing, called a wife
Let him take one, that is weary of his life
For he that always will supplies' wives lack
Must unto Nature go, for a steel back.
A wife? I Will ha noe wife: such sprights will frown
Unless they (er'e a non) are coinurd' down:
Again my little Tubb is too too small
To hold my wife, my self, and whom she will call
It must not be a small house that cann hold
A silent man, joined with a shrill-tongud schold
Now will her gossipps come; then pray now where
Is room for them to chatt, and make good cheer?
And now her old-acquainted friend will come
(Perhapps to see her, when I Am from my home)
Then where is my galleree, for them to walk?
Or any place for old freindes secrett talk?
Some what perhapps theyd' do, I should not see:
Where have I chambers then for them to be?
Not in my Tubb my Tubb ^ath nor the scope
For her to gossip't, with her mates I hope.
Yet though I have (...) wife (with ho^^ desire)
My heart is flamd: burnt am I with loves fire
A love I have to whom I will be true
Observe her parts, I will discribe them you
My loves pure white has never sustaind a spot
She Is wise, ^ood, rich, fair, chaste, what is she not?
Hlr eyes1, grace2, speech3; has1 fired, amazed2, ravished3,
My heart1, sense2, thoughts3; with love1, wonder2, delight3,
But fyr'd1, 'mazd2, sence-rest3; I sought1, prayde2, and wished3,
To quench1, cure2, and heal3; love1, sense2, and eyes3-dymd sight
Thus eyes1, grace2, speech3; has fyr'd1, amazd2, sence-charmd3
My thoughts1, sense2, wits3, with love1, with fear2, unarmed3
Oh my love's fairelie white without a spott
Such is her hue noe stain her hue can blott
Virtue's that Dame in her sweet grace I sit
It Is she loves me, she'es woman's oppositt,
Could I one headles lymb les corp les see
To such a one would I betrothed be
For had she nere a head; noe tongue sheed have:
Nor corpse; then I Would not d^ead the lechrous knave:
Nor lymb; then should I never quivering stand
Fearing my ears remembrance of her hand
Of rope or hangman I was nere afraid
At noe sight quake I but at wife or maid.

Allexander. OH harsh-sowre, crabby Cyn^ick, still I see
To gentle creatures thou will stubborn be
If with a girl thast never slept a night
Thy soul has never tasted sweet delight.
Such is the femall sex, while wife or maid
As of them, too much good, cannot be said
Methinkes the skipping blood (a Virgins grace)
Which tripps lavaltoes in each maidens face
When men's foul tongues, o're-flowes with ribaldery
Should make thee love maids, for their modesty.

Diogynes. Maidens modest? what is this modesty?
^f it is in them, it is a vice say I
Virtue in women is as cold as Ice:
Nothing is warm in them vnlest be vice.
Thou art a dunce, thou haste noe reatche I see
Why Maids at all times cann feign modestee.
Theil' blush as often while they live single lives
As they will weep, when they be mary'd wives:
If it was my list, I could a thousand name
That would (if men talk Ill) blush at the same
Yet thy themselves, their tongues shall nimbly walk
Whole nights together, all in too-broad talk.

Allexander. THou wrongst em soore: I do not think it I
That maidens tongues, will tripp Immodestlie.

Diogynes. THou do not, do? I prithee think so still:
I think thy wit is like a woman's will
But what thou do not think, I truly know:
What I have said of maids men shall find ^oe
I fellow, fellow, till their by thems^lu^s
Maids in talk are modest bashful elues
But being from the company of men
The laws of modesty is broken then.
It Was not long since I stood to maidens near
But Lord! thou't ne re believe what I did hear
For only that same wench esteemd' was well
Which could the ribauldst dream, relate and tell:
I could relate all what they did relate
But that my tongues, disvs'd to such like prate
It Is vild obscene; speak young man wilt you hav't?

Allexander. COme, out with it Cynnick, I know thy delight
^s, all in all to work fair woomen spite.

DIOGINES RELATES the three wanton Sisters wanton dreams.
Diogynes. O Yet the fire, once three maidens satt
^nknowne to them, I over heard their chatt
Each with her tuckt-vp clothes, in pleasing plight
(Pleasing I mean unto fond y^unge men's sight)
Satt ore the fire, so, as one might see,
From sl^nder foot, to round white nimble knee
As thus they satt, I Am sure thou do think what
(When maids with maidens be) will be their chatt
Girls (quoth the eldest sister) what shall's do?
Smal'es my desire, unto my bed to go
For yet, I never in my couche could find
A sportiue mate to please my maiden mind
Alas, alas, what pleasure and delight
Takes one maid with an other in the night?
But small god knows it, for my own part I
Never took any with whom Ie're did lie.
For love, noe revells in that bed does keep
Where one girl, by an others side does sleep.
^or truly (sisters) there is none that can
Give maids delight in bed, but a young man
And but in dream (the more unhappy I)
I never with such a beddfellowe could lie
But yet in dream (oh matchles sweet delights!)
Iv'e line, and line, with one whole wynters nights
The greater grief (you will say) 'twas to my mind
When I did wake, and my self single find.
Oh girls it was! but sisters I do see,
It is with eu'rye maid as it is with me.
Such are our dreams, as we do laugh in sleep
But when we wake again, oh then we weep.
But what shalls' do? we will not so soon to b^dd
Letts rather tell, how never we have been spedd.
Our merry'st dreams come le^t us now relate
Girls got with girls, their minds may freely prate
What though we are maids? here are noe men to hear us
Freely we use to chatt, when they are not nerevs
We Are by our selves: what ere we talk, is well
Come letts draw lotts, which first her dream shall tell.
At which the youngest, blushing like a rose
Being assignd by lot, first to disclose
Begynns to tell how to her souls delight
Her senses ravisht' were, the other night.

THE YOVNGEST Sisters dream.
QOth she, on bedds soft down down did I lie
And s^ugd doowne close, to have sleep close each eye
But ere twould be, I entered in a muse
(I such a muse as all we maidens use)
I mused (me thought) if there were sweeter bliss
For maids, then't lie with men, to clipp and kiss
Me thought, I thought (this thought fetched out a groan)
It was a hell to lie, all night alone.
At which I sight, and turning me I wept
Desiring, what I know not, till I slept
In which my sleep (oh fancies sweet delight?)
Appeard a youth (Pheobus was much less bright)
Gold were his locks, firye sparkles were his eyne
His brows, cheeks, and chynn were as lovely fine
I'ns shirte was he, a shirt so fine I wynn
As one might see, what was tweene shirt and skynn
His snowe-white arms, in-laide with azurd vain
(Mixed with crimson dye) one might see plain
His full-broade manly some-what-downye cheste
Dale-like indented tweene two mounting breasts;
On which two pretty fr^iteles teatlinges grew:
Not milkie sweet, sweet only for the ve^we.
I saw's soft slender waste; and sisters well nie
I fawe what grew beneathe his plump-round belly:
All what I saw (sweet w^nches) I would tell ye
But that sweet love coniures me (heres' the spite)
Not to discribe, man's sweetly-sportiue spright:
Oh sweet's the dream, which yields such delight!
But come girls come; (fie whether do I roame?)
Me thinks bu^ coldlie I tooth purpose come:
To me he came, and kiste me too; when I
Me thought did feign, I did a sleeping lie
Me thought, I let him kiss and kiss agenn
And ^ouche me too (maids may be touched by men.)
I sisters, faith (me thinks) that maide's unwise
That will in private, to her l^ue be nice
Two faithful lovers cannot synn I ween
So what they do, by others is not seen.
Now would the wagg, be stroaking of my face
And now my pappes, anon another place
Delighting of himself, sisters you can
(Better then I) tell what best likes a man
But fayth-la girls, I cannot choose but smile
I lay, as if I soundly slept the while
Permitting him to please the appetite
Of his too too-fond, youth-last-burning sight
Fayning, I soundest slept, when he did steal
To vnhill that which maids should cheifst conceal
But, when as he would have come into my bed
The fear I had to loose my maydenhead
Awaked me: Quoth the other sisters, what?
I hope we maidens least of al^feare that
Believe me (quoth the elder girl) should I
With my sweete-hart, on my wedding-night lie
And find him drowsy dull, like heavy lead
Hunting but coldli^ for a maydenhead:
Twould kill my tender heart: twould murder me
The blushing morn I nere should live to see
Oh I should fill the room with groans: in morn
With looks dejected I should seem forlorn.
But when you wakt (quoth she) cha^t you not then
Oh noe! in that case maids nere chafe with men
Though we seem angry, at there boldest parts
Yet seldom comes, our anger from our hearts
For in loves sport (this is our sexes wyle)
We'el seem to frown when most of all we smile
Yet sisters faith (quoth she) me thought I wept
When I did wake, cause I noe longerslept
For trath-la girls such pleasure in it took I
As in like dream, twould nere greiue me to die
Had I a world, Id'e givt to learn the skyll
How I should sleep and dream so at my will
Had I that art, that matchles pleasing slyght
Few days Id'e have, each day Id'e turn to night:
Lie down I would, lulling my self a sleep,
Bidding my soul delightful revells keep:
Sild would I wake, but always by my will
I Would sleep, and dream, and be embracing still.
Now second sister wake, I pray (quoth she)
And in your last nights dream come second me.
THE SECOND SIsters dream.
THe second sister some what modest bold
Replied; my dream partly by you is told
Before you slept, me thought, I heard you say
You in sweet musinge, did a long time lay
You mu^ing sighed, and sighed till sleep did steal
Upon your maiden eyes, their lidds to seal
At length you slept and dreamt you saw your love
(A dream indeed, which much us maids do move)
You kiste with him but when he'ed with you lie
That made you w^ke, and out the bed to fly
But so (me thought) sweet sister did not I
For I (me thought) did think it was noesym
To let a youth between my sheets leap in
But yet for fashions sake often thus I de cry
Pray get you ^ence, seek some where else to lie
Yet this repulse should still so faintlie come
As it should feircer whett him on for room
For coldlie, to deny loves sweet delight
Spurrs to a gallop, thefeirce appetite.
And sisters well you know, we maids do hold
Those youngmen weak which hunt loves chase but cold
What is it to cry, fie, or pray now hence?
Why to a resolute mind, that kind of fence
Too open lies: oh! men are desprate foes
Upon advantage, they will come in, and close,
I Would never cry, fie away, nor utter this
But I would closly hugg to him and kiss.
Begone, sur^ease, you are rude, forbear I pray
Of times such words, I Have gone about to say
But er'e those cruel words, could have their birth
Tha'ue smoth'erd bynn, and all has turned to mirth
Wagges well know how, to quench our angers flame
Sweet kisses, at first kindling, dampe the same
For (sisters) Love, his scholars this does teach
We join should lips, to seal our lipp's from speech
And so it fard with us; speachles we lay
Giving to pleasures sweetened stream free way
So long (me thought) we dally'd in the bed
As almost I had lost my maydenhead
But (girls) I curse Dreams false deluding guile
As I was loosing it, I wakt the while
Oh girls! oh girls! who knows what I did miss,
For I awakt, in midst of sweetest bliss
If ever maid, touched Nectar with her lipp
Then I (in dream) of that sweet juice did sipp
But oh I wakt! oh then (awakt) my spite
For being 'wakt, a sleep fell all delight
Now eldest sister you must wake (quoth she)
Your turne's to tell, the next dream after me
And reason to the eldest sister said
Else let on me, some for feyture be laid
But, I must tell ^e dreams you have told twice
Unless I should, some feigned dream devise
Were here more then five hundred maids: yet each
Of us, should in one text and lesson preach
For all we maids do dream alike a nights
Then to our eyes appears pleasing sigh^s
And then a smack we taste of loves delights,
Oh that Dame Nature, would but hear my suit
Then should our maiden bodies, bear noe fruit.
Or would it were noe scandal to our lives
To have our pappes give suck, er'e married wives:
If with that pleasing grant, we maids were blessed
Then sooner would we yield to loves request
For a my faith girls were it not for fear
To be with child, Id'e never deny my Dear
Oh then these false dreams fond deluding sightes
Weed never care for: we'ed taste loves tr'ust delights
More then tenn thousand times, Ive thought to pyne
This mallenchollie sullen corpse of mine
For sild (alas) we maids can taste sweet love
But our own bellies, do the tell-tales prove
With ^ullen puft-vp pride alowde they read;
Proclayming publikelye our private deed
Happy are wives, for they are nere afraid
Of that which terryfyeth most a maid,
They may have boys and girls, and boys again:
They may with husbands lie, and other men;
Yet nothing noted; but alas poor we
Sild dare do ought, but what the world may see,
Each thing, it self against us does oppose
All things are blabbes, our secrets to disclose
For sild we reap loves pleasure in the night
But envious day (to'ur shames) bringes it to light
Showing too plain, at what game we have been
Making our sweetly stolen pleasures seen.
Oh were it not for dreams, I wonder I
How we in bed a nights could brook to lie
But come, let these things pass; either of you
Your dreams have told: my dream begins now
THE ELDEST SIsters dream.
OH (sisters) know you, to my ravished sight
My love with his amber locks appeard last night
Bold boie boldly he came as feared of naught,
Showing in what school he his skill was taught
Scar^e speaking ought at all ^f ought it was this
Where Is my Gerle? smothring that too with a kiss
Nor with this kissing spent he all the night
^utt (girls) our pastime yielded more delight
I dreamt it did do so, for you must know
I did but only dream, it did do so:
To loves embracementes, we (me thought) fell then
But loves sweet game is coldlie chaste by men.
Yet our sex, works loves labor, eu'rye day
With minds, as willing, as men go to play
I girls I girls, I speakt in heat of blood
Men too toosoone are ty'rd, with doying good
But oh dear girlis (such is our sexes kind)
One man may please us all, except our mind
For if one man content one woman cann
Then, why should it not be this youthful man?
His veins were full, so strong a backhee had
As Herculis to him was but a ladd
If youth and strength it is, quenches woman's fire
Then 'twas in him, as much as I Would desire
But it is not Oceans of that liquid stuff
Which lies in youthfulst men that is enough
To quench the minds outrageous frying flame;
For that once ty'nd age only dampes the same
Many a woman 'till she has tr'yd two
Distasteth all, her first sweetehart does do
From whence pray comss that Lust, that s^wre-sweet smart?
Oh the ead of that same springes, a divelish heart.
But whether from my text am I uowe fled
My dream was this, I lost my maydenhead
To that let me return: oh it is delight
Unto us maids, to think but on that night.
Him t'weene my arms one while I did infold
Another while, he me, 'tweene his would hold.
Entwindinge legs (me thought) with me he lay
While I, withs curledl^cks, did sport and play
So long plaide we as sisters-well I wisse
Our sportes extended further then to kiss
So long I kiste, so long on's looks I fedd
As sure in dream I lost my maydenhead*
But (sisters) was it in my pow're to choose
Then such a loss Id'e every mynute loose
For when we maids do lose our maiden treasure
Oh by that loss we wynn a world of pleasure
Faith Girls, Maids cannot think what sweet delight
Two lovers take which war in loves feirce fight:
To them loath som's the day, over the night
But now I sighe, now do I greiue to think
That, that night my eye-lides did ever wynke
For when I wakt (oh dreams! oh dreams you are thieves
And mist my love, Judge then (girls) of my greeues
Oh had I had tenn worlds I would have than
Gev'n all those worlds (sweet girls) for half^ a man
Men stuffs their chestes as full as they can hold
With cramb'd-trust bags of aungell-winged gold:
But what to do? for sooth to by this land:
Oh would I had that dust of Tagus strand
I Would not buy land or howses with it I
For other merchandise I Would make it fly:
Had I such laden truncks this I Would do than
For enry night in the year I Would buy a man
For, sisters, I may speak to you my mind
When I awakt, and looked my love to find
Feeling for's neck to claspe that neck of his
For's ruddy lipp, hoping that lipp to kiss
For's wanton leg, for mine with that t'yntwind
And sisters for -- oh girls you know my mind
When for these lovely things I searched to see
Du^ could not find, where those sweet things might be
With bitter passion, I burst out and cried
Wishinge, with in my mothers womhe Id'e died
Oh sisters! oh sweet sisters, then did I
Wish, fatal Death attache me instauntlie.
Now did I stare about; now did I call
But when noe answer I could hear at all
Up in my smock I rose and searched each place
(Oh girls extremes our sex in loves sweet case)
Groping behind each trunck, feeling under bed
Me thought for him which had my maydenhead
And often I Would cry sweet wagg, thy self disclose*
For Iv'e another maydenhead to loose
But when noe answer I could hear, oh then
Weeping, I sighed and went to bed again
Wher'e one while tumbling that way; other this:
Now should I sighe; now my poor pillowe kiss^
Entwinding it between my arms embrace
I Would hug g't as if my dear duck were in place
Fayning (in that my frying passions flame)
I hottlie chaste loves sweetst delightful game
But when I found my sense deluded so
My passions heat, to coldness then did grow
For myssing him I grew more cold then stone;
Oh't pains my heart to telt; come lett's be gone.
So up they rose, but er'e they went I rusht
From where I stood, at which the wantons blushed.
Now sir I hope you see what modest chatt
Young maids will have when by themselves their got.
Graves swallowe them: were all dead I Would be gladd
The best of wives, or maids, are worse then badd.


Allexander. COme, come Diogenes, although those three
In private mirthe exceeded modesty
Yet you do Ill t'accuse so gennerall;
Cause one is badd therefore must they be all?
In so concludinge, very Ill you do
Noe man so gen'rallie, concludes but you*

Diogynes. ANd by your leave sir I Will conclude so still
Where one of them is good tenn thowsand's Ill
What I have said, I will re-saie again
Were not for them, oh blessed were we men
Into us men, they eat as rust and moathes
Eats into Iron, and the fynest clothes
Thou see this riv'led hollowe-eyd face of mine
Thoudst little think it has been dect-vp fine,
And tricklie trym'd-vp in a woman's guise
Only to dive into their knaueries
But dust thou hear (I speak it to their praise)
I have a mary'd wife been in my days
At least wise like one, for th'e^le yet confess
They once took old Diogines for noe less:
Noe butned dublett, on my back I bo^e
A gown down to my heels (wif-like) I wore
And such attire, this head of mine did bear
As mary'd wives in those days vsd to wear
Then to my chynn, noe briflye hairs were known
Nay'thad not entertained any down
But it was so soft, so slee^, as each man said
When I past by, there goes a wife o^ maid:
My curled locks, hang in a careless guize
With which the wynd did play in wanton wise
Like to a wanton, I was trymlie dressed
But why I was so, there consists the jest.

Allexander. WHy wast thou so? I pry thee Cynnick tell:
Till thou haste told it, I shall nere be well.

Diogines. WHy then be Ill: in sooth it is not my list
To make thee laughe: for I Am a Satyrist:
Again thy company, I do brook so Ill
As I would have thee gone, had I my will

Allexander. WHy tel't me then, and instantly shall see
I will depart, and get me hence from thee.

Diogynes. ON that condition I will telt: why know
This was the cause I went disguised so
The Dames of Athens merrye wenches be
And unto meetings giv'n-are much you see
To gossip't with them, I did long time long
To hear the verdict of each woman's tongue
For well knew I when wives are got with wives
There Is trials to be heard, of husbands lives
False accusations, cruel Judgments then,
(Vnmercy fully) pass upon poor men
To hear all which (tooth hazard of my life)
I took on me, the habitt of a wife:
And well I womand it when I did walk
But when at table, I were set to talk
Then did my tongue betraye me; for I trow
It proved a Jade in pace; it was dull and slow:
I mumping satt: I could not for my life
Make my tongue gallopp, like a married wife
It Was cause I lackt their art to spur it up
Ever anan with a full sugerd' cupp.
Yet wiud I it the best that I could do
And now and then raild on my husband too:
But mark me now; now to my tale I go.

The Cynnycks description of the manner of women's gossypping.
AS at our meat we satt it was hard to know
Whether our teeth or tongues, did fastest go.
At tables upper end in chiefest place
Satt maddam, Will, in reeling drunken case
Light in atire she was, she is women's god
They her true subjects be: but she'es man's rodd
Nothing by Will, at any time is said
But is by wives, and widows still obayd.
Wills Oration.
SVbiectes quoth maddam Will I here am set
Not alltogeather, to se how you eat
Nor came I wholly to participate,
With this your freelie-spoken merrye prate
But chiefly why amongst you now I come
Is to know how each wife, fares in her home
How by her husband she is daily vsd
Whether she'es well-entreated, or abusd,
Therefore if any of you suffer grief
Know It I am Will, and will yield you releife
Be bold to speak, I am the wives delight
And ever was, and will be th'usbandes spite
I Will sut as Judge upon these wicked men
Do you accuse, and I Will guie s^ntence then.
The old vviues complaynt against her young husband.
AT which old Crona with her redd-bleare eyes
From of the stool she satt did straytewayes rise
And out aloude, to Will, for justice cries.
Quothe she, mysou'raygne Queen it is not with tongue
I able am t'expres my dayelie wrong.
Three husbands have I had; two old in truth
But they the cropping had, of my green youth
In lewe of whith (to thin'k on it now I Am sadd)
They left me all the goods and gold they had.
With Cattle sto'rd-was all my pasture growndes
With fine woold bleating sheep (...) downs
Crambd'was my barnes, my cheste with in it did hold
Many a Princes picture in puere gold
and while they lived, that thing was wondrous skant
That Crona ever did speake-for and want:
Then in wealths pleasures I did swymm and floate
But out alas that e're old fools should doat
For since their deaths (oh Queen I speakt' with ruth?)
Fond-foolish I set my love on a youth
Making him master and possessor quite
(In hope heed' do to me all true loves right)
Of all the golden goods I were possessed
And left-with by their souls, which now do res^e
But (aye me Caytif) never wretched I
Until this time knew, what was misery
Oh now I find, this is the sweeter life
To be an old man's nurse, then a youths wife
For' s love I wedded him, but he above
Does only know, who does enioie his love
My bed he loathes; he never gives me kis
But he cries, wife, reward my leave for this
For if young men old wives one kis affordes
It Is for the love th'aue, to their golden hordes,
Without I buy his love, heel lie all night
In sullen wise, and discontented plight
Not once so much as turning unto me
Unless a golden lure, his eyes does see.
And now greats gods Will, for loves intent
So long I bribd him have, as all is spent
And I am cast-of, wherefore let me crave
That against him, public sentence I may have
At which same periodd, all the wittles route
In her behalf unto dame Will cryd' out.
Dame Wills Sentence.
SVbiect quoth Will, well has thy fluent tongue
Expressed with passion thy too great a wrong
The sentence I pronounce against that wight
Is this; thou shall torment him day and night
With that same poysned instrument of thine
I mean thy tongue: then shalt-thou se, in fine
How despratelye, to hang himself he'ele gadd
Or else, how soon he will prove braint-sick madd
My seutence is at noe time thou shall rest,
But with thy tongue torment him still thy best.
Infeilde, in bed, at board, in each place still
I Would have thee stying him with thy bitterst skill
Call him up start, base scumm, the worst of worst;
Ask him who made him, and who raisd him first?
Tell him, e're thou mettst with him he did lack
Shoes for's feet, hose for's legs, and clothes for's back
Such peales at all times ring thou in his ear
It is my sentence; do it, and do not fear
To do that hest, away did Crona trudge
Praising dame Will, for a most upright Judge.
The young wife's complaint against her ieolous headed old husband.
THat wrinckle-faced drudge, noe sooner gone
But in her place straight flept-vp such a one
As matchles was in bewties pleasing grace;
One, who excelled, loves mother in the face
Men call her Youtha: oh-greate queen quoth she
Since woemens wrongs thou rightst', then right thou me
My covetous parents (not to Natures kind)
Unto an old man matched me, 'gainste my mind
Forty such men, unable are to quench
The firye flames tyn'd in a lustful wenche.
When burning Lust with his violent scortching fire
Has singed my heart with passions feirce desire
Then in Loves chase I hunt, for in Loves game
Remains that which quenches Lusts hott flame.
But, tweene an old man's arms what is there to quench?
Still flares the flames, ty'nd in a youthful wench.
Yet if that shiu'ring coldness heat allaies;
Then that in old men, shall we find always
As we are extreme hott, so still are they
Extreme in that same cold extremytee
But loves feirce fire with fire must quenched be;
'Ells still the more it burns: so't fares with me.
For alas, when lust has heat me, I cann find
His cold embrace, noe quencher of my mind
My parents might have matched me to one dead,
As well as to a sapples old man's bed:
I cann small diffrence make: for men one old
Like dead men lay: oh they are corruptly cold.
Rug'd-wrinckled is his face: his head in show
Seems like a hillock, hild with milk white snow
His humors heavier, then sadd massy lead
His legs like Isicles do warm my bed
Noe sign of heat, is in this aged fire
'Les in his nose, but that resembles fire.
What shall I say, ther'es none, that does him see
But says the picture of cold winte'rs he
Yet I (oh most unequal match!) alas
Enforste to wedd, with this cold dotard was
With whom (great Queen) I such a life do lead
As I each mynute, wish my self were dead.
So has his aged disabillitie
Possessed him, with this feende Ieolosie
As I cann noe ways, go from sight ofs' eyes
But straitewaies after me, he sendes his spies
Nor cann I talk with any, but in's head
A rises some conceipte, I Will wrong his bed.
Let but atrech'rous door in night once creake
Then straight he doubts, ther'es some with me would speak
Confrence with nearest knin, heel not allow,
Fearing we plott, to break our weddlock vow
Which god he knows (great Queen) my spottles mind
That ways as yet, has never been inclynd
Smyle I, or weep I, all is one; for he
Of wha't so e're I do, will ieolous be
If I do smyle, then says he straight Iv'e had
Sport with my love; it is that, makes me so gladd
If I am sadd; then does he say he knows
The spring from whence my mallanchollie flows
Up braydinge me, I Am only sadd for this
Because my love, of his set how're did miss
Such is a grisly old man's, fair wiues' state
As ieolous-headed he will deem she'el hav't
Though over her he setts a thousand spies,
And eu'rye spy, an Argus is, for's eyes:
Therefore, since (causles) he does wrong me so
Teach me revenge against this loathed foe.
Give sentence (Queen) what shall be done by me
Against him in revenge ofs' ieolosee.
Dame Wills sentence in the young wifes behalf against her old husband.
YOutha quoth maddam Will, with great reguard
Have I, this thy sadd information heard
And do bewail the same; but Ile' have thee
Plague thy old husband, for his Ieolosee.
Yet Ieolous-headed men noe plagves do need
For in themselves, sufficient plagues do breed
For look in what place, Iealosie does dwell
There are the torments, of an earthly hell.
Yet since for naught, he doubts so fair a dame
Thus shall thou sting and torture him, forth' same.
In secrett wise, I Will have: he stain his bed,
And graft fair gilded horns, on's silverd head
Such glorious spriggs so well in noe place grows
As in the riv'led furrows of an old man's brows.
Thou art a woman, therefore can not want
At all times skill, such setts and grafts, to plant
My sentence is thou shall him so beguild
As make him think his father to that child
Which thou thyselfe know not who it bego^t
Togather goods for whom, shall the old drudgi trott
Not sparing night nor day, till's life be done
How to scrape wealth, to give another son
And cause thy parents, forste thee to his bed
Thus will I have thy parents punnished.
Thou shall, unto their skarlet blushing shame,
Bespott them with the spotts, of thy staind name
Soyling thy wedding sheets, fair I'vry white
With foul black spotts, of salt lusts loathd delight
Bewteous youtha my sentence now is done
See that on them the'res execution.
The gossipping vviues complaint against her rich churlishe husband.
THis sentence given, the whole route^gann to rise
But pert-quicke-tongued Gossippa (whose eyes
Contaynd of brymishe tears a cristall fluude)
Starts-vpp, and prays Dame Will, to her be good.
Of all thy loving subjects I (quoth she)
Have ever yet been found faythfulst to thee
And therefore my good Queen, let me acquainte
Thy gentle ears with one petition plainte.
Two things I love; two usual things they are
The first, newe-fashiond clothes, I love to wear
New tires, new ruffes; I, and new gesture too:
In all new fashions, I do love to go:
The second thing I love, is this I ween
To ride about to have those new clothes seen
At eu'rye gossipping I am at still
And ever will be, may I have my will
For at ons own house, pray, who ist' cannsee
How fine in new found, fash'ond tires we be?
Unless our husbands; faith; but very few
And whoo'd go gaie, to please a husbands veiwe?
Alas we wives do take but small delight
If none (besides our husbands) se'es that sight.
It joys our hearts, to hear an other man
P^aise this or that attire, that we wear on
We iocond are, and think ourselves much graste
If we hear one say, fair wenche, faith in waste
This straight-girt gown, becomes you passing well
From other Tailors, yours do bear the bell:
Oh he that well cann actt-out such sweet parts
Throwes-vp the sure which wynns our very hearts
When we are stubborn'st, then let men with skill
Rubb'es well with th'oyle of praise and bend we will
That smoothe-fyne supple oil does soften us foe
As what is it then we will not yield unto?
Meetinges and brauerye were my delight:
Those were the two: but (great queen) he'res the spite
Without great store of wealth, be daily gainde
Of all delights, those are the worste maintaind
And therefore I did always plott in mind
How a wealthy, rich husband, out to find
And one I Have got: but such a churl is he
As scarce a penny will bestow on me
And that shall never come, but (fore, I ha'te)
The miserable clown, will scratch his pate
Always demaundinge what with it, I will do
And then comes out, her'es such a stir with you.
A man had better tidd-be of his life
Then clogged with such a fydling foolish wife
Such are his tauntes, when I demand him ought
As what I get from him is dearly bought.
I cannot grosslie feed, for I in sooth
Have a tender mawe, and a dainty tooth
These beeues and muttons, are but homely fare
My appetite does thirste-for what is most rare:
Had I unto my mind, then I would eat
Still of the fynest pallat-pleasing meat
But fie on h^gges! oh! there is none lives, lives
So straunglie hateful as these rich churles wives
For if I cannot gnawe, a hard dry cruste
Many a day, faste-out the time I must.
Just like to Tantalus it fares with me
For what I hunger-for I always see.
All what against him I do you to say, Ive said
Now queen I do ymplore thy counsels aid.
I cannot gossipp it nor cann go trymm
Cause I want art, to work coin out from him.
Tatling Gossippa here-at holds her tongue
With praying maddam Will to right her wrong.
Silence being made, thus dame Will replies.
Wills sentence upon the rich churl
SVbiect quoth she I Have heard thy Injuries
And if they all he true which I did hear
Then are they too too much for thee to bear
For to us women these things are most Ill
T'abate our prides, and to restrain our will
If he be rich; his harnes are full of grain
Where he one bushel sells, sell thou still twain
His swyne, sheep, geese, henns, ducks, do thou convaie
I, sell his very shirtes but go thou gaie,
Of all men, he vnworthy'st is of life
That will not last of all mistruste his wife.
A nights, fail not but pick the churles stuffed purse
If he does swear, I hope thy tongue cann curse
But if his barnes, purse, yard, and all do fail
Then to the old use put thou thy nimble tail
Let that work for thee; for by that same way
Ther'es many a woman makes her self gaie
That way thou maiste the supple sattins ware
That way thou maiste feed on thee dainty'st fare
If noe way else thou canste make thy self trymm
Then that way, it is my will, thou punnish him
Whoo'd sweat and toil for this same golden treasure
When one may get it, with the sweetest pleasure
Thou know my mind; Gossippa, do it then:
Fare wenches cannot want, while there are men.


Diogynes makes himself known. AT the end of which same sentence, all arose
Where at my self to them I did disclose
But er'e I did it, I did get to'oth door
For had they caught me, they would have vsd me sore:
To hold me, eu'rye woman out did cry
But being out their reach away rann I:
Gladd that Id'e seen and heard their knauerye
Now sir, Ive justly told, for what intent
I like a woman amongst women went
If you on their behalfes have ought to say
Sait'e some where else, or get you hence away
Allexander. TO what thast' said, small creditt I cann give
For I shall never made-be to believe
That creatures half devine for glorious beauty
Should so respectles be to man in duty.
Things eu'rye way so perfect fair in show
In virtues fully perfect, are I know.

Diogynes. THou know it; do? away, thou art an else
What can thou know, that know not thy self
The golden-skaled snake's, a lovely thing
Had not that glorious worm, a poysned stinge
Of maids and wives noe barrel better be
Would God made none, but what were spoke of me.

Allexander. WHy prithee speak; how many would have then?

Diogines. FOr one half girl, tenn hundred thousand men.

Allexander. Now fie upon thee ^ynnick, why do bite
And set so pure a thing, as woman light?
I am a shamd' of thee; do what I can,
I cannot think, thou art a perfect man
I do believe that thou at noe time haste
That manly hear, which causes man to waste
Thou art noe man; for we'rt a man. I Am sure
A woman's company thou could endure.
But say, thou were en forced upon thy life
To take thee to some one to be thy wife
What kind of woman-creature would thou choose
If it were so thou mighst' it not refuse.

Diogynes. BY hanginge, I Would choose rather end my life
Then Id'e a woman have, to be my wife
But were it so, that one I needs must have
And that I had noe way, my self to save
Then all the world Ide' seek, but I would find
A woman for my wife, dumb, deaf, and blind
Besides; if I could possibly prevail
I Would seek the world for one, without a tail
Most men in body wasted are by wives
But such IN me sure, would prove restoritiues.

Allexander. FIe man; why what in women do thou see
That they so much, distastefull are to thee.

Diogynes. NOe more then thou maiste see, if thou art not blind
Why most of them hudge gyantes are for mind
Pride keeps her fair in each fair wantons face
And Lust keeps in their (...) markett place
Revengefull Wrath their furious tongues does swaie.
From labor, drowsy Sloth their hands does stay
In syns sweete-poysned Juice drunken they will be
And Envy others, drunken so to see
What see I not in them? they are the Inns
Wherein does lodge those monstrous murdring synns.

Allexander. FIe Cynnick, thou doste blow too bitter air
On tender blossoms, which are sweetly fair.

Diogynes. IF she be fair, and a sharpe-witted one
And honest too; a Phoenix she'es alone.
Who has tenn Herculesses strengths in's loins
And with a fair sharpe-witted wanton Ioyns
Shall be assurd the horn, on's browe to find:
Whoo'l quench a wantons lust must quench the mind;
They Are proud; each wench would be an Allexander
And by her will, over a world commander.
But if not proud, nor lustfullie inclind
Then either fool, or scold, of her shall find.
Either of them, man's patience so would alter
As they would make him straight make use ath halter,
They are all naught, I cannot brook em I
^ould I were Dea^e, then women all should die

Allexander. NAie fie Cynnick thou railst too gennerall
Thou must not for some few condemn em all,
Thou talkst, as if thou were noe woman's son
I would thou had trauaild, but as I have done:
Although the Athenians givn are to their will
And live a life displeasinge (hateful ill)
Yet since my travail, (whe^^ I have been)
Abundance virtuous (...) I have seen.

Diogynes. OH ya'r a trauaylier; pray are you so?
Where you have been, black swanns you have seen too
Good trauayler the hearing I will give you
But you shall give me leave not to believe you
Women are naught: I Will talk noe more with thee
And therefore naught, because women they be.

Allexander. OH straung! if Allexander heard but thee
For women's sakes (I Am sure) thou would punnisht be.

Diogynes. Go telt' him go; I do as little care
For him as thee; let both do what you dare.
Tell me of him? I fear him not a fly:
I dread not might: Diogynes am I:
He Is but a man; I Will never fa^ne for man's grace
What I have said, I Will boldly say too's face
And were, he were as badd as women be
Id'e bite the monnark to his face, should see.

Allexander. HE knows thou would in that I know the (...)
For I am he: for this cause here I came
To hear thy witty bluntnes, and to see
Whether thy sayings and thy deeds agree,
Come Cynnick burn this tubb and follow me
And unto noble titles, Il^raise thee.

Diogynes. Thou will: but I will not: none can raise me;
I Am in my tubb as great a King as th^e.
Who holds the world and it is vain trash for flight
He truly conquers it, give him his right:
And so do I: therefore hudge Allexander
I hold my self (ath twain) the greatst commander
I will not beg to rule and govern lands
Only thy absence, I Will beg at thy hands.
I prithee pack thee hence and get thee gone
The company still is best, where is but one.
Go seek thee out an other world to wynn
And putt the women of this world therein
But let that world be far enough; and then
Learning and virtue will increase with men
Naught else I have to beg, grant but this suite
Then henceforth ever, shall my tongue rest mute.

FINIS.
YOu choyceste creatures, (you which god did take
From-out man's selfmans comforter to make)
Discomfort not your selves nor be dismayed
At what a dogged Cynnick here has said
What though sowre-churlishe-he (too currish blind)
Has barkt too broadlye gainste your gentle kind
Yet little does such clouds keep from our sights
Your shynninge virtues; this worlds splendanntst lights
Happlye his gally ve^aym'd speech proceeds
As grounded byself-doyinge divelishe deeds.
Dead is the dog, I hope and for your sex
The spirritts does his spirritt hottlye vex.
Excuse my work, it paintes the Cynnick forth
And to the wise it nothing stains your worth.
FINIS.
A MORRALL SATIRE, Entitled the Owls araygnement.
WHen fowls could talk with reason like to men
This accydent amongst em happend then:
Before the Prince of fowls the Owl was brought
To answer why she did things lawles naught:
Her adversaries were the batt the thrush
With others more: who night' lie in the bush
She ey her scard with skreeking fearful cries
Or sodeynlie (ere wake) did them surprise:
Wherefore they apprehending her did crave
That they against her might just Justice have.
Great Prince quoth they to death put thou this Owl
She is a vildlie living wicked foul:
Unfit to live: all day she sleeps; a nights
Small birds she kills; the best and greatst she frights
Breaking our quiet sleep with the fell noise
Of manlike lure and yauling-whooping voice
And therefore sovereign Prince we all do crave
Since she deserves death, death she may have.
The Eagle sternlie mild putt them a side
Commanding silens thus the Eagle cried
Come forward Owl and free thy heart from fear
Speak freely bird true justice I do here
Before my sword of justice Death does strike
The accuser, and the accusd I hear alike
Bribes nor affection maks my clear eyes blind
And therefore freely feareles speak thy mind
When th'owle did hear this mild speech of her Lord
Couradg she took in gesture and in word
Chearing her self, she thus tooth Eagle cries
Impartial justice comes from Majesty's
And since your highness does thus daine to hear
My cause your self; my cause I little fear
For what need I quoth she dread any thing
Being my cause is heard before my King.
Let murdrers quake when, Justice shakes her rodd
The Just nere fears the Judgment of Just god
Noe more will I since freely plead I must
(In guiltles cause) before a King so just
Two accusations are against me ^ayde
To be a murdrer is the first I Am said
The second is that I in sylent night
With manlike voice small birds and fowls afright
Great Prince I both confess; but first I Will show
The cause and reason which makes me skreek so
A nights I hollowing whoop and wondering cry
But gracious Prince this is the reason why
In each place I do see proud Babells built
With cloude-braving turretts daubd-o're with gu^^t
With in those Babells I do peep to spy
The princely presence of your majesty
But when in steed of you (on bed of straw)
I see that tatling bird, the Iack-adawe
With admiration then away I fly
Then lo ho ho then woe ho ho cry I.
Sometimes I daringly presume to peep
With in your Court when all your courtyers sleep
Where when I see the prating parratt graced
And birds of better worth for him displaced
Or when I see the plumy peacocks pride
To strive to lie by's sovereign Princes side
And se the valiant Cock with swains to live
That sight much wonder to my eyes does give
With admiration then away I fly
Then lo ho ho then woe ho ho cry I
Sometimes I fly ore Neptunes glassie soil
To veiwe the slipps of our set-girt-in I Will
But (...) they he
How like they are tooth winter-shaken tree
And how from them all brave sea birds are fledd
Then like a malecontent I hang down head
With admiration then away I fly
Then lo ho ho then woe ho ho cry I
Sometimes ore sto'nd-paud Cities I take flight
Where to my night-cleard eyes admired sight
I see the Cuccoe build in house his neaste
Which ere was wont to be Silvanus gueste:
Baselie brooking each cock-sparrowes rivalrye
Sufferings mate for trash to bath in brothelry
A nights such sights presented to my eye
Makes me with wonder woe ho ho to cry.
This is the cause great Prince why in the night
I wonder so: now where they do indight
Me for a murderer: your grace shall find
I Am least of all your-nobles so inclind;
Guitles I plead; or if I guilty be
With me must die your whole nobility
Your Hawks (dread souraigne Prince) do daily kill
And daily do devour eate-vp and spill
Your honest subjects yet there is noe a aint
Lays hold of them `gainst them the'res noe complain
Greate-peares nere to Princes should not do so
By their stepps we track which way Kings do go
As Phebes light from Phoebus does proceed
So does a great Lords act froms Princes deed
If Kings encloud with vice their Virtues sunn
That self thick-foggye course their peers will runn
If I do murder, they do murder too
What way I go, that way your hauks must go
Else gracious Prince your law gives way and place
To such as are, or are not in your grace.
Else great ones open may your m^^^yes door
Sucking the fatt from men but meanly poor
Iniustly wronging poore-poore underlings
(...)
Far fowler acts within themselves they ^^rrish
And consciensles the (...) things cherrish
But so it should not be my souraigne King
For from a Kingdoms laws clear christ all spring
Alike all streams should runn: I every where
That should spoute water vncorruptlie clear
Let it do so my Prince: let poor man's crime
Be iudgd like theires: w' are made of self-like slime
All kings are earthly gods; therefore should Kings
In an impartial balance weigh all things
The iustest judge does so; and so should your
Like that corruptles judge in all points do.
I freely speak; the cause I speak so free
Is' cause at first great Prince you licensd me.
I have accusd, but not excusd; for still
My faults not lessond for an others ill
Therefore my Prince to this my pleadings tend
You Will quitt my fault, and I Will my fault amend.
The Prince well listening to the appeaching Owl
Turns to the hawks, on whom with wrathful scowl
He fixed his eyes. Quoth he, speak is it true
My nobles which this owl reports of you?
In guiltles blood have you embrud your hands?
It Is monstrous vilde! why your the propps of land^
The steres men to your Prince: by you he is led
By whom but you should he be counseled?
Your heads should conduicts be: clear cristall springs
From which should power al wholesome virtuous things
From your brains fountains such pure streams should flow
As by that moisture things should flourishing grow,
Wherefore enact I laws with your consent?
I think to punish vice was our intent
Will you (...) are part makers of the law
Be breakers of it first? How then in awe
Shall I my sub^^cts have? why when they se
You drowned (...) have they 'le deem the like of me
Disgracefully then this they will report
How theirs an extreme famine grown at court;
Of virtuous men there is such a famine grown
As scarcely one about the Court is known
By you shall I grow to loathd infamy
And iudgd the nurse of fowle-fell tyranny
And therefore nobles if your free and clear
From these dambd haynos crimes, makt now appear,
Silence being made, the guilty nobles
Seeing themselves to grow to dangrous trobles
Thus (despratly) replies: oh King quoth they
I hope unto our murders you will give way
If we make spoil and other birds undo
We take thexsample souraign Prince from you
We nerest Princes Imitate them still
We be the emblems of your good or Ill
If you slaie, we slaie; if you save, we save
All Kings about them many shadows have:
For this our fau^ we seek not make excuse
Cause from your self sprang first this faults abuse
And therefore King if you will have subjects awe
You must not only make but keep your law.
This peremptory answer so incenst
His majesty as twene them wars com^^st
But while as they were so at Civil strife
The Owl that malefactor saues her life
She being loose away from keeper scudds
Lusking from sight all day in thickest woods
But every night about the outlawe flies
Ioying her escape; woe ho ho the cries.
FINIS.
W. G.


