A TREATISE OF TRVE Fortitude. By M. George Gyffard, Preacher of the word of
God, at Maldon in Essex.

At London, Printed for John Hardy, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Tygars head. 1594.

To the Right Honorable and his very good Lord, the Earl of Essex. etc.
AMong all the Virtues (right Honorable,) there is no one which is more
profitable, and in every respect necessary for the safety and good of the
humane society, then Fortitude. Her fruits indeed which she brings forth
are such, as that those Kingdoms and Common wealths be blessed, whose Princes
and Nobles be valiant. For there truth, justice and peace shall florishe.
There shall no good thing be wanting.

The fame of this noble virtue is so great, that many of all sorts and degrees
of men are enflamed to seek her, bending their chief study and care, how
they may become right valiant and brave minded men. But the greater part, for
want of good direction, missing of the right way, and taking into the wrong, in
steed of a pure virtue, light upon a foul vice, which they embrace and make
much of. Great pity it is, that the mighty courage which is in many men, is
not framed aright. They know not how to clime up on hie unto the royal palace
of this goodly virtue, but imagine that they find her, not knowing her
properties. I have therefore written here a few things (so far as my small
skill serves,) to give some light that way.

True it is, that this Image which in rude manner I have drawn, deserves not
to be accounted so much as the line aments, and skiographie of Fortitude, so
far it is above my reach to handle the matter as it is worthy. I wish with
all my heart, that some Apelles would take in hand to draw her picture in the
just summetrie and proportion, and with her lively colors: that even the great
Princes and Nobles might take pleasure therein. I coming then so far short
of this, may seem rash and worthy much blame, that I presume to offer so rude
and so slender a discourse unto the hands of your Honor. But I think I can
remember sufficient reasons, to excuse my boldness herein. As first of all, I
am assured of this, that the virtue Fortitude, is so beutifull of herself, so
well favored and so comely, that she need not be ashamed, no not in her
meanest attire that can be put upon her, to show herself in the presence of
great Princes. Then secondly, it is the common hope and expectation of our
whole Land, (at the least, of so many as carry faithful hearts to their Prince
and Country, and love to the truth) that God has prepared your Honor as a
right worthy instrument, furnished with an heroical spirit for the defense of
our most noble Queen and Kingdom. Then when any thing is written (although not
so exquisitely) in the defense of Fortitude, against those which abuse her
name, and do but as it were steal her cloak to cover a vice, to whom shall
the same be offered more rightly for to seek patronage, then to one of the
chiefest of her noble sons? Thirdly, I know, that such a poor Treatise,
coming nakedly forth, will be little regarded among many, and so, if there be
any thing in it worth the knowledge, it shall not profit: And moreover, some
matters in it will not be pleasant unto diverse men, which frame to themselves
a fortitude contrary unto that which I set forth. This I doubt not of, but
that they carry an affection toward the virtue, and love those greatly which
excel therein: wherefore I do persuade my self, that for your Honors sake,
even among those which otherwise would tread it under their feet, it shall
find some favor.

I do therefore beseech your Honor, for these foresaid respects, to accept
of so simple a thing as this is which I offer. I wish greater, for I wish and
pray, that the most Mighty, the author and giver of all good gyfts, will so
far increase in you that heroical spirit of Fortitude, that your Honor may
abound in all noble and worthy acts, to the praise of the most hie God, to
the good of his Church, and to your own eternal Honor.

Your Honors most humble to command. George Gyffard.

A Treatise of true Fortitude.
FORTITVDE in our tongue, is derived from the Latin word Fortitudo, which
signifies, if we take it in the larger sense, all manner of force and
strength: but more strictly, it is used for that virtue which the Grecians call
(...), that is, manhood, or valiantnes of courage. It is called also of the
Latins Magnanimitas, and of the Grecians, (...), that is, greatness of mind,
which names in both tongues are taken from the effect, for it enlarges the
mind, and makes it great. And that is it which we use to say of one that is
valiant, he is a man of a great mind. And so the vice also that is contrary
to this virtue, namely Cowardlines, in the one tongue is called Pusillanimitas,
and in the other (...), that is, smalenes, slenderness, and weakness of
mind. The Hebrews have used diverse names for to express this one virtue, as
Haiil, Coah, Geburah, Hezek, Maamats, and Gnoz. All which are taken from
strength and prevailing, and may be used in more general sense then for the
virtue.

2 This virtue has ever carried away the greatest and the highest praise among
men. There was never any which the world has greatly admired, but such as
have much excelled in greatness of mind, or at the least were thought to excel
therein. Among the Romans in old time, this title Magnanimuus, was even as the
largest, the richest and most royal robe of honor, which they had to put upon
any man. It was more then to set a crown of gold upon his head. When the Poet
would in glorying wise give the highest praise to Rome that might be, he
does it by extolling the great minds of her Citizens, as comparable to the
heavens, for thus he writes, -- illa inclyta Roma,
Imperium terris, animos aequabit olympo.


The Grecians called their chief valiant men, Heroes, eue^ half Gods, so
highly did they admire and honor the^. Come to the people of God the children
of Israel, and see what the holy Scriptures do speak in commendation of the
mighty. The mighty men in Hebrewe are called Gibborim, Gibbore haiil, Ansche
haiil, Been haiil, Abbirim, and a man of war is called Isch milhamah. We find
that many were praised for their worthy acts, because they were Ansche haiil,
men of courage. If we look among the Kings, the Judges and Captains of
Israel, as Josua, Gedion, Iepthah, Sampson, David, and others. Also diverse
worthies in the days of king David, 2. Sam. 23. For the Lord himself
requires in all that bear public office, either to judge, or to teach, or
to go to the wars, that they be valiant in mind. When the mighty oppress
the weak, how shall a Judge execute true judgment, unless he be of a valiant
courage? If the minister of the word through pusillanimity do fear the face of
man, how shall he reprove sin, especially in persons of high estate? Tyrants
seek to invade kingdoms with great force, how shall the man of war be able to
meet them and look the^ in the face, if he have not the heart of a Lion? And
what an honor is it to the Worthies which fight the battles of the Lord
against the enemies of God, in defense of the truth, the Church, and Common
wealth, that the King of glory himself, (as it were) comes down to be
praised among them, and together with the^? For in his praise it is written,
Iehoua isch milhamah, Exodus 15. Iehoua is a man of war. And Jehoua gilbor
milhamah, Psalm. 24. Iehoua mighty in battle. This is the high praise of the
mighty.

3 But perhaps some man will say, what just cause is there, that this virtue
should be praised and had in admiration above all virtues? Why should it have
the highest or the chief honor? I answer that the cause is apparent, unto
those that behold and view her well, with all the pleasant and sweet fruits
that she bringgeth forth. She makes great, for she is excellent great,
spreading herself thorough the height, the depth, the length, and the breadth
of al goodness: inasmuch as the mind of man, can never retain or practice any
good thing without her force and might. She is even as the sinnewes and bones
of strength, knitting together and supporting the whole body of virtues. She
lifts up the mind of man: for as through weakness man's mind is overcome,
and brought into a base slavery unto all evil, so by strength it overcomes
and has the victory, and is advanced unto freedom and dignity. She is the
maine pillar that supporteth both Church and Common wealth. Inasmuch as she
opens the mouth of the Judge to pronounce true sentence of judgment, without
all dread or respect of persons. She remoueth all fear from the messenger of
God, and makes him bold, faithfully to utter his full message unto all
degrees of men, both high and low. She girdeth on the sword of the mighty
warrior, and leads him forth with boldness to fight the battles of the
Lord, to repel the violence of the enemy, and to save the lives of many
thousands. In respect of these things, her glory is more bright then the
cleerest star that shines in the firmament. Many are the ornaments of Gold, of
Pearl, and of other precious things, wherewith the body is decked, but all of
them are by many degrees inferior to the ornaments wherewith she decketh and
beautifieth the mind of man. Her jewels cannot be valued by any price.

4 This noble virtue then is worth the seeking after, and blessed is he that
finds the right way to clime up unto her. She dwells on high, and is hard
to come unto, as all godly things are difficil. Her fame indeed causes many
to seek after her, but few there be that find her, because the most part light
into the wrong way, enticed and deceived by a sturdy vice, which has stolle^
her cloak, and would be like unto her. These run as swift as the Roe, but
look how much the faster, so much the further off from the pure virtue of
which they have lost the sight. To remedy this mischief, and to direct such as
seek her, the way is to be opened which leads to the one, and that leads
to the other, for so may a man learn to avoid the wrong, and to choose the
right course. And now we come unto it. Fortitude is double, humane and
divine, I call that humane fortitude, which the Gentiles, I will not say had
(for they had nothing in them pure,) but which by the light of nature they did
see and describe, and which they labored to attain unto by the natural
powers and faculties of the mind, through humane courage. And that is the
divine Fortitude, where the mind through faith in Christ, puts on the grace
and power of God, and thereby does become great and valiant. As it is written,
Be strong in Lord, and in the power of his might, put on the whole armor of
God. Ephesians. 6. If we look well into either of these, we shall find in the
one, the right way to ascend up to the Palace of the princely Virtue, and in
the other, the race wherein men run to that vice which does resemble her.
They that seek to obtain her as a spiritual gift from GOD, by faith in
Christ, through the new birth, by which the mind is renewed and made free,
take the right way, they shall posses her, they shall taste of her sweet
fruits. But such as endeavor by their own natural powers, and faculties of
the mind, through humane courage to become valiant, run in the wrong way, and
although they attain to an exceeding hardiness, yet is it no virtue, but a
resolute or rather a desperate boldness, being in deed a vice under the show
or resemblance of virtue. They run in the way of the Gentiles, and higher
then they did, they cannot clime.

5 Marry some will say, I would never wish to clime hier in Fortitude then the
Gentiles did, nor to go in a better way therein then they. There were among
them (as all antiquity does report) as valiant and brave minded men, as ever
lived in the world. And this also we find that never any men have performed
greater or more noble acts, the^ they did, for which they have been had in
admiration and honored, of all men and shall be to the worlds end.

To let pass many of ancient time, which were very great: what say you unto
Phillip of Macedon, and to his son Alexander the great? What say you to
Scipio and Haniball, Caesar and Pompey? Was there but a show of virtue in
these men? was all their courage and hardiness but a vice? May we not rather
esteem them and others of like fame, as worthy patterns for all Warriors to
imitate: let no man covet to be a more worthy soldier then Julius Caesar
was.

6 To this I answer, that in very deed it can hardly be showed, that ever
there have been more souldiour-like men in the world the^ some of those
forenamed, if we respect either their skill to guide an Army, or their courage
and boldness of mind, and also their famous acts: but yet it is out of all
doubt, that they had not in them the true Fortitude, which is a most pure
virtue, but they had some show thereof. And so likewise the fame and the glory
which they have even to the worlds end, is but a vain glory, and shall
vanishe, and at the last lie in the dust. For proof of this, we have first
this undoubted principle, that there is nothing pure in man by nature, but all
wholly depraved and corrupted. As it is written, They are corrupt and become
abominable, there is not one that does good, no not one. Romans 3. And our
Savior compares himself to the Vine, and Christian men to the branches, and
says, As the branch can bear no fruit of it self, except it abide in the
Vine, no more can ye except ye abide in me. Without me ye can do nothing.
John. 15. Then without the new birth of Christ, there is not so much as a pure
thought in any man. The mind is held captive unto vanity and sin. How then
shall so godly and so pure a virtue be found in nature? Moreover, for a more
particular proof, that none of the famous men among the Heathen had the true
Fortitude, take this, that all the most valiant, and men of fame of the
Gentiles, were under some one or other of the four Monarchies, or great
kingdoms, which in Daniel chap. 7. are compared and likened to four savage
beasts, that is, the Lion, the Bear, the Leopard, and a beast very terrible
unlike to the rest. What is here figured by the beasts, the civil power? or
the manners of those that ruled? We may not take it that the holy Ghost does
resemble the civil power by these cruel Beasts: for the civil power, even of
the Heathen Kings, is of God. But what then is resembled by those savage and
cruel beasts, but their manners which exercised the power? The pride, the
vainglory, the covetousness, the self-love, the ambition, the fierce
cruelty, the craft, the subtilty, and the greedy ravening, of the Kings and
stout warriors, which set up and maintained those kingdoms, are represented by
the nature of those beasts. They gloried of a virtue, that they did all for
their Country, when all their valiant courage did spring and grow from those
beastly vices. This is the glory of their noble acts, this is the praise which
the holy Ghost sets of their manhood, howsoever men speak of them.

7 What then, was their great courage a vice? Or was not that hardiness the
gift of God, even in the Heathen? This is undoubtedly, that as God in his high
providence, had before ordained the great Monarchies or kingdoms, so also he
prepared the instruments that should erect and uphold them. He put that skill
for the wars, and that heroycall courage into them. He uses by his almighty
power and wisdom, al manner of instruments to execute his will. But now we
must understand, that as this courage in it self was his gift, so was it by
them corrupted, depraved, and abused, through their pride, vain glory,
covetousness, ambition, cruelty, and through other their abominable lusts.
For these foresaid vices, did nourish and support their courage. These did
wholly ouer-spread it, and were mingled with it. For an example, look upon
Tamberlaine the Scythian, of later time, who in Anno. 1397 ouerthrewe
Baiazethes the mighty Emperor of the Turks. A more valiant and expert
soldier then this Tamberlaine could not be found, and yet withal, as cruel
a Tyrant as ever did breath. Shall we say that he had true fortitude? We must
not think it strange that courage is thus depraved, and turned from virtue to
vice. But consider the creation and falt both of men and Angels, and thereby
we may learn to decide this matter. The Angels of Apostasy, were created
very godly creatures, replenished with heavenly wisdom and fortitude. They
sinned, and were cast down from their high estate. They lost not their
understanding by their fall, but they have corrupted and depraved it, and
turned it from wisdom, into deep craft and subtilty. For we cannot say the
devils are wise, but they be exceeding crafty. No more have they lost their
might and courage, but they have wholly depraved it, and turned it from
Fortitude, into a most obstinate, rebellious, and horrible deuillish boldness.
They be stiff and hardy to war and to maintain a kingdom, even against
the most High. Then look upon man, he also received goodly gifts and
ornaments in his mind. He had understanding, he had valiant pure courage. The
light of his understanding was not utterly quenched by his fall, but corrupted
and turned from wisdom. His courage of mind and hardiness was not quite
destroyed, but defiled, and from noble Fortitude, turned into an obstinate,
proud, and cruel stoutnes. Thus far from virtue was the great courage of
the Heathen.

8 If the courage of the Gentiles was thus depraved, and turned from virtue
into vice: how can Fortitude be rightly divided into humane and divine?
Fortitude is a virtue, not only in show but indeed. And if the courage of
the Gentiles be not a virtue, where is our humane Fortitude? Shall we speak
(...), and term it by the name of a virtue, because of some resemblance which
it has thereof. We may no doubt speak so. But I do not call that humane
Fortitude which the Gentiles had in action, but that which they did define to
be Fortitude. For it is one thing what they did know, and another thing what
they did practice. For let us to make this apparent, have recourse to the
general, and so discende to this particular which we are in hand withal.
They had the Law of nature, which is this, God made man in his own likeness, an
excellent creature, full of understanding and purity. He had the whole Law
even written in his heart, so that he needed not to learn any knowledge of God
from any other book. This wriring is not quite blotted out by the fall, but
remains in some part, as S. Paul speaking of the Heathen, says, that
(...), That which may be known of GOD, was manifest in the^: for by beholding
the frame of the world, his eternal power and Godhead are seen. Romans 1. ver.
19. 20. There is a knowledge also of good and evil remaining in them, as the
same Apostle says, That they did show (...), the work of the Law, written in
their hearts. Romans 2. ver. 15. From hence it came that they uttered so many
sayings touching God. And yet (as S. Paul says,) they did not glorify him as
God, but withhelde the truth in unrighteousness. Romans 1. ver. 18. 21. From
hence also it came, that they so highly commended virtue, and dispraised vice,
and made so many godly Laws. This light in them is, called the Law of nature.
By this they did see the deformity of vice, and the uncleanness thereof, but
could not so much as have one pure thought to purge their mind from it. By
this they did see after a sort, the comlie beauty of virtue, but to deck their
hearts therewith they had no power, no not so much as to think one clean
thought. They could describe in some sort, and commend Fortitude, which is
one branch of the Law of nature: but they did not know the way to ascend up
unto her. So I call that humane Fortitude which the Gentiles described, which
is a virtue: and not that which they had.

9 If the Fortitude which the Gentiles do define, be a virtue indeed, and yet
differ from the divine Fortitude, (as otherwise the distribution is frivolous,)
then are there two Fortitudes, (may some say,) which seems very absurd. Are
there two kinds of purity, or two kinds of virtues? if not, how two kinds
of fortitudes? I answer to this that Fortitude being simply considered in
herself, is but one: but in respect of that estate in which we are, in
respect of the way whereby we come unto it, and in respect of the means by
which it is given unto us; it may well be called double Let not this seem
strange that a thing which is simple in it self, may for some respects become
as double. For we know there is but one righteousness, being simply
considered in it self, and yet the holy Apostle says, There is the
righteousness of the Law, and the righteousness of faith, and sets them as
opposite the one to the other. The righteousness of faith, is the same purity
which the law requires, as the same Apostle teaches, when he says, That by
Christ, the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us. Romans 8. verse, 4.
The Law requires it, if men could of themselves fulfill it, (as Adam and Eve
did before their fall) it might be called the righteousness of the Law, but
now because they cannot, being held under the yoke of sin, we obtain it
only by faith in Christ, Who is made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption. 1. Cor. 1. ver. 30. And it is called the
righteousness of God, and the righteousness of faith. So now is it touching
Fortitude, the law requires it, and if men could by the natural powers and
faculties of the mind attain unto it, the^ might it be called humane
Fortitude: but because there is no such power in man, and the virtue comes by
a free gift in Christ, we may call it divine Fortitude, and so the division of
Fortitude into humane and divine, is necessary to be known of all that covet
to clime up unto her.

10. Thus may we see both the wrong way, and the right. They that would be
reckoned among the Woorthies, and labor to attain thereto by their own
might, have nothing to lift up themselves withal, but humane lust, because
nature has nothing pure. They mount up on high with the wings of pride, of
vayne-glorie, of ambition, of covetousness, and self-love. And there be some,
which if they can attain unto that desperate bold nesse, as to become resolute
not to fear God nor man, (as they say) nor the devil, they think themselves
brave men, and such as are to be esteemed among the chief Woorthies. They do
all in the fierce wrath of man, which works nothing that is pure. On the
contrary part, such as take the right way, are cast down in humility, in
meekenes, in fear, and long suffering; yea, they be even emptied of the
opinion of all things in nature, which seem excellent in man, and whereby men
are usually puffed up, that they may be filled with gifts and graces from God.
They mount up aloft indeed, yea very high, but it is not in the strength of
man, but by the power and grace of God. As that noble King David glories, That
the Lord made him strong and valiant: yea, so valiant, as not to be afraid (as
he says) what man could do unto him. He told that huge Giant Goliath, That
he came unto him in the name of the Lord, and in that name, he cast him down,
and cut off his head. Unto this belongs the saying of the Lord Jesus, He
that exalts himself, shall be abased, and he that humbles himself shall be
exalted. How contrary is it unto man's wisdom, or to the sense of flesh and
blood, that the right and only way unto Fortitude, should be in lowlines of
mind, in meekenes, and in long suffering. He seems to be valiant, that is,
hautie, stout, fierce, and full of revenge: that does all with sturdie and
boisterous roughness. But of these things, we shall have occasion to speak
more particularly in handling the nature of Fortitude, which now we come unto.

11. A perfect definition, does perfectly set forth the whole nature of
every thing defined: for it consists of the essential causes, but such
definitions are hard to be found in the most things, and so to define Fortitude
is very hard, neither will I take it in hand. It shall suffiise to set forth
some chief properties and effects thereof. And herein it shall not be amiss,
to set down some of those things which the Gentiles did teach rightly,
concerning this virtue. For they had certain principles upon which they did
build, which indeed are not to be despised. As first, that the true Fortitude
is never void of honesty and justice, nor can never be separated from the^.
For how can that be a virtue, which is dishonest, unjust, or impure? Heerevpon
they did infer, that the loftiness of mind which utters it self in
dangers and labors, is not a virtue, but a vice, if it be void of
vprightnes, as not fighting for the common safety, but private commodities.
They accounted it the right definition, which for the essential form, has
the final cause, as namely* that Fortitude is Virtus pugnans pro aequitate, a
virtue that fights for equity. If any man were hardy and full of stout
courage, to cast himself into peril, led thereunto by his lust, and not for
the common profit, that was to a wrong end, and they say his courage is rather
to be called an audacious boldness, then fortitude. And they held him as led by
his lust, which would attempt to do great things to get praise and fame, to
get riches and dominion. After these things indeed does the heart of man lust
through self-love, pride, and vain glory. These are the things which they
call a man's own commodities. The higher that a man's mind was lifted up by
these into hardy boldness, the further they said he was carried from virtue,
into immanity or savage cruelty, that expels all humanity. Here may we
see, that the very Heathen, even by the light of nature, did acknowledge, that
the things which outwardly do seem beautiful, admirable, and glorious, (as
the acts of virtuous men) are foul, deformed and detestable: if they do spring
from the lust of man. For how can that fruit be sweet (what good color soever
it has) which springs from a bitter root? And what is more bitter then
pride, ambition, self-love, covetousness, wrath, and such like?

12. But we must now ascend up higher then the Gentiles did, touching the
final cause of the actions of Fortitude. They will have Magnanimity to
refer all to the common good, and to be joined with simplicity and love of
the truth, which is well: But this was dark unto them, that God made all for
his own glory: that all actions are to be referred to his glory, as to their
chief and proper end: and that all the glory of man, is in glorifying this
great God. He that is humble and lowly in his own eyes, not seeking praise
and glory to himself, which is vain, but delighting in the glory of God, and
to perform great and noble acts whereby that glory may be advanced, shunneth
no perrils, nor refuses no labors, there is the true fortitude, there is the
great mind, there is the man that is worthy of all admiration. He respects
the maintenance of the truth, and pure worship of God, he tendereth the
Church, he seeks the good of the commonwealth, in regard of these he
forgets himself. Here are the sweet and pleasant fruits which spring from
a good root, even from a sound virtue. Hereby it is evident, that the final
cause gives as it were the essential form unto Fortitude, and makes her
fuites wholesome. No man can clime up thus high, but through grace, even
through the new birth in Christ Jesus: because of it self, the mind of man
is wholly ouer-spread with vanity, and lusts after vain things, and cannot
so much as have one motion toward a right end.

13. Now are we hereupon to deal a little with those men, which hold this
perverse opinion, that a man cannot be both godly and valiant. They do
perceive plainly, that the pure word of God requires humility, meeknes,
patience, gentleness, and long suffering, and that without these, no man can be
godly. They take these then to be no warlike properties, nor fit in any
respect for a soldier. And hereupon they thus speak. He that will study
the Word of God to follow and to practice it, let him be chayned up in the
Church like a moopish fool or a milk-sope, for he shall not be fit to deal
in the affairs of the Commonwealth. What Warrior shall he prove? And if a
man be as proud as Lucifer, as fell as a Dragon, will swear horrible oaths,
and commit whoredoms, and live in other abominable vices, as having cast off
all fear of God, like a devil incarnate, that is fierce and stout unto
quarrel and bloody revenge, that is he whom they extol and magnify above the
clouds: he carries the brave mind, he is fit to make a valiant soldier.
This wicked error (if I may give it so soft a phrase) is not worthy to have any
answer: because they that hold it, have even as Monsters quenched the light
of nature, so that the principles which the Gentiles held, do confute them.
For by those sparks of light which remain in nature, the very Heathen did
affirm, that a virtue can never be void of that which is good, holy and pure:
for what is virtue but purity, holiness and goodness? Those Gentiles conclude
thereupon, that no man can be both ungodly, and endued with fortitude. For
how should the most pure and princely virtue, be seated in a wicked impure
mind? Mark then how contrary this is to the speeches of our men, which say
that Fortitude and godliness cannot be joined together: and that a man cannot
be both godly and valiant. What is this, as I said, but utterly to quench the
light of nature, and to turn virtue into vice and vice into virtue?

14. And where as they call the^ brave minded men, which are bold and yet
ungodly, it argues, that touching the true ornaments of the mind, which deck
and make it brave, they have neither sight nor smelling. If a man be clothed in
base, rotten, ragged, and unseemly apparel, no man will say, There goes a
gallant fellow in goodly attire, unless he speak ironice. If besides the
baseness of his clothing, they be also defiled and stincke lothsomly, will any
delight to stand nigh him to take the smell? The basest rotten rags that can
be found are not so great a deformity to the body, nor the most loath some
defiled clothes stincke so foully, as the lusts of the flesh, even pride,
ambition, covetousness, wrath, blasphemous swearing, whoredom, and such like.
And yet they take that to be a brave mind, that is (as I may speak) even
clothed with these. They take these to be sweet Jewels and comely ornaments,
that deck and beutifie, otherwise, how could they say that there is a brave
mind, when it is defiled with them? This is the sense which they have in
spiritual things. That is a beautiful, comely, and brave mind indeed, which is
decked with heavenly graces and virtues. There dwells Fortitude, that is a
great mind.

15. Some will reply, that the mind which will not be brought under, but will
prevail, is and may be called a brave mind, even for the courage and valor
that is in it, although there be no godliness in it. I demand then if base
slavery may be accounted bravery? Take a man that has as much strength of
body as three men, and admit that he be a servile drudge, and his strength
employed in the basest works that may be, as in emptying houses of office, or
making clean stinking channels: will any account him to be in freedom and
bravery? In like manner where the mind is not set free from the yoke of vanity
and corruption, but the sturdines thereof, be it never so great, is employed in
service of humane lusts, there is no baser bondage and drudgery. It cannot
rightly be said that such a mind is in freedom, and will not be brought
under, for it is a base drudge unto those foul stinking vices, and her whole
courage is employed in their service. The Heathen could say, that he is the
basest servant of all other, that is in bondage to his lusts. And Salamon
says, J saw servants ride upon horses, and Princes walking on the ground like
servants. Eccle. 10. ver. 7. He calls the^ servant which have princely
pomp in the world, and yet are in bondage to their own unclean lusts. And
those he terms Princes, which have fortitude and freedom of mind, to
subdue and to reign over their inordinate affections and evil desires,
although for outward estate in the world they be but mean, or of low degree.

16. It will be said further, Where can it be showed, that such humble and
meek men, and so greatly mortified, have proved valiant Warriors? Where be the
noble acts which they have done? If men were well acquainted with the holy
Histories of the Bible, this question should not need. Abraham the father of
the faithful was very valiant, when with a small company he pursued the great
Army of the Kings, and made slaughter of them to deliver Lot his brothers
son, who^ they had led away among the captives. Gene. 14. Joshua a right godly
man, the great Captain over the children of Israel, fought great battles
against many Kings, and destroyed those mighty Nations, to place the Trybes
there.

There were many valiant Judges, holy men in Israel, which delivered them out
of the hands of cruel and mighty Tyrants. King David was a man after Gods
own heart, and yet the most valiant one of them for the wars that ever lived.
Who can set forth his noble acts? But what should I stand to reckon up
particulers, read one place of the holy Scriptures for all. For thus it is
written, What do I yet speak? The time will not serve me to tell of Gedeon,
of Barac* of Samson, and of Iephtha, of David and of Samuel, and of the
Prophets. Which by faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained the
promises, shut up the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped
the edge of the sword, of weak were made strong: they became valiant in
battle, turned to flight the Armies of the Aliants. Hebr. 11. ver. 32. 33. 34.

17. Well, what then? let it be a man has no godliness at all in him, but yet
is as ventrous, and does as great exploits, and as much annoyeth the enemy in
defense of his Prince and Country as the godliest, is he not to have the
praise, and may he not in that respect be held as a brave minded man? it is
the good which comes by men's valiant acts, which is to be regarded, and he
does as much good to the benefit of his Country, as an other. I do not
deny, but that at sometimes it pleases God by the means of wicked instruments
to work some good to his people: but we must not take this as a thing
general. For look well into the matter, and we shall confess it to be
otherwise. Whence are wars, and bloody slaughters among the people? and what
are they tokens of? it is well known (the holy Scripture expressly affirming so
much) that they be evident tokens of Cods displeasure. And he threatens to
send them as a grievous plague, to be revenged upon horrible sinners. Then
here arises a great difference, the godly great minded man, overthrows the
enemies of God, with a blessing of peace which follows upon his victories, as
the history of the Judges of Israel does plentifully show with the examples
of diverse godly Kings. Wicked men also sometimes get victories, yet not to
finish wars but to increase and to continue them. For as they that pour on
oil, and cast on dry straw upon a fire do not quench the flame, ministering
matter for it to burn upon more ragingly: so sins being the cause of wars
and inflaming the wrath of God, the ungodly Warriors do even increase and
continue them, and make them more raging. For where the chief Captains in
war be irreligious, given to drunkenness, whoredoms, and horrible swearing,
it is wonderful to behold the foul enormities, and monstrous abominations
which the common soldiers commit. An Army of them but of one months
continuance, seems sufficient to pull down the wrath of God upon a home
kingdom. The most High is the Protector both of the King and of the whole
kingdom, and through his favor and blessing, they stand and flourish. And as
the King and the kingdom, are not beholding to those men which live in ungodly
ways, although they seem to do great service to the Commonwealth, inasmuch
as they be of those that provoke the wrath of God, and thereby put the state
even both of King and kingdom in hazard: so are they not the safer, but in more
danger, through those hardy Warriors which sin so grievously. Let no man
therefore err so grossly, as to think that the deeds of hardy men which be
ungodly, are as good and beneficial to their Prince and Country, as the noble
acts of fortitude. And thus may any man be brought to see, (that will not
wilfully shut up his eyes) that they be neither brave minded men, nor yet
good to their Prince and Country. Thus much touching this point, that
Fortitude and godliness cannot be separated, and that only the right godly man
is brave minded, and profitable to his Country, Prince and common wealth,
seeing ungodly Warriors do hurt and hazard all.

18. We come now to set forth in what the great and valiant mind does chiefly
utter it self. Which as the Gentiles do affirm are two. The one is in the
dispising of all external things: the other in doing great acts, which are
most profitatable, but hard eue^ above measure, being full of painful labors,
and extreme perils, both of life and of things appertaining unto life. In the
former of these is the cause that makes great men, in the other the effect, by
which their excellency breaks forth. For he that is so prepared in mind to
set light by all external things, is fit to endure any travail, and to pass
through all perils and dangers, to do noble and fomous acts. It shall not be
amiss to consider what reasons and principles led the Heathen unto the former
of these two. For the former once obtained, the latter does follow. They held
that we ought to covet and to admire nothing but that which is woorthye of
man. And moreover, that nothing is woorthye of man but virtue. Also they taught
that a man is to account nothing as his own, but the treasures of the mind. And
that the mind is to be great, rich and beautiful, only with her propper
ornaments. So she retain them, the loss of all other things is nothing.
Furthermore, they contended for such a lofty state and freedom of mind, as
that it should not yield to lie under, as subdued, neither to man, nor (as they
spoke) to Fortune, nor to any lust or perturbation, and so in bondage, is not
great. They aimed also at such a pleasant, sweet, and delectable calmnes,
wherein the mind should solace herself, being fully contented with the beauty
and honor of those ornaments, and rich Jewels which are within her, as that
neither fear, grief, pleasure, nor wrath, might disturb the same. For thus
they reasoned. If the co^tentation of the mind, and delight in her happy
treasures, might not be disturbed, nor hindered by fear or grief, much less
by lusts and pleasures of the flesh. For a man cannot delight both in unclean
pleasures and in virtues.

19. Higher then thus the Gentiles could not look, because their darkness was
thick and deep, and their light but even as a small candle: yea rather as
little sparks, or as a glimmering. But we have the broad sunshine, and
clear light from heaven, by which we may see far higher matter to lead us to
the con^empt of all external things, and so to have minds prepared and settled
for the great acts of Fortitude? We find that we are utterly empty and
void in our selves of all good things. Our minds are not only robbed and
spoiled of al goodly Jewels and ornaments, but also are full of foul
deformities, and miserable bondage. There is no glorying in our selves, we are
not to stand upon our own bravery, we are cast down. But here is the
groundwork of all Fortitude. The most high God is the fountain of all good
things. He offers himself unto us in his Son, to redeem us out of our
bondage, to make us his sons, and to become our inheritance. The mind that
through faith embraces these promises, and possesses him, possesses all
heavenly treasures, riches, beauty, honor, glory, freedom, life and joy: with all goodly ornaments to deck herself. From hence arises greatness, from hence
springs valor, whilst in regard and comparison of these heavenly and
spiritual things which we have in God, all external and transitory things
here below, are but base, beggarly, and vile, yea more then dross. For what
is comparble to the God of glory, or what is equal to the happy life or joy in
him? Upon this therefore we are to stand a little, and to make more particular
discourse, that it may appear by what steps we are to ascend up unto this
virtue.

20 External things which are to be despised of the noble valiant mind are
many, yea so many as all things under the sun: but we may bring them into
certain heads, as to say things prosperous, or adverse, pleasant or
unpleasant, good or evil. For some of the Philosophers used to divide good
into three kinds, as the goods of the mind, the goods of the body, and the
goods of Fortune. The first are virtues, they be the treasures of the mind.
The second, are health, strength, comlines, and such like as I may say the
riches of the body. The third are riches, honors, fame, dignities, friends and
all of that sort, these be the goods (as they called them) of Fortune. Then
must there needs be three sorts of evils answerable unto these, as vices
against virtues, sickness, feeblenes, and deformimitie against the good things
of the body, poverty, dishonor, contempt, infamy, reproach and enmity: Opposite
to those goods of Fortune. Moreover, if they come not some way included in
these former, yet there come to be added, carnal pleasures, delights,
sorrows, fear, grief and torments, which seem to touch both mind and
body. Now except virtues, (for they be no earthly things but gifts from
heaven) fortitude lifts up the mind to set light by all these. As let us
consider them now a little apart.

21 I will begin with the third sort of goods. Riches, honors, fame and
friends be gifts of God, and such a man receives much commodity by, not only
for this present life, but also if he be a right godly man, to the furtherance
of his salvation, and increase of his glory in the world to come: inasmuch as
they be means to enable him to do many great good works, and highly to
advance the glory of God. But now, when the godly mind respects the heavenly
treasures of righteousness, of life and joy, with the freedom, glory and honor
of the sons of GOD, and that these things last for ever: in comparison of the
same, she accounts all the highest and greatest treasures and glory under
the sun, to be but as dross and vanity. Others have them in admiration,
because they neither feel not see any greater, but this great free mind,
which possesses that unspeakable glory and riches, despises them as things
transitory. If she have them, she is not puffed up in glory in them, being
but her meanest possession. If they be pulled from her, and in steed of them
there be poverty, dishonor, infamy, and reproach: yet she is not cast down
from her estate, nor broken, nor dismayed, seeing she has lost but as it were
the dross, and holds still her crown of pure gold which none can take from
her. For nothing can separate her from God. Poverty afflictions, and torments
be grievous, but she sees they are momentarie, and not worthy of the glory
which shall be revealed. Health, strength, and comlines, be good things, but
nothing to the health, the strength and beauty which she has in GOD.
Pleasures and delights of the flesh, are sweet and delectable to the natural
man, yea sinful and foul pleasures to those which know not God: but she
feeling the joys of God, they be all but as swill and draugh. She will not
make so bad an exchange, as to sell those true lasting joys, for these
vanishing delights. Thus then may we see, how fortitude aduaunceth the mind
unto such freedom, dignity and greatness, as that her head is lifted up above
all things in the world. Fear, sorrows, joys and pleasures come all under
her feet.

22 It will be objected, that never any have attained unto such strength, so to
be mortified in the world, as so to despise all. True it is, that the
knowledge of God is not perfect in any, the faith is not perfect, and so the
contempt of all external things, by which Fortitude vttreth herself must
needs be imperfect. For according to the measure of the one is the other. If
there could be in any the fulness of Faith, there should be also the perfection
of Fortitude. Hereupon it follows, that as al faithful men are endued with
this virtue, so some are weaker therein, and some stronger. Increase in lively
faith and assurance of Gods love, increase in contempt and despising all the
high things of this world, and so increase in fortitude. Again, we must know,
that the perfection of Fortitude, is not in abolishing all humane affections of
grief, of fear, and such like, which is stoicall: but in ruling over them,
and ordering them aright. See how contrary the true divine fortitude is unto
the humane fury which is in men. For as that does grow from the despising of
all outward things, so this is set on work through the love of them. For
what causes many to rush into all dangers, but the hope of getting thereby
riches, honors, fame and dignity to live in earthly pleasures? Would they
adventure their lives so boldly, if they should not be honored and praised of
men for the same? Would they take such pains, were it not to get some worldly
benefit? Are they led with the love of Gods truth and glory, or care of the
common profit?

23. Well, to proceed a little further we have examples of many worthy men,
which have in high measure despised the riches, the glory, and the pleasures of
this world, and so were right valiant, and performed exceeding great and
noble acts. It shall suffice to speak only of two. Moses and Paul. Moses was
borne in the time of affliction, when the King of Egypt had commanded that
all the male children of the Isralites should be drowned. The daughter of
Pharao found him, and adopted him to be her son. He was brought up in the
Court like a Kings son in all honor and delights. The riches and glory of
Egypt were before him. To be the deliverer of his brethren, being raised up
thereto of God, and that he might be fit to do mighty acts, his mind became
great by despising all worldly wealth, pleasures and glory. For thus it is
reported of him. By Faith Moses when he was great, refused to be called the
son of Pharaoes daughter: choosing rather to suffer adversity with the people
of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Esteeming the rebuke
of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt: for he had respect unto
the recompense of the reward. By faith he forsook Egypt not fearing the
fiercenes of the king, for he endured, as if he had seen him which is
invisible. Heb. 11. ver. 24. 25. 26. 27. Then may we behold, how with mighty
courage of mind, he set light by all things in the world, which others do
admire. And so became a mighty man to work great works both for the
deliverance of that people, and also in conducting and governing of them. He
is one of the greatest through fortitude that ever lived.

24 Then touching blessed Paul, what invincible courage did he ascend up unto?
What famous and right noble acts did he abound in? And let us see then, how
became he fit for so great matters, to pass through all labors and perrils,
but that his mind was also lifted up and made free, great and mighty, even to
despise all transitory things, howsoever with glittering show they shine in
glory, to the outward eye, and be had in admiration among worldly men. Read
that which is written of him, and see how he says, That the world was
crucified unto him, and he unto the world. The most High was his inheritance,
he feared not death nor any danger, but passed through all hard things to do
him service, to advance his glory, and to bring men out of destruction unto
life. To reckon all, would be to tedious, it shall be enough to look upon one
testimony which he is forced to give of himself, the false Apostles seeking to
discredit his ministry. They are Hebrews (says he) so am I, they are
Israelites, so am J, They are the seed of Abraham, so am I, They are the
Ministers of Christ, (I speak like a fool) I am more. In labors more
abundantly, in stripes above measure, in prison more plenteously, in deaths
often. Of the Jews received I five times forty stripes save one. Thrice was I
beat with rods, once stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, night and day have
J been in the deep. In iournying often, in perils of waters, in perils of
robbers, in perrils of mine own nation, in perrils among the Heathen, in
perrils in the City, in perrils in the wilderness, in perrils in the sea, in
perils among false brethren. In labor and travail, in watching often, in
hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness. 2. Cor. 11. The
Martyrs in all ages, not only men, but women also, have showed forth and
delivered their invincible fortitude, by despising all the tortures and
torments which bloody Tyrants could put them unto, whose strength was from
hence, that they looked for a better life the^ that which they laid down.

25. Now we see from what root this noble virtue springs, it remains
that we show wherein her greatest victories and conquests do consist, or which
be the strongest enemies that she vanquisheth: for thereby also it shall more
evidently appear, who they be which are to be reckoned among great men, who
be the Worthies, and who are brave minded indeed. It is a most sure principle,
that Fortitude vanquisheth all adversaries. Then he that overcomes the
weaker, and is himself subdued by the stronger, is he the man, has he the
great mind? Is there the praise and glory of Fortitude? Then seeing it is so,
that Fortitude can not be vanquished by any adversity whatsoever, but
overcomes all, he only has the valiant mind, he only is the great man,
which conquereth not only the lesser and weaker, but also the greater and the
stronger. Then it may be said, which be the weaker, and which be those
stronger? I answer that men are the weaker. Men are but flesh and blood, and
take the strongest and the most mighty that ever lived, they are but weak in
comparison of the devils, which are called principalities and powers, and
Rulers of the darkness of this world. Also, what is an arm of flesh and
bones, unto that which is called the world, and to the things in the world, as
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. 1. John. 2.
ver. 16. So then he that conquereth men, and is conquered of the devil, and of
his own lusts and pleasures, is he great, is he strong? is he free? is he the
noble minded man? How absurd a thing is it to think so? If he can vanquish as
many as Alexander and Caesar of the weaker, which are men like himself, and as
they were, be led away captive of the mightier, what is he the better? He
then is strong and mighty, which does overcome not only men, but devils
and wicked lusts. All this S. Paul sets forth. Ephe. 6.

26 The devil our great enemy, works in the corrupt lusts which are in
man's heart. He takes hold by pride, by vain glory, by ambition, by
self-love, by covetousness, by wrath, and by unclean lusts and pleasures,
to subdue and lead captive the mind unto eternal slavery. Whereupon it
follows, those vices being even as the cords and chains by which he
leads his captives, that he which will be strong indeed through the
conquering fortitude, must begin with himself, even as a mighty Prince
subduing his own affections. This is it which the holy Ghost has uttered by
Saloman: He which is slow to wrath is better then the mighty, and he that
rules over his own spirit, is better then he that wins a City, Pro.
16. ver. 32. The very Heathen were not ignorant of this: for they affirm that
he cannot be great, which is in bondage to his lusts. And thus writes one of
their Poets.

Fortior est, qui se, qua^ qui fortissima vincit
Moeniae, nec virtus altius ire potest.
That is, stronger is he that overcomes himself then he that wins the
strongest defenced Cities and Holds, neither can virtue claim any higher.
Then is it apparent even by the light of nature, that the strongest holds, and
the highest walls for this noble fortitude to scale and win, are in a man's own
mind. There be the Forts and munitions, there be the high things which exalt
themselves against GOD, as Paul teaches, 2. Cor. 10. Here is the labor, this
is the work, here is the great glory of Fortitude.

27 I might here stay from speaking any further of this vanquishing of the
devil and man's own lusts, but that there is an inueterate error in many men
touching man-hoode, as if it did consist in private revenge. If a man have an
iuiurie offered him, or be challenged with some reproachful term, as to be
called cowarde or boy, and will not adventure although it should be either to
kill or to be killed, they think he is utterly dishonored, and the glory of
his man-hoode is stained for ever. Some protest this as glorying in man-hoode,
that if such reproach should be offered them, they will be revenged, and kill
or be killed, choosing rather to die with honor, then to live with dishonor,
and attainture of manhood.

To answer these, we are sure that Fortitude or the right man-hoode is a
virtue, and a most commendable virtue, joined with wisdom, which brings
forth sweet and pleasant fruits, and such as do highly honor GOD, and are
very good and profitable to men. We are also as sure on the contrary part, that
this kind of man-hoode, (if I may so call it) which utters it self in
private quarrel, and bloody revenge, springs from the lusts of man, as from
wrath, vainglory, and disdainefull pride. The devil has a great stroke in
it, who works by those lusts, as it is written, Be angry but sin not, let
not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to the devil.
Ephesians. 4. There is folly committed in high degree, For anger (as Salamon
says) rests in the bosom of fools. Ecclesiastes, 7, verse. 11. It is so
far from honoring God, that it takes his office, for thus he says, Avenge
not your selves, but give place to wrath, for vengeance is mine, says the
Lord, and J will repay it. It plucketh the sword out of the hand of the
Prince, who is the minister of GOD to take vengeance upon the evil dooers.
Romans 3. The fruits which it brings forth, are quarrelling, railing,
horrible swearing, and cruel murders. This is the glory of their man-hoode.
Such therefore as by the mighty power and grace of GOD, have so far subdued
their corrupt lusts, as that they be meek, lowly and long suffering, and
will rather suffer injury and bear reproach, then disobey the truth, have
attained unto great Fortitude, and may eue^ be wondered at. But such as will
show their courage in private quarrels, deserve not to be called valiant or
brave men, but quarrellers, hackers, and murderers.

28. Some man will smile at this, and say they make conscience a cloak to
cover their cowardlines. When they have no manhood in them, they would fight if
they durst and not bear the reproach, but because they dare not, they pretend
humility, patience, and long suffering. How shall it be known what is in a man
if he will not fight? For an answer unto this, I say if a man be withheld
from revenging himself through cowardlines of heart, it is no virtue: but if
he be one that will not in a right quarrel fear any man, then does he not
make conscience a cloak of cowardlines. And touching the vttring his valor:
has fortitude no way to manifest herself, but by quarreling? Nay, he that in
the public cause, for the defense of truth, of Prince and state, shows
himself as a mighty Lion against the enemies of God, and in peace, or
touching private quarrel, is lowly, gentle, courteous, and meek as a Lamb, he
is the great man indeed, he shows himself valiant every way, he is to be
honored, loved and admired of all men. His fruits are delectable. As for the
other, those fierce quarrellers, they be very dangerous, and unprofitable. They
are not to be commended but disalowed and dispraised, as those that would turn
virtue into vice, and vice into virtue.

29 And as there is great difference between him that is valiant through
virtue, and that man which is hard and bold in the pride and lusts of corrupt
flesh: so is there great difference also of their honor and reward for their
acts. The hardy man according to the flesh seeks praise among men; and has
it. But what is it? Even a puff, a blast that vanishes with the breath of
men's mouths. He seeks riches, and finds them. But riches shall not deliver
in the day of vengance. He seeks pleasures of the flesh, and swimmeth in
them: he takes delight and solace in fulfilling the sinful lusts of his
flesh: but these pleasures of sin last but for a season, and endless sorrows
do cease upon them. Their glory shall be turned into shame. If it were but
for a thousand years, yea for a thousand thousand, that then they might have
ease of their misery, it were some comfort: but when infinite thousand
thousands of years are passed over them in their woes, they are never the
nearer to an end, neither can they say there is the less torment behind,
because that which is infinite, cannot be diminished. The sands of the sea be
innumerable, and if at every thousand yerees end a bird should pick up only
one crumme and carry away, she shall take all away, before their sorrows end.
what vain things then are such men here deluded withal? The godly valiant man,
seeks the praise and glory of God. And he that honoreth me (says the Lord) I
will honor him. 1. Sam. 2. ver. 30. His glory is great with God, and shall
stand for ever. He coueteth the riches and joys of heaven, and he shall
possess them for ever, even world without end. His state shall never fail.

30 Therefore o ye men of courage and hardy boldness, seek to have your courage
sanctified and applied to the right use. Let it not be lifted up with the wings
of humane lusts, to seek after vanity, but be strong in the Lord, not only
to vanquish men which are weak, but to subdue the devils and corrupt
affections, that your great mind may with hyroicall courage lift up her head
above all enemies, and enjoy that blessed freedom, and dignity, that ye may
be great princes for ever. For all conquerers shall be crowned with glory and
immortality.

FINIS.
AT LONDON, Printed by James Roberts.

Anno. 1594.


