FOUR SERMONS UPON Several parts of Scripture, Preached by GEORGE GYFFARD,
Preacher of the word, at Mauldin in Essex.

AT LONDON Printed by Thomas Iudson, for Tobie Cook, and Robert Walker. 1598.

The Textes of the four Sermons.
THE FIRST SERMON 1. Tim. 6. Chap. ver. 17.18.19: Charge them that are rich in
this world, that they be not high minded, and that they trust not in uncertain
riches, but in the living God (which gives us abundantly all things to
inioye,) etc. THE SECOND SERMON. 1. Ioh. chap. 5. ver. 7.8.9.10.11.12.13. For
there are three which bear record in heaven, the Father, the word, and the
holy ghost, and these three are one, etc. THE THIRD SERMON. Hebrews 12. ver.
16.17. Let there be no fornicator or profane person, as Esawe, which for one
portion of meat sold his birthright, etc. THE FOVRTH SERMON. Romans 6. ver.
1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11:12.13.14. What shall we say then? shall we continue
still in sin that grace may abound? God forbid, etc.
TO THE RIGHT worshipful Master Edward Lewkenor esquire, one of her Majesty's
Justices of the peace in the county of Suff. and to the right virtuous and
christian Gentlewoman, Mistress Susan Lewken or his wife, grace with all
abundant blessings of this life, and the life to come.
THe complaint of many both learned and very godly persons, that the Church
is burdened and inco^bred with too great a multitude of books, is not made
without cause, being grounded upon the most holy word of God, as also
confirmed by experience, in that good hours are unprofitably spent, piety
with true holiness not a little hindered and impaired. Howbeit, it seems rather
to be directed against vain frivolous and trifling pamphlets, wherein lewd
and ignorante persons have only taste and delight, but especially against
monstrous inventions, unclean and impure writings, which do infect and
defile, both doctrine and manors (thereby deserving as a most contagious and
pestilent air to be consumed and dissolved with fire from amongst the people
of God) and not against the wise and learned travails of godly men, whose
whole purpose and endeavor, is to profit the Church, and to further the
knowledge and religion of the Lord. For variety of good and profitable
books, seems to be necessary (and therefore would not be wanting) both for
the increase of knowledge and learning, because one man, or a few, see not all
things, as also for that every man writes not in one form and manner, and
therefore cannot answer the capasitie of every one, for some fit themselves
sor small and mean capacities, and some for learned and great understanding.
Besides, one has need of one special instruction, and one of another, this
man delights in one comfort and remedy against his temptation, and an other
in that which best answers his infirmity. Furthermore, Satan has daily
new devises to assail the faith of Gods elect, and to draw the^ into sin
never heard of before, which the Lord by his spirit does not only reveal to
some of his servants above others, but provides remedies accordingly, which
because they cannot be ministered always by word of mouth; they are to be made
known by writing to them that stand in need. And surely the bounty and
riches of Gods mercy are so large, and his care of man's salvation and happiness
so great, that even as he has provided variety of creatures for every man's
taste, and use: so has he provided variety of spiritual graces, for every man's
benefit and delight, to the end that every man might profit with comfort and
pleasure, or else be left without all excuse. The consideration of which
reasons, and some others (Right worshipful) caused me, after I had obtained at
the hands of that worthy Minister of Jesus Christ, Master Gyffard, these few
Sermons, whereof he is the Author, to publish them in print to the view of the
world. Not therein respecting so much mine own gain and commodity, as the
good and benefit of the Church of God. Whereof J conceive no little hope, both
by reason of the fruit and benifite which have redou^ded to the comfort of
many by his former works, as also for the excellency of the doctrine
contained herein, the which I rather commit to the judgment of the learned,
and wise Christian reader, then to commend them my self, least in praising
them for want of judgment and wisdom, J should in stead of beauty, bring
disgrace upon them. Whatsoever they be, J thought it meet to Dedicate them to
your worshippes, moved thereto with many respects. And first of all, that J
might publicly testify my duty and thankful heart, for your great kindenes
and manifold courtesies bestowed, not only upon me, but upon them that are as
nearly linked unto me as my self. Of the which, if I should be unmindful, J
were worthy of the reward which the Lacedaemonians appointed for unthankful
persons. But especially the great account and honor that you have obtained in
the hearts of many of the best and wisest Christians for your singular godliness
and rare Christian virtues, do turn mine eyes from many others upon you, as
comfortahle lights shining in the midst of this crooked generation, as lively
examples to your brethren, and worthy ornaments to the profession of the
Gospel. And J have joined you together in this dedicatio^, not only for the
near band wherewith you are so nighly joined together in marriage, but also for
that you do not only strive together in one course to obtain the high price of
your calling, and that everlasting crown of glory reserved for you in the
heavens, but also for that you are mutual helpers one to another to the
performance of all Christian duties, but specially in the well governing and
trayning up of your household, which thereby as a fruit of your rare and holy
labors the Lord has so blessed, as that the heavenly estate and behavior
thereof, may be a president to many families, if it would please the Lord to
give them hearts to confirm themselves thereunto. But I cease to say so much
as I know, least in speaking the truth, might procure envy, and seem to
flatter you, who of all other have least delight in that vein. The only
thing which I ought in duty, and may safely do, is first to pray unto God,
that he would save and preserve you, and yours, from the manifold subtilties
of Satan, and the dangerous baits and allureme^ts of this world, and to
finish the good work that he has begun in you unto the day of Jesus Christ.
Secondly, most humbly to request you, that you would take in good part this
simple gift that J offer unto you, interpreting all things, both in regard
of it, and my self, in the best part, and with that affection J offer it to
you. And thus once again, beseeching almighty God to bless and continue you
many happy years (...) your own comfort, and the goo^ of the Church, as also
to be favorable unto the holy Ministry, which has many years continued in
your congregation, in which, in my childhood I was trained up in the first
principles of Christian religion, the joyful remembrance of which benefit^ I
trust shall never depart from me, either in life, or death. J in all duty
and humble manner take my leave.

Robert Walker.
London, 6. December. 1598.
1. Timoth. 6. Chapt. 17 Ch^rge them that are rich in this world that they be
not high minded, and that they trust not (...) uncertain riches, but in the
living God (which gives us abundantly all things to enjoy)

18 That they do good, and be rich in good works, and ready to distribute,
and communicate

19 Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to
come, that they may at^^^ne eternal life.


OUR Lord Jesus Christ told his Apostles that it is easier for a Camel to go
through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
God, Math. 19. ver. 24. The Disciples when they heard this were exceedingly
amazed, and (...) Who then can be saved? For in deed they ^^ue more credit to
this speech of Christ then the (...) men commonly do, who are little amazed
(...) at when they do hear it though it might ^^ch them nearer then the
Apostles who were poor. But he beheld them, and said unto them with men this
is impossible, but with God (...) things are possible. Whereby it is evident,
th^^ although riches do make it hard to be saved, yea impossible with men, not
that the blame is to be imputed to the riches, but to man's corrupt nature, for
S. Mark reports that Christ said, how hard is it for them that trust in
riches to enter into the kingdom of God? yet there is a passage and a way
opened to heaven for the rich by the mighty power of God, with whom all
things are possible. From hence it is, that the blessed Apostle Paul does
instruct and warn Timothy, and in him all the Ministers of the Gospel, how
they must deal with the rich men of this world. For if there were no
possibility for them or any of them to be saved, it had been utterly in vain
to speak of them as he does: and if the passage to life were easy for them,
what should there need a several precept about them, and so vehement a charge
to be given? Let rich men give heed to this precept, if they tender their own
salvation, for here is showed a great wonder, namely, how the Camel shall get
through the eye of a needle, that is, how they which abound in riches shall get
to heaven, a matter of greater weight then all their possessions here in the
world.

This text of scripture that we may come to handle it, is to be divided into
two parts, the former of them is in two verses, containing the charge that must
be given to rich men, namely, that they be not high minded, nor trust in
uncertain riches, but in the living God, and do good to others, that they may
be rich in good works, etc. The latter part is in one verse, showing the great
fruit and commodity which they shall reap if they obey the charge that is
given unto them: for as he says, they shall lay up in store for themselves a
good foundation against the time to come, and attain eternal life. To come
then a little nearer to the opening of the matter, the former part, which is
the precept or charge does divide it self into two members, the one setting
forth what they must take heed of to eschew, even two most pestiferous vices,
loftines of mind, and vain trust in riches: the other opposing to those two
vices three excellent virtues which they must practice, that is, trust in the
living God, liberality or bountifulnes in distributing to those which be in
need, and facility of manners. Thus may we look upon the sum of the whole
matter, and now let us proceed more particularly.

Charge them (says he) that are rich in this world, etc. The parties to whom
this charge is to be given are named the rich in this world, where S. Paul
even of purpose does use this speech in this world to pull them down a little
even in the very entrance, and to abate their loftiness. For there be two
sorts of rich men, the one sort are rich in this world, the other are rich (as
Christ says, Luke 12. ver. 21.) to God. Now if we could see how far they
that be rich unto God do excel them that are but rich in this world, it would
take them down a little, and it would correct that perverse respecting of
persons, and blind judgment which is in us. For when he says, in this world,
opposing it to the world to come, he notes the vanity and the baseness of
earthly riches, that there is no cause why any should be puffed up by them, if
they were not more then blinded: and as S. James finds fault, Chapt. 2. men
should not have their eyes so dazeled to esteem highly of rich men, although
they be ungodly, even for the very external pomp and glory of their riches,
and to despise the poor, although they be never so rich in faith, and in the
precious gifts and graces of the heaue^lie spirit. This for the persons to whom
the precept is directed. Now for the manner. He wills (as ye see) Timothy
to charge or to command the^. Is this convenient, Poor men in deed may be
commanded, but who shall command the rich, especially the great Lords and
Ladies? Shall the ministers of the Gospel take such authority upon them as to
command such? Yea verily. For albeit they be much inferior to them in the
world, yet he that has sent them, whose Ambassadors they are, is most high
above all, and in his name and authority they are to command them: and the
greatest that shall despise and disobey the charge, shall smart for it, seeing
they despise not man, but God from whom it comes. Zedekiah the king of Judah
(says the holy Ghost) humbled not himself before Jeremiah the Prophet, at
the commandment of the Lord, 2. Chron. 36.12. therefore he was taken by the
Chaldeans, his sons were slain before his face, his eyes then put out, and
he carried in chains to Babel, 2. King. 25.7. Furthermore, when S. Paul
wills the ministers to lay this charge upon the rich men, it argues two
things, even the waightines of the matter, and the great difficulty to be
performed, for were it not even upon the weight of their eternal salvation, so
that in deed rich men can not be saved unless they obey this precept, S.
Paul would not be so urgent. And were it not that rich men are slow and
wonderful hard to be brought to this thing, yea even as the Camel to be
drawn through the eye of a needle, why should the holy Apostle will us to
charge, to command, or to denounce unto them that they do thus and thus? Why
did he not say, move them, put them in mind, exhort or entreat them, (all
which are to be done in deed) but he says, command them. Here we may see
that the Preachers of the Gospel ought to be far from flattering the rich
and great men of the world. They must charge and command them in the name of
the Lord that they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, etc.
Noblemen have their Chaplains which attend upon them in their houses, shall
they command their Lords the things which S. Paul here wills? Surely if
they be faithful to Christ, if they have a sincere care to advance his glory,
they must needs do it, for their Lords have need to be charged in the name of
the most high God; but if they seek themselves, and their worldly preferment,
then will they flatter and be afraid for to displease, not caring much whether
their Lords go to heaven or to hell, so they may serve their own turn, and
get livings and dignities.

And now come to the two vices which they must be charged to eschew that have
the goods of this present world, namely loftines of mind, and trust in riches,
what shall we say of these, are they so heinous? Surely they be two vices so
horrible, so pestilent, and so detestable in the sight of Almighty God, as
none almost can be more. They be vices which are most injurious not only to
men, but also to the high majesty of God, and which he does in deed highly
accurse and condemn. How then is it possible that they should be saved, in
whom these vices do reign? It may be said, are not men of poor or mean
estate subject to these vices? Yes verily, but the rich are more subject, they
be in greater danger, and more hardly drawn from them. True it is that pride,
ambition, vainglory, and loftines of mind, was that which the Serpent did
overcome Eve withal, bearing her in hand, that eating of the forbidden fruit
Adam and she should be like God, Genes. 3. We all even by inheritance have
received the poison thereof conveyed unto us, it sticks most deeply in our
nature, and is even with the last sins which are cast out. Which may appear
by that which S. Paul writes of himself, who being taken up into the third
heaven, even as he says, into Paradise, yet least he should be lifted up or
swell through the abundance of revelations, there was given unto him the prick
in the flesh, the angel of Satan to buffet him, 2. Cor. 12. All then are by
nature highminded, but the rich men are more subject unto it, and more hardly
brought from it, because the corrupt nature of man takes occasion by riches to
be lifted up further in pride, and to swell with loftines of mind. Riches and
worldly dignities are not of the essence of man, they be but adjuncts or
things accidentarie, and yet they that possess them are so lifted up in their
mind (until they be renewed by grace) that they do even as if they were of
another blood, contemn and despise others that have them not. The words of men
do manifestly bewray this their pride and contempt: for if men be poor and in
mean estate, though rich in faith, and the image of God shining in them, they
term them the base rascal sort. But what do I mention the injury which the
lofty mind does offer unto men, seeing it is lifted up far higher even
against God himself? For mark what the Prophet says, Psalm. 73. when he has
noted the prosperity of wicked men, he adds that pride is even as a chain
unto them: and they set their mouth against heaven, they stick not to blaspheme
God, and their tongue walks through the earth. The lofty mind also
arrogateth to it self that which is due to God alone, for it does not render
glory to him, but glories in it self. Wherefore it is no marvel that the
scripture speaks of pride and loftines of mind as of a thing most detestable
in Gods sight. Every one that is of a lofty mind (says Solomon) is an
abomination to the Lord, Proverb. 16. ver. 5. God resists the proud (says
the holy Apostle) and gives grace to the lowly, 1. Pet. 5. ver. 5. Then let
those which are rich in this world (if they have any care at all in them to be
saved) receive this charge here given by S. Paul, that they be not high
minded. Let them imitate holy king David, who says of himself, Lord I am not
high minded, I have no proud look, etc. I am as a wained child, Psalm. 131.
And let them also remember what our Savior says in the Gospel, Except ye
convert and become as children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of God.

And now to the other vice, that they trust not in uncertain riches. A vice
most foul and abominable, which all men are prone unto likewise, but the rich
men most in danger, and not so easily drawn from it as poor men may. This
vice is somewhat more close then loftines of mind, I mean the vglines of it
is not so apparent unto men: yet it is not inferior thereunto, yea, it is even
the root from whence that other does spring and grow up. For what lifts up
the mind of the rich, but this, that they have such wings to mount up aloft
withal above others, such feathers to trust unto? Their riches are their
strong hold of defense, by which they imagine themselves happy and in safety.
But how foolish they are, and how vain this their confidence is, the holy
Apostle notes by calling them uncertain riches. They forsake that which is
certain and infallible, even the living God, in whom, whosoever trusts
shall never be confounded, and trust in that which is uncertain and
deceitful. That they which trust in riches forsake the living God, it is
evident: for Christ says, No man can serve two masters, but he must cleave to
the one and forsake the other, or etc. you can not serve God and riches, Math.
6. And touching the uncertainty of riches (for that is the Apostles phrase) it
does arise partly from the nature of the riches themselves, and partly from
the state and condition of those that do possess them. The uncertainty that
arises from the riches themselves is noted by Christ Math. 6. ver. 19. where
he uses it as a reason to dissuade men from the inordinate love of riches,
saying, lay not up for your selves, treasures in earth, where moth and rust do
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal. And Solomon does as it
were compare riches to a bird, that gets out of the cage and flies up past
men's reach, saying, travail not too much to be rich, but cease from thy
wisdom. Will thou cast thine eyes upon it which is nothing? for riches takes
her to her wings as an Eagle, and flies up into the heaven, Proverb. 23. ver.
4.5. Riches are subject unto many casualties: who can assure himself that he
shall hold that the next year which he does this, though he live? How vain
then is that trust which men do repose in so uncertain things? but yet there
is a greater uncertainty which arises from the men that possess them: for
when one is so rich that there is no likelihoode that he may be suddenly
stripped of that he has, but if the thieves do break through and steal
plenty, and much does corrupt and come to naught of it self, yet it is not
felt, but he can still say, soul, thou have much goods laid up for many
years, eat, drink, and take thy pastime, Luke 12. ver. 19. yet he is not
certain: for look what follows there in Saint Luke, but God said unto him,
O fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul from thee, then whose shall
those things be which thou have provided? The rich men that are high minded,
and glory in their riches do take themselves to be the only wise men under
heaven, but God says to every one of them, Thou fool. And verily their folly
is exceeding great in forsaking the Lord God, who is almighty and lives for
ever, and trusting to corruptible things, which are altogether deceiptfull.
Well it may be many rich men will little be moved with this reason of the
uncertainty of riches, for they will make them as certain as they can to
their posterity, and hope to enjoy them long. They may be deceived in both,
but let it be they live long, and their posterity after them, yet let them
consider how horrible a thing it is to give that to riches, which they should
give only to the living God. For ought not all men to trust in God and in none
other? Then when they put their trust in riches, and make them even as the stay
of their life, and as the only staff which they have to lean upon, they do
in deed make riches their god. This may seem an hard speech, but I do not
speak it of mine own head: for what says the holy scripture, let men
consider well, does it not call covetousness idolatry? Coloss. 3. ver. 5. And
why is it idolatry, but that the covetous man sets his heart upon his
riches, trusts in them, stays upon them, and so makes an idol of them
which he so worshippeth in stead of God? What a thunderbolt is this, that the
covetous worldly men do quite forsake the true God, and in his stead do worship
an idol? If men's hearts were not harder then flint, or then the Adamant, it
would make them tremble and quake. But men cannot be persuaded, that they do
put their trust in riches: they know right well (they say) that they be
uncertain, they know that they themselves must dye: yea, they can go further
and in some sort acknowledge with the holy Prophet, that man walks in a
vain shadow, that he disquieteth himself in vain, and that he heapeth up
riches and can not tell who shall gather them. Well notwithstanding all this
let it come to the just trial. Do not they trust in riches whose heart is more
bent to seek after them, then it is to seek after God, or after heavenly
things? Does not a man make that his god which he loves best, or in which he
does most delight? Or which is a man's chief god, is not that which he does
trust most unto, and which he most cleaves unto? Then consider this, if a
worldly man hold riches; he is safe, he is merry and glad in his heart, he
has to stay upon, though his conscience do tell him that God is displeased
with him, yea the sins which he commits, so he may come by riches, as
often as he thinks of death, and of judgment, do make that God is even a
terror unto him, so far off he is from delighting in God. Yet nevertheless,
rather then he will fail of riches, he does proceed to lay hold of them by
what way so ever, and so makes the Lord God his utter enemy, even for his
oppression, for his extortion, for his briberie, for his usury, for his
falsehood, and for his unmerciful dealing toward the fatherless. Tell him of
this, does it any thing at all stop his course? Judge then indifferently, when
a man does forsake one to obtain an other, does he not mean to forsake the
lesser to choose the greater? Then when men do by all those vices forsake God
to lay hold of riches, do they not manifestly declare that they esteem the
more present divinity to be in riches? Is not there the God in deed which
they can trust unto, and safely (as they think) rest in, if they may lay hold
on him? If they may retain worldly wealth, nothing can make them quail, but
they seem to themselves right happy, howsoever the matter stand between God
and their conscience: but if they fear the loss of all or of the greatest
part of earthly goods, they be straightway in exceeding sorrow and cry out
that they be utterly undone. O how can men be saved while they stand in this
estate, being either high minded, or trusting in uncertain riches! Is not the
way to heaven unto them as the eye of a small needle is unto an huge Camel?
This is the very high way to hell, even the broad way in which they walk: let
them therefore harken what virtues the holy Apostle calls them unto, when
they have renounced and forsaken those two most pestiferous vices, which make
the way to heaven impassable to them: the first is, that they trust in the
living God. S. Paul does then call them away from a dead idol unto a living
God. For what are riches when men repose their trust and confidence in them,
but a dead idol? The Lord God of heaven, he is the true and living God, it is
he that gives us all things abundantly to enjoy, and he that will have life,
or the stay of his life, must rest only upon him. The living God is the
fountain of life, he has given unto us our life, which as Christ says is
more worth then meat, Math. 6. ver. 25. and if he has given unto us the
greater, will he deny unto us the lesser, if we trust in him? Now as he is the
fountain and author of life, and gives all things that belong thereunto, so
if men could steadfastly trust in him, they should not be destitute; for he is
able, seeing (as it is written Psalm. 24.) The earth is the Lords and all that
is therein. And he has tied himself by promise unto all that do put their
trust in him. Let your conversation (says the holy Ghost) be without
covetousness, being content with such things as ye have: for he has said, I
will not leave thee, nor forsake thee. So that we may boldly say, the Lord is
my helper, I will not fear what man may do unto me. Hebr. 13.5.6. He does
feed the fowls of the air, and cloth the grass of the field, then how much
more will he feed and cloth men which trust in him, being created after his
own image, and for whose use also he made the world? But how far off are men
from having this sure trust in the living God? alas it is lamentable to speak.
They can see and they can feel riches, but he is invisible, they can not see
him: yea, but he has given his word and his promise which is infallible. It is
impossible that God should lie or deceive, if they had the eyes of their mind
but half as clear as they have their carnal eyes they might see this. Some
man will object, that sundry which have trusted in the Lord have bin very
poor. That is true, the holy Scripture does afford sundry examples, the Lord
sees it is best for them, and men ought to rest in his will, seeing he makes
poverty a mean to bring them to glory. It will be said further, such a trust
in God, or the pretense of such a trust may make men negligent and idle. That
is not so, for true faith in God does bring forth true obedience to his
commandments: and God does forbid idleness and negligence, commanding men to
use all moderate care and diligence in their callings, but that trusting in the
living God, draws these virtues which follow in the text with it, even
liberality and bountifulnes to the poor, with facility of manners, for that
which is translated to communicate, may be expounded of facility of manners:
for when men are puffed up, and be high minded, because of the abundance of
their riches in which they repose a vain confidence, their manners are rough
and stern, they cannot live in common society, they cannot (as S. Paul in
another place wills) make themselves equal to them of the lower sort, but
touching this virtue I mean to speak no more. And while men trust in, their
riches, making them the staff and stay of their life, and of their posterity,
how is it possible that they should be liberal, and rich in good works, and
ready to distribute? will a man willingly part with that which he does repose
his trust in and makes it his god? no, pluck riches from a worldly minded
man, and it is unto him even as if you should tear out his bowels: for if he
have never so much, yet he fears he shall not have enough to hold out. If he
distribute any thing to the poor, it is by compulsion of the laws; or else
that he is loath to be deemed too too miserable. Does not reason teach, that
the more is taken from the heap, the less remains? A great vessel with
often drawing, is emptied and made dry. These be the thoughts of worldly
minded men which trust in riches: but if they once forsake that their vain
confidence, and fix their hope in the living God, having their eyes opened to
behold how it is he that gives all things abundantly to enjoy, then will they
believe his word and promise, that plenteous liberality ordered with godly
discretion shall not deminish but increase their very worldly substance. What,
shall plentiful giving increase riches to the giver? This may seem a Paradox.
For what reason is it that dispersing and scatring abroad should increase a
man's wealth? He that does show mercy to the poor may (as Saint Paul here
teaches) be rich in good works: but can he be the richer also in the world?
Can a man both keep his goods, and give them away? Yea that he may. For do you
not see how the husbandman does in seed time disperse and scatter his seed,
yea, even bury it in the ground, so that to man's reason (but that we see it
comes otherwise to pass) it would seem to be cast away and utterly lost:
and by the blessing of God he receives it again ten fold, yea often times a
great deal more. Yea but is the liberal distributing to the poor, like the
sowing of wheat or barley, shall it also yield an increase? if rich men were
so persuaded, they would fall to sowing apace. Surely they might be so
persuaded, for the word of truth that can not lie does tell them so. Solomon in
Ecclesiast. chap. 11. says thus, Cast thy bread upon the waters and after many
days thou shall find it. Give a portion to seven, and also to eight, seeing
thou know not what evil shall come upon the earth. The scripture sometimes
does call seed bread, because bread is made of it. And Solomon wills to cast
this seed upon the waters, that is, upon grounds which are well watered and
fertile. Admonishing thereby all rich men to be wise in imitating the
husbandmen: for as they make choice of good grounds to sow their corn, to the
end that in time they may receive the greater increase, so would he have these
to sow to disperse and s^^ter their riches by alms deeds upon the po^re, the
widow, and the fatherless, especially the godly poor, that be (as S. Paul
says) of the household of faith, for these be the well wa^ed and fruiteful
ground, and after many days they shall find it. Such as do sow upon this
ground, do sow unto the Lord: and by his singular blessing they shall receive
great increase. The Prophet in Psalm. 112. setting forth the blessedness of the
godly man, says thus, He has dispersed abroad and given to the poor, and
his righteousness remains for ever. Now mark how S. Paul does apply this
saying of the Prophet, 2. Cor. 5. for persuading them to be plenteous in
liberality, he uses this comparison, He that sows sparingly shall reap
sparingly, and he that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully. All men
do know that the Farmer which does sow but a little seed, must needs have but
a little harvest Even so he shows, that such as do sow but a little in
almes-deedes and works of charity to the poor, shall also have a small
harvest. And then further to show that the same harvest or reaping which he
speaks of, is not only in the world to come, or in the riches of good works,
but also in the blessing of God upon their worldly goods; and to take away the
doubt which men have, that if they give liberally, they may^ come to poverty
themselves, he adds: And God is able to make you plentiful in all grace,
that (...) always having all sufficiency in all things, (...) ^b^^^nd in
every good work: as it is written, (...) h^th dispersed abroad and given to
the poor; his righteousness remains for ever. We see then ^^^w S. Paul
expounds this clause (his righ^^^^snes) to be his benevolence, or
bou^tifulnes in giving a lines, shall remain for ever. As if he should say,
the more lie does scatter and disperse abroad, the more God does make his
riches to abound, and gives him all sufficiency then to sinful that which is
written, that his ^^bilitie to be liberal shall never fail. And to conf^^de
this yet further, the holy Apostle uses the similitude of the husbandman, who
by ^^^ing his seed does receive increase: for thus ^e adds in verse 10. Also
he that finds food in the sower, will minister likewise bread for food, and
multiply your seed, and increase the fruits of your benevolence: that on all
parts ye may be made ^^b unto all liberality, which causes through us
^^^nksgiuing unto God. What can be more for^^ble then this promise of Gods
blessing (if rich men could cast off unbelief, and give credit unto it) to
move unto liberality, that they shall not only thereby become rich in good
works, but also that God will so bless and increase their worldly substance,
that they shall always have abundance, both for their own use ^^^d also to
give unto the poor? What hardn^^ of heart is in men, that can not believe God
(...) this thing, but say still, If I give very fast, I may come to poverty my
self? Whatsoeu^^ then God promises, this is still the conclusion, the^^ men
will trust more to their riches then to^^ promise: their riches they will hold
as fa^^ as they can: there is the sure God, as they think. Is there no help?
is there no re^e^^^ for this so deadly and so dangerous disease Surely if it be
possible to be remedied (as he have showed before, it shall be in some) the
remedy is set down by the holy Apostle in the last verse of this Text, where
he says, In^^g^^ for themselves a good foundation against the (...) come, that
they may attain eternal life. The i^ (a we noted) the second part of the
Text, which declares the incomparable benefit and fruit, which the rich men
shall reap, if they shall show themselves obedient to this charge it is a
benefit to have that blessing of God in this life which is promised unto the
liberal: but this is far greater, being the blessing of all blessings,
which the Apostle here notes: then (...) we here observe, that riches, if men
could use them, are instruments of great happiness: for thereby they have
ability to be rich in good works, which is to be rich unto God, even the
chief riches of all. The holy Scripture sets this forth under diverse
phrases of speech, as first S. Paul here says, They shall lay up for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come. A good foundation is the
groundwork of a sure and permanent building. No man by the multitude of his
worldly goods can make so sure work here, but it will decay and come to utter
ruin, how soever men are builded, and do imagine that they can build their
nest so high and so sure, as that it shall continue. But for the time to come or
against that time, the rich in this world may, if they have grace and true
wisdom together with their riches, make the foundation of a most happy
building, which shall never decay,) Christ Jesus uses an other comparison to
set forth this same matter, Luke 12. ver. 33. saying, Sell your goods and give
alms: make you bags that shall never wax old, a treasure in heaven which
shall never fail, whither the thief cannot approach, and where the moth does
not corrupt. And Luke. 10. ver. 9. he says, Make you friends of the
unrighteous Mammon, that when ye shall have need, they may receive you into
everlasting habitations. This is indeed all one with that which S. Paul here
says, Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to
come. Indeed that saying of Christ is notable to be observed: mark therefore
how he brings it in. He uses a parable, saying: There was a rich man that
had a Steward, who was accused unto him that he had wasted his goods, and he
willed him to give his accou^ts, for he could no longer be steward. The steward
being now in a straight, and knew not how to live when he should forgo^ his
office, at length uses this crafty dealing the goes to all those which did
owe any great sums to his Master, and did strike off and forgive them a
great part, that so befriending them, they might, when he was out of his
office, show friendship to him, and receive him into their houses. Our Savior
hereupon says, that the children of this world are wiser in the^r generation
then the children of light: And then he wills us to imitate this unjust
steward (not in that unjust course which he took) but seeing we are all but
stewardes, and must out of our stewardship, he wills us to be so wise as to
make us friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that when we shall need or fail,
that is, when we shall go out of our stewardship, they may receive us into
everlasting habitations. But what means that, how shall we make us friends
of the unrighteous Mammon which shall receive us into everlasting habitations?
Or who be those friends? It is a parabolicall speech. Ye see how the steward
with his masters goods by an unjust way made him friends: so our Lord does
advise us, which are but stewards under God over the riches which we do
possess, to make us friends after a lawful and commendable way with our Lords
goods, that is, by distributing and giving alms to those that be in
necessity. This is a thing pleasing to God, under whom we do hold our
stewardship; and the friends which we then make, are the good works
themselves, which shall follow and accompany us at our death, when we go out
of our stewardship, and be rewarded with eternal glory: for so God has
promised, that they which bring forth good works, even the testimonies and
fruits of a true and lively faith, shall be rewarded with eternal glory,
which is it that he says, that they may receive you into everlasting
habitations: and as S. Paul says here, Laying up in store a good foundation
against the time to come, that they may attain eternal life. To make bags
then which shall never wax old, to make friends of the unrighteous Mammon,
which may receive us into everlasting habitations, and to lay up in store a
good foundation against the time to come, that we may attain eternal life,
are all to one effect; a wonderful happy thing to rich men if they can lay
hold of it. But alas if we behold the present estate, shall we think that men
do believe this? The wealth that many do flow it, is very great, and
multitudes are pined with extreme misery, and few there be which do
liberally distribute: yea contrariwise we find very many, that care not so
they may enrich themselves, what become of the poor. This thing is evident by
the selling of their corn and other commodities, which they think they never
have enough for, although the price be unreasonable, What an extreme
blindness, and folly is this, yea what a woeful misery, that the men of this
world which have plenty of riches do not only deprive themselves of a double
blessing? the one upon their goods and posterity in this life, according as
God has promised, if they shall distribute to the poor, and be rich in good
works, the other in the reward of eternal glory in the heavens; but also
cast themselves into a double calamity, the one in depriving themselves of
eternal glory, the other in destroying their worldly estate: for if their
riches do stand and continue with them for their own life, which sundry
times falls out otherwise, because God does accurse riches so gotten, yet do
their children scatter and consume them at least within a few generations, as
daily experience shows in a number, and so you may see their double misery.
Well may some man say, does not this make for the Popish doctrine of merit and
justification by men's own works? when a^ men deeds to the poor do lay up
in store a good foundation against the time to come, t^^t they may attain
eternal life: when bou^tifull giving does make bags full of treasure which
shall never wax old: and when compassion, to the needy does make friends
that shall receive us into everlasting habitations? are not men then justified
by these their works, or do not their good deeds deserve or merit eternal
glory? These good works are the testimonies of a true, lively and justifying
faith being plenteously and rightly done, they show that the doer is a lively
member of Christ Jesus who is our righteousness, 1. Cor. 1. being led by his
spirit. And touching merits of works, there be no deeds so excellent as
that they can deserve so great glory: so great reward is of the mere mercy,
and from the free grace of God, who has promised such reward unto good works.
This foundation against the time to come, these bags that never wax old,
and the friends that we must make by alms deeds, are all such works of
mercy as do testify a true and lively faith, being the inseparable fruits
thereof, which God will plentifully reward with glory and immortality. The
doers of these being not forgetful hearers, but doers of the work, shall, as
the holy Ghost says, be blessed in their deed. (...)

It may be here demanded, seeing works do not justify before God, but are the
fruits of those which are justified, Christ being our righteousness, when we
have the full pardon of (...) sins in his blood, and are clothed with (...)
obedience imputed unto us, whether men shall have the greater glory, according
to the greatness and multitude of their good works? I answer, that according
to the measure of Faith which a man has, so are his works: and the greater his
faith and his works be, the greater shall be his reward in glory. If this
were not so, how should S. Paul say, They which sow sparingly shall reap
sparingly, and they which sow plenteously shall reap plenteously. 2. Cor. 9.
Yea how should he say in this place, that he would have those that be rich
in this world charged to do good, and to be rich in good works? If there be
not a more plenteous reward to the greater and more plenteous good works, how
should any, more the^ others be said to be rich in them* It is strange and
wonderful, that rich me^ can not be brought to see this, and to use their
riches to their best advantage, but do indeed let slip their happiness. They
can willingly bestow great cost in building fair houses: it does not grieve
them to bestow very much also in gorgeous apparel: and they reckon not what
they lay out in delicate fare, both upon themselves and upon others that be
wealthy: but to bestow a little more then ordinary upon those that be poor
and in misery, is very gree^ou^, because they do account that to be lost or
cast away: whereas in very deed, there is nothing which can be laid out to
any great profit, but that which is spent upon the poor: for houses, apparel
and meats do perish with their use, they be transitory and vain: but the
reward promised by the Lord is a treasure that shall never come unto an end.
Those former do appertain but unto the satisfying of carnal lusts: but
mercy showed to the needy, heapeth up glory in the Heavens. There is a very
great difference between these two: but men are led by sense and not by sound
wisdom: and that causes them to make so bad a choice. They feel the
sweetness of riches for the present time: they are sure of those goodly
pleasures which they enjoy by them.

But to be rich in good works, and so to lay up a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may attain eternal life; this is not perceived by
sense, this they can not skill of, and therefore they do little trouble
themselves about it. At the day of judgment, this time to come, shall be
present, and then this invisible foundation shall be seen: when Christ shall
say to those on his right hand: Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I was a hungered
and ye gave me meat, I thirsted and you gave me drink; I was a stranger and
ye lodged^^^ I was naked and ye clothed me: I was sick and ye^ visited me: I
was in prison, and ye came unto me, Then shall the righteous answer, him
saying: Lord, when saw we thee an hungered and fed thee? or a thirst and gave
thee drink? And when saw we thee a stranger and lodged thee? or naked and
clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick or in prison, and came unto thee? And
the king shall answer and say unto them. Verily I say unto you, in as much as
ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it to
me. Math. 25. ver. 34.35.36.37.38.39.40, And go ye cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. For I was an hungered and ye gave
me no meat, I thirsted and ye gave me no drink, etc. In as much as ye did i^
not to the least of these, ye did it not to me, a wonderful thing to see the
blindness in which men are. Who does not account it the most happy thing that
can befall a man, to give to Christ when he is hungry, or thirsty, or naked,
or sick, or in prison? Again, who is he that will not confess it to be a
most vile wretchedness, when a man does set more by his riches, then by
relieuing Christ?

Now mark well, are not all that believe, the very members of Christ's
mystical body? Thou beholdest the poor that are sick or lame* thou see
poor fatherless children that pine, and are ready to famish: these, for
ought which thou know, may be the true members of Jesus Christ. If then thou
do neglect and despise them, thou do neglect and despise Christ. Is not
this a most cursed thing that any man should love worldly trash, even for the
filling of fleshly lusts, more then he loves God or Christ? For if a man had
any spark of love in him unto God, he must needs love Christ in his members,
he must needs love his brother.

Whereupon, Saint John manifestly says, He that has this worlds good, and
sees his brother in need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him? 1. John. 3. ver. 17, O cursed love of money,
that caryeth men from the love of God. It is no marvel that Saint Paul says,
The love of money is the root of all evils. 1. Tim. 6.10. For he says there,
that they which would be rich fall into temptation, and into a snare, and into
many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition.
O will some man say, if the words of Saint Paul are so strictly to be taken,
how could some that have been preachers of the Gospel, covet riches, and love
money so much as they have done? Is it not found by common experience, that
never any have been more covetous, or more loved money, or have sought riches
and worldly pomp^ more then some that have preached the Gospel? Shall we say,
that such Lighters walk in so dangerous a way? Do such forsake the true and
living God, and worship an idol? Surely God is no respecter of persons: such
are so far off from all excuse, that of all others they fall into the deepest
condemnation: for while they take upon them in words to set forth the glorious
Gospel of Jesus Christ, and give so foul example in deed, what do they but
pull down the dignity of the Gospel, causing the weak to stumble, and the
blind to wander out of the way?

To return to our matter for laying up the good foundation against the time to
come, I will conclude with two sayings of the scripture, the one of king
Solomon, the other of the prophet Isay. Thus says Solomon, He that has
mercy upon the poor, lends unto the Lord, and the Lord will recompense
him that which he has given. Proverbs, 19.17. And thus says the Lord by
Isay: That thou deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor
that wander into thine house, when thou see the naked, that thou cover him,
and hide not thy self from thine own flesh: then shall thy light break
forth as the morning, and thine health shall grow speedily: Thy righteousness
shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall embrace thee. Then
shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer: thou shall cry, and he shall
say, hear am I. If thou take away from the mids of thee the yoke, the
putting forth of the finger, and wicked speaking, if thou power out thy soul
to the hungry, and refresh the troubled soul: then shall my light spring out
of the darkness, and thy darkness shall be as the noonday: And the Lord
shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make
fat thy bones: and thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of
waters, whose waters fail not, and they shall be of thee that shall build the
wast places, etc. Isay, chap. 58. verse 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. The Lord for his
sons sake give us grace to follow this holy precept, that we may attain
eternal life.

The end of the first Sermon.
THE SECOND Sermon.
1. John, Chap. 5. 7 For there are three which bear record (...) heaven, the
Father, the word, and the holy ghost, and these three are one.

8 And there are three which bear record in the earth, the spirit, the water,
and the bloud^^ and these three agree in one.

9 If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater: for this is
the witness of GOD which he testified of his son.

10 He that believes in that son of God has the witness in himself: he that
believes not God has made him a liar, because he believed n^^ the record that
God witnessed of that his son.

11 And this is that record, that God has given unto us eternal life, and
this life is in that his son.

12 He that has that son, has that life: and he that has not that son of
God has not that life.

13 These things have I written unto you that believe in the name of the son
of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe
in the name of that son of God.


Every word of God is pure, Prou. 30.5. The whole Scripture is given by
divine inspiration, and is profitable etc. 2. Tim. ^.16. And what soever things
have been written afore-time, have bin written for our learning. To. 15.4. It is
our duty ^hen a^ humble and obedient scholars of Christ, to give care unto
every part of Gods word. And moreover, a^ some parts thereof do principally
excel, so are we the more willingly to learn them. Such is this which I have
now read unto you, as you may perceive by the cause, for which S. John
affirms he wrote it, saying, These things have I written unto you which
believe in the name of that son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal
life, and that ye may believe in the name of that son of God. ver. 13. What
higher point then this for a man to know that he shall be saved? What greater
joy and felicity can be fall unto any? Indeed many do hold that it is
impossible for any man while he lives here, to know for certainty that he
shall be saved. How can any man tell (say they) that he shall be saved? Can any
go up to heaven, and there see that his name is written in the book of life?
The Papists proceed yet further, and they say, it is pride and wicked
arrogance for (...) man to affirm that he does know he shall be saved.
Humility (they say) does teach men always to stand in doubt. Most true it is,
that their doctrine of men's merits must needs breed all doubting: and pride
intole^able it is for any man to say, he knows his own good works do merit
or deserve eternal glory in the heavens, and that he is sure he shall have it
for the same. But let these pass with their Antichristian doctrine, and give
ear to S. John, who says, These things have I written, that ye may kn^w that
ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe, etc. But before we handle the
words, let us see how they depend upon the former part of this Chapter.

In the first verse you see it is thus written, Who soever believes that Jesus
is the Christ, is borne of God. This is even the ground of this whole matter,
namely that the new and spiritual birth goes inseparably with faith: for he
says, who so ever believes that Jesus is the Christ, speaking of the true and
lively faith, he is borne of God, (...) so he is the child of God. Whereupon it
follows on the other side, that who soever is not regenerate, but commits
the deeds of the flesh, though he seem to believe, yet he has not the true
and lively faith, but that which the holy Ghost calls a dead faith, he is
not the child of God. Then he adds further, Every one that loves him which
begat, loves him also which is begotten. This must needs be so, for it is as
a principle in nature, whereby it is evident that whosoever loves not the
children of God, he loves not God: for he that entirely does love the Father,
cannot, but for his sake, love the children which are begotten of him. Then it
is thus, he that loves not the children of God, is not borne of God, and
therefore he has not the true faith in Christ. And he that is borne of God,
he loves God, and therefore also he loves his children, and by this he
says, we know we love the children of God, when we love God, and keep his
commandments. The trial that men love Gods children is from hence, that they
love God: and the trial that we love God is, if we keep his commandments:
for so he affirms in the third verse, where he also says, that the
commandments of God are not grievous, or heavy. According as Christ wills
us to take his yoke upon us, adding further That his yoke is easy, and his
burden light. Math. 11.29.30. Is the law then easy to be kept? Surely there
is nothing more grievous to the unregenerate man the^ the law of God for (as S.
Paul says) the law is spiritual and we are carnal, soulde under sin.
Romans 7.14. There is such a disagreement between the heavenly purity of Gods
law, and our corrupt and defiled nature, that when they meet, we are so far
off from having any power to fulfill the law, or any part of it, that by it
the lusts of sin work in our members, to bring forth fruit unto death. Romans
7.5. Not that the law is to be blamed, but as the Apostle there disputes at
large, sin takes occasion by the law. It is not then S. John's meaning to
teach, that the commandments be not grievous or light and easy to the
natural man, for sure to him they be grievous? How then? the commandments
are not grievous to the spiritual man, to the regenerate man, even to him that
is borne of God, for so S. John applies the matter, and rendereth a reason, in
these words, Because whatsoever is borne of God overcomes the world. By the
world is meant what soever, either within us or without us is corrupt and
contrary to Gods will: as chap. 2. ver. 16. of this Epistle, he does expound
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, to be in
the world, and of the world. Then look how far a man is regenerate, and borne
of God, so far he overcomes and subdueth all unclean lusts, he hates
the remnants of them, and delights in the law of GOD. Romans 7.15.22. How then
can the commandments be grievous unto him? The lusts of sin are sweet to
the natural man, and therefore the law which condemns them is grievous unto
him. But can they that are borne of God then perfectly fulfill the law, and so
become righteous in themselves? In no wise. For then should such as are borne
of God be without sin: but in the first chapter of this Epistle. ver. 8. he
says, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not
in us. In many things we sin all. Iam. 3. ver. 2. There is no man (says
Solomon) which sins not. 1, King. 8.46. Yea no man can tell how often. Psalm.
19. Wherefore Saint Peter said thus unto such as would have men justified by
the law, Now therefore, why do you tempt God, to lay a yoke upon the neck
of the disciples, which neither our fathers, nor we are able to bear? Acts
15.10. Well, to proceed; Saint John comes nearer, and says: This is the
victory that overcomes the world, even our faith. There is then a marvelous
excellency in faith: for by it we overcome the world, even all the unclean
lusts of sin: and by it we overcome Satan the prince of the world, who has
no power not authority but by those lusts. But now we must understand, that
this faith is only the instrument of our victory, for the whole matter and
power of our victory is in Christ, whom the faith lays hold on: Wherefore
he says: Who is it that overcomes the world, but he which believes that
Jesus is the son of God? And then he shows that there is the fullness of
victory in Christ, because he came both by water, and blood. In the time of
the law, there was figured by blood, and by water, the full satisfaction, and
the full purification or cleansing from all sin: both these are performed by
Christ: he has by his blood made full satisfaction of, and he does sanctify
and purge his chosen from all uncleanness. Therefore in him is a full
victory. For the curse of the law being satisfied, and then we washed and
sanctified from all spotte, what power can Satan or death have over us? This
being a matter so great and weighty, and faith bearing up the whole weight of
it, most necessary it is, that the faith it self have a mighty and sure
ground work, or foundation to rest upon. That which bears up so mighty a
building, must not rest upon a foundation that is from any creature: And
therefore S. John shows, that faith which is our victory, is grounded upon
the testimony of six great witnesses: of which, three are in heaven, and the
other three in earth. The three which bear record in heaven, are the father,
and the word (that is the son) and the holy ghost. These three are one; that
is, they do all testify one thing, or agree all in one. For what the father
from heaven witnessed of his son, the same did the son witness of himself,
the holy ghost also did confirm it.

This is a most clear place of scripture, against those heretics which denied
the distinction of persons in the godhead, for if the father were not a
distinct person from the Son and so the Son from the holy Ghost, how could
he say there be three which bear record in heaven? Then faith has the
witness of God the father, of GOD the son, and of God the holy Ghost to rest
upon. Here is that sure foundation which can not fail. They be seducers which
teach their scholars to ground their faith upon men, as the Papists which
draw men from grounding their faith upon the testimony of God the father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, expressed and delivered unto us in the scriptures,
and will have them rest upon the authority of the Pope and his popish clergy.
This testimony of their own, they proclaim to be sound, and infallible,
boasting that they can not err: the voice and testimony of God in the holy
scriptures they charge to be dark, doubtful, and uncertain: most blasphemous
wretches. Then he adds that there be also three which bear record in earth,
the spirit, and the water, and the blood, and these three agree in one. Where
first it may be demanded, what spirit this is which is joined with the water
and the blood as a witness upon earth? Is it not the holy Ghost, one of the
three witnesses from heaven? This is out of all doubt and controversy that he
speaks again of the holy Ghost. The spirit then is a double witness, he is
one of the three from heaven, and he is one of the three upon earth.

If any shall demand, how can this be? Let them know that the holy ghost does
two ways bear witness of Christ: first, together with the father and the son
from heaven in the highest authority of the Divine Majesty he did bear
record of Christ, and confirmed his doctrine, which he had taught with signs
and wonders and manifold gifts. And then by his work and grace in the hearts
of men, when he lighteneth them, and applies unto them the efficacy of the
death and resurrection of Christ. Let it not seem strange then that the holy
Ghost is brought in as a double witness, first as one of the three from heaven,
and then as one of the three in earth, that is in the hearts of men: for if
there were no more but the testimony of those three from heaven, Christ should
not profit us at al, because we are not capable of our selves: and therefore
the holy Ghost also, as a witness in earth applies unto our hearts the power of
the water and the blood by which Christ came: that is, the sanctifying and
satisfying power of his death: for he sprinckleth the hearts of the believers
with the blood of Christ. The water, the blood and the spirit then witness one
thing in the heart, even that the whole satisfaction for sin, and al true
holiness is from Christ crucified. Hereby we may perceive that the efficacy and
power of Christ's blood in us, is a witness unto us of a true and lively faith,
and so of eternal life: because the Spirit and the water and the blood bear
witness in earth. Then he proceeds to set forth the stablenes of the credit
of these witnesses, which he does by a comparison, saying: If we receive the
witness of men, the witness of God is greater. This is grounded upon a clear
principle, which none can deny: for God in steadfast truth far exceeds men. We
give credit to a matter when two or three men which are reputed honest, do
upon their solemn oath affirm that they did hear or see it done: if other
me^ make doubt when such as they have sworn, they hold themselves much
injured: for shall we not receive or give credit to the testimony of honest men
upon their oths? How much more injury do we to the God of all truth, whose
witness is greater then the witness of all men, when we do not give credit to
the witness which he witnesses of his Son? For the testimony of God is that
which he has witnessed of his son. I need not stand to open this, for it is
mere brutishnes not to yield unto it. And here I pray you behold again the
great and horrible wickedness and filthy blasphemy of the Pope and his
shauelings: which would make the testimony of men, yea even the testimony of
themselves, (being wicked men) greater then the testimony of God. For what is
the testimony of God by which he does bear record of his son, but his
written word delivered unto us by the Apostles and Prophets? And where can we
have the testimony which God witnesses of his son, but in those sacred Books?
Search the Scriptures (says Christ) for they bear record of me. John, 5. Now
when the Papists do affirm (that the Scriptures have no authority nor credit)
unto us, but as their Pope and they do give it, or commend them to be
believed: what do they but set the witness of men above the witness of God? I
will not stand here to rehearse at large, but even a little touch some of the
vile and execrable speeches of those foul mouthed Papists, which to hold up
the Popish religion deface the clear testimony of God in the Scriptures, which
are flat against them: for being pressed with the manifest voice and testimony
of God in his word, they cry out, there is no certainty in the Scriptures,
they be like a nose of wax, which you may turn which way you will, they be a
dead letter, and a dumb Judge: and but that the Church commends them no more
credit were to be given to the Scripture then to Aesopes Fables. O most vile
wretches, shall the testimony of God, which is greater then the testimony of
men, have no force, but as it receives from them? And then he adds, He that
believes in that son of God has the witness in himself. As he spoke of the
greatness of the testimony of the Father, the word and the holy ghost, which is
from heaven, in the former verse: so now he shows that who soever believes
that testimony from heaven, has the testimony of the three witnesses which
bear record in earth within him. What is that? this it is: he that does
believe the witness that GOD bears of his son, the witness that Christ
bears of himself, and which the holy Ghost has also witnessed, which is all
indeed but one testimony, the same has the witness also of the Spirit, of the
water, and of the blood within him. Mark then how these six witnesses do
meet together to assure us of one and the self same thing, even this, that
God has given unto us eternal life, and that the same life is in his Son.
For when the spirit of adoption, as S. Paul calls him, Romans 8. bears
witness with the spirit of a man, that he is the son of God, he does it by
making him feel the efficacy of the water and blood by which Christ came,
that is the efficacy of his death and resurrection in satisfaction for his
sins, and in sanctification. Every one then which believes aright has the
spirit of God in him, and the lively power of Christ crucified, which do
witness unto him, that through Christ he is made the child of God, and shall be
saved. From hence we may learn what the nature of the true, lively and
justifying faith is, and whereby it is distinguished or discerned from the
historical and dead faith: for if a man do assent and believe, that all those
things are true which the father, the Son, and the holy Ghost have testified
of Christ in the scriptures, and yet be void of the spirit and power of
Christ unto sanctification (as many that are even learned men are) it is a
manifest declaration that his faith is but a dead faith, and not that which S.
John speaks of here, when he says, He that belieueth has the witness in
him self. And it follows, he that belieueth not God has made him a liar,
because he belieueth not the record that God witnesses of his Son, as I
noted before. Men which are reputed honest, (if they testify upon their oath,
in a matter and be not believed) will hold them selves hardly dealt withal, and
much injured: how great is the injury then offered to God, when he has borne
record of his son, and we do not give credit to his testimony? He has not
only promised unto us remission of sins through the blood of his son, but
also he has confirmed the same his promise and testimony with an oath, as we
may read Heb. 6. Therefore S. John shows, That they which believe not the
testimony which God gives of his Son commit an horrible offense, even this,
they make God a liar. Behold again what sweet doctrine, the doctrine of the
Church of Rome is, for notwithstanding the testimony of the three witnesses
from heaven, and the testimony of the sp^rite, the water and the blood, yet
they will have it there should be no certainty, but a doubt. Humility (they
say) it is no doubt: even as much as to say, it is humility to make God a
liar: Is it humility to call into question, and doubt the truth of his word
and of his oath? for he says, he that belieueth not God, has made him a
liar: Is faith and doubting all one? Beloved, we may here learn, that as by
doubting, and distrusting the promises and testimony of God, which he
confirms with his oath. We offer great injury unto his majesty, and do highly
displease him: so the more steadfastly we give credit to that which he
witnesses, the more we honor him, and do that which is pleasing in his
sight. In the next words he teleth what witness God gives of his son, or
what is the testimony of all the three witnesses in heaven, namely, that God
has given unto us eternal life, and this life is in that his son. First we
see the words are plain that God has freely given unto us eternal life:
this S. John sets down as part of the record which God bears. This is
greatly to be observed, because it expounds the scriptures. For how wickedly
and how impudently do the Papists cavil and pervert the truth, when they so
stifflie affirm, that men obtain eternal life by their own deserts? If
eternal life be the gift of God, as God himself does witness says S. John.
How do men purchase it by their own merits? And then there is an other part
of the testimony which God bears, and that is, that this life eternal which
he gives us, is in his son: whereupon he infers, that he that has the
son has life, and he that has not the son, has not life because God
witnesses that he gives unto us eternal life in Christ, it follows of
necessity that he which has Christ has life: for how can the son of God
and the true life be parted asunder? Moreover, seeing God gives this happy
life only in his son, he that has not the son, how is it possible that he
should have the life? Here is the sum of the Gospel; that whatsoever shall
bring us to life everlasting, we have it whole in Christ: God himself does
witness this. Saint Paul says, That Christ is of God, made unto us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctificacatio^, and redemption, that he which glories, should
glory in the Lord. 1. Cor. 1, Let this testimony of God stand, as of
necessity it must stand, and all the whole frame of popery comes down. For
if all be given unto us in Christ, what becomes of all those things by which
the Papists say, men get pardon of their sins, and purchase life
everlasting? Where be all the Popes pardons? what becomes of all their
running on pilgrimage to the images of Saints, to seek life at the hands of
dead blocks and stones: Well, let this Antichristian synagogue of Rome pass,
and let us learn from this place to seek eternal life only in Christ,
seeing God does bear record that eternal life is in his son. They that
have him, need none other thing to bring them unto life. They that to obtain
eternal life, will join themselves, or other creatures with him, as giving
part thereof, do dishonor him, and deny him, and so must needs miss of the
true blessedness. And now we come to that verse which I mind to stand upon,
because it shows the end for which S. John says, he did write these
things. Thus the words are: These things have I written unto you that
believe in the name of that son of God, that ye may know that ye have
eternal life, and that ye may believe in the name of that son of God.

We may divide this into two parts, the first that all true believers may be
assured of their salvation: the second that they may believe. Touching the
latter of these it may be said: if he wrote to them that did believe, and so
did know that they had life eternal, how could he say, And that ye may
believe? The answer to this is easy: no man does believe so perfectly, but
that his faith may receive increase. But this I will not handle: therefore let
us come again unto that former. That ye may know that ye have eternal life.
Here are four things to be noted in this: the first is, that it is not
impossible, but men may come to be assured that they shall be saved: the
second, that it is not pride, nor arrogancy, or a wicked presumption for a
true believer to assure himself that he shall be saved: the third, what way
we are to come to this assurance of our salvation: the fourth; and last, how we
are by degrees to increase this assurance. Let such then in the first place as
hold it a thing impossible for any man to know he shall be saved, consider how
flat co^tary it is which they hold, unto the word of God: for if it be not
possible for men to know that they shall be saved, how could S. John say, These
things have I written unto you that believe in the name of the son of God, that
ye may know that ye have eternal life? Ought not this to stop the mouths of
all men in this matter? For when he says we may know, shall we say it is
impossible to know? We grant (say some) that certain special men might know,
and have assurance that they should be saved, for it was by special
revelation: but it does not follow thereupon, that the faithful may come to
the knowledge and assurance of their eternal life and salvation. Yea even this
cavil also is fully answered, and taken away by words of the holy Apostle: for
he writes to the whole Churches, even unto all that have the true faith in
Christ: he speaks not unto some special persons, but indifferently unto
them all, that they might know they had eternal life. Also he does not speak
of any especial revelation, but that the knowledge of their salvation is by
the things which he wrote unto them. Let all men then (which will not wilfully
and wickedly gainsay the holy Ghost) stoop down and acknowledge the truth in
this, namely that the faithful may know that they shall have eternal life. Let
this sta^nd firm and unremovable, unless we will gainesay the Apostle.

Come then to the second point: it is deemed great arrogance and pride by the
Papists, for any man to affirm that he is sure he shall be saved: yea the
Jesuits call it damnable false illusion and presumption. I wonder how they will
answer here to S. John: would he of purpose write these things, to bring men
to a damnable illusion and wicked arrogance? He says he wrote these things,
even to this end and purpose, (for so much his words import) that they which
believe in the name of the son of God, may know they have eternal life. Why
did not the Jesuits in their annotations say somewhat upon these words? Is
it not translated amiss? Surely they translate it even thus: These things
write I unto you, that you may know that you have eternal life, which believe
in the name of the son of God. How then? Is there not some figurative or
mystical speech in these words? They cannot for shame say so. Then it must
needs follow that the Papists are proud and arrogant, yea blasphemous in
accusing S. John that he leads the faithful into a damnable illusion. Is it
not some one speech, or once uttered by Saint John? If it were but one speech,
and once uttered, it were enough, and fully sufficient to confirm the matter,
being uttered by the spirit of truth: but in deed Saint John uses the like
speech more then once, or twice. For in the third chapter of this Epistle,
verse. 14. he says, We know we are translated from death to life, because we
love the brethren. And in the same Chap. ver. 19. And by this we know that we
are of the truth, and shall persuade our hearts before him. Also Chap. 4. ver.
13. By this we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given
us of his spirit. Then let us proceed unto the third point, which is, that
by what way, or by what means we may attain to the assurance of our
salvation. No man needs to doubt, but that S. John has showed the only way
and means, seeing he says, These things have I written unto you, etc. that ye
may know that ye have eternal life. He does not then send up men to search in
the secret counsel of God, to see whether their names be written in the book
of life: neither does he will them to rely upon some special revelation, but
will have them to know that they have eternal life, by those things which he
has written unto them. Then are we to seek the way and means in that which
he has written. But here it may be demanded whether these words, (These
things have I written) be to be understood of that which goes before in this
Chapter of all that he has written in this Epistle. Indeed almost the whole
matter of this Epistle tends to that purpose, as any that shall advisedly
read it over may easily perceive: but yet it is specially to be referred to
that which he has spoken before in this chap. touching the full victory that
we have in Christ through faith, and touching the six witnesses which faith is
supported by. Here we are first to note how far they be awry, which would
have some assurance and hope to be saved, and let go the way and means by
which they should attain that assurance. When they hear of a certainty of
life, why should not we be persuaded (say they) that God will save us as well
as others? And yet the things which S. John says, he has written that men may
know they have eternal life, they neither know, nor care to know: they hold
this principle, that it is God only which does save men: and upon this they
rest, not considering by what means he does save them: as if a man should say
that has grounds, it is God alone that feeds al flesh: he only makes the
corn to grow: I care not therefore for plowing or sowing, if he will feed me,
I shall be fed, if he will not, what can I help it? Will not all men laugh at
such folly? Will not every simple man say, if he will have the Lord God to give
him corn for his sustenance, he must use the means, that is, he must plowe, he
must sow, yea reap, and carry into his barnes. Even so God alone brings men
to eternal life, and gives the knowledge and certainty thereof, but he does
it by means, and he that will come to it must use those means. He must come
to this that Saint John says: These things have I written unto you that
believe, etc. that ye may known ye have eternal life. Will a man know it,
or have it, and yet let pass the things which are written, by which he is to
know it, and to have it. Christ wills the Jews to search the scriptures,
affirming that they do bear witness of him. John 5. He that will know Christ
the savior of the world, in whom the father does give us life eternal, he
must know him by the scriptures. The true faith is grounded upon the witness
which the three witnesses from heaven, that is the father, the word, and the
holy ghost, do witness.

If a man do not know what record these do bear, how can he tell what to
believe? What manner of faith then have all they which hearken not to the voice
and testimony of God, which the holy Apostles and Prophets have delivered in
writing: but follow their own blind imagination? These never consider why God
has revealed his counsels, or why he sent Prophets and Apostles, yea and his
own son to publish the testimony: let us take heed that we be not of this
company, which indeed is a very great company, that have no care to harken
what the three which bear record in heaven have witnessed. There is an other
sort of men, which also are much awrie, touching the way and means to
salvation? These do search the scriptures, they read, they hear, they labor
for knowledge, yea, they hold that men may and ought to come to the assurance
of their salvation, and profess that they be sure thereof themselves. If you
demand of them a reason of all matters, they can from the word of God
satisfy you with good reasons. All this is highly to be commended, why, or
how are they then awrie? They be awrie, which separate and put asunder those
things which God has coupled together. They stand strictly upon the written
word of God, tell them of putting asunder the things which God has coupled
together, and they will also deny it. Yea, they will constantly promise and
profess, that if you can show them any thing which they put asunder from that
which God has coupled it unto, they will be ready to amend their fault. I
would that were true: for we should not then have so many carnal gospellers:
neither would there be so many proud Schismatikes. But some man may say, what
be the things that God has coupled together, which such men do put asunder?
I will tell you. Does Saint John say, that Christ came both by water and blood,
not by water alone, but by water and blood: and yet they will separate these
two, they will have remission of their sins, or justification in Christ
without sanctification? He that has Christ to be his righteousness, must
needs have him also to be his sanctification. A man cannot be in Christ, but
he must be borne of God, he must be a new creature, he cannot continue in
sin, and be the servant of sin, as for that point, let men read and
study well the 6. Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans. But let us proceed
further in this matter, as Saint John here does. He says, there be three which
bear record in heaven, and there be three which bear record in earth. What
will you say if they part asunder these six witnesses? What if they leave out
these three witnesses in earth, and stand only upon the three in heaven? It
may be said, is not the testimony of the three witnesses in heaven sufficient?
May not a man rest in the testimony of the Father, though there be none other
joined? surely the testimony of God is infallible, and all sufficient of it
self: but whosoever believes that testimony of God, has (as S. John says)
the witness in himself: he has the witness which is in earth within him, even
the witness of the spirit, of the water, and of the blood. Where these three in
earth are not to give their testimony, the witness of the other three in heaven
is not believed, though it seem to be believed. As ask a man this question
which is carried awrie that way, you believe the gospel, I do, (will he say)
believe it. You are sure you shall have eternal life: I am sure thereof (says
he) Then demand further, how come you to that assurance, or whereupon does it
rest? He will answer, it rests upon Gods promise, I am sure he can not
fail, nor deceive. That is out of all doubt: but you do not believe it. Yes
said he, I do believe it. Then where be the three witnesses in earth which be
in every one that does believe aright? He that believes, has the witness in
himself. ver. 10. Where is the blood, the water, and the spirit? I hope (will
he say further) that they be within me. But come to the trial: the heart is
unsanctified, the mind is corrupt and vain, the tongue speaks proud
things, under the lips is deceit, and guile, the hands are full of unjust
dealing: covetousness and pride do bear sway. Examine the whole course of such
a man's life, and you shall find that he does not glorify God. Is the spirit
of God in the heart such a man? Has he the power of Christ in him even of the
water and the blood, by which he came? Is he justified, is he sanctified? No,
but as I said before, he does separate the three witnesses in earth, from the
three in heaven. It is but a vain arrogancy in him, and a mere illusion in
deed that he boasts of the certainty of his salvation. For he has nothing
but his own imagination to warrant him that he does believe. It is no marvel
therefore when such do fall: and to them Saint Paul says: Let him that
thinks he does stand, take heed that he fall not. 1. Cor. 10. ver. 12. He
does not say, that such as do stand in deed can utterly fall unto perdition,
but they which are deceived in their own opinion, boasting that they be sure
of salvation, and yet have not in them the three witnesses in earth. They have
not the firm and infallible ground to rest upon, for the certainty of their
faith, and so of life everlasting. For even when any such man does most of all
glory that God is his God, and his father: If he would but descend into
himself, and but a little awake and stir up his drowsy conscience, that
would tell him that there is no such matter, but that in deed he may expecte
the severity of Gods wrath, his conscience will tell him, thou have a proud
heart, thy mind is full of vanity, thou art defiled continually with vile
and unclean lusts, and with abominable deeds. Thou do delight in sinful
ways, and take pleasure in wicked things. God is a most severe and a
righteous Judge, he will execute vengeance upon all ungodly men. This
unpleasant song will the conscience sing unto the unregenerate, and not that
sweet tune of certainty, that they shall be saved. Let us then omit these
which are awrie, and come to that right way and means, by which we may attain
to so happy an estate, as without all deceit or illusion, yea, without all
arrogancy or vain presumption, to know that we shall be saved. We hear that
as there is a dead faith, which may easily be known, if we were not too too
negligent, so is there also a true and a lively faith, which we may try in our
selves by that which Saint John here writes. Which is thus, we must not rest
in this alone, what the father, the word, and the holy Ghost do witness, as to
say, I know what record they bear, or I am out of all doubt that the record
is true and infallible which they bear: because it is impossible that God
should lie: for so far the historical faith does go, the dead faith, yea
(as I may say) the faith of devils. How then, where is the difference? I must
have in me the spirit to bear record. What spirit? The spirit of Christ,
even the holy Ghost; a spirit which comes not alone: but with the water and
the blood by which Christ came. He witnesses in deed with the efficacy of
the death and passion of Christ, which he does apply both in satisfaction and
sanctification unto the hearts and consciences of the belieuers. The voice of
this spirit, as it were speaking in the heart of a man and telling him that
he is the child of God, is most certain and infallible. The same spirit
(says S. Paul) bears witness with our spirit, that we be the children of
God. Romans 8. What will any man say, that the holy Ghost can deceive, or can
lie? If he witness with the spirit of a man that he is the child of God, can
it fall out otherwise? Here the Jesuits and other Papists do fret and murmr.
The holy Ghost (say they) can not lie: but how can any man assure himself that
the holy Ghost does bear record unto his spirit, that he is the child of God?
Does not every sect of heretics boast that they have the spirit of God? is it
not then their private fantastical spirit which they are led by? For answer
unto this, first let all men rightly consider whether these Papists do not
flatly gainesay the holy Apostles. S. John says, it is the spirit that
bears record. And S. Paul says, that the same spirit witnesses with our
spirit that we be the sons of God. If it be so as they would bear in hand,
that a man can not know whether he has that holy spirit, how does he witness?
And touching the reason which they use (if we may give the title of a reason
unto so absurd a speech) mark it well I pray you. Every kind of heretic,
and likewise every sectarie does boast that he is led by the spirit of God:
therefore no man can tell which is the true spirit. If men should travail from
a far part of the land toward London, some knowing the way perfectly and
othersome not knowing it: if they which do not know it, yet rashly presume
that they do, and go on out of the way; shall we affirm thereupon, that the
other also cannot know it? Were not this very ridiculous? And I pray you what
other, is the reason which the Papists here use? Heretics are deceived, which
in deed are rashly led with the spirit of Satan, therefore they which are led
by the spirit of God, can not know for certainty whether he be the right
spirit. S. John in the 4. Chapter of his Epistle verse 24. says. He that
keeps his commandments dwells in him, and he in him, and by this we know
that he abides in us, even by the spirit which he has given us. How shall
any man know that he dwells in God, and God in him by his spirit that he
has given him, if he can not for certainty know which is the true spirit?
But how can this spirit be known for certainty? He is known by his
efficacy, by his working: he goes not without the word, he testifies
together with the water and the blood by which Christ came. He applies the
mighty power of the death and resurrection of Christ, unto the heart of the
belieuer, both touching remission of sins, and sanctification. He that does
bear himself in hand, and boast that he has the spirit of God, and has
not the blood and the water by which Christ came, does but deceive himself,
and is arrogantly puffed up, for the three witnesses in earth, the spirit, the
water, and the blood, do go unseperably together. Therefore by the power of
Christ crucified unto righteousness and true sanctification, a man does know
that he is led by the holy spirit of God. S. Paul does set forth the same
matter, but with other words. For when he says, The spirit himself bears
record with our spirit, that we be the so^^es of God Romans 8. ver. 16. He
leaves him not as a spirit at randon, but a little before expresses his
operation by which in deed he is known. If ye live after the flesh (says
he) ye shall die: but if by the spirit you mortify the deeds of the flesh,
you shall live. For as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the
Sons of God. What shall we say to this? How shall a man know that it is the
holy spirit of God by which he is led? Does not S. Paul tell you that he is a
spirit which does mortify the deeds of the flesh? There is no spirit which
does moritfie, or indeed which can mortify the deeds of the flesh, but the
spirit of Christ, who does it by applying the power of the death of Christ.
And wheresoever he goes, he has that work: so that where the deeds of the
flesh are not mortified, there is not the spirit of Christ. And he that has
not the spirit of Christ (as it is written) he is none of his. That man
commits sin, and therefore as this Apostle says, He has not seen Christ
nor known (...) 1. Ioh. 3. ver. 6. To come nearer then to the ^^^^l, that a man
is led by the spirit of God, and ^o assured of his salvation? What be those
deeds of the flesh, and what is it to mortify them? All the lusts of sin
which are in our nature, all uncleanness, and all the wicked actions which spring
from the same, be called the works, (...) the deeds of the flesh. Saint Paul
says: The deeds of the flesh are manifest, which are these, adultery,
fornication, uncleanness; wan^onnes, worshipping of images, witch craft,
hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, sects, enuyings,
murders,, drunkenness, gluttonies, and such like. Gal. 5. ver. 19.20.21. It was
not his purpose to reckon up all, and therefore he adds this clause, and such
like. For there is pride, ambition, vainglory, covetousness, perjury, and
many other. To mortify these, is not only to suppress the outward deeds,
but to kill and to root out the power of them in the heart. As for example,
man being proud, the spirit of the Lord does kill that evil vice, it
changes the heart and makes it humble, and lowly. Also, a man is covetous
and earthly minded, the holy ghost does work in his heart a contempt of
worldly things, a (...) ^ust in God, and the love of heavenly things. If he
be full of wrath, of rage, of cruelty, and such headdie passions, so that he
is even as a fierce and savage beast by nature, the spirit of grace does
subdue and root out these, and make him gentle and meek as a lamb. Where
unclean lusts of whoredom and fornication do burn, and boil in the heart,
the heavenly spirit does quench them, and makes the mind chaste and pure.
What should I stand to repeat many particulars, you may by these see what it
is in all the rest? This is that which Christ said to Nicodemus: Except a man
he borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. This is it which the holy
Apostle S. Paul, calls the putting off the old man, and putting on the new.
Yea, this is that which the scripture calls repentance. Can any man have this
work in him, and not know assuredly that he is led by the spirit of God. The
papists in deed do utterly condemn this; because they be utterly void of
it, and can not tell what it is. For how can they which deny and condemn the
true doctrine of sal^ation in Christ, be partakers of the spirit which does
assure the faithful of eternal life?

But yet they have a further objection, and which in deed they deem to be
unanswerable, let it be (say they) that a man does know he has the spirit of
God, that he is regener^^^^^ and is in the state of grace, yet is he sure he
shall stand to the end, and not loose that spirit and fall from grace, or is he
sure he shall not sin? Is not this great presumption? Verily it were great
presumption, according to the Popish doctrine, for any man to assure himself
that he shall stand to the end: for they teach that a man stands by free
will. So I grant it were foul presumption for any man to presume upon his
own strength: but it is no presumption for a man to rest upon the infallible
certainty of Gods promise, and the testimony of the holy spirit: for when the
Apostle says, the spirit himself witnesses with our spirit that we be the
sons of God: does he witness, that we are, and does he not witness that we
shall be so, even to the end? Can a man to day be the child of God, and to
morrow not? Moreover, there is no godly man which says, he is sure he shall
not sin: for all men sin daily. But the regenerate do know that through
the grace of God, they shall not so sin as to fall quite away from Christ, or
to have the life of GOD (whereof they are made partakers in the new birth)
utterly extinguished in them. Touching this point S. John in Chapter 3. of his
Epistle verse 9. says, Whosoever is borne of God, sins (...), for his seed
remains in him, and he can not s^^^, because he is borne of God. What can all
the Papists in the world say unto this? S. John says not that some of those
which are borne of God do stand to the end, but he says, Whosoever is borne
of God sins not. Then is it certain that he which does know he is borne of
God, and le^ by his spirit, does also know that he shall not fall unto
destruction. And for this he renders a reason, namely, that the seed of God
remains in him. The regenerating grace is never lost, if the seed of God
remain still in him that is borne of God, yea even when he does by infirmity
(as David did) fall into some grievous sins. Also he says, that such a one
can not sin, this seems an heard saying. Is there any man beyond whose
power it is for to sin? Is it so heard a matter for a man to do wickedly, if
he will endeavor? We must not take it that he which is borne of God will ever
endeavor for to commit sin. No, the grace of God does still so guide him,
that he does endeavor to please God: and though by ignorance and frailty he
do after go awrie and transgress, yet can he not fall from God: he can not
utterly loose his new birth. The reason which S. John renders is, because he
is borne of God. God is immortal: the seed of God by which his children are
regenerate is immor^^^ as it is written, 1. Pet. 1. The life of God begin in
them is immortal: how then can it be extinguished? or how can he that is borne
of God fall away unto perdition? Let all men then know, that where there is
the witness of the spirit, of the water, and the blood, there is the certainty
of salvation: according as S. John says, These things have I written unto you
that believe in the name of the son of God, that ye may know that ye have
eternal life, and that ye may believe in the name of the son of God. There
are yet another sort of men, I cannot tell what I should term them, that are
confuted by this place: they hold that a man for the trial of his faith,
whether it be lively or a dead faith, is not to look upon the fruits
thereof. It is enough (say they) that a man do believe in Jesus Christ: what
should he, or what can he examine further? Faith is Faith. Believe, and thou
shall be saved. These men do quite abolish, and that most wickedly and
profanely, the testimony of the three witnesses in earth. They bring in
Epicurisme and all carnal liberty. Let not the wise harken unto them, but
look for the testimony of the spirit, of the water, and of the blood within
them, if they will be assured that their faith is the true faith, and that they
shall come to life eternal. And now let us come to the last point, which is
that the faithful are by degrees to increase this certainty of their
salvation. To make an entrance into this matter, it is good for us to consider
that the spiritual birth is compared and likened to the natural birth: for as
in the natural birth there is first brought forth a little weak babe, which
has life, and does in time by degrees, even by little and little grow up unto
man's estate, so in the spiritual birth, such as be borne again in Christ,
they be first as little babes, they have indeed the life of GOD in them, but
they be marvelous weak. Read touching this, what S. Peter writes in his
first Epistle, in the beginning of the second Chap. how he does will these newborn babes to covet the sincere milk of the word, that they may grow thereby.
And likewise what S. Paul says to the Cor. 1. Epist. Chap. 4. Then as in the
natural things, as a man grows up in years, so he grows to a riper
knowledge and understanding in matters of this world: so they that grow up in
Christ, come to more and more assurance that they be led by the Sprite of God,
and that they shall be saved. Most true it is also; a^ no man can deny, that in
the natural things men do grow up from babes to man's estate by food and
sustenance, they grow also in knowledge and understanding by practice and
means. The same is to be said of the babes in Christ: they cannot grow up
without the Spiritual food, they cannot come to more assured knowledge of
their salvation, but by the means which God has ordained, and that is it which
S. John here leads unto, when he says, These things have I written unto
you, etc. that ye may know that ye have eternal life. Well then, seeing we
must grow up unto this happy assurance by means, let us in some few
particulars consider how: first seeing the word of GOD is the sincere milk by
which we are to be nourished, and to grow up, it is our part, as the same
Apostle wills, to covet the same. 1. Pet. 2.2. We do all know this, that
when a child is borne, if it be alive and in health, how much it does covet
the mothers breast, and how sweet the milk is unto it: in like manner, when a
man is borne of God in the new and heavenly birth, he has a vehement desire
and longing after Gods word, it is marvelous sweet and delectable unto him.
And questionles, all such as care not, nor labor not to know the heavenly
oracles, are void of the spiritual life: they be like unto those children which
are borne dead, which care not for the mothers breast. We must labor therefore
by reading and by hearing the word preached, by meditation and earnest prayer
to come to the true understanding and right use of the sacred word of God.
Mark further what S. Peter then teaches, how men shall attain to assurance
of salvation. He wills to give all diligence to minister in our faith virtue,
in virtue knowledge, in knowledge temperance, in te^perance patience, in
patience godliness, in godliness brotherly kindness, in brotherly kindness love:
for if these things be in you and abound, they shall make you that ye neither
shall be idle nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ: but
he that lacks these things is blind, and cannot see far off, and has
forgotten that he was purged from his old sins. 2, Pet. 1. ver. 5.6.7.8.9.
Here is the way prescribed, and by this men shall attain to the certainty of
their salvation, which S. Pet. there expresses in verse 10. and 11. after this
manner, Wherefore brethren give the more diligence, to make your calling and
election sure: for if you do such things you shall never fall. And by this
means an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. What can be spoken more clearly
for the certainty of salvation? and that by means and degrees men rise up unto
it? Does he not teach that by those things men shall make their calling and
election sure? What is that? but that they shall thereby know assuredly that
GOD has called them and chosen them unto eternal life. For doing those
things, he pronounces that they shall never fall. What is it the^ which makes
men to doubt that they shall not be saved? Is it not the conscience of sin
which is in them? Is it not that their heart is full of unclean vices, and
that the holy virtues are wanting? Now where the vices have their full power,
and do reign, there is a whole doubting, and worthily: for men may assure
themselves that in such an estate, they cannot be saved. Then where the work
of the spirit is begun, so that the vices are somewhat suppressed, and the
virtues begin to budde and grow up, there arises some comfort and
assurance, there the spirit, the water, and the blood begin to bear
record. This is a true record, but yet it seems not so clear, because the
remnants of sin are very strong and plenteous, and the virtues are, as I may
say, tender and weak. Now, as knowledge, and faith, and the power of the
spirit increases, as the deeds of the flesh are more and more mortified and
subdued, so the testimony of the spirit, of the water, and of the blood, is
more clear and strong. The more godly the heart and the mind grows, the
more assurance we have that we shall be saved. Many say, O what a blessed thing
it is, if a man attain to the knowledge and assurance of this salvation? How
willingly will that man love and obey God? how chearefullie will he bear all
troubles, and afflictions? I feel sometime great joy, and assurance of Gods
love toward me: but through mine own negligence, I have so many sins, as
that they take away my comfort, and make me doubt. Then consider what way we
are to overcome such doubts, and to come to that happy and blessed assurance.
Mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit. What is it that depriueth
thee of this happy estate, and makes thee to doubt? Is it not through the
want of the clear testimony in thee, of the three which bear record in
earth? Thou have many sins in thee, which thou see not, and it may be, very
great ones, as loftines of mind, vainglory, covetousness, self-love,
vanity of mind, contempt of spiritual things, and such like. Yea, further
it may be, that sundry things which thou deemest in thy self to be virtues,
examine them well by the light of Gods word, and thou shall find them to be
vices. So long as it is thus, there will be doubting: for where is the
testimony of the spirit with the water and the blood? Mortify the vices by
the spirit, use all diligence with fervent prayer, and all other good means,
and give not over, although thou seem sometimes to labor in vain: for in
continuance of time, thou shall gain much, and great peace shall arise in thy
consc ence, and the same springing more and more, as thou shall purge it from
dead works. O beloved, this is the way of salvation, enter into it, and give
not over, it is worth the labor. The Lord bless us, that we may be found
constant even to the end. Amen.

The end of the second Sermon.
THE THIRD Sermon.
Hebrews. 12. 16 Let there be no fornicator or profane person as Esau, which
for one portion of meat, sold his birthright.

17 For ye know that afterward, when he would have inherited the blessing, he
was rejected: for he found no place for repentance, though he sought it with
tears.


ALl wise men do account it a friendly part, when any do forewarne and show
unto them, how they may prevent and eschew some great danger that was coming
toward them. I trust therefore, that you will be the more attentive to this
scripture, in which not a mortal man, but the holy ghost, the spirit of
wisdom and truth, does set before us a most horrible danger, and such, as
if we fall into it, we are utterly undone for ever, without all recovery. Now,
that I may make it the more plain and easy unto you to behold, we may divide
it into three parts. The first is, a precept, or warning given unto us, to
take heed there be no profane person. It is in these words: Let there be no
fornicator, or profane person. I do omit to speak of the fornicator, who
is here joined with the profane person. The second part propounds an
example with the fact, whereby he shows himself to be profane, that we
may see what the sin of profaneness is, or whom the scripture calls
profane men: and it is in these words, as Esau, who for one portion of meat
sold his birthright. The third and last sets forth the severity of Gods
judgment and wrath upon him, which is the horrible danger that I spoke of,
into which they fall with him that follow Esau in profaneness. The words be
these: For ye know that afterward also, when he would have inherited the
blessing he was rejected, for he found no place for repentance, though he
sought it with tears.

Come then to the precept, Let there be no profane person. It may be demanded
whether this be given to every private and particular man, or to the Pastors
and guides of the flock, or to both? Doubtless to both. For as the shepherds
are to watch over the whole flock, to teach, to exhort, to admonish and to
rebuke even every particular man, as need shall require: so is every private
man to have a singular and special care to take heed to himself, that he
become not profane, otherwise, what shall all the diligence of the teachers
prevail? Yea, moreover all men are enjoined to consider one another, to
provoke unto love and good works, and to exhort one another, as we read in
the tenth Chapter of this Epistle to the Hebrews, ver, 24.25. For he that
shall see his brother, his friend, his neighbor, or familiar acquaintance
grow profane and so running into that danger of Gods heavy displeasure, here
set forth in the example of profane Esau, and shall not be moved therewith,
nor touched with care and love to admonish him, it argues that he is deeply
tainted with profaneness himself. He loves not God, he loves not aright his
own soul, that cares not whither other men walk. Therefore let the Pastors
use all their diligence to look to their flock, that profaneness creep not in
among them. Let every man watch over his own heart and conscience, and take
heed to himself, yea let him not neglect his neighbor, for this is an
undoubted thing, that Satan labors to make men profane, and prevails
much. To be profane is a most execrable thing, as it does appear by the
severity of Gods displeasure and indignation against it, expressed in the last
part of this text: but the most men do not know what it is. They do
understand that it is taken in very evil part when we say one is profane,
they know it is a sore accusation, but yet they can not tell the nature of the
sin, or wherein profaneness does consist. In the second place therefore,
here i^ an example set down of a very profane man, and what his profaneness
was. So that from hence we may learn what the sin is, which the holy ghost
warns us to take heed of. The man propounded for an example unto us is Esau,
the elder son of Isaake the great Patriarch. We are then warned to take
heed, that we be not like profane Esau, for if we be, we are sure to drink
of the same cup that he did: for God is no respecter of persons, if he spared
not him, he will not spare thee, if thou be found like him, but wherein did he
show himself profane? He sold his birth right for one portion of meat.
Herein lies the matter, this needs exposition: for by this we shall see
what profaneness is. God called Abraham from Vr of the Chaldeans, he made his
covenant with him, that he would be his God and the God of his seed: and also
that in his seed all the nations of the earth should be blessed. In this is
included that Christ the Savior of the world should come of his seed.
Abraham begat Isaake of Sarah. And unto Isaake by the express commandment
of God, willing Abraham to cast out the bondwoman and her son, the blessing
came. For in that place he says, In Isaake shall thy seed be called. Genesis 21.
ver. 12. Abraham therefore passed this blessing over, not unto Ismael his elder
son, but unto his son Isaake. Abraham being old, he took an oath of his
servant that he should go into the land of his Nativity, and from thence take
a wife for his son Isaake. He did bring Rebecca, whom Isaake took to wife,
she was married unto him twenty years before she had any child. For it is
written that Isaake was forty years old when he married, Gen, 25. ver. 20.
And he was threescore years of age, when Iaacob and Esau were borne, as we
read in the same Chapter verse 26. For Rebecca being all that while barren,
Isaake prayed to God for her, and the Lord heard him, and she conceived, and
the children straue in her womb, whereat she was troubled, and went to
enquire of the Lord touching the same. Where answer was made unto her by God,
two nations be in thy womb, and two peoples shall be separated from thy womb,
the one people shall be greater then the other people, and the greater shall
serve the lesser. Esau was the first borne, as we read in that Chapter: and so
the birthright, even the heavenly blessing, that God should be his God, and
Christ to come of his seed, was by the ordinary course of nature, to be
conveyed unto him. This blessing could be passed over but unto one of the two
sons, and Esau was the elder by birth. But then Moses does proceed and
shewerh how profane this Esau was. He says, that when they were grown up,
Esau followed hunting, and Iaacob was a plain man, and dwelt in tents. He
dwelt with cattle, that was the husbandry and trade of life which he followed.
Also, that which we translate, a plain man, is in the Hebrewe, a man of
simplicity, integrity, vprightnes, sincerity, or some dealing, such an one
was Iaacob. Esau came weary out of the field, and Iaakob had made pottage,
and he requested that he would give him some of them. Iaacob answers, sell me
then thy birthright. Esau said, behold, I am ready to die, and what is the
birthright to me? Then Iaakob said, swear unto me, and he swear unto him,
and sold his birthright to Iaakob. And when Iaakob had given him bread, and
pottage, he eat, and drunk, rose up, and went his way, and set light by, or
despised the birthright.

Now may you perceive wherein his profaneness lay, which God is so highly
offended withal, that he sets so light by the heavenly blessing, as that he
would sell it for a mess of pottage. Isaake had instructed them touching the
promise: Esau did know that the Savior of the world was promised with that
birthright: he is so earthly minded, for this world, and for his belly, that
he prefers a little commodity before it. In a word, he made little account
of spiritual graces and heavenly blessings in Christ, or of that covenant
which God had made with his grandfather Abraham, who lived until he was
fifteen years old, so old I say, was Esau when Abraham dyed. That covenant
being now renewed with Isaake his father, and that heavenly blessing and grace
of God, in which Isaake most rejoiced, and fully purposed in deed to convey
it over unto Esau, did he nothing esteeeme. He was then profane, because he
did esteem and love as a carnal worldling, the base and transitory things
of this world, more then the heavenly promise and blessing of GOD. You may now
discern what the sin of profaneness is. And so what it is which the holy
Ghost warns us to beware of, when he says, Let there be no profane person
as Esau. But some man may obiecte, how can there be any like Esawe, is there
any birthright now, or any such covenant and promise touching Christ to come?
If not, how can this example of Esau be applied to us, can any be like him,
when there is not the matter, wherein they may be like? I grant that there is
no birthright now, as there was between Jacob and Esau, or covenant touching
Christ to come of their seed: but yet the covenant made with Abraham belongs
unto us, as to have this birthright, to become the sons of the most high GOD
through Christ the blessed seed, to be heirs of life everlasting. This is it
which is set before us, and all such as do set their hearts upon carnal
pleasures, honors and riches of this world, loving them, and seeking after
them, more then after this heavenly blessing and grace of God in Christ,
delighting more in bellie-cheere, then in the Gospel, which is the glad
tidings of salvation, what are they but profane persons, even like Esawe,
which made more account of one portion of meat, then of his birthright? Yea,
but Esau sold his birthright for a trifle. May some man obiecte and say,
surely all the lusts and pleasures of sin, which are but for a season: all
the riches and honors of this world which are transitory, upon which men set
their hearts, and are drowned in them, are but trifles, yea even a mess of
pottage in comparison of the heavenly birthright offered in the gospel, which
many set light by.

And if the great things of this world might somewhat excuse, as to say, men
are not so profane as to sell the kingdom of heaven for a matter of nothing:
yet there be many which their own conscience do tell them, if they would
examine it, that they more set by a pair of old shoes, then by the glorious
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. The rich treasures of the kingdom of GOD are
opened and offered in the same, even as goodly pearls of incomparable value:
but to such worldly minded me^ they be powered out as before swine, which tread
them under their feet, they set light by them, their noses must into the
trough to their swil, and unto the porrage pot with Esau. Is not this a great
profaneness? Is not this a wonderful blindness that men should discern no more
of spiritual and heavenly things, then swine do of pearls, which they will
tread in the mire? And yet Christ speaks of some that are more profane,
whom he calls dogs: a dog is counted a most profane thing: and as our
savior Christ says, Cast not pearls before swine, because they still tread
them under their feet: so he says, Give not holy things to dogs, least they
turn again and all to rent you. The profane dog goes further then the
profane swine: for the swine is quiet and will but tread the heavenly pearls
under his feet, whereas the dog does turn again, bite and tear those
which give holy things unto them. These be such as do reproach, rail upon,
and persecute them that bring the Gospel. Thus may you see in what account the
profane persons like Esau be in before God and his Angels, when Christ calls
them dogs and swine, Math. 7. verse. 6. The holy Ghost (as you see) warns
that there be no profane person like Esau: as who say. It is an horrible thing
for any one such to be found in the Church: and yet alas, now they swarm every
where: how many towns and villages may a man come to in this land, where he
shall scarce find two or three which zealously embrace the Gospel? They be
honest men, they follow their worldly business, which in it self indeed is not
dishonest: no more was it for Esau to eat a mess of pottage when he was
hungry. But in the mean time together with their honest dealing, they do as
Esau for a mess of pottage sell their birthright, because they love and seek
their belly, and the things of this present world, more then the honor and
high dignity of the heavenly birth and sons of God. Is not this a most
lamentable case, that men should be so profane? Now to the third part, which
sets forth the heavy judgment of God upon Esau, and so in him, even as it
were in a table, painteth out unto us in lively colors what fore vengeance
abides for all such profane worldlings as sell their birthright, that is, to
fill their belly with some dainties for the present time, set light by the grace
of God. The words are thus, For ye know that afterward when he would have
inherited the blessing, he was rejected, and found no place of repentance,
though he s^^ght it with tears. The sum of the matter is as you see, that
whereas Esau before had with a profane mind set so light by the birthright,
that he sold it for a trifle; now afterward, when he was desirous to inherit
the blessing of that birthright, he was rejected: yea he cried and wept to
obtain it, and missed thereof: he was then as a profane man rejected and cost
off unto condemnation. This is the heavy judgment of God especially, that
though he did eue^ with tears seek to have that blessing and heavenly grace,
yet was he cast off. So it is then, that these profane men, which set so light
by the grace of God offered in the Gospel, may be touched in conscience, and
desire, when they are to depart out of this world, that they might have the
dignity of the sons of God: yea they may with tears and bitter crying crave
it, and yet be rejected. Is not here then a wonderful great and fearful
danger, which we are warned to take heed of? And being indeed so great, yet
men do not know that there is any danger, but imagining God will hear them,
how profanely soever they have lived. But to open the matter, we must have
recourse unto the history set down by Moses, Genes. 27. Isaake was old and his
sight failed him: and he called Esau his elder son, and willed him to take
his bow and quiver, and to go hunt some venison, and to make him such meat as
he knew he loved: then to bring it to him, that he might eat of it, and
bless him: Isaake (as I told you before) had a full and resolute purpose to
bestow and to convey over the heavenly blessing unto Esau. And indeed this
Esau made now full account that he should have it: for what now should let? See
what hope of felicity the worldly profane: men are sometime led into, from
which when they fall, it is the more grievous unto them. When a man is in
exceeding great heat and ready to fainte with thirst, and has a cup of cold
drink in his hand, even lifting it up to his mouth, and then it is plucked
from him, what a grief is it? as the Poets have feigned, that some of the
pains of hell be in such manner: so Esau here comes, even ready to have the
blessing put into his hands: but when he looks assuredly to have it, it is
gone: for see, Rebecca who loved Iaakob, and worthily, heard when this was
spoken to Esau: she wills Iaakob to go to the flock, to fetch her two good
kiddes, and she made such meat with them as Isaak loved: she put the garment of
Esau upon Iaakob, she put the skins of the kiddes upon his hands and upon
the bare of his neck, because Esau was heary: she put the meat in his hand,
and so Iaakob went in to his father, and said he was Esau: he felt him, because
he said, the voice was the voice of Iaakob, but the hands were the hands of
Esau, and so he blessed him. When he was gone forth, then came Esau with the
meat which he had prepared, and craved the blessing: Isaak demanded who he was,
and he told him that he was Esau. Then was Isaak astonished and afraid
exceedingly, and showed him how his brother had come by fraud, and taken it
away: he told him that he had blessed Iaakob, and that he must be blessed. Then
did Esau cry out with a great and an exceeding bitter cry, craving that he
might be blessed. And (as we read after in that Chapter, He lift up his voice
and wept: But yet Isaake does not alter, there is no place for repentance;
Isaake saw now that the matter was of God, and so confirmed it unto Iaakob, and
so Esau was rejected. Thus may you briefly see how the matter stood: but now
it shall not be impertinent, to open the circumstances more at large in all
these four persons, Isaak Rebecca, Iaakob, and Esau. First touching Isaake, it
is a thing that may be wondered at, how he should be so blinded with natural
affection, that he could not epsy the profaneness of Esau, but loved him
better then he loved Iaakob, who was an exceeding godly, and a very reverend
holy man. It is more to be wondered at, that he was so carried in his affection
for a worldly commodity: for Moses chap. 25. notes the cause expressly, why
Isaak loved Esau, even because the venison was in his mouth. He was led
hereunto by the sweetness of that meat which Esau hunted. But in deed, it
is most of all to be wondered at, that he was so far blinded in his natural
affection, as that he would, contrary to the oracle of God, Chap. 25. which
said, the greater should serve the lesser, seek to derive the blessing unto
Esau,

Here we may see, that the holy Patriarchs were not without their frailties and
imperfections, they had not the flesh so far mortified in them, but that the
remnantes thereof did remain, and now and then bear a great stroke. It was by
grace and free pardon of their sins, that they were saved. Look upon Lot,
look upon Ahraham the father of the faithful, look upon David, and you shall
find the same. As we may hereby on the one side take comfort, when we behold
our own corruption, which does so often lead us awrie: so on the other side
it ought to shake of all security, and stir us up to prayer and watching,
least we be overtaken by our corrupt nature, and fall into those things which
dishonor God, and provoke him to plague us. For thus we may reason, if the
holy Patriarch Isaake, a man so highly replenished with the spirit of God, had
notwithstanding such corruption of the flesh remaining in him, which did so
daungerously blind him, and carry him awrie: what shall become of us, if God
do not by his grace and holy spirit prevent us, which are full of the strong
remnantes of so many noisome lusts in the flesh? Whither shall we fall, if we
be but even a little left unto our selves? Are not we in danger of falling so
deep as never to rise again? Also, if so holy a man as Isaake was blinded in
his son with natural affection, and for so small a commodity? How are other
to fear that they be not also blinded in their children, when they be
profane, and so do not correct, nor by wholesome admonition withdraw them from
the way of perdition? Now touching Rebecca, she loved her son Iaacob, she
would have the blessing to come upon him. Doubtless she had good cause so to
do: for Iaacob was an holy man, and the Oracle of God was for him. Thus far
Rebecca was right: but now that she deuiseth a slight to deceive Isaake, and
sends Iaacob her son with a lie unto him, therein appears her frailty,
she can not be excused. She had indeed as I said before, the Oracle on her
side, before the children were borne, God preferred the younger, this she did
believe, but now to bring it to pass, she will help God. She heard Isaake
tell Esau that he would bless him, and she sees no way how this should be
altered but by a cunning device. We may behold the like in Sarah the mother of
the faithful. God made his covenant with Abraham, that in his seed all the
nations of the earth should be blessed, she believed this promise, but she
began to wax old, she grew toward fourscore, she had been barren all her
youth, it seemed a difficult matter how it should be brought to pass,
therefore she does devise how to further it. She had an handmaide named Hagar,
she gives her unto Abraham that he might have a child by her. This turned to
her own grief, for when Hagar saw she had conceived, she became so proud
that she despised Sarah. Surely, when our inventions are brought in to further
the works of God, they do often times turn to our grief, although this
devise of Rebecca took effect. And now touching Iaacob that so much desired
the blessing even as an holy man that preferred heavenly things before
earthly, how can he be excused in this his deed, that he must feign and lie?
There does remain Esau now, what fault can be found in his doing touching this
action? He obeys his father, who willed him to go hunt him some veneson, he
prepares it and brings it, and craves of his father to bless him. Isaake
as we have seen was led awrie by natural affection? when he minded to bless
Esau. Also Rebecca, she had her fault in that she devised such a slight to
deceive Isaake, and so to have him bless Iaacob, when he thought he had
blessed Esau. Iaacob was in the same fault with his mother. Only Esau at this
time deals so as he cannot in this thing be blamed. The other three are dear
to God, and Esau is rejected. What may we note in this? Surely that it is not
the outward doing of some one action, or of a few which declare a man to be
righteous before God, for this profane man can not be blamed here in his one
outward deed. And so let men know that all worldlings and profane dispisers
of holy things, do not that which is acceptable before God, when they make a
glorious show of some goodly deeds: for before the fruit can be good, the
tree must be good: before the actions can be such as shall please God, the
heart and conscience within must be sincere, even purged from profaneness and
filthy uncleanness.

What is all the Pharisaicall alms, fasting, and prayer of hypocrites? Mat. 6.
What if a man should give all his goods to the poor, and have not love. 1.
Cor. 13. Again, we may mark on the other side, how, where the heart is
sanctified with a lively faith, where there is the true love of God, and the
thankful embracing of his spiritual blessings, there the particular errors,
slippes and defects do not cast such out of the favor of God, or make them
not to be holy and righteous men. Then from hence let us be wise in
discerning: Esau was not an holy man for his upright carriage in one action?
Neither were Isaake, Rebecca and Iaacob unholy for swaruing in some
particulars. At this day you shall behold in those, which from their heart
love and embrace the Gospel, sundry imperfections, take even the best that
you can find. For are any more holy then the great Patriarks were? And from
some of Gods elect in all times great offenses have broken forth: take heed
that for some such particular faults we judge them not as men rejected of God,
or over severely judge them wicked and ungodly. And on the other part, you
shall see the very enemies of the Gospel, sundry of them which make a goodly
show in outward deeds, they be profane as Esau, and all the show of their
works is nothing before God.

Well, now to the severity of Gods wrath upon Esau, for that is the principal
matter which we have in hand. He was rejected, he found no place for
repentance, though he sought it with tears. What is this? Esau had the
repulse, when he came and would have inherited the blessing: and then seeking
even with tears to obtain it, Isaake could not be moved to alter that which
he had done, there was no place to repent him, and so to call it back again
from Iaakob, who had got it by sleight. For now was Isaake stricken with an
exceeding fear, and even as it were, awaked out of the error of his natural
affection; and saw that the thing came of God: for that Isaake cannot alter the
thing he had done, nor repent, it proceeds from God. Mark then the
severity of God: Esau had set light by the birthright, so profane he was,
that he loved the life present more: yet when he does consider of it more
advisedly, (...) judges it to be a great thing, and wishes so earnestly to
have it, that when he saw it taken from him, he cried out bitterly and wept,
but his crying and his tears do not move God (...) show any pity or
compassion toward him. Therein now lies the matter. For God laid a great
terror upon Isaake, and held his mind, that although he loved Esau dearly,
yet he saw now, that he might not give the blessing unto him. What was there in
all the world which Isaake loved so tenderly as he loved his son Esau. How
can it be then, but he must needs be moved much with the doleful cry that
he uttered, and with those tears that he shed? Why was not his wrath kindled
against Iaakob? Why did he not call for him, and tell him that as he had no
meaning to bless him, so he would now revoke it, and bestow the same where he
did purpose, yea, and thought he had bestowed it? All men may easily perceive,
that this did proceed from the severity of Gods displeasure. Isaak like an
holy man, and as a godly father had carefully instructed his sons in the
covenant, and showed unto the^ what incomparable treasures of felicity were
included therein, Iaakobs mind was inflamed with a burning desire thereof, but
Esau, though he understood the doctrine, yet set little by it, and that is the
cause why God was so angry with him. If any shall think, was this so great a
cause to move the Lord so to wrath, that he would never forgive him? Judge of
it thus. If a prince offer unto a subject great honor, and it be despised,
will it not be hardly taken? Now, when the king of kings does set before
miserable sinful men the high dignity, glory, and felicity, even to become
his sons and heirs with Christ of the eternal kingdom, and they esteem
baselie thereof, how can he but be exceedingly displeased at such a profane
contempt? Let us not then marvel that this profane man is rejected, but
rather take heed to our selves least we be like him, and so be forsaken of God
as he was. If he cried and wept and could not be heard, surely, if we take not
heed, we may so highly offend, that when we cry and weep, we shall not be
heard. There can no heavier judgment of God light upon a man then this. The
sum (as it were a botomlesse gulf of al miseries and plagues) is contained
in it: as when a man shall call and cry out bitterly with tears for the
blessing of God, and partaking of life eternal, and be rejected. Here is a
pit to fall into, here is a danger unrecoverable, yea here is a state and
condition which may make us all to tremble and quake to come nigh it. For if
men will quake when they look down from the top of an high tower to the
ground. If when there is danger of falling: how much more are we to fear at
this? There a man may fall so high, that he dashe in pieces upon the ground,
and so be deprived of this natural life: but here is the loss of life
eternal, and that with the sustaining of endless sorrows. It may be some will
take it to be an hard collection, to gather from this example of Esau: who
cried to his father with b^^ter cryings to have the blessing: and also sought
it with tears, and was rejected, that therefore men may call and cry to God,
and even with sobbing and tears crave pardon of their sins, and yet not be
heard. Esau did not pray to God but sought the blessing at the hands of his
father: and shall a general doctrine be drawn from a particular example? I
have showed before, that the rejecting came from God: far was it from the
natural affection of Isaake so to have rejected Esau, if it had been in his
own power. Also, we may see that the holy ghost does propound this example in
one man for a general doctrine: even this, that such men as like Esau
profanely despise the graces of God shall afterward cry bitterly and weep,
and call for the blessing of God, and yet be rejected of him. And to speak
the truth, the holy word of God does teach us this only by the example of
Esau: but delivers it forth in flat and plain terms, as a general
doctrine. In the first Chapter of the Proverbs, Solomon brings in wisdom,
preaching, and calling upon men to receive her instruction. And then she
complains that they despise her counsel, and so utters a terrible
threatening, that she will laugh at their destruction, and mock when their
fear comes. She says, they shall call upon her, but she will not answer,
they shall seek her early, but shall not f^^de her. With many more speeches
there this matter is set forth. Christ is that wisdom of the father, which
calls there unto men, to return unto him, to embrace his laws and holy
doctrine, offering all spiritual blessings in heavenly things: but men set
light by his counsel, they be addicted to the world, and to the vain
pleasures of sin, and so with profane minds despise the heavenly gifts and
graces, This does move his indignation so far, that he says, he will be so
far from pitying them is their calamity, that he will laugh at their
destruction, and mock them in their fear and distress. Yea, he shows
plainly that they will call upon him for help, but he will not answer,
they shall also early seek him, but not find him.

Can any thing be more plain then this? do you not mark the reason? Such as
will not hear the Lord calling so earnestly to them, and offering so great
kindness, he will not regard nor hear them, when in their distress they shall
cry unto him. In the 28. chapter of the Prou. ver. 9. it is written, He that
turns away his ear^ f^^ hearing the law, even his prayer shall be
abominable. Is not this a most fearful thing? Is not thi^ the same also in
effect with that which is hee^^ spoken of Esau. Then the doctrine is general.
Let every man then take heed to it. God does^ now offer unto us grace, he has
sent unto us the word of reconciliation: he opens unto us the heavens, and
calls us with an holy calling: then take heed we be not so profane, a^^o
set light by it: for if we do, it may be that we shall afterward seek it
with tears, and yet miss thereof. Men cannot believe this, and therefore they
live dissolutely, trusting that at their end they shall call to God for grace,
and so obtain pardon. O poor wretches, if their prayer it self then be
abominable, where is their help? what shall become of them? I pray you le^ (...)
repeat it again. The Lord God does call upon men to turn unto him from their
wicked and sinful ways, he promises to become their father, as it is written
in the Prophet, and alleged by the Apostle, 2. Cor. 6. ver. 17.18. Therefore
come out from among them, says the Lord, and separate your selves, and touch
no vnclea^ thing, and I will receive you, and I will be you father, and you
shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord God almighty, and being
sons, they be the heirs of God, and fellow heirs with Christ, Romans 8.
Now, while this dignity and glory is propounded and set before them, men
prophanelie despise the same, they do more esteem a mess of pottage, they
satisfy their vain lusts and carnal appetites: they have all threatenings in
derision: they will repent and call for grace, when age or sickness shall take
hold of them: they hope to do even as well then as the godliest of them all
that live upon the earth. Thus with Esau they fall to their pottage, what care
they for the birthright? Well, sickness comes, terror of conscience arises
from the sight and remembrance of their sins in which they have walked, they
must now come before the high Judge, they wish now that they had never
committed such abominable and filthy vices: where is their refuge? only in
prayer. They cry out with fear, with horror, and with tears. And where are
they then: if this their prayer be abominable to God? Ye see the place which I
alleged, Prou. 28. Which tells us so. They cry and call now unto Christ,
and he does mock them, and laugh at their destruction, as he says he will,
Prou. 1. Do you not see now what a woeful case these profane men are in,
which now despise the grace of God, that the prayer and the repentance which
they trust unto is abominable. This is hard will some man say. For do not they
esteem highly of Gods blessings which weep and cry to have it? Again does
not the Scripture teach that God will forgive at what time soever a sinner does
repent hi^^ of his sin? Shall we say that they do not repent which cry with
tears to GOD for mercy? To this I answer, that Esau would feign have had
the blessing at the last, but that does not argue but that he was profane. Who
is i^ that would not willingly be saved? Or who (...) so profane, but that he
would be glad to escape from the damnation of hell? And touching their crying
with tears, it is not true repentance no more then that in Esau. He wep^ not
for any detestation of his profaneness, b^^ because he had lost the blessing.
Even so these do weep and cry out, not that they loath and hate the sin,
by which they have dishonored GOD, and defiled themselves, but because their
conscience does terrify them with the loss of heaven, and with the fear and
horror of hell. O beloved learn to know true repentance, least we be seduced
and carried awrie to destruction.

It will be objected further, that the holy Scriptures do testify, how some
have repented at their end and have been saved: as for example the thief
upon the cross. And Christ in the Parable of the man that hired laborers
into his Vineyarde, does teach that some come at the eleauenth hour. Most
true it is, that God always has, and does convert some even toward the end
of their life, when as they have spent a long time in wickedness, for thereby
the Lord does declare the riches of his mercy drawing men even out of hell,
which of themselves would never have returned. But shall every man therefore
presume that God will do the same to him? He does open the eyes of some,
giving them faith and repentance which have lived in blindness and ignorance
al their life: will he therefore hear thee which have for a great part of thy
life, yea it may be even from thine infancy, been taught, and have despised
the grace of GOD, boldning thy self in sinful ways, and saying thou will call
for mercy and pardon at thine end. Yea thou say that thou have known many
which have lived very wickedly, which have made as good an end as the
godliest, calling even to their last breath for mercy, and for pardon. Well
Esau, trust not to such kind of repentance, think not that such must needs be
saved, because they weep and cry for pardon: but hear what Christ has
spoken, Ma^^^e the seventh. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my (...)
which is in heaven. Turn, turn, and do the will of God while thou have time,
(...) godly life, that so thou may ma^e a godly and a happy end. Let us
call upon God for this wisdom and grace.

The end of the third Sermon.
THE FOVRTH Sermon.
Romans. 6. 1 What shall we say then? shall we continue still in sin that
grace may abound? God forbid.

2 How shall we that are dead to sin yet live therein?

3 Know ye not that all we which have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have
been baptized into his death?

4 We are buried then with him by baptism into his death, that like as Christ
was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we should walk in
newness of life.

5 For if we be grafted with him to the similitude of his death, even so shall
we be to the similitude of his resurrection.

6 Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of
sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin.

7 For he that is dead is freed from sin.

8 Wherefore if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with
him.

9 Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead dies no more, death has no
more dominion over him.

10 For in that he dyed, he dyed once to sin, but in that he lives, he
lives to God.

11 Likewise think ye also, that ye are dead to sin, but are alive to God
in Jesus Christ our Lord.

12 Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal body that you should obey
it, in the lusts thereof.

13 Neither give ye your members as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin,
but give your selves unto God, as they that are alive from the dead, and give
your members as weapons of righteousness to God.

14 For sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the law
but under grace.


IN the former part of this Epistle, from the 16. verse of the first Chapter
unto the end of the fifth, S. Paul has disputed of justification: and now in
the beginning of this sixth Chapter, he enters into a discourse touching
sanctification. These be two principal points of doctrine, most necessary
for all Christians to be well instructed and grounded in. I suppose that some
do not understand the difference between justification, and sanctification:
it is requisite therefore that I touch that first. Christ, as the Apostle says,
Is our righteousness and our sanctification 1. Cor. 1. ver. 30. Our
righteousness, is our justification: so that by that Scripture, it is evident
that justification and sanctification be two several things. In deed the
Papists do confound them, or make them both one, while they make our
sanctification, or righteousness inhaerent, to be our justification. To be
justified, is to be made righteous from al guiltiness of sin, and so to be
acquit and cleared from the curse and penalty thereof. To be sanctified, is
to be drawn out of the yoke and bondage of sin and sinful lusts, to the
service of God in true holiness. But this is not enough to make it clear unto
every man's understanding what the difference is between them: I must therefore
speak further in this matter. First therefore concerning justification, S.
Paul before in this Epistle, calls it the righteousness of God, and says,
it is revealed in the Gospel from faith to faith, Chapter 1. verse 17. And
then shows that all men both Jews and Gentiles, are of themselves grievous
sinners, void of righteousness. The true belieuers are justified or made
righteous in Christ. So the righteousness of God, is that righteousness which
God gives unto us in Christ, which is called the righteousness of faith,
because faith does apprehend it, Chapter 3. ver. 21.22? We may also say that
it consists of two parts: the one is the free forgiveness of sins through
Christ's blood, even of grace Chapter 3. ver. 24.25. For until there be a
satisfaction for sin, and so the guiltiness thereof purged away, there can
be none just before God. Then further the other part is this, we are bound to
keep the whole law, which we break, and Christ in our nature has perfectly
fulfilled it, and his obedience is imputed to those that do believe in him:
wherefore he says, as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by
the obedience of one shall many also be made righteous, Chapter 5. ver. 19.

Thus may we see what justification is, even the purging away of all our sins,
and of all spot of sin by Christ's blood: and the imputation of his obedience
in fulfilling the law. Thus all that believe are made righteous in Christ.
This is it which he writes in another place, saying, he made him to be sin
for us, which knew no sin, that we in him might be made the righteousness
of God. 2. Cor. 5. ver. 21. Then sanctification is that which is called the
new birth, repentance, the putting off the old man, and the putting on the
new. The mortifying and putting off sin, and all sinful lusts of the
flesh, and the walking in the virtues of the spirit. This is also called
righteousness, it is the righteousness in Here^^, o^ that does stick in the
faithful, the righteousness which consists in the godly deeds of men. Of
this, the holy Apostle in the fi^ Chapters disputes at large. And the sum of
this matter is this, that justification in Christ and sanctification do go
inseparable together. There is no man which has his sins pardoned by the
blood of Christ, and that has the obedience of Christ reckoned to be his: but
he has also the grace of sanctification, he has unfeigned repentance, he
renounceth vice, and follows virtue. Many do part these two asunder, for
they do very willingly hearken to this, that Christ has by his blood, made
satisfaction for our sins, and that we in his obedience shall be made
righteous before God, this is comfortable: but when they hear that he has
redeemed us, that we should deny our selves, forsake our sinful lusts, and
lead a godly life according to the rules of his holy will, that is, sower,
and unpleasant. Let such give ear unto S. Paul, for he does by two arguments
in this Chapter, which are drawn even from two principles in reason, prove,
that whosoever is not sanctified in Christ, he is not justified in him, he may
imagine that his sins shall be forgiven him; but they shall not? a matter of
very great waight^ let us then come unto it. What shall we say then (faith S.
Paul) Shall we continue still in sin, that grace may abound? Here is the
whole question, here is the state of the ^^sse which is to be decided. The
words of themselves are so plain, that they need no opening, but only in
this, to see how this question is made, or depends upon some matter vttred in
the former Chapter. You may see there, how the Apostle at the 12. verse,
enters into a comparison between Adam and Christ, which are as two stocks,
or fountains: from the one, that is from Adam, there has sprung and flowed
sin and death over all men: from the other, that is Christ, there springs,
and flows righteousness and life. Herein they be like, that both of the^ do
make those which are theirs, partakers of that which they have. But herein they
be unlike, that Adam deriueth sin, and that unto death, into all them that
are his, even into all his posterity, by nature, or by a natural propagation,
for they have all sinned in him: Christ bestows his righteousness upon those
which be his unto life eternal, by grace, by a free gift, they have it not as
Adams children have their sin from him by a natural spreading, but by
imputation? Also, there be other differences: as namely, all are made guilty,
and cast down by one offense of Adam: but Christ by his righteousness freely
given unto us, does not only absolve us from that one offcnee, but from all
other sins, which we have committed. And the righteousness of Christ
imputed by grace, is of greater power to save us, then the sin of Adam was
for to condemn us. Seeing then, that as by the disobedience of Adam, many were
made sinners, so by the obedience of Christ, many are made righteous. Why came
the law? To this Saint Paul answers, that the law entered, that sin might
abound, but where sin abounded, there grace has superabounded. The greater
the sin was, the more plenteous was the grace of God in Christ, in taking it
away. That as sin had reigned unto death, so grace should reign through
righteousness unto life eternal, by Jesus Christ: Then the more that sin
abounded, the greater is the riches of the grace of God in Christ that does
pardon it, and so the greater is the praise and glory of God. All this is
true. Now hereupon the wisdom of the flesh does argue thus. If the more the
sin be increased, the greater is the glory of God in pardoning it, then is
it good for those which believe in Christ to continue still in sin, to
commit all abundance of sin, that so God may have the greater glory.

This is a pleasant doctrine to man's corrupt nature, and much followed in all
places: for albeit you shall not hear many use the same words which S. Paul
sets down, to bolden themselves to continue in sin: yet mark i^ well,
and you shall perceive that there is the same reason in effect. Great
multitudes, as you know, do profess Christ, and they say, they look to have
all their sins forgiven, only be his death and bloudshedding. Look upon then
lives, and you shall find that the greatest pa^^ are eue^ overwhelmed, and lie
as it were drowned in all manner of unclean and abominable vices. Deal
particularly with any one, and say but thus unto him, These foul sins which
you continue in and daily commit, are such as God does threaten vengeance
against: will he not answer? I know they be grievous sins, but I hope to have
them al forgiven me through the blood of Jesus Christ: yea, are there not many
which will say, I hope I shall call for mercy and pardon at the last? This is
the doctrine of the holy Ghost, the grace of God which brings salvation, has
appeared unto all men, teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
to live soberly, justly and godly in this present world, Tit. 2. ver. 11.12.
Behold how contrary to the doctrine of GOD such men be. He says that the grace
given us in Christ, does teach us to deny all wicked ways, and to live a godly
^^fer and they say, because there is pardon in Christ, we will continue still
in our wickedness, and ^all for mercy at the last. Al such men does the holy
Apostle here quite cut down, pro^^^g indeed that they have no part in Christ,
they do but deceive themselves. Also he does here meet with the Papists,
which are enemies to the cross of Christ, and can by no means endure to hear
that we have our justification only in Christ: but they will have men's own
good works and merits to justify them before God. And thus they cry out
against us: you open a gappe unto all loosenes and licentiousnes of life, you
destroy all zeal and care of good works, when you teach that men are justified
only by faith in Christ: for if a man shall have all his sins forgiven by
the grace of Christ, what will he ear what sins he commit? Also if a man
shall be made righteous only by grace in Christ, and not by his own good
deeds, who will care to do any? This also I say, does S. Paul here meet
withal, showing and proouing by strong reasons, that all they which have a true
faith in Christ, and so have al their sins forgiven by his blood, and have
also his obedience imputed unto them, and be fully justified, cannot but live a
godly life. Justification in Christ and true sanctification cannot be parted
asunder: first therefore propounding the question, Shall we continue still in
s^^^ that grace may abound? he rejects it with detestation, saying, God
forbid: as if he should say, It is a thing that ought not to enter into our
thoughts. And then he propounds the first reason, in these words, How shall
we that are dead to sin yet live therein? This is a principle in the light of
natural reason, so that if a man have not lost the common understanding, he
cannot deny it. We all do know that contraries cannot be together in the same
subject, at one time, in the same part, and in the same respect, but the one
necessarily does exclude the other, and if the one be, it is impossible that
the other should also be. And that is the cause why S. Paul says, How can we
which are dead to sin, yet live therein? As much as to say, it is impossible:
for to be alive to sin, and to be dead to sin, at the same time (which are
so flat and perfect contraries) cannot be. He that is alive is not dead, and he
that is dead is not alive. Thus now the matter stands: we, that is all true
Christians, are dead to sin, how can we then live to sin? And so if it
be impossible for a man which is a right Christian, and therefore dead to
sin, yet to live in it, how should we continue still in sin that grace may
abound? Well, may some man say, This is a clear case, that such contraries as
these, to be alive and to be dead, cannot stand together: but how shall th^^
appear, that a true Christian of necessity is dead to sinn^ for S. Paul has
but affirmed that we are de^d to sin: and therefore in the (...) words he
proves it: for the death to sin being proved, the life to sin is thereby
of necessity excluded. Know ye not (says he) that all we which have been
baptized into Jesus Christ, have been baptized into his death? Lo here is
his proof: and this is a plain, a strong and an invincible demonstration,
that every true christian is dead to sin, and so by consequence cannot
possibly be alive to sin. It is drawn from the use of Baptism, or from that
which Baptism does represent unto us. It represents that we are ingrafted
into Christ, and therefore he says, Know you not that we which have been
baptized into Jesus Christ? Being then baptized into Christ, the holy
Baptism does represent unto us that we are washed in his blood, and so have
the free remission of our sins, but also that in him we have the new, the
spiritual and the heavenly birth. Now the death of Christ is as it were the
fountain of this regeneration: and therefore the Apostle puts us in mind
that we are baptized into the death of Christ. He that is baptized must
remember that he is baptized into Christ crucified, and therefore into the
death of Christ.

To what end then, was the death of Christ? Not only to make satisfaction for
sins but also to destroy, and utterly to abolish s^nne in his mistical body,
which is the Church (...) John. ^ verse 8. Sin there; is called the works of
the devil, which the son of God was made manifest to loose; that is, to
dissolve, to break and so utterly to destroy. Mark well then Christ died to
slay sin: he had none of his own to slay: And thereupon it must needs
follow, that his death, is to slay the sins of those which be ingrafted into
him. This is it that Saint Paul says, we are baptized into his death, that
is, we are baptized into Christ crucified, that the power of his death may be
in us, to crucify, and to slay our sin. He the^ that has not the bare sign
alone in baptism, but the very efficacy of the grace represented, must
needs, without all controversy be dead unto sin. And therefore S. Paul does
insinuate how grossly blind they are, eue^ in the principles of the Christian
religion, in the doctrine of baptism, which suppose that a man can be a true
Christian, and yet continue in sin. Do ye not know (says he) as if he should
say, It is a strange thing, if ye know not this, that all which have been
baptized into Christ Jesus, have been baptized into his death? Know ye not that
they which do die with Christ, do die unto sin? how then can they live unto
sin? or how can (...) be a true Christian that continues still in sin S.
Paul (as I said) did propound this as a strange matter, that any should be
found so ignorant and blind, as not to know that all which are baptized into
Christ Jesus, are baptized into his death, and so have sin slain in them,
are become dead to sin, and therefore cannot any longer live therein. But in
our days it is no wonder: for the most which glory in their baptism,
understand as much as a block, what the doctrine of Baptism is: for if they
did, would they continue still in so many wicked and abominable vices, and yet
imagine that they be true Christians? What know they that every true Christian
is baptized into the death of Christ, and that the power of his death is to
slay sin in them? Can they be both alive to sin, and dead to sin?

Thus we see that the first argument of the Apostle, but he does open it more
at large in the words that follow, because it is so necessary a matter for
all men to be well taught and instructed in. It is the new birth figured by
baptism, of which the Apostle makes three parts, the one from the death of
Christ, an other from his burial, the third from his resurrection. We are
buried with him by Baptism, says he, into his death, that like as Christ was
raised up from the dead by the glory of the father; so we should walk in newnes
of life: you se^ it plainly here expressed, that in our baptism these three
things are represented, namely, that we die with Christ, that we are buried
with Christ, and that we rise with Christ. How i^ this to be taken? Thus. The
death of Christ unto which we are baptized does slay sin, which is called our
old man: this is the first step, for until sin be slain in us, we can not
live unto righteousness. And there is nothing of power to kill sin, but the
death of Christ. The second step is burial, for when a body is dead, it does
by little and little rotte and consume away in the grave. Even so our old man
or sin, having received a deadly wound by the death of Christ, remains
still as a dead carcass in those which be in Christ, and by the virtue of
Christ's burial, does even as it were by little and little too, rotte and
consume. This is certain, that whosoever is in Christ crucified, and so the
power of Christ's death in him, sin is slain in him: yet sin is not by and
by utterly abolished, but remains in him, and by the virtue of Christ's
burial is consumed. We may not think then that so soon as ever a man is in
Christ, that sin is utterly abolished in him: but in continuance of time it
diminishes and does become less and less. What then if a man have sin as
strong in him this year, as he had the last year, and the last year as
strong as ten years past? Will not any man say, that the burial of Christ
has not taken effect in him? Shall a dead body being buried, rotte and consume
nothing at all in so long time? Well if there be no power of his burial, there
has been no power of his death, the body of sin is still alive and not
slain, for a body does not consume so long as it is alive. If it last, surely
it is alive, and thereby we may be sure that he in whom sin is not
diminished, is not partaker of the burial of Christ, and then is he also not
partaker of his death, for they go inseperably together: wherefore S. Paul
says, We are buried with him by baptism into his death. Such a man then as
does continue in sin, has received only the outward sign in baptism, but
not the power of Christ crucified. Let all men beware of this, for if they have
but the external sign, that they are buried with Christ by baptism into his
death, and the power of his death and burial, be not in them to slay and to
consume the body of sin, they be as far off from the benefits of Christ, as
either Jew or Turk. And now touching the third part of our new birth, which
is the walking in newness of life: this follows from the resurrection of
Christ. As Christ (says he) was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
father, so we should walk in newnes of life. Here needs some exposition to
make this plain. When he says Christ was raised from the dead by the glory
of the Father, we may take it that the glorious power of God did raise him up,
and that GOD was grorified by his resurrection, all which is true: but not the
thing which S. Paul here means, The Greek preposition which is translated
(by) may (as it is sometimes used) be translated into, or unto.

Thus it is, Christ before his passion took upon him the shape of a servant,
having as S. Paul says Phil. 2. Emptied himself of the high glory, being in
the shape of GOD, when he thought it no robbery to be equal with God: and
then he had taken upon him all our infirmities, sin only excepted. He was
subject unto hunger, to thirst, to weariness, and such like. But when he rose
from the dead, all these things are left behind, and he enters into the
glory of the father, even into the glorious and heavenly life of the Father:
and we being baptized into him, and dying with him, must needs also be raised
up with him into that heavenly life of God, which he expresses, by walking in
newness of life. Thus it is, if Christ dyed for to slay sin, and then roase
up from the dead into that heavenly and glorious life, then we that die to
sin with him, must needs be raised up also with him, into the partaking of
that spiritual and heavenly life. As the killing and burying of sin is
called the putting off the old man, so this rising with Christ unto new of
life, is called the putting on of the new man. This is to walk in true
holiness. Seeing all this is thus, I pray you how can he be a true Christian,
that does continue in sin? Shall we continue still in sin, that grace may
abound? You see it manifest, that a true Christian is so far off from
continuing in sin, that contrariwise he does walk in newness of life. This
Saint Paul does further examplifie in the verses that follow, namely, that all
they which die with Christ unto sin, must needs also rise with him unto the
partaking of the new life, and further, that being once raised up from the
death of sin into that life of righteousness, they never return back again
to live unto sin. Touching the former of these, for to express it, he uses
a similitude taken from a plant. If (says he) we be grafted to the similitude
of his death, even so shall we be to the similitude of his resurrection? Thus
it is, in the natural plant, as we also do know, that when the siences are
grafted into a stock, and that is dug into the ground, if the stock die,
they die with it, and if the stock do grow and spring up, they do grow and
spring up with it. Even so, the holy Apostle teaches, that a man being by
faith grafted into Christ, as he is grafted, and does grow to him by a
mystical and spiritual union to die with him, that is, as Christ died to slay
sin, so he dies to sin, or sin by the power of Christ's death is slain
in him: likewise, he is grafted unto the similitude of his resurrection? that
is, he receives the sap of life from Christ, as from the stock into which
he is grafted, and so does live and grow up by him. Then you see by the
doctrine of the holy Apostle, that from the near conjunction which the
faithful have with Christ, these two things go inseperablie together, the
dying to sin, and the rising to the new life, even the life of
righteousness. For how should a man be in Christ, and separate these? As a man
cannot have justification except he be in Christ Jesus: and if he be in him,
he must needs with it be partaker of the grace and power of sanctification:
so also, if he be partaker of the one part of sanctification, he can not be
void of the other. If he be dead and buried with Christ, he shall also rise
with him. Whereby this is manifest, that where holy life appears not in a
man, there sin is not slain: for where there is a death and a burial of
sin, there must needs be a resurrection unto a new life. All they then are
in the bondage of their sins: which are not by the resurrection of Christ
quickened unto a new life, even to walk in the virtues of him that calls us.
What shall we say unto those also which will seem to have the latter without
the former? They would seem to be very rich and plenteous in good works,
and so to live unto righteousness: but look upon their life, and examine it
by the rules of the holy word of God, and you shall behodle great and
grievous vices that reign in them. As those other which make no show of good
works, are awrie when they imagine that they have part in the death of
Christ, and yet they are not partakers of his resurrection, because they have
no holy life: so these are utterly deceived which will seem to be risen with
Christ unto an holy life, and yet were never dead and buried with him. In
deed they cannot be raised unto the life of righteousness, unless they have
first died unto sin. Will they be grafted to the similitude of Christ's
resurrection, and have not been grafted with him to the similitude of his
death? What then are all those good works which they work, that together,
with those good works, do mingle so many bad vices all their life long?
Surely, their good deeds are even such, as the alms, fasting, and prayers of
the Pharisees which Christ does reprove, Mat. 6. Take this for a most undoubted
truth, that there is no holy life, but from the virtue of Christ's resurrection.
There is no partaking of the true life of God, and consequently not of any
action of that true life, but from hence, that a man be grafted with Christ to
the similitude of his resurrection. And therefore all the good deeds which men
do, that have not sin first slain in them, proceed but of vainglory,
self-love, or from other such sinister respects. What is it when a profane
dispiser of Gods word, an horrible abuser of Gods name, by swearing, a
covetous, a proud and an hawty person, or an idolater, does alms deeds? The
poor indeed are relieved by it, but they do not any thing that is good
before God. And now touching the words that follow, Knowing this, that our old
man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin, for he that is dead is freed from sin.

This being so notable a matter touching our ingrafting into Christ, and
growing together with him to the similitude of his death and resurrection: the
Apostle does yet lay it open further, and so comes to that other point which
I noted, of not returning back again from the life of righteousness, to live
unto sin. But here now the speeches which are used be very effectual to
express and to open unto us this whole matter. As the old man, crucified, the
body of sin abolished, and the service of sin from which we are freed.
First, what is it which he calls our old man? This you must understand, or
else you shall not attain to the doctrine of the Apostle. It is neither the
essence of our soul nor body, which is called the old man: but the corrupt
qualities. As also the new man is in the pure and uncorrupted qualities: as
when we are willed to put off the old man, and to put on the new man: it is a
speech borrowed from the putting off and on of garments: for the putting off
the old man, is as the putting off a most filthy garment: the putting on the
new man, is as the putting on of a pure and clean garment. Then further we must
note, why it is called a man, our old man: and that is because the filthy
corruption has by nature ouerspread all parts of man, both within and without.
All the powers and faculties of the soul, and all the parts of the body are
defiled: so that there is nothing pure in man, as he is in himself by nature.
The power and dominion of sin has gotten the mastery over all that is in
man. For this cause also, even as the natural body of man has diverse
members, so there are ascribed members to the old man, as when he says,
Mortify therefore your earthly members, Colos. 3. And then reconeth up
particularly those members of the old man, even unclean vices, as you may read
in that Chap. Then he says, Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with
him. Here the manner of the death is noted, by which this our old corruption of
sin is slain, teaching withal that it is not crucified, but in the cross
of Christ: for he says, With him. This our old man will retain his force and
power until he be slain: it is not in man to come out of the bondage of his
native corruption, until it be wounded to death; and nothing there is that can
give that deadly stroke unto it, but only the death of Christ: wherefore it is
said to be crucified with him. When a man is in Christ, and so the efficacy of
Christ's death has crucified his old man, yet there is still a body of sin,
there does remain that whole dead carcass, though not with the force and
dominion it had before, which daily by little and little is consumed and
abolished: for so the words of the Apostle are, that the body of sin might be
destroyed. First the old man is crucified, that so the body of sin may be
destroyed. Behold here what is wroght by the redeemer. Sin in man's nature may
be espied, and many goodly precepts may be given against it, with persuasions
to come out of it, but all in vain, until it be crucified with Christ.
Moreover, this we are to note, that the slain body of sin, though through
the burial of christ it do consume and is diminished in the regenerate, so that
from day to day the remnants of sin have less and less force in the^, yet it
remains in them, and none are fully delivered from it so long as they live in
this world: for you may read what the great Apostle cries out touching
himself, O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of
death? Romans 7.24. This slain body of sin does still annoy all the faithful
(but as he gives thanks there) we shall be fully delivered by Christ Jesus our
Lord. Now follows the end why our old man is crucified, namely, that
henceforth we should not serve sin. By nature we are all in bondage, we are
under a most tyrannous Lord that rules over us, even sin: we do our service
and obedience thereto: Christ does set us free from this bondage (as he says,
If the son make you free, then are you free indeed. John, 8.) and it is by
slaying the tyrant: wherefore he says, He that is dead is free from sin. We
all know this, that death sets the bond servant free from his master.
Here-upon S. Paul does reason, that if we be dead with Christ unto sin, then
are we freed from it. So that you may plainly see, that they that do in such
sort profess the Gospel of Christ, as that they do continue still in sin,
are little acquainted with this, that Christ came to slay sin, that we by
dying there-unto, might be set free from the service and bondage thereof. And
now to the other point, which is, that he which is once crucified with Christ
and so is ded to sin, the same must needs, as we showed before, rise with him,
and live with him: wherevpo^ it follows, that he which so has died and risen
with Christ, can never return again unto the spiritual death, which is to
live to sin. This point is not common, I mean, every one does not understand
it, and therefore I do pray you to mark well the speeches of the holy
Apostle. Wherefore if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also
live with him. This has a necessary consequence, as you have seen before in
the similitude of a plant: where the science grafted in growing to the stock
does die and live with it. If the^ we be dead with Christ unto sin. If the
power of his death has crucified our old man: then do we believe that we also
rise with him unto the new life: for he rising up to life, how should we being
planted into him, and growing unto him, but rise also to life with him? This is
the first step unto the matter now in hand. Then in the next place he adds,
that Christ being enrred into that heavenly life, never returns out of it, to
die any more. This is so evident that he says, Knowing that Christ being
raised from the dead dies no more, death has no more dominion over him. If
death have no more dominion over him then can he never return from that
glorious life: for life is not taken away but by death. Now that death shall
have no more dominion over him, he shows by this reason, that, in that he
dyed, he dyed once to sin, but in that he lives, he lives to God. This was
the cause why Christ dyed, even that he might satisfy for the sin of the
world, and that he might destroy sin. This being once done, there is now no
cause why it should ever be done again, for the full satisfaction is made at
once for ever, and sin by his cross shall be utterly dissolved. But
touching his life, the Apostle says he lives to God: his life then is
perpetual and everlasting.

Thus much touching Christ the head. And now he comes to the application of
it in the members. Likewise think ye also that ye are dead to sin, but are
alive to GOD in Jesus Christ our Lord. First in these words the Apostle
wills us, not barely (as the word is translated) to think: for that is but
an opinion: but to conclude as it were necessary by a Syllogism (for that
speech he uses) that we are dead to sin and are alive to God through
Christ Jesus our Lord.

Here now lies the force of his matter, as Christ dyed but once for to
satisfy for sin and to slay it, so all the true members of Christ can but
once die to sin. Sin or the old man being once crucified in them, and
having received the deaths wound, can never revive again. Christ dyed once to
sin, so his must die but once to sin, for being in him can they be off and
on, now dead to sin, now alive unto it? Most true it is, that sin is in the
faithful by degrees put down, and not at once: but yet it is at once by the
death of Christ slain. Then the party in whom the old man is once crucified
and slain, is also risen with Christ and is partaker of the new life, and so
with him, or rather in him, is alive to God. Then mark the drift of the
Apostle: If Christ could die but once to sin and then lives for ever: then
they that be in Christ can die but once to sin, and likewise do live with
him to God for ever. How then can the old man once crucified, ever recover
life again? Or how can the new life, the life of God being once begun be
utterly extinct in any? Seeing the Apostle does argue upon this ground, that as
Christ can not alter, so they that be in Christ can not alter. How then shall
they that be in Christ, and so dead to sin yet live therein? How can any
true Christian man continue in sin, that grace may abound: but especially
consider how contrary they be unto this place, which hold that a man may be
regenerate in Christ, and utterly fall from it. By the doctrine of those, the
old man may be crucified and slain in a man, and live again, and so again
he may be slain (if they leave place for repentance) and live also from that.
Also by their doctrine, the life of God may in a man be extinct, and so he does
not in Christ live to God. Why then does S. Paul here make such a comparison
between Christ and his members which are grafted into him? But let these pass,
and return again to the former. S. Paul now draws from hence an exhortation
unto all Christians, that seeing their profession figured by baptism, is so as
they must die with Christ to sin, and rise also with him unto the new life,
that therefore they would not let sin reign in their mortal bodies etc. If
sin be slain in you, then you must not let it reign in you, for is that meet,
that a dead thing should reign? And shall men obey the lusts of that which is
slain? Surely if sin reign, sin is not slain: if any man do obey the
lusts thereof, it is alive still in him. Such a man without all controversy is
not in Christ, but now mark how the blessed Apostle does frame his speeches
in this exhortation. He does not say th^^, let not sin remain at all in you,
or see that in no wise you be found to sin: for then all are lost, if none
be in Christ, if none be dead and risen with him, but such as are quite void
of all sin, But let not sin reign in your mortal body. Here is all that
the faithful are called upon, for while they live here, namely that they obey
not the lusts of sin, and so give unto it a kingdom and a dominion in them.
He shows plainly by this that the slain body of sin remains still in
them, and the lusts thereof be in the mind, but we must not obey them. Also
he says, Let it not reign in your mortal body. What does he by this, give
alowance that sin may reign in the mind. Surely that were a small
reformation, if sin should be restrained only in our bodies, and retain
the full force still in the mind. But seeing it can not be but that the motions
of sin will arise in the mind he does advertise that yet we should restrain
our bodies from performing those lusts. It is the like speech when S. Paul
says, Be angry but sin not. He speaks not there of an holy anger, which
indeed is not sin, for then he would not will us to cut it off, saying, Let
not the sun go down upon your wrath, but he does thereby insinuate, that
man is so prone unto anger, and it does arise so suddenly oftentimes even
upon every occasion that it can not be avoided, nevertheless, he does advise
that we should not perform the cruel deeds which anger does lead unto.
Seeing it can not be, but that the filthy motions and lusts of sin will
arise in the mind, yet resist them so (this is his council) that they reign
not in your mortal bodies, or give not up your bodies in action to perform
such wicked motions. Labor to have the mind wholly purged from them, but seeing
that can not be fully attained, let them not have the reign and dominion in
your bodies. And further, in this exhortation he wills us, not to give our
members as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, but give (says he) your
selves unto GOD, as they that are alive from the dead, and give your members
as weapons of righteousness to God. To understand this, you must consider that
the holy Ghost likneth sin unto a mighty tyrant, who has his ministers and
servants, attending and setting themselves in his presence, to wait his
pleasure what service he will command them, which then they execute. And
therefore he uses here the like phrase of speech, willing us not to set our
members in the presence of sin, as weapons, or instruments, or as it were
ministers attending and ready to execute his pleasure. This in deed is the
miserable bondage that man is in by nature, that all the powers and faculties
of his soul, with all the members of his body, are even willingly pressed and
ready, and do even present and set themselves as attendants in the presence
of sin, ready to execute the lusts thereof. This being renounced, as it is
reason, S. Paul exhorts that we should give up our selves to God, as they
that are alive from the dead, and our members as weapons of righteousness.
This is a goodly thing which is here required: and all things considered
very equal. We have showed our selves very ready to the obedience of sin,
we have set all our members as attendant, to perform most willingly the
lusts thereof. Shall we not now be as ready to give up our selves to God,
being ra^ed up from the death of sin unto the life of righteousness? and
shall we not ^e as willing to set all our members as ministers and servants to
attend upon righteousness, as we were to give them to sin? Shall we not change
our Lord, if it be from the worse to the better? Or shall we not serve the
better Lord as willing as we served the worse? Consider I pray you: what is the
reward of those which are the servants of sin: Is it not eternal death, even
the torments of hell: and yet how chearefully men perform that service? How
ready be they to obey the lusts of sin? What is the reward of those which
serve righteousness? Is it not promised that they shall have eternal glory,
and shall we not then be as willing and as ready to obey righteousness as we
were to obey sin?

And now to the last verse, which I have read unto you, For sin shall not have
dominion over you: for ye are not under the law, but under grace: This is a
most excellent comfort, which S. Paul utters to harten and to encourage all
the faithful to resist sin. We hear of freedom from the yoke of our evil
lusts, we are called upon to renounce our obedience unto sin. Also we are
willed to present all our members as weapons of righteousness to God: but in the
mean time we do feel our selves so oppressed with the tyrannous power of
sin, that it seems we shall resist in vain. Yea it falls out in many,
that the more they do resist, and strive against their evil lusts, the more
furiously the same do seem to rage. Whereupon some do give over striving,
feeling themselves so yoked, as that they think it impossible to wind out.
For this cause S. Paul says, Sin shall not have do^^^^^^ over you. As if he
should say, be of good courage, and faint not, resist sin with all the force
ye can: for albeit the motions thereof do arise in you very strong, and seem
often times even to lead you away captive, yet it shall not reign Why may one
say, does not sin reign in you: where the motions (which arises in the mind)
does take place: so that a man is carried into some sinful acts? Surely we
must judge thus, that where a man does that which he unfeignedly hates, and is
drawn thereunto, even against his will, he does not obey sin, neither can it
be said that sin does reign in him: But is not such a man in danger that
he shall be overcome? No verily, for mark what a reason the holy Apostle does
render. For ye are not (says he) under the law, but under grace. The sum of
the reason is this, sin has lost his force in you and is unarmed, and you
have obtained an invincible power against it, therefore go on v^^^ntly in
resisting, for you shall assuredly obtain the victory, and sin shall not
have the ^ominion over you. Now sin has lost his force by this, that you are
not under the law, and you have obtained your power in this, because you are
under grace. Is not this a marvelous encouragement? The tyrant is utterly
weakened, and you are mightily armed, therefore go to and resist, he shall not
prevail agianst you. This you shall see plainly, if you did understand what
it is not to be under the law, and what it is to be under grace. The law was
Moral, Judicial, and ceremonial. Here we must needs take it of the law
Moral: But now how is this to be understood, that he says, we are not under
the moral law? They be utterly awrie which take it absolutely, as if we had
no more to do with the law of GOD. The law is the rule of holy life: all
vices are condemned only by it, and alone it commands all virtues: what
then can be more absurd, then that Saint Paul urging godly life, should
abolish the only rule thereof? We are still, under the law thus, to have our
mind, our will, our affections, our thoughts, our words, and our deeds
wholly framed according to the same. It is therefore but in some respect, that
Saint Paul says, we are not under the law. Some do take it to be meant, that
we are not under the curse of the law. Most true it is, that Christ has
delivered his from the curse of the law, as it is written, Gal. 3. but that
appertains unto justification: S. Paul does not here deal about
justification, but as we see plainly touching sanctification, that is, the
godliness which is begun in all the faithful. Here then it must be understood
so, as it is to be applied to the conflict that is between the flesh, and the
spirit, in the regenerate. And that is thus, ye are not now under the law as
it is the strength of sin, 1. Cor. 15.56. This matter is handled at large in
the next Chapter, where he does clear the law from all blame, that it is the
strength of sin, or that the native corruption in us, which as an husband,
has force by the law in our members to bring forth children unto death: that
is, to beget, and to bring forth wicked deeds, in the faculties of our souls
and bodies, being as the wife. For it is accidentarie to the law to do this.
For the law being spiritual, and requiring an heavenly purity, and lighting
upon our nature, which is carnal, or utterly corrupt, only showing our
uncleanness, and not healing it, concupiscence becomes more raging in us,
which without the law lies as it were dead. He that is in Christ, and so
endewed with grace, or that is led by the spirit of sanctification. Which does
mortify the deeds of the flesh, is not so under the law any longer, as that
sin should have strength thereby. Thus the holy Apostle then does encourage
and comfort all those that strive to mortify their sinful lusts, telling
them, that the tyrant has lost his force, which he had by the law in our
corrupt nature, and that we are armed with the mighty power of grace to subdue
him, and therefore, he shall not have dominion over us. What greater comfort
then this? why should we not take heart? The Lord increase his grace in us, and
make us strong in renouncing all obedience to sin, and in giving up our
selves wholly to his service: Amen.

FINIS.

