THE Worthy tract of Paulus louius, containing a Discourse of rare inventions,
both Military and Amorous called Imprese

Whereunto is added a Preface containing the Art of composing them, with many
other notable devises.

By Samuel Daniell late Student in Oxenforde.

AT LONDON, Printed for Simon Waterson, 1585.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIP FVL SIR EDWARD Dimmock, Champion to her Majesty, SAMVEL
DANIEL wishes happy health with increase of Worship.
He unskillful Statuarie wanting the two principal instruments of his
science, judgment, and art: having rudely fashioned the form of either some
Apollo or Cupid, and waighing therewithal, the baseness of his simple work: by
good advise erecteth the same on the sommitie of some high Pillar, to the end
that both the errors therein committed, may escape the narrow vewe of the
captious, and likewise shadow all imperfections which might dislike the
curious, both which he auoydeth by the distance of his lofty mounted statue,
escaping thereby the stain of reproof. In like manner right worshipful, have
I adue^tured to place these my unpolished labors on the Pillar of your
worthiness, craving the supportance of your favorable protection. Whose worthy
name and Martial title being enstamped in their forehead, shall adorn them with
a sufficient orname^t to pass the vewe without reprehension. And if herein I
shall any way satisfy the delight of the studious Gentlemen, you alone are to
receive the guerdon of their favorable voices, whose offered courtesy has
enforced me to undertake the tillage of so hard a soil, to make you a present
of the first fruits thereof: which if they are not such as your virtues
deserve or my affection desires, yet spring they from the ground of a willing
mind. Solon ordained that the Sacrifices offered to the Gods, should be of
as little cost as might be, to the end that great expenses might not hinder
religion, saying: the Gods did only accept the willing heart respecting the
piety of the giver, without waighing the largeness of the gift. And I hope my
small Sacrifice, proceeding from devotion, shall be accepted on the Altar of
your courtesy. To whom he wishes all happy felicity, who remains always
yours at command.

Samuel Daniell.

TO HIS GOOD FRIEND SAMVEL DANIEL, N. W. Wishes health.
I Know not whether to excuse your nature (good M. DANIEL) or blame your
shamefastness, which so much laboreth (as the utter enemy of your good name)
to defraude your labors of their deserved Laurel, and in despite of art to
deprive us of so delicate inue^tions, which the best wits in Europe have
dedicated to posterity: wherein surely, you injury your countrymen
publicly, unnaturally your friends, and unadvisedly your self. But what can
you pretend? The severity of Censors, the nice delicatenes of Courtiers, or
the grauetie of Philosophers? What Philosophy taught you that? That which is
current may abide the touch, the young AEglets dare look upon the Sun, and
that which is eloquently polished may abide the press. Why then may not your
Iouius look any man in the face, having art to direct him, authority to
defend him, all humanity to plead for him. If you misdoubt his grace in the
University, the Muses will give him their voices, if the suffrages of the holy
virgins in the Court, they are Graces themselves. If only the multitude Odi
profanum vulgus and arceo. For I suppose you remember the old proverbs: that
it is great trouble to make a Couche for a dog, for that turning himself so
variably, no man knows where to place the Pillowe: and so mutable and
unconstant is the multitude, that it is not for a wise man to endeavor to
feeede their humor or fit their fancies. Yet do not think that every prudent
reader is like to wanton Mistress AEmilia, who would ordinarily flout the
first line she read: or to curious Gonzaga, surnamed the Carper, who no sooner
heard a pretty invention, but would recompense it with his gentell girkes: Or
to Theodorus scollers, which received every thing with their left hand, which
their master gave with the right, or to the Hidropicus, who having no judgment
of tastes, yet never likes any sauce, and condemns all Cooks. Therefore I
would wish you as your friend, never to sinotther so sweet inventions, for
fear of Censors, who in words perhaps will debase it, which in deed they
conceive not, and control that they cannot amend, neither following the
counsel of the wise, nor the example of the virtuous.

There is another point in your last letter, wherein you seem to mar all that
you have made, and dash that which so cunningly was devised. For sooth you
blush to open another man's shop, and sell Italian wares as though you were a
Bankerupt in philosophy, and could not afforde any pritie conceit without
borowing or embeselling. I pray you Sir, shall Castilio be more reverenced for
his courtier, then D. Clarke admired for inuesting him with so courtly robes?
shall Menander be eternized for his Comedies, and Terence forgot who gave them
credit: Shall Lambin, Cardan, and Scaliger, and the most excellent Secretaries
of nature, Pliny, Matthiolus and Tolet, shall they be less reuereced, for
perfecting knowledge, the^ the old Philosophers for a shadowed invention? shall
the wit and capacity of antiquity sit in her throne, and disposition and
judgment of posterity keep the door: no reason, the one devised, the other
disposed. Iouius therefore is bound unto you, both for absoluting and blazing
his inuetions abroad in this famous Island, and we are beholding unto you for
revealing them to us: wherein truly both art in translating, and knowledge in
judging, justly may challenge their fees. You cannot forget that which Nolanus
(that man of infinite titles among other fantastical toys) rruely noted by
chance in our Schools, that by the help of translations, al Sciences had
their offspring, and in my judgment it is true. The Hebrews hatched knowledge.
Greece did nourish it, Italy clothed and beautified it, and the arts which
were left as wards in their minority to the people of Rome, by Translators as
most careful Gardiners, are now deduced to perfect age and ripeness.
Concerning the nakedness of your style (which troubles you without the colors
or flourish of Rhetorique) Tullie commends it, al Translators approve it: and
no man makes so much account of the glossoas of the substance: of the gay suie
bush as of the wine: Neither could it prejudice you at all (if it were naked as
in deed it is pure) because you have not done it as the Sybaritae, that bad
their guestes a whole year before the feast, to make some expectation of a
sumptuous banquet. A toye would require all bravery: Vanity all ornaments, and
an Ass had need of all his trappings. But your argument is such as can both
move and delight, tickle the ear and satisfy the mind. And our time also
has learned to loathe that od riming vain, and to persecute the letter is
clean out of fashion, which begone by a bad portraiture of wit, and is ended by
a ripe direction of judgment. But why do I rather answer the capcious, then
satisfy the grave and modest, who at the first vewe (I dare presume upon their
wisdom) will subscribe to the supremacy of the wit of your new Science. For
if Courtiers are inwardly ravished in vewing the Picture of Fiametta which
Boccacc limned. If Ladies entertain Bandel or Ariosto in their Closets. If
Lovers embrace their Physician Ovid in extremity of their passion: then will
Gentlemen of all tribes, much rather honor your Impresa, as a most rare Jewel,
and delicate Enchiridion. For there is not published a flourish upon fancy, or
Tarletons toys, or the silly Interlude of Diogenes: You prosesse not Artem
iocandi or Pota^di: You discourse not of Apuleius Ass: You trifle not as
Cornelius the Brabantine, who Anno. 158.
published an Encomion of Tuftmockados: But you present us an order to frame
Devises, in show glorious, in form plain, in title strange; the which is so
much the more to be esteemed, being derived from the most pure springs Lucas
Contile, and Rusoelli, whom I cannot name without some Preface to their
commo^dation. What should I recount Dominicus and Alciat, with whom you seem
to have been very familiarly acquainted, which adds much credit to your
work, and notably has given light to your studies. But concerning the art
of Imprese, I need not draw the petigree of it, since it is known that it
descended from the ancient Algiptians, and Chaldcans, in the School of
Memphis: who devised means before Charecters were found out, to utter their
conceiptes by forms of Beasts, Stars, Herbs, (as you have declared) and
these notes were called (...).i. sacrae notae. This Philosophy was increased
by Orus Niliacus, and Pythagoras: and was more plainly revealed by Clcmeus,
Pausanias, Atheneus: and in this last age revived by Pierius Valerian. But to
what end served this? to shadow suerly their purposes and intents by figures.
So counsayled Plaeto: So practiced the first parents of Philosophy. As by the
picture of a Stork they signified (...). By a Serpent (...).
policy. By an Olive peace. By a Got lust: drawing these Charecters from the
world, as from a volume wherein was written the wonders of nature. Thus was the
first foundations laid of Imprese: From hence were derived by succession of
pregnant wits Stemmata Coats of Arms, Insignia Ensigns, and the old
Images which the Romans used as witnesses of their Ancestors, Emblemes and
Devises. Then what was the intent of these Ensigns and Devises? What cause can
be pretended for them? What did they import? Iamblicus says that they were
conceiptes, by an external form representing an inward purpose: So Fergusus
the first Scottishe King did bear in his Standard a Lion geules, to bewray his
courage testify his stomach, and dismaie his adversary, which being well
marshalled, is borne for the atchiuement of the Kings ever since. So did the
Athenians bear their Owl: the Thebans their Sphinx: the Switzers their Bear.
But among all inventions, surpass for wit and art your Imprese: neither less
renowned then the Insegnes, nor less heroical then the Arms called by
Paradin Symbola Heroica, by Simeon devises illustra. Minoes a man otherwise
excellently qualified in all humanity, seems neither perfectly to define
Impreses, nor artificially to distinguishe them from Emblemes. The sole word
Symbolum every way is to large and general a term for them, (...), that note
by which we know or ca^ conjecture any thing, is Symbolum. Now in this scope
and generallitie, how is it restrained, how does he measure and fit that word
for Imprese? Sumitur hic Symbolum pro argumento seu nota qua quod piam
occultatur, sed doctis auribus intellige^dum proponit ur. There is great ods
(my good friend) betwixt this adumbration and your substantial definition. If
we respect the form it is lame, and why so? because there is no proper
difference to supporte it. And this is an infallible ground: for seeing it
comprehends all the former, Standards, Liurees and Arms, it is rather an
universal note then a special Idea: if we regard the circumstaunces, it is
very superficial: if the final end, confused. Now to come to the difference
of Emblemes, and Impreses, what subtilitie does he show in it? Symbolum est
genus, Emblema species: This motion is to universal, rather tending to divide
the genus then to define the species: but the difference must be borrowed, from
the properties: and because this is a case worthy to be demurred, let us
consult more curiously with our artistes, let us confer with our professor,
what distinction makes Iouius? I must excuse him as Traian did a certain Poet,
Plus est in art quam in artifice. For as Minoes judges of him, Artem hanc
incheauit potius quam persicit. But in deed these two conceits are allied by
so great affinity, their intents and pictures so uniform, and co^sonant:
that without sharp insight we cannot discypher their difference. Emblema is
derived of (...) interponere, inserere: quicquid interseritur ornatus gratia,
whether the invention be embrodered in garments graven in stone, enchased in
gold, wrought in Arras: and in my opinion there is great imparitie between
them, both in body and soul. They are disseuered by sondrie Cognisances,
established by reason and confirmed by reading, and may be authorized, by
experience. The mot of an Impresa may not exceed three words. Emblems are
interpreted by many verses. An Impresa is not garnished with many different
Images, Emblemes are not limited. In Devises it is enacted that the figure
without the mot or the mot without the figure should not interpret the Authors
meaning. In Emblems is more liberty and fewer laws. Impreses manifest the
special purpose of Gentlemen in warlike combats or chamber tornaments. Emblems
are general conceiptes rather of moral matters then perticulare deliberations:
rather to give credit to the wit, then to reveal the secrets of the mind.
What should I say more. This Impresa is that perfect Symbolum: for antiquity
to be reverenced: for worthiness admired: for pleasure embraced. Pardon me (I
pray you) if I rainge a little and chase a discourse in this so wide a Forest:
let me record some monument of the old Registers of Greece.

Agamemnon Sovereign at the seige of Troy, bare in his shield a Lion saliant,
with this mot (...). Amphitruo being encamped against the Thebans, caused to be
portrayed upon his Target. Cum quadrigis sol exoriens, and breathed life into
that body by this soul, In ardualaurus. Artetemesia to testify her self a
loyal wife to her Lord and King wore in her Tablet an Eliotropium, rising and
falling with the Sun, adding this mot, Persoluet vota pictas, which was
verified, for she enterred the ashes of her slain husband, in no other Tomb
then in her own body, so that death could scarce divorce them. But let us come
nigher hand. Vascus Gama being diswaded from the Indian voyage (never before
attempted) erected a globe elumined with Stars, upon a pillar of gold, with
this sentence Vndique par: respecting the ancient very. Vnaique ad superos
tantundem est viae. Have: not our Printers also of late honored this
proffession? Have they not been at emulation for ingenious Devises. Stephen
glories in his tree, and moderateth those (that love to mount: by lofty
wits) with this Posie: Noli altum sa pere. Plautin bears The tree of good
and ill.
a compass in a hand: stretched out of the clouds which measures all,
Constantia and labor. I will omit Griphin's Episcopus: I will forget all
artificers, who commonly buy such inventions at the second hand. I will not
meddle with Courtiers, I will pass over the known Impreses of Moore and
Cromwell, a pair royal of nobles. And now I will bring you to Church. A
certain English Prelate, devised a Lamb in a thorn bush, pitifully inflamed,
yet casting his eyes cherefully upon the Sun with this mot. Ne cede. Tell me
how you like this Heroycall Impresa of Curtius Gonzaga. An Egle flying on high
against the Tune cede malis sed co^tra aude^tius.
Sun, with this word pur che, a part of that verse of Petrarche. Pur che ne
godan gli orchi, ardan le piuine. For that which delights my eyes burns my
feathers. A friend of mine, whom you know, M. P. climing for an Egles nest, but
defeated by the mallalent of fortune, limned in his study a Pine tree stricken
with lightning, carrying this mot. Il mio sperar, which was borrowed also from
Petrarch. Allor che fulminato e morto giaacque il mio sperar che he devised
also a Pinnace or small Bark, tossed with tempestious storms, and in the
sail was written expectanda dies, hoping as I think for one Sun shine day to
recompense so many glomy and winter months. Therefore now to conclude, seeing
your argument is plausible, the art a novelty, your first fruits ripe what
reason is there, why you should privately bestow them of some one gentleman:
especially cosidering that you can please him no way better, then to pleasure
his country me. For who does not know M. Dimmock, to be a gentleman by famely
worshipful, by loyalty unspotted, by office the Princes Champion: so also by
courtesy worthy the Chronicle? what need you the to fear the malice of the
weakest enemy that may be a carping tongue, having him for the Champio of your
book, whom her Majesty has vouchsafed the Champion of her person, or why
fear you least our old Academicks improve your art for a toy, seeing that
wisdom is not incorporated to Nightcaps, neither must we depend upon the
verdite of some conceled Philosophers.

Thus am I bold to animate and encourage you to your credit, which if I have
done to long, so upon occasion did Tullio Plato, Seneca: if rudely ascribe it
to simplicity, if slightly to the rarenes of your art: if to copiously to a
fervent desire: for seeing that in verbis est aliquod praemium, I had rather
show my self to prodigal to my friends, then a snudge: which when you have
read, fire it. From Oxenford the xx. of November.

Yours, N. W.

TO THE FRIENDLY READER.
I Thought it good (right worshipful and courteous gentlemen) to communicate
with you this delightsome tract of strange devises, barcly clothed in an
English habit, void of al such ornaments as are due unto the worthiness
thereof: presuming upon your wisdoms, who had rather gather a pleasant flower
springing amongst the sharp thorns, for the sweet savor, then a gay colored
weed for all the fair semblance: esteeming the value of the precious treasure
not by the outward show, but the inward substance, since often we find by
trial meliora latere, and fair shows to prove often fond shadows. The tree
Caliestephenon in Palestine, has a corrupt bark, but a pure body: And well
may a gallant blossom fit the humor of a delicate eye, when the gaynfull
fruit shall satisfy the savor of a discreet taste. But the Diamant has
engendered a natural form, so that it need no artificial frame, a gay gloss
may better beseem a course Kersey, then a fine Skarlet. My weak commendations
of these not able and rare inventions, may rather eclipse their credit, then
purchase their fame, therefore I refer them to the censure of your
considerate readers, for whose better understand of the Imprese of Paulus
Iouius (who in many places have erred from the common received precepts) I have
gathered into a certain order the way of framing and composing all such kinds
of devises both military and amorous used at this day of the noble gentlemen
of Europe, in adorning their glorious triumphs, or declaring their inward
pretended purposes and enterprises, not by speech or any apparent manner, but
shadowed under a certayle veil of forms or figures in such sort as shall
hereafter be declared. And although that to signify our intentions by these
forms or figures, of creatures, be not a thing more notable then speech or
writing, which perfectly do manifest any operation, whereas the other does
doubtfully discover our pretenses. Yet I say, that to represent unto the sense
of sight the form or figure of any thing, is more natural in act, and more
common to al creatures then is hearing, and thereupon says Aristotle, that we
love the sense of seeing, for that by it we are taught and made to learn more
then by any other of our senses, whereby we see that all men naturally take
delight in pictures, and even little children as soon as they can use their
hands at liberty, go with a Cole to the wall, indeuoring to draw the form
of this thing or that. This natural disposition has reigned generally even
from the beginning when the word was but yet new, and induced nations first to
figure beasts, plants, trees, celestial signs, and such like, observing the
nature and quality of every creature represented by their figures, whereby in
time they became able to show their intent to their friends and others vayled
under the form of these creatures, in which faculty the Egyptians were most
singular as the first authors of this Hieroglyphicall art: as well do witness
their sacred Colomnes dedicated to Mercury, whereon were diverse forms and
pictures wrought and engraven, containing great knowledge, which they called
Hieroglyphi, To the which pillars Plato is said to have gone and returned
with great profit. Yet notwithstanding, in my opinion their devise was
imperfect, by reason of the diversity of the natures of beasts and other
things which they figured. Whereupon they who drew more near unto our time
seems to have brought this art to perfection, by adding mots or posies to
their sigures whereby they covertly disclose their intent by a more perfect
order. Moreover besides the figuring of things corporal and of visible form,
men have also represented things incorporal, which they could not do more
fitly then by colors, as representing sorrow by black, defire to shed blood
by red, purity by white, etc. And now since time has brought to perfection
many notable devises, which rude antiquity could not discern: Let us consider
by how many ways we may discover our secret intentions by colors and
figures, as first by Liurees, secondly by Ensigns, thirdly by mots, and lastly
by Imprese, of which four kinds of Devises, I purpose to set down distinctly
in few words their significations and properties, according to the opinion of
the best authors which ever have written of this matter.

This word Liuree is borrowed of the Spanishe, which they write with, b librea,
but pronounce it as written with v. Some say it had his Etemologie of Libro,
for that Liurees are as an open book where a man may read the intent of him
which wears them. Some also will have it derived of Libero, and that for two
reasons, the one, in that from the beginning it has been a profession only
of Gentlemen, and noble personages: and although that servant do commonly
wear these Liurees, yet are they not said to be their own but their patrones.
For Plutarch in the life of Solon says, that servants were forbidden any
free exercise. The other reason may bce, for that the Authors setting them to
the common vewe, being not altogether apparent, commit them libero iudicio, to
the free judgment of the Interpreter. Some will have it brought from the
Latin, Liber eram, for that the principal purpose of Liurees have been to
show some amorous service, and for this only intent were they first invented
at the beginning, to show that they which did wear them, were no more free of
them selves but subject servants to their Mistrisses: as who should say,
Liber eram, I was free, but now bound: according to that of Virgil, fuimus
Troes.

It is said that Liurees of only colors, had their original after this
manner: that the Gentlemen which loved or rather (to speak after the Spanish
or Neapolitan manner) which served any Lady, with that amorous kind of
service, which is used in those places, were accustomed, to mark with what
colored robe their Mistrisse was invested, to the end to deck them selves
with apparel of the same color and cut. But some supposing that to be to
great a presumption, thought rather to address themselves in a habit of the
same color, as did the domestical servants of their Lady, to denouate
humility, and show them selves readic for any service commanded by her
soueranitie: Yet now, for diverse respects, in this our time the discrete
Gentlemen bound to the performance of this strict Obligation of faith and
fecrecie, have devised a closer covert for their amorous conceiptes, by colors
and figures in their Liurees, which are now more commonly called Devises, in
all the most flourishing Countries of Christendom: which also is not forgotten
of Ariosto, in these verses following, recounting the Devise of Bradamante,
whereby she expressed her despair, and desire to die.

Era la soprauesta del color
Di ch' esser suol la foglia, che s'imbiansa,
Quando dal ramo e tolta, e che l'humore
Che facea uiuo l'arbore, le manca:
Ricamata a tronconi, era di fuore
Di cipresso, che may non si rin francae
Poi ch' ha sentito la dura bipenne
L' habito al suo dolor molto conucnne.
Thus in effect in English.

Her upper robe of such like color was,
As is the fading leaf of palish hew
When from the bow the lively fap does pass
Which nourish did the stock whereon it grew
Embrodered al with branches thick above,
And fading bows of doleful Cipresse tree:
Which cut with deadly axe does never prove
This habit with her grief did well agree.
There are first, diligently to be observed in these Dcuises or Liurces three
things: The time when: The place where: and the manner how they are to be used.
Concerning the time: they are never worn but either in true or fained war,
or at Iusts, Turneis, Maskes, or at such like extrauagant shows. The place sit
for them, are on armed men or Maskers, worn in such place as they best like
about their persons: albeit the Helmet, the Shiclde, the Bardes, the borders of
the garment, or the breast, are the fittest places appointed for them. The
manner of using them is diverse, according to their species: but first generally
you are to observe this, that they be not too intricate in great number, nor
so confused that they need some Apollo to resolve them. Perticularly it
behooves to note the deuition of their species which are of al kinds of
Devises or Liurees six. The first consists altogether of colors: The second
of colors and figures: The third of colors and letters: The fourth of colors
figures and letters: The fifth of figures only: The sixth of figures and
letters. Concerning the first colors alone, are now seldom used but of
Mourners, or such like. As for example, a certain Gentleman on a time, having
ill success in his amorous feruico, and spending his time in dolor and grief,
was advertised that the wife of a certain freende of his was departed this
life, whereupon it behooved him to put on mourning apparel: and having occasion
to show himself at a feast, he clothed him in black Grogran drawn out with
Taffatie, and both cut on black Damask, in such sort that the Damask was
best seen to be blackest: which mourning habit was no sooner seen of such as
knew the history of his love, but they perceived What it signisied, as well
as if he himself bad declared it: and greatly did they commend the invention.
For with the uppermost black he represented sorrow for the dead: with that
underneath he mourned for his friend: but his own black appeared more and
signified some greater grief, and that of his friend seemed less, and
represented less in effect. For in his opinion less grief was it to be
deprived of a wife, since she is called to the heavens, then to stand secluded
from the favor of a proud disdainefull dame, whilst an other enioyes the
fruit of his desirued affections. But to return to our purpose, Liurees of
only colors, and also with colors and figures are wont to serve in effect,
but for the show of one day, either at Iusts, Maskes, or other solemn
festival sportinges, where are commonly assembled a great multitude of people:
and to the end that Gentlemen and Gentlewomen (which give the view but as they
pass by, among so great a company) may not stand to muse about the intention
of the subject, there is used a mot to declare the meaning, and these kind of
mots pertaining to Liurees, are to be composed in the same language which is
there used where they are presented: and it is requisite they be short so
that they exceed not two of our verses: very rarely are they made of four,
yet so they may be if need require. These mots so composed serve for colors
alone, or else for colors accompanied with figures, or with figures alone: and
when they shall be joined with colors alone, yet are they called Liurces, when
with colors, figures and the mot, which shall exceed three words being
manifest of it self and serving for no other purpose but to declare the
signification of the colors and figures, they are likewise then called Liurees
or Insegnes, and as I have before said, they serve only for one day. These last
properties rehearsed, that the mot may pass three words, and that it must be
plain and manifest, serving only to disclose the meaning of the colors and
figures: note well, for therein consists the difference between Liurees and
Impreses, which are altogether diverse. The ignorance of which distinction
deceived many in the composing of Impreses. And also Iouius him self in his
discourses following was greatly ouersene in putting no difference between
Impreses, Liurees, and Insegnes, as you may plainly perceive. This word
Insegne is taken from the Latin, by the which is signified Standards, Banners,
and also the Helmets of the chief Soldiers and Captains, as may appear in
this verse of Virgil.

Danaumque insignia nobis.

Aptemus Clypeos, but chiefly it is now taken for Standards or Banners, which
are capable of all such properties mentioned before in Liurees, as either of
colors alone, as when they are all red, all white, all black, etc. Or when
they are of several colors, as white and red, or in like manner of any other.
To them also may be added mots, as many notable men have used of late time:
and also colors with figures, or figures alone: all in such manner as has been
shown in Devises or Liurees. The Ensign is also fit for Impreses, of the
which I am hereafter to speak, and many therein set the Arms of their house:
whereof to recite examples this short Preface will not afforde, since each of
them severally require a whole volume. only suffice it, briefly that we touch
them, to the end we may the better understand the form of Impreses: which
before I come to handle, it is necessary that I say somewhat of Mots, which
truly are of great excellency if they be gallantly composed. And first this
word mot signifies as much as Gnome, a short sentence or Posie, whose places
are diverse. Some use to set them on gates, as that which (according to the
fiction of the Poet) was set on Hell gate. Lasciate ogni speranza voi chi
intrate. Lay aside all hope, all you which enter in.

A ridiculous mot or posie is not to be used but in some occasion of maskes, or
to quip an enemy, as for example, a certain Cardinal in Rome for some offense
being imprisoned, and after put to death, it was bruted abroad, that the Pope
had done it to pleasure two of his Nephews with his livings, whereupon one
lively pictured the said Cardinal on the Cross, and the two young Cardinals
preferred to his livings, at his feet beholding him with this Posie in their
hands, Crucifixus etia^ pro nobis. But the mots which are chiefly used, are
either amorus or grave, and they bear a great grace if they be perfectly
composed with their circumstances and properties, so that they be short, and
exceed not if it be possible a verse in any tongue. Yet Latin and Greek verses
of six feet are to long to be used whole, wherefore of the^ it is better to
take a part, as nullu^ scelus error habebat. And better are they esteemed being
taken out of some famos author. As out of Ovid, Horace, Catullus and other Latin
Poets, out of Homer, Hesidus, Callimachus, or any good author of the Greeks
out of Petrarch, Divine Ariosto, Da^te Bembo, and other famous in the Italian
tongue, and above all, if it be possible, let them leave some scruple whereon
to meditate, to him who either reads or hears them, and it is lawful to use
them without figures, although that Paulus Iouius vainly terms them so used,
souls without bodies.

There is also another kind of Devise called in Italian, Cifre celate, which
many have heretofore used being ignorant of Imprese, which invention is only
for youth, and very unfit for men of gravity, serving the^ but to sport with
their Ladies, by co^uaying their names into some Posie or figure, which they
ware in toke^ of their service, of this kind you shall find fit examples in
Paulus Iouius, which I have noted in the Margent. The invention is altogether
barraine, and utterly disliked of the wise.

Thus having briefly touched the principal points of the former Devises, it
rests that I say somewhat of Impreses, which is the most notable, ingenious
and perfect king of all other. And first to declare the signification of the
word, with the diffinition, I say, that Impresa is used of the Italians for an
enterprise, taken in hand with a firm and constant intent to bring the same to
effect. As if a Prince or Captain taking in hand some enterprise of war, or
any other perticulare affair, desirous by some figure and mot to manifest to
the world his intent, this figure and mot together is called an Impresa, made
to signify an enterprise, whereat a noble mind leueling with the aim of a
deep desire, strives with a stedy intent to gain the prise of his purpose.
For the valiant and hautie gentlemen, disdayning to co^ioine with the vile and
base Plebeians in any rustique invention, have procured to themselves this one
most singular, which time has now at length perfited and rought into a more
regulare order. And the chief places whereo^ they use to wear these their
Impreses are their Standards, Shields, Helmets, Brooches, Tablets or such like.
The time when, is either in Wars, Iusts, or amorous services. And you are to
note, that Impreses are not Hereditarie, as are Arms, for the son may not
use the Impresa of father, nor the successors of their ancestors, and it
behooves that they be of no other colors, save onoly black and white, unless
it be rather to adorn them, then for any necessity, and chiefly in the
composing of them, are to be noted these five properties. First, that they have
not many kinds of different forms, for at the most there can be but three, in
a perfect Impresa, unless they be parts of the whole: as the Sun, Moon and
Stars represent only the heavens, which may be the intent of the Impresa: or
as many trees flowers and herbs, represent only a Garden. As for example, a
certain gentleman figured a garden with Palms, Bays, Marigolds and Roses,
with this mot. Tu haec omnia, to signify that his mistress deserved the Palm
for her beauty, and that she was free from the assalt of Love as is the
Laurel from the wrath of the heavens, that she drew the eyes of his mind
after her, as does the Sun the Marigolde, and that by the virtue of her
comfortable looks she revived his heart, as do the joyful beams the blowming
Rose. But now in any other case diverse forms are not to be used.

Secondly, the mot or posie of an Impresa may not exceed three words, unless
it be composed of some of these. Dum. Nec. Et. Non. In. Per. Autsi. Cum. Vt.
and then may it have four, as Nec spe nec metu.

Thirdly, that the mot be taken out of some famous author. This precept is
good, but not always necessary.

Fourthly, that it be not altogether manifest nor too too obscure, neither yet
triuiall or common.

Fifthly, that the figure without the mot, or the mot without the figure
signify nothing, in respect of the intent of the author, and this precept is
of great importance, for many ignorant hereof, have composed Imprese altogether
vain and void of all invention. As when the figure of it self or the mot of
it self, suffice to declare the meaning, wherefore either the one or the other
is superfluous. As he which figured a Heart in the midst of fire, with this
mot, Il cuore ho in fuoco. I have my Heart in fire, or as he which depainted a
Cupid, with his Bow and shafts, and thereunto this verse. A gli strali d' amor
son fatto segno. To Cupids shafts I am ornayned the Butte. Or not unlike to
that of him in Iouius, which figured a Chimney with a great fire and smoke,
with this mot. Dove e gran fuoco e gran fumo. Where there is great fire, there
is great smoke, in all which the mot without the figure, or the figure without
the mot, might have served the purpose as well. But if unto the fire and smoke
had been added this mot, Vtru^que simul, the Impresa had been most perfect.
The like defect had that of Borgia, which likewise Iouius does mention, which
was the mountain Acroceraunii, whereunto, if instead of feriunt summos fulgura
montes had been added Humiliora minus, or humiliora nunquam, therein had wanted
no perfection. Iouius also adds for a precept in the rules of Imprese, that
in them thcre ought to be no humayne form, which precept is most true, if it
be in the ordinary and simple form of a man, for that rarenes is rather
delight some: but yet when the human form shall be in a strange and
unaccustomed manner, it bears a great grace. As did that of Sinior Bernabo
Adorno, being inamored of a noble and virtuous Lady, wbo often certified him
both by speech and writing, that the arrows of love could not enter or pass
farther then her gown. Whercupon the Gentleman composedan Impresa which was a
Cupid, holding in one hand the veil of his eyes, and in the other hand an
Arcobuze s^ttled to his breast, as if he were ready to discharge it, and
thereunto this mot. Hoc peraget. To signify that he had omitted no service,
devotion, or loyalty in his pursuit, which are the only maynshotte of Love,
and are able to batter the bulwark of a rigorous breast, and make the most
flintie heart to yield.

Thus have I in few words (gentlemen) declared the properties of a perfect
Impresa, to the end your choice therein may be current, since many deceive
themselves with a counterfeit. And so wisbing the happy success of all your
virtuous Impreses and godly pretenses. I refer you to the reading of Paulus
Iouius, till time my studies shall yield you a better present of the like
subject.

S. D.

HERE BEGIN THE DISCOURSES OF PAVLVS IOVIVS BISHOP of Nocera, in the form of a
Dialogue had between him, and Lodouicus Dominicus.
Dedicated to S. Cosimo Duke of Florence.
SVch is the curtesy of your highness toward me, that I hold my self bound
to render an account of the vacant leisure, which partly by your lovely
exhortations I have enjoyed in these parching and noisome heates of the fiery
month of August, the enemy of moystles old age. And therefore having
intermitted my History as a burden more po^derous, I resorted to take my
pleasure in discourse and conference with that virtuous ge^tleman Master
Lodouico Dominico, (who also thereunto invited me) upon the invention of
Imprese, borne at this day of great and Noble personages. Whereupon this little
tract being composed, for that the subject seemed delightsom and the varierie
of the matter pleasant, I emboldened my self to commend it unto you, deeming
it to be a meet recreation for so noisome a season. Resembling herein your
simple Gardener, who on your Table replenished with sundry and costly cates,
adue^tureth to present you a bondle of his fresh flowers with Rosemary and
Bourage, to serve among other meat for a sauorie Sallade. This tract may well
be compared to the diversity of the foresaid flowers, both grateful to the
vewe, and pleasant to the taste: which also I hope shall be the rather accepted
of you, for that it was brought forth in your house. And afrer this manner had
the argument of our present discourse his beginning. Master Lodouicus Dominicus
familarly accompanying me in translating my History into the vulgar Tuscan
tongue, he happily entered into conference of Inventions and Imprese, which
worthy gentlemen and noble Knights of our time bear (in token of their
gentlemanly minds) upon their Vestments, Shields, Bards, or Ensigns, to whom
I answered.

Iou. The reasoning on such a subject, may seem as it were an entering into a
vaste sea, from out the which there is no easy issue.


Dom. Under correction my Lord, you being a man of a quick memory, prompt and
of a present wit, let it please you to record a summarie of them, being now
vnbusied from writing your History in these intemperate days: wherein a man
laboreth well if he preserve him self in health, neither can we better pass the
time then in the delightsome reasoning of such pleasant conceits, which agree
with the form of a History, renouating a sweet memory of the notable men of
our time, which already have departed this life, not without their singular
commendations. And this shall be the more easy to you, having as l understand,
your self in your fresh and flourishing age composed many for such gentlemen as
requested them of you.


Iou. This shall I willingly do on this condition, that you will ever now and
then make interrogatiues, to which, I will willingly answer, to the end our
propose may carry the form of a dialogue.


Dom. I yield you infinite thanks for such The original and beginning of
Impreses.
an offer, but first tell me I pray you, whether the bearing of Imprese be an
ancient usage or not. There is no doubt but that the au^cients used to wear
Crestes and Ornaments on their Shields and helmets: which Virgill plainly
discovers when he recites the Catologue of the nations which came in favor
of Turnus against the Trojans in the eight book of his AEne. Amphiraus also as
Pindarus reports, at the war of Thebes bare a Dragon depainted on his
shield. Statius writes also of Capaneus and Polinices, whereof the one bare an
Hidra, and the other a Sphinx. We read also in Plutarch, how at the battle of
the Cimbri seemed in show very gallant, as well for their silver shining armor,
as for the decked Crests of their Helmets, wherein were represented the
effigies of diverse savage beasts, depainted after diverse fashions. The same
author reports that Pompey the great did bear for his Enseigne a Lyo^ with a
sword clasped in his claw. We find also in the remaynes of old antiquities many
to have like signification to our modern Impreses, as appears in that of
Vespasianus, which was a Dolphin entangled with an Anchore, with this posie:
Festina lent. A sentence Make soft speed.
which Octauianus Augustus was wont often to use. But leaving apart these
examples of antiquity: of this the famous Palladines of France can yield
testimony, the which in truth for the most part were not feigned, and we see,
in that wherein the writers agree, that every one of them had his peculiar
Impresa or Enseigne. As Orlando the chesse, Rinaldo a Lion, Denise a Ladder:
Solomon of Bretaigne, the Eschequier: Oliver a Griffon: Astolphe, a Leopard:
Ganelon a Faulcon. The like we read of the Knights of the round Table, of
Arthure that renoumed King of England. Those which are famosed in the Spanish
histories, as in Amadis de Gaul, Primaleo^, Palmerin, and Tirante used the
like. And now in this later age, in the time of Federicke surnamed Readbeard,
began the age of Ensigns of families, called Arms: given by Princes, in
guerdon of honorable exploytes achieved in the field. Whereupon there grew
such singular and fantastical inventions or Ensigns and Pictures upon
Helmets, to enhaunce the honor of valiant Knights, as may well be seen by
diverse Pictures in the Church of new Saint Mary's at Florence. But now in our
time, after the coming of Charles the eight, and Jews the twelft into Italy,
every one which followed the war, imitating the French Captains, sought to
adorn himself with goodly and popous Imprese, wherewith the troops of
horsemen being separated company from company, made so resplendent show, having
their upper garments embrodred with silver, bossed with beaten gold, and in
their breast and back the Imprese of their Captains: in so much that the show
of the men of Arms yielded a very po^pouse and rich spectacle, and in the
battle was tried the courageous force of their companies.


Dom. I perceive my Lord that your memory is fresh, and therefore may it
please you to recount unto me of all such as you your self have seen, because
I know that you have known all these Captains by sight, which are contained
and made famous in your history, and perfectly hold imprinted in your memory
the bravery of their ornaments.


Iou. I will not fail to declare you all these things, and truly in delating
hereof, I seem to my self to become a youth again, wherein the^ so much I
delighted that it seemed a presage that I should write their history. But
before I come to repeat the particulars, it is necessary that I manifest the
general properties which are required in making a perfect Impresa: which is a
thing very difffcult, and proceeds of a sharp wit and rich invention,
nourished by the worthy writings of ancient men. Know you then (Master
Lodouico) In an absolute Imprese are required these.
that an iuention or Impresa, (if it be to be accounted current) ought to have
these five properties, Sibilla to enterprete it, nor so apparent that every
rusticke may understand it. Idioma of him which bears the Impresa, to the
end the sense may be the more covert. these properties, you shall understand
that the body and soul above mentioned, is meant either by the mot or by the
subject, and an Impresa is accounted imperfect when the subject An Imprese
imperfect, Duplex. 1.
or body bear no proportion of meaning to the soul, or the soul to the body.
As Caesar Borgia Duke of Valentia used this soul without a body, Aut Caesar aut
nihil: Meaning A soul without the body.
hereby, that he would show his manhood, and make trial of his fortune.
Whereupon after he was unfortunately taken and beheaded in Nouara, Fausto
Maddalena a Roman said, that the posie was verefied, in the last part of his
Distich: Borgia Caesar erat factis and nomine Caesar.
Aut nihil, aut Caesar, dixit, vtrumque fuit.


And truly in his great and prosperous estate, the Posie was most witty and
worthy his Nobility, if it had been applied to a proportioned Subject, as was
that of his brother Don Francesco Duke of Candia, who had for his Impresa the
Mountain Chimera, or Acroceraunes strike^ with the lightning of heaven, with
these words out of Horace: Feriunt summos The lightning hents the highest
hills.
fulmina montes. Which likewise was verified in his unhappy end, being
strangled and thrown into Tiber by Caesar his brother.

Contrariwise, a fair body or subject is as ill beseeming if it be without a
soul, as was 2. A body without a soul.
that of Charles of Bourbon Constable of Fran^ce, who bare depainted a Heart
with wings: meaning thereby that his natural swift running was not sufficient,
but that he would fly into every difficult and dangerous hazard. The which
Impresa (albeit the beauty of the goodly beast, which was pompouse) seemed yet
blind wanting a Posie, which should give it light, which ministered occasion of
sondrie interpretations: among which this one was most sharply given of a
French Gentleman, called Motta Augruing, who attended on the Pope, when woeful
news came of the discomfiture of the most Christian King at Pauia: and talking
of the disloyalty of Bourbon, said to Pope Clement: Bourbon, although he
seems to be a betraier both of his King and Country, meriteth yet some
excuse, in having shown before what he meant to do by bearing in his Coat of
Arms, a Heart with wings: meaning thereby that he minded to fly into Bourgonie:
which he could not do with his feet, had he not had wings, and therefore
this Posie was bestowed upon him, Cursum intendimus alis.

The like defect had the Impresa of the Lady Hippolita Fioramonda Marquise of
Scaldasole, at Pauia, who far excelled all the Gallants of our time both in
beauty and amourous courtesy, who often wore in her Sky colored Satin robes,
Candleflyes all dispersed, wrought in embrodery of gold, but without a mot,
warning thereby the amourous that they approach not too near her fire, least
it happen to them as it does to that fly which ventureth so nere the flame
that it burns itself. And being requested of the Lord of Lesui (being a
brave and valiant Knight, and at that time a practiser in the art of Ryding)
to manifest unto him the meaning of this mystery: To whom she replied, It is
convenient for me to use the like courtesy to Gentlemen which resort to see
me, as you do to such as ride in your company, being accustomed to put under
the tail of your Coursier a rattle or such like, to make him more fierce in
yerking, to warn those which come nere you of the danger of his heels, and
to cause them keep the more aloof. Yet could not this caveat take place with
my Lord of Lesui, but that many years after he perseuered in his love, and at
the end being deadly wounded in the field of Pauia, he was carried into the
house of the Lady Marquise: where he ended his life with great contentation,
yielding up his last gasp between the arms of his dearly loved Mistrisse
and Patroness, as he used to term her.

The contrary defect had the mot of the worthy Lawyer Master Jason di Maino,
who had engraven over the gate of his Palace this Posie without a body,
Uirtuti fortuna comes: signifying thereby that his virtue had happy fortune.

An Impresa may also be gallant in show by Proportion required.
reason of the ornaments and colors, of both the body and soul, and yet by
means of the weak proportion, that the soul has to the subject: it
becomes ridiculous and obscure, As that of the Duke Lorenzo of Medici, which
was a Laurel tree betwixt two Lions, with this mot: Ita and virtus. Signifying
thereby, that as the Laurel is ever flourishing, so is virtue never fading: but
none there were which could tell what the 2. Lions imported. Some said it
represented Fortitude and Clemency, in that they seemed to parle, their heads
being so closely joined together: Others construed it an other way. At length
one Master Domitius da Cagli, Chaplain to the Cardinal of Medici, (who was
afterward Clement the seventh, and coming to visit the Duke Lorenzo, who was
sick of a disease whereof shortly after he died) adventured to demand of one
Master Philippo Strozzi, being desirous to understand the secret of the
Impresa, invited thereunto also by the Gentleman's courtesy, said: Master
Philippo you which are so skillful in learning, and also Cosine and companion
of the Duke, show me I pray you what means these Lions under this Laurel
tree. Master Philippo looking askance on the Chaplain, who although he were a
gowned man, yet not so well grounded in learning that his knowledge reached
beyond his portois, made him this sharp and ready answer: Understand you
not (quoth he) that these Lions do guard this Laurel, and defend it from the
fury of such Poets, which run mad on a rumor, having heard of the inuesting
of the Abbot of Gaeta, solemnized in Rome, and flock so fast to spoil her of
her branches, to show them selves Laureat? The Chaplain replied (who
delighted to make certain Sonnets to run in dogrell rhyme) saying, As God
help me it is done of very envious malice: seeing that the Pope Leo has
courteously made Laureat the Abbot Baraballo, and that he has caused him to
triumph over the Elephant. Which thing came to the ears of the Cardinal, who
greatly iested at Domitio as at a slender Poet, and an unlearned Chaplain.

Moreover, we must have regard that it incur Not.
not the suspicion of any great pride or presumption, although both the soul
and body be sound and perfect: for it easily discovers the vanity of the
bearer. As did that of the great Cardinal of S. George, named Raphael Riario:
who set in a thousand places about his Palace depainted a stern of a Ship,
with this mot, Hoc opus. As who should say, I should need to be Pope or
governor of the world, that makes such gorgeous and magnificent buildings.
Which devise fell out most vain, when Pope Leo was created, and afterward
(being found confederate in the conspiracy with the Cardinal Alphonso
Betrucci) he was taken and convicted, his goods confiscate, and he himself
banished to Naples where he ended his life.

I tell you it were a great point of folly to These three which follow are
called of the Italians Cifre celate, and not Imprese, Composed only of youth
unfit for gravity, as has been showed in the Preface
tax the defects of Imprese which are used in this age, being composed of the
indiscreet, and borne of mad brains, as was that of the fierce Soldier, (I
will not say Ruffion) Sebastien del Mancino, (which name was accomted at that
time honorable among Fencers) who used to wear on his hat, a shoe sole, with
the letter T. and a Pearl, which is called Margherita, in the midst of the
sole, thereby to discover his affection, and his Mistrisse name after this
manner: Margherita Te suola di cuor' amo. Margerit I only love thee with my
heart.
Margherit I soly love thee.

An other being his rival called Panmolena, setting the same in beaten gold
in stead of leather, thereby seeming to infer this Margherita te adoro:
Margherit I adore thee (you must Margherit I adore thee.
understand that adoro in the Italian tongue, signifies to reverence or
worship, and also to beautify and deck with gold) supposing there to be
greater efficacy, in I adore, then in this threedbare word, I love thee.

The like invention was that of Master Augustine Porco of Pauia, inamoured of
the Lady Biauca Paltiniera: who to show himself her faithful servant, used
to wear fastened BIAVCA signifies white.
to his scarlet Bonet, a little Candle of white Wax, to signify, by dividing
this word Candela, which is in English a Candle, into three fillables Can de
la: Can, that is faithful servant, CAN, a dog, a most faithful servant.
de la Biauca, of the Biauca.

But much more ridiculous was that of Caualier Casio the Bolognian Poet, both
for bravery and fine invention, who wore in his hat, in a great Agate the
discention of the holy Ghost upon the twelve Apostles: and being demanded of
Pope Clement, with whom he was very familiare, wherefore he wore this Dove,
representing the holy Ghost, and the fiery tongues upon the heads of the
Apostles, he answered, Not for any devotion, but to express a conceit of
love. For having been of a long time inamored of a Lady, and vngratfully
handled of her, not able any longer to support her crafty delays, nor the
expenses bestowed on presents and gifts, I figured the Feast of Penticost:
meaning, I repent of the cost bestowed of my Lady. Upon which exposition the
Pope (howbeit he were in other things severe) laughed so vehemently that he
rose from the table at the midst of supper.

There were also in ancient time, some worthy Personages which wanting the
inue^tion of such like subjects supplied it with mots of their own fantasies,
which became very ridiculous, as when they were to long. As was the mot of
Castruccio Lord of Luca, when Lodouico Bauaro was crowned Emperor, and he made
Roman Senator, which was then a very great dignity, who wore openly in a
Cremosin Cloak this mot embrodered in his breast: Egli e come dio vuole: and
aunswerable It is as God will.
to that behind was another, Esara quel che dio And shall be as God will.
vorra.

The like fault of length had that of the Prince of Salerua, who builded the
sumptuous Palace in Naples, on a Pinnacle: whereof in the fore front he
erected a pair of horns with this mot: Porto le corna ch' ogui Huomo le vede,
E qualch' Altro te porta che vol creed.


In English thus. I wear the horns which each man sees by vewe:
And some man wears them to, which scarce he thinks is true.


Desirous thereby to quip a certain Nobleman, who talked dishonorably of a
Lady, having himself a wife suspected of her honesty. The length of these
mots are the rather condemned, for that they are in the proper tongue of him
which wears the^. For that, as I have said, they better square in a strange
language.


Dom. My Lord you have even revived me with the ridiculous follies of so many
Imprese, as you have recited unto me.


Iou. It shall be now therefore time that we return to our purpose, recompting
only such Imprese which savor of magnanimity, sharp invention, and
generositie. And it seems unto me, that these great Princes of the world (in
having about their persons men of singular wit, and learning) have gotten unto
them selves, the honor of such inventions: as amongst other the Emperor
Charles the fifth, the King of Spain, and Pope Leo. For that of the Emperor
exceeded far the Impresa of his Grandfather by the mothers side the great
Charles Duke of Bourgonie. And in my opinion that of the Pillars of Hercules
with the mot, Plus vltra, not only excelled in gravity and brave invention
the Tinderbox of his said Grandfather, but also all other which either Kings
or Princes have borne to this day.


Dom. In truth these Pillars with their mot (considering the good fortune in
the happy Conquest of the West Indies, which eclipseth the glory of the old
Romans) does satisfy the vewe, with the goodly subject, and delights the
mind of the considerate regarder, with the perfection of the soul annexed
unto it.


Iou. Marvel not thereat, for the inuentor thereof was an excellent man, named
Master Laigi Marliano of Millan, Physician of the Emperor, and died Bishop of
Tui. And beside other of his excellent qualities, he was a great Mathematician.
For commonly these picked Imprese spring not of light brains, but of rare
wits.


Dom. The truth you say my Lord, but tell me of favor what you were about
to say touching the tinderbox of the Duke of Bourgonie: I pray you recompt
unto me the history of this famous invention, with the which the valerous
troops of worthy Knights of this our age adorn them selves, who are of the
honorable company of the order of the Fleece, amplified by the invincible
Charles the fifth.


Iou. This which you demand is very intricate and of few known, yea hardly of
many, which wear it about their neck: because thereunto is hanged the Fleece,
interpreted of some the golden Fleece of Jason gotten by the Argonautes. And
some refer it to the holy scripture, that it is the Fleece of Gedcon, which
signifies unbroken faith. But returning to our purpose concerning the
tinderbox of the valiant Duke of Bourgonie, who was fierce in arms, and used
to wear the flint-stone with the steel and box, and two tronchions of wood
thereby, to denotate, that he had power to kindle great fires of War, (as
the truth is he did) but this his whole valor had a sorrowful success. For
taking in hand the war against Lorena and the Suissers, he was (after
receiving two discomfitures) overcome and slain above Nansi, the Eauen of the
Epiphany, and his Imprese was skorned of Renato Duke of Lorena, who was
triumpher in this conflict, to whom when his Ensign was presented, Truly
(quoth he) this unfortunate man when he had need to warm himself, had no
leisure to use his tinderbox. Which saying was the more pithie, for that the
same day of the battle, the earth was covered with Snow all died with blood,
and it was the greatest cold, that happened within the memory of man: In such
sort that it might be seen by the Duke, that the wavering Goddess dayned not
to accompany his divine manhood in these three last enterprises.


Dom. As far as I perceive my Lord, you have begun according to your
promise, to enter into the chosen and picked Imprese, which the worthies of our
age do wear. Whereupon, I hope that as our inue^tions are more subtle, and
our knowledge purified, in respect of that of former time: even so our modern
devises and Imprese shall appear more galla^t, as proceeding of more flowing
wits. But before you prosecute your discourse of these late Imprese, I pray
you since you have recited the order of the Fleece, to declare unto me in a word
or two, the posie which they of the Order in England do wear.


Iou. Touching your demand, for that it is an ancient custom commenced
above two hundred years passed, this only report remains: That the Order
being instituted by Edward the third (a magnanimous Prince) A plain cross
geules in the field argent.
under the protection of S. George on horsbacke within a white Shield, parted
with a red cross: the King by chance in gathering up a garter from the
ground, gave occasion to a certain Lady whose garter it was, to murmur at it.
Wherefore it pleased him in the honor of that Lady, to ordain that every
Knight of the Order, which were wont to be six and twenty, should wear for
an Ensign about their leg the Garter with this inscription, Honni soit qui
mal y pense.

But now returning to our time more enriched with singular wits, I say that
those Kings which of late have been, have advanced them selves both in their
warly enterprises, and also in the bravery of their ornaments of Imprese,
above the honor of their ancestors. And to begin with that of Jews the
twelft, King of France, which seems to all men, both of singular beauty in
show, and also of excellent sharpness in sense, for that it fitted the noble
nature of that Martial Prince, whom no toil of War could ever tire, who
with an invincible mind caused to be worn on the upper garments of the
Archers of his Guard, a Hedghogge crowned, which pricketh those, that come
near to anoy it, and casts most sharp thorns at those which stand farther
of: signifying thereby that his forces were ready nere at hand and also
abroad. On which subject I remember to have seen this mot, Comminus and eminus.

Nothing inferior to that of Jews, was the Impresa which his successor and
Son in law Fraunces the first used to bear, who as his slipperie youth did
lead him, changed the manly exploites of war, with the weak pleasures and
effeminate delights of his fond love. And to signify that he fried in these
passionat flames, wherein so much he gloried that he shamed not to say, that
he nourished Inourishe my self.
himself in them. Whereupon he wore the Salamander in the flaming fire, with
this mot, Mi nutrisco: being the proper quality of this beast to purge all her
cold humors among the burning coals: whereby it comes to pass that she
fears not the force of the fire, but rather te^perateth the heat thereof, or
puts it out. And truth it was that this heroical and curteouse King was
never without a love, being notwithstanding zealous in affecting, and liberal
in rewarding the virtuous, and of courage valiant, against all the iniquities
of Fortune (as the Salamander, against the force of the fire) in all chau^ces,
and warly events: and this invention was forged with the stamp of his own
brain.

Also that of his Son and successor King Henry, is in all points comparable
to the former, who continued to bear the same Impresa, which whilome he made
being Daulphin: which was the Moon Cressant, with this brave mot carrying
great sense: Donec totum impleat orbem. Signifying thereby, that until he
amounted to the inheritance of the kingdom, he could not manifest his inward
valor, as the Moon ca^ not yield her full light, until she come to her
perfect greatness. And of this his noble mind the recovering of Bologne, and
many other whorthy acts (which Italy can witness) do yield sufficient
testimony. Wherefore at the earnest request of Sir Mortier the French
Ambassador, after the death of Frauncis his father, I figured a full Moon al
round, with this mot: Cum plena est, sit Emula Solis, showing that she had so
great brightness, that she equalled the son, making the nights as clear as
the days. The king also meant hereby to yield some thing to the honor of a
Lady under the name of Diana, who was accounted of the Ancients, the same
goddess with the Moon.


Dom. Without doubt these three Imprese of these three French kings, have in my
judgment, all the excellency required both in the subject and outward show,
as also in the soul. And I doubt whether the sharp witted Spanyard can come
near them.


Iou. And truly therein you are not deceived, for it is a difficult thing any
way to better them.

But the King of Spain quitteth him self well in bearing the Gordia^ knot with
the hand So much le excels.
of Alexander, who with his Faulchion cut it in sunder when he could not undo
it with his fingers: engrauing this mot above it, Tanto Monta. To the end you
may understand the meaning of this prudent king, you need to read Quintus
Curtius, how that in Asia in the City of Gordius, there was in a Temple an
inextricable knotte, and it was given out by the Oracle, that he which could
untie the same, should be lord of all Asia. Whereupon Alexander coming
thither, and finding no way to unloose it, by fatal rashness, and in despite,
cut it in pieces, and by that means Oraculum impleuit aut elusit. The like
hapened unto the Catholic king: who having long strife and contention about
the kingdom of Castile, finding no way to attain to his right, with sword in
hand he adventured, and got it, whereby this so worthy an Impresa got great
fame, and was adjudged of equal wit and learning with those of France. Some
men were of the opinion, that it sprung from the subtle invention of Antonio
Nibrissa, an excellent learned man, who is said to revive the latin tongue in
Spain. But to say the truth (although that many notable Imprese have sprung
from the worthy witttes of the Spaniards, as was that which Don Diego of
Mendozza, a valiant and honorable knight, did use to wear in the wars of the
great Captain Consaluo Ferrante. Yet there have been some very vain, and
void of all such properties as they ought to have, as was that of the knight
of the house of Porres, who being inamored of a Gentlewoman attendant on the
Queen Isabell, whose name was Anna, and fearing that she should marry with a
certain other knight far richer then himself, who fought to win her from
him: he therefore counsayling her that she should remain constant in her love
toward him, and not condescende in any case to the other, he wore on his Crest
depainted a Ducke, which in Spanish is called Annadino, which name divided into
sillables, is after this manner, Anna dino. As much to say, as Anne say no.

Like unto this also was that of Don Diego of Guzman, who having received a
discourteous countenance at the hands of his Mistres: wore in a triumph at
Iusts, a great bush of green Mallows: to denotate thereby that his love went
a cross: for Malua in Spanishe is the herb Mallowe, and being distinctly
written, Mal va, is as much to say, as it goes ill, the affairs of my love
have no good fuccesse.


Dom. These here agree well with those ridiculous inventions of the white
Candle, and of Penticost. But I pray you shut up these vanities with the worthy
Impresa of Don Diego of Mendozza, which whylome you said to be so commendable.


Iou. Yea, and peradventure the only one among those which are exstant, not
only in Spain, but else where. And this it was, that having sounded the ford of
his Mistress fancy, and finding the wharfe of her good will very difficult to
ariue at: being driven into dolorous affections, and as it were desperate,
invented a wheel with buckets which draw up water, and then cast it forth
again: And for that half the buckets are full receiving in the water, and half
are empty casting it forth, he adioined this mot,* Los llenos de dolor y, Los
vazios de speranza. Those that are full, carr^ sorrow, tho^^ that are em^^tie,
hope.
This was esteemed an Imprese of subtle invention, and almost singular in
outward vewe, because the water and the wheel gave to the beholders great
light unto the subject, and seemed to infer this, that his grief was without
hope of any remedy.

Worthy of Commendation was also the Impresa of S. Antonio da leua: who being
by reason of the Gout carried in his Chair, caused this mot to be worn of his
Captain, set on the trappings and ornaments of his horse, Sic vos non vobis:
at such time as Charles the fifth was crowned in Bologna, and the Dukedom of
Millan restored to Francesco Sforzae. And the mot was without a body, which if
it had not, there could not have bin a better. For that thereby he seemed to
show, that how by his virtue and manhood the state of Milan, was gotten and
preserved, and after restored to the Duke by the Emperor, being desirous to
retain it to himself, contrary to the order of the league, as he had done
before.

And because I am to prosecute the order of the Nobility, I will recite unto
you the Imprese of the four last Kings of Aragona: and amongst other what the
opened Book does signify, being the Impresa of Alphonsus: which having no
soul of any mot at all, caused many to doubt of the signification. And for
that the King was of incomparable knowledge, as well in feats of Arms as
faculties of learning, and also excellent in the practice of civil government:
some said one thing, and some another: but most me^ thought he meant thereby,
that liberty was the most precious thing that a man might have, and therefore
he him self as most prudent, never took any to wife, thereby not to make him
servant to his own choice. Some said he bare the Book to signify that the
perfection of the intelligence of man, co^sisted in the knowledge of the
Sciences and liberal Arts, in the which he himself was very studious. But to
let pass the significations of this Book, I say that Ferrante his Son bare
a worthy Impresa, which began upon the rebellion of Marino di Marciano Duke of
Sessa, and Prince of Rossana, who although he were Cousin to the King,
notwithstanding did confederate with Duke John of Augio, to procure the death
of his Lord and King being at Parliament: but by mean of his hardinesle and
noble courage, the treacherous purpose could take no effect. The history of
this eue^t remains engraven in Brass on the gate of Castle nuouo. And after
a time Marino being taken and cast into prison, he resolved with himself not to
put him to death: saying, that he would not embrue his hands in the blood of
his own kindred, (albeit he were ungrateful) contrary to the expectation and
will of many his friends, and Counsailers: and in token of this his noble mind
and clemency, he figured an Armelui compassed about with a bancke of dung,
with this mot, Malo mori quam foedari: being the proper nature of the Armelui
rather to perish by hunger and thirst, then by escaping through the mire to
defile her self, and spot the polished white of her precious skin.

That also of Alphonsus the second his Son was brave, but very extrauagant,
as being composed of sillables of the Spanish tongue. And it was after this
manner, that the day drawing nere of the battle of Campo Merio, against the
Velletri, to exhort his Captains and Soldiers, depainted in his Standard
three diadems of Saints joined together, with this word Valor in the midst,
to signify that that day they ought to show their manhood above all other:
pronouncing it after the Spanish manner, Dia dc mas valor: a day of greater
valor.

Right notable in truth was that of Ferandino his Son, who being induced
with these noble and Princely qualities, liberality and clemency, and to
show that these qualities were of nature and not art: he figured a mountain
of Dyamants, which grow all as naturally of them selves, as if they were
fashioned by workmanship and art: having this mot, Naturae non artis opus.

Neither was that less commendable of King Federicke Uncle to Ferandino, who
succeeded him in his Kingdom (being by the spareles Parcae, deprived of life)
and taking possession of the Kingdom, being weakened with the late wars,
and enfeeblished with the factions of those of Aniou, to assure the Nobility
of the contrary part of his favor, he did bear figured in form, a Book of
accomptes, with leather stringes and buckles, after the manner of the Bankers
books, setting for the title 1485. and represented flames of fire to arise by
the margents of the Book being closed, with a mot of the holy Scripture: which
was this, Recedant vetera. To show by this his worrhie invention, that he
pardodoned all men their misdeedes and offenses for that year. And herein he
immitated the ancient Athenians which made the law of Amnestia: which
signifies oblivion or forgetting all which is past. Yet this did little
profit the good King Federicke. For within five years by the vnpreuented
conspiracy of Ferdinando King of Spain, with Jews the 12. of France, he was
enforced to abandon his Kingdom, and leave it to these two Kings, who divided
it amongst them.

There were other Princes of Italy and famous Captains, who delighted to show
their conceiptes in Imprese, and such devises, amongst the which, was worthily
esteemed that of Francesco Sforza Duke of Millan (at that time wherein these
sharp inventions were not so rife) who having taken possession of the state,
by means of the right of his wife, Madonna Biauca Viscont, and by force of
Arms apeased all troubles, caused to be embrodered on his Coat armor, a
Mastiffe or Greyhou^d crouching on his hinder legs, and standing up before,
under a Pine tree, with this mot, Quietu^ nemo impune laccsset, to signify
that he would not molest any man, but that he was ready to offend, and defend
himself, if any dared to oppose them selves against him: whereof he made trial
against the Venetian Nobility, (whiles he held quiet the King Renato of
Province) in repressing the greedy desire which they seemed to have of that
state.

Very like unto the former devise in beauty, was the obscure Impresa of
Galeazzo his Son and Successor, which was a Lion with an Helmet on his head,
sitting on a great fire. Very fair was the picture to the vewe, but yet
reputed without a good invention, being without a mot, and hardly understood
of the author himself: wherefore I will not strain me with the repeating of
the diverse interpretations which were given of many, whereof some were vain
and ridiculous.

But yet very learned and of a gallant show, was that of his brother Duke
Lodouico (although too too presumptuous) who was, for the opinion men had of
his wisdom, on a time chosen the Judge and arbiter of the Peace and War of
Italy, and thereupo^ he bare the Mulbery tree, (called in Italian Celso moro)
for his Impresa: which as Pliny says, is accounted sapientissima omnium
arborum, because it bloometh late, to avoid the pinching frosts, and ripeneth
her fruit very soon. As who should say, he knew by his wisdom, what fortune
the future times would bring. But his wit failed him when he called the French
men into Italy, to war against the King Alphonsus his deadly enemy, which
were after the cause of ruin: and so became his great wisdom to derision,
ending his life, imprisoned in the Tower of Loches in France, a fit example of
the misery and vain glory of man.

He caused him self also to be surnamed Moro. And when he passed the
streets, a man might here the voice of children and apprentices crying aloude,
Moro, Moro: And continuing in his like vanities, he caused to be depaynted in
the Castle, Italy in the form of a Queen, invested with a golden robe,
wherein were embrodered all the chief Cities of Italy, according to their
right semblance: and before her standing a waiting black More, with a Brush in
his hand. Whereat on a time the Ambassador of Florence merueiling, demanded
of the Duke, to what end served this black Page which brushed the robe and
the cities. To whom the Duke answered, To cleanse them from all filth, to give
him to understand, that the More was judge of Italy, to order her as he
thought good. Now the sharp witted Florentine perceiving his drift, said, Take
heed Sir that this More brush not so long, that he brush all the dust on him
self: wherein he foretold the truth. And here you are to note that many
think that this Lodouico was called Moro, for his brown skin and black
face, but they are deceived, for rather was he of a white and pale complexion,
then in any part black as we our selves have seen.

But that excels not only the Imprese of the Princes of Italy, but also
those of the house of the Medici, his predecessors, which John the Cardinal of
Medicis inverted, who afterward was Pope Leo being restored unto Florence, by
the force and power of the Spaniards, having been before eightene years in
exile. His Impresa was a yoke, which Oxen use to bear, and the mot Suaue,
signifying thereby that he was not returned to tyra^nise over his country, nor
to revenge the injuries done him of his enemies, and factious citizens: But
rather to show that his government should be gentle with all clemency, with
the mot out of the scripture answerable to his Priestly habit, taken out of
this place: Iugum meum suaue est, and onus meum leave. And truly it was very
congruent to his nature, and proceeded from the sharpnes of his own learned
wit: although it seemed that the yoke came first from the great Cosimo, who
when he was recalled to his country from exile, figured the city Florence
fitting on a Chair, with a yoke under her feet: to show thereby as it were
that saying of Cicero, Roma patrem patriae Ciccronem libera dixit, and for the
excellency hereof, it continued to be worn unto the time of Pope Leo, and
merited to be instamped in the coin of Florence.


Dom. This Impresa does greatly delight me, and in my judgment is very notable:
but of favor I pray you, let it please you to recount others of the most
famous house of Medicis, and in the^ to touch diffusedly, both the devise and
also the History, which shall notably explane them, and bring great delight to
this your discourse.


Iou. I cannot go beyond the three Diama^ts which the great Cosimo did bear,
which you see engraven in the chamber wherein I lie. But to tell you the
truth, although with all diligence I have searched, yet cannot I find
precisely what they signify, and thereof also doubted Pope Clement, who in his
meaner fortune, lay also in the self same chamber.

And truth it is that he said, the Magnifico Lorenzo used one of them with
great bravery, inserting it between three feathers of three sundry colors,
green, white, and red: which betokened three virtues, Faith, Hope, and
Charity, appropriate to those three colors: Hope, green: Faith, white:
Charity, red, with this word, Semper, below it. Which Impresa has been used
of all the successors of his house, yea, and of the Pope: who did bear it
imbrodered on the upper garments of the horsemen of his guard, under that of the
yoke.

The Magnifico Pietro, Son of Cosimo, did bear a Faulco^ with a Diamond in
her talent, And the same was used also of Pope Leo, and Pope Clement likewise,
with this mot Semper, applied to the title of religion, which the Popes
profess, although it be, as is above said, a foolish thing to compose mots
of sillables, or single words. The Magnifico would have to be understood
hereby, that every thing ought to be done to the will and pleasure of God, and
the better does it fit this purpose, for that the Diamant is of so invincible
fortititude both against the fire and stroke of the Hammer: as was most
miraculously this Magnifico, against the conspiracies and trecheries of M. Luca
Pitti.

The Magnifico Pietro, Son of Lorenzo, as a youth and inamored, used to bear
for his Impresa, great Billets of green wood, set one upon the other, which
seemed to cast forth flames and smoke from the fire within, signifying that his
enflamed affection, was the more vehement, for that the wood wherewith it
burned, was yet green. And this was the invention of that learned man Angelus
Politianus, who made thereunto a mot containing this latin verse: In viridi
teneras exurit flamma medullas.


The Magnifico Julian his brother, a man of good nature and excellent wit,
who was afterward Duke of Nemors, having taken to wife the Niece of the King of
France, Sister to the Duke of Sauoi, to show that fortune which was so many
years adverse unto him, now began to turn her favor toward him, he caused to
be set in a shield of triangular form, this word of six letters, GLOVIS:
which turning backward, you may read SIVOLG. And because it was judged obscure
It turns.
and vain in sense, many of his affectioned servants, interpreted every
letter severally by it self, whereby arose as many diversities of opinions, as
did among them in the Counsel of Basile, who interpreted the name of Pope
Foelix: saying, Faelix id est salsus eremita ludificator.

And because we have above spoken of the Imprese of Lorenzo, it shall not be
amiss, to say somewhat of that of Pope Clement, which we see depainted in
every place, and was invented of Dominico Boninsegni Florentine his treasorer,
who searched the secrets of nature, and found that the Sun beams passing
through a piece of Crystal, being so strengthened through their uniting,
according to the nature of the Prospectiue, that they burn every object,
saving only things passing white. And Pope Clement willing to show to the
world that the purity of his mind, could not be contamined, by the
malicious, neither by any force, used this Imprese: when his Enemies in the
time of Adrian, fought to bereave him both of life and dignity, which
conspiracy they brought to no effect. The Impresa became very notable and
renowned, because therein were all things which might make fair appearance to
adorn it, which were these: a round piece of Crystal, the Sun with his
beams passing through, the flame proved by them, all set in a white hood, with
this mot, Candor illesus. Yet for all this, was it very obscure to those-which
knew not the property above said. Wherefore it needed that we his servant
should to each man desirous to know the same expouded, and make manifest what
Boninsegni and the Pope meant thereby: which obscurity ought to be shunned in
an Imprese, as is before declared. And it was the more intricate for that the
mot was divided by sillables, as this, Can dor ille sus. One Master Simon
Schiauone Chaplain to the Pope, who had no more learning then would serve him
to mumble up a Mass, all meruelling at the Posie, demanded of me, what the
devil, the Pope meant thereby, which as he thought served to no purpose: For
(quoth he) ille sus signifies, that Sow: and repeting it oftentimes, ille, is
that, and sus, is sure a Sow, as I have learned in the Grammar School at
Sebenico, and therefore must it needs be that Sow. Upon this arose great
laughter, and the matter came to the Popes ear, who gave advertisement not to
deride it by letters to avoid the like errors of Amphibologia, committed by
such foolish interpreters.

That also of Hippolito Cardinal of Medicis, although it was very goodly both
in show and substance, yet had it some defect: for that none could thoroughly
understand it save only the learned, and such as were very well seen in the
Poems of Horace: for being desirous to signify that the Lady Iulia Gonzaga,
excelled in beauty all other women, (which is not unknown to our age, who for
her chaste conditions, and excellent virtues does reverence her) he figured a
Comet, whereof says Pliny, Augustus did write, that in the time of the
Feasts, which he ordained to be celebrated to Venus, a few days after the
death of Julius Caesar, appeared in the Septentrionall parts of the heavens
shining so bright the space of seven days to every Region, that it began to
appear an hour before Sun setting. The common people thought this Star to
signify, that the soul of Julius Caesar was received into the company of the
immortal Gods: which was the occasion that Augustus placed the sign of this
Commet on the top of the Stal^e, which he had erected in the Forum for his
adopted Father. Whereupon, Horace uses these words to the honor of Julius
Caesar. Micat inter omnes Iulium sydus
Velut inter ignes luna minores.


So Hippolito taking out these verses only Inter omnes, vouchsafed to use it
as a mot to honor this most virtuous and renoumed Lady. And in the Impresa
being the figure of a Commet, it seems that it was to prognosticate the
doleful death of the Cardinal, which peradventure the fearful star did
threaten, who being constrained to pass from Gaeta into Africa to the
Emperor, who lay then at Tunis, by the way to the great discomfiture and
grief of all his friends died at ^^re Castle, which was then in the possesion
of the Lady Iulia Gonzaga.

He had also before, another Impresa of the Eclipse, figuring the Moon in the
shadow, which happens by reason of the interposition of the earth between
the sun and it, with this mot, Hinc aliquando eluctabor. Signifying thereby
that he was placed in the darkness of certain obscure and troublesome thoughts
and imaginations, from which he striued to issue forth, but in showing what
they were, because they seem impure, and scarce honest, and because I will not
do prejudice to so worthy a man, neither to the worship of his house, I leave
to explicate the meaning of the Impresa, which shall notwitstanding be
understood of many which remember the man.

After the death of the Cardinal the Duke Alexander, having married Margherit
of Africa, daughter to the Emperor, and governing Florence with equale justice
agreeable to the citizens: seeing himself gallant and able of person, was
desirous to make himself renoumed by the wars, saying, that to get glory and
in taking the Emperors part, he would courageously enter into every difficult
and dangerous enterprise: resolute in this, either to win honor with praise,
or lose his life in peril. And hereupon on a day earnestly requested me to
devise him some notable Impresa to wear on his cote Armor. And I chose him out
the wild beast Rhinoceros, the deadly enemy of the Elephant, which being sent
to Rome by Emanuel King of Portugals, who fought with it, coming by Province
where it was seen being arrived on the land, and afterward drowned by hard
fortune, amongst the rocks a little above Porto Venere, (for it was not possible
that such a beast could save it self being chayned, albeit it swam miraculously
among the sharp rocks, which are all alog that cost) yet notwithstanding there
was brought to Rome, his true portrature, and greatness in February 1515 with
information of his nature: the which as Pliny says, and the Portugals
affirm, is to go and find the Elephant, and assaulting him, strikes him
under the panch with a hard and sharp horn which it has growing on his
snout, neither does he ever depart from his enemy. nor from sight, til he has
weried and slain him, which most often falls out: unless the Elephant with
his long snout do take him by the throat, and in closing do strangle him. The
form of this beast in goodly embrodery served for the couerture of his
Barbary horses: which ran in Rome for the price or masterie, with this mot in
the Spanigh tongue: No buelle sin vincer: I I war not but I won.
return not without victory, according to this verse, Rhinoceros nunquam
victus ab host cedit. This devise pleased him so that he caused it to be
engraven in his breast plate.


Dom. Since you have rehearsed the Impresa of the noble Princes of the house of
Medicis which are dead, let it please you to say somewhat of those, which the
worthy Duke Cosimo was wont to wear, of the which we have seen so many in the
Palace of the foresaid Medicis.


Iou. In truth I saw many the day of his marriage, which seemed to issue from
worthy wits, Whereof one above all pleased me, for that it was fitly applied
to his highness, who having Capricornus for his Ascendent, as also Augustus
Caesar, as witnesses Suetonius. And therefore caused the Image thereof to be
instamped in his Coin. This beast seen ed unto me very congruent to the
purpose, for that Charles the fifth, under whom the princely estate of this
Noble Duke flourished, had likewise the same ascende^t. And it seemed a thing
fatal, that the Duke Cosimo the same day of the Calends of August, wherein
Augustus Caesar obtained the victory over Antontus and Cleopatra at the
promontory Atticum, the same day he discomfited and took his enimyes on the
mountain Murlo. But this Capricornus having no Posie: I adjoined thereunto
this mot: Fidem fati virtute sequemur. To this sense I will strive with mine
own virtue, to archiue that, which the Horoscopus does promise me. And so I
figured the stars of that Constellation in the Chamber ordained for the honor
of the Duke. Which Impresa you have seen in my Study, where is also the Eagle
which signifies Jupiter and the Emperor, who holds out in her beak a
triumphant Crown, with this mot: Jupiter Merentibus offert, signifying that
his highness deserved each glorious reward for his worthy virtues.

He bare also another in the beginning of his government, learnedly devised by
the reverend Master Piea Francesco da Riui: and it was that which Virgil
speaks of in the An. of the golden Bow, with this mot: Vno auulsu non
deficit alter, signifying a bow rent from the tree, in the place whereof
suddenly succeeded another, meaning thereby, that the Duke Alexander was not so
soon departed this life, but that there was another of the same golden line
ready to succeed him.


Dom. It seems unto me my Lord that you have sufficiently touched those
which apertayne to the house of Medicis: It therefore remains, that you now
speak of other Princes and famous Captains, which you your self in your time
have known.


Iou. I will not fail herein, and now you have pleasauntly pricked me
forwards, you make me call to mind many things pertinent to this purpose,
which now I will disburthen to do you pleasure and satisfy your desire: since
the number of so many Imprese are tedious unto you.


Dom. This memory of yours cannot seem yrksome to any man of judgment, nor
tedious to those which delight in these Gentlemanlike discourses, and let not
this extreme heat which already makes you to sweat, (although we are set in
a fresh and ayrie place) be any excuse to cause you to break of your talk.


Iou. Well, since it is your pleasure, I am content to begin with the valian^t
troop of Captains, which you have seen renowned in our history. And me
seems that the honor of Rome requires of desert that we begin with the
Romans, because they have in effect borne away the mainprise of picked
Soldiers, as the inheritors of the ancient virtue of their Country. Amongst
whom in my days the two principal Famelies, chief of the ancient Facton
Guelfa and Gebellina, which were called Vrsini and Colonesi, have had each of
them two most renowned: The Famely of Vrsina had Verginio and Nicolo: the
Colonesi, Prospero, and Fabritio. Verginio, in authority, riches, multitude of
Soldiers, and in the magnificence of his house, being Captain of all the
Primates of Italy, ascended to the tipe of Dignity: from which again he
fell, after the coming of King Charles into Italy, being taken with the Earl
of Pitigliano at Nola by the French men, deceived by the promise of the Nolans
and by Jews d' Arsio the French Captain, and was kept prisoner until the
sedicious uproar happened in the French Camp at Tarro, wherein he finely escaped
the hands of those which guarded him, being as then busied about greater
matters. Now the Colonesi being under the conduct of the Cardinal Ascanio
Sforza, who at the beginning served the French men: and being made a new
league between the Princes of Europe, they returned to the service of the
King Ferandino, Prospero first, and then Fabritio, vowing themself Aragonians.

Verginio also was invited to go serve the same King, being offered a great
pay, and to be recompensed with offices of honor and dignity, as to be high
Constable, which office was afterward given to S. Fabritio, with the government
of Abruzzo Alba, and Tagliacozzo: but he judging it not beseeming his honor,
wilfully condiscended to the French, and rather accepted of their pay: although
therein the Vrsini utterly disliked his determination, because it might be
prejudicial to the honor and state of Italy, which then began again to
conspire against France, fearing least it should become subject to so puissant
a nation. But he hardened with a fatale obstinacy, addressed himself with
many other Captains of the same conspiracy against king Ferandine: answering
those which dissuaded him to the contrary (as the servants of the Pope, of the
Duke Lodouico, and of the Lords of Venice, who showed him the danger he
wilfully cast himself into, and therewithal willed him to weigh what great
rewards and benefits were offered him) said, I am like unto the Camel, whose
nature is this, that coming to a clear river, drinks not of the water until
first he has fouled it by trampling with his feet. And therefore I bear a
Camel troubling a River with this French mot. Il me plait la trouble. But his
rash determination had rufull end. For being overcome Trouble does please me.
in this conflict besieged in Atella, and at length taken, died in prison in
the Castle of Ouo. This received he the punishment of his paruerse enterprise.

The Earl of Pitigliano, being in pay with the Lords of Venice, in the wars
of Lombardie, had for his Impresa a collar of Iron, called in Latin Millus, set
full of sharp pricks, as we see about the neck of the Sheepheards Mastiues to
defend them from the biting of the Wolves, with this mot, Sauciat and defendit
albeit this Impresa is to be seen at this day at Rome, in the Palace of
Nicosia in possession of the S. ors of the house of Vrsina: and in the midst
of this collar is this Posie, Prius mori quam fidem fallere: there also are
figured two hands, which seeming to take hold of the Collar, are pierced with
the sharp pricks which are set thereupon: and in the midst there is
depainted a Rose.

To the other former Imprese are nothing inferior those of the other two
Brethren the Colonesi, Prespero and Fabritio, who at diverse times had sundry
inventions: some Military, and some amorous, according to their fantasies.
For both of them even to extreme old age, thought it no shame to be amorous,
and especially Prospero who having placed his affection on a noble Lady, unto
whose company (to dissemble the secret favor which he received, and to
aucyde sufpition) he aduertured to bring a freende of his: which thing was
unadvisedly done, considering that women are almost all generally desirous of
choice and change, of whom she became inamoured, deeming him worthy the
possession of her person: which Prospero perceiving, and thereby receiving no
final discomfort he took to his Impresa the Brazen Bull of Perillus, who was
the first which experienced the torment that he him self had invented, being
commanded to be put therein (by the Edict of the tyrant Phaleris) and a great
fire to be kindled underneath, where with yelling cries he ended his miserable
life. And this did Prospero, thereby to signify, that he himself was the cause
of his own misfortune. And the mot was this. Ingenio experior funera digna
meo. My self was cause of my own misfortune.



Dom. Me seems the soul of this gallant invention had bin far better
after this manner, Sponte contractum inexpicabile maluns.


Iou Truly that of Fahritia, excelled for bravery, who perseuering in taking
the French part, although invited with promise of great rewards, to
participate with the whole consent of Italy, yet at the first he refused it,
and thereupon took for his Impresa a vessel made after the ancient form,
with this mot, Samnitico no capitur auro: to signify that he would not be
corrupted with coin no more then was that Fabritius the aucient Roman, with
the proffered gold of the Samnites, who were in league with Pyrrhus.

He also did bear an other, very commendable, which was the Touchstone, with
this mot, Fides hoc vno, virtusque probantur: to importe that his virtue and
faith should of al men be known by touch and trial. This did he wear at the
coflict of Rauenna, where his valiant courage was manfully shown, albeit he
was there wounded and taken prisoner.

In the same war Marc' Antonio Column Nephewe to Prospero, who lay in
garrison defending the City Rauenna, where he worthily behaved himself against
the violent rage and terrible battery of Mouris de fois, had a bow of Palm
wrethed with a bow of Cipres, with this mot, ERIT ALTERA MERCES: Meaning that
he went to the wars either to win victory or loose his life. The Palm
being borne in sign of Victory, and the Cipresse worn at Funeralles. This
man had all the gifts which either nature or fortune might bestow, to make a
man singular.

The same Marc' Antonio wore also an other in the wars of Mirandola and
Bologna, wherein the Cardinal of Pauia was Legate, of nature proud and
imperious, and the lofty minded Roman not yielding to be co^trolled, but
would execute every duty which pertayned to the wars himself, the rather
for that he perceived the Cardinal to use dishonest dealing with the Duke of
Vrbin, therefore he was after slain of him. To manifest his noble mind he used
for his Impresa the Heron, which bird in the time of rain flies so hie above
the Clouds, that she escapes the wett, to the end it may not fall on her
back, and yet naturally uses to bathe her in the little streams, content to
have the water under her, but not that it should fall upon her. The Impresa was
very delightsome to behold: for besides the brave show of the bird, there was
figured the Sun above the Clouds, the bird between the Sun and the
Clouds, in the middle region where rain and hayle are engendered, below were
Marish grounds with Sedge and other green herbs, but above all it was
adorned with this goodly mot about the neck of the Heren, Natura dictante
feror.

I remember also an other which he used (as one which greatly delighted in
these ingenious inventions) in the wars of Verona: which City was valiauntly
defended by his manhood, against the force of both the French and Venetian
Camps, which was a vesture in the midst of the fire, which notwitstanding
burned not, as made of that Lint of India, which Plinic called Albestin, which
may be purged from spots in the fire and not consumed, and it had this mot,
Semper pertinax.

S. Mutio Colonna, the Nephewe of S. Fabritio, happily did immitate the prompt
wit of Marc' Antonio, and was a valiant and prudent Knight, who for his
deserts had of Pope lulio the 20. and Pope Leo the 10. the company of an
hundred Lances, on whose upper Armor and Ensigns he caused to be figured an
hand burning in the fire upon an Altar of Sacrifice with this Posie,
Fortiafacere, and pati Romanu^ est. alluding his own proper name to the
ancient Mutius, who intending to have slain Porsenna King of Toscanie, and
For that his hand failed in striking an other, he burnt it of, in the sight of
Porsenna: which was so merueilous, (that as the Poet says) Hane spectare
manu^m Porsenna non potuit.

The Colonesi bare altogether one Impresa for them all, at such time, as Pope
Alexander showed extremity to the Roman Baronyt whereupon they were
constrained with Ihon the Cardinal to slye Rome, and part of them took
Naples, and part Scicill: in which case they were thought to make a better
departure then had done the Ursini, for that they had rather loose their robe
and dignity then to commit their lives to the mercy of bloody tyrants, as
did they: whereupon they became undone and miserably strangled. Their Impresa
was to signify, that although they were persecuted by hard fortune, and their
former power so greatly abated, yet lived they, and in hope that when these
boisterous storms were past, they should again have to rejoice: and this it
was: Certain Bulrushes figured in the midst of a River, whose nature is to
bow and not to break, neither with the violence of wave nor wind, and their
mot was, Flectimur non frangimur vndis.


Dom. Since you have recited the devises of these Roman Barons, it seems
also convenient that you say somewhat of other Princes and Captains of Italy,
and likewise of Forainers, if happily they come to your memory.


Iou. But first hearken to that which S. Bartolomeo Aluiano, a Captain stout
and valiant, but very unfortunate, used to bear on his Ensign. He was a
great defe^der of Vrsina faction: he manfully overcame Bracciano, the Cha^pio^
of Pope Alexander: And took Viterbiu^, spoiling all which took part with John
Gatto (in favor of the Maganzesi) saying they were the pestilent venom of the
City: and after the death of this John Gatto their Captain, he bare in his
ensign an Unicorn, whose property is to have power against poison, figuring a
fountain all environed with Todes and Serpents, and the Unicorn putting in
his horn into the River before he drink, to purge the venom, with this mot
about his neck, Venona pello. The same Ensign was lost in the Battle of
Vincentia, after that this Aluiano had a great space defended him against the
fury of his enemy: Marc' Antonio da monte, holding it in his arms, and never
leaving it, until he fell down dead.

For the same Aluiano was composed also another Impresa, by Cotta of Verona his
Poet, after the sacking of Vincentia, whereof it was said the Purueyour or
Paymayster Master Andreo Loredan, was the principal cause, who at that instant
when the Cesarian enemies being put to flight, run armed with this brestplate
of Crimsin Velvet, into the Pauillion of the General, and sinding him sitting
at the Table with many other captains, consulting what were best to be done:
he began to lay before them their cowardice, and long lingering, in not
pursuing the Enemy: Albeit they were of this mind, that the enemies which
slye ought to have a bridge of silver. But he with great instancie urged them
that they should not so suffer the^ to escape their hands, considering that
they had already turned their backs. By the brave and furious words of this
Loridano, were many incensed to pursue them: and by that means were the
Venecians overcome, and Loridano left dead in the field, receiving the just
penalty of his rash attempt. Whereupon Cotta exhorted his Lord, that in stead
of the Unicorn that he had lost in that Battle, to bear in his Ensign a
Gander in the midst of certain Swannes, with this brief about his neck:
Obstrepuit inter olores: to signify that it was unfit and ill beseeming that a
Senator with a long gown should presume to judge of warlike affairs among
Captains. But this devise Aluiano refused, (albeit greatly commending it) for
that he would not seem to scorn the said Loridano being dead, in comparing
him to a Gander.

Now will I speak of others, renowned with the fame and glory, which they by
their worthy deeds have atchiued: amongst who^ I reckon as chief Francesco
Gonzago Lord of Mantua, who became most famous in the Battle at Tarro, and by
the Conquest which he got over the Kingdom of Naples, for the King Ferandino.
This Gonzaga being of malicious envy accused before the Venetian Senate, for
whom he was Captain general: and after he had justified himself, he used for
his Impresa a Furnace wherein gold is tried, set on the fire, with certain
stemmes of gold therein, with this Posie out of the holy Scripture: Brobasti
me Domine, and cognouisti willing also, Sessionem mea^ following in the same
sentence to be understood. His slanderous accusers objected, that he coueted
to sit on two seats, that is to say, serve the Venetians in the wars, and
also Lodouico Sforza his brother in law, in taking the advantage of the time
after the Battle, ceasing to pursue the French men half conquered, in which
case he never offended, for it was all forged by the Earl Gaiazzo, to pleasure
the French men, and in dispight of the Duke Lodouico, for Gaiazzo desired not
to see the Venetian Lords Conquerers: to the end, that if the French men had
been overcome, they had not so victoriously have gone to occupy the state of
Millan, of them-desired ever since the time of Duke Phillip and his father.

Amongst all the famous Captains, the Lord Giouan, Giacopo Triuultio, was of
sovereign wit, and in great reputation, who from the beginning as an Enemy to
the Duke Lodouico Sforza, seeing him seek the usurping of the Dukedom, which
was the right of his Nephewe, he joined with the King of Aragona open Enemy to
Lodouico, for the same cause. And to signify that in the government of his
Country he was not to yield one jot to him: he bare for his Impresa a quadret
of Marble, with a style of Iron planted in the midst, opposite to the Sun,
which was the an^cient Ensign of his house, with this mot, No^ cedit vmbra
soli: Although the Sun turn about never so often the style always yields
his shadow.

Alphonso Duke of Ferara, a Captain of resolute Prowess and admirable
constancy, when he went to the Batell of Rauenna, did bear a Globe or round
boule of mettle, full within of artificial fire, which powered forth flames by
certain creueis, and it was so cunningly contrived, that at due time and place
the fire would issue forth, making great confusion of those, which were within
the danger thereof. The invention wanted a Posie which was afterward added
by the famous Aristo, and it was Loco and tempore: and then translated into
French to give it a better show after this manner, A lieu e temps. Valiant did
In place and time.
he show himself in this bloody battle, placing his Artillarie in such
sort, that he slew much people.

After that by the death of Pope Leo, the Duke of Vrbin had recovered his
estate, being reconciled with the Baglioni, and in friendship with the Cardinal
of Medicis, who at that time governed the state of Florence, was ordained
general for that common wealth. And on a time Master Thomas Maufrede his
Ambassador, requested me to devise some Impresa for his Standard: whereupon I
caused to be figured a Palm, having the top thereof weighed down with the
heavy poize of a great Marble tied thereunto, to signify that which Pliny
says of the said tree, being of this nature that it returns to the former
fashion be it depressed with never so great a weight, mounting it up in time,
and drawing it on high: adding thereunto this mot, Inclinataresurgit: alluding
to the virtue of the Duke, which never had been oppressed, though sometimes by
the fury of Fortune for a time abased. This invention pleased him well, and he
ordained that it should be set on his Standard: albeit upon certain occurrents
he came not to take the office of General.


Dom. I am glad that you are begun to recite some Imprese which you your self
have devised, whereof I have seen diverse in the Chamber where you study.


Iou. In truth I have made many in my time, but I shame to recount the^ all,
since there are some which have those defects which are peculiare to human
actions. For as I said at the beginning, the framing of an Impresa is the
adventure of a ready and fantastical brain: and it is not in our power,
although with long study, to forge an invention, fitting the humor of him
which shall wear it, or aduau^cing the credit of him which composeth it: for
therein he adue^tureth his fame, being accounted learned. And in effect it is
one thing to say well, in showing a conceit, and an other thing, to express
the same with a soul and body, that it may be altogether curra^t without any
error. For I my self which have made so many for others, desirous greatly, but
yet in vain, to find the body of a subject to this mot, Fato prudentia minor:
wherein I fare like the Shoemaker, who fitteth with new and nete shoes every
other man's foot, and is feign himself to wear his own broken and patched:
for never could I find out subject of any thing which satisfy me. But first
before I show you those of mine own composing, in respect of modesty I will
recite some of other men.


Dom. I pray you have regard that you utter no more which shall seem maimed or
imperfect.


Iou. I shall now recount those which shall be perfectly good, since heretofore
we have been showed such as have been ridiculous: and to prosecute our purpose
I say, that the Impresa of S. Ottauiano Fregoso at the wars of Bolona and
Modena, was accounted ingenious, but very extrauigant considering the picture:
for he wore a great many Ciphers Sables in a field: Or in the borders of the
utter part of the Bards of his horses. Which Charecters of them selves, in the
art of numbering signify nothing, but having a figure of number set before
them, they make a multitude almost infinite: as for example placing but an
unite before the said Ciphers, they signify a Million Millions. Above the
border was written this. Hoc per se nihil est, sed si minimu^ addideres maximum
fiet: Signifying that with a little aid he should recover the State of Genoua,
which whilom was in the possession of Signior Pietro his father, who there was
slain, and this Signior Ottauiano at that time banished, little at all aided
by the Duke of Vrbin: but yet of sufficient hope to be restored to his house,
as afterward he was by Pope Leo. Truth it is that the Posie is to to long, but
yet the nature of the witty subject does bear it singular well.

Signior Hierosin Adorno, who took Genoua, by the force and strength of the
Cesarians, and chased from thence the foresaid Signior Fregoso, for that he
making himself of France, gave over the government of the Dukedom, reserving
but only that title of Governor. This Adorno was a youth of singular hope,
and adorned with great vertnes: but envious death too sone cut of his desired
life: he, as it is the slipperie nature of that frail age, was ardently
inamoured of a Lady decked with notable beauty, and adorned with rare
chastity: and on a time he requested me to inue^t an Impresa to this tenor: how
that he thought and verily believed, that the obtaining of her favor would be
the attayning of his felicity: and contrariwise, the losing of the same the
bereauing of his life, in yielding to him a desired death to end the tedious
travails which he had sustained, either in the pursutes of love or practices
of war: which I hearing there came to my remembrance that which Iutius
Obsequeus wrighteth in his Book da prodigijs. The lightning to be of this
nature, that coming after great travails and disgraces, it will make an end
of them, but during the time of happy fortune it brings damage, ruin or
death: and so I figured the lightning of Jupiter, after that form as we see it
in antique Monuments, with this brief about it, Expiabit aut obruct. The last
part of which Posie he shortly after verified, departing this life in Venice,
where he sat chief Ambassador for the Emperor.

But since we are entered to mention the worthies of Genoua, I will rehearse
three of mine own which I made at the request of two Gentlemen of the house of
Flisca, Sinibaldo, and Ottobuono, whereof one was to signify the revenge,
which they had of the death of their Brother Girolamo, cruelly murdered by the
Fregosi co^petitors of the state: for the which these lost their lives,
Zaccaria Fregoso, S. Fregosino, Lodouico, and Guido: which rouenge did
something recomforte them for the loss of their Brother: saying, that their
enemies had not much whereof to vaunt, in using such cruelty against them:
being a thing not usual among the Fregosi, Adorni, and Flischi, to imbrue their
hands in the blood of their foreign enemies, but a thing lawful to contend
for the principality in civil contention among the^ selves, or else in open
war. I therefore figured an Elephant assalted of a Dragon, who twinding about
the legs of his enemy, is wont by his venomous biting to empoyson his belly,
wherewith he dies. But the Elephant by nature knowing the danger, trayleth
him along the ground till he come to some stone or block, whereunto leaning
himself he rubbeth there against the Dragon that he dies. The devise had a
goodly show, and the mot did sufficiently bewray the signification thereof:
which was in Spanishe after this manner, Non vos alabereis: to show unto the
Fregosi, that they had not to boast of You need not boast.
the vilanie committed against their blood.

I also composed another for the Flischi upon this occasion: They being in
conference and consulting to take the Emperors part, and to join with the
Adorni: whereupon many which were affectioned unto them and also their
servant, advised them not hastily to resolve them on this enterprise: for
that the forces of the King of France were great, and that S. Ottauino Fregoso
had got them on his side, and had set firm footing in the government, and
therefore was well provided to defend himself against any which should offer
him the onset, at that time: To who^ they replied, that they knew how and when
to put in practice such exploites. And upon this they demanded me some
Impresa, and presently there came to my remembrance that which Pliny writes
of the Alcions, certain birds, which by instinct of nature, attend Solstitium
vernale, as most commodious for them, knowing the just time when the calm
season, and quiet seas shall be, which duly happens once in the year, and
is called of the common sort S. Martins Summer, in which season the said
Alcions build their nestes, lay their Eggs, and hatch their young in the
midst of the Seas, having happy leisure by the quiet calm. Wherefore the
days wherein the Alcion breeds are called Alcionides. I caused then to be
figured a clear Sky, with a calm Sea, and thereon a nest, from the midst
to either end somewhat reared up of some high, with the necks of the birds
looking over the prowe being of merueilous strange colors, as azure, red,
white, green, and yealowe, with this mot above them in French, Nous scauous
bien le temps: as much to say, as we know well the time, when we have to give
the onset on our enemies. And so it happily sell out that they returned to
their possessions reue^ged on their adversaries, with the good Augure of these
Alcion birds. This devise was depainted in many places of their stately Palace
at Viola, before it was by public edict ruined.

I made also an other which peradventure may better like you, for Sinibaldo
Flischo, concerning a matter of love, which began now to florishe in wanton
peace, after the restles toils of war. For this Sinibaldo serving a Lady,
who began to enter into some suspision of him, seeing him, every where to
frequent other gallant Dames, according to the custom of the Gentlemen of
Genoua, whereof she sharply oftentimes reproved him, complaining of his vnpure
and corrupted faith. Whereupon, he desirous to clear himself of that
suspicion, requested me to invent some pretty devise concerning his case. And
I figured him a Needle touched with an Adamant, applied to a Sea card with a
Compass thereunto, and above the clear azure Sky with Stars, with this mot,
ASPICIT VNAM: To show that although in the heavens were very many fair
Stars, yet there was but one regarded of the Adamant, which is only the Pole
star: and so he reconciled himself with his Mistrisse, whom he entirely
loved. And albeit he sported with others, yet was it not in earnest, but rather
to cover his faithful affection, under the veil of a pretensed love.


Dom. Well my Lord, since there is not to be observed any order, in rehearsing
these things which are extraordinary: therefore I pray you prosecute those
Impresa which shall come next to hand, whether they be amorous or touching
Arms: although in my co^ceipt it were better to dispatch first those
pertaining to Arms, and to end your discourse with the sweet inventions of
love.


Iou. There comes now to my remembrance one of S. Gion Paul Baglione, a man
of great wisdom and expert in feats of Arms, very affable and of such
courtly eloquence, as they use in the Perugian tongue, but yet passing subtle
and crafty, having aspired to be (as it were) Tyrant of Perugia, and Gouerner
of the Venetian Camp. Howbeit, better had it bin for him, to have kept him
quiet with honor at home in his Cou^trcy: for Pope Leo (provoked by the
infinite complaints, made by the chief of the famelie of the Baglioni)
trained him to Rome, by smoth entrcaties, whether when he came he cut of his
head. And so became his Impresa clean dashed and most vain: which was a
Griphon argent in a field Geules, with this mot, Vnguibus and rostro, at que
alis armatus in hostem: whereupon wittely said S. Gentile Baglione: this great
bird had not the use of his wings, as at other times it has to avoid the
ginne, which was laid for it.

I remember also an other which I made for Girolamo Mattei a Romayne Captain
of the Horsemen pertaining to the Guard of Pope Clement, a man of noble
courage: who having with great patience, perseuera^ce, and dissembling,
attended a time to slay Girolamo, the Nephewe of the Cardinal of Valle, to the
end to revenge the death of Paluzzo his brother, by him cruelly murdered in a
civil contention. And having requested me to find him some Impresa to this
sense: that a noble mind has power to digest with time every grievous
injury. And I figured for him an Austritch devouring an Horsenaile, with this
mot. Spiritus durissima coquit. So much was his notable revenge commended, that
his very enemy of the house of Ualle accepted of an agreement, cancelling all
cause of iarres between the two famelies, and the Pope Clement pardoned the
homicide, and made him captain.

The Austritch also served me, by reason of the diversity of her nature, and
her diverse properties, for a another devise, which I had for my Lord the
Marquess of Uasto, at such time as the Emperor and the Pope assembled at
Bologna, and consulted of the affairs of Italy: where was made Captain of
the league, for the defense of all estates, and the preservation of peace
Antonio da Leua, which degree rather seemed to appertain to the Marquess then
to him. But Pope Clement displeased for some damages received by the Spanish
Fauteric in Piacentino and Parmegiano, where the Soldiers living at their own
pleasure (the Marquise not restrayning their over great liberty) pillaged
almost all the country, whereof the Pope would be revenged in hindering his
dignity, which thing the Marquise taking grievously, complained of the Pope in
this manner: I may repent me that I was not at the sacking of Rome, when I
departed and left my Soldiers, and like a true Italian refused to be Captain.
For I could not be present at the injuries and damages done to the Pope.
Whereupon on a day as I recomforted him he said unto me: were it not that I had
been aided by mine own deserts, to attain to be General of this invincible
band of footmen, it had not failed but some had put in their foot before me.
And thereupon willed me to make him some Impresa, and me seemed that the
Austritch Cursant made very much to his purpose, who as Pliny says, is
accustomed to use her Wings as Sails, excelling in swiftnes of running all
other creatures. And albeit Nature has given her Wings, yet has she not the
use of them as have other birds. And unto this Austritch I added this mot. Si
sursum non efferor alijs, saltem cursu praeteruehor omnes.

Also I gave the proportion of the same bird to the Earl Pietro Nauarro, when
by the capitulatio^ of peace, he was delivered our of the prison of Castle
Nuouo, and came to Rome, where I began with him to have very strinct
familiarity, thereby to be informed of diverse points concerning my History
touching human affairs which I was then to write, wherein he courteously
satisfied me, as one most covetous of his honor.

And having recounted all his victories and misfortunes, he requested of me an
Impresa upon certain subjects which I liked not: whereunto I replied. Sir,
you need not seek farther then your own noble deeds for an Impresa: for I
having made you renowned in my history, as the glorious inuenter of that
admirable and supernatural art of Undermining, which shall immortalize your
name: as there where you caused most miraculously the Castle of Ouo at Naples
to be blown up into the air: I would not have you part from this, being a
thing which has purchased unto you surpassing honor and singular reputation.
Whercupo^ he confessing it to be true, answered me: I pray see if you can
find me one to this effect. Then came there to my remembrance that which some
write of the Austritch, which does not hatch her Eggs as do other birds by
covering on them, but does accomplish it with the effectual rays of her
eyes. So I figured the Austritch Male and Female, steadfastly looking upon
their Eggs with the rays passing from their eyes to their Eggs, with this
mot, Diuersa ab illis virtute valemus. Expressing thereby the renoumed
commendation of his wit in the invention of Undermining, which with the
violence of the fire, is in effect equal to the infernal Furies. This devise
pleased him well, and he willingly accepted of it.


Dom. Truly my Lord these your Austritches with their diverse properties, have
served passing fitly in these three far different Imprese, and I doubt
whether any of the rest which remain can excel them, but it may be they may
disgrace others, composed of noble wits, which you shall hereafter recite.


Iou. I am not so arrogant to assume so much to my self, as to make such which
shall excel, nay rather cou^teruaile the devises of others: as namely of that
of the Marquise of Pescara, the first time he was General of all the light
Horsemen in the Battle of Rauenna, where to defend his Ensign, he was
grievously wounded, and being found amidst the dead Carcasses was taken
prisoner by the French men, he bare in his Ensign a Spartan Targat, with this
mot, Aut cum hoc aut in hoc: According to the same which that courageous woman
gave unto her Son going to the Battle of Mantinea, to signify unto him,
that he should be resolute in this, either to combat so valiauntly, thereby to
purchase victory, or else dying like a Gentleman or worthy the name of a
Spartan, to be carried dead in his Target to his house, according to the
ancient usage of Greece: which thing Virgill seems to note in this verse:
Impositum scuto refirunt pallanta frequentes: which also may be gathered by the
words of the famous Epaminondas, who being in a Battle wounded to death, and
carried forth by his Soldiers, earnestly demanded whether his Target were
saved, and answer being made, that it was, he even in the extremity of
death showed some sign of rejoicing.

The French Captains have been much delighted in Military and amourous
Impressed, amongst whom, the best renoumed, and who deserved to be sovereign at
Arms, was the Lord of Trimouille, who being Conqueror in the Battle of S.
Aulbin in Bretaigne, where was taken prisoner the Duke of Orleans, which after
was King Jews: had for his Impresa a whoele with this mot, Sans point sortir
horse de l'orniere: Without tra^sgressing the prescribed limets.
to signify that he always kept himself upright in the service of his King,
without going astray for any inconuenie^ce which might happen. He was a
Captain of absolute courage, in so much that being 60. years of age, honorably
died fighting, in the sight of his King, when he was overcome and taken in the
Battle at Pania.

There was also among the chief Captains which came into Italy famous and
renowned, Jews of Luxembourg of the race of the Emperor Henry, who died at
Bonconuento, whose Sepulture you saw in the great Church at Pisa. It was this
Jews, to whom the Duke Lodouico Ssorza, yielded himself being betrayed by the
Suissers at Nouara, hoping to have by him or by his means some comfort in his
calamity. He (to come to our purpose) had for his Impresa a Sun, Or, in a
field azure, environed with thick Clouds, with this mot, Obstantia nubila
soluet: to infer that he having endured diverse adversities, after the
beheading of his Father the high Constable of France, hoped notwithstanding
that by his valor and virtue, that even as the Sun with his skalding beams
dissolues the Clouds, so should he vanquishe all that was adverse to his
shining virtues.

There succeeded this Governor in Lombardie, Charles of Ambouse, called, for
the dignity of the office he bare in the Kings court, great Master, and Lord
of Chamon: He was of a pleasant disposition, and much addicted to love, yet by
his visage a man would have judged him rigorous, and by his Cholorique words
fierce and angry: notwithstanding he delighted to court Ladies, and took
great pleasure, in feasting, banqueting, dancing, and in Comedies: which
life was not liked of King Jews. For he lay then sporting in these delights
when he should have succored Mirandula, besieged and taken by Pope Julius. He
gave for his Impresa a savage man with a Clubbe in his hand, and above him this
Latin posie, Mitem animum agresti sub tegmine seruo: thereby to assure the
Ladies, that he was not so rigorous as he seemed to the outward vewe.

The foresaid invention to many seemed good: but notable in my conceit was
that of Francesco Sensauerino Earl of Gaiaza, who in emulation of his Brother
Galeazzo at the coming of the French men into Italy, departed from the Duke
Lodouico, and joined with them, not without breach of his honor: for that such
a departure carried some suspect. His Impresa was set on the Coat armor of a
hundred Lances, which he obtained of the King, and it was the Travail wherein
Smithes use to put in wild horses when they shoe the^, with this mot, Pour
dompter folly: to signify that he would tame a certain enemy of his, To tame
folly.
which was of the like wilful nature.

There was also among the French men a famous Captain of tried valor named
Edward Stuart, of the blood royal of Scotland; called my Lord of Aubinie: he
as being Cousin to King James the fourth, gave a Lion rampant in a field
argent, all sown with buckles, imbrodered on his Cotes and Ensigns with this
mot, Distantia iungit: Signifying that he was the mean and the buckle to hold
united the King of Scots and the King of France, to counteruaile the forces of
the King of England, the natural enemy of the French men and Scots.


Dom. It seems good to me, my Lord, that you return again to our Italians,
at the least to those (as we say) of the second rank, since you have already
from the beginning spoken of the most famous, to whose glory few dare presume
to aspire, now at this day: for neither the Colonesi nor Vrsini, have any of
their progenic which will tread their steps in the practice of Cheualrie. And
it behooves those Princes which seek to equal them selves in honor with
Francesco Gonzaga, Alphonso d' Este, Giacopo Triuultio, or with the Signiori
Regnicoli, to strive with restles labor and industry: but now they, it
seems, are in declining: for that at this day, honors and dignities, the
rewards of Cheualrie, are given into the hands of Strangers. And if the
Earl Ferrante Sensauerino, Prince of Salerna, a man decked with notable
virtues, does not resussitate the honor of his Kingdom, I see not what hope
there is of other Princes in Italy.


Iou. There is some hope in deed of him, whereof he gave great likelihood in
the Battle of Cerosola, where it was manifest that through his policy retiring
a little back, he made in great part frustrate the victory of the French
men. And it may be said that he preserved the state of Millan, and Piemont for
the Emperor, which was no small commendation in so great disgraces.


Dom. Tell me my Lord, does this Prince bear any Impresa, in my opinion he
should not want being so gallant a Knight.


Iou. Truly I never saw any Ensign of his, neither any amorous devise,
whereof I marvel, having in his house the excellent Poet Bernardo Tasso. Also
in his country the Duke of Amalfi of the house of the Piccolomini, a
courteouse and valiant Knight, and above all an excellent Rider, and very
skillful in judging of a good and courageous horse, being exhorted in my
presence by the Lord Marquise of Vasto his Cousin, to leave the pleasures of
Sienna, whereof he was Governor, and to go with him unto the wars of
Piemont: he answered, the spirit was willing but the flesh was weak: but what
mcaneth (says he) that place of Scripture, Nemo nos conduxit. Upon that the
Marquise made him General of the light horsemen in the wars of Piemont. And
the Duke before he departed requested me a denise for his Ensign, to this
effect that the Marquise had before said unto him, that three things were
convenient for him which should take on him the like office, which are courage,
liberality, and vigilancie: Do not you (said I) put him in remembrance of
liberality, neither courage, since he has learned them both of you, neither of
vigilancie, for that he is of this nature to rise before day, either to go to
the chase or at least to get him out of his bed: whereat he smiling said: the
vigilancie I mean comprehends all care and industry a man vfeth; to the end
he be not taken at unawares, or else to seek how to take his enemy at the
advantage. Whereupon I figured for his Impresa a Crane holding up her left
clawe, wherein she clafpeth a stone for a remedy against sleep: which thing
Pliny records of these Birds, being merueilous watchful: and thereunto
added this brief, Officium natura docet.


Dom. Tell me my Lord, were there none amongst the Nobility of the Regnicolo
more ancient then this man which did bear any goodly devise?


Iou. I remember but two, the one of Andrea di Capua Duke of Tremoli, and the
other of Tomaso Caraffa Earl of Matalone. The Duke in his flowring age, being
made Captain general of Pope Iulio, died in Ciuita Castellana, as was thought
by poison, given him of some which envied his honor. He bare for his Impresa a
bundle of darting Iauelines, to signify that he wanted not weapons to keep
the enemies from approaching him, his mot was Fortibus non deerunt.

The County of Metalone, the General of King Ferandino, had for his devise
Roman Balance, with this mot of the holy scripture, Hoc fac and viues: which
seemed very extrauagant, for that the Balance serves to weigh many things:
and it was skorned by Mons. di Persi Brother to Mons. d' Alegria, who
disco^fiting the Aragonian Camp at Eboli got the Ensign of the General, and
said: in good faith my Enemy has not observed that which was written about
his Ballace: for that he has not well waighed his forces with mine.

And since we are entered among the Neapolitans, whose Princes seem to
degenerate from their auncesters in not going to the wars, which I think is
because the honors and dignities due unto them are given to strangers: yet I
say there wa^teth not men of the second form, both noble and valiant, who by
their valor aspire to honor: Amongst whom is Signior Giou Baptista Castaldo,
famous for a thousand fresh and notable experiences, being General of the
Camp of Charles the Emperor, obtaining great praise for his enterprises at
Germany, amounting to the honor of Liutenaunt and Captain for the King of
the Romans in the affairs of Transiluania against the Turks and the
Valacchi. This Castaldo, all the time that the whole wars endured, against
the French men in Piemoat, he would not be there, seeing that the Marquise of
Vasto did distribute all the honorable Offices to ill experienced Soldiers, and
therefore lived aloof at Millan: declaring that the Marquise did work things
against nature, to make all Nations to wonder at his disorderly dealing. And
thereupon willed me to compose him some Impresa, and I figured him the Mount
AEtna of Sicilia, whose top burns casting out violent flames of fire, and a
little below has the ground all covered with Snow, not far from that a
vastie place full of burnt and consumed stones, and at the foot thereof lies
a most pleasant and fruitful soil: adding thereunto this mot, Natura maiora
facit: Alluding to the disorder of the Marquise in bestowing the honors of the
field. Thus he became stained with the reproache of unskillfulness and want of
Judgment, in preferring such as he thought might command him: and putting by,
so valiant a Captain, as was this Castaldo.


Dom. Now I pray you my Lord what are the other Imprese which I have seen
depainted in your Gallery?


Iou. There is among other, that of the excellent and never sufficiently
commended Lady the Marquise of Piscara, Vittoria Colonna, to whom I account my
self infinitely bound, as I have showed to the world in the life of her
invincible Spouse, the Lord Marquise of Piscara. This Lady, albeit she lead a
chaste and sober life, virtuous and liberal toward every man. Yet there wanted
not envious and malignant persons, which did molest and disturb her well
disposed mind. But co^forting her self with this: that they which though to
harm her, hurt them selves: which proved most true by diverse reasons which
are not here to be uttered. Therefore I figured her certain Rocks standing in
the midst of a turbulent Sea, beating against them with boisterous waves:
with this brise added above it. Conantia frangere frangunt. As much to say,
that the Rocks of their firm force and strength, repel the furious surges of
the raging Sea, breaking and consuming them into froth. And this Impresa
bearing a gallant show I caused to be figured in my house.

And since we are entered to speak of Women, I will also show you another which
I made for the Lady Marquise of Uasto, Maria d'Aragone. Who was wont to say,
that as she her self made singular acount of her honor and chastity, so not
only would she preserve it in her own person, but also take great care that
none of her gentlewomen and feruants should, rechlesly corrupted, transgress
the limits of honesty. And thereupon set down a straight order in her house,
to remove all occasions both from her men and women, of seeking to defile
themselves or their honor. And therefore I made her that Impresa which you so
greatly commended in my Gallery, which is two bundels of ripe Millet, bound
together with this mot. Seruari and seruare meu^ est. For the Millet is of such
nature, that not only it gardes it self from al corruption, but also preserues
other things from putrefying which lie near it, as the Rubarbe and Caufire:
which precious things the Apothicaries keep in boxes full of Millet, to the
end they may not be consumed.


Dom. I am glad that you are descended from Captains to treat of Women:
which also is the more pertinent to the purpose, for that these two were the
wives of most honorable knights.


Iou. Hereupon I call to mind a beautiful dame, the love of Odelto diffois,
called Monsigdi Lutrec, who on a time merely sporting with him said, that he
was noble and valiant, but too too proud, wherein peradventure she told the
truth. For when diverse of the richest Seigneurs of Millan came in the morning
to his house to salute him, without putting of his Bonnet, or with any other
gesture of courtesy or humanity, hardly would he dayne to show them a merry
countenance, which thing brought him into reproach and contempt with the
Nobility of Milan. Whereupon he took occasion (in steed of a Cow, Gueles
with Bees, the ancient Arms of his house) to figure a large Chimney, and
therein a great fire, with this mot Dou' e gran fuoco e gran fumo. To infer
an answer to the Lady, that where there is a fiery courage joined with
Nobility, there must also be a great smoke of pride: Wherefore it is
necessary, that great estates, take especial regard that they commit nothing
to cause them to be hated of the common people, as was Theodoro Triuulsio, who
having bin long a complaining among the French men, and Aragonians in the
kingdom of Naples, was esteemed wise and politic, rather for speaking little
in Counsels and assemblies, then for combatting in Skirmishes, he bare for
his devise only five years of corn, without any mot, being a man little
liberal either in hospitality or rewarding Soldiers, and of small courtesy
in affairs of peace, which brought him into disdain with the Uenetian Lords,
for when he was general, that they determined to change him for Marc' Antonio
Colonno. And therefore Master Andre G: itti, puruoyer of the camp, vouchsafed
to bestow on him a bitter bob after the conflict of Bicocea: saying, our
General goes very ill provided for victuals, carrying but the provision of
five ears of corn with him, to whom replied Master Caesar Viola his Standard
bearer, a gentleman of Milan: marvel not thereat Sinior pouruoyer, for that
our Captain lives with a thin diet, puts out to credit, and after pays
himself with ready coin. But these corn ears of Theodoro reduce to my
memory, a devise which I made for the Marquise of Uasto, when after the death
of Antonio da Leua, he was chosen General for the Emperor Charles the fifth,
saying that he had scarce ended the toil and trauayles which he had induted in
attayning the Captayneship of the Fauterie, but that new cause of troubles
began to spring, the chardge thereof being almost unsupportable. Thereupon,
conformable to his purpose I figured him two Sheues of ripe Corn with this
brief. Finiunt pariter renouantque labores. Signifying thereby, that scarce is
the corn fully ripe, but that the Plowmans restles toil is renewed, again
providing for another Harvest, and the rather was this agreeable to the subject
of the Marquise, for that his great grandfather Don Roderico d' Aualos, high
Constable of Castile did bear the Sheffe of corn which he wan in Battle.

Also not long before he had an other notable devise invented by Master
Gualtier Corbct Senate of Milan, upon certain talk had with the said
Marquise, who greatly desired to be general (as afterward he was) that he
might wholly show his valor, without having his deserved praise communicated
with the other Captain which was in authority above him, saying that he had
proved, that many of his own exploytes, in feats of Arms were attributed
either to the Marquise of Piscara, or else to Sinior Prospero, or Antonio da
Leua: and that now he hoped, since he was freed from a compagnion, to manifest
to the whole world what he could do in the art Military. And herupon Master
Gualtier figured the Spheres of the four Elements separated: with this mot
above them. Discretis sua virtus inest. As much to say, that the Spheres in
their proper places have their peculiare virtues, whereunto, notwithstanding, a
Philosopher will not yield, for that the Element of fire in his own proper
sphere does not burn, but only when it is mixed with other Elements, but for
that it had fair appearance it went for current, being set on the banners of of
the Trompetters.

This Marquise had also another concerning a matter of love, invented by
Antonio Epicuro, a learned man in the University of Naples: The which was the
Temple of Juno Lacina figured, borne up with Pillars, and therein an altar with
flaming fire, which with no winds could ever be blown out, and yet the Temple
was on every side open, all the space between the pillars, thereby to signify
to the Lady whom he served (and who long time had loved him, and now grieved
seeing her self, as she thought, abandoned of him, wherein notwithstanding she
was deceived) that the fire of his love was eternal and unquenchable, as was
that on the altar of Juno Lacina. And the inscription it self of the Temple
engraven on the Pillars, served in stead of a mot. Iunoni Lucinae dicatum.
This device also bears a fair show, but it requires some man of skill to
declare the History to those which know it not.

Also that Impresa was somewhat lofty of Lodouico GonZaga, called for his
bravery Rodomanto, who the same day that Charles the fifth visited Mantua, wore
in his Cote of raced Satin all embrodered with squares of diverse colors, one
represented a Scorpion, and the other this mot. Qui viuens laedit morte
medetur: being the nature of a Scorpion to cure her venomous infection, being
killed and laid to the wound. Thereby to signify that he had slain him
which presumed to offend him, and had cured the hurt of the offense with the
death of his enemy.

The same Lodouico Gonzaga had also an other Imprese far better, and it
happened upon this occasion: Being arrived with the Emperors Camp to assalt
Rome, between the gate Aurelia, and Settimiana, took the Suburbs of S.
Peter's, through the courage of his Soldiers. Whereupon Rome being miserably
sacked by Germans, Spaniards and Italians, which took the Emperors part:
he said, that the Soldier is to have renown, as his guerdo^, be it good or
bad. As if he should say, although the taking of Rome, and the spoil thereof
was abominable to every good natured Italian, yet notwithstanding did he think
it would make him famous: and upon this he had figured the sumptuouse Temple of
Diana Ephesia, which being burned by one desirous of fame, (not regarding
whether it were good or bad) by destroying the most gorgious Monument of the
earth: who therefore became so despightfully loathed of the Grecians, that they
never used his name, so detestable an act had he committed: his Posie thereunto
was, Alterutra clarescere fama: which I after added, misliking this which he
had before, Sieve bonum, sieve malum, fama est.

I composed also another for the Marquise of Vasto: who had intelligence that
his Soldiers in their tents and lodgings presumptuously talked, saying with
great iolitie that the Marquise might well give the assault to this or that
Forte, or skirmish with displaied Ensigns at the first and least occasion, or
bend his force against such or such a Castle, pretending them selves to be
very skillful and of great hardiness in their lofty words, yea, even
reprehe^ding their Captain as one which lay idle. But the Marquise said, such
men, when happened the point of danger, and need required to show their
prowess, would then keep quiet both their hands and their tongues, when as
he should enter the field with sword in hand. And to express this his
conceit, I depainted him that Mechanical Instrument, which has many clackes
set on a wheel, which make a great rattling, and is used to be set in stead of
Belles to call to divine service on the holidaies during the time that it is
dark, as commonly is used in Italy, at the time of the death of our Savior,
when the Belles are not to be rong, the stead whereof the noise of this
Instrument supplieth, and truly it bears a pleasant and fantastical
show, having this mot, Cum crepitat, sonora silent: to mean thereby that when
needful occasion should serve, and the Marquise with glittering Armor were
entering into dangers, these pretended venturers would tremble with fear,
showing them selves not aunswerable to their bravery used in words.

I may not pass over in silence the Estendard of the Earl of Santafiore,
which he bare in the Battle of Seruia, which was poudred with Quinces, being
the ancient Arms of Signior Sforza da Cotignola, by right line his great
Grandfather, and amongst the Quinces was this mot, Fragrantia durant Herculea
collect a manu: to signify that the Quinces gathered by the hand of so noble
a Captain, endured yet, yielding a sweet odor: alluding to Hercules, who
gathered the like fruit in the Western gardens Hesperides. The field was
Gueles and the Quinces Or.

An amorous Lady in Italy, who through her incontinent desire and insatiable
appetite, not sufficed with the favor of an honorable Lord, who effectuously
served her, abased her body to a youth of mean estate and poor parentage, but
in the lineaments of his body comely, and of proper personage, with whose
feauture she became fettered, and doted so much upon him, that neither council
could reclayme her, nor shame compel her, nor the entire affection of her
noble lover restrain her from committing sacrilege with her honor. The
foresaid Lord had quickly some inkling of this matter, peradueture by the
Lady herself (for quis been celauerit ignem) who by her inconsiderate gestures
and semblances unwarily discovered her tra^sported love. Whereupon he with
great dispight contemned her, and willed me to compose an Impresa to this
effect: That whereas he accounting himself happy, being in the proper
possession of so great a good, and afterward to become copartner with so base a
compagnion, he thought himfelse extremely iniuried. Wherefore I upon this,
caused to be depainted a triumphal Chariot, with an Emperor therein
triumphing, drawn with four whihte horses, and a slave standing behind him,
holding fast his crown of Laurel upon his head after the ancient manner of
the Romans, who to temperate the happy fortune and vainglory of the Emperor
used to have a slave to triumph with him, The posie thereunto was taken of
Iuuenal. Seruus currn portatur eodem. Here the humane form may seem
tolerable to the scrupulous searcher; being in an extraordinary habit.


Dom. This greatly delights me, for that the soul being a verse of Iuuenal,
gives it great light, but tell me my Lord, do Cardinals, with whom you have
been conversant, use to bear Imprese.


Ion. Yea in truth, being worthy Princes, as was the Cardinal Ascanio Sforza,
who labored by all possible means to creat Federico Borgia Pope, which was
Alexander the sixth, and it was not long after, but by manifest trial, he
found him not only ungrateful, but also his deadly enemy. In so much, that
by the means of him and his own unlucky fortune, the Duke Lodouico Sforza was
dechaced milan by the French men. And without giving over his hatred, he never
ceased to pursue the famely of the Sforzi, until they were betrayed, put from
their estate, and lead prisoners into France. To this purpose Ascunio framed
for his Impresa the Eclipse of the Son, which happens by reason of the
interposition of the Moon betwixt it and the earth: to infer, that as the
Son cannot then shine on the earth, by reason of the injury and ingratitude
of the Moon, having no light of her own, but such as she receives from the
Son, and in the Eclipse she takes away from her benefactor as most
ungrateful, Even so Pope Alexander rewarded a singular good deed with most
vile recompense, his mot hereunto was: Totum adimit quo ingrata refulget.


Dom. Without doubt this Pope Alexander was a terrible and pestilent monster
among all the Nobility of Italy: but I marvel the less at his ingratitude
toward this Ascanio (which was for a long time the honor of the Roman court)
for that diverse his successors have followed his steps, which may plainly be
seen in searching their lives.


Iou. Hippolito d'Este Cardinal of Ferrara, (Uncle to the last which bare the
fame name) had for his devise, a Falcon holding in her talents the counterpoize
of a Clock, as is to be seen on the Park gate of the Stews of Dioclesian,
but he had thereunto no mot: for he would have to be understood by dividing
this word Falcon, that he wrought al his affairs in time, after this manner,
Fall con tempo. The Falcon with the diamant of the house of Medicis, is
attainted of the like fault.

And besides this he bare an amorous Impresa, which was a Camel on his knees
charged with a great burden, with this mot, Non suefro mas de lo que puedo: as
if he should say to his Lady, lay on me no greater torments the^ I can bear:
for I will suffer no more then I am able, being the property of the Cammell to
incline him self to the earth of his own will, to have his lode laid on him,
and when he feels that he is burdened sufficiently, beginning to set
forward, he signifies that he can carry no more.

After the death of Ascanio, and the Cardinal of S. George, there succeeded
Lodouico of Aragon and Sigismondo Gonzaga, who repenting them selves to have
created Pope Leo: the one of them, to wit the Cardinal of Aragon, wore a white
tablet with this mot about it, Melior fortuna notabit: and the other, Gonzaga
bare a Crocodile, with this brief, Crocodili lachrymae: which is used in a
Proverb, signifying the dissimulation of those, which make fair appearance of
amity, and within bear the venom of hate and emnitie.

The two most famous gallants of the Roman court, have been two youths, the
one exceeding the other, Hippolite of Medicis, and Alexander Farnese. And as
for the first, we have already showed his Impresa, Inter omnes of the Comet,
and the eclipsed Moon. Now it rests that we declare those three devises of
Fernese: whereof the first was an Arrowe hitting the white of a But, with this
Greek mot, (...), as much to say, it belioueth to aim to the white.

The second was one which I made him, to satisfy his request: which is to be
seen in his rich and stately embrodered. Tapistrie: and it happened upon this
occasion: On a time talking with me he said, that at the beginning of his
Cardinallhipp he was not resolved what Impresa to take, and that I should
compose him one, to this effect, that he said unto me: if God did favor him in
his secret desires, in time would he publishe them with some notable Impresa.
Whereupon I figured a little scrole of white paper, with this brief above it,
Votis subscribunt fata secundis.

Lastly, when by Pope Paulus the third, he was sent Legate into Germany with
the flower of the Italian Cheualrie, to aid the Emperor Charles the fifth
against the Dutch men, which favored the doctrine of Luther, and rebelled
against him, I made for his Impresa, the triple forked lightning, the peculiar
weapon of Jupiter, which he uses when he will chasten the pride and impiety
of men, as he did in the time of the Giants, with this mot, Hoc vno Jupiter
vltor: alluding the excommunications to lightning and the Pope to Jupiter. By
the aid of this supply, which at the beginning of the wars came very
commodiously, Charles the Emperor gained the victory.

Mons, Andre Gritti, Purueyer for the Venetians wars, wherein he was renowned
from the beginning to the end, which wars endured eight years, and merited
by his courageous valor, to be Prince and Duke of their Commonwealth. At that
time by his power was Padoua recovered and defended against the forces of
Maximilian, who had on his side all the Nations of Europe: He had a notable
Imprese, invented by Giouan Catta, the famous Poet of Verona: and it was the
heaven with the Zodiac and the twelve Signs, borne upon the shoulders of
Atlas, kneeling on his left knee, and with his hands embracing the heavens,
with a mot there above, Sustinet nec fatiscit: Albeit the Lord (respecting
modesty) would not wear it publicly, to avoid envy, although it greatly
pleased him, and was highly commended of every man. Atlas has a human form,
yet is the thing tolerable by reason it is a fiction.

The Lady Isabella Marquise of Mantona, does not deserve to be passed over in
silence, who for her honorable conditions was always esteemed to be of a noble
mind, and had sundry times of her life, diverse assaults of fortune, which gave
her occasion to have more then one Impresa, and amongst other, it happened that
for the unmeasured love (which her son Duke Federico, which he bare to a
Lady, to whom he did all the favor and honor he might. Whereby the Lady
Isabella remained vnhonoured and little esteemed. But the beloved of the Duke
used to ride very stately through the City, accompanied with a great troop of
gallant gentlemen, which were wont to attend on the Marquise. And at length it
came to this, that there remained to accompany her, but only two or three old
gentlemen which never would forsake her. Upon which inconucnience, the said
Lady caused to be figured this Impresa, in the old Court of her Palace in the
Suburbs, to this purpose: which was a Candelsticke made triangulare wise,
whereon are set many Candelsticks for divine service used at this day in the
holy week. From the which Candelstick not without some mystery the priests
use to take away the Candles one by one, until they have left on the top of all
but one, to signify that the light of faith cannot perish at all. Unto the
which devise there wanted a mot, whereupon I added this. Sufsicit vnum in
tenenebris, according to that of Virgil, Vnum pro multis.

For the Son and Heir of the Marquise of Vasto, inheritour of the name, and
the Estate of the great Marquise of Piscara, in who^ was seen the express
Image of virtue, striving to attain to the glory of his Uncle, and Father,
and of his other Ancestors at such time as he went into Spain to serve King
Phillip, I figured a great tree of Laurel pertaining to the ancient house of
the Auolos, from the which Laurel were seen certain great branches cut of,
and among the rest which remained, was a straight and gallant twigge springing
up on a great height, with this mot: Triumphali e stipite surgens alta petit,
which was so much the more congruent to the purpose, for that the Laurel is
dedicated to triumphers.

I will not omit one which I made the last year for Sinior Andrca, the son of
Don Ferrante Gonzaga, who being a youth of great hope and towardnes, having
gotten to be Captain of a band of horsemen, he required of me an Impresa for
his Standarde: and I alluding to that of Virgil, Parma inglorius alba, caused
to be depaynted a Shield or round buckler, all fringed about, with four
round circles set at four sides thereof, bound together with four wreathes
of Laurel. In the first Circle was the Furnace trying gold, the Impresa of
the Mraquise Francesco, (with this mot: Probastime domine) who was his
grandfather by the fathers side: in the second, the mount Olimpus, with the
Altar of faith, of Duke Federico his uncle: in the third, that of Andrea Capua
Duke of Thermopolt his grandfather by the mothers side, which was the bondle of
Darts, with Fortibus non deerunt: in the fourth was the Cattle of his father
without a body, with this mot: nec spe, ncc metu, and about his shield in a
field Argent was written this brief, Virtutis trophaea nouae non degener
addet: to signify that he would not take away or detract from his Ancestors,
but rather did some notable Impresa of his own.


Dom. Is it possible, my Lord, that the old Captains and ancient Princes
used no notable invention in their Impresa? in my judgment, they (and
especially the worthies of ( Millan) for a long time, were loath to lcaue their
deaths heads, their Barnacle, courry combs and brushes with their posies
either fondly composed or too too arrogant.


Iou. It is true, but yet there has been some good and current, as was that of
Galeazo Viscont which builded the Castle and bridge at Pauia, a work worthy
the noble mind of a Roman, he bare a firebrand with a bucket of water, to
signify that he held in his hand both war and peace, but there wa^ted
thereunto a posie. That of the Earl Colo of Campo Basso, who lived in the
memory of our Fathers, had both a subject and a soul. He being in pay with
the great Charles of Bourgonie, feared not to adventure the reproach of notable
disloyalty, to be revenged of a perticulare injury, and it was for some
displeasure conceived against the Duke (a man without measure chollericke) for
crossing him in a consultation holden concerning the wars, for the which he
bare him deadly hatred, and it so stack in his disdainful stomach, that until
the time of revenge, he could never forget it, which fitly was offered him in
the battle of Nansi, where he gave advertisement to Renato Duke of Loren, that
he should not fearc to assault the Duke his Lord with the Suissars,, for that
he with his company would not once move to give aid, but be as lookers on.
Whereby in that conflict the Duke was slain, and the Earl Cola addressed him
toward France, to acquaint him with King Jews. And his Impresa was afterward
a great mighty stone of Marble, cleft with the force of a Fig tree springing
out of the creuise thereof, which in time creeping and encroching farther into
the Marble, spoyleth and defaceth it with weak force and slender violence, and
above it was this mot taken out of Martial, Ingentia Marmora findit caprificus.
And this Impresa was not only counted gallant in show, but also an example
for Princes that they ought not in choler to abuse their servants, especially
such as be noble and of stout courage.


Dom. This revenge was great, but very ignominious, and not unlike to that of
the Priest Rinaldo da Modena, sometimes Steward, and Chamberlaiue to the
Cardinal of York in England, who having received besides the injury of words,
certain blows of the said Cardinal, which he could not well digest, and to
be revenged thereof he gave him poison, whereof he died, and afterward
confessing his fact, his body was quartered in Rome, in the time of Pope Leo.
Let this suffice that it is no jesting with me^ of courage, which esteem their
honor: therefore either dispatch them of life, or never meddle with them. For
the man receiving the offense, at the end, for his honor will watch a time to
be revenged.

Some worthy men in their Impresa follow the conformity of their names, or
else of their Arms: as did Matthias Coruin King of Hungary, who bare a Raven,
a bird in force, wit and viuacitie singular. Some bare their proper Arms
for an Impresa, as did John Schiepusensis after that he was King of Hungary,
being by the aid and favor of Soliman great Lord of the Turks, and through
the affection of the Nobility of his Kingdom, crowned in Alba, who bare a
Wolf with her Vdder full strouting, being the Arms of his Father, but he
added thereunto a mot, composed very pithely by Stephanus Brodericus,
Chauncellor of his Kingdom, which was Sina alienaque pignora nutrit: to
signisie that he received into favor, such as was his enemies.

I had almost forgotten to tell you the Impresa of Francesco Maria della Rouera
Duke of Vrbin, (after that with his own hands he had slain the Cardinal of
Pauia in Rauenna, in revenge of the insuppotible injuries received of him)
which was a Lion rampant in his proper color in a field Gueles, with a sword
in his pawe, with this brief, Non deest generoso in pectore virtus. The like
was that which Pompey bare, (as Plutarch reports) and the invention was of
Signior Castiglione, who was present with him at the death of the Cardinal:
albeit the Duke would not make great show of this Impresa, to avoid the
emnitie of the Cardinals.

Signior Stephano Colbuna, the magnanimous General of the Duke Cosimo, had a
Siren, the ancient Arms of the house of Colonna, and requested me being his
godfather to ad thereunto a mot, which I did, conformable to his noble mind:
and it was this, Contemnit tutae procellas: to signify that he despised
adversity, trusting to his valor, as the Siren in swimming, contemns all
tempests.

I figured for the Lady Duchess of Florence a Peahen, which under her wings
covered six of her young, three on the one side and three on the other, with
this mot, Cum pudore laeta foecundit as: alluding to the nature of the bird,
which therefore is dedicated to Juno the Queen of heaven, according to the
opinion of the Panims.


Dom. Tell me my Lord, I pray you, since you have made, as it were a
capitulation of all the noble Princes, Captains, and Cardinals, are there no
other kind of men which bear Imprese?


Iou. Yes in truth are there, and some of the best learned men: as Giacopo
SanZaro, who being excessive amorous, and judging it to be for his honor
aleadged Bocace, who greatly commends Guido Caualcanti, Dante, and Master
Cino di Pistoria, for that they even to their extreme age were fo und to be
inamoured. Wherefore remaining alw aies, expecting some recompense in his love,
bare for his devise a pot full of little black stones, with one amongst all
the rest white, with this mot, AEquabit nigras candida vna dies: meaning, the
day wherein he should be thought worthy the love of his Mistrisse, should
counteruaile all the black, clowdie, and unfortunate days of his life. To
this was agreeable the old custom of the Ancients, who were wont to mark the
success of their good and bad adventures, with little black and white stones,
thereby to number at the years end, of which they had most, to see to know
whether that year has been luckie or unfortunate. And he demanded of me my
judgment of his Impresa, and I told him it was good yet somewhat
supernatural: for that the pots of the Ancients were wont to be made of earth
or mettaile: wherefore a man could not figure within any black or white
stones: for that these pots were not transparent: to which he answered, that
his was to be supposed of gross glass, wherein they might be discerned. And
so we passed the time in pleasant jesting about this matter.

Master Lodouico Aristo invented a notable Impresa, figuring a Hiue of Bees
with their honey, whom the ungrateful peasant does stiffle with smoke,
bereauing them of life, to recover their honey and wax: with this mot, Pro
bono malum: signifying thereby as it is thought how he had been ill entreated
of a certain Nobleman, which may also be gessed by his Satyrs.

Erasmus Rotcrodam, borne in Holland, so excelled in the gifts of the mind and
so admirable wit, that he surmounted all other the learned of his time, as his
infinite works do plainly testify: who for his authority in learning, bare
for his Impresa the God Terminus, being in signification somewhat difficult:
meaning that he would not give place to any other Writer, as the God Terminus
would not yield to Jove in the Capitol, as wrighteth Varro: His Posie was, Vel
Ioui cedere nescit. He had freendly familiarity with Sir Thomas More of
England, a man of equal fame in wit, of whom he demanded what posie were fit
to be set on his Study door, to whom Sir Thomas More answered, that the
Image of Apelles paynting somewhat, would very fitly adorn it: By the which
Erasmus meruayled what he meant, and he to express the signification said: It
well beseems you, for that Apelles was wont to say, Nulla dies sine linea:
which you have very well observed in your writings, amazing all the world
with your innumerable volumes.

Moreover, the worthy learned man Andreas Alciatus, had for his devise the
Caduceum Mercury, with the horn of richesse of the Got Amalthaea the nource
of Iuppiter, to signify; that by the abundance of learning and knowledge
whereof Mercury is said to be superintenda^t, he had attained renoume, a
worthy reward for his trauayles. But truly this gallant devise does want a
Gnome.

I remember that in my youth being amorous at Pauia, I was constrained of
necessity, for avoiding a greater inconvenience to undertake a hurtful
departure to save my life, and to signify the necessity which enforced me, I
figured the beast called a Beuer, who to escape the hands of the hunter,
knowing that he is pursued for no other cause then for his stones which are of
great virtue, biteth them of with his teeth as says Iuuenal. and leaves them
to the pursuers: with this Greek mot: (...), as much to say Necessity, to the
which as says Lucian, both goods and men obey.

Finally, I made an Impresa at the request of Master Camillo Giordan, a Lawier,
upon this that he said he was doubtful in mind, and in suspense to adventure
a certain enterprise: and to be resolved therein, he attended the advice and
counsel of some Oracle. And therevpo^ I figured him the Aigyptian Spinx, which
did interpret Riddle with abstruse and secret matters, and also that Serpent
with his tail in his mouth, which signifies time, with this Gnome: Inccrta
animi decreta resoluet.

Also my Nephew Iulio Iouio composed him an Impresa, wherein he divided or
prophesied to him self some happy success, as his worthy wit replenished
with all learning did well deserve, figuring a tree with graftes set thereon
with (this Dutch mot): Wan Got will, as much to say when God will, this my
graffe shall spring and flourish,


Dom. If it were not presumption my Lord, I would show you one which I made
for my self, although Imprese are only fit and convenient for men of greater
calling, and not for me.


Iou. And wherefore not for you Sinior Dominico? tell it me plainly and I will
absolve you of all blame of presumption which you may incur thereby.


Dom. Being then emboldened by your authority and favor I will show it you:
being desirous to signify a fantasy of mine, not any way immodest, upon this
that not able to live in mine own native country Piacenza, in such
tranquillity and quiet of mind as I desired, I chose for my second country
the flourishing city of Florence, where I hope fortune will prosper me under so
prudent a Prince, and thereupon I figured a Peache tree laden with fruit,
which in the proper soil wherein it first springs yields forth poisoned
and unpleasant increase, but being transplanted in some farther Cost,
becomes wholesome and fruitful: and the Posie was, Translata proficit arbos.


Iou. Signior Dominico, this devise although it savor of subtle invention, yet
do I mislike it for two reasons: the one is, for that (as I remember) it has
bin devised already by Master Alciat in his Emblems: the other for that it is
not agreeable to you, in so much you were not planted venomous, for then could
you not have brought forth such fruit in your native soil as you have done.
Wherefore if you will be ruled by me, provide you of an other better beseeming
you.


Dom. Well my Lord, since you have composed so many for others, vouchsafe me
the favor of some of your pithie and sharp inventions: for to say the truth
I am not satisfied with mine own.


Iou. I will not fail to fulfill your request, yet not in respect of any
recompense, for the travails which you have undertaken in tra^slating my
history, wherein since you spare no toil to attain to learning, it shall not
be amiss that you figure the sollowe share, which with long tilling becomes
bright shining as silver: with this mot, Longo splendescit in vsu: Alluding to
your self, who with long labor have gotten singular learning.


Dom. Truly I willingly labor and will as long as I live, exercise my self
in study, hoping to get some brightness of shining fame: and herein I shall
immitate your Lordshippe, who with your continual study have made your name
immortal: which thing happens not to many. But have you any other notable
Imprese to recount unto me, for loath I am that this so sweet a banquet should
have so short an end.


Iou Hardly do I remember any more, worthy the rehearsing, and I love not to
enterlace the Corrall with the Rubie: the Brick with the Emerauld, or the
Beril with the Diamant: and well may these suffice you, considering my age,
wherein memory is wont to suffer some defect.


Dom. Truly I confess my Lord, you have done more then your age would well
allow, yet this I say, that he which shall peruse and see what you have
written of this matter, will say you have reserved many other notable devises.
But herein you may excuse your self, and say as you did in your Book de
Elogijs, or the discourse of famous me^, newly published: that albeit there are
certain left out, yet the fault was not yours, in that you had not their true
portraitures, but rather theirs who neglected to send them to your study, to
accompany so many worthy and Heroical persons. As of late I met with a
certain Gentleman of the Province of Romagna, greatly complaining that he
could not find in your Elogies, the Knight della Volpe, who showed himself so
valiant a man in the service of S. Mark, and for the honor of Italy. But I
to comfort him said, that I was assured the said Knight would not willingly
have his Picture drawn, being somewhat deformed in visage, having lost an eye
honorably in fight, and that I would for recompense procure him a place in this
tract of Imprese: and thereupon I demanded him whether he had ever borne any.
What Sir (says he) is it not well known he bare a Fox in his Ensign showing
his devouring teeth, with this mot, Simul astu and dentibus vtor: to signify
that there was no dealing with him being so defended on every side.


Iou. In deed the Knight was of great courage and vigilancie, and eskapeth not
our history without great commendation: and thereupon the Venetians erected him
a goodly stature in their Church of our Lady.

And now at the last I will not conceal the Impresa of Giouanni Chiuchiera,
accounted a famous Knight in War, although it may (like unto the former)
move the beholders to laugh, which had depainted in his Banner, (to show his
courage and skill in the exercise of light Horse) a fierce Wolf with a bloody
Lamb between his legs, turning his head back regarding two great
Sheepheards Mastiues, whereof the one being nerest, looking also back behind
him to see if the other dogs came in to succor him, as fearing to assail so
terrible an enemy: the mot added thereunto was, Pauent oues, Timent canes,
intrepidus maneo. But Signior Dominico, the number of Captains with their
Imprese being so great, that it will confound the wits of the diligent and
laborous writer, I think it best for this time, to give an end to our
discourse.


Dom. Well, since it is your pleasure, I would not seem troublesome unto you:
hoping that an other time shall as fitly serve for our purpose.


The end of the Imprese of Paulus Iouius.
HERE FOLLOW, TOUCHING THE FORmer subject, certain notable devises both
military and amorous,
Collected by Samuel Daniell.
ACertaine gentleman of Italy named Hermet Stampo, a Prelate, bare for his
devise a Laurel tree menaced with lightning, with this brief: Nec sort,
necfato, to signify that his virtue could not be endamaged or anoyed by any
fatale chance, for lightning (as writes Pliny) has no power to hurt the
Laurel.

The same S. Stampo, being created Marquise of Soncino, and having married a
wife, leaving his Fcclesiasticall habit: represented this devise: two Palm
trees, the male and female, which never bring forth fruit, unless they are one
planted by the other, adjoining thereunto this mot: Mutua foecunditas.

His brother the Earl Maximian, being amorous of a Lady named Anna Moronna,
who afterward was his wife, had for his Impresa a silk worm, which only lives
with the leaves of the Mulberie tree, which tree in Lombardie is called
Moronna, with this mot: Suol di cio viuo, which is half this verse of
Petrarch: Suol di cio viuo e d' altra mi calpoco. Thus in English: Only of
this I live disdayning other food, to show that as the little beast does only
live by those leaves: so he only contented himself to feed on the leaves of
his love, in hope one day to enjoy the fruit of legitimate marriage.

The Earl Baptista di Lodron, who died at the taking of Gazal Montferrato, had
for his particular devise a Calthrope, a Stratagemical instrument used in
war, made with three iron pricks so joined, that howsoever it be thrown,
one prick always stands upright, with this Posie thereunto: In vtraque
fortuno: to signify that the value and constancy of his noble mind, in all
fortunes uncertainties, remained firm and upright.

Gasper de Mayno, a Knight of Millan, bare a Stockdoue with a Diamant in her
bill, being the nature of this bird never to lose any thing it has once
taken, thereby to infer, that he would never give over to love his Lady,
whose vowed servant he faithfully remained, whose name was also Diamante. His
mot was: In aeternum.

The Lisard of all his properties, has one most rare and admirable, among the
wonderful and infinite effects of nature, which is, it is never in love to the
which all other beasts do yield, whereupon S. Federico Duke of Mantona, made
him this Impresa: The Lisard figured, with this mot: Quod huic deest me
Iorquet. Meaning thereby that it was the love of his Lady which tormented him,
from the which torments this beast was exempt.

The Earl Maurucio Pietra, who afterward was Bishop of Uigena, being Student
in Suna, took to his surname Disarmato, for that being a soldier, he left the
practice of Arms, and took him self to his studies, whereby he amounted at
length to the Pontifical dignity. He had for his devise a Snayle, with her
head forth of her shel wounded with an arrowe, and his mot was this verse of
Petrarch: Trouonemi amor del tutto disarmato. Thus in English. Love did me
find unarmed, quite alluding to his surname, and also to the Impresa of that
university, which was a Snayle put into the fire, which feeling the heat
thereof does scritche, whereupon the Louewormes, slaves to affections, would
infer that they being all fiered with amourous flames, were constrained to
sing and discharge in languishing verse their sweet sour passions.

Sinior Charlo Ursino, had for his Impresa a Ball mounted up on hye with the
stroke of an hardy arm with this mot Perculsus eleuor, which might be alluded
to his invincible courage, who the more his power was abated by adverse
fortune, the more he seemed to exalt his unconquered mind by force of virtue.

A young gallant of Salerna, having a long time served a courteous and beautiful
dame, and at length by the favor of the winged boy cropped both the flower and
fruit of his long deferred pleasures, to the extreme contention of each of them
both. But fortune fell to good hap, set her envious foot in the pleasant
plotte of their delights, to fade the sweet savoring Flowers of their
unconstant joys. For this youth roming about the city, unhappily happened to
fix both his rouing eyes and flitting fancy on the force of a young Damsel
adorned with infinite beauty, and was so ardently inamored, that he doted upon
her. In which new affection, the heavens seemed so favorable to further his
purpose, that he easily trained the tender heart of his yielding Lady to the
lure of his love, as one greatly delighted to live by exchaunging: whereupon
(as lovers are commonly wont to bear open ears and unclosed eyes, and often
to repeat a falfe tale for truth) his first favored to whom bruted fame had
reueyled, the transported affection of the wandering youth, seeing her self
abandoned, lived desolate, plunged in the deapth of all perplexities, and
almost desperate. Yet at the length waighing her case with wisdom, did
moderate the grief of her desaster, without discovering to any her secret
sorrow, purposing only to disclose, by some covert mean, to the disloyal and
ungrateful lover, her pensive and passionate heart. And thereupon she caused a
false Diamant, to be so cunningly set in Gold, that it would easily have
deceived any man save only the expert artificer, and within the ring next unto
the finger, she had made to be engraven this mot in Ebrewe: Lamazabatani, which
done, all dissolved into tears she sent it to her love, praying him, if any
pity or piety remained in the breast of a perjured, to have compassion on
her, and restore her his love. The youth being learned and discreet, that at
the first sight he understood the Hebrewe mot, yet could he not comprehend
what secret the devise (imported) until by chance showing his ring to a friend
of his, an excellent gold smith, who told him that the Stone was a counterfeit,
he began to meditate on the mystery, and love having opened the eyes of his
understanding, he soon perceived thereby the lamentable complaint of the
miserable Lady, and the injury he had done her: resolving into two words the
mot of the false Diamant, in this sort: Di amante falso. Adding thereunto her
Of a false Lover.
mot out of the Gospel, signifying why have thou forsaken me. Whereupon the
gentleman sorowing his fact, had compassion on the desolate dame, placing her
again in the possession of his love, which she long time after enjoyed.

The Earl Clemete Pietro being amorous of a Lady, enforced for a time to
depart from her, had for his Impresa an Elephant, which by nature (as says
Pliny) knowing that the Hu^ters pursue it for no other thing but for his
teeth, (which are of admirable virtue) he knocks them out against a tree: His
mot was out of Petrarch. Lascai di me la meglior part a dietro. I left behind
the better part of me.

The same Gentleman being also at an other time inamoured of a Gentlewoman
named Laura, he had for his devise a Raven co^batting with a Cameleon, who
being hurt and inuenomed by his enemy, knowing the wound to be deadly, to
cure himself takes the fruit of the Laurel in his mouth: his mot was, Hinc
sola salus: to signify that his amorous wound need no better Cataplasme, then
his Lady Laura.

He had also another, being Captain of the Horsemen in Piemont, which was an
Egle flying so high against the Sun that it burned her feathers, with this
mot, Aude aliquid dignum.

The fourth devise of this worthy Knight, was a naked sword having this mot,
Ex hoc in hoc: to show how he was to try by the sword his just cause, and
the reason he had t^o combat with his enemy.

Giouanni Battista Bottigella, an honorable Gentleman desirous to express an
amorous conceit, had for his Impresa a Ship with hoysed sail, and the Fish
called in Latin Remora holding it fast: which Fish (as Pliny recounteth) is
of such great force, that if it take to a Ship, it staieth it and holds the
same so fast, that neither the fury of winds, nor any other force, is of
power to stir it: His mot was, Sic frustra: signifying that even so it
nothing prevailed him to be faithful and constant to his Lady, since she
showed her self rigorous and cruel toward him.

Hippolito Girami a Gentleman of Millan, at the wars of Sienae, in the
service of the Emperor, bare a sword figured, with a Serpent twinding about
it, having a Laurel garland in his mouth, with this posie, His duoibus. The
sword in this place signifying strength and valor of body: The Scrpent
wisdom and virtue of mind.

A certain Gentleman to signify that according to his courteouse and gentle
nature, was willing to please in every virtuous and reasonable action, but by
force, and co^straint he was not compelled to do any thing: whereupon he
figured a Palm tree, whose property is sufficiently known, with this mot,
Flectimur obsequio non viribus.

An Italian Lady named Liuia Tormiella, was in her life most beautiful, and
of rare chastity, who to signify the integrity of her worthy mind wholly
addicted to virtue, had depainted Heliotropium the Marigold, which always
turns toward the Sun, as if it had sense, with this mot, Uertitur ad
solemn.

An honorable Gentleman having vnfortunatlie married a wife of singular
beauty, but (according to the common rumor) of single honesty. For all wnich
knew him, verily believed that she offered him an extreme injury, as in truth
she did. But the poor Gentleman (as commonly it happens in the like case)
perceiving her unfaithful dealing, drunk up his sorrow in silence,
entreating (notwithstanding) his wife honorably, in all lovely manner:
supposing thereby, for that she spra^g of noble blood, that she would become
faithful and loyal, respecting her honor. But herein he was greatly deceived:
for the disloyal Dame having sauoured the sweet of sondrie dishes, neglected
her old diet as unpleasant to her insatiable appetite, which he to his
insupportable grief understanding, to excuse his hard hap, figured Argus with
his hundred eyes garding Io the Minion of Jupiter transformed into a Cow, who,
notwithstanding his diligent watching was deceived of his chardge: Hereunto he
added this mot, Frustra vigilant.

Girolamo Palauicino, did bear for his Impresa an Egle, which according to
Pliny, only of all Birds, has never been slain with an Arrowe: wherefore he
is said to carry the weapons of Jupiter: hereby to signify that he had never
bin stricken with the wrath of the heavens: and although he had bin with great
injury persecuted, yet was he again restored to felicity and honor: his mot
was, Est mihi sort datum.

A certain Gentleman having espoused a noble and virtuous wife, caused her to
were for her Impresa a Snayle closed in her shell, as she remains all the
winter, to defend her from the cold, with this Posie, Proprio alitur succo:
to signify that she should satisfy her self with the love of her own
husband, even as the Snayle is nourished with her own moisture.

A Dutch Gentleman soiourning at Neples the nurce of delicious pleasures, and
recourse of all vices, in the blouming flower of his youthful years, being
well monied, became amorous of a Dame, with who he spent both his unrecoverable
time, and consumed his dearly gotten treasure, in vain delights, and
inconstant pleasures. But at length coceiuing his error, knowing whether his
youth and this abuse would bring him, accepting good council retired from
Naples, to escape the toils of enticing affections. And to show his intention
he figured a Bucke, couched in a ditch: being the nature of this beast, that
after having conjoined with the female, does so loathe himself by reason of the
stenche of his filthiness, that he retireth solitarilie into some ditch,
wherein he remains until there happen a great shoure of rain to wash and
make him clean: and afterward returns again to feed: his Posie was,
Lasciuiae paenitentia.

The Captain Consaluo Fernando in the last wars at Naples, performed great
exploytes, but rather by policy then any great power, whereby he always over
came in Battle: and desirous to manifest to the world, how he was aided by
his subtle practices, took for his Impresa a Crossebowe bent with a rack,
and thereunto this Posie, Ingeniu^ superat vires.

A certain gentleman after his long and tedious suite, finding the soil which
he tilled altogether fruitles, and the flintie heart of his mistress to
afforde him no favor, to show that his malady was without remedy, he figured
an heart wounded with an arrow, with a branch of the herb Dictamus in his
mouth, which herb grows plentifully in Candia, whereof the wounded Heart
eating is said to be cured, with this Spanish mot thereunto. Esto tiene su
remepio y non yo, As much to say, this beast finds remedy, and not I: like
unto that, whereas Phoebus in Ovid, complayneth of his love to Daphne, saying:
Hei mihi quod nullis amor est medicabilis herbis.


Sinior Pyrho di Stipiciana, being at the defense of Carignan in Piemont,
valiantly sustained the siege against Mons. d' Augnian, and all the French
Camp, and (after that the Marquise of Vasto was discomfited at Cerisole, where
the Emperors part lost the battle) he before he would yield, although
greatly destitute of victuals, held them out forty days, and at the length,
having no hope of succor, he was constrained to yield, and so departing from
Carignan, went (according to the oath he had made) unto the King of France, who
greatly honoring his virtue, albeit he was his-enemy, made him the proffer of
great preferment if he would serve him. But Sinior Pirhus rendering thanks to
his majesty, refused all conditions and offers made. Afterward upon this he
had figured for his Impresa the horse of Julius Caesar, who would never suffer
any other rider, which had (as says Pliny) his fore feet like unto the feet
of a man, and so was he figured in the temple of Venus. His mot was: Soli
Caesari. Faithful only to the Emperor.

An amorous gentleman of Milan bare in his Standard a Torch figured burning,
and turning downward, whereby the melting wax falling in great abundance,
quenches the flame. With this Posie thereunto. Quod me alit me extinguit.
Alluding to a Lady, whose beauty did foster his love, and whose disdain did
endamage his life.

A noble minded Gentleman (whose worthy virtues, since in flowring years they
have purchased the happy favor of each man's voice, little need the simple
Blazon of my rude pensill) has for his Impresa a sword with this Greek mot
((...). Fideliter perseueto in fide illi.
Vowing thereby his loyal service to his lawful sovereign, perseuering
constant and faithful, following the example of his worthy progenitors, under
whose Ensign both I and these my simple labors hope to find favor.

FINIS.

