THE BLESSING OF A GOOD KING.

Delivered in Eight Sermons upon the story of the Queen of the South, her
words to Solomon, magnifying the government of his family and kingdom.

By THOMAS GIBSON, Minister.

Eccles. 10. 17. Blessed art thou o Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles.

AT LONDON. Printed by Tho: Creed, for Arthur Johnson, Dwelling at the sign
of the white Horse in Paul's Churchyard. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable the Lord Harington Baron of Exton, Thomas Gibson
wishes all true happiness, both in this life and in the life to come.
MY purpose (Right Honorable) in the dedication of these sermons, was to have
joined your Honorable father with that worthy City, whereof he was a
principal member, and had special command and authority: which place he much
respected and loved, and where he was again much respected and honored. The
joy and ornament of the City, was his name and countenance, the very report
and news of whose decease, was the cause of many a watrie eye, and of many a
heavy heart. But their special comfort and joy is, that the Lord has in
mercy provided so gracious an heir, so worthy a successor, so virtuous a
favorer, as of all, that are honest religious: so most of all, such as have
been the faithful friends and entire lovers of your Honorable father: who
himself was a lover of all learning, religion, and of all good men; a true
worshipper of God, zealous in the truth, a sincere professor and friend of the
Gospel; a favorer of faithful Ministers; a worthy member both of Church and
commonwealth: a faithful, dutiful, serviceable, and rare subject: like Moses
in faithfulness, in meekenes and in zeal against Idolatry: like Job a just
man, fearing God, and eschewing evil: like Nathaniell, a true Israelite
without guile. Finally, a man full of grace, piety, courtesy, humility,
temperance, and other, both moral and christian virtues. I am not able to
commend him, according to his deserts: that requires a larger discourse, and it
would perhaps prove an increase of sorrow, which is rather to be abated then
renewed* I will therefore bend my self to administer comfort for so great a
loss, a loss so general to Church and commonwealth. Friends and followers,
Tenants and servants, and for my own part, I cannot but bear a part in sorrow
for the loss of so kind a Patron and Benefactor, both to me and mine. Yet this
is the use of the praises of the dead, not only for imitation of their
virtues, but also for the comfort of friends alive. And is this a small
comfort, Right Honorable, that you had such a father? yea a comfort and
blessing it is to be of the seed of the righteous. It is a further comfort,
that you enjoyed him so long till your self came to ripeness of years, and
that he died in a good age, full of days, few of his Ancestors lived longer:
and howsoever he left this life in a strange country, yet (no doubt) he died
in the true faith of Jesus Christ (which he sincerely professed all his life)
and in the honorable and faithful service of his gracious Sovereign the
Lords anointed. It is no wonder, that old men die, rather it is a wonder in
these latter days that any live so long. Moses in his time made account of
man's ordinary age, to be threescore years and ten. Now the world decays, and
the days of our life is shortened. We hear daily of the death of Infants,
children, young men, yea Princes taken away in the prime and strength of their
years: what marvel then though the ancient ^ie? when the apple is ripe it
must needs fall; when the candle is spent, the light must needs go out. This
use we are to make of the death of young or old, to remember always our
mortal state, and the uncertainty of our life, to be always ready and
prepared, not to regard but contemn the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the
eye, and the pride of life, pleasures, honors, riches, and the vanities of
this wicked world. Many more comforts we have against excessive and immoderate
sorrow for the death of our best and dearest friends, as to consider what they
leave, (a miserable world) and whither they go, (to the haven of happiness.)
The best sort of the Heathen used three remedies against such kind of sorrow.
First, to consider that death is common to all and unavoidable. Secondly, that
it is the end of misery and haven of rest. Thirdly, that it is likely, that
the souls live and are blessed. We have the same and more sure comforts. We
know that our Redeemer lives, and that we shall see him as he is. We know
not only the immortality of the soul, but the glorious resurrection of the
body; and that those that dye in the Lord are blessed. Nothing comes to pass
without Gods pouidence, who is wise and mighty: We pray that his will may be
done both of us and in us. It will nothing avail us to torment our selves, we
are borne to dye; many thousands are gone before us, and we must follow.

Pardon my boldness (right Honorable) in presuming to put you in mind of these
things, which (both by your own private reading, and public heauing of many
worthy men) you do already know and understand sufficiently. Yet in my love to
your Honor, give me leave to add some further instruction. It has always
been the endeavor of Satan, the common adversary of man's salvation, by all
means possible, to draw all sorts, degrees, and ages of men, from the true care
and study of religion and virtue: to the effecting whereof, he has from
every estate his pretended colors and fair pleasing shows of persuasion and
allureme^t, persuading the elder sort, that it is a thing unseemly and
unbefitting their gravity, to become scholars in Christ's school, seeing
their heads are filled with other matters: namely, of the Commonwealth and
affairs of this world. He can tell the middle sort, which are in the prime of
strength and wit, that it is against all equity and reason, that such should
be deprived of the pleasures and delights of the flesh and the world. And as
for the younger sort, he will easily make make them believe, that it is not
yet time to serve God, that the points of religion are too high for them, and
able to dull and trouble their tender wits, buzzing into their ears that
wicked proverb; A young Saint, an old Diu^ll. Thus by his will he would have
none religious, because he would have none saved; but rather that all should
perish and come to utter ruin and destruction. It is a torment and vexation
unto him to see any well disposed in religion: but if we hearken to the
counsel of God in his word, we shall soon find Satan herein a liar, a
murderer, a seducer: For the Lord charge all sorts and degrees of men, to
give themselves, and that betimes, to religion and virtue: commanding his law
to be read and published to men, women and children. The Kingly Prophet, Psalm.
148. 11. 12. 13.
exhorts Kings of the earth and all people, Princes and Judges of the world,
young men and maidens also, old men and children to praise the name of the
Lord. 1. Tim. 5. 1.
Saint Paul charge Timothy and Titus to teach old and young without
exception. Tit. 2. 1.
Saint John writes his Epistle to fathers, 1. Ioh. ^. 13. 14.
young men and children; therefore the youngest are not exempted in regard of
their young and tender years: Eccle. 12, 1.
Inasmuch as God is their Creator, they are to remember him in the days of
their youth: Seeing in their first entrance into the world they have been
baptized into the name of the blessed Trinity, and so have taken upon them the
profession of true religion, their proceeding and practice when they come to
years must be answerable to their beginning. Further, that age is slipperie,
weak, dangerous, and subject to many temptations, easily seduced and overcome
by bad counsel and company: They had need therefore betimes to be armed with
the shield of faith, and sword of the spirit: their wit and capacity is
then most fresh and pregnant to conceive, remember, keep, and hold good and
gracious instructions. Ephesians. 6. 4.
Parents therefore are commanded to bring up their children in instruction and
information of the LORD. And it is the counsel of the wise man; Pro. 22. 6.
Teach a child the trade of his way, and when he is old he will not depart
from it. Again, young men are subject to death, and must appear before the
great Judge in that day as well as other. Need therefore have they of due
preparation. Besides, a religious disposition and behavior in young age, will
bring them credit and honor all the days of their life; and comfort, joy, and
peace of conscience in old age: And what joy, what exceeding joy will this be
to Parents, friends, Tutors, Pro. 10. 1.
teachers, and to all that love and fear God? Pro. 23. 24. 25.
A wise son (says Solomon) makes a glad father, but a foolish son is a
heaviness to his mother. Luke: 1. 14. 15.
It is therefore said of John the Baptist, that his father should have joy of
him, and many should rejoice at his birth, because he was filled with the holy
Ghost in his mothers womb. 2. Ioh: 4.
Saint John writing to that noble and worthy Lady, rejoices greatly that he
found her children walking in the truth. And examples we have of grace and
religion in the younger sort: Samuel from his childhood was consecrated and
dedicated to the service of God.

Josiah was but eight years old when he began to reign in Jerusalem, 2.
Chron: 34. 1. 2.
yet there was never any before nor after him, Prou: 4. 3. 4.
more virtuous and religious. Solomon though most tender and dear in the eyes
of his father and mother: Mat: 21. 15.
yet in his young years was taught divine and heavenly wisdom. 2. Tim. 3. 15.
When our Savior Christ came riding to Jerusalem in a base manner, though the
Scribes and Pharisees disdained him, yet children cry, Hosanna the son of
David: Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord. Timothy from his
childhood had knowledge in the scriptures, being instructed by his good
Grandmother Lois, and his mother Eunic^, John the Baptist grew and ^^^ed strong
in the spirit, and Jesus Christ being but 12. years old, increased in
wisdom, in statute and favor with God and men. God will have the first
borne, the first fruits, and he that begins well is half his way. Dimidium
facti qui been caepit habet; The tree that buds not in the spring is dead, and
such as are deformed in youth, never prove welfauoured in age. As the arrow is
first directed so it flies: youth is compared to the day, while it is day, let
us walk in the light, the night comes when no man can work. The time of
youth is the summer time, with the Ant and Be, we must provide in summer
against winter. The time of youth is compared to Harvest, wherein men take the
occasion, and use all means they can, for the reaping and enjoying of the
fruits of the earth; if they let that time slip, all is lost. He that sleeps
in harvest is the son of confusion. David in his youth kills the Lion, the
Bear and great Goliath. Sampson in his youth, killed the Philistines; let us by
our spiritual armor overcome the wicked one, even in our young time. Now
besides all this, give me leave (Right Hon.) to put you in remembrance of one
worthy example of a noble young man; Joseph full of grace and virtue, worthy
to be imitated of Kings, Princes, and Potentates. In this famous pattern I
observe these six virtues. The first is his rare chastity, who being tempted
to folly by his mistress, did flatly refuse her, saying, How can I do this
great wickedness, and so sin against God? He knew with Job, that this was is
a wickedness and iniquity to be condemned, yea that it is a fire which shall
devour to destruction, and shall root out all his increase. The second virtue
in young (...) which is the ground of all the rest, is his religion, and the
true fear of God in his heart. All his actions, and all his proceedings, do
savor of the fear of God. It was this that kept him from that gross
iniquity. He ascribes the interpretation of dreams, not to himself but to
God. He protests to his brethren, that he fears God. And again, when he
made himself known to his brethren, he said, Be not sad, neither grieved with
your selves that you sold me hither; for God did send me before you for your
preservation: ^5. 9.
And when his father asked him of his sons; These are my sons (said he) which
God has given me. This is the chief virtue in great persons and the best
Nobility. 3
A third virtue in Joseph is his faithfulness to his Prince: He gathered all the
money that was found in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, for the
corn which he bought; not for his own private use, but for the profit of the
King his master: And as he is careful to preserve the royal dignity of the
King, and seeks the wealth of Pharaoh; so he has a pitiful heart to the
poor distressed people, and is careful to relieve them. This is an excellent
virtue in great persons which serve in the Court, not to seek their own
private gain, but the credit and wealth of their Prince, and yet to have
loving and merciful hearts to the poor distressed commons. 4
The fourth virtue in Joseph is his severity and clemency wisely mixed
together: He speaks roughly to hi^ brethren, he threatens them, and
charge them to be spies; and yet his heart is full of compassion and love:
When they are truly humbled and know themselves, he does entertain them
kindly, and receive them with much joy: And this is a special virtue required
of Princes and Magistrates. They must with David, Psalm. 10^. 1.
in the governing of their Court, Church, Commonwealth and house, strike on
these two strings, Mercy and Judgment. They must be severe and rough against
notorious offenders, and yet their hearts must be full of love, pity and
compassion.

The fifth virtue in noble Joseph is his patience and magnanimity in suffering
so great wrongs and injuries: 5
He was hardly dealt with all by his brethren many ways, being reviled,
scorned, and sold into Egypt by them; falsely accused by his mistress, and
unjustly cast into prison by his master. In all his miseries he possessed his
soul with patience; and when it was in his power to be revenged of his
brethren, he bridleth his affections, kindly entreats them, and overcomes
evil with goodness. Oh rare example of true Christian patience and courage;
he feeds them, he entertayneth them, and preserves them that had conspired
against him. The last virtue is his kindness, love and duty to his father; he
inquireth of his brethren touching the life and health of his old father. In
time of dearth he sent provision for him and his without money: He sent
Chariots to bring him and h^s family into Egypt: He went to meet his father
Israel, and presented himself unto him, falling on his neck and weeping a
good while: He brings him before Pharaoh: He placed his father and
brethren, giving them possessions in the Land of Egypt, in the best of the
land: He visits his sick father; he fell upon his face, wept upon him and
kissed him at his death: performs his will, and honorably burieth him. And to
this kindness al are bound by the law of God and nature, by the care, love, and
benefits of Parents toward them, for which we are never able to make
sufficient recompense.

These are the chief and Princely virtues in a Noble person, worthy to be
imitated of all the sons of Nobles. Ambr. lib. off. cap. 17.
Most worthy is that of Ambrose; Es^ bonorum adolescentium timor^m dei habere,
defer parentibus honorem, etc. It is required of good young men to have the
fear of God, to give honor to their parents, to reverence their elders, to
keep themselves chaste, be humble and lowly, to love kindness and
shamefastnes, which are ornaments to young age: for as gravity is commended in
old men: so shamefastnes in young men, as if it were by the gift and dowry of
nature: Isaacke a child, fearing God, the son and heir of Abraham, gives
such honor to his father, that he refused not death at his fathers pleasure.
Joseph also, when he dreamed that the Sun and Moon and Stars should
worship him, yet was he still careful to honor his father: so chaste, that
he would not have an unchaste word: so shamefast, that he fled from his
mistress: so humble, that he was content to serve: so patient, that he
cheerfully suffered imprisonment: so ready to forgive injury, that he
preferred those that sought his life. Genesis 49. 22.
Therefore the blessing of his father fell upon him.

These things I write (Right Honorable) not that I doubt either of your good
education or virtuous disposition; but hearing of your good beginning and
proceedings in grace: my purpose is only to comfort and encourage you in that
good way where you are already entered. But for further direction, I refer you
to the Sermons following, which I have dedicated to your Honor, together with
that worthy City where they were preached, and where your Honor now (to the
comfort of many) does succeed your worthy father in place and authority. The
cause of my dedication to your Honor, is; First, love to your self, heartily
wishing continuance and increase in grace, being the special joy, hope and
ornament of our Country. An other cause is, the duty I owe to your Ho^ourable
parents; to whom both I and mine are so far obliged, that we shall never be
able so much as to be sufficiently thankful, much less to requite them.

And thus I beseech the Almighty God, the father of all gifts, to bestow upon
your Honor the portion of Joseph, all the noble virtues and graces that were
in him; all true prosperity and honor in this life, and an eternal
inheritance in that blessed and heavenly Canaan, prepared and purchased by the
blood of Christ, for all such as truly believe in him.

Your Honors to command

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful M. Mayor of Couentry, the Justices, Aldermen,
Sheriffs, to all the rest of that corperation, and to all within the liberties
of that City, which sincerely profess and love the truth of Christ's Gospel,
T: G: wishes all happiness in this life, and everlasting glory, in the life to
come.
SVch is the gracious favor and kindness of our good and merciful God toward
his children and servants here on earth, (Right worshipful and beloved in the
Lord) that in his love he vouchsafes to accept and to approve their weak
service and works, so that they be done and performed with honest, right, and
good affections; And thus he accepts our prayer, hearing, receiving, alms,
and other actions being weakly and imperfectly performed by us. And if the
Lord were not of this gracious inclination and nature, we might be utterly
discouraged to do him any service at all, considering the manifold wants and
infirmities that are in us. But being sure of his favor and acceptance, and of
our own honest desires, and affections to do more and better then we can
perform, and being sorry we can do no better: we are emboldned to perform
any duty and service to so good a God and loving a father, Exodus 25. 2. 3. 4.
5. etc.
and it is his own will and commandment that we should do so. Thus he says
to Moses about the building of the material tabernacle: Speak to the children
of Israel. that they receive an offering for me of every man, whose heart
gives it freely. Yet shall take the offering for me, and this is the offering
which you shall take of them, gold, silver, and brass, and blew silk, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats hair, Rams skins colored
red, and the skins of Badgers, and the wood Shi^im. From whence we are to
learn, that God requires the offerings of his people, for the building of his
tabernacle, and furthering his service: Again, that he requires not a
compelled, but a cheerful service; a true, sincere, joyful heart and
affection, And further we learn; that the endeavor and labor of those which
any way help the spiritual building, either by cost or counsel, so far as
they may, is a service pleasing to God. For we see things there offered be of
diverse kinds, some more precious, some base and vile. There be difference of
gifts in building the spiritual tabernacle, some are endewed with gold, some
with silver, some with blew silk, and all profitable. Such as God has given,
such we are to bring, and God will accept it. Some things God appointed, that
the poorest might be able to offer, and no man shut out for want of ability,
they may bring wood, stone, or at least Goats hair. Every one in his calling
as he has received, must do his uttermost endeavor to further the building.
Some by preaching, some by writing, some by government, some by countenance,
some by cost, some by counsel, some by baser services, which yet are accepted,
if they be done with right affections. Indeed, we are to desire more, and the
greatest gifts of all, if we would have them: but let us do our uttermost
endeavor so far as we can and the Lord will accept it. Earnest and
affectionate is that speech of a learned Father, Origin: in Exodus
Lord Jesus grant that I may have some monument in thy tabernacle: I will wish
if it would be, that some part of that gold might come from me, whereof the
propitiatory is made; or with which the Arc is covered, or whereof the
candlestick is made; or if I have no gold nor silver, at least I may be found
to offer something that may help forward the pillars and sockets of them; or
that I may have some brass in this tabernacle, whereof the rings may be made,
and other things prescribed by thy word. O that it were possible for me to be
one of the Princes, or to offer precious stones to the adorning of the Priests
garment: but because all these are above my power, at least let me find favor
to offer goats hair in the tabernacle of God, that I be not found empty and
unfruitful in all.

A holy, gracious, and devout speech: we are all to be of the same mind and
affection, to desire increase of graces, but yet to use those well which we
have: knowing that God will accept them being rightly used: yea he accepts
the meanest gifts, they are as welcome to him as the greatest of the richer
sort: Non omnes possum^^ esse Cesares, We cannot be all Caesar's. Mat. 25.
To some the Lord has given ten tale^ts, to some five, to some one, he accepts
of the least, being faithfully used and employed, Luk: 21. 1.
he accepts and allows of the two mites of the poor widow, cast into the
treasury, as well as of the great and abundant gifts of the richer sort. We
are to follow this good nature of God, to take in good part that which is
offered to us with a loving mind. Thus civil honest men, being of good natures,
do take in good part any small thing given them, by those whom they know to be
their friends, and would give more if ability served. Right Worcester: let me
entreat the same kindness and favor in accepting these few fermons, which are
as two mites into the treasury, in respect of the multitude of learned books
and sermons which you daily read and hear. I confess, it may seem needles
and superfluous for me, the unworthiest of thousands, to offer any such thing,
to such a people, as have such store and abundance, and plenty of instruction.
It may seem I say as needless as to cast water into the sea. But seeing many
more needles things are published, and all are (as they may) to further the
building of Gods tabernacle, I pray you pardon this my bold attempt. The
causes why I presume to dedicate these my poor labors to you are these.
First, because the effect and sum of these sermons, was preached in the
presence and hearing of many of you, though I confess I have made since some
additions and amplifications. Again, because abiding some while amongst you, I
sound no little kindness and favor, and I received much spiritual comfort and
profit to my soul in many public and private exercises amongst you: which
did cause me greatly to affect and love that place, and now at last by this
poor present, to testify my love and thankfulness to you. And I doubt not but
the matters handled in these sermons, will be acceptable to al good Christians
amongst you. And how can the doctrine of good government, be unpleasing to that
City, where there are so many religious, wise and good governors? who are
careful to perform all the parts of their calling: careful I say, to punish
offenders, to countenance the good, to relieve the oppressed, to maintain and
defend, the Gospel of Christ, the preachers, and professors of it. And must
not the commendation of true wisdom be acceptable and delightful, to so many
friends, followers, sons and daughters of wisdom? There are no doubt
amongst you, many good and gracious hearers, receiving the seed of wisdom in
good ground, understanding and believing the word, bringing forth the fruits of
it, some thirty, some sixty, and some an hundred fold: Many, old, young,
rich, poor, men, women, and children, Masters and Dames, servants professing
and loving the Gospel, and greatly rejoicing in it. Many seeking and searching
for true wisdom, from the true fountain, being careful to ask, to enquire
for resolution and satisfaction from the mouth of God. Many reuerencing and
loving all faithful teachers; stirring up and provoking others to do the
like, reposing their chief felicity in heavenly wisdom, desiring,
thirsting, hungring after it, as the true food of their soul; watching daily
at the gates, and giving atte^dance at the posts of the doors of wisdom,
sparing neither for pains nor cost to enjoy it, hating all errors, falsehood,
folly, and striving for the maintenance of the truth, and resolved to hazard
goods, and life, for the defense of the Gospel. Many like Mar; choosing the
good part which shall never be taken from them. Many like Lydia, whose hearts
the Lord has opened to giu^ attendance to Paul's preaching. Many like Eunice,
and Lois the Grandmother and mother of Timothi^, having a care with them to
bring up their children in the true faith. All such hearers, as I doubt not
there are many such among you, must needs be glad to hear their Mistress,
their Lady, their Princes, their mother, so highly commended and magnified.
And will not this story of so worthy a Queen, comfort and encourage all that
are ready with her to bestow pains and cost, for the attaining the same
wisdom, esteeming it more precious then all things else in, the world? Give
me leave therefore (right worthy Citizens) to comfort and set you on in the
paths of wisdom, wherein many of you have already a long time most
graciously and profitably walked. As for any further instructions and
admonitions, I refer you to the Sermons following. I now end, praying
heartily for you all, with the Apostle; Romans 15. 5.
That the God of patience and consolation would give you, that ye be like
minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus; that you with one mind
and with one mouth, may praise even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ; Phil.
1. 9. 10.
that your love may abound yet more and more, in knowledge, and in all
judgment, that you may discern things that differ one from another; that ye
may be pure and without offense, until the day of Christ; 1. Coloss. 1. 10.
that ye may walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all things, being
fruitful in all good works.

And the very God of peace sanctify you throughout: 1. These. 5. 23. 24.
And I pray God that your whole spirit, soul and body, may be kept blameless
to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful is he which calls you,
which will also do it. Brethren pray for us.

Yours always in the Lord Jesus, Thomas Gibson.

THE PRINCIPAL matters handled in every Sermon.
The Contents of the first Sermon.
THe sum of the Books of the Kings and Chronicles. The exce^lencie of the
speaker: of the par^^e to whom these words are spoken, and the excellency of
the mat^er it self. Eight marks of good hearers from the example of this
Queen. Ver^ue and religion is to be praised in any. Against vain glory, and
hunting after the praise of men. Diverse opinions of men touching true
happiness. No perfection of happiness in this life, but in another. Some
description of that happiness. Our chief thoughts, desires and affections are
to be upon that.
The Contents of the second Sermon.
THe division and difference of wisdom. Salomons chief wisdom revealed in
the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Canticles. True wisdom to be found only in
the Scriptures. It consists in the knowledge of God and of our selves. No
perfection of wisdom in this life. True wisdom always joined with religi^n
and virtue. Three kinds of hearing the word. The chief felicity of this life,
to hear and obey wisdom. The necessity, excellency, and profit of divine
^isedome, and of the ministry of it. The unhappiness of such as want it, or
seek^ to stop the course of it, or refuse to ^eare it, or cont^mne and mock^
it, or profit not by it. Causes why men profit not in wisdoms school.
The Contents of the third Sermon.
THe vanity of such as repose felicity in riches, pleasures or honors. The
word of wisdom to be reuere^tly and carefully heard. We are to prefer it
before all things, eagerly thirsting after it, and rejoicing in it. We are to
love the public assemblies, to be arken to this wisdom, read or preached,
and to despise no means of grace. We are often in secret to confer and
meditate of it, and to maintain the credit of it by godly conversation. We
are to hate all falsehood and folly, as enemies to wisdom. We are to love
wisdom when it is most hated and persecuted in the world. A comfort to the
true sons and daughters of wisdom. An application to the Auditors. The
happiness of that City. The necessity and blessing of often and pl^sntifull
preaching. The example of this Queen applied to the shame of the Jews and of
us.
The Contents of the fourth Sermon.
THe example of the Ninevites, and of diverse others, alleged and applied to
the further condemnation of this our age. The power of divine wisdom. Signs
of true conversion in this Queen. Solomon a figure of Christ; but Christ more
excellent then Solomon. Religion belongs to all women, much more to men; and
to great persons most of all.
The Contents of the fifth Sermon.
THe piety of this Queen in worshipping the true God. God to be blessed for
all his benefits. The love of th^^ Queen, not envying the prosperity of
Solomon but ioying and praising God for it. We are specially to rejoice and
praise God for the Kingdom of Christ. God the disposer of Cro^nes and
Kingdoms. All things fall in love to Gods children. A testimony of Gods love,
to be called and fitted to high places. God^ benefits to Solomon, and his
great felicity. Salomons great and grievous fall in his old d^y^s. Some of
the learned doubt of his salvation. Arguments to prove his rising and
repentance, and that he could not finally perish. The great danger of
prosperity. Great and good Princes subject to falling. Some begin w^ll and end
ill. Instructions for young and old age. The haynonsnesse of unclean lusts,
and of Idolatry. It is most dangerous to m^tch with Idolaters. Idolatry not
to be tolerated for the savor of any. We are not to be offended at the fall
of Princes or Preachers. Their bad lives scandalous. Their callings and
doctrines not to be contemned. The right uses of the falls of Saints.
The Contents of the Sixth Sermon.
A Good King is a rare blessing of God. The original of Kings, and of diverse
kinds of go^ernment. The power of a King Miesticall. The rushnesse and
fickleness of people, loathing and misliking Gods ordinance. Bad Princes are
of God in wrath to a people. Their sins from themselves, their callings from
God. Such Princes not to be resisted. Such as are chosen in love perform their
duties. Many glorious titles of Princes in Scripture. The like titles given to
Ministers. There is great affinity and agreement betwixt the callings of
Magistrates and Ministers. Good Rulers are to defend and countenance good
Ministers. The duty of Princes and Rulers. They must govern themselves,
their families and the people.
The sum of the seventh Sermon.
THe true felicity of Princes. They are chiefly to regard the common good of
the people. Of laws, of Judges; and of execution of laws. All notorious
offenders to be grieuouslie punished. Good uses of such punishments.
Idolaters, Heretics, and false Prophets are to dye the death. All to be
compelled to the outward service of the true God. Comforts to Magistrates
punishing offenders. Great offenses not to be remitted. Princes (...) to be
merciful not cruel. They are to comfort and countenance the good; and by
kindness to win the hearts of the people.
The Contents of the eight Sermon.
PRinces are to defend their subjects against forrayne enemies, and oppressions
at home. Private men are not to revenge themselves. The haynousnesse of
oppression. Two worthy patterns of Judgment and Mercy. Against oppression
by usury. That the poor are to be provided for by the Magistrates. Motives
to that duty. Caueats and comforts for the poor. The care of religion
belongs to Magistrates. Uses of the doctrine of Magistrates. Joy and
thanksgiving for the King. We must be willing to learn of any.
THE FIRST SERMON.
1. Kings. 10. 8. 9. 8. Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants,
which stand ever before thee, and hear thy wisdom.

9. Blessed be the Lord thy God, which loved thee, to set thee on the throne of
Israel, because the Lord loved Israel for ever, and made thee King, to do
equity and righteousness.


THe whole scripture says the Apostle is given by inspiration of God, 2. Tim.
3. 16.
and is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, to instruct in
righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto
every good work: As all and every scripture serves for these holy uses, so
especially these books of the history and Chronicles of the Kings of Judah and
Jerusalem. For here are not only many examples of vice, and virtue, but here
is described the true knowledge and worship of God, the confutation of
Idolitrie and false worship, the true form and pattern of all reformation of
disorders. The duty and blessing of good Kings, the ruin of the wicked, the
estate of the Church, the care and protection of God for it. Here we are
taught, that God is the chief Monarch, the disposer, the chief governor of
kingdoms, that the happiness of Kings consists in maintaining true religion
and Justice; that impiety in religion and false worship, is the overthrow of
kingdoms, and as the whole story is of great use and instruction to the
Church: so especially the Chronicle of David the father, and Solomon the son,
they being the first Kings that God gave to Israel next to Saul: yea indeed the
first that God gave his people in love, men qualified with extraordinary
graces, the one a Prophet, the other a Preacher, both of them tipes and figures
of Christ Jesus, the true David and Solomon.

Their story is large and long, as you may read in the two books of Samuel,
and a great part of the first book of the Kings, and further in the first
book of the Chronicles: and the nine first Chapters of the second book.
Touching Solomon, in those books, there is set down the favor of God toward
him, in appearing familiarly twice unto him, the singular blessings of
wisdom, honor and riches, bestowed upon him, the care of Solomon in building
the Temple, Gods house, according to his mind, his joy, praise and sacrifices
for the same: now this chapter in hand contains two general heads. First a
profitable and pleasant story of the Queen of the south. Secondly, the
magnificence and greatness of Solomon.

This text is a branch of the first part, and contains a worthy commendation
of Solomon: First commending the happy government of his family: secondly, of
his whole kingdom: whatsoever is in these two short sentences of scripture,
all is worthy and excellent, and of great force to draw reverence and
attention, whether we consider the person that speaks, the party to whom it
is spoken, or the matter and subject it self: the speaker no simple nor base
person, though the weaker vessel a woman, yet of great estate and majesty, a
famous, Royal Queen: the person to whom this is spoken, is no less a man
then Solomon, a most worthy and glorious King of Israel, beloved and chosen of
God, excelling all the Kings of the earth in riches, honor, and wisdom. A
lively tipe and figure of Christ Jesus the son of God, the King of all Kings,
and Lord of heaven and earth. The matter and subject here handled and
commended, is neither riches nor pleasure, nor the pomp, nor the glory of the
world, but wisdom, divine wisdom, which she saw and heard in Solomon, and
for the enjoying whereof, she took so tedious, so long, and costly a journey,
after her conference with Solomon, and after she heard him speak so divinely
to her self, and other strangers, to his courtiers, servants and people, her
heart being inamoured with love of this wisdom, and feeling the power and
virtue of it, working in her soul, she cries and exclaimeth, Happy are these
thy men, happy are these thy servants, which stand ever before thee, and hear
thy wisdom, etc.

Before we come to this speech it self, it shall not be amiss to say some
thing of the speaker, a woman, a Queen of excellent virtues; the whole speech
it self commends her, for here she speaks reverently of Solomon, commending
and magnifying his wisdom; she confesses and worshippeth the true God; she
acknowledges him to be the disposer of kingdoms, and Israel to be his people:
she puts Solomon in mind of the duty of a King. She is a tipe of the
calling of the Gentiles, and finally, she is commended by Christ himself in
the Gospel, as we shall see hereafter.

And though all the world, and all the Kings of the earth, sought to see
Solomon and to hear his wisdom, yet this woman is especially named, and
commended, and a whole story is written of her, because it was a great matter,
and almost a wonder, that a woman should take so great, so troublesome and
tedious a journey, and it seems her zeal, and piety exceeded all the rest.
In the beginning of this chapter, it is set down whence she came, namely from
Sheba* being as Christ says, from the uttermost part of the earth: that the
fame of Solomon moved her to come, that she came with a great train, and
brought with her sweet odours, gold and precious stones: the end of her coming
was, to prove Salomo^ with hard questions in matters of religion: and as she
spared neither pains nor cost, but cheerfully took upon her so great a
journey: so when she is come, she is careful to learn and enquire, of the
true knowledge of God, to be satisfied and resolved concerning all points she
stood in doubt of: she confesses her ignorance, and neglects no occasion to
do her soul good. And now after Solomon had answered all things to the full;
she highly commends him, she stirs up his courtiers, subjects and servants
to be thankful for such a Master, Lord and King: she rejoices, praising God
for him: and after in token of thankfulness, she bestows upon him, gold,
odors, and precious stones: she could not then perfectly learn true religion
in her own country, Jerusalem was the seat and school of religion, the
scripture not being then in all tongues, as it was after in the time of the
Apostles, therefore she comes so far to learn true wisdom, both for her
private comfort, and the public good of her people: and now having found, felt
and inioyed it, she both blesses God the Author and Solomon the teacher. In
this example, we are to observe diverse worthy notes and marks of gracious and
good hearers: First, in that she seeks for wisdom, and such things as
concern the name of the Lord, and that from Solomon, who was so wise in so
great a measure. Good hearers must follow her example, not to seek for folly
or fables, but for true wisdom, and that from the true Solomon Christ Jesus
in his word and Gospel: For the scriptures only as the Apostle says, 2. Tim.
3. 15. 16.
are able to make us wise unto salvation. And the Psalmist says, Psalm. 19. 7.
The law of the Lord is perfect, converting souls, and gives wisdom to the
simple. Solomon himself gives this counsel, Incline thine ear, hear the
words of the wise, and apply thine heart to my knowledge. Secondly, good
hearers after this worthy pattern, Pro: 22. 17.
must refuse no pains, nor labor for the attaining of this wisdom: The wise
man will have us call, and cry for it, to seek it as silver, and search for
it, as for treasures. And again, buy the truth, but sell it not: likewise
wisdom, and instruction, and understanding, when Christ was borne at Bethlem
in Judea, Pro: 23. 23.
there came certain wise men from the East to Jerusalem, to seek for him;
Mat. 2. 1.
this woman and they in many things are much alike, they were some great men,
she a Queen, they came to Jerusalem, so did she: they came to seek Christ,
she came to Solomon the figure of Christ: they enquire of the Priests to be
satisfied where Christ should be borne: she seeks to be satisfied of her
doubts, from S^lomon a preacher: they seeing the star leading them to Christ
rejoiced, she having comfort and knowledge from Solomon rejoices also: they
offer gold, Incense and Myrrh to Christ, she offers and gives to Solomon
precious things: they were a figure of the calling of the Gentiles, so was she
a tipe of the same long before: they came a great journey from the East, to
seek for Christ, she came from the South, a great and dangerous voyage to
hear and enjoy the wisdom of Solomon. Luke. 8. 2.
Marie Magdalen, Ioanna the wife of Cusa, Herod his steward, Act. 8. 27
with many others follow our Savior Christ to hear his sermons, the Eunuch
the treasurer of Ethiopia, came to Jerusalem to worship God. It is lawful then
to seek for instruction abroad, if we lack it at home: Merchants venture upon
the seas to far countries for traffic, many go to the Indies for gold.

Such as lack provision at home, go to markets and faires for it: if our
cattle want food or water, we will seek far and near for them: how far
do men run, what pains do they take for humane learning, how careful are
they to get money, how painful to find it, if they loose it? many fly to
Rome and Rhemes, not for wisdom, but for foolishnes; not for truth, but for
errors; not for food, but for poison: many trudge many a mile on pilgrimage,
to worship Idols, stocks and stones, yea some to join with the enemies, to
work treason against their lawful Prince: this example will not serve their
turn; There is a lawful peregrination to visit good men, to confer, to
learn arts, tongues, religion: the Jews were commanded to go to Jerusalem
sundry times in the year, Deuteronomy. 16.
but it was about the true worship of God. 1, Sam. 1. 3.
Elkanah the Priest, went every year to worship and sacrifice to the Lord of
hoasts in Shilo. Gal: 1. 18.
S. Paul went to Jerusalem to visit Peter, and to confer with him, the popish
peregrinations are unlawful, they make it a principal part of Gods service:
there is no commandment for them, they visit dead men's bones, Images, and
relics. This superstition, as many other, was invented many years after
Christ: others travel and take upon them great and dangerous iournies to the
hurt of body and soul.

But the pains and travel of this woman is to learn divine wisdom:
teaching us to refuse no pains in seeking for the means of our salvation, but
to labor with all care and diligence, for the profit, the comfort, and the
good of our souls.

Thirdly, a good hearer must be inquisitiue and careful to learn. This woman
(a Queen) is not ashamed to confess her ignorance, to ask questions, and to
be taught. The wise man says, Hear^ o ye children, Prou. 4. 1.
the instruction of a Father, and give ear to learn understanding. The
Apostle complains of some women that were ever learning, 2. Tim. 3. 7.
but were never able to come to the knowledge of the truth: There are many
hearers; but few learners. The care of this woman, is not only seen by her
cost, and labor in coming, but by opening her heart, and moving doubts:
asking questions, conference, and reasoning with good men, are gracious means
to further us in the true knowledge of God.

The people must look for the Law: of God at the Priests mouth: The Apostles
ask of Christ their master, Mal. 2. 7.
the interpretation and meaning of hard parables: Math. 17. 36.
The Corinthia^s write to S. Paul, to be resolved in certain doubts. 1. Cor. 7.
And here by the way, observe two notes of a good teacher in Solomon; they
must be able and apt to teach: secondly, ready and willing, not nice, strange,
and stately.

The graces of God are given for the good of others: the end and use of the
ministry, is to instruct and resolve doubts. But many in the Church, are
unable to teach; others are unwilling; and others both unable and unwilling:
these are all confuted by Salomons example, who both abounded in wisdom, and
was willing to impart it to others. He was as ready to answer, as this woman
was to ask: he was as ready to teach, as she was to learn.

Fourthly, after her hearing and learning, she comends her teacher highly, and
speaks reverently of him; So must good hearers, have a reverent estimation of
such as instruct them from the mouth of God.

David receiving good counsel from Abigail, 1. Sam. 25 32.
blesses both her and her counsel: The woman in the Gospel, hearing the
gracious words that proceeded out of the mouth of Christ, Lu. 11. 27.
cried out; Blessed is the Womb that bare thee, and the pappes that gave thee
suck.

The holy Apostle Saint Paul commends the Galathians for this cause, Call. 4.
14.
that they esteemed him as an Angel of God, yea even as Christ Jesus. In an
other place, We beseech you brethren, that ye know them that labor among
you and are over you in the Lord, and adm^nish you that you have them (...)
singular love for their works sake: And when you feel the power and fruit of
their ministry, say with this woman, Blessed be God, blessed be such men,
blessed be such servants, which have called me, comforted and strengthened me,
happy are those people which may daily hear such wisdom.

Fifthly, she acknowledges the chief felicity of this life, not to consist in
riches, honor, pleasure, but in wisdom. So good hearers ought to esteem it,
the greatest happiness under heaven, to have a resident and teaching minister,
expounding and applying to them, the wisdom of the true Salomo^ Chrst Jesus.
But of this point I mean to speak more largely and fully after.

Sixthly, she stirs up Salomons Courtiers and servants, to know this their
happy estate, it may be some of them scarcely acknowledged any such thing, as
many careless and unthankful people in our days, having good pastors, yet
neither feel nor confess any blessing at all: strangers can say, happy are
such a people, though they themselves know no such thing: good hearers must by
this example, not only hear the word of wisdom, and highly esteem it
themselves, but stir up others to the like affection toward it: they would
have others partakers of the same graces with them, and indeed if they find it
a blessing and comfort to themselves, they will imparte it to others, and
labor to make others partakers of the same co^forts with them. Esai. 2. 3.
Esaiah prophecieth, that such shall be the zeal of the people under the
Gospel, that they shall say one to another, Come, let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, he will teach us his
ways, and we will walk in his (...). Z^ch. 8.
And Z^cariah says, They that duel in one (...) shall go to another, to call
their brethren saying, (...) let us go pray before the Lord* and seek the
Lord of Hoasts: Every one shall answer, I will go also. John. 1. 4. 45.
Andrew being called, calls Simon Peter his brother, and ^hilip calls
Nathaniel, John. 4.
the woman of Samaria, being once acquainted with Christ Jesus, calls her
neighbors, saying; Come see a man that has told me all things that ever I
did: she had been a companion with them in sin, now she would have them
companions with her in grace: this woman would have the courtiers and servants
of Solomon, to confess that blessing which she had found, in having so wise a
gouerner and teacher.

Seventhly, she rejoices and blesses God for Salomons instructions, so that
is the duty of good hearers, as to be thankful to the men and means of
their conversion, so much more to God, the author and giver of all good: as
David blessed Ab^ga^l so first of all, he blessed God for her counsel. And the
same David says to the Lord, Psalm. 119. 7.
I will praise thee with an upright heart, when I shall learn the iudge^ments
of thy righteousness. Psalm. 119. 164.
And again, seven times a day do I praise thee because of thy righteous
judgments* And in another place he exhorts Jerusalem to praise God, as for
peace and plenty, so chiefly for that he had showed his word to Jacob, his
statutes and judgments to Israel, he has not dealt so with every nation says
he, neither have they known his judgments* praise ye the Lord. Our Savior
himself rejoices in his spirit, and gives thanks to his heavenly Father for
the good success of the Gospel: Luke. 10. 21.
when Phillip preached in Samaria, Act. 8. 8.
with great power and profit, there was great joy in that City: 1. Cor. 14. 25.
the Infidel being converted by the preaching of the word blesses God.

Eighthly, good hearers after this royal example, are to be bountiful and
thankful to their teachers, she gives unto Solomon abundance of gold, sweet
odours exceeding much: as you may see in the next verse following this our
text. It may be some will say, that Salomo^ had no need of such gifts, having
such abundance of wealth and riches: It is true, yet he does accept it, and
requiteth her kindness, with precious presents, and gave her whatsoever she
asked; so that she went home richer then she came, richer I am sure in grace,
and divine wisdom, yet in giving Solomon such precious gifts, she showed her
thankefulnes, thinking nothing too dear for such a teacher.

And though the ministers be not able to requite the kindnesses and
liberalities of men, yet God is able to do it, and he has promised to bless
and reward all true friends and benefactors to his servants. Pro 3. 9.
And yet the people must know, Mat. (...). 41. 42.
that they receive from good ministers, more gain and profit, Mat. 25. 35.
then they do from them: the ministers they offer and deliver heavenly
mysteries, 2. Tim. 1. 16.
the Jewels and treasures of the word, the spiritual food of the soul:
which is more precious then thousands of gold and silver, they receive from the
people only earthly and outward maintenance, provision and substance, for this
body and life: and therefore the people have no cause to grudge the
maintenance of good ministers, seeing if they make their accounts aright, the
gain is theirs. The Apostle says, 1. Tim. 5. 17.
Such as labor in word and doctrine, are worthy of double honor; Gal: 6. 6.
That is, of reverence and munificence. And again, Let him that is taught in
the word, make him that has taught him partaker of all his goods: they that
sow spiritual things, are worthy to reap temporal things. And the Lord
has ordained, that they that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel: It
is the law of nature, equity and thankfulness, that such should be maintained,
being spiritual pastors, fathers and soldiers, and spending themselves as a
candle for the common good.

The good Shunamite is kind and liberal to Elisha the Prophet, 2. King. 4* 8.
not suffering him to want either food or lodging. Luke 8. 3.
Holy women in the Gospel ministered unto Christ, Act: 10: 4*8.
and maintained him of their own substance. Act: 16. 15.
Cornelius kindly entertaineth Peter, L^dea, even constrained Paul and his
company to come to her house: Acts. 16. 15.
And the Iaylor converted, refreshes Paul and Sila^ his prisoners. Acts. 16.
34.


And thus you may plainly see in this worthy example, eight notes and marks
of good hearers; Some before this Text, some in this text, and some after: and
these notes do contain and comprehend the whole story of this worthy
Queen. And now because this whole text is a praise and commendation of
Solomon, let us learn from hence, that virtue and wisdom is to be commended,
Pro. 12. 8.
in whom soever we find it. A man (says Salomon^) shall be commended for his
wisdom: and not only great personages, but the poorest are to be commended
for virtue: Better is a poor and nise child (says Solomon) then an old and
foolish King, Ecc. 4. 13.
which will no more be admonished. And again, Better is Wisdom then
strength: Yet the wisdom of the poor is despised. And in an other place,
Better is the poor that walks in his vprightnes, Ecc. 9. 16.
then he that peruerteth his ways, though he be rich.

Saint James reprooueth this parcialitie in men, who esteem highly, and
magnify rich men, be they never so wicked, and despise poor men: such as are
chosen of God, rich in Faith, and heyre^ of the Kingdom. Those that honor me
shall be honored, 1. Sam. 2. 30.
(says the Lord,) and those that despise me shall be despised; God himself
commends and praises such. He says of Job that he was an upright and just
man: one that feared GOD, Job. 1. 1.
and eschued evil.

Christ commends John the Baptist, saying; There was not a greater Prophet
amongst women's children. Math. 11.
Zachary the Priest, and his wife Elizabeth, are said both by the holy Ghost
to be just before God, Luke. 1. 6.
and to walk in all the commandments of God, without reproof. And Simeon is
said to be a just man, fearing God, and waiting for the consolation of
Israel. And Christ, writing to the seven Churches, Though he has something
against most of them, worthy of blame and reproof, yet he commends any
good thing in them: Yea, he especially commends the church of Smyrna* though
in persecution and poverty, accounting it rich in grace, and spiritual
treasures: So that it is lawful, and it is our duty to commend and praise
virtue and goodness in any: the behavior of good men is such as deserves and
draws love and praise: And this does encourage them to go forward in goodness,
and does provoke others to follow their example, as the shadow does follow the
body, so Honor and praise does follow virtue: sometime the wicked do praise
their virtues, and are forced to commend them, and though they do it not, yet
righteous men commonly will praise them, and the more godly and wise that men
are, the more praise they deserve: and we must take heed that our praise be
moderate, just, and without flattery, and above all things, we must take heed
that we praise not without cause and desert, that we never justify, nor
comme^d the wicked, remembering that there is a fearful woe pronounced against
them, that speak good of evil, Esai: 5. 20.
and evil of good. The use of this doctrine is for the reproof of many, Use.
as of those that are so blind and senseles, that they cannot see, and discern
the grace of God in men: others are so dumb and unthankful, that though they
be partakers of many graces from others, which they must needs see and
confess, yet they silent and never speak once a good word of them: others are
malicious, and do daily carpe, deprave, disgrace and diminish as much as they
can, the gifts of God in his servants. Again, this reprooueth those which hunt
for glory and praise, this they greatly seek for and desire, though they have
no care of virtue, nor wisdom: Mat. 6.
these are like the Pharisees, proud, vainglorious Hypocrites, seeking onley
the praise of me^. What is more unseemly, or more infamous, then to be
desirous of glory? the more we seek and desire it, the less we shall find
it. If thou would be glorious, despise glory, and thou shall be glorious to
all: the vain glory of this world, is a deceitful sweetn^s, an unprofitable
labor, a perpetual fear, and a dangerous preferment: Bernard.
vain glory, it flies lightly, it pursues easily, but it does inflict, not
alight wound; but does easily kill such as be blind and negligent, it is a
secret venom, a subtle evil, a close plague, the mother of hypocrisy, the
beginning of many vices, the rust of virtue, the mouth of holiness, the blindness
of the heart; be not proud, for the praises of men, when thou know there are
many wants and infirmities in thee, if thou seek for praise, thou have lost
it, and thy good deeds are corrupted, let God be praised in them, and not man,
who is an instrument, let the holiest say, Psalm: 115. 1.
Not unto us o Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory. What have
thou that thou have not received? 1. Cor: 4. 7.
If thou have received it, why reioycest thou as though thou had not received
it. The Apostle says of himself, 1. Cor. 15. 10.
By the grace of God, I am that I am. And again, Let him that rejoices
rejoice in the Lord, 2. Cor. 10. 17. 18.
for he that praises himself is not allowed, but he whom the Lord praises:
when we have done all that we can, let us count our selves unprofitable
servants, esteem thy self unprofitable, and God will count thee amongst them
that are profitable: If thou will be great in heaven, thou must be small in
earth, small in thine own conceit, and think rather of thy manifold sins,
both of commission and omission, rather then of any goodn^s that is in thee.
What a vanity and madness is it, to desire to be well spoken of, praised and
glorified of men, if we seek it, we shall scarce attain it, and when we have
it, it is worth nothing at all, being but the breath and blast of few men's
mouths, and upon every light occasion soon altered and changed: Christ
himself was tossed too and fro with the speech of men, some said he was a
Samaritan and had a devil, John. 9.
others said he was a Prophet, sometimes they will make him a King, and receive
him into Jerusalem, Mat: 21*
with triumph of Hosanna, a little after, Mat. 27.
they cry, Crucific him, crucify him, and preferred the life of Barrabas, a
wicked murderer before him. ^^ct. 28.
The Barbarians at the first, they count Paul a murderer, ^. Cor. 4. 3. 4.
and presently after, they say he is a God. Let us therefore be of the
Apostles mind, saying; As touching me I pass very little to be judged of you,
or of man's judgment: No, I judge not my own self, yet am I not thereby
justified, but he that judges me is the Lord.

The praises or dispraises of men are little to be regarded; they account some
just, holy, virtuous, honest, which are nothing so; what are these men the
better for the flattering speeches of men, when God and their own consciences
can tell them, that they are no such kind of men at all? but indeed profane,
unjust, vile, and naught. Some again are accounted in the mouths of men, as
wicked, and notorious hypocrites, what need they care for these speeches, when
God and their own conscience does witness that they are sincere in heart,
desiring to live honestly and uprightly in the sight of God and men. The
testimony of a good conscience, is a sufficient bulwark against all false
reports and slanders whatsoever: but the common mischief and poison amongst
men, is the pleasing speeches of flatterers and clawbacks, which does feed them
in their humors, and magnify them to the skies, when there is little or no
cause at all: Nay, when rather they are to be blamed and dispraised. There be
two kinds of persecutors says one, first, of such as do dispraise us, and
secondly, of such as do praise us: but the tongue of the flatterer does more
hurt, and persecute us, then the hand of a persecutor: I had rather to be
reproved of any, then to be praised of a flatterer: no reproof is to be feared
of him that loves the truth, but he that flatteringly praises, Pro: 28. 23.
does err, and confirms us in error. Therefore true is that saying of
Solomon he that rebukes a man shall find more favor at the length, then he
that flattereth with his tongue.

And the wounds of a friend are better then the kisses of a flatterer.
Therefore says David, Psalm. 141. 5.
Let the righteous smite me for that is a benefit, and let them reprove me, and
it shall be as a precious oil, that shall not break my head. The desire of
praise does hinder zeal in religion, and constancy in the profession of
Christ. John. 5. 44.
How can ye believe says our Savior, which receive honor one of another, and
seeks not the honor that comes of God alone. And in another place it is
said, that many of the chief rulers believed in Christ, but because of the
Pharisees they did not confess him, least they should be cast out of the
Synagogue, John. 12. 42. 43.
for they loved the praise of men, more then the praise of God; It is almost an
universal vanity, to be desirous to be praised when we deserve it not, and
not to praise those who are worthy of praise: and this is a vain thing, that
through our ignorance oftentimes, that is concealed which is, and that is
published which is not. Bernard.
L^ud^m^^ mendacit^r, delectamur inaniter, we are falsely praised, and we
delight in vanity, so that they which are praised are vain, and they which
do praise are li^rs: man is not to be praised in his life, which praise is a
temptation and trial upon the earth, yet is he to be praised, who is dead to
sin, and lives to God. It is a vain and a seducing praise, whereby the
sinner is praised in the desires of his soul, yet he is to be praised who can
truly say, I live not, but Christ lives in me, and so not he but the life of
Christ is praised, the gifts and graces of God wheresoever we find them, are
to be reverenced, honored, and magnified, with praise and joy.

And let the best take heed that they be not desirous of vainglory. It is
lawful to receive due praise when it is offered, and we are not utterly to
renounce and forbid it: good men are not ignorant of the goodness that is in
them, and therefore they rejoice, that God has given unto men such good
affections, to like so well of those good things which they praise in others,
and it is the gift of God to allow and approve of his graces, and to forbid
such kind of commendations, is not to will nor desire, that the faithful
should praise and approve those things which are worthy of due praise and
approbation. Solomon in this place, does not refuse, but accept the just
commendation of this woman, though it be of himself in his own presence, and
in the hearing of many other, and yet we must beware that we be not moved to
do well, for the desire of praise, and that we cease not from doing good,
though we be reviled, and hardly spoken of, and those praises which are given
to us, let them not rest nor die in us, but let the glory of them be referred
to God, the author, and giver, of all good gifts.

A worthy Father writes of himself, that in this respect he had cause to be
much grieved, because he was often praised and he could hardly avoid the
pride of heart: yet he says, that this was his comfort, that it was appointed
of God, that praise should be the follower of a good life: Pro. 27. 2.
And howsoever Solomon says, Let an other man praise thee, and not thine own
mouth, a stranger, and not thine own lips: yet sometimes the Saints of God
are forced to praise themselves, not for vain-glorie, but for the glory of
God, the confirmation of others, and for the stopping of the mouths of the
adversaries.

It is a worthy saying of the same Father, Behold (says he,) August. in
Psalm. 144*
it is found how thou might praise thy self, and not be proud, praise God
in thee, and not thy self; praise him, not because thou art such a one, but
because he has made thee such a one: not because thou can do any thing,
but because he can do something in thee, and by thee.

Finally, this doctrine serves for the comfort of virtuous and good men, who
have small comfort and commendation in the world, but rather dispraise and
discomfort, they are disgraced and despised of the most: let them take this as
some cross upon them: and howsoever they have not deserved it of the world,
yet it may be God has something against them: and it may be if they had the
praise of all men, it would make them proud and high conceited; and God
depriueth them of earthly glory, that they might more carefully seek heavenly
and Eternal glory. As for the praise of men, it is but like a feather, tos^ed
up and down by the wind, hither and thither, and therefore not to be regarded
nor hunted after: Let us content our selves with the testimony of a good
conscience, the praise of good men, and specially, and most of all, Ps. 8^. 11.
with the approbation and praise of God: For the Lord God is the Sun and
shield unto us, the Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he
withhold from them that walk uprightly: the full accomplishment of these
promises, and the like, shall be in the great and latter day: the day of praise
and reward, and a full recompense to every man, according to his works, when
God shall be glorified in his Saints, and be made marvelous in all them that
believe: then those which by continuance in well doing, have sought glory,
shall certainly have honor, immortality, and eternal life. In the mean
time we must remember that God has the disposing of all to ^gues and hearts,
and he can make our Righteousness and Innocence to shine as the light, even in
this life, to the shame of the enemy, and to our comfort and credit. But to
let this pass, and to come to the maine point, and chief doctrine of this
sentence, which was the fifth note observed of a good hearer, to repose true
felicity and happiness in true wisdom: This I mean to urge, fully, and
largely, because it is expressly set down in the text, and comprehends all
the rest. For they which thus esteem of it, will refuse no pains to learn
and enjoy it; will reverence the teachers; will be thankful to God and them;
For the cause why few men do desire this wisdom, but are idle, careless, and
unwilling to learn, the cause why few reverence their faithful pastors, few
move and stir up any other to goodness. Few rejoice in the means of
salvation, and praise God for it, but rather loath and contemn it, the cause
(I say) why most hearers are profane, careless, churlish, froward, covetous,
unthankful, and unprofitable: the cause of all is, they do^ not rightly
esteem of this wisdom, they think basely and contemptablie of it,
preferring carnal wisdom, and all worldly things above it.

But let this worthy woman, teach them the true price, worth, and estimation
of wisdom: She accounts them happy that enjoy it; she reposeth the
greatest felicity of this life in it: she might have said, happy are you
which have so sumptuous and beautiful a temple; such a princely palace, which
was twenty years in building, surpassing all that ever was, either since or
before: she might have said, Happy are you which have so glorious and famous
a King, a mirror and wonder to all the world, in pomp, wealth, and dignity:
she might have said, Happy are you which have such Vineyards, Orchyards,
gardens like Paradise, such pleasures and delights of all sorts and kinds: she
might have said, Happy are you which have such store of goodly Horses and
Horsemen, and such abundance of gold and silver* so many Targets of beaten
gold, and all drinking vessels of gold and silver, being as common as stones
in the strectes; but she passing all these things as nothing in comparison,
she accounts this as the greatest Happiness, to hear and enjoy the wisdom of
Solomon; and in this her judgment, she excels and surpasses many learned
men, both before, and since her time, who have erred and gone far astray,
touching the chief good and Felicity of man. About that question of the
final good, the Philosophers have kept a wonderful coil among themselves,
seeking in every cranke and cauerne thereof, for the true beatitude, for that
is the final good, being only desired for it self, all their goods having in
their attainements, a reference out of that alone: we do not call that the
final good, which ends goodness, that is, which makes it nothing: but that
which profits it, De ciuit: dei. lib. 19. cap: 1.
which gives it fulness of perfection. Thus Augustine defines the final good,
the same father, rejecting, confuting, the variety, multiplicitie, of vain
opinions, by many Sects of the Philosophers* Cap: 4.
he sets down the Christians opinion of the chiefest good. If you ask us
now says he, what the City of God says to this position of the perfection of
good and evil, It will answer you presently, eternal life is the perfection
of good, and eternal death the consummation of evil. And that the aim of all
our life must be to avoid this, and attain to that other: therefore it is
written, The just shall live by faith, for we see not our greatest good, and
therefore are to believe and hope for it, nor have power to live accordingly,
unless our belief and prayer obtain help of him, who has given us that
belief and hope that he will help us: but such as Found the perfection of
felicity in this life, placing it either in the body or in the mind, or in
both, or to speak more apparently, either in pleasure or in virtue, or in
pleasure and rest together, or in virtue, or in both, or in natures first
effects; Fondly and vainly are these men persuaded to find true happiness here.
The Prophet scoffeth the^ saying, The Lord knows the thoghts of men. Or as S.
Paul has it of the wise, that they are vain. Some of the Philosophers have
counted virtue in a perfect life, some in the tranquillity of the mind, some
prosperity, with virtue, some to be without sin, and some have counted it
the best happiness to die well. Solon being asked of Cressus who excelled all in
riches, whether ever he saw a man more happier the^ he. He named one Tellus an
Athenian, a private man, who had left his children and kinsefolke well brought
up and instructed, had happily ended his days: and being asked again, who^
next to him he did think to be happy, he named Cleobin and Bitis, brethren,
men of small estate, who were both dead, and left behind them a great name and
praise of their piety. The King being angry said unto him, do thou the^
put me in no place of happiness? Yes says Solon I do easily confess that thou
art a King, flourishing with wealth and government, but yet not to be called
happy, before thou do happily end thy life. Of all the Philosophers Plato
and his disciples came nearest to true Christianity, and in defining true
happiness, he determined, that the end of all good was the attaining of a
virtuous life, which none could do but he that knew and followed God: neither
is any man says he, happier by any other means, and therefore he affirms,
that to be a Philosopher is to love God, whose nature is incorporiall: the
Philosopher is then blessed when he enjoys God, he held God to be the creator
of the world, the light of understanding, the good of all actions, the
beginning of nature, the truth of doctrine, the happiness of life, he says it
must be a wise man's continual meditation, to follow God and to be like him,
that is, to be just, holy, wise. Finally, he places beatitude, true blessedness
in the life to come: these are divine and heavenly points, and therefore he was
called Diuinus Plato. and some think, that he had seen some part of the
scripture, as Jeremiah or Geneses.

And a man would think that he wrote and spoke like a Christian, and in the
things above named, he and we do agree, but yet he was vain in his
imaginations, and his foolish heart was full of darkness, being ignorant of the
true wisdom, he held diverse gross errors, as the worshipping of many Gods,
the eternity of the world, and denied the resurrection of our bodies: but this
we hold with him, that there is no true felicity in this life, but in another,
and therefore it is rightly said, the true beatitud^ is vnattaineable in this
life, for none lives as he list, but he is happy, and none is happy but he is
just, yet the just lives not as he list, until he attain that sure eternal,
hurtlesse, vndeceiuing state, that he naturally desires, and cannot be perfect
till he have his desire, but what man here upon earth can say he lives as he
list, when his life is not in his own hand, he would live feign, and he must
die, how then lives he as he list, when he lives not as long as he list, but
if he list to die how can he live as he list, that will not live at all? and if
he desire to die, not to forgo all life, but to change it for a better, the^
lives he not yet as he list, but attaineth that by dying.

But admit this, he lives as he list, and brought himself to this, to desire
nothing but what is in his own power, as T^^rence says* Since you cannot have
what you would, Aug. de ciuit: dei. lib: 14. Cap: ^5.
desire that which you may have: yet is he not blessed because he is a patient
wretch, for beatitude is not attained except it be affected, and if it be both
attained and affected, then must this affect needs surmount all other, because
all other things are affected for this, and if this be loved as it ought to be
(for he that loves not beatitude as it ought to be, cannot be happy) then
cannot it choose but be desired to be eternal.

Again, earthly riches can neither bless us nor our Children with happiness,
we must either lose them in this life, or deem them to be enjoyed after our
death, by one, we cannot tell whom, perhaps by those we would not should
have them: Lib: 5. 18.
no, it is God, the minds true wealth, that makes us happy, and this happiness
is in the life to come: there shall the Creator bestow all the gifts of nature
upon us, and give them not only as goods, but as eternal goods, not only to
the soul, by reforming it with wisdom, but also to the body, by restoring it
to the resurrection, there the virtues shall not have any more conflicts with
the vices, but shall rest with the victory of eternal peace, which none shall
ever disturb, for it is the final beatitude, having now attained a
consummation to all eternity. We are said to be happy here on earth, when we
have that little peace that goodness can afford us: but compare that happiness
with that other, and this shall be held but plain misery: there is health
without infirmity, strength without decay, fulness without loathing, freedom
without bondage, beauty without deformity, abundance without want, security
without fear, knowledge without ignorance or error, holiness without sin, Joy
without any sorrow: Joy I say, full, universal, sufficient, eternal, what a
glory and Joy, to have always the presence and sight of God, whose beauty the
Angels do wonder at, whose light darkeneth the Sun?

Oh blessed sight to see God, to see him in himself, to see him in us, and us
in him.

Oh happy sweetness, and sweet happiness, whatsoever we desire we have it,
desiring no more at all, and whatsoever we shall have, we shall love, with a
blessed love: all things to be desired are to be found in him, his countenance
sweet and amiable, he is sufficient for reward, we shall always behold him,
have and enjoy him, delight in him. This is the whole good and felicity of
man, to know and love him, that loved him: what do thou love, oh my soul?
what desire thou, oh my flesh? whatsoever thou love or desire there it
is: If thou love and desire beauty, there the righteous shall shine as the
Sun, is the kingdom of the Father: If thou desire health, and life, there it
is for ever: If wisdom, there is wisdom it self: If true love, then we
shall love God more then our selves, and one another as our selves. If thou
love company, there is the best, all thy good friends and kindred, the
blessed Saints, Martyrs, and Angels: If thou desire honor and glory, there
we shall be as the Angels of God, our bodies shall be like the glorious body
of Christ, and this mortality shall put on immortality: If thou desire
riches, there is an heritage and kingdom, that never fades away: If thou
love mirth, music and melody, there is a consort of Angels, singing
Alleluia, glory, honor, and praise be to the Lamb for ever: If thou would
have certainty, safety, and security, there we are sure to loose none of
these things, no enemy can assault us, no enemy can hurt us: the City of God
says a Father is eternal, no man is borne in it, because no man dies in it,
felicity is there fully, yet no goddess, but a Gods gift, of this habitation
have we a promise by faith.

As long as we are here in this pilgrimage on earth, Aug: de ciuit: dei Lib:
5. Cap. 16.
and long for that rest above, the Sun rises not there both upon good and
bad, but the Sun of righteousness only over the good, how great shall that
felicity be, where there shall be no evil thing, where no good thing shall be
hidden? there we shall have leisure to utter forth the praises of God, which
shall be all things in all: for what other thing is done where we shall not
rest with any slothfulnes, nor labor for any want I know not. There shall be
true honor, where no man shall be praised for error or flattery, there is true
peace, where no man suffers any thing which may molest him, either of
himself, or any other: he himself shall be the reward of virtue, which has
given virtue, and has promised himself unto us, then whom nothing can be
better or greater: there shall be the great Saboth having no evening* there we
shall rest and see, we shall see and love, we shall love, and we shall praise:
And behold what shall be in the end without end* for what other thing is our
end, but to come to that kingdom of which there is no end: Oh most blessed,
incomparable and unspeakable felicity: but this is not to be found in this
present world, nor so long as we live in thi^ life, no perfection, no
perpetuity in earth: why then should we set our heart upon the things of this
world, and upon the love of this life? true felicity we all desire, but that
is in heaven, in an other life: why do we not then set our heart and
affections above, and not upon the earth, seeing we are strangers here? why do
we not love and long for our own home and country? if our treasure be there,
why is not our heart there? why are we not ravished with the desire of our
resurrection, restitution, glorification, and full redemption? this is the
delight and desire of the godly. Romans 7. 2^*
Oh wretched man that I am says Paul, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? And in an other place, We know, that if our earthly house of this
tabernacle be destroyed, 2. Cor. 5. 1. 2.
we have a building given of God, that is a house not made with hands, but
eternal in the heavens: therefore we sigh, desiring to be clothed with our
house which is from heaven. And again he says, Phill: 1. 23.
That he desired to be loosed and to be with Christ, and the bride the true
spouse of Christ, all true faithful Christians cry in their soul, Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly.

What a desire had David to seek and serve God in the Temple, in the assembly
of Gods Saints on earth, saying, As the Heart bayeth for the rivers of waters,
so pants my soul after thee o God, my soul thirsts for God, even for the
living God, when shall I come and appear before the presence of God. And
again, O Lord of hosts, Psalm: 84. 1. 2. 4. 10.
my soul longs, yea and faints for the Courts of the Lord, my heart and
flesh rejoices in the living God, blessed are they that dwell in thy house,
they will ever praise thee, a day in thy courts is better then a thousand
other where: I had rather be a door keeper in the house of my God, then to
dwell in the tabernacles of wickedness. If David had such a desire, such love,
such zeal, such longing to the tabernacle, to the company of Gods people in
the public assemblies on earth, how much more should our affections be set,
and fixed upon the heavenly tabernacle?

O Lord says David, How manifold are thy works? in wisdom have thou made
them all, the earth is full of thy riches: he confesses the abundance of Gods
mercies in this world, in his works of creation, providence, and preservation
of all mankind, and yet if all the world be so full of his mercies, his Church
militant here on earth, has far greater mercies, as his word and Sacraments,
election, calling, redemption, and sanctification: so that we may say, how
great is thy goodness o Lord which thou have laid up for them that fear, and
done to them that trust in thee?

And if the earth be full of so many temporal and general mercies, and the
Church so full special, and spiritual blessings; how full is the life to
come, the kingdom of heaven, of all perfect, glorious and heavenly blessings?
Indeed the holy meetings of the Saints, worshipping and praising God truly,
according to his word, has some resemblance and shadow of our eternal
happiness in heaven, and our felicity there, must begin in this life: and there
is a way and means to lead and bring us thither. And of this happiness
speaks this worthy woman in this place, and our thoughts and meditations may
apply this sentence further: For if she esteem and account the servants and
Courtiers of Solomon to be happy, because they enjoy the sight and presence
of so glorions a King; Are not we to esteem it as the best, and most perfect
happiness, to enjoy the presence of Christ, the true Solomon, and to be with
him in his house, in everlasting glory?

Jerusalem, the city of God, the beauty and joy of the world, the temple of
Solomon, most glorious and beautiful, his own house, and Palace, most
sumptuous, costly, and pleasant: So that happy might they be counted which
were citizens of such a City, which might worship God in that Temple, And
indeed many came far and near to their great cost and pains, to offer
service to God in that place: and happy might they seem to be, which lived and
dwelled in such a Palace: but all these were nothing in comparison of that
City, of that Temple, of that Palace, whereof we speak* Those were earthly,
outward, mutable* and transitory, and subject to ruin and destruction: these
are Celestial, durable, and everlasting. Our Pilgrimage being ended, we shall
be indeed citizens of that heavenly and holy Jerusalem, which shall be all of
pure gold, like unto clear cristall, having the foundations of the Walls
grarnished with precious stones, the gates of Pearls, which has no need of
Sun or Moon to shine in it, because the brightness of GOD shall be the light of
it, and the Lamb himself shall be the Candle of it: no defiled thing shall
enter into it; Oh how happy shall the Citizens been, that shall live in such a
City? And thus S. John, by the description of the most rich and precious
things of the world, lays out unto us the value, glory, and majesty of the
felicity, prepared for us in heaven. In this miserable life, full of sorrows
and cares, all sorts of men, yea, most wicked men, have many commodities,
pleasures, and delight. What happiness and joy then, shall the friends of God,
and all good men have, in that life, of all true joy and happiness.

Heerevpon says a Father, in the secret speech of his soul with God; O Lord,
If thou for this vile body of ours, give us so great and innumerable
benefits, from the Firmament, from the Air, from the Earth, from the Sea, by
light, by darkness, by heat, by shadow, by deawes, by showers, by winds, by
raines, by Birds, by Fishes, by beasts, by Trees, by multitude of herbs, and
variety of Plants, and by the ministry of all the Creatures; O sweet Lord,
what manner of things, how great, how good, and how innumerable are those which
thou have prepared in our heavenly country, where we shall see thee face to
face. If thou do so great things for us in our prison, what will thou give
us in thy Palace? If thou give so many things in the world, to good and
evil men together, what have thou laid up for only good men in the world to
come? If thine enemies and friends together, are so well provided for in this
life, what shall thy only Friends receive in the life to come? If there be so
great solace in these days of tears, what joy shall there be in that day of
marriage? If our Iayle contain so great matters, what shall our country and
kingdom do? And as there is no end of thy greatness, nor number of thy
wisdom, nor measure of thy benignity: So is there neither end, number, nor
measure, nor number of thy rewards, toward the^ that love and fight for thee.
We may sooner set down, what that felicity is not, then what it is: there is
no death, no sorrow, no wearines, no hunger, no thirst, no poverty, no
infirmity, no corruption; all is good, and greatly, and excellently good: yea,
and surely, and contially good. All offices and callings, both of Church and
commonwealth, do there cease: there is an end of our Faith, hope, patience,
prayer, sacraments, there is an end of original and actual sin, of all
miseries both of body and soul; of natural life, and the means of it: God
shall be unto us, King, Prince, Father, riches, life, and glory; yea, all
things, and such a heap of happiness, that as sundry vessels cast into the
midst of the Sea, are full of water, so as they cannot neither want, nor have
more; So the Sea of the Deity, being all things in all us, we shall be filled
and satisfied with life and glory: so as we can neither want, nor receive
more. Then shall we not only taste how sweet our God is, but we shall be
filled, and thoroughly satisfied with his most wonderful sweetness. A chief part
of our felicity, shall be then to see Christ, our brother, head, and
Bridegroom, exalted in his divine Majesty and brightness. John. 17. 24.
This is their happiness, that they may be with him, and behold his glory, this
is the fullness and perfection of their joy.

O heart, human, poor, and needy, o heart exercised with misery, and almost
consumed of them, what should thy joy be, if thou had the full enjoying of
the abundance of these good things? Ask of thy soul, if thou were capable of
the joy which thou shuldst feel of one such felicity? but if besides, any
other whom thou love as thy self, should enjoy the same happiness with thee,
surely this superabounding joy which thou should feel of thy own happiness,
should it not be twice doubled, for the glory and joy of him whom thou love
as thy self: and for whose hahpines thou should be as joyful as for thine
own? Now if there were two, three, yea, a great number enjoying the same
happiness with thee, whom, also thou love as thy self, thou should feel
as much joy for the happiness of each of them as for thine own; what shall this
be in this perfect Charity, when we shall love all the blessed Angels, and
the Elect, loving every each one of them, even as our selves, and being no
less joyful of the felicity of each of them then of our selves? Surely, if
never a one of the Elect shall be capable of his own Joy, for the greatness of
it, how shall he be capable of so many joys, for the happiness of so many of
the Elect, for whom he shall feel as much joy as for his own.

What a Joy shall it be, to see such an honorable and innumerable company in
joy with thee? As, Angels, Archangels, Patriarchs, Princes, Prophets, Apostles,
and Disciples of CHRIST, Martyrs, and Saints of God, but yet the greatest joy
of all is, to behold the glory of Christ, whom we shall love more then all
these; Yea, more then our selves; we shall then see him and know him as he is,
and so love him according as he is.

Oh, blessed and glorious society; o holy Feast; o delectable dainties; where
there is no loathing, but all satietie, and fulness; He whom we shall see is
wholly sweet, wholly healthful, wholly pleasant, and to be desired; In him the
fulness of graces is; the universality of mercies; the fountain of Piety,
which cannot be dried up.

O Verity, Charity, Aeternitie, o blessed, and blessing Trinity; O Verity,
the country of Pilgrims, the end of banishment; Thou art true liberty, thou
art Life, thou art Glory, thou art sufficiency, thou art perfect blessedness,
wholly joy, and the rest of all blessed Spirits.

O Joy above all Joys, passing all joy, and without which there is no joy;
When shall I enter into thee? when shall I enjoy thee? to see my God, that
dwells in thee?

O everlasting kingdom, and Kingdom of all Aeternities; O light without end;
O peace of God, which passes all understanding; in which the souls of Saints
do rest with thee, and everlasting joy is upon their heads; they possess joy
and exultation.

O how gracious a kingdom is thine (o Lord) wherein all Saints do reign with
thee? August.
adorned with light, as with Apparel, and having crowns of precious stones on
their heads; O kingdom of everlasting bliss; where thou (o Lord) the hope of
all Saints art, and the Diadem of their perpetual glory; Rejoice them on
every side with thy blessed sight, in this kingdom of thine, their infinite
joy, and Mirth without sadness, health without sorrow, life without labor:
light without darkness: felicity without abatement: all goodness, without any
evil: where youth flourishes, that never waxes old; life that knows no
end; beauty that never fades; love that never cools; health that never
diminishes; joy that never cease; where sorrow is never felt, complaint is
never heard, matter of sadness is never seen; nor evil success is ever
feared; for that they possess thee o Lord, which art the perfection of their
felicity: If God would grant thee to enjoy this felicity but half an hour,
thou would contemn a thousand worlds to have it, especially to have it for
ever. And though this world were indeed very good, and the things of it, of
great weight and price, and that thou might enjoy it, in health, safety,
and honor, yet should thou esteem it as ridiculous and vain, in respect
of that most happy fruition of God: How much more being as it is, most vile,
base, uncertain, transitory, should thou despise the greatest Treasures or
pleasures of it? in comparison of that Felicity, that is, the greatest and
most true good, which is receceiued from the Creator himself, and not from the
creature: the which if we do once receive, none can take it from us, in
comparison of which, all joy is sorrow, all pleasure is pain, all sweetness is
sower, all beauty is filthiness. His countenance is pleasant, his words sweet,
his face delectable to look upon: Yet there we may always behold him, there
we may always have him, and delight in him. This is the chief and whole
felicity of man, to know, and love his lover: He that is sure of this, will
sell all that he has to get this treasure: will count all the things of this
life dross and dung in comparison of that. The hope and assurance of this,
has made the Saints of God to contemn the world, to mortify the flesh, to
to humble their souls, to fight against temptations, to endure reproaches,
scoffings, and torments, and to die cheerfullie and willingly, having respect
to the crown of glory, the place of pleasure, everlasting life.

This made Moses to refuse to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, and to
choose rather to suffer adversity with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season, esteming the rebuke of Christ, greater riches
then the treasures of Egypt; Many would think this a foolsh refusal, and a
foolish choice: but the cause that moved him follows, he had respect to the
recompense of reward. Heb: 11. 24* 25.
Again, he forsook Egypt and feared not the fiercenes of the King, for he
endured as he that saw him, which is in visible; I have been long, and large
in this point: but pardon me, I cannot content and satisfy my self, and the
matter is weighty and of great importance, and the chief end of our creation,
of our calling, redemption, and sanctification, and yet few do regard it. Oh,
that all which I have said, might draw our hearts from the vanities of the
world, to settle and fix them upon eternal happiness: This text indeed
speaks of that chief happiness, which may be had in this life, and is a
means whereby we may come to the other: yet this is a consequent of that, and
the first degree of life eternal in this life. Besides, that there may be some
fit resemblance and illusion, betwixt the glory, happiness, and wisdom of
Solomon, and of Christ: so that in the closet of our souls, we may say to our
Savior in these words, Son of God, Son of David, the true Solomon, the
King of that heavenly Jerusalem, the King of peace and glory, happy are thy
servants and Saints in heaven, the Citizens of that City, the worshippers of
that Temple, the attendants and inhabitants of that palace, which do always
behold thy majesty, thy holiness and wisdom. If this woman admired the order
in Salomons house, the glory and beauty of his palace, and his wonderful
wisdom, how admirable is thy glory, beauty, and wisdom in the heavens? If
she count them happy which enjoy these things, how happy are they, which
enjoy thy presence, in thine eternal kingdom? and are they not most happy
which have left a noisome filthy prison, to enjoy a palace: that have past
from the turbulent sea, to a most safe heaven of rest? are they not happy,
which have left all toil and labor, and be now at ease? and are they not
happy which have ended their pilgrimage, and are now at home in a pleasant
country, in that blessed land of Canaan? and though their bodies be still in
their graves, subject to dust and rottenness, yet are those bodies happy in
comparison of ours, they being exempted from ignorance, incredulity, from
mistrust, from covetousness, ambition, envy, hatred, fear, terror, lust, and
other sins.

Oh sweet Jesus, direct and lead us in the way to true happiness, that we may
be happy with them. We have many hindrances, many enemies to keep us from
that Aeternall Felicity; but thou art the way, the Truth, and the life: guide
us right, keep us from error, lead us to life Eternal: And good Lord,
remember us, with the favor of thy people, visit us with thy salvation, that
we may see the felicity of the chosen, and rejoice in the joy of thy people,
and glory with thine inheritance; give us sweet Lord, the beginning of that
true happiness; that so we may be happy here, and hereofafter happy for ever.
Give us saving knowledge, peace of conscience, the guidance of thy Spirit: that
so here we may have thy Kingdom of grace, and after this life, thy Kingdom
of glory.

THE SECOND SERMON.
THough all men naturally desire to be happy, yet most do fail and err in
the defining of true happiness: Some reposing it in one thing, some in another;
but few or none truly judging what it is; We have heard already, that there is
no true perfect happiness in this life: but the true Felicity is to be sought
for, desired, and waited for in the life to come; yet there is a means to come
to that, and there is a kind of Happiness in this life, the which this holy
woman does repose and fix in true wisdom; of the which now we are to speak in
such manner and measure, as God shall vouchsafe grace unto us. There is the
wisdom of the world, and the wisdom of God: a wisdom humane, and a
wisdom divine: Humane wisdom, contains the knowledge of Arts and liberal
Sciences, the politic government of the Commonwealth, and families, and the
knowledge in Trades and handie-craftes. All these, yea the least of these, are
the special gifts of God. And therefore the Lord says to Moses, Behold, I
have called by name Bezaliel, Exodus 31. 1, 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
the son of Vri, the son of Hur, of the Tribe of Judah, whom I have filled
with the spirit of God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge,
and in all workmanship, to find out curious works, to work in gold, and in
silver, and in brass: Also in the art to set Stones, and to carue in Timber,
and to work in all manner of worke-manship; And behold, I have joined with
him Aholiab the son of Ahisamah, of the tribe of Dan; and in the hearts of
all that are wise hearted, have I put wisdom, to make all that I have
commanded thee.

By the which place we may see, that wisdom and skill to do such works, is
the gift of GOD; and the wisdom of God does not take away, or overthrow the
wisdom of the world, in Sciences, governments, or Trades; but rather it
does help and cure the errors and faults that are in, humane wisdom; the
preservation of Kingdoms, and Cities, consists in peace, justice, and
mercy: but all these are commended, and commanded in the Gospel. All civil
virtues, as Chastity, Temporance, Justice, Fortitude; are made better by the
Gospel.

What is the overthrow of Kingdoms, and of Countries, but notorious vices and
sins? As Prophanenes, Atheism, Idolatry, disobedience, Murders,
Adulteries, and such like; but Gods wisdom does reprove, contemn, and
overthrow all such vices.

There are some things common, betwixt humane and divine wisdom; as in both
there are proofs, from causes and effects; things necessary, and things
profitable, are distinguished; arguments are disposed in just order, and in fit
words; in both, there are definitions, divisions, collections, but yet great
difference between humane and divine wisdom.

The one does follow the light of nature, the other is guided by the Spirit,
and by Faith.

The one does draw her principles from the Senses, from Observation, and
Experience: the other does altogether, wholly and only rest upon the word of
God. The one does dispose of speeches and actions, according to the nature of
the hearers, and businesses; The other, is always like her self: laying open
the sins of men, and the wrath of God against them; offering CHRIST and his
benefits to all believing, and repenting sinners: and finally, urging
amendment, and newnes of life. This is the sum and course of Gods wisdom
without alteration. Again, the wisdom of the world, does devise and utter
eloquent speeches, and fine sentences: the wisdom of God, does use fit, grave,
simple, and plain words: the other does boast it self, and does lift up the
minds of men, this does humble and cast them down.

Now seeing there are so many and great differences, how can they agree
together, and ever be reconciled? And therefore the wisdom of God, accounts
the wisdom of the world foolishnes; and the Lord speaks basely of the wisdom
of this world, esteeming and counting it mere foolishnes. And yet there is a
lawful use, of civil wisdom in this life, but in the life to come, it has
no use at all: this here is not to be contemned, but may be used; and has
many commodities in this world, but it does nothing profit to salvation: it
must not meddle with Gods wisdom, to check or control it, but rather submit
her self to it, as a servant and handmaid, and to keeepe her self within her
own compass and limits; and yet this wisdom has her worthiness and
excellency, it is more excellent then riches, pleasure, or strength; for what
are all these without wisdom? and therefore the Wise man says, That
wisdom is good with an inheritance, and excellent to them that see the sun:
his meaning is, that heritages, goods and lands, are the gifts of God, but
wisdom is far more excellent, and may be without them: but riches or
pleasures without wisdom, will do us more hurt then good. Again he says,
Wisdom shall strengthen the wise man more then ten mighty princes that are
in the city. Yet most do glory in riches, and hunt after pleasures, and few
regard humane wisdom and learning: more are foolish, simple, and sottish that
way, then wise. Great good and profit comes by the knowledge of natural
things, for they do publish the praise of the Creator, and from them we may
learn to know the Creator: Psalm. 19. 1.
The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handie
work. But this knowledge is sufficient to make men excusable, but not
sufficient to salvation. But all civil and humane wisdom is but a shadow, in
respect of true wisdom, which does excel al other, as the heaven does excel
the earth: this comes and proceeds from the holy of holiest, as it were
from the kings secret closet; the other from the common treasury, as it were
from the outward courts of the kings palace: true wisdom is bestowed only
upon Gods friends, the other upon his enemies also. It may be demanded then of
what wisdom this woman speaks, which she calls the wisdom of Solomon,
and counts them blessed that hears it. It is true that Solomon excelled in
the knowledge of natural things, of liberal sciences, and of public and
private government. It is said before in this book, 1. King. 4. 29. 30. 31.
that God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and a large
heart, even as the sand that is on the sea shore: and Salomons wisdom
excelled the wisdom of all the children of the East, and all the wisdom of
Egypt, for he was wiser the^ any man, and he was famous throughout all nations
round about. But this woman came to be instructed and satisfied, in things
concerning the name of the Lord: she came to Jerusalem where was the Law, the
Temple, and Solomon: she had no doubt at home many Philosophers, many wise and
learned me^, which could sufficiently instruct her in the knowledge of natural
and worldly matt^^ but they could not satisfy her, in her doubts concerning
religion. Again, the effect and power wrought in her heart by this wisdom,
drives her to great admiration, she reposeth felicity in it, it wrought in
her grace and religion, confessing and worshipping the true God, and
acknowledging Israel to be Gods people. No wit of man, no civil or humane
wisdom, has any such power to work such a work. Now that Solomon was a
Prophet, and full of divine wisdom, his works extant amongst us do prove it:
I mean his three worthy books of the Proverbs, Canticles, and Ecclesiastes,
which are Canonical, and his true books in the Hebrew Canon. I pray you
consider with me the sum of the divine matter contained in those books: The
Proverbs are most excellent, not humane, but divine: all nations and tongues
have their peculiar proverbs, sentences, and witty counsels, in few words,
setting out great matter. There be sentences of Plato, Aristotle, Plutarch,
Seneca, but there is great difference betwixt the Proverbs and sentences of
the wisest Gentiles, and Proverbs of Solomon, for the other they are known in
nature: and many of them are profane, and filthy, contrary to faith and
charity; but these are Prophetical, sacred Scripture, inspired by the Holy
Ghost: they contain many things, which humane reason is not able to see nor
comprehend: they commend the word of God, and teach true wisdom, how we may
attain to it, and stir up all to seek and follow it; they teach us faith
and piety, the true worship and fear of God, the true love of God and our
neighbor: they are full of precepts and exhortations, full of grave counsel,
and sweet consolations; they inform all men in the several duties of their
callings; Prou. 8.
they commend virtue, and forbid vice; Prou. 9.
they set down rewards for the godly, and punishments for the wicked; they
speak of Christ, the wisdom of wisdom, the wisdom of the Father. The
Canticles, entitled, The Song of Songs, the most excellent and holy Song, is
no vain nor idle book, of wanton love, as carnal men may falsely conceive
and imagine, but it is altogether mystical, speaking of the spiritual love of
Christ and his Church. And thus writes one of this book: Aug. de ciuit. dei
lib. 17. cap. 20.
The Canticles (says he) is a certain, spiritual, and holy delight, in the
Marriage of the King and the Queen of this heavenly City; that is, Christ and
the Church: but this is all in mystical figures, to inflame us the more to
search the truth, and to delight the more in finding the appearance of that
Bridegroom, to whom it is said there, Truth has loved thee: and of that
Bride that receives this word, Love is in thy delights. As for the book of
the Ecclesiastes, it does entreat of the same argument we have now in hand, of
the chief felicity of man in this life, that it is not in humane wisdom,
nor in pleasure, nor in virtue, if it be considered as it is in it self, nor
in any public or private state of life. Again, he shows what is true
felicity, namely, to fear God, and to worship him with a true and unfeigned
heart. This book makes nothing for Epicures and Atheists, though he seem to
stir them up to eating and drinking, and to rejoice, as though this was the
chief felicity of man in this life.

S. Augustine applies that in the place before alleged, to spiritual eating
and drinking, and to the participation of Christ's table. For he says, The
Preacher cannot mean of carnal eating, because in an other place of that book
he says, It is better to go to the house of mourning, then to go to the
house of feasting: because this is the end of all men, and the living shall lay
it to his heart. Again, the heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but
the hearts of fools are in the house of mirth: yet sometimes it may be, and it
is most likely, that he speaks not in his own person, but in the person of
Epicures, not allowing their speech nor practice. Eccle. 2.
For does he not say of laughter and pleasure, Thou art mad? And does he not in
an other place scoff and threaten young men for their vain delights and
pleasures, saying; Rejoice o young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer
thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart in the
sight of thine eyes, but know, that for all these things God will bring thee to
judgment. And presently after he gives him this counsel, Eccle. 12.
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth. And o ye Atheists,
Epicures, and Libertines, mark and remember the conclusion of that book, as
he began, so he ends, crying and repeating, Vanity of vanities (says the
Preacher) all is vanity: and the last word of his book are these, Let us
hear the end of all, Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the
whole duty of man, for God will bring every work to judgment, with every
secret thing, whether it be good or evil. This is the chief wisdom of
Solomon, which is extant, written and recorded for the instruction of all
posterities: this is true and divine wisdom: and though it was not then
written when these words were spoken, yet the same or the like he taught this
woman, she received and believed it, and with great joy does here, commend,
and magnify it. Therefore true felicity consists in true and divine
wisdom, which was unknown to the Philosophers, for their wisdom was
earthly, false, and contrary to it self: and as there is one Creator and
governor of the world, one God, one truth, so there must needs be but one true
wisdom, because whatsoever is true and good, it cannot be perfect, except it
be singular. And therefore it is worthily said, All the wisdom of man
consists in this one thing, that he know and worship God: this is our
doctrine, this is our sentence, and therefore with as high a voice as I can,
this I testify, this I proclaim, and this I denounce, Lactan. lib. 3. de fall.
sap. cap. 6.
this is that which all the Philosophers in their whole life sought for, but
could never find nor comprehend it, because they held a false religion, or
else utterly overthrew religion: let them therefore go, which have troubled
the life of man, for what should they teach, or whom should they instruct, who
have not instructed themselves? whom can the sick man cure, or whom can the
blind rule or guide? shall we tarry then till Socrates know any thing? till
Anaxagoras find light in darkness? or shall we stay till Democrates draw out
the truth? or till Empedocles dilate the paths of his mind? or Arcesilus and
Carneades perceive and understand? Behold a voice from heaven teaching the
truth, and showing to us light more clear then the sun it self. Why are we
injurious to our selves, and so slow to receive wisdom? How many worthy men
have spent themselves in seeking, and yet could never find? He that will be
wise and blessed, let him hear the voice of God, let him learn
righteousness, let him contemn earthly things, receive heavenly, that so he
may attain to the best and greatest good, to the which he was borne, casting
a side all other religions: Let us come to the true religion and wisdom, this
true wisdom consists in the knowledge of our selves, and in the knowledge
of God, this is the height of wisdom, in comparison of which all knowledge is
ignorance, and if thou had the perfect knowledge of all Arts and Sciences,
what would it profit thee if thou know not thy self: thou wandrest abroad,
and think thou know many things, and yet are blind at home: But o
blessed soul which is filled with wisdom of God, and happy is he who
desires to be wise in Gods sight, for one little drop of this true wisdom,
is more worth, then a river and sea of worldly wisdom: In all the creatures
the Lord does show his wisdom and power, but most of all in man, creating him
after his own Image and likeness: many know many things, and yet know not
themselves: they see others and pass by themselves: the better thou do
know thy self, the better thou shall know God. Set before thine eyes the
misery of thy body, and the shortness of this miserable life, and so thou shall
come to GOD; thou must beginn^ with the knowledge of thy self: this will
humble thee, and make thee fear God. If thou will know what thou art, look
thy self in a glass: The glass of a man, is an other man; If an other be
earth, dust, and worms, such a one art thou, be thou never so Rich, or
Honorable. If thou will see what thou art, look upon a man, (not alive, but
dead) what he is, such were his predecessors, and what they are, thou shall
be the same hereafter.

If thou look well upon thy self, thou shall find in thee sufficient matter
to contemn thy self. What art thou in respect of thy body, but a vessel of
corruption? That body, which thou so tenderly love, it shall rotte, and come
to nothing. What is more noisome then a dead body? What is more miserable
then man's life? and most of all miserable, in respect of his soul, being
without grace, an heir and child of perdition.

This knowledge of our selves, the first part of true wisdom, will cut down
all Pride, Ambition, and Impatience; and from this proceeds the knowledge of
God; and from the knowledge of our selves: know GOD to be most just, most
merciful, most wise, most good, and most powerful. And if thou would know
what GOD is, see what thou art to him, and what he is to thee. And if thou will rightly know GOD, cast off the love and wisdom of the world.

This double knowledge of GOD and thy self, is necessary to salvation;
because, as from the knowledge of thy self, there comes into thee the fear
of God; and also from the knowledge of God, there proceeds the love of God.
So on the contrary, Bern: super Cant.
from the ignorance of thy self, proceeds Pride, and from the ignorance of
GOD, comes Desperation.

Thou have found true wisdom, if thou will amend the sins of thy former
life; If thou desire with all thy heart Eternal blessedness, Bern: in Pro: 3.
thou have found wisdom; If thou taste and savor all these things, as they
are, that thy sin be bitter to thee, and abhorred; that the things of the
world be as Transitory, and contemptible; that the perfect good things, be
with thy whole desires affected; In these three things, thy mouth does slow
with Wisdom: If in thy mouth there be confession of thy sins, the voice of
praise, and of Thankes-giung, and the word of edification. The wise man
accuses himself, glorifieth God, edifieth his neighbor: therefore in the
Philosophers there could be found no true wisdom, because some thought that
all things might be known: these were not wise: others thought nothing could
be known, these also were not wise: the one because they give too much to man,
the other because they gave too little: this then is wisdom, not to think
thou know all things which is proper to God, nor yet to know nothing which
is proper to beasts: knowledge in man is joined with ignorance: knowledge in
us, is from the soul, which is from heaven: ignorance is from the body, which
is from the earth, so that we have some community both with God and with
beasts; with God in respect of knowledge, with beasts in respect of
ignorance: The more we excel in divine knowledge, the nearer and the more
liker we are to God himself, who is not only the fountain and giver of
wisdom, but very wisdom it self. But here may an objection be propounded,
How is there any true happiness, seeing both in the getting, holding, and
enjoying of wisdom, there is much care labor, sorrow, and vexation of
mind. This Solomon himself confesses, when he says, I gave mine heart to
know wisdom and knowledge, Ecc: 1. 17. 18.
madness and foolishnes: and I know also that this is a vexation of the spirit,
for in the multitude of wisdom is much grief, and he that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow: this is true indeed, that in all trades, callings,
sciences, there is great grief and labor. The Philosophers no doubt took
great pains in finding out natural things, yet in many things, they were
blind, deceived: in government, either of commonwealth or families: there is
much care and labor, in inuenting of counsel and grief, when our counsels
are hindered, and have not good effect, and sometimes we err in governing, and
the wisest men are not always so wise as they should be, and the best wisdom
of man cannot foresee all dangers which follow, nor prevent them with all their
cunning. In Mechanical trades and handicrafts, what care and labor to learn
them, to exercise them, and to increase daily in skill and knowledge of them?
and in divine wisdom, there must be great care and labor to get it, to hold
it, to increase in it, it will not be gotten by ease and carelesnes, but with
great study and diligence, and much sorrow is joined with it.

Good men are grieved, because they cannot so soon and so easily learn and
understand, as many other can. We read and hear many things, which do cause
much grief unto us, as our own sins, and the sins of others; and the
fearful judgments of God, which have fallen upon men for sin: and the more
knowledge we have, if we continue in sin, without Repentance, the more we
heap and multiply the wrath of God upon us, to our greater grief and sorrow:
and the more learning and knowledge that men have, the less ease and rest: For
many seek unto them, and they are ready and willing to instruct others as much
as they can: which cannot be done without study and labor. The calling of the
Magistrate, and of the Minister, though excellent and divine callings, yet
subject to much vexation, sorrow, and danger, and exceeding pains.

The Apostle says, Who is sufficient for these things? And indeed, they be
heavy and intolerable burdens for any mortal man to bear, without the
special help and grace of God. Besides, the wiser that a man is, the more he
searches, desires, and seeks for wisdom still: and the more he sees his
own ignorance; and this is grief and vexation of mind. There is no perfection
of wisdom in this life; we see here but in part, the best, and holiest, and
wisest, have their wants, infirmities, and ignorances. Therefore the wise man
(having feeling and sense of this, though he did excel in virtue and
knowledge; Yet he says thus of himself. Surely, I am more foolish then any
man, and have not the understanding of man: I have not learned wisdom, nor
attained to the knowledge of holy things, who has ascended up to Heaven, and
descended? Prou: 30 2. 3. 4.
who has gathered the wind in his fist? who has bound the waters in a
garment? who has established all the ends of the world? what is his Name? and
what is his Sons Name if thou can tell?

The greatest wisdom in man, is like a smoking Toarch, if it be compared to
the beams of the Sun, to the height of Gods wisdom, which is unspeakable
and admirable. The best men are wost humble, and confess their ignorance; when
as the foolish proud people, think they know all things, when as they know
nothing as they ought to know.

Our ignoronce is much in the things of this life, even in common and vulgar
matters, we do not so much as know the names of many tools and wares, which
are to be had, seen and fold in many occupiers shops, in law, in physic, in
mathematick^s, etc. Many know little, some nothing, or very weakly, or
imperfectly: In the matters of God, how ignorant and senseles are we?
Nichodemus a great Docter in Israel, cannot understand or conceive the doctrine
of regeneration, John. 3.
it is a thing incredible to him, that a man should be borne again. The
natural man perceives not the things of God, for they are foolishnes unto
him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned: yea, the
spiritual man himself, though he discerns all things that are revealed to
him by the spirit, yet he has not full and perfect knowledge in this life,
perfect felicity is in the life to come: and though wisdom be not that
felicity, yet it is the way to attain unto it, and the study of it is
sweet, good and profitable: it is as sault to season, and as honey to sweeten
all cares, troubles and sorrows whatsoever: it is as a precious medicine to
cure all maladies, to comfort us in the greatest distress and dangers: and
though those which be ignorant and know nothing, may seem to be happy
because of their ignorance, and because they are free from the care and
sorrows of wisdom: yet their cares and griefs are worse and greater, they
are in danger and know it not: they cannot discern good from evil: and
therefore let them remember this counsel, let them lighte^ themselves with the
light of knowledge, Bern: in sermon:
before they go out of the darkness of this world, lest they pass from
darkness to darkness, yea to everlasting darkness. Some may yet object: How is
there happiness in wisdom? whereas many which profess and preach it, and are
of great knowledge, yet profane, without religion, conscience or piety, their
life most ungodly and wicked, are these men happy? We answer, that they are
far from true happiness and wisdom. Solomon accounts all men unregenerated
and wicked, to be very fools, and so unhappy wretches. Ambrose teposeth a
happy life in honesty, that is, in the tranquillity of conscience, and
security of innocence: and therefore confuting the Philosophers of whom some
placed a happy life, in not sorrowing as Ieronimus, some in the knowledge of
things as Herillus: some in pleasure as Epicurus: some have joined to this
honesty, as Calipho and Diadorus, some in virtue, as Aristotle and his sect.
But the Scripture says, he places a blessed life in the knowledge of
Divinity, and the fruit of good working: It is eternal life (says Christ)
to know God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. David says, Blessed is the
man that fears the Lord, and delights greatly in his commandments: so
that innocence and knowledge makes men happy. Again, Ambrose off. lib. 9.
cap. 1. cap. 2. cap. (...).
wisdom has no fellowship with vices, it has an inseparable conjunction
with other virtues. No man is wise which knows not God. The fool, (not the
wise man) says, There is no God. How is he a wise man which knows not his
Creator? How is he wise which fears not God? Off. lib. 1. cap. 25.
seeing the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom. Only that wisdom
which is of God, is wholesome and saving, which according to the definition of
Saint James, is both pure, and peaceable: for the wisdom of the flesh is
voluptuous, not pure: the wisdom of the world is tumultuous and troublesome,
not peaceable: the wisdom of God is first pure, not seeking her own, but
that which is Jesus Christ's: not doing her own will, but considering what is
the will of God. Secondly, it is peaceable, not abounding in her own sense,
but resting more upon the counsel and judgment of others. Again, the sun
does not warm all whom it shines upon, so wisdom does not always give
power to those whom it teaches, to do that which it teaches. It is one thing
to know riches, Bern. in Cant.
another thing to possess them. It is not knowledge that makes rich, but the
possession of it. There be some which desire to know to that end only, that
they might know, and this is filthy curiosity: and there be which desire to
know, only to sell their knowledge for money, for honor, and this is filthy
lucre: and there be which desire to know, that they themselves may be known,
and this is filthy vanity: and there be that desire to know to edify
others, and this is charity: and there be that desire to know to be edified of
others, and this is prudence. The first wisdom is a laudable life, Greg.
and a pure mind before God, whereby the pure are joined to the pure, and the
holy are coupled to the holy. That is excellent wisdom, not which flies in
words, but which consists in virtues; so that happiness consists not only
in knowing, John 13. 17.
but also in working: if you know these things says Christ, happy are you if
you do them. Mat: 11. 2^.
Again, blessed are they that hear the word of God and keeps it: and the
hearers of the law are not righteous before God, Rom: 2. 13.
but the docrs of the law shall be justified. Apoc: 1. 3.
And S. John faith, Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words
of this prophecy, and keep those things written therein. (...). 4. 25
And S. James says, Who so looks in the perfect law of liberty, and
continues therein, he not being a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work,
shall be blessed in his deed: Indeed God bestowed upon prephane men and very
reprobates, many great and excellent gifts: they may have the word of wisdom,
1. Cor: 12 ver. 7. 8. 9. 10.
the word of knowledge, a kind of faith, gifts of healing, operations of great
works, and prophecy, discerning of spirits, diversities of tongues, the
interpretation of tongues, and these are the works of Gods spirit: and yet
these may be unhappy and cursed men, and never partakers of true felicity.
Saul prophecieth, so does Balaam, so did Caiphas, Judas was a preacher and an
Apostle, but not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, Mat: 7. 21. 22. 23.
but he that does my Fathers will which is heaven, says our Savior; Many will
say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not by thy name prophesied, and by
thy name cast out devils, and by thy name done many great works? then will I
profess to them I never knew you, Depart from me you that work iniquity.
God does bestow such great gifts upon wicked men, that his power might be
known, in using such instruments to his own glory, to the good of others, and
to their condemnation: and so the Lord also makes a difference betwixt those
gifts which he bestows upon the wicked, and such special graces as he does
give to his own children: to these he gives the knowledge of salvation by
remission of their sins, through his tender mercy, whereby the day springs
from on hie, visiting the^, he gives them light, Luke. 4. 77. 78. 79.
eue^ the Sun of righteousness shining from heaven, to guide their feet in the
way of peace, that is, to all true happiness and felicity. These are his
beloved which he has chosen to salvation from the beginning, sanctifying them
by his spirit, 2 These: 2. 13. 14.
and giving them the faith of truth, even the faith of his elect, calling them
by the Gospel, to obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ: these be the
sure notes and marke^ of those which are truly wise, and truly happy: yea,
happy here, and happy for ever. Therefore let us pray with the Prophet, every
one of us, saying; Look upon us (...) Lord, and be merciful unto us: as thou
use to do; to love those that love thy name. We must not think then, that
this woman ascribes happiness to the bare hearing of Wisdom: but this
hearing, includes knowledge, Faith, and practice. Therefore the Schoolmen
make three kinds of hearing: The one sensitu^ with outward ear, an another
Intellectual, (that is) with understanding; the third, they call Auditus
obeditiuus; that is, hearing with obedience. The foolish Virgins they have
Lamps, but no oil in them, they have only a bare profession, and knowledge,
without inward grace, or practice: but the wise Virgins, have their Lamps full
of oil, full of Faith, obedience, holiness. Such as be only hearers, and not
practitioners of wisdom, they be like unto a man that beholds his natural
face in a glass, and when he has considered himself, he goes his way, and
forgets immediately what manner of one he was: such are foolish and
unfruitful hearers. With true wisdom, there is always joined true religion,
and sanctification. Therefore says one; Wisdom is no other thing, but Truth
it self, in the which the true Felicity shall be found: It is in no place, it
is every where, it admonishes abroad, it teaches at home; it makes all
better, and none worse.

Again, he that loves himself being a Fool, shall not profit in wisdom.
Neither can it be possible to be such a one, as he desires to be, except he
hate himself, as he is. Both these must be joined together, Religion and
wisdom: but men are deceived, that will seek religion without wisdom: and
therefore they fall into false Religions, because they have left true Wisdom:
And some give themselves to wisdom without religion, but therefore their
wisdom is false and vain, because they have no ^are of the religion of the
true God, who would guide and instruct them in the way of the best and happiest
wisdom.

Of this uniting of religion and wisdom together, Lacta: de fall. sap: lic. 4.
ca. 3.
Lactantius writes excellently: Where Wisdom (says he) is coupled with
Religion, there must of necessity be true religion, and true wisdom;
because in worshipping God, we have wisdom: that is, we must know what is
to be worshipped, and how, and in being wise, we must worship God: that is, we
must perform in truth and deed, that which we know: where then is wisdom
with religion to be found? even there where the one true God is worshipped:
where the life and all our actions are referred to one head: and he concludes
thus, in wisdom is religion, in religion is wisdom, they cannot be
separated nor put asunder: because to be wise, is nothing else but to honor the
true God, with just and holy worship. And most worthily after he says thus;
Wisdom pertains to sons which requires love: religion to servants which
requires fear: as they are to love, and honor their father, Lanct ibid Cap. 4
so these are to fear and reverence their master: God being one, because he
takes upon him both these persons of a father and a master: we ought to love
him, because we are his children: and to fear him, because we are his
servants: And therefore it cannot be that religion should be separated from
wisdom, nor wisdom from religion, because the same God is he who must be
known, which is a part of wisdom, and must also be honored, which is a part
of religion: but let religion go before, and let wisdom follow, because we
must first know God, and then we must worship him; the fountain of wisdom
and religion, is God himself. Therefore profane and wicked men are not truly
wise, and so not truly happy: the Lord complains of such people, Deuteronomy. 32.
28. 29.
they are a nation void of counsel, neither is there any understanding in
them: Oh that they were wise, then they would understand this, they would
consider their latter end. Bernard alleging this place, They would understand
says he, the things which are of God, In quad: Epist:
the things which are of the world, and they would foresee the torments of
hell, then they would abhor hell, desire heaven, and contemn the earth. And
this is true knowledge says he, to know that the Lord will come to judgment,
though we cannot know when he will come. And where as some will say, that all
men know this, even the wicked themselves; but says he, this knowledge works
repentance, amendment of life, and a care and desire to live honestly. And S.
John says, 1. John. 3. 3.
That every man that has this hope in him, purges himself as he is pure; so
that true knowledge, and true sanctin^cation, goes together. Therefore S. John
says in an other place, Hereby we are sure that we know him, if we keep his
commandments; he that says I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is
a liar, and the truth is not in him. So that this stands as an infallible
true principle, that those which are truly wise, are truly happy in this life;
and in the way to that full and perfect happiness in the life to come. But now
at last, to observe and prosecute the chief and maine point, and doctrine of
this place, which is this, that the way and means to make a people happy, is
rightly to hear and obey wisdom: this is the principal joy and happiness of
Gods Children in this life. And therefore says Solomon, Blessed is the man
that finds wisdom, and the man that gets understanding, for the
merchandises thereof, is better then the merchandise of silver; and the gain
thereof, is better then gold; it is more precious then pearls; and all things
that thou can desire, are not to be compared to her: length of days is in
her right hand, and in her left hand, riches and glory: her ways are the ways
of pleasure, and all her paths prosperity; she is a true life to them that
lay hold on her, and blessed is he that retains her: see the fruits of
wisdom, immortality, durable riches, Gen: 2.
eternal glory, true Joy and peace; she is a tree of life to the soul, like
that tree in paradise, a sign of Gods favor; ^or like to the tree of life
showed to Moses in Marah, Exodus: 15. 25.
which sweetened bitter and deadly waters: or like the tree of life in the
Revelation 22. verse: 2. which brought forth twelve fruits, and the leaves
thereof were for the curing of the gentiles: or like any living good tree,
which brings forth good fruit, to the preservation of life: Therefore the
wise man says, Pro: 4. 13.
Take hold of instruction, and leave not, keep her, for she is thy life. Pro:
10. 17.
And again, He that regards instruction, is in the way of life. Such a tree
is wisdom. It is compared also to a precious fountain, and well of l^fe:
Pr^* 10. 11.
Therefore says Solomon, The mouth of the righteous, is a well spring of life;
and the instruction of a wise man, Pro* 13. 14.
is as such a well, to turn away from the snares of death: Pro* 26. 22.
And again, understanding is a wel-spring of life to them that have it.

The necessity and commodity of wisdom, all trees, plants, herbs, all
fruits and creatures, have need of water, for comforting, nourshing, and
sustaining them; but this water is far more excellent then all fountains,
wells, or water in the world; this is true Aqua vitae, the water of life; that
other water comes out of the earth, this from heaven; that common to the most
vile and wicked, and to all creatures and beasts: this peculiar and proper to
the sons and daughters of God: that water not to be found every where,
sometimes it quite fades and fails in time of drought: but this is offered to
all, and does never utterly decay: that water cannot preserve life against
violence, diseases and age; This does defend us against Satan and sin, and
makes us always strong and lively: those waters may be stayed and stopped by
the policy and malice of man, as the Philistimes stopped the wells which
Abraham's servants dug in his time, but this well can no mortal man stop.
This wisdom is also compared, to food, to bread, to a feast and banquet of
most dilicate costly dainties: wisdom has built her a house, and hewne out
her seven pillars, she has killed her victuals, drawn her wine, prepared her
table, she inuiteth and calls her guestes to eat and drink with her: Pro:
9. 1. 1. 3. 4. 5.
corporal food is pleasant to the taste: Fla^: 55. 1. 2. 3.
the food of wisdom is pleasant to the soul: bodily food, nourishes poor
weakly bodies; wisdom reuiueth and raises up wounded souls, and afflicted
consciences: by earthly food we grow stronger and higher: by this spiritual
food we grow in grace and the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ: other food
only for the belly, but for a time: this food for the inward man, and
endures both in life and death; it is durable food, and nourishment that
abides and sticks by us; it is the bread and food of life: and finally, it
makes us truly happy and blessed; and therefore to be chiefly esteemed and
desired. Wisdom is the beginning says Solomon, get wisdom therefore, and
above all thy possessions get understanding; exalt her, Pro: 4. 7. 8. 9.
and she will exalt thee; she shall bring thee honor if thou embrace her, she
shall give a comely ornament to thine head, yea she shall give thee a crown of
glory. And again, thus speaks wisdom; Oh ye foolish men, understand
wisdom: and ye o fools, be wise in heart; give ear, and I will speak of
excellent things, and the opening of my lips shall teach things that be
right: receive mine instruction, and not silver, and knowledge rather then
gold: for wisdom is better the^ precious stones, and all pleasures are not to
be compared to her: she is then excellent, upright, perfect, true, just,
plain, easy, and sweet: she promises grace, favor, friendship, riches of
the mind; As knowledge, temperance, patience, righteousness; she promises
honor and glory to all her friends and followers; as a Princess, she shall
either make thee honorable, in the eyes of profane people, as she did Joseph
in Pharaohs sight, or she shall make thee gracious and glorious in the eyes of
good men, of Angels, and of God himself: she will make us Kings, Priests,
Prophets. Oh most blessed, bountiful and gracious wisdom, happy, yea thrice
happy, are all thy true disciples and followers: Let us therefore harken to
that counsel of wisdom; My son hear my words, Pro: 7. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
and hide my commandments with thee; keep my commandments and thou shall
live; and mine instruction as the apple of thine eyes; bind them upon thy
fingers, and write them upon the table of thine heart; say to wisdom, thou
art my sister: Again, Harken oh children to me, for blessed are they that
keep my ways, hear instruction, and be ye wise, refuse it not: Blessed is
the man that hears me, watching daily at my gates, Prou. 8. 32. 33. 34.
and giving attendance at the posts of my doors: for he that finds me,
finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord; but he that sins against
me, hurts his own soul, and all that hate me, love death* The way therefore
to make a people happy, is to hear and obey this wisdom: this is that which
the servants of God have chiefly desired and wished for in this life. 1. King.
3. 9.
Solomon himself, when he was put to his choice to ask what he would, passed
by all other things; this is his only desire and prayer to God, to give him an
understanding heart: This was Iobes felicity, Job. 23. 12.
I have not departed says he, from the commandment of his lips, and I have
esteemed the words of his mouth, more then mine appointed food: Iere. 15: 16.
This was Ieremies felicity, Thy words were found by me, and I did eat them,
and thy word was unto me, the joy and reioicing of my heart. And this was
David's chief happiness, Psalm. 27. 4.
One thing says he, have I desired of the Lord, that I will require, even that
I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the
beauty of the Lord, to visit his Temple. But most lively and fully he
shows, that this was his chief joy and felicity, in the 119. Psalm, through
that whole Psalm: for this is the chief scope and drift of that large and
sweet Psalm, that that man is only truly happy, that frames his religion
and life according to the blessed rule of the word of God: he commends the
diginitie, profit and sweetness of that word: he prays many times for the
understanding and practice of it; he sets forth the great account and
estimation he had of it, the special love and delight he had in it; Psalm. 1^9.
142. 72. ^^5* 111.
I have had says he, as great delight in the way of thy testimonies, as in all
riches, thy testimonies are my delight and my counselors, the law of thy
mouth is better to me then thousands of gold and silver, thy word is a
lantern to my feet, and a light to my paths, thy testimonies have I taken as
an heritage for ever, for they are the joy of mine heart; I rejoice at thy
word, as one that finds a great spoil. But to let all the rest pass, let us
consider and view a little one whole part of that Psalm, wherein he proves,
that his chief happiness was in this word of wisdom: Oh, how love I thy law!
He cannot utter the great love that he bare to it: as who should say, I love
it above all things in the world, there is nothing so dear, and so precious to
me; and because many protest their love to Gods word, and yet indeed love it
not, they show forth no fruits of love. Psalm. 119. 97. 98. 99. 100, etc.
David proves his love by his often meditation of the word; It is says he, my
meditation continually: As if he should say, my affections and thoughts are not
seldom, but often in a day upon thy word: The blessed man, his delight is in
the law of the Lord, and in his law does meditate day and night. But David
proceeds, and shows what profit and fruit he got, by the reading, hearing,
meditation, and such other exercises of the word: he was not a simple,
senseless, unprofitable, and unfruitful hearer, as many are which hear much
and are never the better: but he protests, that by his exercise in the word,
he had gotten and learned wisdom, yea more wisdom then his enemies, more
then all his teachers; more then the ancient, and that by the power of the
word, he refrained his feet from every evil way, and hated all the ways of
falsehood, and that his chief care and desire was to keep and practice the
word: but yet he confesses, that h^ could not do this of himself, but that
it was God that did inwardly teach him by his spirit, and so tasting the
sweetness of Gods grace in him, he found the word and promise of God more sweet
to his mouth then honey it self. You see what account and estimation David had
of true wisdom, esteeming it his chiefest and greatest felicity; happy then
are the true scholars and followers of wisdom. And if this woman thus
pronounce and account the hearers of Solomon to be so happy, how happy are
they which do daily hear the wisdom of Jesus Christ, in the preaching and
ministry of the Gospel? Blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears
for they hear, says our Savior Christ to his disciples and followers: Mat.
13. 16, 17.
For verily I say unto you, that many Prophets and righteous men have desired
to see those things which you see, and have not seen them; and to hear those
things which you hear, and have not heard them. Now in the ministry of the
Gospel, we hear and see Christ himself: He that hears you, Luke 10. 16.
hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, says Christ of his.
Apostles, and of all his faithful ministers; We beseech you as ambassadors in
Christ's stead, 2. Cor. 5. 20.
that you may be reconciled to God, says S. Paul. And in another place, he
says, Gal. 3. 1.
That Christ was described and pictured before their eyes by the preaching of
the word. It was not the outward hearing of Christ himself, or the sight of
his person that made me^ blessed: for the Jews saw him, Judas and other
enemies to Christ heard him and saw him often; But blessed are they that have
not seen, and yet have believed: Christ is heard and seen in the public
ministry of the Gospel. Wisdom has sent forth her maidens and messengers
to call and inuit us to her feast and banquet, happy are her guests, happy
are her disciples and followers: to have such messengers is a special and rare
blessing of God. In Job it is accounted by Elihu, as a special comfort in the
greatest distress and danger, to have a messenger, an interpreter, one of a
thousand, to declare unto man his righteousness: then will God have mercy upon
him, and say, Deliver him, that he go not down into the pit, for I have
received a reconciliation. By the which words we are taught, that it is a sure
token of Gods favor and blessing toward sinners, when he causes his word to
be preached to them. This God promises to his people as a special mercy: and
he says, I will give you Pastors according to my heart, which shall feed you
with knowledge and understanding. It is ^ESVS CHRIST the wisdom of all
wisedoms, Ephe. 4. 8. 11. 12.
that has ascended, and given gifts unto men, and has ordained Pastors and
Teachers, for the gathering and building of his Church.

What is your Felicity says S. Paul to the Galathians? For I bear you
record, ^al^t. 4. 14. 15.
that if it had been possible, you would have plucked out your own eyes, and
have given them me. And before he says; That they received him as an Angel
of God; he commends them faithful in Galatia, because they esteemed it the
greatest happiness under Heaven, to enjoy the ministry of such an Apostle, and
Preacher, and faithful messenger of wisdom. And is it not a happy thing to
have the eyes of our souls opened, to be turned from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan to God? that so we may receive forgiveness of sins,
and inheritance among them which are sanctified. And is it not true happiness,
to have our souls borne and begotten by the immortal seed of Gods word;
Acts. 26. 18.
and as Babes and children in CHRIST, to be fed and nourished with the sweet
and pure milk of eternal life? 1. Pet. 1. 23. and cap. 2. 2.
and this is done by the ministry of wisdom. And is not this Felicity, to
have sins reproved? to be instructed in the right way? 1. Cor. 14. 3. and 2.
to have errors corrected? to be comforted in all distress and danger, outward
or inward? Tim. 3. 16. and cap. 4. 2.
and finally, to be made wise to salvation? and all this is done by the
ministry of wisdom.

And what happier thing can we have in this life, then to know the Lords
mind? then to have his privy counsel revealed to us, and to be made wise to
Salvation, through Faith, (which is) in Christ Jesus? Nay, Is it not eternal
life, to know GOD, and his Son JESUS CHRIST? and all this we receive, if we
be gracious hearers, from the messengers of wisdom. And will not all
confess, that this is the greatest good: and the happiest thing in the world,
to have the wrath of God pacified, to be in his favor; so that he is become
our Friend and Father; and we are taken and accounted as friends to him. And
there is a true reconciliation betwixt us, so that we need never doubt of the
salvation of our souls. Now this comfort and assurance we have, 2. Cor. 5. ^9.
and 1. Tim. 4. 16. 17.
by the ministry of wisdom, being the very word of the Kingdom; the word of
grace; the word of reconciliation, and salvation; the word of life: yea, of
eternal life.

And finally, Is it not true Felicity to have that good part, which shall never
be taken from us? That one thing needful, yea, so needful indeed, that we
had better want all other things in this life, then be without it. And is it
not true happiness, to have that happiness restored and increased, which Adam had
in Paradise, and lost by his Fall? to have that Image of GOD, wherein he was
first created, to be restored unto us; and in some some sort, to be made like
to GOD himself, in true holiness and Righteousness? And is not all this true
happiness, and the way to that Eternal and perfect blessedness, which we
shall enjoy in the Hea^ens? whereof we have spoken largely before.

And thus we conclude from the premises, as from infallible reasons, taken from
the necessity, excellency, power, and fruit of Wisdom; that this position
and doctrine which here is holden and collected, by the words of this Woman,
is most true and sound: Namely, that the way to make a people happy, is to
hear, receive, and embrace this true wisdom. This is the joy and Felicity
of Gods children in this life.

This doctrine serves for many excellent uses; And first, it serves to set
out the miserable estate of such as are destitute of this gracious means: For
if they be happy that hear this wisdom, unhappy are they, and cursed, which
cannot hear it, which are clean without it, and have no taste or knowledge of
it: Prou. 29. 18.
Where Proph^cying fails, or where there is no Vision of wisdom, there the
people perish.

And in an other place; Prou. 11. 14.
Where no counsel is, the people fall; But where many Counselors are, there
is health. Again, The Lord complains in these words, Hosea. 4. 6.
by the Prophet, saying; My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge:
Because thou have refused Knowledge, I will refuse thee; that thou shall be no
Priest to me: And seeing thou have forgotten the Law of thy God, I will also
forget thy children.

The Lord threatens it, Esa. 56. 9. 10.
as one of his greatest Judgments, to send in his wrath to any people; Zach.
11* ^6 17.
Blind Guides; dumb Dogs; Idol Shepherds; and scarcity and famine of his
word. Amos. 8. 11.


And as our SAVIOVR CHRIST says, That if the blind lead the blind, both shall
fall into the ditche, Ignorance and blindness is a wretched and unhappy thing,
both in Minister and people: Knowledge, a part of Gods Image, Ignorance
defaceth it. Knowledge, the Eye of the soul: Ignorance, the very blindness and
darkness of the soul. It is the cause of all sin and error: And if it be
Eternal life to know God, it is eternal death, destruction, and damnation,
not to know him.

And heavy is that sentence of the Apostle against such, when he says; That
when the LORD JESUS shall show himself from heaven, with his mighty Angels,
he will (in flaming fire) render vengeance unto them that do not know GOD; and
which obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. 8. 9.
which shall be punished with everlasting perdition, from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power.

Some are maliciously ignorant, misliking and hating the Truth: Some are
sloathfull, idle, and careless: They will take no pains for Wisdom. Some
are proud, thinking scorn to learn: and that they need not be taught, but
know enough already: These are none of the sons and daughters of Wisdom:
but rather those Fools, of whom Solomon often speaks in the Proverbs; And
indeed the Devil may beg them for fools, these have no part in this
happiness, but are unhappy here, and shall be most unhappy hereafter. This
doctrine also serves for the reproof of such as seek to hinder and stop
the course of wisdom: these are unhappy themselves, and seek to hinder the
happiness of others: they are like to the malicious Philistimes, Gen: 26.
which stopped the wells of Isaac, as fast as he dug them, and would have
kept his cattle from water: so these would hinder men from the sweet water of
life: He that withdraws the corn says the wise man, the people curse him,
Pro: 11. 26*
but blessing shall be upon the head of him that sells corn. Covetous and
cruel men are most vile and wretched creatures, which keep back the corn
from the poor, hoping for a greater dearth: much more unhappy are they, which
keep from the people the bread of life; the decay of tillage, is a hindrance
to the commonwealth, and the cause of want and dearth; and they that do it,
do offend against God and men: and they sin much more, which pulls down
Gods plough, and hinder the sowing of the blessed seed of his word, which is
as needful for the soul, as husbandry is for the body. The righteous man
regards the life of the beast, Pro: 1^. 10.
but the mercies of the wicked are cruel: pity and compassion is to be showed
to the very dumb creatures that does us service, we must see them fed, and it
were cruelt^e to pine them: how much more are we to be merciful to men, to the
bodies of men, and most of all to their souls? And if it be cruelty to pine
and famish the bodies of men, yea of any creature, how much greater cruelty is
it to pine, famish, and murder the precious souls of men, in keeping from
them, the blessed and spiritual food of their souls? Were it not an
unmerciful and cruel thing, to take from a poor soldier, his sword, his
buckler, his whole armor, and to leave him naked and open to the force and
rage of most cruel enemies: As unmerciful are they which take from the poor
people, the sword of the spirit, the word of God, being the armor of proof,
and so leave them altogether weak and unarmed, against their spiritual
enemies: by the power of the word, and the right use and handling of it,
Satan, Antichrist, sin, ^rror, heresies and all corruptions, are weakened and
overthrown: how shall we then do, if we be deprived of such a weapon? and
most cruel are they that deprive and rob the poor people of it, such are
the Papists, which keep from the people, the blessed book of true wisdom,
and will not have it read to ye people in their own tongue but in a strange and
an unknown language: whereas the Apostle had rather in ye Church to speak five
words with understanding, then ten thousand in a strange tongue: 1. Cor. 14.
and he would have us not to be children in understanding, but of a perfect and
^ip^age; Christ commands to preach the Gospel, to al nations, Mat: 8.
and therefore he gave the^ the gift of all tongues, Act: 2.
that they might preach to every nation in their own tongue. Others also ^oyne
with ye Papists, which by any means s^eke to hinder and st^ppe the free course
of the Gospel: such were the Pharisees, whom Christ threatens, saying, Woe be
to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, because you shut up the kingdom of
heaven before men, Mat: 23. 13.
for you your selves go not in, neither suffer you the^ that would enter to
come in. And in an other place it is said, Luke 11. 52.
that they had taken from the people the key of knowledge: such were the wicked
and malicious Jews, who killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, 1.
These: 2. 15. 16.
and persecuted the Apostles, and forbad them to preach to the gentiles, that
they might be saved, to fulfill their sins always, for the wrath of God is
come on them to the utmost. Such a one was Alexander the copper Smith, of who^
S. Paul says, That he had done him much evil: 2. Tim: 4. 14. 15.
the Lord reward him according to his works: of whom be thou ware also, for he
withstood our preaching sore. Again, this also serves to reprove all those
which may hear and will not, such are all Recusants, Papisticall, or
Anabaptisticall, which refuse to come to our assemblies, and will not be
partakers with us, either of the word or Sacraments: they have other meetings,
and have gathered to themselves other kind of teachers, and have made quite
separation from us, and yet without any just cause or reason: and the true
messengers of wisdom, do truly deliver the doctrine of salvation, speaking
in sincerity as of God, in the sight of God, casting from them the cloakes of
shame, 2. Cor: 4. 2.
neither handling the word of God deceitfully, but in declaration of the truth,
approving themselves, to the consciences of all good men. There be many worthy
me^ in our Church, of excellent gifts and graces, whose ministry has been
powerful, to call many thousands, from sin and error, to truth and holiness:
to the conversion and saving of souls: Our Church holds the true foundation,
it sets it self, by doctrine and sword, against all heretics: it has
bredde many worthy Martyrs, it is a true witness, keeper, interpreter, and
translator of the holy scripture: it is an helper and harbourer of the Saints:
and it does truly call upon the name of the true God, and has the true word
and Sacrament, the essential marks of the true Church. What cause then is
there of separation from us? though there be great odds, betwixt these two
kinds of Recusants, the one in greater degree of error then the other. Yet we
dare bouldly say to them both, as Saint Paul says to the Corinthians, 2. Cor*
11. 4.
who began to contemn their Apostle Paul, and to get other teachers; If he
that comes says Paul, preaches an other Jesus then him whom we have
preached, or if you receive an other spirit then that which you have received,
either an other Gospel then that you have received, Gal: 1. ^. ^.
ye might well have suffered him. As if he should say, If any man can preach a
better Jesus, a better Gospel, a better spirit, they might hearken to him, but
indeed none could do it. And therefore he says in an other place, Though that
we, or an Angel from heaven, preach unto you otherwise the^ that which we
have preached unto you, let him be accursed: As we said before, so say I now
again: If any man preach unto you otherwise then that you have received, let
him be accursed. We preach the true Jesus* according to the scriptures, that
there is no Name under heaven that we can be saved by but by him: that he is
both true God and man; that he is the King, the Priest, and Prophet of his
Church: we preach the true Gospel, containing the doctrine of Faith and
Repentance. To this doctrine is joined the true spirit, the spirit of Adoption,
the spirit of boldness, of comfort, and sanctif^cation: If any of them can teach
a better Jesus, a better Gospel, a better spirit, we will harken to them: The
Papists they teach and hold many things corruptly of Christ Jesus the son of
God, overthrowing the power, and end of his coming, and derogating from him
the glory of our own, and full redemption; by their Mass, and many
Mediators, they abolish the Priesthood of Christ, by the Popes supremacy,
making him the universal head of the Church: they diminish, dishonor, and
quite overthrow the Kingly Office of Christ, by their own Inventions, and
vain Traditions: they take away his Prophetical office: their Gospel is full
of superstition and Idolatry, adding and diminishing at their pleasure: making
new Articles, and new Sacraments: their spirit is a spirit of Error, of
Ignorance, of doubting, and torment. But to let these go, and to come to the
other;

It may be^ (some will say) that they hold the same Jesus, and Gospel with us;
Let it be granted that they and we agree in all matters concerning Faith and
salvation, as it may appear by their own confession of Faith, wherein there is
nothing, that is sound and Orthodoxall, but they received it from us: Many of
them, specially of their founders, and first beginners, were bredde and borne
amongst us; they had their faith, if they have any: their knowledge, the word
and Sacraments from us; they confess, they hold the same things with us, and
other Churches, touching matters of Faith; the more shame for them, to fly and
run away from us, as though they had some better Jesus, some better Gospel
then we have: where as all may see, that they have no other: And therefore
their separation is most unkind and ridiculous. Let the best reformed churches
in the world, who have given us the right hands of fellowship. Let them (I say)
be Judges between us and them: or let the scriptures themselves, truly opened
and applied, be the true touchstone and trial between us. Let them show and
bring forth one scripture, commanding, or one holy example approving, such a
separation, from such a church, from such ministers, holding, professing, and
teaching that which they do: from whence, you your selves, have received all
the good things which you hold, maintain, or profess, in matters of
Religion. So that you might say as Carneados a Philosopher was wont to say of
his Master and reader Chrisippus; If it had not been for Chrisippus, I never
had been any body. So might you say, If the pride of your heart will suffer
you: If it had not been for the church of England, many of you could never
have had, Bible, Faith, nor knowledge, in the matters of your salvation.

Now you do very ill requite the fathers that begot you, the mother that bare
you, thus to fly from them, to accuse, slander, revile, and curse them.
Herein you deal, as Aristotle dealt with his maistar Plato; who having gotten
great Learning from his master, did after oppose himself against him, and by
all means sought his disgrace and discredit: Therefore Plato was wont to call
Aristotle a Mule; because when she has filled her self with her mothers
milk, she will beat her damme with her heels.

Plato signified by this, the ingratitude of Aristotle; for when he had
received from Plato the principles of Phylosophie, and increase of knowledge
therein, he became enemy to the school of Plato; and with his Familiers and
Scholars, did always contend and strive against Plato. If the dealing of
these men be not as hard and unkind against our Church, let any reasonable
and indifferent men judge: And are they not too near like the Viper, who
gnaweth out the dammes belly, and so lives by the death of her damme? But of
the unthankfulness of these men, to God, their Prince, and this Church, we shall
speak of it in an other place; For this time I refer them to the judgment of
two worthy men, writing jointly upon the 13. chap: of the Proverbs, 13. verse,
the words are these: He that despises the word shall be destroyed: but he that
fears the commandment, he shall be rewarded. This sentence (say they) will
press so upon the Brownists, who are become bitter despisers of the Ministry
of Jesus Christ, by separating themselves from the Churches of God, and
deprauing all the holy means of salvation; howsoever they pretend to stand for
sincerity, yet they resist it: and taking upon them to be cha^pions for Christ
his kingdom, they fight against it: and though their arguments seem to be
grounded on the word, yet being well sifted, they prove mere falacies and have
no agreement with the meaning of the holy Ghost, in the word, they are strongly
illuded by Satan, and made his Agents; (as much as may be) to (...) the right
ways of the Lord.

Finally, this Doctrine, that happiness consists in the right hearing of
wisdom, it makes directly against all contemners and mockers: ye^, against
all unprofitable and unfruitful hearers. There he some in the Church, which
do hear sometimes, and yet are no friends to wisdom: but either open^y or
closely despise it, and scoff at it. 1. Thessal. ^ 4. 8.
These men are in most fearful and cursed state, for their contempt is not
against man, but against himself: He that despi^eth these things, despises
not man, but God, who has given us his holy spirit. These men, they will not
believe, they have no part in the promises of grace and salvation: they live in
Gods displeasure, they expose themselves to his curse, both temporal and
^ternall; and therefore our Lord says: That whereas he had sent to his people
Messengers, rising early, and sending, and they mocked the Messengers of God, 2 Chronicles. ^6* 15. 16.
despise his words, and misvsed his Prophets, that his wrath should rise
against them, and there was no remedy, he could for ^eare no longer, he must
needs punish them.

And to such contemners, our Savior Christ threatens, Matt. 21.
That the kingdom of God sh^lbe taken away from them, and given to a Nation
which shall bring forth the fruits thereof. Acts. 13. 46.
And the Apostles, Paul, and Barnabas, spoke boldly to such contemners; and
said: It was necessary that the word of God should first have bin spoken to
you, that is, to the Jews) but seeing you put it from you, and judge your
selves unworthy of everlasting life, lo we turn to the Gentiles; Prou: 1. 20.
21. 22. 23. 24. (...).
and let us hear the voice of wisdom; who cries without, and utters her
voice in the streets, she calls in the high streets, in the prease, in the
entering of the gates and utters her words in the City, saying; O ye
foolish, how long will ye love foolishnes? and the scornful take their
pleasure in scorning, and the fools hate knowledge? (turn you at my
correction, Lo I will power out my mind unto you, (and make you understand my
words,) because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched forth mine
hand, and none would regard: but ye have despised all my counsel, and would
none of my correction; I will also laugh at your destruction, and mock when
your fear comes, when your fear comes like sudden desolation, and your
destruction come like a whirlewinde: when affliction and anguish shall come
upon you, then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer: they shall
seek me early, but they shall not find me: because they hated knowledge, and
did not choose the fear of the Lord: they would none of my counsel, but
despised all my correction: therefore shall they eat the fruit of their own
way, and be filled with their own devises. In the which place, we may plainly
observe a proof and testimony of the mercy and justice of God: his mercy in
calling and inuiting to wisdoms feast* such as be unworthy, ^uch as be
contemners, enemies and scoffers, yet he does entreat them, and earnestly
desire them to leave their folly, and to be partakers of true wisdom: but
then follows his severity and justice against such as despise and contemn
his loving and kind offer. The wisdom of all wisdom, protests and
voweth, that he will hau^ no pity of such, but rather will take delight to
destroy them: Nay, he protests, that though they cry and call upon him in
their greatest extremity, yet he will not hear them: the reason is, because
they have so long contemned his great mercies, that their hearts are hardened
they cannot repent: therefore God cannot hear, for he hears not the prayers
of impenitent sinners. Again, these men have no faith, and therefore cannot be
heard, for faith is grounded upon Gods word, which they despise, contemn, and
mock. A like heavy sentence has Solomon in another place, Pro. 28. 9.
saying, He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer
shall be abominable: not only the sins and wicked deeds of co^temners and
wicked men, but those which seem most good, and have greatest show of
holiness, are odious in Gods sight: the sacrifice of the wicked are
abomination to the Lord: the prayers that they make, though never so earnestly
in their most need, though it be in the hour of death, the Lord will not
hear them, but reject and abhor them. And is it not great reason and
equity, he does but serve them as they serve him; they will not hear him, when
he calls and cries to them by the mouth of his Ministers: and why should he
hear them, when they call and cry in their greatest necessities? and heavy
are the threatenings of the Apostle: If the words spoken by Angels were
steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense
of reward, how should we escape, if we neglect so great a salvation, which at
the first began to be preached of the Lord, and afterward was confirmed unto us
by them that heard him, Hebr. 2. 2. 4.
God bearing witness thereto, both with signs and wonders, and with diverse
miracles and gifts of the holy Ghost, according to his own will. Hebr. 10. 28. 29
And in another place he says, He that despises Moses law dies without
mercy, under two or 3. witnesses: of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall
he be worthy, which treads under foot the Son of God? Hebr. 12. 25.
Again, See that you despise not him that speaks, for if they escaped not
which refuse him that spoke on earth, meaning Moses, who spoke rudely in
comparison of Christ, much more shall we not escape, if we turn away from him
that speaks from heaven. But not only contemners are here reproved, but also
idle and unprofitable hearers: many are in the school of wisdom, no enemies,
no contemners, but frier^ds and well-willers, they think well, and they speak
well, and like well of the means of salvation, they commend it, they hear
daily, and seem greatly to joy in it, yet they profit little, either in
knowledge or sanctification. But it is not simply a blessing to hear
wisdom, except we be better by it: nay, it is rather a woe then a bliss, to
be under the means, and to profit little or nothing by it. Aug. de Mor. ecc*
Cath.
There be, says a Father, three degrees of woe, He that has not that he
loves, cannot be said to be blessed; neither he that has that he loves, if
his love be hurtful to him: neither he that has that which is good and
profitable, if he loves not that which he has: so^e desire the Ministry, and
have no means to come by it: this is a woe: some love superstition, Idolatry,
ignorance, and they do enjoy it, they have such blind guides as they like of;
this is a greater woe: some are under good Ministers, yet they profit little by
it, these are not happy, but in a fearful state. It is a grievous sin not
to profit according to the time and means: it is an unkindness and injury
offered to Christ, it brings outward judgment* at least spiritual: it does
bring upon us the spirit of slumber, security, and benummednes of conscience:
there is a curse and judgment upon the ears and souls of such: they are like
unto the ground that is continually dressed and tilled, in good order, and sown
with good seed, and yet brings forth no good fruit. All will confess, such
a ground to be very bad and cursed. And the holy Ghost says the like* That
the earth which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and brings
forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receive the blessing of God:
but that which bears thorns and briers is reproved, and is near to cursing,
whose end is to be burned. Math. 13. 23.
And our Savior Christ teaches in the Parable of the seed, That the good and
blessed ground brings forth good fruit, some an hundredth fold, some sixty
fold, some thirty fold: so they which hear with a good and honest heart, do
also keep the word, and bring forth fruit with patience. An unprofitable
hearer offends against God, who cries daily to him, yet he will not hear
him to any purpose; who does kindly visit him, but he will not receive and
entertain him with such comfort and fruit as he ought: they offend against
their teachers in discrediting and greeuing them, making all their labor and
travel as much as in them lies to be in vain: they do an injury to
themselves, being still ignorant, whereas they might have had knowledge; being
profane, whereas they might have had some measure of holiness: the grace which
they have, if they have any, it decays and dies, and is taken away from
them; for God does take away his gifts from those, which use them not aright,
and have no care to increase them: they draw upon themselves, diverse
punishments from God, as we hard before. Nay these unfruitful hearers they
offend the Church, they do no little wrong to it, because they are unprofitable
members, and can do no good to others: whereas we are borne not for our
selves, but for others, we should so profit, that we should be able to teach
our families, to comfort, admonish, and edify one an other: yea w^ should be
examples of virtue and piety to others, and grow daily in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ: the causes why men profit not, are these;
they have not repented of sins past, but they are withholden by some special
sin, or else they are not persuaded of the truth of Gods holy word; or else
they are careless what become of the^ after this life; or else they are dulled
with the cares and pleasures of this world; or else they neglect prayer,
hearing, reading, conference, and other holy private exercises; or else they
have some proud conceit of themselves, that they know enough, and are holy
enough already, and need no more; or else they have the curse of a stonic and
hard heart; or else they are drawn away and hindered by bad counsel or
company: these be the pull-backes and hindrances which keep men back from
profiting in the school of wisdom.

THE THIRD SERMON.
FRom this worthy sentence of a most worthy and gracious woman, we have
already, delivered and handled, this worthy doctrine, namely, that the chief
felicity of this life, consists in hearing and obeying true wisdom: this
we have largely confirmed and proved, and have made some use of it: gathering
from hence as a necessary consequence, the miserable and wretched estate of
such as are destitute of this wisdom, of such as seek to hinder and stop
it, of such as refuse to hear it, of such as are contemners and mockers, and
of such also, as are idle and unprofitable hearers: and yet still we are to
make some further use of this doctrine, it serves directly, to reprove and
confute the vanity and folly of such as repose their chief felicity, either
in carnal wisdom, or in the glory of the world, or in riches, or in pleasures:
Of al these we have spoken something already, yet let us say something more of
the two latter, namely riches and pleasures: because most men do repose true
happiness in them: this is taken as a principle, that those are the happiest men
in the world, which abound in wordly wealth, and spend their whole life, in
mirth and Iollitie, in earthly delights, and carnal Joys, but the vanity of
these men shall easily appear, if true wisdom may be judge; Travel not too
much to be rich, says the wise man, but cease from thy wisdom: Pro: 23. 3.
Will thou cast thine eyes upon that which is nothing? for riches takes her to
her wings, as an Eagle, and flies into the heaven. His meaning is, that riches
are of small reckoning and account, and that they are uncertain, flitting and
fading, therefore there can be no true happiness in them. In an other place, he
does handle this more largely, He that loves silver says he, shall not be
satisfied with silver; and he that loves riches, shall be without the fruit
thereof. His meaning is, that such as repose their happiness in riches, are not
happy but miserable: because they are like unto such as are always thirsty
and hungry, and never satisfied: he sets down many other miseries of such
men, that they have not so much as the fruit of their riches, because they dare
not use, that which they have, they are tormented with the desire of more: In
the midst of all their wealth, they want as well that which they have, as
that which they have not; and the more they have, the more they are to
maintain; as servants, friends, and many parasites and flatterers: and this
misery also is incident to such, that they do so much think of gathering and
keeping their riches, that they cannot have so sweet rest and sleep as many a
poor man has, their thoughts are troubled, thinking sometimes how to deceive
others, and how others may deceive the^: they are in continual fear of
thieves, robbers, of fire and water, and of other danger and losses; they are
troubled in their minds, thinking how badly they have gotten their riches, and
how badly they hold and use them: their riches turn to their own hurt and
destruction, being occasions to them, of pride, covetousness, prodigality, and
licentiousnes, and sometimes very ruin of body and soul. These riches are
spent and consumed, by many ways, by dilicate and dainty fare, by costly
apparel, by smptuous buildings, by gaming, by whoredom, by buying, by
selling, by lawing; how many ways are riches spent and consumed, by fire, by
water, by wars, by thieves, by unskillful and unfaithful Physicians, by
prodigal wives, and prodigal children, by negligent and untrusty servants;
and thus riches perish by evil travel. This is also an other misery, that
they leave the owner, he can take nothing with him; he knows not how soon he
must leave the^, he has heapt up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather
them: it may be, neither child nor friend, but his enemy; he that has not
contented himself, with many Lordships and countries, he that has joined
house to house, land to land, then a little piece of ground will serve his
turn. By such reasons does Solomon prove the misery of riches: (...). 5 9.
^0. 11. 12. ^3. 14. 15. 16.
and he concludes, that the whole life of the rich man is miserable, saying;
All his days he eats in darkness, with much grief, and sorrow and anger.
Finally, riches are deceitful and dangerous, they hinder us from Gods
kingdom, they draw our heart to them, and make it as a captive and slave;
they ouerloade and press us with cares, they make us faint-harted, and
fearful cowards, to endure any thing for the Gospel of Christ: they often
hinder us, and keep us back from wisdoms School: and though we come
thither, yet they do choke the seed of the Word in us. Therefore there is no
true Happiness in them.

Those be true Riches, Aug. super Math. Greg: in Ho:
which when we have them, we cannot loose them: Earthly substance compared to
Eternal felicity, is no help, but a burden: This life compared with Eternal
life, is rather to be called death then life.

The sons of Adam (says Bernard) are a covetous generation; What have you to
do with earthly Riches, Berr: in Ser. 4.
which are neither true riches, nor yet yours? Gold and Silver, is red and
white Earth, which the error of man does make and account more precious; And if
they be yours, take them with you when you die.

It is a true saying of these Earthly riches, Hic gig^untur, Hic amittuntur,
Hic dimi^tuntur. Here they are gotten: here they are lost, and here they are
left.

Those then, which repose Felicity in Riches, have neither true Wisdom, nor
true Happiness, nor true Riches: They are as much deceived, which put any
happiness in Earthly pleasures. Some of these are Carnal, Prou: 10. 23.
and wicked, and have their beginning from Hell.

Of this speaks Solomon, Pro. 10. 23.
when he says: It is a pastime for a Fool to do wickedly. And of this
speaks Esaiah, when he says: Esa. 22. 12. 13.
The Lord calls to weeping and mourning, and behold joy and gladness;
slaying Oxen, and killing sheep: eating flesh, drinking wine; Eating and
drinking, for tomorrow we shall die.

Of this speaks our Savior CHRIST, when he says; Woe be to you that now
laugh, Luke 12. ^5.
for you shall wail and weep. In such pleasures the rich man lived in the
gospel: all his life time upon earth, but after death, Luke 16. 25.
his soul was tormented in Hell. The Apostle says of the wanton widdowe, that
she living in pleasure, 1. Tim. 5. 6.
was dead while she lived: and indeed, those which were most lively and lusty
in these pleasures, are but dead men in grace and goodness.

But to let these sinful pleasures pass, wherein yet many, too wholly spend
their time, and count it their chief Felicity: And to come to honest,
lawful, and civil pleasures, yet there is no true Felicity in them: Let the
best, the greatest, joy and delight be named, yet it is but transiorie; It is
not true and perfect joy; It does not satisfy and content us. After we have
it, we loath it; It is common both to good and evil; It does lead to
corruption, and it does oftentimes cause grief and sorrow: The other pleasures,
indeed they come from hell, and these are but from the earth: They are but
petty joys, bitter sweetings, seeming Joys, earthly and bastardly joys, in
comparison of true and perfect joy: we are not borne to spend our time in mirth
and joy, but rather to mourn and lament, Mat: 5. 4.
in respect of our sins and miseries: Blessed are they which mourn says
Christ, for they shall be comforted: and they that sow in tears, for they
shall reap in joy: and there is a godly sorrow that leads us to repentance,
and so to salvation: the true way to godly joy, is to feel godly sorrow. Oh
that we would remember the greatness and the multitude of our sins, the
certainty of death, the uncertainty of the hour of it, the account that we
are to make in that great day, the manifold duties that we owe, and are to
perform to God, to the Church, to the commonwealth, to our country, to our
families and others: and the remembrance of these things no doubt, would abate,
restrain and moderate our lawful pleasures: 1. Cor: 7. 31. 32.
Let them that rejoice, be as though they rejoiced not: and they that use this
world, as though they used it not: for the fashion of this world passes away.

Love not this world says S. John, 1. John. 2. 15. 16. 17.
neither the things that are in the world; If any man love the world, the love
of the Father is not in him: For all that is in the world (as the lust of the
Flesh, the lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of life) is not of the Father, but
is of the world, and the world passes away, and the lusts thereof: but he
that fulfilleth the will of God, abides for ever.

The glory of this world (says one) is deceitful, Bern: in epist. 3. ad
Soth:
and is worthily refused: It is but like the flower of Grass, and a vapor
appearing for a time; In what state so ever of this life, there is more grief
then pleasure; whilst thou do revenge, defend, envy, suspect: whilst thou
do always love that which thou have not: and having gotten something, thy
desire is not diminished; What rest is there in thy glory? If there be any,
the joy passes away, not returning again, and thy grief remains, which
will never leave thee.

Oh wicked world: who do wont so to bless thy only Friends, that thou
do make them the enemies of God.

There is small joy to a man, when he sees his Neighbors house on Fire. He
is vain which spends the days of his Repentance in pleasure: when he sees
daily before his eyes, both his Friends and others to die, and so sees that
Death is certain: Is he not vain then, that (forgetting the fear of God)
does give himself to vain delights?

Parents do more grieve then joy, when they see their Child borne, and die in
one day: The joy of this world is short, It is a foolish thing to delight in
our own Foolishnes. It is a vain thing to fill our hearts with delights,
which are ended, before they begin.

It is a vain joy of the Birds, in the midst of Nets, Trappes, and
Snares, set for them: And it is a foolish thing in the Fishes, to delight in
the bayte of the hook, which brings present sorrow and death. And they are
as vain as those unreasonable creatures, which glory in the vain delights of
this world; Seeing that Death is so near them.

The very Heathen have proved, and mocked this folly of men; Some saying: That
we come into the world weeping; we go out of the world wailing: And yet we
live here laughing: others, saying, that the desire of pleasures are grief,
that the fulness of pleasure is full of repentings; that the end of pleasures is
heavy and grievous: Senec. ep. 28.
that if any may be counted blessed for them, then the beasts also may be
counted blessed. What enemy is so injurious or contumelious, as the pleasures
of some are to them? Many are so drowned in pleasures, that they are brought to
a custom, and cannot want them, which for this cause are most miserable,
because they have made those things most necessary, which are superfluous:
therefore they serve their pleasures, and do not enjoy them; they love their
evils, which is the chief of all evil. Another says, that true joy is not
possessed, unless peace and righteousness be kept and holden: Aug. sup. ps. 52.
The first is as it were the root, that is righteousness: the second is peace,
the third is joy: from righteousness proceeds peace, from peace proceeds
joy, they rejoice in temporal things, which have not learned to desire
eternal things, Chryso. de repas. lap.
If we list to give our selves to pleasures, a hundredth years, yea add
another hundredth, and if thou list ten hundredth more, what is this to the
reward of eternity? is not all the time of this life, wherein we seem to enjoy
pleasures, and serve our lusts, Aug lib. 9. Confess.
but the sleep of one night, in comparison of eternity? There is a joy which
is not given to the wicked, but to them o Lord which do willingly worship
thee: whose joy thou thy self art; and this is the true blessed life, to
rejoice of thee, and for thee: this and no other is true blessedness, but of
the vanity of these men, which repose felicity, either in humane wisdom, or
in the glory of the world, in riches, or pleasures, we have partly spoken
before. And let Solomon deside and determine this matter, both by his sentence
and example; he pronounces of all these things, Vanity of vanities, vanities,
of vanities, all is vanity: If he had but thus spoken, in his wisdom, being
divine and inspired, we should believe him, and rest upon his judgment, but he
speaks also upon experience and proof. If a poor man had spoken it, we
might have rejected his judgment, as one that never tasted the excellency of
riches and pleasures: but it is spoken by Solomon, a famous and worthy king,
who excelled and abounded in all wisdom, glory, wealth, and pleasures: having
tasted of all, he protests and cries out, that all is vanity. And mark what
one says of that sentence: If those says he, Chrysostom. sup. Mat. Ho. 30.
which are occupied in power and riches, they would write this verse upon all
their walls, upon their houses, upon their doors and gates, and specially if
they would write it in their consciences, that they might always have it
before their eyes, and feel it in their heart, that all is vanity. And thus
we see sundry enemies opposites to wisdom, we see the miserable estate of
such as want her, of such as despise her, and repose their happiness in other
things: And howsoever many be against her, and she has but few faithful
friends, and few do respect or regard her as they ought, but prefer most base
and vile things before her, yet is this wisdom justified of all her children.
Now let us come to some further uses of this doctrine, for the instruction and
comfort of her friends and followers. First then this serves for the
instruction of the sons and daughters of wisdom, that with all diligence,
care, and reverence, they continually hearken to true wisdom. Though outward
hearing be not sufficient, yet it is commended as profitable and necessary, and
as means to convey grace, knowledge, and faith to the heart: and it is the
chief end why God has given us ears, even thereby to hearken to his voice.
Without this hearing, how should we know God? how should we love him? how
should we fear and believe in him? Who so is among you that fears the Lord,
Esa. 50. 10.
says Esaiah, let him hear the voice of his servant. Again, hearken unto me
my people, and give ear unto me o my people, Esa. 51. 4. 7.
hearken unto me you that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my
law: we are ready to hearken to fables, to hear histories, to hear the
letters of our friends, and the Proclamation of Princes; and some are very
ready and willing to hear the Idolatrous Mass, and shall not we be more ready
and willing to hear the voice of our God? The public assemblies are the
schools of wisdom, we must like good scholars, with diligence resort
thither, and be content both to hear and learn: we must like Cornelius,
hear with reverence, whatsoever shall be spoken from the mouth of God: we must
with Lidea, give attendance to Paul's preaching: and we must daily watch at the
gates of wisdom, and give attendance at the posts of our doors: we must
willingly neglect no time nor occasion that may serve for our instruction in
this school. But of this point, I will stand no more, because heretofore in
the commending of wisdom, we alleging many testimonies of holy Scripture;
from whence we may draw sufficient reasons and motives, to stir us up to
careful hearing. Now I add another use, that seeing our felicity lies in
wisdom, we must not only carefully hear it, but also love it most dearly,
and esteem it, above all things else whatsoever. Some there be diligent
hearers, but yet they do not so highly esteem of this wisdom as they
should, neither do they show the fruits of that love which this deserves:
they think it good, but not the chiefest good: but we are to love and esteem
this wisdom, not as an ordinary or common thing, but as it is indeed, the
best and the chiefest of all things: preferring it above all riches, pleasures,
or any thing else in the world, be they never so pleasant, profitable, or
excellent: esteeming this as most good, most necessary* and that we had better
want all the best things in the world, then this; and who indeed will not thus
esteem of this felicity* being the greatest felicity of this life, and that
which will lead us to eternal happiness? Such an account and estimation had
the wise man of it, when he puts it in the first place, Pro: 3.
and prefers it before all things. Our Savior Christ counts it the one
thing needful, Pro: 4.
and the good part that shall be never taken from us: Pro: 8
he compares it to a treasure hid in the field, Luke. 10.
and to a pearl of great price, Mat: 13. 44*4^. ^.
which when a man has found, for joy thereof, he sells all that he has and
buyeth it. The blessed Apostle, he esteems all things else dross and dung,
Phil. ^. 8.
in comparison of this excellent knowledge: so that our love to this, it must
be rare, sincere, and perfect, like our love to God himself: and indeed so
much as we love God, so much we love his word; and as little as we love the
one, so little we love the other. The special note to prove our love to God
is, our true love to his word: now where true love is, there is hungring and
thirsting, and eager desiring of that which we love; there is a delight and a
joy unspeakable when we have it. Wisdom calls those only to be her guestes,
Esa* 55. 1. ^. ^.
to be partakers of her dainties, which do hunger and thirst after spiritual
graces. Ioh: 7.
The Prophet David says of himself, Ps: 119. 20.
My heart breaks for the desire to thy judgments always. Such a desire as
worldlings have to their riches, as voluptuous men have to their pleasures, who
are never satisfied; such a desire I say have the Saints of God to this
wisdom. The kingdom of heaven says our Savior, from the time of John the
Baptist hitherto, suffers violence, and the violent take it by force; his
meaning is, that the hearts of men were then inflamed with an earnest zeal*
and greedy desire to hear the word: they did not coldly and for fashion, but
with an earnest and violent affection, follow and seek after this wisdom: not
the idle and careless sort, but such as be spiritually violent, take and
receive the kingdom of heaven: he that takes any thing by violence, he does
vehemently desire it, and will not want it, and uses all power and endeavor to
obtain it; neither does he fear to expose himself and all that he has to
danger, so that he may enjoy it: the matter then being so weighty, it must not
be lightly desired and sought for, but with great vehemency and zeal. And
therefore the Apostle exhorts, 1. Pet. 2. 2.
that as newborn babes, we should desire the sincere milk of the word, that
we may grow thereby. Infants they desire milk, and that egerly, they cry and
yell for it, nothing will stay them till they have it: and their desire is
daily and continual. Such desires and affections we must bear to true
wisdom: and as good food is sweet to the hungry, when it is eaten, so is
wisdom to the soul if it be inwardly received and digested: there will follow
exceeding delight and joy, but because most hearers profess their love to the
word, and show their love by desiring it, and delighting in it, as it may seem
to the eyes of the world, let us see some further signs to approve our true
love to wisdom, and the account that we make of it: first then, they that
truly love and truly esteem this wisdom, they must needs love the public
assemblies, and specially the public ministry and preaching of wisdom: some
think it enough to pray and read at home, but Gods ordinance must be
acknowledged, private duties must give place to the public: this is the gate
of heaven, the house of God, the court of the Saints: here shines most
clearly the loving countenance and face of God in his temple. Does every man
speak of his glory? O Lord says David, Ps: 26. 8.
I have loved the habitation of thine house, and the place where thine honor
dwells. And again, I rejoiced when they said unto me, we will go into the
house of the Lord: he loved and ioyed in such meetings, because of Gods
presence, because of the sacrifices and Sacraments, they are ministered* and for
that he had there the company of Gods people, public and joint prayers, and
the word of wisdom, there read and expounded: and as this was David's joy and
practice being a worthy Prophet and King, so it is said in an other place,
Ezeck: 46. 10.
that the Prince shall be in the midst of the assemblies, he shall go in with
the people, and when they go forth, they shall go forth together. And as
Solomon built an house for God, and confec^ated it to holy uses, so he himself
resorted thither, with the Priests and people, to offer public service to God.
Christ himself, the Apostles and Saints, did commonly frequent public
assemblies: and such as contemn these, they do not read nor understand
aright: having so many precepts and preside^ts against them. Others there be,
which are content to come to public meetings, to prayer, and to the reading of
the scriptures, but they think this sufficient, and that they need no more at
all: as for preaching, they care little for it; nay many do scorn and hate it:
these do not rightly esteem or love the word; if they loved it read, they
would love it preached: and the rather, seeing it is more to edification: by
preaching we are assured of the authority of the scriptures; we better
understand them, many dark sentences of scripture are explained, (...)
places which seem contrary are reconciled; the hid treasures of wisdom are
laid open to our further comfort: scriptures are applied to time, place,
persons: affections are more moved, many are called and converted, such as are
called, are further confirmed and increased, by the power of preaching; for it
is ordained of God, not only for conversion of souls, but for confirmation,
augmentation, and continuance in grace, and therefore most needful for all
persons, 1. Cor: 14.
be they never so wise, strong or holy: these be the special prerogatives and
privileges of preaching. And therefore the Apostle accounts and esteems of
it, as the most necessary and profitable gift in the Church: the cause why men
do contemn and hate preaching is, because they are in love with their sins,
which are discovered by it. Therefore Aha^ hated Michaiah the Prophet, as he
confesses, 1. King. 22. 8.
because he prophesied not good unto him, but evil. Light is come into the
world, and men love darkness more then light, because their deeds are evil: for
every man that evil does, hates the light: neither comes to light, least
his deeds should be reproved: but he that does truth comes to the light,
John. 3. 19. 21.
that his deeds might be made manifest: that they are wrought according to God.
Again, they hate this light of preaching, and contemn it, because it is an
enemy to their carnalliberties sincere and sound preaching reproves many
delights, vanities, and corruptions, which flesh and blood would feign retain
and nourish: and therefore carnal men say, Let us break this bond, and cast
this cord from us: Let us shake off this yoke of Christ: but the godly do
therefore the more love it, because it does reprove their sins, and is an
effectual means to bring them to true repentance and mortification: they love
the word read, and they love it preached: reading is not to be neglected, and
contemned, it is commended both in the law and the Gospel: thereby we are the
better acquainted with the scriptures, we are made thereby more profitable
hearers; reading helps our judgments, affections and memories; preaching
helps reading, and reading helps preaching: they that best love preaching,
and seek most for Sermons, if they do it with right affections, they read
most, and with more comfort and profit: All the parts of Gods service are to be
practiced by a Christian, no part of his service is to be neglected or
contemned: this is an other sure sign of our true love to wisdom, often in
secret to meditate of it, to confer of it with others, to read the word, or
to cause it to be read unto us: by these private exercises, David proves his
love to the word, Ps: 119. 97.
as we have hard before: love will draw our affection to speak and think
often of that which we love: this is a more sure sign then the other, it may
be some are drawn to public meetings by fear, by examples, by law, by
custom, but when we are alone in private, or few with us, then to speak of
the word, then oftentimes to think and muse of it, even in our privy chamber,
this is a sure sign of sincere love. Again, if we do sincerely love, and
worthily praise this wisdom, our care and endeavor will be, to mainetaine the
dignity and credit of wisdom, by our godly life and conversation: we must be
not only professors, but practitioners; and how can they be said to be the
sons and daughters of wisdom, which do follow the examples and customs of
folly? these do stain and pollute their profession, and are but like foolish
builders, and foolish Virgins, not adorning the doctrine of wisdom, but
dishonouring it; Let your conversation be such says the Apostle, as it
becomes the Gospel of Christ, that which we love, we seek to credit, to
beautify, and to honor it by all means we can: we will not suffer it to be
disgraced or defiled by our default. The very heathen will not suffer their
false Gods to be dishonored or defaced, by any: and shall we wilfully dishonor
and discredit the excellency and majesty of wisdom, by our wicked lives and
conuersations? Ioh. 14. 23.
If any man love me says Christ, he will keep my words. Again* ye are my
friends, Io: 15. 14.
if you do whatsoever I command you* An other sign of our love and estimation
to wisdom, is to hate, detest, and abhor all falsehood and folly, as
sworn enemies to true wisdom. I hate vain inventions says David, but thy
law I do love: Ps* 119. 113.
light and darkness, truth and lies, wisdom and folly, are opposite, they
cannot be reconciled. Elias and Baalls Priests, Michiah and false Prophets,
Amos and Amasias, the Ark of God and Dagon, God and Baall, Jews and
Samaritans, Believers and Infidells, Papists and Protestants, cannot agree
together. In all the book of the Proverbs, the wise man and the fool,
wisdom and folly, are opposed one against another: the sons of wisdom,
are the sons of light: now the nature of light is, to expel mysts and
clouds, to discover and reprove many unclean things, but it cannot be defiled
with any, and it has no fellowship with unfruitful works of darkness:
Wisdom is a chaste matron; folly and error is a harlot: and therefore their
must needs be discention betwixt them: the friends of wisdom must needs fly
and abhor al seducers and deceivers. Pro 14. ^.
Therefore says Solomon, Depart from the foolish man, when thou perceiuest not
in him the lips of knowledge. And again, Pro. 15. 27.
My son hear no more the instruction, that causes to err from the words of
knowledge. Though seducers be subtle, and we are apt to err, yet this is the
power and use of wisdom, to keep us sound and safe from error: this wisdom
does build us up, in sound faith and knowledge, and does make us stable and
constant, and is a special preservative against the deceit and craftines of
foolish and false Prophets: Finally, another more sure argument of our tru^
love to this wisdom, even then to love it, and most highly to esteem of it,
when it is generally disgraced, contemned and persecuted of the world: it is an
easy matter to hear and profess it in the time of peace and prospeitie, when
the profession of it is commanded and approved by the power of Princes:
wisdom then has many friends, but the trial of true love and friendship is
then, when most men do appose and set themselves against the profession of
wisdom: even then to esteem it our felicity, even then to love it dearly,
and defend it: this I say is a true sign of love indeed. Such a love had
David, when many were enemies and persecutors of the truth, Princes says he,
did sit and speak against me, but thy servant did meditate in thy statutes,
also thy testimonies are my delight and my counselors; the proud have had me
exceedingly in derision, yet have I not declined from thy law. Again, the
bands of the wicked have robbed me, but I have not forgotten the law: the proud
have imagined a lie against me, but I will keep thy precepts with my whole
heart. The profession of wisdom is not always peaceable, but oftentimes
brings with it hatred and contempt: our flesh is enemy to it, and Satan
does trouble us by seducers and persecutors: but we must stand firmly for the
maintenance of the truth, and defend this our felicity, though it be to the
loss of life and living: men do strive and contend for maintenance of their
riches, their freeholds, and lives, and shall not we stand for defense of that,
which is better and more worth then all these things? If any man come to me
says Christ, and hate not his father and mother, and wife and children, and
brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.
His meaning is, that we must cast off all affections to our dearest friends,
which draw us from Christ. And in the same place he does teach us, that when we
begin our profession, we must make full account to hazard our credit, goods and
life for it, or else our beginning is rash and unadvised, and men will scorn
us fools, because we began and could not make an end. The Apostle commends
the Thessalonians, 1. These 1. 6.
because they became followers of him and of the Lord, and received the word in
much affliction, with joy of the holy Ghost. And in another place he says,
Phil. 1. 29
that it was given to the Philippians for Christ's cause, not only to believe
in him, but to suffer for his sake. Hebr. 11. 32, 33, 34.
And the Hebrews are commended, because after they had received the light,
they endured a great ^ight in afflictions: partly while they were made a
gazing-stocke, both by reproaches, and afflictions: and partly while they became
companions of them: for both you sorrowed says he, for my bonds, and suffered
with joy the spoiling of your goods, knowing of your selves, how that you have
in heaven a better, and an enduring substance. The last use that I make of the
former doctrine, is a comfort to the true sons and daughters of wisdom.
Their state is most happy and blessed, and they are in the right way to
eternal happiness, they have many discomforts and discouragements in the world,
and are accounted of all other most wretched and unhappy. But what need they
care for the blind, rash, and false judgment of men, seeing for this cause the
world knows us not, because it knows not God: and the voice of wisdom, the
voice of God and good men, does pronounce us happy: and our own conscience
does testify to us, that we walk in the right path to everlasting blessedness.
Indeed the wicked they say, It is in vain to serve God: and what profit is it
that we have kept his commandments, Mal. 3. 13. 14, 15, 16. etc.
and that we walk humbly before the Lord of hosts? therefore we count the
proud blessed, even they that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt
God: yea, they are deceived. Then spoke they that feared the Lord, every one
unto his Neighbor, and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a Book of
remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought
upon his Name: And they shall be to me (says the Lord of Hosts) in that day,
that I shall do this, for a Flock: and I will spare them, as a man spares
his own son, that serves him: Then shall you return, and discern between
the righteous, and the wicked: between him that serves God, and him that
serves him not. Against all blasphemous, false, and wicked speeches of the
world, let the friends of wisdom oppose for their comfort, these sweet
words, and comfortable promises of God, the Father and Founder of wisdom, and
the defender, and liberal rewarder of all such as truly love it.

And now before I pass to other matter, (by your Patience,) in respect of the
premises: Let me make some Application to this City; God has blessed you with
many special favors and mercies a long time, far above and beyond many
other places: I will not speak of your outward Privileges, Freedoms,
Donations, order of government, wherein, it may be, you excel some others. But
I will speak of your chiefest Privilege, the beauty and Ornament of your
City, and the best flower of your Garden: and that is indeed, the plentiful
and sincere preaching of the Gospel: In respect whereof, some do truly
think, and say (with this woman) Happy are you, which may daily hear such
wisdom; And they may truly say in respect of so many heavenly visions, This
is the house of God, this is the gate of heaven: and though many other places,
are in some sort, partakers of this happiness, yet but few are equal with you
in this gracious blessing.

First then, consider how long a time you have had a certain, settled, and
resident ministry, for the space of no less then fifty years; many in the
mean time have been destitute, as poor sheep without a shepherd. Some have
had this means of salvation very seeldome: and sometimes interrupted, and
eclipsed.

O happy are you, that have had so great a blessing, so many years continued;
and the greater blessing it is, not only that you have had this word of
Wisdom preached amongst you, but also soundly and sincerely by faithful
Pastors and teachers: dividing the word of Truth aright. Others it may be, have
had the Word preached: but corruptly, and erroniously, mixing Chafe and Wheat
together: and flattering the people in their sins. This is also a further
blessing, that you have the Word preached, not only so long, and so sincerely,
but also in such variety of gifts and teachers, of strangers, of yout own
Contrymen: of young and old: variety of teachers amongst your selves, this
is a special blessing. Thus you have experience of the diverse graces and gifts
of God, in diverse men: and herein God is good unto you, if one can do you no
good, another may.

A worthy Father holds it profitable, that of the same questions, many Books
should be made by sundry men, in a differing style, though not in a differing
faith, all stomaches (we see) are not alike. One kind of dressing pleases
one, which has no relish with an other: and yet the same meat, ordered after
another fashion, may fit his appetite. As differences of meats, so of humors
and dispositions of men: the same matter diversely handled, may find
entertainment with diverse men, which yet disgested after one only fashion,
would have acceptance with fear; All fishes are not taken with the same bait,
all birds are not caught by the same kind of voice and singing: I speak not
this to please* vain and curious humors, who without just cause distaste and
dislike their faithful teachers; Love your Pastors, reverence the gifts of God
in any, be they more or less: yet know that it is a blessing which many want,
to be in such sort as you are partakers of the labors of sundry teachers. And
herein also your blessing is the greater, because you have such preaching, so
often and so plentifully, both upon the Saboth day, and at other times:
howsoever some may think this too much, and some murmer at it, and some loathe
it, so that much preaching is loathsome and odious to some, yet is this a rare
blessing, which God has not imparted to many. In other things we count plenty
a blessing, and we never care how much we have, the more the better: we never
think we have too much or enough: God himself does promise it as a blessing
to his children, Deuteronomy 28.
to have store and abundance of victuals, of Cattle, of Corn, and the men of
this world do confess it a great blessing, to enjoy these and such like
things plentifully. Is it not a far greater blessing, to have in such
abundance the blessed food of our souls? the want, penury, and scarcity of
this food is a curse and judgment: Amos 8. 18.
therefore to have it plentifully is a special and a rare blessing. Ier^. 3.
15.
God does promise it as a rare mercy to his people, and a special token of his
love, to give them such Pastors as shall feed them with knowledge and
understanding. Again he says, Esa. 62. 6.
I have set watchmen upon thy walls, oh Jerusalem, which all the day and all
the night continually shall not cease; you that are mindful of the Lord, keep
not silence, and give him no rest, till he repair, and until he set up
Jerusalem the praise of the world. The Ministers must be watchful in praying
continually for the people, and they must be as careful to put the people in
mind of their duty, and the people must take it as a blessing, to have such
remembrancers: we are dull and slothful in attention, in understanding, in
memory, and practice, the best remedy is often preaching, and importunate
calling upon. Eccl. 12. 11.
The words of the wise, says Solomon, are like goades, and like nails fastened
by the masters of the assemblies, which are given by one Pastor. His meaning
is, that whereas we are dullards and slobacks in all goodness: by the goade of
preaching we are set on, pricked forward, and quickened in all good ways; and
whereas we are wavering and fickle, we are by the nail of preaching, if it be
well and often driven, we are I say by this settled and stayed in the truth. And
though this goade and nail be commonly used amongst us, yet in respect of our
weakness we have great need of it, neither are we to contemn it, because it
is so common and plentiful. Good and necessary things are not to be loathed,
though they be common. The sun, moon, and stars, water and fire, bread and
drink, are common, yet can we not live without the^, neither do we contemn
them, and though the word be compared to corporal food, and in many things
they agree together, as we have heard before: yet herein they differ, that of
the food of the body, we may have too much, and surfeit of it to our hurt; yet
it is not so in this spiritual food, we may be too wise in the world, too
wise in our own conceit, but we can never have too much of this spiritual
wisdom, so long as we live in this world; and he that is most wise or holy,
has his wants, and does daily desire increase of grace. Corporal food says
one, when we have it not, Greg. in Him.
does breed in us a great desire to have it; when we have it, and eat it, and
fill our selves with it, we oftentimes loath it: but on the contrary,
spiritual dainties and food, when we have them not, we loath them; when we
have them in truth, we the more desire them. In bodily food, appetite
breeds fullness, and fullness breeds loathing: in spiritual food,
appetite breeds fullness, and fullness breeds appetite and desire: for,
spiritual daynties, when they feed and fill, they do increase in the mind
an earnest and ardent desire. Therefore oh worthy Citizens, confess and
acknowledge this great blessing of God upon you, and be thankful to God for it:
others confess this blessing upon you, they are glad and rejoice for it, and
would be more glad to have the like blessing in some sort amongst themselves:
they take pains to come, to take some part with you in this grace, and many
neighbors and strangers have received much comfort and profit by these blessed
and gracious means which you enjoy in such abundance. It may be some amongst
you do scarcely confess this blessing, they think it needless, or that they
may well spare it: but most unkind and unthankful are these, without grace or
understanding. Others say, happy are you, but they can neither feel nor see
any such happiness. It may be some of Salomons Courtiers and servants, thought
it no great happiness to have such a master, such a divine teacher, to be
partakers of such heavenly wisdom: but yet this woman, a stranger, a Gentill,
pronounces them happy; and happy were they indeed, if they knew their own
happiness. And I doubt not, but many of you do acknowledge with joy this to
be the chief happiness of your city, to have so long time, so sincerely, in
such variety of gifts, so plentifully the true wisdom of Christ preached
and published amongst you. Indeed the Lord has not dealt so with every nation,
with every town or city: Nay, the Lord has stricken many countries and
towns with palpable darkness, but there is light, clear light, the day light,
yea the clear light of the sun, in this worthy place where you dw^ll. Many
places have long endured, the most bitter famine of the soul, they have bin
deprived and destitute, many years of the sweet bread of life: but here has
bin many years plenty: and others come hither to get food and sustenance for
their souls. We therefore brethren, as helpers, exhort you, that you receive
not this grace of God in vain, but receive with meekenes the word that is
grafted in you, which is able to save your ^oules. And here by your patience,
let me stir you up to more care and diligence in resorting to Sermons on the
week day. There is great negligence and slacknes in some, not only of the
common and profane sort, but also of some professors of the Gospel: a fault I
say, in neglecting so many Sermons which they might hear, if slothfulness,
worldliness, or some idle conceit did not hinder them. If we did sincerely
love this wisdom, and esteem it, as our chief felicity, we would neglect
no time nor means, which is offered to us: he that truly loves the word,
does love it at all times. A Sermon in the week day tries our true love to
the word. On the Saboth day, men are compelled to come by force of law: all
sorts of men come then, Publicans and Pharisees, Atheists, and time-seruers: but
to come on the weekeday, when law does not bind us, when we have other
occasions to hold us back, it is a more sure sign of our sincere love and
zeal to the word. And though the Saboth day be chiefly ordained for divine
service and Sermons, and that day we are wholly to giu^ ourselves to such
exercises without distraction: and though the Lord give us liberty to work the
six days, yet we owe him all the days of our life: and every day we are to
prefer heavenly things before earthly: and the soul before the body, when
occasion is offered, whenever the Lord calls; though it be to the losie of
the best things we have: Every one is to answer with Abraham, Here I am: and
with Samuel, (after he knew it to be the Lords voice) speak Lord, for thy
servant hears. And with the Aposties, to be ready to forsake all, when CHRIST
calls.

Every day we are to prefer Heaven before earth: things most necessary,
before things less necessary: things public, before things private. This care
and policy we have in the matters of the world. Every day we must remember
and practice these holy scriptures; Thou shall love the Lord thy GOD, with all
thy mind, with all thy soul: That wisdom is the beginning, that we must
first seek Gods kingdom, and labor for the meat that never perishes; and
that there is one thing needful.

Oh that we would often think with our selves, how much we are bound to God,
how many duties he requires of us, how many graces we want, how weak we are
in faith and knowledge; Oh that we would seriously remember the vanity of
riches and pleasures, the shortness of this life, the comforts of the Word, the
great necessity and use of it, in all the occasions of our life: And that we
would consider how dull and forgetful we are, what measure of knowledge, zeal,
love, and sanctification is required of us: what account we are to make, for
not hearing, for loss of many Sermons, which we might have heard, and what a
blessing the plentiful preaching of the word is, then would we think no time
too much, nor too long, that is spent about it: but would say with this woman;
Happy are they that may always hear such wisdom. And if it be a happy thing
to hear, then are they unhappy which hear not. Those that keep themselves
from hearing, they hinder their own happiness.

Some say, they go to a Sermon, when they have nothing to do: As who should
say, they would not go, if they had any thing to do at all: but these do
not rightly esteem of wisdom, preferring it before all things; Nay, as it
seems, they prefer all things before it. There is a promise of blessedness
made to such as come, though they be never so small a number: But there is no
such promise made to them, which upon light occasions, absent themselves from
holy meetings. Nay, our Savior Christ threatens such, Luke 14.
that they shall never taste of his heavenly Supper.

There is nothing lost, by serving of God at any time, to such only, he
promises all blessings; godliness is great gain, and has a promise of this
life, and the life to come. We must not leave any duty undone which God
commands, for fear of loss.

When the man of God, forbad Amasiah the king, to take the Army of Israel
with him to battle, 2. Chron. 25. 9.
which he had hired, the king said; What shall we do then, for the hundredth
Tallents which I have given to the hosts of Israel? Then the man of God
answered, The Lord is able to give thee more then this. So that if we obey God,
we need not fear losses: the Lord will will give us all things necessary, so
that we shall not need to fear want.

It is the Lord that does bless our Trades and calling^: and he will
requite any loss, that we endure for his sake: And indeed nothing is gotten by
negl^^cting his service: you may put all such gains in your eyes, and see
never the worse: the cause of ^osse, is the contempt and neglect of Gods
^eruice* Others deceive you, because you deceive God: your servants are
deceitful, ^loathfull and unfaithful, because you are so to God. The Lord
threatens to plague his people with drought and scarcity, Agg. 1. 6.
because they preferred their own worldly policies before religion; they
sought not him first of all: but built there own houses, and let his lie
waste. Gains that are gotten besides Gods will, they will not prosper: but are
like that Manna, which was kept and reserved till the morning, contrary to Gods
commandment, and it was full of worms and stancke. Number. 21. 5
Some like the unthankful Israelites, which loath heavenly Manna, and
prefer garlic and onions before it. Mat. 8. 34.
Some like Gergesites, which make more account of their hogs then of Christ:
they will rather entreat him to go out of the country, then endure any loss
by him. Some like Esau, preferring a mess of pottage before the blessing. Genesis
25.
And with Demas they forsake Christ, and embrace this present world. What is an
hour, or two or three hours in the week, amongst such a multitude of hours?
the poorest tradesman early or late, may win and recover so much time. One
friend may entreat an other a longer then that, though to his pain, cost or
hinderance. Prince, master, father, may command many hours and days from our
own business, and may not God command a few hours for our good; How many
hours do we spend in the week idly and vainly, we are content to eat and
drink, some twice, some thrice in the day, it may be oftener, and we think
much to receive the food of our souls, some few hours in the week. Some
are content to work, some to play from morning till night, and it may be from
night till morning: but they are soon weary, in hearing the word, they think
all that time long and lost, they would have long health, long leases, long
lives, long dinners, and suppers, long feasts, and sleeps but short prayers,
short Sermons, and a seldom as may be, some to their shame, ar^ oftener in the
Alehouse then in God house: some are glad of the company o^ vain companions,
they care not how long nor how often they be with them: but the make small
account of the fellowship (...) the Saints, in the great congregation. Chapmen,
go to markets, to faires, many amile for the belly and for gain, they will
hardly lose any that is commodious for them: but many will scearce come out of
their doors to hear a sermon; we are to labor for the word if we want it,
though it be to our cost and pains; and will we not receive it, when it is
offered, to us so near at hand? they that will not hear it when they may have
it so easily, would hardly take any great journey for it: we see by experience,
that all go of necessity to common duties, and to common works, in town or
City, and is not this a common duty to all Christians, to hear and receive
the word of life, when they may have it? The minister is to preach in season
and out of season; and as he is bound to preach, so you are bound to hear. Woe
be to him, if he preach not the Gospel: and woe be to you, if you hear not
the Gospel; by the preaching of the Gospel, the minister does perform a
special service to God.

And it is a special part of Gods divine service, required of all true
Christians, diligently, and carefully to hear his word preached; Finally,
remember, that the slacknes and the negligence of the people in hearing, is a
wound and Corosiue to the heart of the minister, their forwardnes, their zeal
and diligence, is no small i^oy and comfort to him: but when he sees them
negligent, slack and untoward, it does discourage and discomfort him, it
troubles his study, it disquieteth his heart, and makes him think, that
such people have small love, to him or his ministry; seeing they will not
vouchsafe to hear and reverence, those fruitful doctrines and exhortations,
which he has gathered from the holy scriptures; and that with great pains,
care and labor.

Therefore obey them that have the ouer^ight of you, and submit your selves,
for they watch for your souls, as they that must give accounts; Heb. 13. 17.
that they may do it with joy and not with grief; for that it is unprofitable
for you; and never cease to desire the sincere milk of your soul, that you
may grow thereby. But yet further, to rouse us all, and to waken careless and
unthankful hearers, let us see how our Savior alleges and applies the
example of this woman, and likewise the example of the Ninevites, against the
unthankful, rebell^ous; and unbelieving Jews. The Queen of the South says
he, shall rise in judgment with the men of this generation, and shall condemn
them, Luk: 11. 31. 32.
for she came from the utmost parts of the earth, to hear the wisdom of
Solomon, and behold a greater then Solomon is here. The men of Niniuie shall
rise in judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it, for they
repented at the preaching of Jonas, and behold a greater then Jonas is here.
Both these examples are fitly applied, by our Savior against the Jews, and so
against us, they contemned his holy doctrine and miracles, and therefore he
charge them with great unkindness, threatening them with most severe and just
punishment: and to amplify their sin, he compares this Queen and them
together, she a woman, the weaker sexs, unfit to take upon her great Iournies;
they, many of them, were men more able and stronger, and yet would take no
pains to come to him: she a Queen, brought up tenderly and daintily, and
therefore more unfit to endure travel: they, most of them private persons,
acquainted with labor, and yet they will not labor, for that heavenly Manna,
and bread of life: She a gentile, a heathen, uncircumcised: they, Gods people,
Abraham's seed, and yet they will not accept of the true Messiah, being the
blessed and promised seed: She undertook a great ^ourney, dangerous in respect
of wild beasts, thieves, enemies: Christ was borne amongst them, he was
brought up, and dwelt with them, he came to them, preaching in every City,
Town and Synagogues, his wisdom cried in their streets, and at their doors.
This gracious woman, spent much, and was at great charges, in coming and
returning, and giving costly presents to Solomon. Christ freely offreth to them
temporal and spiritual graces, food to soul and body, and yet they regard
him not. She was moved with fame and report, which is often fal^e and untrue:
they saw before their eyes his wonders and wisdom. There came to Solomon a
man, being only a tipe of Christ: but the Son of God, the true Messiah, the
wisdom of the father, came of his own accord to them; yea, he came amongst
his own, but his own received him not. She came to learn, to be resolved and
satisfied of her doubts: Christ offreth them divine wisdom, such as is able
to satisfy and resolve any that are willing to learn, in all the matters of
their salvation; but they being carried away, by a conceit of their own
wisdom and righteousness, think scorn^ to be resolved by him: this Queen,
above all things prefers this heavenly wisdom, as the chief treasure and
felicity: but they make the commandments of God to be of no force by their
own traditions. She moves many doubts to Solomon, with a good mind to be
resolved: they indeed ask many questions, and propound many doubts to our
Savior, but with most wicked malicious minds, to catch, entangle, and
intrappe him in his speech. This Queen, commends, magnifieth and reuerenceth
Salomo^ her teacher, but they r^uile and blaspheme our Savior Christ. She
stirs up others to love and honor Solomon: they withdraw others, so many
as they can from honoring of Christ. She accounts it true happiness to hear
Salomons wisdom: they feel and find no such thing, though they hear the
wisdom of Christ. She a stranger admireth Solomon: they of the same country,
stock and kindred with Christ Jesus, and yet reject and despise him. She most
thankful to God and to Solomon, for the comfort and good which she had
received: but they most creul, and unthankful, against Jesus Christ; though he
bestowed many great blessings and benefits upon them: they were those bad
husbandmen to who^ the Lord set his vineyard, and sending his servants to
receive fruit, some of them they beat, and some of them they killed: and at
last sending his son, they said among themselves, This is the heir, come let
us kill him, Mat. 21. 33. 44. etc.
and let us take his inheritance. Therefore says our Savior to these, That
the kingdom of God should be taken from them, and shall be given to a nation
which shall bring forth the fruits thereof. Finally, this woman observed all
things that Solomon spoke, or did, and wondreth: but they are so blind, that
neither the power of his doctrine, nor the greatness of his miracles, could move
them to admiration. She was not brought up in the school of God, and yet
seeks for instruction: they were learned in the law and the Prophets, and
yet despise the true teacher and Prince of Prophets. Therefore shall this
Queen rise it judgment against these blind and obstinate Jews, which is not
so to be taken a^ if she had any power of judging or condemning, for that
properly belongs to Christ: but that by this example, and fact others, they
shall be convicted, and left without excuse. It shall clearly testify to all
the world, that their damnation is most just.

THE FOVRTH SERMON.
MAny worthy and excellent things we have heard already, of this gracious
woman, her great care, desire, and love, to know the truth, in coming so
great a journey to her great pains and charge, her reuerencing and magnifying
of Solomon, and accounting, the hearing and obeying true wisdom, as the
greatest felicity in this life. We have heard her example commended by our
Savior Christ, and alleged by him, to the shame and condemnation of the
Scribes and Pharisees, and all the obstinate and unbelieving Jews, who did not
receive, but reject him, that was far greater then Solomon. Now let us add the
other example of the Ninevites, applied also by our Savior to the same
purpose, against the Jews, and so let us make some use of them both to our
selves. The men of Niniuie says Christ, shall rise in judgment with this
generation, and shall conemne it, for they repented at the preaching of Jonas,
Luke 11. 32.
and behold, a greater then Jonas is here.

Here is a like comparison as before, to the same use and end; the Ninevites
being Gentiles, strangers from the commonwealth of Israel: yet at the
preaching of Jonas, suffer themselves to be reproved and reformed: these were
Israelites, the seed of Abraham, to whom pertained the Adoption, the covenant,
the promises, the law, the oracles of God, and yet they will not harke^ to the
voice of the son of God, the savior of the world. They had but one Preacher
of the word, the prophet Jonas: these had many prophets, yea John the Baptist,
and Christ him self, and yet they did not believe them. The Ninevites in one
day, at one Sermon, were touched and converted; To them the word had bin
preached a long time, many years, and yet they were not the better. They
repented at the preaching of Jonas, being confirmed by no sign nor miracle:
they saw daily new signs and wonders wrought among them, such as never any did
before, and yet they contemned both his Doctrine and miracles. Theywere moved
at the preaching of Jonas a stranger, being a Jew, coming from the Jews, a
nation odious to the^: but these loathed CHRIST, being their own Countryman,
borne among them. The Ninevites endured Jonas his sermon, threatening most
fearful and general destruction upon them; but they hated Christ, and could
not abide him, but thought him worthy of death, though he preached, and
offered to them, the treasures and grace of mercy. Finally, they believed
Jonas, a mortal and sinful man: these would not believe Christ, being not
only man, but God, whom they could not reprove of any sin, having so many
witnesses from the Law, from the prophets, from God the Father, from John the
Baptist, and from his own glorious works.

And very notably does one knit up this comparison together in these words. The
Ninevites says he, a nation strange from God, Jonas, a wan unknown, and of a
base condition, came to them: No man commended him unto them before he came,
none foretold his coming, he wrought no miracles at all, he got no man's
favor by any benefits, he promised no great matter, he only threatens
destruction, and he preached no longer then three days: but CHRIST was
promised long before, by the Oracles of the Prophets, often commended by the
testimony of John, and his Father, proceeding from the same progenitors, of
whom they gloried: he had taught them a good while, and wrought many miracles
among them, he bestowed many benefits upon many, both upon their souls and
bodies, he did not thunder or threaten h^a^ie judgments, but freely promise
remission of sins, and freely offers the inheritance of eternal life: and
yet they say, he has a devil, and they pursue and hate him to death: so far
are they from being drawn to repentance by his heavenly doctrine. Therefore
most justly does our Savior, both allege the example of this woman, and the
example of the Ninevites, to their shame and condemnation. This may seem very
hard and heavy to some, but it is most true, and confirmed by common sense and
reason, that those shall be most severely punished, which are not moved, by
such means, as have moved many other; those I say are in most heavy case,
which have more and greater means of repentance, and yet have not repented;
this will lie heavy upon all contemners of the word, upon all false
Christians, upon all unprofitable and unthankful hearers, though they come of
Christian parents, though they profess, hear, and be partakers of the
Sacraments: yet this will not serve the turn, if they be inferior to them in
grace and goodness, and so condemned by their example, that had either no
knowledge of religion, or less means then they: such men sometimes, to their
shame, the Lord sends them, not only to the heathen, but also to the very
brute beasts, to learn of them; Esa. 1. 3. 2.
Hear o heavens, and hearken o earth, for the Lord has said; I have nourished
and brought up children, but they have rebelled against me. The Ox knows his
owner, and the Ass his masters cribbe: but Israel has not known my people,
has not understood. His meaning is, that the very brute and and dull beasts,
are more kind, and more dutiful, to their Masters and feeders, then many
people are, to God their Creator, preserver, and redeemer. And in an other
place, Ier. 8. 7. 6.
he complains, saying; I hearkened and heard, but none spoke right, no man
repented him of his wickedness, saying; What have I done? every one turns to
the raze, as the horse rusheth into the battle: even the storke in the air
knows her appointed times, and the Crane, the Turtle, and the Swallow,
observe the time of the coming: but my people knows not the judgment of the
Lord. The meaning is, that these birds do better know and observe, the
seasons of Summer, Winter, cold, and heat, then his people did the times of
mercy and judgments. The greater means, the longer time, and the more
plentiful we have it; the heavier shall be our judgment if we profit not by it.
And therefore our Savior Christ, did most of all vpbraide and threaten those
cities where he preached most, and wrought most miracles, because they repented
not. Woe be to thee Chorazin, says he, woe be to thee Bethsaida, for if the
great works which were done in you, had been done in Tyrus and Sydon, they
had repented long ago in sack cloth and ashes: but I say to you, it shall be
easier, for Tyrus and Sydon at the day of judgment then for you. And thou
Capernaum, which art lifted up to heaven, shall be brought down to hell; for
if the great works which have been done in thee, had been done among them of
Sodom, they had remained to this day: but I say to you, It shall be easier for
them of the land of Sodom in the day of judgment then for thee. In these
places he did many of his greatest works, and that a long time, yea so many
and so great works, as might have moved the very Infidels to repentance, his
works do comprehend his doctrine: for the more confirmation of his doctrine,
these people they heard Christ teaching, they received and entertained him,
they saw his miracles, they accepted his benefits, both corporal and
spiritual, the benefits and privileges were very great, which he vouchsafed
them, he did not deal so with every Nation, City, or Town. It is a great
mercy to have a Prophet, though it be to our cost and pains, but Christ came
to them freely, undesired, unsought for. It is a mercy to have the word
without miracles, but they had both his word and miracles. It is a favor to
see Christ, and to hear him, though it were but once, but they heard and saw
him many times, and yet they are unthankful and disobedient. But let us more
nearly consider, what Christ speaks of the city of Capernaum, it was a
famous city of Galilie, and had some special prerogative above the rest: for
the Son of God, beginning his kingdom and priesthood, he did choose that
city as his Palace and Sanctuary; there he lived and dwelt amongst them.
This is the chief glory of Cities, to entertain Christ and his Gospel. This
does as it were lift them up to heaven, but if they repent not, but still
continue their sins, and abuse the mercies of God, their judgment shall be
the heavier. The grace of God is tied to no place nor person, he will spare
none if they abuse his mercies: and this makes much to the shame and
condemnation of the Pope of Rome, who glories that he is Christ's Vicar, Peter's
successor, and that Rome is the Metropolitan and Mother Church of all the
world. Though this be most false, yet if it were true, he must know, that the
more promises and privileges they have, they must look for the greater
judgments. Idolatry, pride, uncleanness, unthankfulness, incredulity, and
other like sins, have bin the ruin and destruction of many famous Cities,
which have had greater promises, and greater privileges then ever Rome had.
Memorable and fearful is the example of Jerusalem, which was called the city
of God, the holy city, a figure of the spiritual and heavenly Church, of the
which the Psalmist speaks excellent things. God is known in Judah, his name
is great in Israel, that there are thrones for judgment, even the thrones of
the house of David: Pray for peace of Jerusalem; let them prosper that love
thee. Esa: 2. 3.
The Prophet Esai says; The law shall go forth of Syon: the word of the Lord
from Jerusalem. What City had ever greater privileges? and yet according to
Christ prophesying, it is long since come to miserable ruin and desolation:
the Jews that were once the people of God, have been long since rejected: the
natural branches are cast off, and they are become a lamentable spectacle to
all the world; for the contempt of Gods word, and abusing of his mercies. The
like fearful examples we have, in the seven Churches of Asia, of the which S.
John speaks in his Revelation, they were planted by the Apostles themselves,
they professed the Gospel of Christ, they had the word and Sacraments, they
had all the prerogatives, privileges, and marks of true Churches, yet are
they long since quite overthrown, for their unthankfulness and disobedience to
the Gospel. What then shall become of Papists, Athists, Recusants, despi^ers,
mockers, Pagannes and Infidells, when as such as have received the Gospel, and
entertained it, shall be in harder and heavier estate, in the day of judgment,
then Sodom and Gomorah? whose state no doubt is most grievous and miserable, as
their ^innes was most heinous, and abominable. S. Peeter says, that they are
already condemned, and therefore never likely to be saved. What then shall be
the fearful state of those, which shall be subject to greater destruction and
damnation? and such are all careless and unprofitable hearers, which profit
not, nor yet are brought to repentance, by the preaching of the Gospel: these
are in harder case, then the Jews, the^ the Infidells, or the Sodomities,
because they have greater means, Mat. 12. 4.
and a more clear light, then ever they had: he that knows his masters will
and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. If I had not come and spoken
to them says Christ, they should not have had sin, but now have they no
cloak for their sin. His meaning is, that their sin had been the less, if
he had not come; so that the coming of Christ, his death and passion, his
glorious Gospel, offering grace and salvation to all, does not ease, lessen,
or excuse the sin of any, but does rather aggrauate their sin, and so makes
their punishment the sorer: which express not the virtue of his death, and the
power of the Gospel, in their lives and conversation. And therefore the Apostle
does terrify the Corinthians, with the examples of the Jews, 1. Co^: 10. 1.
2. 3. etc.
who had great graces and privileges, who were under the Cloud, and al passed
through the sea, and were al baptized unto Moses in the Cloud and the sea, and
did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual
drink, for they dra^ke of the spiritual rock which followed them, and the
rock was Christ. The meaning is, they had special signs of Gods protection
and favor, many rare deliverances, they had Moses, they had the law and the
covenant, they had sacraments and sacrafices, and yet with many of the^ God was
not pleased: for they were overthrown in the wilderness. And the Apostle
setting down diverse judgments which fell upon them for their sins, in the end
he says, All these things came unto the^ for ensamples, and are written, to
admonish us upon whom the ends of the world is come. Wherefore let him that
stands, take heed least he fall. Let us therefore apply all the former
examples to our selves, and make goog use of them: we have had the Gospel of
Christ a long time preached amongst us, and that sou^dly and ple^tifully, as
you have heard. And yet many are in darkness under the light, being very
ignorant, not knowing the principles of holy religion, not being able to give a
reason of the true faith. Others, though they have knowledge, yet they have not
truly repented, but live still in their old sins: other, and most of all,
though they profess repentance, and that they have forsaken their old course
of life, yet they bring not forth fruits of amendment; they seem to hate
evil, and yet do no good: at least they leave many good things undone, they
fail much, to the discredit of the Gospel, in practice and obedience; they
make small conscience of many duties of piety, equity, and charity, they
make a show of godliness, but deny the power thereof. So that we may complain,
as the heathen man complained of the carelesnes of many hearers in the
Philosophers schools, Senec.
Some says he, come to hear, but not to learn, as to a stage play, for
recreation sake, to delight their ears, they are carried away with the speech,
with voice, with fables: a great part of such hearers thou shall see in the
Philosophers school, they go thither, when they are Idle and have nothing to
do, they go not to this purpose, to receive any law or rule of life, that so
they might amend their manners: with the same minds, and with the same
purposes, many resort to hear sermons. The Prophet complains of such hearers,
Ezeck. 33. 30. 31. 32. etc.
or rather the Lord by the Prophet, saying, Thou son of man, the children of
thy people, that talk of thee by the walls, and in the doors of the houses,
and speak one to an other, every one to his brother, saying, Come I pray you,
and hear what is the word that comes from the Lord, for they come unto thee,
as the people use to come, and my people sit before thee, and hear thy words,
but they will not do them; for with their mouths they make iestes, and their
heart goes after covetousness; and lo thou art unto them as a Jesting song* of
one that has a pleasant voice, and can sing well, for they hear thy words,
but they do them not. And when this comes to pass, for lo, it will come,
then shall they know, that a Prophet has been among them. We have had
(blessed be God) a flourishing Church a long time, the Gospel soundly
preached, in many places of our land: many men in the Church of great learning
and gifts, many zealous and forward professors of the truth, the fame of these
things has comforted other Churches, has caused many strangers to come
amongst us, and to live with us: Oh that I might truly say, as this woman said
to king Solomon in the two former verses before this text: It was a true word
says she that I heard in my own land, of thy sayings, and of thy wisdom,
howbeit, I believed not this report, til I came and had seen it with my eyes:
but lo, the one half was not told me, for thou have more wisdom and
prosperity, then I hane heard by report; oh that the strangers that are or
have been amongst us, might truly say, we see and perceive by experience,
more zeal, more religion, more sincerity, more piety and goodness, the^ we
heard of before we came. But may they not to our great shame, may they not see
much defection and declining from the zeal of former times, much Atheism,
Popery, and profaneness, much hypocrisy, and dissimulation, great contempt
of the word and ministers, much cursing and blasphemy, much oppression in
Church and Commonwealth; and finally, may they not see most places full of
idleness, full of wantonness, and most filthy uncleanness; and therefore
we may justly complain, as other have done long since, in their times, and
cuntries, let us hear the complaints, Bulling. in Mat. 12.
and lay them to our own hearts, the Gospel is preached amongst us, and a
blessed life is offered to us by Christ, and nothing is required of us, but
obedience, purity, and honesty of life: but we do obstinately contemn this
divine and holy request; therefore the Ninevites and this woman shall condemn
us. I speak nothing of persecutors and oppressors of divine wisdom, but I
speak of such as profess the Gospel amongst us: the common sort do very
badly spend the Saboth day, which should be consecrated to divine wisdom:
others had rather give themselves to drinking, and playing, then to praying or
hearing; many Citizens and Townsmen, look to their Shops and Trades, or else
they take iourneyes, or if they be at home, they are profanely occupied, or
if they come to the Sermon, their minds are at home; they are like Idols, that
have ears and hear not, eyes and see not; they do not consider and mark,
nor believe those things which are spoken of the contempt of this world:
against covetousness, oppression, and deceit; If they be somewhat nearly
touched, they gruntle like Swine, they bark like Dogs; such as are learned,
and have knowledge, being delicate and dainetie, they think the plain and
simple style of preaching agreeing to the Scripture, to have small sweetness
or delight in it, they stand upon eloquence and man's wisdom; it is grievous
to them to hear a plain simple Preacher, though he speak with power of the
spirit. Great persons, men of state and countenance, which are scarcely
accounted men, but half Gods, they think it a discredit to hear many
sermons. Ieron.
I am afraid (says a Father) that the Queen of the South, coming from the
farthest part of the world to hear the wisdom of Solomon, that she shall
judge men of this age: and the men of Niniuie repenting at the preaching of
Jonas, shall condemn those which despise a greater then Jonas: so many among
the people, shall condemn many Ministers in the Church, withdrawing themselves
from their Ecclesiastical duty, and doing those things which do not beseeme^
a Minister: Chrisost. in op^. im per.
yea, they do not beseem a simple Christian. An other complains both of
Ministers and people, saying, Wo^ be unto you Scribes, and Pharisees,
hypocrites; which shut the kingdom of heaven before men. By these words the
Lord will show, that the Priests of the Jews did all things for covetousness,
and who knew by the scriptures that Christ was come, and they considered,
because Christ was believed and received, that the custom of sacraficing and
offering would cease, and that the sacrifice of righteousness would prevail:
but they did shut the door of truth, when they decreed, that if any should say
he was the son of God, he should be shut out of the Synagogue: so now
heretical ministers, they do shut the door of truth; for they know, if the
truth be made manifest, the Church would leave them, and they should be cast
down from their places. What then is the ignorant people to be excused? No,
for if thou would buy thee garments, thou seek to sundry Chapmen, and
where thou may have the best garments, and the easiest price, those thou
take: and therefore thou must seek and search for teachers, and enquire
where truth is, and where is error: It is not forbidden to know the confessions
of all men, and to choose that which is best, according to the saying of the
Apostle; Prove all things, and hold that which is good. If for worldly business
thou would go to a place thou know not, thou do not cease from thy
purpose, because thou know not the way, but thou do try this, and that
way, thou do ask, seek, and enquire, and so find the right way: If thou will enter into the truth of the scriptures, sometimes pray, sometimes search
the scriptures, sometimes seek by good works, sometimes enquire of this
minister, sometimes of that: that so thou may see, who they be that have the
keys of knowledge. If these things be not done, it is because the word of God
is not believed, nor the promise of blessedness desired, nor the last judgment
feared. Where is this care of searching, and the truth to be found? where is
that diligence of inquiring? Men are ready to hear, receive, and believe any
thing, like children, they are carried away with any kind of doctrine, they
are still ignorant, and fall into many errors, because with this woman, they
will not diligently and carefully seek for the truth where it may be found.
All others are careful and painful to learn, and seek the true knowledge
and skill (as much as they can) of their trades and sciences, only Christians
are idle, careless, and ignorant in their profession. Harken I pray you (says
the same father) is it not an absurd thing, that the Physician, the Shoemaker,
and Weauer, and generally all workmen, strive for the profession of their
Arts: but a Christian cannot bring a reason of his religion: those Arts being
neglected, are but the loss of money, the contempt of religion is the loss of
the soul: and yet we are so mad, that we employ all our care and thoughts
that way, and we make no account, of the necessary defense of our soul; for
this cause, the heathen know not their error, but take offense, and mock us;
for they being in error, do all things for the defense of their errors: We
(being professors of the truth) can say nothing for defense of it; and for this
cause, the very heathen do condemn our doctrine of weakness, they suspect in
us some fraud, and foolishnes, and so they speak evil of Christ, as of a
liar: we are the cause of this blasphemy. Saint Peeter commands us, to be
ready to give a reason of the faith, that is in us, to every man that asks.
1. Pet. 3 15.
And S. Paul does exh^rt us: Coll. 3.
That the word of God may dwell plentifully in us. But what say the foolish
people to this? they say blessed is the simple soul, and he that walks
simply, walks boldly; this is the cause of all evil, that many cannot
rightly and truly apply the scriptures: Pro: 109.
for by the simple, is not meant the fool, but he that is honestly and
uprightly minded: for if it were so understood, in vain were the saying of
Christ, Be wise as serpents, Chri: in John.
and innocent as doves: Let us blush, and be ashamed, that the Samaritan woman,
Hom. 3.
was so careful in learning, that her worldly business could not hinder her
from the doctrine of Christ: Chap. 4.
We enquire nothing in the knowledge of heavenly things, but are careless and
neglect all things. Which of us (I pray you) when we come home, does any thing
worthy of a Christian? who does search? repeat? or remember the scriptures?
The scriptures are given, not only that you should have them in your books,
but also in your hearts: I do not forbid to get you books: nay I do admonish
you, and entreat you, that you get them; yet so, that you do oftentimes
repeat, both the letters and the sense, in your mind: that by it, that may be
made pure. For if in whatsoever house the Gospel of Christ is, the devil dare
not enter; how much less, shall the devil ore sin, touch that soul, which
is familiar with the diligent reading of it: therefore sanctify thy soul, and
sanctify thy body, this shall come to pass, if thou have always in thy
mind, and tongue, the Gospel of Christ. Seeing therefore, there is such
ignorance, impenitencie, prophanenes, disobedience and unthankfulness amongst
us, not only the former examples, but many others shall rise up in judgment
against us in the last day. The G^ecians shall condemn us in that day, for
they reverently esteemed, and heard their Philosophers disputing doubtfully of
vice and virtue: but we contemn the faithful preachers, delivering unto us
the certain and sure word of God. The Romans shall condemn us, who gave such
honor to the obscure writings of Sybilla, that in all doubts they rested upon
them: we neglect the scriptures, which are able to resolve us in all doubts,
and to comfort us in the greatest extremities. The Papists shall condemn us,
who make more account of their own traditions, then we do of Christ's Gospel.
They are more constant in errors, then we in the truth: they go further to a
mass, then we to a sermon: they are more liberal in mainetaining of
Idolatrous Priests, then we aree to maintain the Lords faithful ministers.
They take more care and pains, in drawing as many as they can, to their
idolatrous superstition: then we are to draw men to true religion: They
liberally maintain their followers and favorers; we suffer many true
professors and Christians to want.

Our forefathers, who lived in blindness, shall condemn us: who were full of
good deeds, abounding in hospitality, liberality and alms deeds, dealing
justly, honestly, and uprightly in their contractes, and bargains.

Many amongst us under the Gospel, are covetous, miserable, and unmerciful,
full of deceit, and cruelty.

These miserable worldlings shall condeme us: who do so much follow the
world, and bestow so much care and pains upon it, neglecting no time, or
occasion of gain: whereas we are sloathfull, careless, and negligent in
heavenly things. These two examples of the Ninevites, and this woman alleged
by our Savior Christ in the Gospel, against the unthankful and disobedient
Jews, may as truly and as justly be applied against us. The Ninevites shall
rise in judgment and condemn this generation; They hearing but one Jonas* and
one sermon, threatening destruction, believed God, repented of their sins, and
showed the fruits of their faith and repentance: but how many sermons have we
heard, and that by sundry men, and a long time? sermons of mercy, alluring us
by the sweet promises of God; and sermons of judgments, threatening and
thundering everlasting damnation: and yet where is our repentance? where are the
fruits of our faith and obedience? A few sermons, or one sermon, was
sufficient to witness against us; how much more such a multitude of sermons, so
long continued? By the mouth of two or three witnesses every thing shall be
established: And the Apostle accounts his sermons and Epistles, as witnesses
against the Corinthians: And if the very shaking off the dust of the feet of
Gods servants, be a sufficient witness against an unthankful people: how much
more shall they themselves, their continual labors and sermons, testify
against them, to their utter shame and confusion?

And if our Savior Christ pronounce so hard a sentence against Chorazin,
Bethsaida and Capernaum, amongst who^ he preached but a small time: what shall
become of us, that have had the Gospel preached so often, and so long a time.
Our Savior preached publicly in the world, but three years only: he taught
in many other places, he bestowed but some of that time in those Cities. Now if
one years preaching, two or three years preaching be sufficient, to draw
upon an impenitent people, such heavy judgments and damnation: what shall
become of those, which have had the Gospel preached, some ten years, some
20. some 30. some 40. some 50. years? and yet have been, and are still most
unthankful, and unprofitable hearers. The law of nature was sufficient to
make us inexcusable, much more the moral law of God written, and most of all,
if to these two be joined the Gospel of Christ, these are three heavy
witnesses against us. But to come to the example we have in hand, and to make
some special use of it to our own souls; This woman the Queen of the South,
shall rise in judgment, and condemn this generation wherein we live. She
trauelleth far, takes upon her a great, long, teadious, dangerous, painful
and costly journey: but many amongst us, are secure, idle, and sloathfull; few
or none will labor for it. Nay, they will scarce have it, receive it, though
they may have it with ease, without any cost or labor. If any have care and
conscience to seek for wisdom abroad, wanting it at home: such are derided,
scoffed, hated, and persecuted, by the most sort of men. This woman reuerenceth
her teacher, and thinks nothing too dear for him. Many despise their
faithful teachers, little regarding their doctrine, seeking their discredit,
and offering them injuries: and as for maintenance, they think a little, too
much, they grudge to give that little, which the law allows, in many places,
and hardly can any be drawn to voluntary contributions, and if they be, they
are soon weary of it. Exodus 2.
The Children of Israel do offer voluntary gifts, for the building of the
tabernacle, as gold, silver, precious stones: and they were so free, and gave
so much, that the Lord said to Moses, The people bring too much, and more then
enough for the use of the work which the Lord has commanded to be made. Exodus
36.
And in an other place, 1. Chron. 29.
the people and Princes offering many thousand tallents of gold, silver, and
precious stones: It is said, The people rejoiced, when they offered willingly.
And David the King, rejoiced with great and blessed God, for their frank
offering. Where are such people? where are such hearts? so free and liberal to
maintain Gods house? In an other place, The children of Israel, they pulled
their eare-rings from their ears, to make a golden Calfe: and Baalls Prophets
are richly and liberally maintained. Our forefathers have been very
bountiful, and prodigal, in maintaining Idolatrous Priests: they gave indeed
too much to the Church, even the very wealth and fat of the world: but we are
come to an other extremity, they gave too much, we give little or nothing: nay
that which is worst of all, we take away that, which was given by others. Oh
what account shall these make, which spoil and rob the Church, Nay which
rob God himself? If Christ shall say to those, which have not relieved and
harbored his servants, Depart ye cursed to everlasting fire: shall not those
be partakers of that heavy sentence, to whom the judge may truly say, I had
meat and drink of my own, but you took it from me: I had house and harbor,
but you thrust me out? Whosoever they be that are not ready, and willing, to
relieve, and maintain, the faithful teachers: they think basely of the word:
they do not truly love it, nor take it to be their felicity: for as love is
painful to seek for wisdom, so it is bountiful, to maintain it. Want of
maintenance is the decay of learning, and religion, and by this policy,
Satan does hinder and keep back many from this calling, and discomfort many
that are in it. Therefore not only this woman, but also many other, as the
Jews and our forefathers, yea Iezabell in maintaining Baalls Priests, shall
condemn, the miserablenes, the covetousness, the hard dealing and unkindness
of this our age, against the true ministers of the Gospel. Again, this woman
accounts it the chief happiness in earth, to hear true wisdom; we
prefer every profit before it, we speak and think basely of it, we have
neither true desire nor delight to be exercised in it; either publicly or
privately; we esteem too much of folly, we have no true resolution to hazard
life or goods for this wisdom: nay we deface and discredit it by our bad
lives; and therefore we do not truly love it, nor make it our joy or
happiness: and therefore this woman shall rise in judgment against us, and her
example does make much to our shame and condemnation. Finally, this woman was
with Solomon but some short time, she could not stay long, having a kingdom,
it may be, she stayed some few weeks, or months, and in so short time, she
is called, and converted, by the force and power of Salomons wisdom: we have
had a long time, a greater wisdom then Salomons, and yet it has had no such
power for the good and conversion of many; and let us here set down our rest a
little. The word of the Lord is mighty through God, to cast down holds,
casting down the imaginations, and every hie thing that is exalted against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity every thought to the obedience
of Christ; It is able to convert souls, and to redress the ways of young
men, be they never so leaude, wild, or wanton: This wisdom is of that power
(if it enter into thy heart and delight thy soul) that it will preserve thee
from the ways of wicked men and women. It is a preservative against all sin.
It is compared, to a hammer, and to a fire, which are of great force: by the
hammer and fire, the smith buckles and bends the hard iron to his use and
purpose; and is not the hammer of Gods word, able to bruise, and buckle, and
break our stony and hard hearts? the fire has power to inflame, to consume,
to purge, and shall not the fire of Gods word be as powerful, to kindle zeal
in our hearts, to consume sin, and to purify and cleanse us within? This word
is compared, to a shaft or an arrowe, which strikes and enters deeply: and
is not the word able to strike our hearts, and to pearce them through; It is
compared to rain, which sinketh and soaketh into the earth, and softneth the
hard ground; and shall not so many sweet showers and deawes from heaven, enter
into our hearts, soften them, and make them fruitful in grace? finally, it is
the power of God to salvation, and sharper then any two edged sword; and can it
not wound us, and cut down out sins, the enemies of our soul? The Apostle
says, That such is the power of prophesying, that it is able to convert an
Infidel; there has been great power of natural philosophy, in drawing men
from the hatred of sin, to the love of virtue. A Philosopher could say, when
he saw a vicious man, that he himself had been as bad, if he had not given
himself to the study of Philosophy: And shall not the profession, study and
preaching of heavenly wisdom, be of greater power to us: there is an example
of one Polemon of Athens, a wild and Luxurious young man, delighting and
rejoicing in infami^; like some of the swaggering youths of our days; this
young man spending a whole night in drinking and wantonness, after the Sun
rising, returning home from his riotousnes, he entered into the school of
Xenocrates, the Philosopher, not to learn, but to laugh, and deride him. The
Philosopher omitting the matter he was entreating of, began to speak of
modesty and temperance; and he did it with such gravity and authority, that
he so moved the young man, that he showed open signs of sorrow and
repentance, and after forsook his luxurious life. A worthy example, to the
shame and condemnation of many both old and young in our age, which hear daily
many worthy sermons, full of grace, and power, and yet they are impudent,
desperate, graceless, and hard hearted; nothing* can move them to sorrow and
humiliation for their sins: If such be the power of natural Philosophy,
far greater is the power of heavenly wisdom. As one does most soundly and
truly describe it: Only the heavenly doctrine says he (the which alone is
wisdom, Lactant instit: lib: 3. Chap. 26.
) brings to pass those things, which the Philosophers were never able to
do. The commandments of God (because they are sincere and pure,) of how great
force they are in the hearts of men, daily experience does show it. Bring me a
man inclined to anger, ill tongued, unruly, and rash, with a few of Gods words
I will make him as quiet as a lamb: Bring me a covetous person, a greedy
scraper, and a niggard, hence forth will I make him liberal. Bring me one that
is fearful of death, and of pain, straightway, he will despise both gallous
and fire, and dangers, yea the torments of the Brazen Bull: Bring me him, that
is a leacher, an adulterer, a ruffion, and a rioter; henceforth shall thou see
him sober, chaste and continent: Bring me a cruel person, and one that
thirsts after blood, soon shall that fury be changed into clemency and
mercy: Bring me an unjust man, unwise, and sinful, he shall straitway be just,
wise, innocent, and harmless; so great is the might of godly wisdom, that
being powered into the heart of men, it will at once, even at one push, expel
and drive out foolishnes. Has ever yet hitherto any of the Philosophers
performed these things? Or if he were willing, were he able to do it? who when
they have spent their whole time in the study of Philosophy, yet
nevertheless are not able (if nature do a little withstand it) to make
themselves, or any others the better therewith. Their wisdom therefore, how
much soever it can do, yet does it not root out vices, but hide them; but a
few of Gods commandments do so thoroughly and wholly change man, and so make
him new, that thou can not know him to be the same man he was. The meaning
of this worthy man is, that the wisdom of the word excels infinitely the
wisdom of nature, be it never so absolute: And howsoever Philosophers
sometimes might make some men ashamed of their vices, and to forsake them: yet
they could never thoroughly convert any, because they could not teach them true
religion, and the fear of God, which is the beginning of all true wisdom.
Many examples we have of the power of Gods word, in the calling and converting
of men's souls. By this, both this woman and the Ninevites were converted.
Peter preaching even to those Jews that crucified Christ, their hearts were
pricked, and they said, Men and brethren what shall we do? And by that sermon
he won three thousand souls to God: Oh the mighty power of the word, if the
Lord lay his helping hand to it. Act: 16.
Paul preached to Lidea, she gave attendance to Paul's preaching: the Lord
opened her heart, and so both she and her house was converted: In the same
manner was the Iaylor and his househould converted. In an other place, the word
was of such power, that the believers came and confessed, and showed their
works, and many also of them, which used curious Arts, brought their books
and burned them before all men, and they counted the price of them, and found
it fifty thousand pieces of silver (which was of our money about 2000. marks)
so the word of God grew mightily and prevailed. Thus we see, that the word
has been heretofore of great power to win souls to God. Is it now become
weak and feeble: nay the fault is not in the word, but in the ^tubbornnes and
hardness of our hearts, which will not suffer it to enter, nor give it any place.
The word is the same it was, it is the same seed, but is now sown in a bad
soil, and therefore it will not, nor cannot fructify; And that you may know,
whether the word has this power in you or no, for the conversion of your
souls, remember this worthy and excellent counsel, for your instruction and
direction. When any is converted to the Lord, the veil is taken away:
therefore the cause of taking away the veil, is our conversion to God; From
whence we may gather, that whilst in reading the scriptures, the understanding
of them is kept from us, and whilst, that which is written is abscure and shut
up from us, we are not yet converted to the Lord: for if we were converted, (no
doubt) the veil would be taken away. Let us see what it is to be converted to
the Lord. But that we may the more clearly know, what is to be converted, let
us first see, what is to be auerted, that is turned from the Lord. Every one
then, that when the words of the law is repeated, is occupied in common
fables, he is auerted; Every one which is bound with the cares of possessions,
with the desires of riches, and of the glory, and honor of the world, he is
auerted; that is, turned from the Lord: He which seems to be estraunged from
these things, and sits and hears the words of the law, and is attentive
with his countenance and eyes, but his heart and thoughts are wandering, he is
auerted; that is, turned from the Lord. What is it then to be converted and
turned to God? If we cast all these things behind our backs, and give our
selves in study, in deeds, in mind, and care to the word of God, to meditate
in his law day and night, Oreg: in Exodus: Hom: 12. Chap 41.
letting pass all other things, let us give our selves to God. Let us be
exercised in his testimonies: this is to be converted to the Lord. If thou
would have thy son to learn the liberal sciences, do thou not free him
from other things? for this cause, thou do provide a schoolemaister and
books, and thou do spare for no cost, to have thy purpose brought to pass.
Which of us does so give himself to the study of Gods law? who does with
such study and labor, seek for heavenly things, as he does for humane and
earthly? and why do we complain, that we are ignorant of that, which we
learn not? Some of you, so soon as they hear that rejected which is read,
they strait go away, there is no inquisition of that which has been spoken,
no conscience, no remembrance: where as it is said, Ask thy fathers, and they
will tell thee: Ask thy teachers, and they will teach thee: Some tarry not so
long, till the lectures be ended; some though they hear, understand not, being
in the lower parts of Gods house, and occupied with fables, of whom I dare say,
that when Moses is read, there is not only a veil upon their heart, but there
is a wall set betwixt them. If he that is present which does hear and is
attentive, and does enquire and discuss of those things which he hears, and
that which he cannot understand, he does ask the meaning of others, and so
learneth, he that shuts his ears least he should hear, and turns away
his face from hearing: how is the veil taken away from his heart? Let us take
heed then, that when Moses is read, when Paul is read, there be not a veil
upon our heart. Certainly if we hear negligently, and have no care to learn
and understand, not only the scripture of the Law and Prophets, but of the
Apostles and Evangelists, we are hidden and covered with a great veil, and I
do fear, that by the negligence and foolishnes of our heart, that the divine
volumes are not only hidden from us, but sealed: as if a book should be given
into the hands of man to read, and he answers, he cannot read, or that it is
sealed. And therefore we must have a care, not only to learn the scriptures,
but we must entreat the Lord, by supplications day and night, that the lamb
of the tribe of Judah may come and vouchsafe, to take this sealed book and
open it: And indeed, it is Paul that planteth, and Apollo watreth, but it is
God that gives the increase; he is the author of our ministry, the author of
the word, the giver of all gifts and graces to his servants. Good seed is
sown in sundry grounds, but it does not fructify in all: Man speaks to the
outward ear, but God must speak inwardly to the heart: or else the word will
have no power to convert the soul. The Gospel is heard (says a father) some
believe, and some believe not: They which believe, they hear and learn from
the father: they which believe not, they hear outwardly, but they neither
hear nor learn inwardly: that is, to them it is given to believe, Mat. 13. 14.
to the other it is not given* So says our Savior to the Apostles: To you it
is given to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to others it is not
given. Act: 13. 48.
It is said in an other place: As many as were ordained to eternal life
believed, when Paul and Barnabas preached. Though Prophets speak to us, though
Apostles, though Solomon, though John the Baptist, though Angels and Christ
himself speak: yet they shall nothing avail to convert us, except God open
our hearts. The Lord reigns, Aug: de benedict: Esau. and Iac.
both upon the corn and upon the thorns; but he sends Rain upon the
Corn, for the barn, and upon the thorns for the fire, and yet it is the same
rain: so the word of God is powered upon all, let every one see what root he
has, let him see whether he draws the good rain, if he draw it to engender
thorns, is the reign of God to be accused, before it come to the root? that
is a sweet rain, till it come to a bad heart. Now that the word may have more
power in us hereafter, let us cast off natural blindness, carnal security,
our old sins and worldly cares: let us come with hungry, and humble hearts,
denying our selves, and desirous to learn: let us come with repentance for our
sins, and a sincere love to the word; And above all things, let us pray
heartily, and continually to the father and founder of all good gifts, for the
blessings of all good lessons and instructions to our souls; let us confess
our own weakness, Cant. 1. 3.
and say in our souls, with the spouse to her husband Christ, Draw me, and we
will run after thee. Finally, Ps: 119. ver. 13.
let us pray with David, be beneficial to thy servant, that I may live and
keep thy word, 18.
open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy laws. 32.
I will run the ways of thy commandments when thou shall enlarge my heart.
33.
Teach me (o Lord) the way of thy statutes, and I will keep it to the end, 34.
Give me understanding, and I will keep thy law, yea I will keep it with my
whole heart: 35.
Direct me in the path of thy commandments, 36.
for therein is my delight. Incline my heart to thy testimonies, and not to
covetousness, 37.
turn away my eyes from regarding vanity, and quicken me in thy way. ver. 132.
Look upon me, and be merciful to me, as thou use to do to those that
fear thy name. 133.
Direct my steps in thy word, and let none iniquity have dominion over me.
Ps: 143. 10.
Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God. Let thy good spirit lead me
unto the land of righteousness. Psalm 86. 11.
And in an other place* Teach me thy way (o Lord) and I will walk in thy
truth: Knit my heart to thee, that I may fear thy name.

And let us pray with the Prophet Jeremy; Ier: 17. 14.
Heal me o Lord and I shall be whole; save me, Lament. 5. 21.
and I shall be saved; for thou a^t my praise, turn thou us unto thee o Lord,
and we shall be turned. And indeed the calling and conversion of a sinner, is
the great work of God; as great as the work of our creation: And indeed, what
is our conversion? but an new creation: for God (that commands light to shine
out of darkness) is he, which shines in the he arts of his children converted.
It is he, that must, make both the ear and the heart tractable and flexible.
It is he, that both must make us willing to do good, and also able to do
good. It is he, that must inwardly persuade the heart, and by his spirit teach
us inwardly, before we can be truly converted. Let therefore ministers of the
word, give attendance to reading, exhortation, and doctrine. Let them stir up
the grace of God, that worthy thing in them. Let them be faithful and wise
stewards, in disposing the secrets of God. Let them preach sincerely,
diligently and fervently. Let their affections and life be upright and holy.
Let them be wholly possessed with the desire of Gods glory, with the love of
Christ, and with love to the souls of the people, and then their ministry
shall be acceptable to God. If not powerful to convert, yet to confound: their
recompense shall be with the Lord: their labor shall not be in vain in the
Lord. We are unto God says the Apostle, the sweet Savior of Christ in them
which are saved, and in them which perish: to the one we are the Savior of
death unto death: and to the other, a Savior of life unto life: and who is
sufficient for these things? And seeing that Paul is nothing, Apollos is
nothing: but the effect and blessing is of God: Let them strive and wrestle
with them, by humble and hearty prayer, continually, vehemently, privately, and
openly, for the assistance of his spirit, and the blessing of their labors:
that he would persuade Iapheth, that he might dwell in the tents of Shem, that
he would circumcise the hearts and ears of the people, and take from them, the
veil that hinders, as ignorance, prophanes, unbelief, hardness of heart, and
such like. That he would power water upon the thirsty, and floods upon the
dry ground. That he would take away their stony hearts, and give them hearts
of flesh: that so they might walk in his statutes: finally, that he would give
them understanding hearts, that they might be fulfilled with the knowledge of
his will, in all wisdom. That they may discern the things that differ; that
they may be pure, and without offense, until the day of Christ. That they may
walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all things, that the same signs of
conversion may be seen in their people, as were truly found in this woman.
And indeed, many, if not all, the notes of good hearers, which in the beginning
I observed in her, are true signs and notes of her calling: In that she takes
so great pains, and bestows so much cost, to seek for true wisdom: In that
she is so careful to enquire, and search out the truth of religion. In that
she speaks and thinks so reverently of Solomon her teacher, reposing true
happiness in true wisdom, and stirs up others to be of her mind: these and
sundry other, are signs and tokens of her conversion.

She speaks not like a Pagan, Heathen or Idolater: but like a worshipper of
the true God: she blesses him, and confesses him to be the disposer of
kingdoms; and acknowledges Israel to be Gods people; and howsoever before,
either by secret inspiration, or by report, she heard of the true God, of his
worship, and of Salomons wisdom: yet now she does fully taste the truth of
it, in her own soul: the secrets of her hearts are made manifest, she
worshippeth God, and says plainly, that God was in that place.

The divine wisdom of Solomon had parswaded this daughter of Iapheth, to come
to the tents of Shem, to be a member of the visible Church, and to embrace the
truth of religion, and no doubt she went joyfully home, and endeavored (by all
means possible,) to establish the law and worship of the true God in her own
country.

Our Savior (as you have heard) commended this woman, and joins her with the
Ninevites, who no doubt truly repented, though many of them fell away
afterward. It is true, that all the Kings of the earth sought the presence of
Solomon, ver: 24.
to hear his wisdom, that God had put in his heart, as we may see in this
chapter.

I do not say that all these were called and converted. It may be many of them
came to hear and see news, rather for humane then divine wisdom; to see the
glory and royalty of Solomon: the beauty of the Temple, and his Palace,
which he had builded, or upon some other sinister respects: Among so many, this
woman is especially named, singled out, and commended, yea a whole story is
recorded of her, and not of the rest: the cause of her coming was religion:
She lost not her labor, but got fruit and profit by her coming, and shows
plain testimonies of her conversion. Indeed something is said of King Hyram,
that he ever loved David, and when he hard the words of Solomon, ^. King. 5. 8.
he rejoiced greatly, and said; Blessed be the Lord this day, which has given
to Da^id a wise son, over this mighty people: And by his power and help he
furthereth and helps Solomon in building a house to the name of the Lord his
God. The learned do observe; That in this King is prefigured the vocation of
the gentiles, who should help to build the spiritual Temple of Christ, and
indeed, he speaks religiously, rejoicing when he heard Salomons words, and
blessing the true God for him; as great tokens of calling and conversion (if
not greater) are apparent in this woman: If she amongst others be a figure of
the calling of the gentiles, then it must needs follow, that she her self was
also called, for though God made a separation betwixt Jews and Gentiles, and
chose to himself for a time the seed of Abraham, so that the general calling
of the Gentiles was not before Christ his coming in the flesh: yet God had
always some amongst them, as King Hyram, Naamon the Syrian, Job, this Queen,
and others. She seeks for true wisdom from Solomon, and finds it. The Church
seeks for the treasures of all knowledge, comfort, and joy from Christ. She
commends and magnifies Solomon: Cant. 2.
the Church magnifieth Christ, accounting him as her well beloved husband. She
pronounces Salomons followers and servants to be blessed: the Church
accounts them happy, who hear and receive Christ in this life; and them
more happy, who behold his glory for ever in the life to come. Rom: 12. 1.
She gives Solomon precious gifts: the Church gives Christ the best things
she has, even her body and soul, as a living sacrifice, loving Christ above
all, and forsaking all for his sake, Gen: 12.
as Abraham forsook his own country, the Apostles their nets, Mat. 4.
and Paul accounts all things dross and dung in comparison of Christ. Phil:
^. 8.
And as in this woman, we have a figure of the calling of the Church of the
Gentiles: so in Solomon we have a tipe and figure of Christ's Salomons kingdom,
a figure of Christ's kingdom: his wisdom, a figure of Christ's wisdom: his
glory, a shadow of Christ's glory: his riches, a tipe of Christ's spiritual
riches: his Temple, a tipe of Christ's Temple.

And as Solomon does kindly accept the gifts and presents of this woman, though
he had no need of them; so does Christ as kindly accept the service of his
Church.

And therefore this should encourage us, to give him the best things we have*
with willing and cheerful hearts, seeing he is as willing to accept of them,
a^ Solomon does the gifts of this Queen. Again, Solomon bestows on her
every pleasant thing, which she asks; Christ gives to his, whatsoever they
ask in his fathers name; he gives us better things then Solomon should give
this Queen; namely, he gives to us himself, his body and blood, his spirit,
his word, all spiritual graces, yea life eternal. For howsoever there is some
resemblance between Solomon and Christ, yet he is more excellent then any
Patriarch, Prince, Prophet, or Saint whatsoever. Solomon a King of the earthly
Jerusalem: Christ the King of the spiritual and heavenly Jerusalem, of the
militant and triumphant Church. Solomon a King of peace, of outward and earthly
peace. Christ the King of inward and everlasting peace. Solomon excelled all
Kings of his time in wisdom and knowledge: Christ the founder and treasurer
of wisdom: Of his fulness have we all received, grace for grace, for God has
not given him the spirit by measure. Solomon a Prophet, a Preacher; Christ as
the King of all Kings, so the Prince of all Prophets and Preachers. Solomon and
all the rest spoke by him, Solomon but a man: Christ both man and God,
Omnipotent, Creator of all things.

Solomon a grievous sinner: Christ pure, undefiled, without sin; the Savior
of repenting sinners, meriting life for them, and making his word effectual in
them.

And now let us further note, from this religious woman, that religion
belongs to women: God is their Creator, and therefore they are to serve him.
The first woman was created in the image of God, which is true wisdom,
holiness, and righteousness, which was lost by the fall of their first parents,
and they must seek to recover it in Christ* who died for them, as well as for
men. They are partakers of both the sacraments: they have souls to save as
well as others: they are the weaker vessels, and sooner overcome of Satan:
they have many special infirmities: they are partakers of many blessings and
deliverances from God. Therefore religion, the fear of God, and divine
wisdom, appertains to them. Luk: 8.
Besides these reasons, we have plenty of holy examples in the scripture, Luk:
10.
as Euah, 2. John:
Sarah, Rebecca, Debora, Marie, and Elizabeth, 2. Tim. 1.
with many other, holy and religious women. If then religion belong to women,
then much more to men. As they excel in place and power, so they should excel
in grace and wisdom. They should be examples of zeal, and piety, and
teachers of their wives and families. This serves for the confutation of the
Papists, who lock up the scriptures from men and women, teaching that does not
belong to them, to search the scriptures. This also makes against profane and
careless women, who are altogether negligent in the matters of religion, as
though it did not belong to their Sexes at all. Here are also reproved wicked
and profane husbands, who do not further, but altogether hinder their wives,
in the exercise and zeal of religion. And most cursed are all Athiests and
carnal men, who scorn and deride any profession or show of religion in women.
And finally, here is comfort, and encouragement for all forward and religious
women: this may be to stir them up to proceed, and go on, in the way of
godliness, having so many, both reasons and examples set before them, moving and
enforcing them to the zeal of religion. And as it appertains to all men and
women in general: so more especially, to Gentiles. Nobles, Lords, Ladies,
Kings, and Queens: as they excel and shine before others in diet, in
apparel, in possessions, and dignities; so should they go before them in
spiritual graces: As they have received more blessings from the Lord, so are
they more tied and bound to him again; and more zeal, piety, and
thankefulnes, is required at their hands, according to the saying of our
Savior: To whom much is given, of him much shall be required. Their places and
honors, should be inducements to piety: as Samuel said to Saul: The Lord sent
me to annoint thee King over Israel, 1. Sam: 15. 1.
now therefore obey the words of the voice of the Lord. As if he should have
said, because God has honored thee, thou art bound to obey him. It is their
chief honor to honor God. Those that honor me, 1. Sam: 2. 30.
I will honor says the Lord. The examples of great persons does most good or
most hurt: If they be godly, they are a means to win many souls to God, by
their good examples to draw them to the exercise of true religion. If they be
wicked, they infect and dr^we many to destruction with them. Therefore religion
does chiefly concern great persons. Here is a Queen religious, and here is
King Solomon, a professor and teacher of religion: and Bethseba his mother
describing a good Queen, a fit wife for Solomon. She says, who shall find a
virtuous woman, for her price is far above the Pearls: And though she commend
care and painefulnes in such a woman, in providing for her family; yet the
chief thing that she commends in so great a person, is virtue and religion;
Strength and honor (says she) is her clothing, Pro: 31. 10. 25. 30.
and in the latter day she shall rejoice. She opens her mouth with wisdom,
and the law of grace is in her tongue. Favor is deceitful, beauty is
vanity; but a woman that fears the Lord, she shall be praised. These be the
words of a woman, of a Queen, of a religious woman, of Salomons mother,
inspired by the holy Ghost; directing her beloved son Solomon, what he should
chiefly require in the choice of a wife. A glass for women to look into,
though they be never so high or great in the world: wherein they may behold and
see, what things are chiefly required of them, for their credit and comforts:
namely, virtue, wisdom, and religion.

THE FIFTH SERMON.
Verse. 9. ver. 9. Blessed be the Lord thy God, which loved thee, to set thee on
the throne of Israel, because the Lord loved Israel for ever, and made thee
King, to do equity and righteousness.


WE have heard already many things in commendation of this worthy and famous
Queen: and yet still we must persist upon that argument. For as the words
before, so still, the words of this text are greatly to her praise and
commendation. She praises the true God, she confesses that it was of his
mere goodness, that Solomon was preferred to the kingdom; She gathers
thereby, that God loved Israel, and would preserve it: She shows the end, why
he was placed in his throne: she speaks divinely of the blessing, dignity,
and duty of a good King. The words contain a thanksgiving and congratulation,
for the preferment of Solomon, to the kingdom of Israel: wherein, we are first
to observe her piety to God; and her love to Solomon. Her piety to God, in
that she distinguishes him from Idols, and false Gods; and worshippeth and
blesses him, as the true God: She calls him the God of Solomon: not that he
was proper, and peculiar to him, (for he is the God of all the world) but
because he showed special love, and favor to Solomon; so is he called the God
of Abraham, of Isaacke and Jacob, the God of Daniell. It is an honor to us, in
that he vouchsafes so to be called. It is the glory of Saints, that as ye
Apostle says, their God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God. It is
a happy thing then, to be the friend of God, he has such in memory, they are
within his special care and protection. And as the Psalmist says: Ps: 144. 15.
Blessed are the people, whose God is the Lord. She blesses this God, saying:
Blessed be the Lord thy God: A common manner of thanksgiving in the scriptures,
we are said to bless God, and God is said to bless us. He blesses us, when
he bestows his blessings upon us; we bless him, when we give him thanks,
for his blessings bestowed. An example of both, Ephe: 1.
we have in these words of the Apostle: Blessed be God, even the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly things, here are the blessings of God upon the faithful, and here
again the faithful do praise and bless God for the same. Phil. 4. 6.
Thanksgiving is a part of Gods worship, and a part of prayer, and therefore
the Apostle says; These: 5. 17. 18.
In all things let your requests be showed to God, in prayer, and supplication,
with the giving of thanks. And again, Pray continually, and in all things
give thanks; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus toward you. By this
we testify our humility, and love toward God: It is a debt due to him, and
all the tribute we can pay unto him. It is a benefit to our selves: because by
it, we are imboldned to crave more blessings of him. It is the final end of
all Gods benefits. Let us therefore offer the sacrifice of praise always to
God, Heb: 13. 15.
that is, the fruit of the lips, which confess his name. Now we are to
praise him for all blessings, even for the least, whether spiritual, Gen: 24.
or temporal. Abraham's servant praised God, for prospering his journey.
Melchisedecke blessed God, Genesis 14.
for delivering Abraham and Lot from the hand of their enemies. Christ himself
whenever he eat, John: 6. 11.
though it were but barley bread, and a few fishes, lift up his eyes, and gave
thanks; 1. Cor: 10. 31.
and therefore the Apostle wishes us, that whether we eat, or drink, or
whatsoever we do, we do all to the glory of God. If we are to praise God for
the least benefits, much more for the greatest; If for earthly, much more for
heavenly; If for the food of the body, much more for the food of the soul;
If for deliverance from the enemies of the body, much more for the deliverance
from the enemies of our souls. Neither are we to praise God only for our
selves, Phil: 1.
but also in regard of others, Coll: 1.
the Apostle (in his Epistles written to the Churches) gives thanks for the
faith, love, and spiritual graces, bestowed upon them. King Hyram when he had
heard of Salomons wisdom, and Reign, rejoiced greatly and blessed God for
him: And this Queen does the like, here in this place. How much more had the
subjects of Solomon, cause to rejoice and praise God for such a King; And this
is the duty of good subjects, as to pray for their governors, so to bless
God continually, for the manifold benefits they enjoy through their good
government: but of this I purpose to speak in an other place. Now as we have
seen the piety of this woman to God: so let us see her love to Solomon,
rejoicing so greatly at his preferment, and prosperity. For this is the fruit
of love; Rom: 12. 15.
To rejoice, with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep, and to be
of like affection one toward an other. The wicked envy, grudge, and repine,
at the prosperity of others: and rejoice in their harms. Invidia (says one)
est odium Alienae ^^lu itat^, etc. envy is the hatred of an other man's
felicity. In respect of the superiors; because that envious men be not equal
with them. Aug: in quod: ser:
In respect of inferiors: least they should be equal to them. In respect of
their equals, because they are as good as they. Whereupon Caine did envy the
prosperity of Abell. Rachell the fruitfulnes of Leah. Saul the felicity of
David. Through envy, the fall of the world, and the death of Christ was
procured. An other says, that there is no felicity so modest and gentle,
which can avoid the teeth of malice and ill will. Envious men be rich of other
men's loss; wealthy with other men's poverty; immortal, with other men's death.
Wherefore one being asked how a man might be free from envy; answered, if he
had no great and worthy gifts, or did nothing famous or praise worthy; non ^ola
miseria care^ invidia. Only misery is free from envy. This sin is almost
common in all. One Prince enuieth the glory of an other. One rich man, the
wealth of an other. One minister the gifts of an other. And the meanest sort
the better state of an other. But love enuieth not, but rejoices at the
prosperity of others; Envy (says one) is the daughter of pride; But this
mother pride cannot be barren: wheresoever she is, she does continually bring
forth: Suppress the mother, and there will be no daughter. This woman is so
full of love and humility, that though Solomon does far excel her in
wisdom, in glory, in wealth: yet she grieueth not at it, but rejoices,
praising and blessing God for it. And if she do thus rejoice for the
government of Solomon; how much more cause have we to praise God continually,
for the government of Christ? for his kingdom of grace and glory: And if
Salomons subjects and servants, when he was anointed King, 1. King: 1. 40.
rejoiced with such great joy, that the earth range with the sound of them: How
are we to reioyce^ for the spiritual and heavenly kingdom of Christ? David
praying for the prosperous state of the kingdom of Solomon (who was but a
figure of Christ) concludes thus: Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of
Israel, which only does wondrous things, and blessed be his gloriou^ name for
ever; Ps: 72. 18. 19.
and let all the earth be filled with his glory, so be it, even so be it. David
being a long time rejected of Saul, and of the people, and at length obtaining
the kingdom; Ps. 118. 22. 23. 24. 26. 29.
he exhorts the people, to joy and thanksgiving, saying: The stone, which the
builders refused, is become the head of the corner, this is the Lords doing,
and it is marvelous in our eyes. This is the day, which the Lord has made:
let us rejoice and be glad in it. Blessed be he, that comes in the name of
the Lord: we have blessed you out of the house of the Lord. Praise ye the
Lord, because he is good: for his mercy endures for ever. David was a figure
of Christ, and that place is a plain prophecy of Christ, and was most lively
fulfilled in him; And therefore, the subjects of Christ are most heartily to
rejoice, for the government of their Lord and King Christ Jesus. Z^ch^: 9. 9.
Rejoice greatly, ^ daughter Syon, (says the Prophet) shout for joy, o
daughter Jerusalem; behold, thy King comes unto thee, he is just, and saved
himself; poor, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the fo^le of an ass.
This prophecy was fulfilled in our Savior Christ, when this King Christ Jesus
having righteousness and salvation in himself, for the good of his Church: he
came (I say very porely, and basely to the City of Jerusalem: Mat: 21.
yet the multitude spread their garments in the way, others cut down branches
from the trees, and strewed them in the way; L^k* 19.
And the Disciples began to rejoice and praise God, for all the great works
that they had seen: Saying, blessed be the King that comes in the name of
the Lord: peace in heaven, and glory in the highest places. Hosanna, the son
of David. Hosanna, thou which art in the highest heavens. The fathers,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Ioyed greatly with the desire and expectation of his
first coming. Abraham rejoiced to see his day, and he saw it, and was glad;
yet he saw it but in figure: John. 8. 56.
He saw it a far off, with the eyes of faith. Old Simeon (being* just man)
waited for the consolation o^ Israel; And when he saw Christ in the flesh, he
took him up in his arms, and praised God: Nay not only he, but all the
faithful, rejoice at Christ's coming, as Zachary and Elizabeth, John the
Baptist in the womb. The Virgin Marie, the wise men, the Shepherds, and
Angels, rejoiced exceedingly at his coming: La^ding, and praising God: And
this is a sure sign of our love to him, to look and wai^e for his second
coming, then shall we have fullness of Joy; when this our King shall have
fullness of glory. When he shall sit (...) the throne of God, at the right hand
of his father, with all the Angels, Saints, and blessed souls, and all his
enemies shall be trod under his feet; Apoc: 19. 7.
then shall we be glad and rejoice, and give glory unto him; because the
marriage of the lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready. Now let
us come to the causes of this woman's Joy, and thanksgiving. The first ^s, that
Solomon was King, set in the throne of God. And here she secretly admonishes
Solomon and Israel, to be thankful to God; for if she a stranger, blesses God
for Salomons preferment; how much more ought Solomon and Israel to do the same?
she sends them to the fountain of all graces, bestowed upon the King and
subjects; she acknowledges God, the chief Monarch and disposer of Crowns:
And herein she speaks divinely, according to the scripture in diverse places.
Pro. 8. 15. 16.
By me Kings Reign (says wisdom) and Princes decree in justice: By me
Princes rule, and the nobles and all the judges of the earth. Dan. 2. 21.
And (Daniell says) it is God that changes times and seasons; He takes away
Kings, and sets up Kings. Elihu says in Job; Job. 36.
His eyes are with Kings in their throne, where he places them for ever, and
thus are they exalted. And Hanna (an other holy woman) can teach us thus much.
The Lord makes poor and makes rich, brings low and exalts, he raises
up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, to
set them among Princes, 1. Sam. 2. 7. 8.
and to make them inherit the seat of glory. For the pillars of the earth are
the Lords, and he has set the world upon them. And David says, Ps: 75. 6. 7.
that preferment and promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the
West; but God is the judge, he makes low, and he makes high.

CHRIST says to Pilate, Thou could have no Power over me, except i^ were
given thee from above. Ioh. 19. 11
And the Apostle says, The Powers that are, they are ^^ God. Romans 13.
The true God (says Augustine) gives the heavenly kingdom, only to the
godly, but the earthly kingdoms both to good and bad, as himself likes.
Whose pleasure is all justice, he is to have all power, of giving or taking
away Soueraignetie, August: de (...) Dei lib 5. c. 21
ascribed to himself alone, and no other: For though we have showed some
things, that he pleased to manifest unto us, yet far, is it beyond our power
to penetrate into men's merits, or scanne the deserts of kingdoms aright.

He that gave Marius rule, gave Caesar rule. He that gave August^^ it, gave
Nero it. He that gave Vespasian rule, or Titus has son, both sweet natured
men, gave it to Domi^^an that cruel blood-sucker. And to be brief, He that
gave it to Constantine the Christian, he gave it to Julian the Apostata. All
these, did the true, sacred, and only wise God, dispose and direct as he
pleased. And if the causes be unknown, why he did thus or thus, is he
therefore unjust? His meaning is, that God is just, in the disposing, and
placing Kings or Kingdoms. An other cause of this woman's joy, and thanksgiving
is: Because she saw the love of God to Sa^omon, and to Israel, in placing such
a king.

The cause of all blessings and favors, is not any merit in us, but the love of
God. The Lord chose Israel above other nations: Deuteronomy: 7. 8.
not for any worthiness in them, but because he loved them. All things come
from God, to his childdren in love, blessings, honors, riches, crosses, etc:
Nothing to the wicked in love, their blessings are joined with a Curse, they
are given with his left hand. Except we have true Religion, Faith, and
regeneration, we cannot be assured of Gods love. And hence we learn: That it
is a testimony of love, to be chosen to great places, either in the
Magistracy, or M^nistery: so that we be made willing and fit to discharge
such places, else not.

The Apostle counts it a blessing to be made an able minister of the New
Testament. 2. Cor: 3, 9.
Again, he counts it a mercy of God, 2. Cor: 4. 1*
to be called to the Ministry. But (Solomon says) as snow in summer, and
rain in harvest, are not meet, so is honor unseemly for a fool.

Now let us see the manifold testimonies of Gods love to Solomon. Before he was
borne, God chose him to build his house, preferred him before his father in
that work, and promised to establish his kingdom. So soon as he was borne,
he was called Iedidiah, because the Lord loved him. He had a good father David,
a good mother Bethseba, and Nathan the Prophet as his tutor and teacher. While
his father lived, he was anointed King with joy and consent of his father and
people. He was a younger brother, therefore had no right to the crown by birth;
yet was chosen extraordinarily to be King, by God himself, (in like sort was
both Saul and David chosen) but afterward Kings were created by election, or
blood. God appeared twice to him, and spoke familiarly with him. He gave him
his desire, and more too. He was King not of heathen or infidels, but of
Israel, Gods chosen, of Jerusalem, that holy City. He built a most glorious
Temple, prefiguring the true spiritual Temple of God. He had peace in all his
countries from Dan to Bersheba. The Amorites, Hittites, Perezites, Hiuites,
Iebusites (which the children of Israel were not able to subdue) he made them
all tributaries and bondmen. He had wisdom and understanding exceeding much,
and a large heart, even as the sand, that is on the Sea shore; being wiser then
any man: and he was famous throughout all Nations round about, and there came
of all people of the earth to hear his wisdom, and he exceeded all the
Kings of the earth, and all the world, both in riches and wisdom, and all the
world sought to see Salomor, to hear his wisdom, which God put in his heart.
So that whatsoever God promised to Sal^mon, he performed faithfully to the
full; 2. Chro: 1. 12.
that none either before him or after him, were or should be like him.

We think him famous, whose ^ame passes but through a country or kingdom;
but his passed through the world: and that not lightly, but with such a power,
that not only his subjects, but strangers, Infidells, Kings, and Queens, came
from the farthest part of the world to see and admire him. As this Queen in
this place.

But some may object and say, Is Solomon above all men and kings? was he wiser
then Adam or Moses? I answer, these were not Kings, neither had they that
kind of glory and power that he had. But was he more wise then the Egipti^n
kings? or more mighty and wise then his father David? or more powerful,
glorious, and worthy then the Babylonian, Persian, and Macedonian Kings? Was
he more famous then Alexander, the Conqueror of the world, or mightier then
Julius Caesar, or Augustus? or richer then Croesus? He is compared only with
the Kings of Israel. He had not only wisdom, not only glory, not only
power: but all those together; and herein is no king comparable to him: what
should we say more? his felicity was admirable and unspeakable, and is largely
set out in this chapter, and in the former chapters of this book: So that he
had sundry and singular testimonies of Gods love toward him. But some will
say, why did God love him? or how could he love him? and why did he bestow so
many gifts upon him? to his own ruin and destruction (as it may seem). For
into what horrible and monstrous sins did he fall, as we may see in the next
chap: of this book, thus it is written of him. King Solomon loved many
outla^dish women, both the daughter of Pharaoh, and the women of Moab, Ammon.
Edom, Sydon, and Heath: Of the nations whereof the Lord had said to the children
of Israel, Go not you in to them, nor let them come to you: To them (I say)
did Solomon join in love: And he had seven hundredth wives, that were
Princesses, and three hundredth concubines: And his wives turned away his heart,
after other Gods: so that his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as
was the heart of Dania his Father. And his Idolatry, in following diverse gods,
is after described; and also the anger of God against him, threatening to rent
his kingdom, and stirring up diverse adversaries against him, to vex him a
long time, one after another: and rent his kingdom, and gave away ten Tribes
from him, to ^eroboam, to the great trouble, discredit, and vexation of Solomon.

We have spoken much already of Salomons great felicity, but now all is turned
into misery: his wisdom into folli^, his honor into shame, the great joy
that many had of him, is now no doubt turned into general sorrow and
lamentation.

What a fearful fall is this of such a great person? of such a King, a
Prophet, a Preacher; and that in his old age, even then he falls into folly
and uncleanness: even then his heart was turned from the Lord after other
Gods.

The love of outlandish women drew his heart from the love of God: His sins
are directly against the written law of God, against his own doctrine, and he
is most unkind and unthankful to God, who had twice appeared unto him, and had
bestowed so many privileges, and excellent graces upon him. And therefore the
Lord is justly angry with him, and grieueth him, and vexes him with diverse
adversaries, all the days of his life. He troubled and vexed the Lord,
therefore the Lord vexes him. He divided Gods worship, and therefore the Lord
divided his kingdom.

This fall of Solomon is most fearful, horrible, and lamentable; Nay, it is
incredible, that such a man (having spent his younger time in building Gods
house, in writing books, in divine instructions and meditations), should in
his latter days fall so grossly, into such monstrous wickedness Who would
believe this? or think it possible? but that it is written and recorded by the
holy Ghost, the spirit of truth. The remembrance, the reading, hearing, or
thinking of such a foul fall, in such a man, it may trouble us, and make our
hearts to quake and tremble.

O Satan, subtle serpent, cruel dragon, mighty and roaring Lion, the
adversary of man's salvation: great is they power, thy subtilty, and boldness,
that could prevail so far with such a man. But what wilt not thou, or what
can thou not do, if the Lord let thee loose? who did seduce Adam in
Paradise, and wast not afraid to tempt our SAVIGVR CHRIST in the wilderness,
though thou could not prevail against him: but all thy desire, endeavor, and
labor is, to destroy the souls and bodies of sinful mortal men: But the
Lord reprove thee (o Satan) and stay thy infatiable rage and fury.

O the corruption and sinfulnes of man's nature: what are we the best of us
all, if the Lord leave us to our selves? Into what monstrous and beastly sins
do we fall? O Solomon, how art thou degenerated? how have thou forgotten thy
self? who has bewitched thee? In thy young time, all admired thee, sought to
thee, commended and magnified thee for thy wisdom; now all may admire and
scoff thy folly and madness. The enemies of God, the Heathen may say, Is this
the great wise man, whom all the world admired? Thou have been a joy to all
good men, they rejoiced at thy prosperity, wisdom, and piety: Now they
figh, they are grieved and wounded at their heart, for thy folly and
wickedness. Have thou forgotten thine education? 2. Prou. 4. 4.
or the good counsel of thy parents? who taught thee, and said unto thee, Let
thy heart hold fast my words, keep my commandments, and thou shall live. Thy
loving Father gave thee this counsel upon his death bed, saying: 1. King. 2.
2. 3.
I go the way, of all the earth, be strong therefore, and show thy self a
man, and take heed to the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways,
and keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments, and his
testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moses, that thou may prosper in
all that thou do, and in every thing whereunto thou turnest thee. And have
thou forgotten those sweet words of thy father? Thou Solomon (my son) know
thou the God of thy father, 1. Chron. 28. 9.
and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind: For the Lord
searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of thoughts. If
thou seek him, he will be found of thee: But if thou forsake him, Pro. 31. 12.
he will cast thee off for ever. And have thou forgotten the sweet and loving
counsel of thy mother? the prophecy which she taught thee, spoken to thee
with a tender and motherly affection: What my son? what the son of my
womb? and what, O son of my desires? give not thy strength to women, nor thy
ways, which is to destroy Kings: And there she describes a wife forthee. Not
many wives, but one, not a stranger or Idolater, but a woman fearing God. O
Solomon, have thou forgotten the first institution of marriage? wherein God made
for one Adam, Genesis 2.
one (...); for one man, one woman: and they two (says he) shall be one flesh.
Dent. 17. 17.
And have thou forgotten the express law of God? forbidding the King to take
him many wives, least his heart turn away from God. Deuteronomy. 7. 1. 2. 3. 4
And again, forbidding all compacts and marriages with Idolaters, least they
cause his people to turn away from him, and serve other gods; and so the wrath
of the Lord wax hot against them, and destroy them suddenly. Of the truth of
these words thou have woeful experience in thy self. And have thou forgotten
the words of God spoken to thy self? promising to bless thee, if thou keep
his statues and judgments? otherwise, if thou and thy children turn away from
me, and will not keep my commandments and my statutes, which I have set
before you; but go and serve other gods, and worship them: then will I cut
off Israel from the land, which I have given them, and the house which I have
hallowed for my Name, 1. King. 9. 4. 6. 7.
will I cast out of my sight: and Israel shall be a proverb, and a common
talk, among all people: even this high house, shall be so: Every one that
passes by it shall be astonyed, and shall hiss, and they shall say, Why has
the Lord done this unto this land, and to this house? and they shall answer:
Because they forsook the Lord their God; which brought their Fathers out of
the land of Ae^^pt, and have taken hold upon other Gods, and have worshipped
them, and served them: Therefore has the Lord brought upon them all this
evil.

And (Oh Solomon) have thou forgotten thine own counsel and doctrine,
inspired by the holy Ghost, and delivered to the instruction of others: And may
it not be said to thee; Romans 2. 17. 18. etc.
Behold, thou art called a lewe, and restest in the law, and gloriest in God,
and know his will, and allowest the things that are excellent, in that thou
art instructed by the Law, and perswadest thy self, that thou art a guide of
the blind, a light of them that are in darkness, an instructor of them which
lack discretion, a teacher of the unlearned, which have the form of knowledge
and Truth in the law; Thou therefore which teach another, teach not thou
thy self? Thou that preachest a man should not steal, Do thou steal? Thou
that say, a man should not commit adultery, Do thou commit adultrie?
Thou that abhorrest Idols, co^mittest thou Sacrilege? Thou that gloriest in
the Law, through the breaking of the Law dishonorest thou God? For the name of
God is blasphemed among the Gentiles, through you, as it is written. Prou. 5.
34. 5 8. 9. etc.
Consider then, how this thy bad example and filthy fall, disagreeth with thy
former doctrine and counsel; Are not these thine own words? That the lips of
a strange woman drop as an honey comb, and her mouth is more soft then oil:
but the end of her is more bitter then worme-wood, and sharp as a two-edged
sword. Her feet go down to death, Prou. 6. 23. 24. etc.
and her steps take hold on Hell: Keep thy way far from her, and come not
near the door of her house; least thou give they honors to others, and thy
years to the cruel.

And is not this thine own sweet counsel? that the commandment is a
Lantern, and Instruction, and Light, and Corrections, for instructions, and
the way of life, to keep thee from the wicked woman, and from the flattery of
the tongue of a strange woman: desire not her beauty in thy heart, neither let
her not take thee with her Eye-liddes: For because of the whorish woman, a man
is brought to a morsel of bread; and a woman will hunt for the precious life
of a man. And doe^^ thou not describe, and cunningly lay out, the folly of
those young men, that suffer themselves to be abused, and seduced by the
baits, temptations, and allurements of harlots? saying, that such are as Oxen
going to the slaughter, and as a fool to the stocks of correction; till a
dart strike through their liver. As a bird hastes to the snare, not knowing
that he is in danger: saying, Pro. 7. 6. 22. 26.
that the harlot has caused many to fall down wounded, and the strong men are
slain by her. Her house is the way to the grave, which goes down to the
chambers of death. And are not these thy sayings? Pro. 25. 15.
The mouth of a strange woman is a deep pit, he with whom the Lord is angry
shall fall therein. And again, A who^e is a deep ditch, and a strange woman
is an narrow pit. Also, she lies in wait as for a prey, and she increases
the transgressers amongst men. O Solomon, have thou forgotten the law of
nature? the written law of God, the sweet counsel of thy father and mother,
and the good counsel which thou have long since given to others? Has
sensuallity, prosperity, pleasures, and lusts, wholly possessed thee, blinded
thee, and taken away they heart? O pitiful, lamentable, woeful, and fearful
fall! The greatness and heinousness of this sinful fall, have made some
learned Fathers to doubt of the salvation of Solomon: And some to put him in
the number of the reprobate and damned: their reasons are these: First, because
his father David, being a Prophet, says of him in the place before alleged:
That if he forsook the Lord, he would cast him off for ever. It Is true, if
Solomon did finally forsake him without repentance. Again, they say that the
Scripture makes mention of his grievous fall, as we have heard before, out of
the next Chapter following; but there is no mention of his repentance, though
his death be there named. Neither is it found, that he took away the Idols,
which he had erected. But it may be, his repentance was late, and he could
not take them away suddenly. Again, he is not numbered by the Apostle in the
Catalogue of the faithful. Heb. 11.
Though Samuel and David his father, and diverse others be there named: yet all
the faithful of the Old Testament are not there numbered, nor all holy Kings:
for there is no mention there of Iehosephat and Hesechias. Again, some do
allege, that sentence of God out of the Prophet, saying, I will speak
sudde^ly against a nation, or against a kingdom; to pluck it up, and to root
it out, and to destroy it; but if this nation (against whom I have pronounced)
turn from their wickedness, I will repent of the plague, which I thought to
bring upon them: and thus they gather from this place, that because God plagued
Solomon by sundry adversaries to his death, and never took away this plague;
that therefore Solomon repented not, but died in his sins. But that sentence
of Jeremy is not rightly applied, because God does oftentimes correct penitent
sinners with temporal punishments; and thus he did to David after his
repentance: He forgave him his sins, but yet he did correct him diverse wa^es,
by temporal corrections. It is true indeed, that all penitent sinners are
sure, to be freed from eternal and everlasting punishments. And it may rather
be thought that God does threaten and afflict Solomon, to draw him thereby to
repentance; and no doubt, if he had any spark of grace, or divine wisdom
left in him, such afflictions and corrections, one after an other, would draw
him to true humiliation and repentance. The Fathers, some of them speak very
hardly and heavily of this fall of Solomon. David the son of the celestial
Jerusalem says one, reigned in the earth, and was much commended in the
scripture. His piety and true humility so conquered his affections, that he
was one of them, of whom we might say with him; Aug: anit: dei. lib: 17.
Blessed are those, whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
After him his son Solomon reigned in all his kingdom, Chap: 20.
beginning to reign in his fathers time, he began well, but ended badly:
prosperity (the mouth of wisdom) did him more hurt, then his famous and
memorable wisdom profited him. Chris: 2.
An other says, that Solomon received a deadly wound, Cor: Ho^^: 23.
that his father fell, but after he rose again, that he warred and thence
received a crown, but so did not his son Solomon. And an other; Bern: de
pass: dom: Chap. 14.
Who was wiser then Solomon? but departing from the commandments of God, and
joining himself to heathenish women, he built Temples to their Gods, yea to
devils; being so much the more dejected, and deceived in folly, as before he
was lifted up in wisdom. An other compares Solomon with Christ, saying, that
he did much excel him, because Christ had wisdom by nature, but Solomon did
ask it by prayer, and in the end possessed it not. These things are heavy, to
speak, and think of, and they are some blot and blemish to Solomon: but yet
it is hard and uncertain to determine of the damnation of any; and as the
former reasons, may be answered, so, as I take it, there be stronger arguments
to prove the repentance and salvation of Solomon: And first, call to mind
those great promises, which God makes to David, touching this his son
Solomon, saying of him, I will be his father, and he shall be my son; 2. Sam:
7. 14. 15.
and if he sin, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the
plagues of the children of men: but my mercy shall not depart away from him, as
I took it from Saul, whom I have put away before thee. A plain testimony of
Gods love to Solomon, and of his election to salvation. And howsoever some do
apply, that mercy of God, to the mercy of succession in the kingdom; and that
God would not utterly cut off his seed from thence, as he did to Saul: yet that
mercy may be further extended, to the pardoning of the sin of Solomon, and
saving of his soul. And if God be his father, and he his son, how can he
finally fall and perish? Are any of the sons and children of God damned? Is
God a father to the reprobate? and are the reprobates his children? does he
correct them gently in love, as fathers use to chasten their children? or does
he not rather punish them in his fury and rage, in his justice and severity?
In an other place: when Solomon was borne, David called his name Solomon, and
it is said that the Lord loved him. 2. Sam: 12. 24. 25.
For the Lord had sent by Nathan the Prophet, therefore David called his name
Iedidisah, that is, beloved of God. For that is the reason of the name, because
the Lord loved him. That is one of his titles: Beloved of God. And it is said
twice (in that place) the Lord loved him: John: 13.
and in this our text, this Queen says as much, that God loved him. Now
those, whom God loves, he loves to the end. And those whom God loves, how
can they finally and totally fall away? Though they fall, they cannot fall
away; though they sin, they must needs rise again by repentance, and so be
saved. And I have never read in all the scripture, that God does profess any
such love to a reprobate. God says of Jacob, Rom: 9. 12.
I have loved him, because he was chosen; and I have hated Esau, because he was
rejected. Again, we have heard already that Solomon was a figure and tipe of
Christ Jesus, the son of God, the Savior of the world. Again, he was also
as we have heard, inspired by the holy Ghost, and a writer of the holy
scripture. Some reprobates have spoken the truth, and have preached and
prophesied, as Balaam and Judas: but the Prophets and writers of holy scripture
are all elect and saved (so far as we know.) Our Savior Christ says, that the
wicked shall see Abraham, Isaacke, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the
kingdom of God: and themselves thrust out of doors. Now Solomon was a
preacher, a Prophet, a writer of scripture, and therefore we doubt not but he
has his part in the kingdom of heaven. Finally, the book of the Preacher, is
called by the Hebrews, the repentance of Solomon: and so it seems, by the
first beginning and entrance of it: where he cries out, Vanity of vanities,
all is vanity. They be the words of one, that had tasted of all the pleasures
in the world that could be devised; and yet at last being weary of all, and
renouncing all, he reposeth all true felicity of this life, in true religion
and the fear of God. This may serve to satisfy us, touching the repentance
and salvation of Solomon: And now because we (upon some just occasion) have
made some digression, not impertinent, nor unprofitable (and because this fall
of Solomon is abused by many) let us (before we proceed further) deliver some
good instructions, and uses, touching this his fall. First then consider, how
dangerous the prosperity, the great wealth, and honors of the world are, and
therefore let us not (too much) desire them, nor set our hearts, or delights
(too much) upon them. For (thorough the corruption of our nature) many wax
proud, contemning God and men, injurious to themselves and others, being
wanton, luxurious and Lascivious. And therefore the Lord says to his people
Israel: Deuteronomy: 8. 10. 11. 12. etc.
When thou have eaten, and filled thy self, thou shall bless the Lord thy
God, for the land which he has given thee. Beware that thou forget not the
Lord thy God, not keeping his commandments and his laws, and his ordinances
which I command thee this day; least when thou have eaten, and filled thy
self, and have built goodly houses, and dwelt therein, and thy beasts and thy
sheep are increased, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and all that
thou have is increased; then thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord
thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, and out of the house of
bondage. Deuteronomy: 32. 15.
And in an other place, he complains of that people, saying; He that should
have been upright, (when he waxed fat) spurned with his heel. Thou art
fat, thou art gross, thou art laden with fatnes; therefore he forsook God
that made him, and regarded not the strong God of his salvation. How should I
spare thee? (says the Lord) thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by them
which are no Gods; though I fed them to the full, Ier. 5. 7. 8.
yet they committed adultery, and assembled themselves by companies in the
harlots houses; They rose up in the morning like fed horses; for every man
neighed after his neighbors wife. Again, I did know them in the wilderness,
Hose: 13. 5. 6.
in the land of drought, as in their pastures, so were they filled; they were
filled, and their heart was exalted; Therefore have they forgotten me. Oh that
the great men of the world, the Potentates, Princes, States, Nobles, and all
the wealthy of the earth, would remember this, who (by their power and wealth)
take liberty to sin, and to live licentiously without controulement, and are
infatuated by worldly cares, and pleasures, whereas the end of all outward
blessings is to make us more thankful, Ps: 105. 44. 45.
and more holy: God gave his people the lands of the heathen, and they took
the labors of the people in possession; the end of this and of all their
former blessings is, that they might keep his statutes, and observe his laws.
And seeing that great prosperity is so dangerous; let us pray with the wise
man, Give me not poverty, Pro: 30. 8. 9.
nor riches: feed me with food convenient for me, least I be full, and deny
thee: and say, who is the Lord? or least I be poor, and steal, and take the
name of my God in vain. Great abundance is dangerous, and extreme poverty is
dangerous; the competent estate is the best, and let us be content with it, and
let every one harken to that counsel of the Lord, saying; Ier: 9. 23. 24.
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his
strength, neither the rich man in his riches: but let him that glories, glory
in this, that he understands and knows me.

Again, by this example we see, that great and good Princes are subject to
falling; some have good beginnings, and continue long, and yet in the end they
decline and fall away. Nero in the first five years of his reign, was of such
liberatie, clemency and gentleness, that he passed all Princes that were before
him, he either for gave or else diminished all taxes and payments. He was so
gentle and favorable to all degrees, that he would admit them to come to
salute him, and also did salute them himself by name: He made many good laws:
but although he did these and such like things, with great honor at the
beginning of his reign: yet (at the last) forgetting the Imperial dignity,
he opened his wantonness, his fleshly pleasures, his riot, his Avarice, his
cruelty: Oftentimes he attempted to kill his own mother Agrippina: She
escaped often, at last the Centurion (coming toward her with a naked sword in
his hand) slew her; she putting forth her belly, cried out, That he would
strike that part first, for this belly (says she) is to be pierced through
with Iron, which brought forth such a monster. Then the (Centurion thrust his
sword into her belly, and so slew her with many wounds; after this horrible
murder was done, Nero being both without fear and shame, beheld the Carcass
of his mother being slain. He killed Seneca his master, and Burrus one of his
governors. What will you more? he ceased not to kill whom he pleased, and that
for what cause soever he pleased. Tyberius (who succeeded Augustus) raised up
of himself, (at the beginning of his reign) no small hope of goodness: but
afterward, proved a very Tyrant, and most filthy man. Alexander the great, at
the first ruled justly and valiantly: but after he was so effeminated with the
dainty delicates of Pasia, that he became proud, leacherous, a drunkard, a
murderer: by the which vices he both shortened his own days, and made
himself to be detested of his own Macedonians. Constantine the great,
unhappily ended his empire, He pursued the good Bishop Athanasius: He brought
home the Heritike Arrius, and became an Apostata. Mauritius of a long time
governed happily, but afterward he became so cruel, so covetous, so violent;
that he was hated of his own subjects, and slain by Phocas. There be many
such examples; but there is one before our eyes, the wisest Prince that ever
was, a long time governing religiously and virtuously: but in his old days,
falling in most gross and beastly manner. Of whom it may be said, as it was
said of Origin. Vbi been nemo melius, vbi male nemo peius, where he did well,
none did better: where he did evil, none did worse: I mean in respect of his
unbridled and filthy lust, seeing therefore, that the best and the wisest
Princes, are subject to the temptations of Satan, to the allurements of the
world, flesh and sin, and may decline and fall away from good beginnings and
proceedings; let all good Christians and good subjects, pray heartily and
continually to God; not only to make their Princes good, but also to hold,
keep, continue, and increase them in goodness. And seeing that all of us, are
subject to the like temptations, let us all be careful, not only to begin
well, but also to hold on and continue to the end: remembering that fearful
sentence of God, saying: If the righteous turn away from his righteousness, and
commits iniquity, and do according to all the abominations, that the
wicked man does; shall he live? all his righteousness which he has done,
shall not be mentioned, Ezekiel: 18. 24.
but in his transgression which he has committed, and in the sin that he
has sinned, in them shall he die. And let us never forget that excellent
counsel of Salomons. Pro: 4. 18.
The way of the righteous shines as the light; that shines more and more,
until the perfect day. His meaning is, that as the light in the morning (when
it once appears) increases more and more, till it be perfect day: Pro: 16.
31.
so good men, they grow daily, in knowledge, grace, and goodness. Again (he
says) age is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness.

Happy is that young man, that has lived well; but more happy is that old
man that hat lived well.

It is not sufficient that we have been good, except we continue so still: the
righteous (says David) shall flourish like a palm tree, and shall grow like
a Cedar in Libanon. Such as be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish
in the Courts of our God, they shall bring forth fruit in their age.

Young men must remember their Creator in their youth, the powers of their body
and mind is then fittest for the service of God: They are subject to death, as
well as others: they must give their best time, and first fruits of their age
to God; They cannot tell how soon they may die, and they must come to
judgment as well as others, and the piety of their young age will be a
comfort and a credit to them in their old age; and therefore let them be
careful of religion, and holy conversation in their tender years* and let old
men and women take heed of vices, and do nothing, that is unseemly to their
age: And (in very deed) the beauty and ornament of the elder sort is the true
knowledge of God, and heavenly wisdom, and an unblameable life: they may set,
that no age is free from danger; If the devil cannot deceive us in our youth,
he will not leave us, but will deceive us in our age (if he can) some in this
age, are guilty of Salomons sins, both of uncleanness and Idolatry. Some are
ignorant, some profane, some unjust, some overcome with lying, some with
drunkenness, and the most in their old age, are subject to impatience, and
covetousness, and are unwilling to die, and leave this sinful world: but let
them of all other be examples of wisdom and virtue, let them fly from the
lusts of youth, and follow after righteousness, faith, love and peace, with the^
that call on the Lord with a pure heart. Tit. 2 3.
Let the elder men be sober, honest, discreet, sound in the faith, in love, and
in patience: the elder women likewise, that they be of snch behavior as
becomes holiness, not false accusers, not given to much wine, but teachers of
honest things. Oh, how pleasant a thing is it, when gray headed men minister
judgment, and when the elders can give good counsel? Oh how comely a thing is
wisdom to aged men? and understanding and prudence to men of honor? The
crown of old men is to have much experience, and the fear of God is their
glory. They are to give themselves to continual prayer and devotion, to
reading and hearing of the word, to the meditation of the shortness of their
life, and of the happiness and eternity of the life to come. Worthy is the
example of Barzillai the Giliadite: who went to conduct King David over Jorden,
and King David said unto him, Come over with me, and I will feed thee with me
in Jerusalem: I am this day four score year old (says he) and can I
discern between good or evil has thy servant any taste in that I eat? 2.
Sam. 19. 31. 35. 37.
or that I drink? can I hear any more the singing voice of men or women?
wherefore then should thy servant be any more a burden? thy servant will go a
little way over with thee, I pray thee let thy servant turn back again, that
I may die in my own City, and be buried in the grave of my father and of my
mother. His meaning is, that the pleasures of the Court was not fit for him,
though he was a man of great account, and substance, yet being old, his mind
was of death, of his grave and burial. Happy is he that has so lived both in
young, and old age: that he can say (with good Ambrose seeing his friends
weeping about him at his death) I have not so lived, that I am ashamed to live
still amongst you, neither am I afraid to die, because we have a gracious and
good Lord. Now let young and old, and all sorts of men and women, especially
Princes, and great persons: let all (I say) take heed of these two vices where
with Solomon is touched, namely, unbridled lust and Idolatry. God is a holy
and pure spirit, he has ordained marriage as a bridle and remedy against
vnclearle and unlawful lust, and we are to live chastelie in virginity, and
single life, which is the first degree of chastity: or else to live in marriage
(the ordinance of GOD) which is the second degree of chastity. But the Devil,
he is a foul, filthy, and unclean spirit, an enemy to marriage, to
chastity, and honesty: and therefore, from the beginning he has sought to
defile, and pollute, that holy institution of GOD, by multitude of wives, by
fornication, whoredom, adultery, and other wandering, wanton, and vagabonde
lusts. These are against the law of nature, against the law of God written,
against civil honesty, and charity. These destroy and consume the goods,
the good name, the body and soul. And (as Bertheba says to her son
Solomon) Such uncleanness is the destruction of Kings: so it is the destruction
of many others, men and women, of many great houses, towns, countries, and
kingdoms. Therefore (says Job) If my heart have been deceived by a woman, or
if I have laid wait at the door of my neighbor: let my wife g^inde to
another man, and let other men bow down upon her. Job. 31. 9. 10. 11. 12.
For this is a wickedness and iniquity to be condemned; yea this is a fire
that shall devour to destruction, whi^ shall root out all mine increase.
Hose. 4. 11.
And it is most true (which the Prophet says) that whoredom and wine take
away the heart. And indeed, such sinful pleasures, they take away wit, and
understanding, grace, and religion: they take away credit, riches, and health;
yea the comfort of soul and body. It is a great curse, and heavy judgment of
God, to be given over to such vile and filthy lusts. And this Solomon
confesses, upon woeful experience, saying, I have compassed about, Eccle. 7.
27. 28. 29. 30.
both I and my heart to know and to enquire and to search wisdom and reason,
and to know the wickedness of folly, and the foolishnes of madness: and I find
more bitter then death, the woman whose heart is as nets and snares, and her
hands as bands: he that is good before God, shall be delivered from her, but
the sinner shall be taken by her. Behold (says the Preacher) this haued
found, seeking one by one to find the count: and yet my soul seeks, but I
find it not: I have found one man of a thousand; but a woman among them all,
have I not found. His meaning is not to disgrace good women, but that women are
easily drawn to wickedness, and being wicked, they exceed men in wickedness: and
are of great power to draw and allure others to the same. And that fewer women
are good then men; finally; he speaks upon his own experience, and trial,
that he for his part amongst so many found none at all good; and this is some
testimony of his repentance: These words being spoken, and that book being
written (as some think, and as it is probable) after his grievous fall: But
we see by that place, that it is a token of Gods anger, to be given over to
such uncleanness, and it is a just judgment upon our profaneness, neglect,
and contempt of Gods service: and therefore the Apostle says, That because men
regarded not to know God, Romans 1. 24. 28.
he delivers them up into a reprobate mind, to do those things, which are
not convenient: he gave them up to their hearts lusts, and to vile affections.
Because men are careless in religion, and of the true honor of God: therefore
the Lord gives them over, to such filthy and odious sins, to their utter
dishonor and shame in life, and death, and after death: so that the memorial
of such (though they have been of never so high account in the world) is but
vile, rotten, and cursed. Therefore let us hearken to that blessed Exhortation
of the Apostle, 1. Pet. 2. 11.
saying: Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain
from fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul. And let us not forget those
words of another Apostle: 1. Cor. 6. 15. 16. 17 18. etc.
Know ye not (says he) that your bodies are the members of Christ? shall we
then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God
forbid. Do ye not know, that he which coupleth himself with an harlot is
one body: for two (says he) shall be one flesh; but he which is joined to the
Lord is one spirit. Fly fornication: every sin that a man does, is without the
body: but he that commits fornication, sins against his own body. Know
ye not that your body is the temple of the holy Ghost which is in you, whom
ye have of God? and ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a price.
Therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit; for they are Gods.
Another sin which we are to avoid, and which was Salomons sin, is Idolatry.
It is said (as we have heard) that he matched with Idolatrous women: that for
the love of them, he built high places, he wrought wickedness in the sight of
the Lord, and continued not to follow the Lord as did David his father: and
that his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God. The beginning of his sin
was, that he matched with Idolatrous women, contrary to the express law of
God: And therefore it was sin so to match. We are to avoid all unnecessary
society, and familiarity with the wicked: and therefore Iehosephet is reproved,
2. Chro. 19. 2.
because he helped the wicked, and loved them that hated the Lord: for he
joined in the affinity with Ahab, but the wrath of the Lord came upon him for
it. Pro. ^9. 27.
Solomon says, The wicked man is an abomination to the just; and he that is
upright in his way, is an abomination to the wicked. There can be no sound nor
true friendship betwixt those that are diverse and contrary in religion and
manners. 2. Cor. 6. 14 15. 16.
Therefore, says the Apostle, be not unequally yoked with Infidels, for what
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has light
with darkness? what concord has Christ with Belial? what part has the believer
with the Infidel? and what agreement has the temple of God with Idols? The
Lord complained thus of his people, saying, Judah has transgressed, and
abomination is committed in Israel, and in Jerusalem, for Judah has defiled
the holiness of the Lord, which he loved, and has married the daughter of a
strange god. The LORD will cut off the man that does this, Mal. 2. 11. 12.
both the master and the servant, out of the Tabernacle of Jacob and him that
offers an offering to the Lord of Hoasts. Such cursed and cross matches, was
the cause that God destroyed the first world with the general flood: And such
matches (at this day) are the causes of profaneness, Athisme, Popery, and
much wickedness. For what comfort or blessing can they look for, which have
no respect to God in marying? But only regard pleasures, and riches. The
example of Solomon is fearful, that so great and wise a man, of extraordinary
gifts and graces, is allured and drawn to Idolatry, being overcome with the
love of heathenish women: And yet (it may be, and it is likely) that Solomon
himself did not worship those Idols, or think them to be gods, or that
there were any divine power in them: neither did he bring them into the Temple,
nor command any to worship them; but this was his fault, that he did not
suppress the worshipping of them, but granted and suffered such Idolatry, for
the pleasure of his women: So that he fell, as Adam fell; who did eat of the
forbidden tree, not because that he thought thereby to be like unto GOD, or
wiser then he was made: but least he should offend his wise, so that he
preferred the love and good will of a woman before the word of his God. So
Aaron knew well enough, that there was no Godhead nor divine power in the
golden Calfe; yet fearing least the people should stone him, he yielded to
their fury, he made an Idol, and promulgated the feast of it. In like manner,
Solomon knowing Idols to be nothing, yet being overcome with the flattring
inticements of wicked women, he granted to them diverse kinds of Idolatry. It
is dangerous for any Prince, to suffer and tolerate any Idolatrous worship,
for the love or favor of any, be they never so near or dear unto them. Nay,
we must all learn generally, not to harken to the voice of our dearest friend,
though it be our own lawful wives, if they go about to draw us to any kind
of sin whatsoever. This was the cause of Adams fall (as we heard even now)
This was the cause of that ruin of Ahab, and his house: because he harkned to
the voice of his wife Iesabell, and being persuaded by her, most unjustly took
away Naboths vineyard, and also most cruelly took his life away from him. No
natural affections should cause us to sin against God, or offend his divine
Majesty; our love to him should be greater then to any mortal creature
whatsoever. The Heathen could say, Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, sed mayor
amica veritas: Plato is my friend, Socrates my friend, but truth is a greater
friend. So may we say, Our fathers, our mothers, our brothers and sisters, our
wives and children, are near and dear friends unto us: but yet Christ is our
greatest and best friend; he has done and can do most for us: And therefore
nothing should draw us from his love. And touching Idolatry, it is most odious
and abominable in the eyes of God. It is a spiritual whoring from God. A
denying and forsaking of his Majesty; it has been the ruin of many Nations
and Kingdoms. And therefore in no case to be suffered nor tolerated for the
love of any. Deuteronomy. 7. 25.
Therefore the Lord says to his people; The graven Images of their gods, ye
shall burn with fire, and covet not the silver and gold that is on them, nor
take it unto thee, least thou be snared therewith: For it is an abomination
before the Lord thy God. Bring not abomination into thy house, least thou be
accursed like it: But utterly abhor it, and count it most abominable. And in
another place, we are forbidden to hearken to the Prophet that does persuade us
to go after other gods, and that such a one being convicted and condemned by
the Judge, Deuteronomy. 13. 1. 2. 3. 6. 7. 8.
is to die the death. Nay, though it be our son, or daughter, or wife, or
brother, we must not consent to him, nor pity him, nor show him mercy: but
thou shall kill him (says the Lord) thy hand shall be first upon him to put
him to death; and then the hands of all the people. And this is the direct law
of God: He that offers to any gods save the Lord only shall be slain.
There must be then no sufferance at all of any kind of Idolatry. This was
Salomons sin, and therefore it is said that his heart was not perfect with
God, as the heart of his father David was: For howsoever he sinned in
adultery, and murder, and in numbering the people: yet he repented presently,
and never did the like again; and he had always this sincerity and
perfection of heart, that he never defiled himself with Idolatry; neither did
he suffer the true worship of GOD to be corrupted in his Kingdom; but kept
it sincere, pure, and sound: He always hated and detested all false
worship, his soul hated Idols, 2. Sam. 5.
as lame and blind guides; therefore he takes them away at the beginning of
his reign. 1. Chron. 14 15.
And he caused the gods of the Philistims to be burnt with fire. Psalm. 16.
The sorrows (says he) of them that offer to another god shall be multiplied,
their offerings of blood will I not offer, neither make mention of their names
with my lips. It has been a blot and blemish upon many good Kings, because
they suffered the high places to remain, and it is the chief commendation of
good Josiah: 2. Chron. ^4. 33.
that he took away all the abominations, out of all the countries that
perteyned to the children of Israel; and compelled all that were found in
Israel, and compelled all that were found in Israel, to serve the Lord their
God. This blessed King, a worthy president of full and perfect reformation, he
took away not only gross Idolatry, but all Relics and remnants, all
occasions, prouocations, appearances and shows of Idolatry. One thing more,
very necessary and pertinent, we are to learn by Salomons fall: namely, Not
to be offended though we do see Christian Princes, learned Preachers, and
great professors, men of gifts above others, to be seduced and drawn into
great and gross sins: we are indeed to be grieved, and much to lament,
when we see or hear such things: but yet we must not be discouraged in our
profession, and in the truth of religion. Men of greatest gifts, have been
subject to great sins: As Adam Noah, Lot, Abraham, Moses, Aaron, David,
Sampson, and Solomon. Satan does most envy such, he stands at the right
hand of Iehosua: He will winnow and sifte (to the very branne) the Apostles of
CHRIST, as he himself warns them. Indeed the bad lives of Preachers and
professors, are scandalous and offensive; and hinder many in the way of
salvation; and makes the word and profession ill spoken of by many; yea
loathed and rejected: as the sons of Elie by their wickedness made the
offering of the Lord to be abhorred. Ambr. off. lib. 2.
In seeking and receiving counsel (says one) the honesty of life, and the
prerogative of virtue does much prevail. Who will seek for a fountain in a
dunghill? who will drink of filthy water? for where there is luxury,
intemperance, and other vices, who will think any good to be drawn from
thence? how can I take him to be my superior in counsel, whom I see inferior
in manners? And can I think him fit to give me counsel, that cannot give
it to himself? he that gives counsel to others, he must show himself an
example of good works; in integrity and gravity, that his speech be sound
and unrebukable; his counsel profitable, and his life honest. He that lives
wickedly in the sight of the people (as much as in him lies) he kills him
that looks upon him: A^g. lib. de past.
he that follows him, perhaps dies; he that follows him not, lives; but
as much as in him lies, he kills both. Examples are stronger then words, and
it is a more full teaching by works then by word. The house and conversation
of a Preacher is set on a hill, all see it and look upon it; it is as it were
a guide and teacher to others; whatsoever he does, others think that they may
do the like: that word is willingly received of the hearer, which is uttered
from the Preacher with compassion of mind. He has learned to speak truly,
that has first learned to do well. And then does the seed of the word bring
forth fruit, when the piety of the Preacher does water it in the breast of
the hearers. Grego.
We must first be cleansed our selves, and so cleanse others; we must first
be wise, and so make others wise; we must first be made light, and so lighten
others; we must first come to God our selves, and so bring others to God; we
must first be sanctified, and so sanctify others. This law is laid upon the
Preachers, that they lighten them by living, which they are careful to
persuade by speaking. For the authority and power of speaking is lost, when
the voice is not helped by work. No man can stand in the valley and speak
from the mount: Chrysostom. sup. Mat. 5.
Where thou stand, from thence speak; and from whence thou speak, there
stand. If thy mind be in the earth, how do thou speak from heaven? be in
heaven, if thou speak from heaven. If thou will not do righteousness, why
do thou make thy self a teacher of righteousness? why do thou call thy
self a master of that, whereof thy self will be no scholar, nor Disciple?
Finally, there be three kinds of negligent Prelates: Hugo.
Some who live well, and suffer their people to live ill. Some who live ill,
and compel their people to live well. Some who live ill, and will have their
people to live ill: Those which live well, and suffer their people to live ill:
they go before them in example; but they do sin because they reprove not
their errors. Though they live well: yet they must of necessity give account
of the flock committed to them, to the Lord of the flock. Those which live
ill, and compel their people to live well: They do call those that go astray,
but they kill those which are rightly strong: They call by words, they kill by
examples. Of the third sort we are not to speak at all. But though this be
true, that the sins of Preachers and professors be thus offensive to other,
and hurtful to themselves: yet neither preaching nor profession is to be cast
off or condemned. Physicians (oftentimes) live contrary to their own rules:
and Lawyers live lawless: And yet both Physic and Law is good. A warrant
from the King is not to be despised, though the Officer be naught. In all
professions, and callings, some are good and some bad. The callings are not to
be condemned, because of the badnesse of them which are in them: All flesh is
grass, and the glory thereof like the flower of the field: All men are
subject to sin and error, but the word of the Lord abides for ever. It is
pure, holy, just, and good: though those which profess and teach it, be never
so bad: Gold is not the worse, though a Thief handle it, no more is the word
of the Lord (which is more pure then gold, being seven times tried in the fire)
though wicked men profess and teach it. This is the counsel of our Savior
Christ, Mat: 23. 2. 3.
saying; The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat, all therefore whatsoever
they bid you observe, that observe and do; Chrysostom:
but after their works do not. Excellently says one upon that place, he that
does evil, does injury to the seat. Sitting in judgment, if thou live well,
and teach well, thou shall be judge of all; If thou live ill, and teach well,
thou shall be judge of thy self only? for by teaching well, thou do teach
thy people how they ought to live; but by living ill, thou do teach God, how
he ought to condemn thee: If they live well (meaning the preachers) it is
their gain: If they teach well, it is your gain (speaking to the people).
Take that therefore which is yours, and trouble not your selves about that
which is an other man's: for often there proceeds good doctrine from an evil
man, even as the vile earth brings forth precious gold: Is that precious gold
contemned, because the earth is vile and base? even therefore as the gold is
chosen, and the earth is left: so receive you the doctrine, and leave the
manners; Let us receive the doctrine, not the manners. Herbs are not
necessary for Bees, but flowers; so gather you the flowers of doctrine, and
leave the conversation. Augustine speaking of this example of Solomon, In Psalm:
grad:
says thus. If Solomon be rejected of God, why are his writings of such
authority in the Church? that we may know (says he) that the words of God
are not therefore true, because they were spoken by Solomon; but because they
proceeded from God by Solomon: whatsoever therefore he wrote well, it must be
ascribed to God; and as for his sin, it must be left to himself. The same may
be said of Balaam, who though he was an evil man, yet he delivered good and
wholesome Oracles. David sinned grievously: yet his Psalms, are most blessed,
divine, and sacred; full of sweet comforts and instructions; to be embraced,
believed, reverenced, and practiced of all good men. Peter, his fall was most
grievous, in denying his master; yet his sermons, his doctrine and writings,
are in no case to be rejected, but to be received and followed of all
Christians, as holy, and canonical scripture, inspired by the holy Ghost. Thus
the falls of the Saints are abused sundry ways; some men do excuse all their
faults; some by them take occasion to disgrace and discredit the Saints: and
some take occasion thereby, to practice the like sins in themselves; but
these are all deceived and do err foulely. For they are not written to any
such purpose; but rather that we may learn, and see the corruption of all men
by nature, Ambr: in Luk:
and that we may know the Saints were but men, and therefore not to trust in
them, but in God. And this use does one make of this example of Solomon, that
God suffered him to err, least we should err. Many things are written
(specially in the Psalms) of Christ in the person of Solomon: Now we might
take those things, to be spoken altogether of Solomon himself, but that we
see, he has so grievously fallen; whereupon we are constrained, to pass those
excellent Oracles from Solomon to the Messiah: for seeing we are admonished in
the scriptures, that Christ knew no sin; and we see that Solomon sinned so
hainously, we may understand thereby, that Solomon was not the Messiah. And by
such examples, the mercy of God is made manifest, to repenting sinners: And
they may gather comfort from thence, that if they have the like repentance,
they shall have the like favor and mercy: Greg: in Hom:
And therefore (says one) I consider Peeter, I consider the thief upon the
cross: I look upon Zacheus: and I see nothing else in them, but examples set
before our eyes of hope and repentance. By these examples also, we are stirred
up to humility and watchfulnes; to work our salvation with fear and
trembling; and upon view of these things, let him that stands take heed least
he fall. And finally, we are moved to pity, kindness, and mercy toward other
sinners: seeing in many things we sin all, and such excellent, and holy men,
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, have had their grievous falls.

THE SIXTH SERMON.
WE have heard the rejoicing and thanksgiving of this woman, for the Reign of
Solomon, and specially, because she saw the love of God, both to Solomon and
to Israel, in placing such a King: We have heard the happiness of Solomon, the
great and extraordinary gifts of God bestowed upon him, and manifold signs of
Gods favor toward him, and that God by his own mouth and promise, and by a
special name given to Solomon, professes his love toward him. And therefore
howsoever he fell, most grievously, and therefore deserved no love, but rather
hatred, and to be cast off for ever: yet no doubt, but God did love him still,
and in time brought him to repentance and salvation. Now let us from these
words, of this blessed woman (seeing Gods love in placing Solomon) let us (I
say) learn and observe from hence, that a good King, is a rare, and a special
gift of God, and a token of his love to the people. For it is said here,
Because God loved Israel to establish it for ever: therefore he made Solomon
King over them. When God means to bless a land, and to do any good unto it,
he gives it good Princes; when he means to correct and punish a people, he
sends wicked men to Reign over them. So that it is God that gives Kings,
sometimes in love, sometime in anger. Esa: 3. 2. 4.
He threatens to take away the Judge and the Prophet, the prudent, and the
aged, and to appoint children and babes to be Princes over them. Job. 34. 30.
In his justice he causes the hypocrite to reign. Woe to thee o land, when
thy King is a child, and thy Princes eat in the morning: that is, Eccle: 10.
16. 17.
when they are without wisdom and counsel, and are given to their lusts and
pleasure. But blessed art thou (oh land) when thy King is the son of nobles;
meaning, when he is noble for verture and wisdom. A good King is a great and
worthy blessing of God. Pro: 18. 22.
Solomon says, He that finds a good wife, finds a good thing, and
receives favor of the Lord. Pro: 31. 10.
And Bethsheba says, Who shall find a virtuous woman, her price is far
above the pearls. How much more truly may this be said of a virtuous King?
Every good thing is from God: As good husbands, good wives, good parents, good
children, good masters, good servants; how much more a good King, being
publicum bonum* that is, a public good: and bonum quo comunius ^o melius, a
good, the more common it is, the better it is. The want of such, is an occasion
of sin and ruin to the people. Judge: 2. 19.
It is said (in the book of the Judges,) that when the judge was dead, they
returned and did worse then their fathers; in following other gods, Judge: 8. 33.
and in worshipping them. And again, when Gideon was dead, the children of
Israel turned away, and went a whoring after Balim; Judge: 17. 6.
and made Baall their God: And this is set down as a cause of Idolatry and of
all vilanie amongst that people. Judge: 18. 1.
In those days, there was no King in Israel: but every man did that, which was
good in his own eyes. Judge: 19. 2.
Miserable is the state of the people without a Prince; like fishes devouring
one another; like a body without a head; like sheep without a Shepherd; like
soldiers without a Captain; like children, without a mother; a ship not safe
without a governor; nor a private house without a guide, nor the commonwealth
without governors. This knew Moses who was careful of his posterity, and to
have a governor for his place before he died, Numb: 27 16.
and therefore said. Let the Lord God of the spirits of all flesh, appoint a
man over the congregation, who may go out and in before the people, and lead
them: that the congregation of the Lord be not as sheep, which have not a
Shepherd. Esa: 32. 1. 2.
Great are the commodities and comforts which we reap by good Kings. Behold
(says Esaiah) A King shall reign in justice, and the Princes shall rule in
judgment; and that man shall be as a hiding place from the wind, and as a
refuge from the tempest; As the rivers of waters in a dry place, Ps: 72.
and as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land. And mark the happiness
of Salomons government, here commended; His father David prophecieth of him,
that true religion should be maintained in his kingdom* that in his days the
righteous should flourish: that he should be to such as comfortable, as the
deawe and shewers after the mowne grass; That in his time should be abundance
of peace and plenty; That he should judge the poor with equity, and deliver
him when he cries; and save the children of the needy, and subdue the
oppressor: redeeming their souls from deceit and violence, and preserving
them from all wrong. Behold then, the happiness, the benefit and comfort of a
good King: He is a father, a pastor, a nurce, to the Church, and commonwealth;
He is as a wall, and prop, to stay up the tender boughs of the vine. He is
like the shadow of a great tree, refreshing his subjects; He is as it were a
common soul to the people, whereby the body of the Church and commonwealth is
stayed and vpholden: And as the sun is to the planets, and the planets to the
stars; so is the King with his counsel, judges and magistrates, to the
commonwealth; From thence it has life, comfort, and light. A good King is
much more excellent and better, then a good subject: His goodness more large,
moreample, and profitable, then the goodness of others. As much difference as
there is betwixt a private family, and the commonwealth, betwixt one house
and a City, betwixt a little river and the sea: so much difference there is,
betwixt a good subject and the King. He is like a spring, or fountain of
water, descending from the top of a high mountain, watring all the lower
grounds, cherishing and filling all the lower brooks. The care, the religion,
the wisdom, the pity, the piety, the liberality, justice and temperance
of a king, profits all his subjects. By his means, religion, peace, justice,
arts, schools, families, trades, buildings, Church and commonwealth
flourishes.

Therefore (says Solomon) In the prosperity of the righteous, Pro: 11. 10. 11.
the City rejoices; and when the wicked perishes there is joy. And by the
blessing of the righteous the City is exalted. Pro: 28. 28.
Again, when the wicked rise up, men hide themselves; but when they perish,
the righteous increase; when the righteous are in authority, the people
rejoice; Pro: 29. 2.
but when the wicked bears rule, the people sigh: All good subjects rejoice
at the reign of good Princes: because they enjoy lives, liberties, their
goods, and the Gospel: when the wicked rule, there is a storm; the just are
molested; they fly as David from Saul; they hide themselves as the Prophets in
Ahab his time; They fly as birds for shelter: But when the godly rule, the
righteous swarm, as Bees in a sunnie day: They multiply and fill the
Churches, and show their faces bouldly and openly.

The necessity and commodity of kings, may be seen in the universal order
of nature. The chief Philosophers, Plato, Aristotle, and Apollonious, did see
and feel, that as generally there is one chief Creator, and maker of all
things, and as among the stars, the sun bears the chief light; as among
Bees, there is one chief king; as the flocks and herds of beasts have one
guide and ruler; finally, as the cranes do follow one leader; So there ought
to be in a commonwealth one king as head, by whom all the members may consent.
And this reason of the commonwealth (declared by the instinct of nature) God
has more evidently opened in the holy scripture, and makes mention of kings,
and does approve and allow their authority with his own mouth, as we have
heard before; and the words of this woman does approve and testify the same.
She blesses God for this king, who had set him in his own throne. She
acknowledges God the author of this kind of government: so that the authority
of kings is a sacred and divine ordinance. But it will be objected: How is God
the author of this kind of government? when as Solomon was but the third King
that Israel had: they had no King at all before Saul, who was a wicked King,
given to them not in love, but in wrath, and that at the unlawful and
turbulent desire of the people: wherein they sinned both against God and
Samuel. For thus it is written: That the Elders of Israel, 1. Sam: 8. 5. 6. 7.
8. 9.
gathered them together, and came to Samuel unto Ramath, and said unto him:
Behold thou art old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways: make us now a King
to judge us like all nations. But the thing displeased Samuel (when they said
give us a King to judge us) and Samuel prayed unto the Lord. And the Lord said
unto Samuel: Hear the voice of the people in all that they shall say unto
thee: for they have not cast thee away, but they have cast me away, that I
should not reign over them: As they have ever done since I brought them out of
Egypt even unto this day (and have forsaken me, and served other gods) even so
do they to thee. Now therefore hearken unto their voice: howbeit, yet testify
unto them, and show them the manner of the king that shall reign over them.
Behold here are a people great and small, affecting and desiring a king,
having had none before: yet their desire is displeasing to God and Samuel; the
reason is, why God misliked their petition, because they did now cast off that
form of government which God himself had ordained for them. They ask that
which would be hurtful unto them, and that with an obstinate and bad mind.
Deuteronomy: 17. 14. 15.
But it will be objected, that they had a commandment and warrant from God:
who said thus unto the forefathers, when thou shall come into the land, which
the Lord thy God gives thee: and shall possess it, and dwell therein: If thou
say I will set a king over me, like as all the nations that are about me, then
thou shall make him over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose; from among
thy brethren shall thou make a King over thee. Thou shall not set a stranger
over thee, which is not thy brother. Behold here the allowance of God, to choose
themselves a king; so he be not a stranger. And whereas it is said, the Lord
should choose them a king; they come in this place to him, that be would make
choice of a king for them: how do they then offend in this their petition and
desire? Indeed their desire is not simply evil of it self, for if it were
so, it might not have been granted; but their desire is not to this end, to
have the word of God performed, but to satisfy their own humors. They should
have stayed Gods time and leisure, but they distrust God, and are most
unthankful to Samuel, despising him in his old age; neither do they ask a
king according to Gods appointment and institution; But let us have a king (say
they) as other nations have, be he good or bad. But yet if God would (as it
fell out after) give them a king: why is he angry with them for asking a king?
because they did ask it with a bad mind, offering some injury to Samuel: yet
in his secret will and purpose, his meaning was to give them a king: He
disliked in this people, their distrust and difficience: who relied more upon
man, then God: their bouldnes, in attempting, so rashly and suddenly to erect a
new form of government. He misliked the contempt of his own government, in
that contemning him their king, they sought a certain king, after the example
of other nations, and so they were weary of Gods order. And yet, the
government of kings does not shut out the government of God, but God does
reign by kings, as well as he reigned by judges. The king is the minister of
God, his servant, and deputy: he sits in his place and throne, and God is
the author of his office and authority, as we may see in this place. And this
form of government has been of many nations much desired.

This principality or kingdom was first begun (as it is thought) by the
Egyptians, who could live no while without a king. And we find (in the book
of Geneses which is most ancient) that the Egyptians had their kings, one
after an other. And whereas in the administration of a common weal, there has
been (long since) three sorts or kinds of governments set down, the one
Monarchy, an other Aristocratie when the best govern; the third Democrati, or
popular state, when the common people have a stroke, in ruling the public
weal. The first kind of government is thought as good as any, if not the best
of all: For when counsel or government is in the power of one: In the
government of the commonwealth, all things are more easily performed. In the
other two kinds of gouernme^ts, one oftentimes says one thing, and others will
not grant it, and they are not easily agreed: Here one has a stroke, the
pre-eminence and prerogative of commanding and granting. The whole world is
ruled and governed by one, and what can be better or more wisely governed? The
government by Judges, was not very strong; but almost voluntary, and therefore
more contemptible: but in the government of a king, there is more majesty in
their kingly pomp, and glory, which is a more admiration and a wonder to the
people, and is a means to keep them in better order and subjection: The name
of a king has been always famous, great, most glorious, and sacred, amongst
all nations of the world: But ye^ s^e the madness, and inconstancy of this
people: They egerly desired a king, and when they had him, they would not
receive him, but many of them despised him. And thus they dealt with the Lord,
many times before and after this. They desire deliverance out of Egypt, and
when they are delivered, they desire to return thither again They desire
Manna from heaven, when they were in the wilderness: when they had it, being
sweet and heavenly food, they loathed it, and made light account of it. They
desire to turn out of Babylon into their own country: when their return is
granted, a great part of them refuse to return. So in this place, 1. Sam. 10.
(...).
how importunate and eager are they with the Lord to have a King: but when he
was anointed and chosen King, some wicked men said; How shall he save us? so
they despised him and brought him no presents. How can such people be pleased,
being fickle, wavering, and changeable, misliking the best government that is;
yea such as the Lord himself allows, and appoints: and such, as they
themselves (sometimes) have liked and desired. 1. Sam. 10 24. 2^.
But yet it is said, that many of those people shouted and said, God save the
King. And when Saul went home to Gibiah, there followed him a band of men,
whose heart God had touched. Again it may be objected: how is God the Author
of the calling and authority of Kings? how do they sit in his throne? When
many of them are most wicked in life, and unjust, and corrupt in governing;
when all things are full of confusion and disorder: but we are to look to the
good we have of government. And we are to know, that both bad Governors, and
corruptions in government, the sins are not of God but from themselves. God
does neither allow nor command them, but forbid and detest them. And yet there
is some profit in bad Magistrates: Many good laws, and some form of justice
amongst them. Wicked Governors, are as plagues and punishments for the sins
of the people: Because when they are good, we receive not that goodness at the
hand of God thankefully, submitting our selves to his laws and ordinances; but
abuse the goodness of God to our sinful and beastly lusts: Tyndal.
Therefore does God make a scourge of them, and turn them to wild beasts
(contrary to the nature of their names) even to Lions, Bears, Foxes, and
unclean Swine, to avenge himself of our unnatural, blind, unkindness, and
of our rebellious disobedience. So he turns the fruitful land into
barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. Psa. 107. 34.
Let us not take the staff by the end, to seek to avenge our selves of his
rod, which is the evil rulers, The child, as long as he seeks to avenge
himself of the rod, has an evil heart: for he thinks not that the
correction is right, or that he has deserved it, neither repents, but
rejoices in his wickedness, and so long shall he never be without a rod; yea
so long shall the rod be made sharper and sharper. If he acknowledge his
fault, and take the correction meekely, and kiss the rod, and amend with the
learning and nurture of his father and mother, then the rod is taken away. So,
if we resist evil Rulers, seeking to set our selves at liberty, we shall (no
doubt) bring our selves into more cruel bondage, and wrappe our selves into
much more misery and wretchedness: For if the heads is overcome they will make
their yoakes sorer. If the people overcome the Rulers, then make they away for
a more cruel nation, which has no right to the Crown. If we submit our
selves to the chastening of God, and meekely acknowledge our sins, for the
which we are scourged, and kiss the rod, and amend our lives: Then God will
take the rod away: that is, he will give the Rulers a better heart; or if they
continue their malice, and persecute thee for well doing, he will deliver thee
out of their tyranny. When Israel sinned against GOD, he gave them up to one
Tyrant or other: when they repented, he sent them deliverance. A Christian man
(in respect of God) is but a passive thing, a thing that suffers only, and
does naught; as the sick, in respect of the Surgeon or Physician does
suffer only. The Surgeon slancheth, cutteth out the dead flesh, searches
the wounds, thrusts in tents, burns, seweth, stitcheth, and puts
corasiues to draw out the corruption; and last of all, lays too healing
playsters, and makes whole. The Physician gives purgations and drinks to
drive out the disease, and then with restoratiues brings health. Now if the
sick resist the razor or searching iron, does he not resist his own health,
and is the cause of his own death? So likewise is it of us, if we resist evil
rulers, which are the rods and scourges, wherewith God chastises us, the
instruments wherewith God does search our wounds, and bitter drinks to drive
out sin, and corasiues to draw out by the root the coare of the pox of the
soul, that fretteth inward. Thus a Christian receives all things at the hands
of God, both good and bad, both sweet and sower, both wealth and woe: and he
does take good Princes as a special belssing, and bad Princes as a just
judgment sent for sin. But it will be objected, That the Lord says of some
Rulers, that they reigned not by him: Hosea. 8. 4.
They have set up a King (says he) but not by me; they have made Princes and
I knew it not. The meaning is, that the people of Israel had set up Jeroboam,
by whom they sought their own liberty (as many Tyrants, do not respect Gods
word or will, but their own lusts and affections:) But we must distinguish
the office from the person; and we must know that men do abuse good things
through their own corruption: And therefore whatsoever is good in government is
from God; and he does use the Devil as plagues and punishments for the sins
of the people. Dan. 2. 2. ^7.
It is said by Daniel, that God changes the times and seasons: He takes away
Kings, and sets up Kings. And Daniel says thus, to the proud King
Nebucadnezer: O King, thou art a King of Kings, and the God of heaven has
given thee a Kingdom, power, strength and glory. And when Pilate said to
Christ, Know thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to
loose thee? Jesus answered, Thou could not have power at all against me,
except it were given thee from above. But it may be yet objected, That the
authority and office of Kings, is not of divine institution* Seeing Saint
Peter calls it an ordinance of man, and that place is abused by the Pope, to
the disgracing of Christian Princes. The meaning is not, that the power of
Princes and Magistrates, is only a devise of man, and only from man; But as
one says. Est ordinatio diuina, secundum substantium ordinatio humana,
secundum modum ac finum: It is a divine ordinance, in respect of the substance.
and it is humane, in respect of the manner and end. The office and power of the
King is from God: The manner of choosing and governing the commonwealth, is in
many things humane, and the end is for the good and preservation of man: and so
are lawful Pastors, though their calling be divine; yet they are chosen,
approved, and ordained, for the benefit of men. And thus the Apostle defines
a High Priest: To be taken from among men, and is ordained for men, in things
perteyning to God: And so is a King taken from among men, ordained for men, in
things pertaining both to God and men; That is, for the good both of the Church
and Commonwealth. As for the Popes office and usurped supremacy, it is
merely humane; nay it is diabolical, and against the examples and authority
of holy Scripture. He has no true nor just warrant, from the Law, Prophets,
Evangelists, nor Apostolical writings: But of this, it may be we shall speak
more hereafter. It is sufficiently proved already, and it shall appear more
plainly hereafter, that the office and power of Princes is divine and sacred.
Now because some Kings are given of God to his people in love and mercy, and
some in wrath and judgment: Let them try themselves, whether it may be said of
them, as it is said of Solomon in this place, That God in love to them, and in
love to his people, has set them in his own throne. Let them know then, that
such a King (as is given of God in love) is both qualified with gifts fit for
his calling, and will and must necessarily perform the duty of his place: as
this Queen testifies of Solomon in the words following. It is said of David,
that as he was chosen from the sheepe-folds, to feed Gods people in Jacob,
and his inheritance in Israel: Psa. 78. 70.
so he fed them according to the simplicity of his heart, and guided them
by the discretion of his hands. 2. Sam. 8. 15.
And it is said of him (in another place) that he reigned over all ISRAEL,
and executed judgment and justice: Psa. 101. 1.
and he himself protests, that he governed his Court, Church, and
Commonwealth, according to the true rules of mercy and judgment. And it is
said of Solomon, that all Israel feared him; for they saw that the wisdom of
God was in him to do justice, and to perform faithfully the duty of his place
and calling. A learned writer upon that Psalm 78. says, God did choose David
to this end, that he should feed his people; and therefore he fed them. He
chose Saul to afflict his people, and therefore he afflicted them. For mark
what the Lord said to the people that would needs have a King; he threatens
them, and gives them that King in his wrath. This (says he) shall be the
manner of the King that shall reign over you: 1. Sam. 8. 10. 11. 12. 13. etc.
He will take your sons, and appoint them to his Chariots, and to be his
horsemen, and some shall run before his Chariot. Also he will make them as
Captains over thousands, and Captains over fifties, and to ear his ground,
and to reap his harvest, and to make instruments of war, and the things that
serve for his Chariots. He will also take your daughters, and make them
Apothecaries, and Cooks, and Bakers. And he will take your fields, and your
vineyards, and your best Olive trees, and give them to his servants. And he
will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give it to his
Eunuchs and his servants. And he will take your men servants, and your maid
servants, and the chief of your young men, and your Asses, and put them to his
work. He will take the tenth of your sheep, and you shall be his servants:
and you shall cry out at that day, because of your King, whom you have chosen
you, and the Lord will not hear you at that day. But it may be, some will say,
May Kings thus oppress the Commonwealth? no, they have no such authority by
their office: But this King was sent in wrath from God, to plague this people;
and therefore he does plague them. Samuelthreatneth to that people, the
deminution of those liberties which the Israelites enjoyed before under the
Judges He admonishes them of the hard estate which was to ensue. This was Gods
doing in his justice, for the sins of the people. For God is in heaven, he
may do whatsoever he will; his ways are all just and righteous. But as for
Kings, they n^ay not do what they list, they are bound to the laws of God, to
the laws of charity, equity and righteousness. But those which are given in
wrath, they shall vex and afflict the people. Christ said to Peter, Feed my
sheep. It was said to Antichrist, Devour, destroy, beat down, seduce the
people, because they receive not the love of truth, that they might be saved:
Therefore he destroys, seduceth, and deceives as many as he can. The Lord
threatens in Zachary: Zac. 11. 16.
I will raise up a shepherd in the Land, which shall not look for the thing
which is lost, nor seek the tender lambs, nor heal that which is hurt, nor
feed that which stands up: he shall eat the flesh of the fat, and tear
their claws in pieces. Our Savior Christ says, That a thief, comes to
steal, kill, and destroy. So that by their deeds. practices, and fruits,
both of Princes and Ministers, it may be easily gathered, whether they be
sent to a people in love or wrath. But of the duty of such Governors as are
given in love, we shall speak hereafter. Now as the dignity of Kings
appears, in that their calling is so divine, and from God himself: so in
this also, that they are in his place and throne, and have so many honorable
titles given unto them in the Scripture. They are called nurcing fathers and
mothers, shepherds of the people, leaders, keepers, helpers, Governors; yea,
in some sense Saviors; and God does give them his own name, counting them
gods: not by nature; for so they are men like other men, borne and conceived as
other, and shall dye like men: But they are gods by office, they are the
Vicegerents and Images of God. This is a great honor, great excellency and
dignity, to be admired and reverenced of all men. Yet let me admonish you,
that the same, or the like titles and dignities may be applied to the faithful
Ministers of God; though they be accounted and taken by most men, as vile,
base, contemptible, and the very off-scourings of the world: And many which do
magnify, and almost adore great persons, Governors, and Magistrates (it may
be for fear, ^latterie, favor and lucer) even these do vil^sie, scorn,
contemn, and disgrace the calling of the Ministers, as much as they can. But
let them know, that there is some likeness and affinity betwixt the calling of
a Magistrate, and the calling of the Minister. As good Princes are the
blessings of God, so are good ministers; as we have heard before, when we
entreated of true wisdom. As the calling of the Magistrate is sacred and
divine, so is the calling of the Minister; it is the holy Ghost that appointed
Ouer-^eers in the Church; and it is Jesus Christ that gives gifts to men, to
become Pastors and teachers in the Church. Those glorious titles (before spoken
of) they belong also to the Ministers of God: They are pastors, fathers,
nurces, and in Gods stead. Magistrates are to be honored; such as rule well in
word and doctrine are worthy of double honor. The same is the end of both
their callings, to suppress and beat down sin: But our power is
spiritual, therefore the greater, even the power of God to salvation; power to
convert souls, to beat down Satan and sin, and to bring into bondage
every thought that does raise it self against God. By the Magistrates care,
policy and power, we live in peace, and are defended from foreign and
domestical foes. By the ministry of the word, the sword of the spirit, we
are armed against our spiritual enemies, and enjoy true peace of conscience:
And therefore the ministry of the word is truly called, the streugth and
life of a land. When Elishai saw Eliah taken up into heaven, he cried, My
father, my father, the Chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. It is sin
that weakens a land, it is religion and piety that makes it strong. By the
preaching of the word sin is weakened, and all virtue and goodness is increased
and confirmed. The want of this word, is the famishing of men's souls: the
plenty of this word, is the life of their souls. Magistrates are keepers and
maintayners of both the tables of the commandments; and so are all faithful
Ministers. Magistrates are to execute outward punishments upon offenders.
Ministers have power to reprove, to bind, and exclude notorious offenders* Our
bodies, goods and lives, are subject to Princes; but al power, worship, and
majesty, are subject so the word which we preach: And as they are rebels to
Princes which resist their power, so are they rebels to God, which set
themselves against the doctrine, counsels, and exhortations of his faithful
Ministers. And finally, as good Magistrates do comfort and encourage good
subjects, by rewards, honors and countenance; so good Ministers are careful
by all means possible to comfort good Christians by the sweet promises and
mercies of God, and by the assurance of remission of sins and life eternal.
Seeing therefore there is such agreement, both in the titles and callings of
Magistrates and Ministers, there should be also an agreement and union in
affection betwixt them. They are entirely to affect and love one another. The
Ministers are to guide and direct the Rulers by the word, and they again are
to defend them by the sword. This the Lord teaches, when he appointed two
brethren to govern his people, Moses and Aaron, the one to govern, the other
to teach. It went well with Saul, so long as he hearkened to Samuel the
Prophet. David had Gad and Nathan near unto him, as his faithful Counselors.
Hezekiah the King, was directed by Esaiah the Prophet. Therefore Magistrates are
to countenance good Ministers, and to encourage them. We teach and persuade
all men to obey the higher powers. We pray for you publikelie and privately,
and stir up others to do the like. We set forth the excellency of your
callings: We threaten damnation to rebels and traitors. As for our calling,
although divine and sacred, yet odious and contemptible to the world, because
we reprove the sins of all men: we endure many hard speeches, unkindness
and injuries of wicked men: the eyes of many, their ears, hearts and mouths
are open against us. We are subject to many temptations and infirmities. We
have many discomforts and discouragements. Who is to comfort, and countenance,
and defend us, but the good Magistrates? And you must not be offended though
we sometimes justly reprove your opon sins, in open place. It is our office
to reprove sin in all; as it is your duty to punish sin in all. As you
must not be partial, and not have respect of persons in judgment; so we must
not be partial in reproouing. We do it (God, knows) in duty, love and
conscience; and therefore you are to take it in good part. All holy men, though
they were Kings and Princes, have been content patiently to receive just
reproof: And the sins of Magistrates and great persons do most hurt of all
other; and therefore most of all to be reproved. If we be careless and idle
in our place; If we be flatterers and time seruers. If we be corrupt and false
in our doctrine; If we be wicked and dissolute in life; Let us be censured
according to our deserts. But if our care be to do good, to take what pains we
can in our places, to win fowls, to beat down sin and Popery, to live
honestly, and keep a good conscience in all things: If neither our doctrine
nor life can be justly touched, why should you be strange unto us? why should
you keep back from us your favor, assistance, and countenance?

It is the chief end of the office and calling of a good Magistrate, to defend
and countenance all good and honest men, much more the faithful and paynefull
Ministers of God.

And seeing Magistrates and Ministers have the same author, the same names and
dignity, let them join together for the beating down of sin, and be
helpers and comforters one to another; and let the highest of all remember,
specially those which make small account of our calling; let them remember and
lay up in their hearts these worthy places of Scripture. Remember that caveat
which GOD gives to his people: Deuteronomy. 12. 19.
Beware that thou forsake not the Leuite as long as thou live upon the earth.
And again: Psa. 10. 15.
Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. This was spoken even
to Kings and Princes, to their rebuke and shame. And never forget that bitter
prayer of Moses, who yet was the mildest man that ever lived upon the earth,
Deuteronomy 3. 11.
Bless o Lord (says he) his substance, and accept the work of his hands: he
speaks of the tribe of Levy, the faithful ministers of God: Smite through
the Ioynes of them that rise against him, and of them that hate him, that they
never rise up again. Luke 10. 16.
And remember that saying of our Savior Christ, speaking to his Apostles,
saying, He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises
me. And those sayings of the Apostle; Now we beseech you brethren, that you
know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, 1. These: 5. 1^.
and admonish you, that you have them in singular love for their work sake.
Love them for their calling, for the gifts of God in them, for their great
pains, for the gain and profit which you do or may reap by them. And never
forget that saying of the same Apostle already alleged, 1. Tim. 5.
That those which labor in word and doctrine are worthy of double honor. And
finally, remember the sweet and gracious exhortation of the worthy king, good
king Iehosephat, delivered to his own subjects by his own mouth, 2. Chron:
20. 20.
saying, Hear you me o Judah, and you inhabitants of Iersalem, put your trust
in the Lord your God, and you shall be assured; believe his Prophets, and you
shall prosper. Now let us come to the duty of a king, and of all governors,
set down in few words, by this blessed Queen; she puts Solomon in mind
o^ the end why God did thus highly prefer and advance him, it was to execute
judgment and justice, to do equity and righteousness. This is the end and
calling of a^ governors and rulers, appointed by God himself, and let us in
respect of the place and persons, apply our speech, to subordinate
magistrates, who are the kings deputies, and rule in his name under him, they
must faithfully do their duties, and justly discharge their places, and the
trust committed to them. And by the king, being the chief magistrate, the
scripture do^^ understand, all other governors, officers, assistance and
helpers to him; he cannot rule and govern alone by himself, so great a
kingdom and people, he has need of many eyes, many ears, many heads and
hands, to help and assist him in government. Exodus 18.
Moses by the counsel of Iethroh^s father in law, provides sundry officers
and judges under him, for hearing and judging of causes. 2. Chron: 19.
King Iehosephat sets judges in the land, throughout all the strong Cities
in Judah, City by City, and tells them, and teaches them, what they are to
do in their places. 1. Pet 2. 13. 14.
S. Peter exhorting us to submission to the king, as to the superior, so he
makes mention of governors under the king, for the punishment of evil doers,
and for the praise of them that do well. We have hard before, the excellency
of kings and magistrates, namely, that God is the author of their place, that
they are in Gods stead, and called by his name. This no doubt is a great honor
and dignity to be above others, to be chief in a kingdom, in a city, town
or country, to represent the person of a king, yea to represent the person of
God: this may be an occasion to lift up the hearts of many above their
brethren, because of the greatness of their place; and many in this their
office, do only respect, the highness, the glory and worship of it: and
therefore are conceited in themselves. But as it is Hon^^, so it is Onus: As
the place of the magistrate is an honor, so it is a burden, a great and heavy
burden: and the consideration of this may serve, to humble good magistrates,
both in the sight of God and men; to remember in what low and base astate they
have been heretofore, though they be now advanced. Gen: 32. 10.
They may say to God in the humility of their souls, with Jacob, I am not
worthy of the least of all thy mercies, and all the truth which thou have
showed to thy servant; for with my staff came I over this Jorden, and now have
I gotten two bands: And may not some say with David that the Lord has chosen
and taken them from the Sheepefoldes, Psalm: 78. 70.
to feed his people in Jacob, and his inheritance in Israel. May not many truly
say, that though they be now of great wealth, yet they have been as poor as
others: though they be now governors and rulers of others, yet they have been
subject to those whom they govern. Nay the greatness of their place, the honor
and dignity that they are in, should not make them proud: for if they look
well to the great and manifold duties required, they shall have no cause to be
lifted up, but rather to be humbled and cast down: they are not called to the
place of government to be proud, idle, to take their pleasure and ease, to live
in ^otousnes, in luxury and licensiousnes, but faithfully and carefully to
perform all the duties which God requires of good governors in holy
scripture: to govern well, is a matter of great difficulty, care, labor, and
danger: many times in pleasing men, they displease God; and in pleasing God,
they displease men; so that they can hardly so behave themselves, but that they
shall displease the one or the other: What wisdom, humane and divine, is
required in good governors, or else they must see with other men's eyes, he must
speak with other men's tongues, and they must be wise by other men's heads:
governors without true wisdom, are like a ship without an anchor, like birds
without wings. A wise governor is like salt to season others, he is as the
eye and the heart of the people. What courage and magnanimity is required in
good rulers, for the suppressing of the rebellious and wicked, and for doing of
justice without partiality? and what care, diligence, providence, labor, and
toil, for the right government of so many, and so many sorts of men. The
heathen could say, that the greatness of government, is the greatnes^ of care:
he is in duty to warrant the sleep of his subjects by his own watchfulnes;
their peace by his labor; their ease by his industry; their leisure by his
business; the head watches and provides for the government of the whole body;
how careful and watchful are nurces for the feeding and ordering of their
children? how watchful are good Shepherds for the leading, and feeding of
their sheep? and how careful is a good householder and master, for the
government of the whole family? so that it is an old saying, Therein but one
servant in an house: meaning, that the master is servant to all; in respect of
his care and providence over all. Greg:
In very deed says one, it seems to me, that it is the art of all arts, the
discipline of all disciplines, to govern man, which of all creatures is most
variable in manners, and diverse in will. An other says, that to govern, is
not only a dignity, but an art; yea the greatest of all other: for if they
rule over other things which are without man, the skill and the cunning is
better then all the things themselves: how much more is the government over men
most excellent, seeing that men do excel all other things? There are diverse
kinds of arts, one excelling an other, there is the art and skill of
husbandry, of carpentrie and building, Chry: in 2. Cor. 7.
which are very necessaire, and do serve for the help and conservation of
this life: there be other arts, which are less then these; As to be
shepherds, tailors, smithes, but amongst all these, husbandry is most
necessary, which God himself ordained and commanded so soon as he had made
man: for it is possible for a man to live without most of the other arts, but
without husbandry it is impossible to live; without it, all the rest are to no
purpose; yet kings do govern husbandmen, and there is some likeness between
husbandry and government: the governor is a setter of plants, some he
proyneth, some he cherishes, and causes to grow: some he cutteth down and
pulls up by the roots: good governors are like husbandmen; by husbandry,
the badnes of the earth, and the wildnes of the plants are made better: by
weeds, the plants and seeds are hidden and choakt; but the good husbandman,
is careful to pluck them up: so by good laws men are made better, and the
wicked which hinder and hurt others, are restrained and suppressed: and as
husbandmen have many things to hinder their planting and sowing, as wild
beasts, tempests, hail, floods, drought, so have governors hindrances and
enemies to their government, which they will carefully avoid as well as they
can. This comparison of husbandry, as it sets out the necessity and
excellency of government, so it shows the great care and labor that is
joined with it: for who is more careful and painful then the husband man?
let therefore magistrates be humbled in consideration of the virtues and duties
of their great calling: and yet for their further humiliation, let them
remember their own infirmities and wants to perform their duty as they
ought. Let them remember that they are subject to the temptations of the
devil, of the flesh, and the world: and let them know, that they are subject
to the common miseries of this life, and to other miseries and crosses,
incident and peculiar to their calling: and let them in no case forget, that
they must give account to the great Judge and governor of all the world, how
they have behaved themselves in their places and callings: It shall be said to
them, to every one of them, Come, give account of thy stewardship, thou may
be no longer steward. And for their further humiliatio^, they must know, that
they cannot tell how long they shall enjoy those places of honor and dignity,
being subject to death as well as others; and they cannot tell how soon they
may be taken away. Agathon had wont to say, that a magistrate must always
remember these three things. First, that he rules men; secondly, that he must
rule according to laws; and thirdly, that he shall not always rule. The
consideration of this latter point of the shortness and uncertainty of this
life, that we must certainly die, and we know not how soon, is able to
humble, the mightiest potentate in the earth. The highest of them all may say,
I my self am also mortal, and a man like all other, and am come of him that
was first made of the earth, and in my mothers womb was I fashioned as others
are; and when I was borne I received the common air, crying and weeping at the
first as all others do; I was nourished in swaddling clothes, and with cares.
For there is no king that has any other beginning of birth, all men have one
entrance to life, and a like going out. David calls death the hie way of all
the earth, and he himself puts governors in mind of their mortal state:
for howsoever he says, that God stands in the assembly of gods, he judges
among gods: And again, I have said ye are gods, and ye all are children of
the most high: this he speaks of magistrates, magnifying and extolling their
office, and giving them three times in that Psalm, the glorious and sacred
titles of Gods; yet least they should be puffed up with the excellency of
their callings, Ps: 82. 1. 6. 7.
presently he tells them, ye shall die as a man, and you Princes shall fall
like others. He would have them remember, that though they be gods, yet they
are but mortal gods; of this mortal state of Princes, we to our great
discomfort have had woeful experience not long since in this our Land: A
worthy young Prince of great hope, the flower and Jewel of our land, the
comfort of his parents, and of all good Christians and subjects, the heir
apparent of sundry kingdoms, how soon has the Lord taken him away in the
prime of his tender, young, and flourishing age? happy no doubt is he, that is
so soon taken away from a miserable world, but unhappy are we, whose sins,
has caused the Lord to take such a Jewel from us: it cannot but
prognosticate, some heavy judgment to this our nation and country: and great
cause have all christian hearts amongst us, to mourn and lament for such a
great loss. This Church may say as Naomi said, upon the death of her husband,
when they called her Naomi, she answered them, call me not Naomi, that is
beautiful, Ruth. 1. 20.
but call me Marah, that is bitter: for the almighty has given me much
bitterness. Why call you me Naomi, seeing the Lord has humbled me, and the
almighty has brought me to adversity? We may mourn and say with David, 2.
Sam: 3. 20.
mourning for the death of Ionathon, Tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in the
streets of Ashkelon, least the daughters of Philistimes rejoice, 2. Sam: 3. 33.
least the daughters of uncircumcised triumph. And as he says in an other
place, after the death of Abner, there is a Prince, and a great man fallen this
day in Israel. But blessed be God, who is still more merciful to us then we
deserve, and in judgments remembers mercy, who though for our sins has cut
off so precious a branch, yet the blessed tree is yet alive, and stands and
flourishes, and also some sweet branches to our great comfort and hope. Now
the Lord of mercy, bless them all and multiply, and increase them, and
continue them and theirs if his will be, to the end of the world, to their own
comfort, the shame of their enemies, and to the common good of this Church and
commonwealth: yet let us not forget that heavy judgment, but so remember it,
that it may draw us to true repentance, for that is the true use of all
judgments: and let us learn to depend wholly and only on God, and not upon
any mortal man. Psalm: 146. 3.
Remembering that counsel of David, put not your trust in Princes, nor in the
son of man, for there is no help in him, his breath departs, and he
returns to his earth; then his thoughts perish: blessed is he that has the
God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God which made heaven
and earth, the sea 'and all that therein is, which keeps his fidelity for
ever. And let this and the like examples of the death of great persons, put all
in mind (though they be never so high,) of the mortal state of all the
children of men, of what state or conditions soever they be; And thus though
governors and magistrates take occasion by the dignity of their places, yet
both this, and many other causes, may move, draw, and induce them to true
humility. And now let us draw nearer to the description of the several
duties required of Christian governors, both in this and in many other places
of scripture, the Lord does not only in his word set down, generally the
rules of all christianity, but also the several duties of all states,
degrees, and callings, as of fathers and children, masters and servants,
husbands and wives, kings and subjects: wherein we may see the fulness and
equity of scripture, applying it self, and speaking to all sorts of men.
Again, we learn this lesson by it, that it is not sufficient for us to
perform the general duties of Christianity, but also the particular duties
of our several callings. And we may see the corruption of our natures, that
every one is willing and ready to hear the duties of other men, forgetting
and little regarding what does belong and appertain to themselves. The servant
is content to hear the duty of his master, and the master is content to
hear the duty of his servants; children are content to hear the duty of
their parents, and parents are content to hear the duties of children.
Husbands are willing to hear the duties of wives, and wives are content to
hear the duties of husbands. Ministers are content to hear the duties of the
people, and people are content to hear the duties of ministers. Subjects are
content to hear the duties of their Princes, and Princes are willing to hear
the duties of their subjects. But few or none are so ready or willing
to-heare and learn their own duties. For redress of this corruption, let
every one say with the kingly Prophet David, I will hear what the Lord will
say concerning me. And of al other, the scriptures do often and plentifully
speak of the duties of Princes and Magistrates, in Exodus, in Deutrinomie, in
the Proverbs of Solomon, in the Law, in the Prophets, in the Gospel; and many
preachers, many times, in many places, upon just occasion do handle this
doctrine of the Magistrates, and this is not superfluous, because it is a
matter of great importance: for if they do their duties, the Church and
commonwealth flourishes: otherwise there is decay and ruin. Again, their
office is hard and difficult, much holiness, much wisdom and faithfulness
required of them, their charge and burden is great, they have many hindrances
and enemies, they are subject to many dangers, therefore they had need of much
and daily instruction, and so much teaching, and so many sermons, shall be so
many witnesses against them if they do not regard and follow the^: but to come
to the description of good rulers, their first care must be, that if they will
well and profitably rule others, they must first govern and rule themselves.
The very heathen have accounted those the best Emperors and rulers, which
could rule their own affections, they have thought and said, that we need not
so much fear our armed enemies, as our own desires and lusts: that it is a
far greater work to overcome our selves, then to overcome our enemies. And
thus says one very excelle^tly, If thou will have all things subject to thee,
subject thy self to reason; thou shall rule many, if reason rule thee: Seneca.
from thence thou shall learn, what and how thou art to take any thing in
hand. Isodo.
Kings and rulers, have their name from doing well; therefore by doing well,
thou do hold the name of a ruler; but by sinning, thou do lose it:
therefore they are rightly called kings and rulers, who can rightly rule
themselves and others. Greg:
The highest place is well ruled, when he that governs has dominion, rather
over vices, then over his brethren. Again, it is a good house and well ordered,
where the man rules, and the wi^e obeys: he is a good man, where the spirit
rules, and the flesh serves. Most excellent is the speech of his Majesty to
his gracious son, of famous memory, saying; That he is not worthy to rule
others, that cannot rule himself. Inordinate affections, more dangerous and
powerful then the enemies of the body, those are vanquished by spiritual
power: this is the best victory; and such be truly noble. Base m^n may
subdue Kingdoms, and themselves bondmen of sin and Satan. He is not
worthy to govern a Christian people, that is not a Christian himself; let
such look for no good success. Again, Princes are tied to God in a double
bond; First, in that they are men; Secondly, in that they are Rulers of men: In
piety and thankfulness they are to go before others. The highness of their
place aggrauateth their fault: Their glory is to shine before others. He is
better (says Solomon) that rules his own mind, then he that wins a
City. Such as win Cities, spoyleth and destroys: He that rules himself,
does hurt and spoil no man; he is at war with none but with his own wicked
nature. Pro. 16. 12.
It is abomination to Kings to commit wickedness; for their throne is
stablished by justice. The greater that men are, the more grievous, horrible
and loathsome are their sins. Hose. 4. 7.
As they were increased (says the Prophet) they rebelled against me;
therefore I will change their glory into shame. Again, they are poor, they
are foolish; Ier. 5. 4. 5. etc.
for they know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment of their God. I will
get me to the great men, and will speak to them; for they have known the way
of the Lord, and the judgment of their God: but those have altogether broken
the yoke and burst the bonds; wherefore a Lion out of the forest shall slay
them. These are most unkind to God, who do thus requite his kindness, for
their great preferments and dignities. Magistrates of all others must be
unrebukable, the eyes of all are upon them: A spot or a mote in the sun is
soonest spyed: their good example does much good; if they fall, others follow;
they lead others to hell. It is a stain to their place, to their dignity and
titles, to be stained or tainted with any gross sin: They are called gods;
and therefore they must be like God in hating sin; they must be like God in
holiness and righteousness. Rulers must out go the people, not in pleasure and
lust, but in temperance, in virtue, and magnanimity. It is the saying of the
heathen; He is not worthy to govern, that is no better, neither has more
virtues then they which he gouernes: they are to be first doers of that which
they command: they must lead the way to virtue, and practice that which they
command. It is written of Lycurgus, that he set down no law, whereof he
himself had not showed an example and practice in his own person. Ageselaus
would be the first doer of that he commanded others to do. Sins of great men
are examples and privileges to others: whatsoever they do, they seem to
command. As a great branch cut from a tree, brings down many small ones with
it: And as when a great Prince comes forth of his palace, a multitude follow
him: so do subjects ordinarily follow the examples of their governors good or
bad: yea the affection, in subjects to please Princes, and to immitate their
actions, is of more force then laws and punishments: And therefore true is
that saying of a heathen man; That Magistrates, in matters of wickedness and
vice, do not only conceive it, but spread it, and as it were, water their
subjects with it. And again, will thou have thy subjects good? be thou good:
The Prince by well doing teaches the subjects to do well. Examples of Princes
never rest where they begin, but do break forth, and scatter far and
near, the world notes their words and deeds; neither can they be hid more
then the beams in the sun. Good Rulers are to punish all sins in others;
and how can they do this, if they be guilty of the same, or of greater, or
more grievous sins? And what a a shame is it to be called Rulers and
governors, and yet to be servants and slaves to sin? yea, to as many sins
as do rule and reign in them? Diogines had wont to say, that harlots were as
Rulers, and Queens to Kings; because they might command what they would; and
that they would deny nothing to them as they did to their subjects. Of this
there is example in Herod, who granted to Herodias, Mat. 14.
a wanton dancing Damsel, half of his kingdom. Rulers are often carried
away with the conceit of their dignity, as though they had a privilege to do
as they list; and they have flatterers about them, which will soothe them, and
set them on in this conceit. Monstrous was the saying of the Stepmother of
Anthony Caracalla; for when he was so bewitched with her beauty, that he
desired to marry her, and sighed and said, O si liceret, O that it were
lawful: She shamefully answered, Si libet lice^: If thou list it is lawful:
for Princes do give laws, and not receive laws. A most untrue speech in
things concerning the law of nature; as well confessed Dionisius, when his
mother would have married otherwise then became her age: saying, Oh mother, the
civil laws of man may be changed and altered, but the law of nature cannot
be changed. Herodotus writes; That Cambises, King of Persia, coveting to
marry with his sister, asked his Counselors whether there were any law to
permit the brother to marry with the sister. They answered, after deliberation,
that they could find no such law; but they found a law, whereby it was
permitted to the King of Persia to do what he listed. A most wicked answer,
when the question was of the law of nature. Oh vild flatterers and pernicious
parasites, the very bane and poison of Kings and Rulers. It is sin and wicked
affections, which are as rebels and traitors, which Christian Rulers are first
of all to subdue in themselves. Hoc opus hic labor est: This is the greatest
work, the greatest labor, cunning, victory and conquest. Sampson overcame
many of the cruel and mighty Philistims; yet was he overcome by filthy
lust. Alexander conquered a great part of the world; but yet he could not
conquer nor tame his own drunkenness, lust and anger. Hercules overcame and
tamed many monsters; but at last he became a servant and slave to Omphala: of
whom one writes thus: Hercules (says he) famous for his virtue, and counted
as it were a god amongst the gods: but he defiled the world with filthy lusts
and uncleanness. How could there be any divine thing in him, that was a
servant to his own vices? and those things which he did are not to be counted
divine virtues: for what great matter was it to overcome a Lion or a Bear, to
kill wild and fierce Horses with their rider? Lactant. lib. pri. instit. Chap.
9.
These are the works of a strong man, yet of a man; and those things which he
overcame were frail and mortal, and may be overthrown by the strength of
man: But to overcome the mind, to suppress wrath, it is the part of the
mightiest man, which he did not neither could do. He that does this, I do
not only compare him with the chiefest and best men, but also I account him
most like to God himself: And he only is to be judged a mighty man, who is
temperate, moderate and just. Wherefore let Rulers remember this golden
sentence, proceeding from a golden mouth, saying; He that has great power
over many things, let him first purge his own conscience; and those sins
which he punishes in others, Chry. in (...).
let him not commit himself; and let him avoid that which he punishes: for it
is a foolish thing when any would rule others, and yet cannot rule themselves.
And let them further know, that their authority is no dispensation for sin;
and that God has punished great persons for such faults as might seem but
small in our eyes; As you may see in the examples of Elie and David: and also
in the example of Hesekiah: God did grieuouslie punish them, the one for
pampring his children, the other for numbering the people; and the third, for
showing his treasures to the Ambassadors of Babylon. Let all Governors be of
Nebemiah his mind, who when he was persuaded to fly, he answered; Should
such a man as I fly? Let every Magistrate, when he has any motion to sin,
say thus; Should such a man as I, that am a governor to others, that am in
Gods place, that should be an example to others in all goodness, that should
reprove and punish sin in all: should I commit sin? should I blasph^me the
name of God? should I profane his S^both? should I be proud, or covetous?
should I give my self to wh^redome and drunkenness, or to any such grievous
sin? What a dishonor will this be to God? What a diseredit to my place and
calling? and how offensive to the people? h^w should I rule others, if I cannot
rule my self? And finally, let the^ know, that the greatness and excellency of
the Magistrate, must be accompanied with the excellency of virtue, and with
good example. And as the Magistrate is first to begin with himself, and first
look to his own heart and ways, so also he must have a special regard and
care of all that are under him, in his private family. It is not enough that
he au^yde all kind of sin and wickedness himself, and that he himself lead
a good, godly, and righteous life in the sight of God and men, but also must
have a special care, that his whole family, his wife, his children and
servants, do the like. For they are his special cure and charge committed to
him of God, to be ruled and governed by him according to the rule of his laws,
and therefore worthy is that saying, For all that are under thee, and subject
to thee in thy house, Aug:
thou shall give an account unto God: and therefore the Lord directs the
fourth commandment to the father, master, and householder whatsoever,
Inioyning not only himself to sanctify his Saboth, but that all that belong
and appertain unto him, and are within his doors, do sanctify the Saboth
with him; he is not only himself to come to the holy assemblies, to hear, to
pray, to receive with the congregation, and both openly and privately to be
occupied the whole day in religious exercises, but it is a charge laid upon
him by the Lord, that he cause his whole family to do the like: And if this
be required of every private man, and of every Christian householder
whatsoever, be he never of so mean and base estate, how much more is it
required of the public Magistrate? God speaks thus to his people Israel, D^u:
saying, These words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart, and
thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy children, and shall talk of them
when thou tarriest in the house, and as thou walk by the way, and when thou
lie down, and when thou risest up. This is a general commandment to all
Gods people whatsoever, and much more to the Magistrate: this duty of
household government is most ancient, commended and commanded of God. Every
Christian householder is to be as a King, Priest, and Prophet, in his own
house; As a King to rule, as a Priest to pray, and as a Prophet to teach. Their
care must be, that the wise be the spouse of Christ, their servants to be Gods
servants, their children the children of God. Most are careful to see their
own business and works followed* and in no case neglected, and why should they
not be as careful to see the works of God and his service and business duly
performed in their families? They carefully provide for all necessary
proui^io^ for the maintenance of their bodies: and so far goes an Infidel;
and the like care they have also of their beasts, but Christians must go
further, and see that the souls of their families be fed and provided for; and
so they shall find much fruit and profit to themselves, for this is the way and
means, to make painful, faithful, and conscionable servants: and also by
this means, true religion is continued to our posterity; whereas if we fail
in this duty, religion may decay and die with us, for any thing that we do.
For the continuance and propagation of it, most are careful, specially great
persons, men of power and wealth, that their names, riches, and houses, may
continue if they could for ever. And shall not we have as great a care, for the
preservation and continuance of Gods true worship and service, to the ages to
come? To move us to this duty, let Magistrates and others (...) set before
their eyes, the examples of holy and worthy me^ in scripture, how (...) they
were in teaching and (...) their families. Gen: 4
Our first (...) Adam had a (...) of this, and therefore he taught his two
sons, how to sacrifice to the true God. Gen* 18. 19.
Abraham is commended of God, and he promises to bless him for it, because he
commanded his sons and his household after him, that they keep the way of
the Lord to do righteousness and judgment. Jacob said to his householde, Gen:
35.
and to all that were with him, Put away the strange gods that are among you,
and change your garments. After the example of Jacob, let others cleanse their
houses, as of Idols, so of ignorance, of prophanes, of bl^sphemie, of filthy
speaking, and of all uncleanness and wickedness. For these and such like, do
infect, pollute, and defile, both houses and kingdoms. Josh: 24. 15.
And let every one say with good Joshua, I and my house will serve the Lord.
And as Hannah gave her son Samuel to the Lord, so let every one give and
dedicate their families to God. And as Job every day sanctified his sons, by
praying to God for them, so let every one sanctify themselves and their whole
family by good instructions, and sweet prayrs to God. Ps: 101. 1. 2. 3. etc.
The example of David is most worthy to be imitated of all, and especially of
Magistrates, he professes his care both in ruling himself and his family,
the whole Church and kingdom; he professes his piety to God, the vprightnes
of his own heart, and the wisdom that he had in discerning and separating
the good from the evil, both in his ^wne house and country: He will suffer
no wicked person in his house: he will reform both Church and Commonwealth:
he will not be partaker of other men's sins, nor suffer the blood of them to
cleave to his soul. Worthy also is the example of Cornelius, a Captain, yet
a devout man; one that feared God with all his household; and he had soldiers
fearing God: Act. 10. 2. 33.
And sending for Peter for further instruction; when he was come, he said,
that both he and all his were there present before God, to hear all things
from the mouth of Peter, that was commanded him of God. I will allege but one
example more, of two householders, the man and the woman* persons of no great
account in the world; but yet religious, and religiously governing their
household: (...) mean Aquila and Presilla: Aquila the husband a Tent-maker,
Presilla his wife: Saint Paul says of them; Romans 16. 3. 5.
Greet Presilla and Aquila, my fellow helpers in Christ Jesus: likewise greet
the Church that is in their house. Act. 18. 24. 25. 26.
It is said of these two in another place; That they taught Apollos, a learned
and eloquent man, yet they taught him the way of God more perfectly then he
knew before. S. Paul confesses they were helpers to him in the Lord, and that
they had a Church in their house. His meaning is, that in their house there was
such instruction, reading, hearing, prayer, conference, and other divine
exercises, that their household was as a little Church. If these poor and
private persons had such religious care of their family; how careful ought
Governors and Magistrates to be for the government of their families, which
are to be directions and examples to others? One example more I must needs
aim and point at, I cannot avoid it; it lies in the text; and that is the
example of Solomon, commended un to us by this woman; as in this verse she
commends the government of his kingdom; so in the former verse she admireth
and magnifieth the government of his house; she saw such good order amongst his
servants, such divine and wise instructions by Salomo^, that she bursteth out
into these words; Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants which stand
ever before thee, and hear thy wisdom; his house was so wisely governed,
that she accou^teth them blessed who dwell and live under his government: but
unhappy are many servants and children, who have cause to curse both parents
and masters, who by their folly, carelesnes and bad example, do lead them
to hell, and to everlasting destruction. The Courts of Princes, and great men's
houses, they should not be sinkes of sin, nor yet cages of folly and
uncleanness, but they should be patterns of piety, of wisdom, and religion,
of temperance, and all other virtues; patterns I say to the inferior sort,
whose cies are upon them, and are ready to follow them in good or evil. That
which the Apostle applies to the minister, that may be applied also to the
Magistrate; he says, that the Minister must be one that can rule his own
house honestly, having children under obedience with all honesty; for if any
cannot rule his own house, how shall he care for the Church of God?

THE SEVENTH SERMON.
VERSE 9. And made thee King to do equity and righteousness.


IT is the duty and part of good Governors, (as we have heard already) to
begin first with themselves, to judge and rule their own affections and ways,
and then also so to govern their families, that they be as lights and
lanthornes to others, shining before them in religion, in piety, in all honesty
and good conversation. This is some part of the duty of good Rulers, but this
is not all; It is not enough that he rule himself and his household, that he
perform these common duties of Christianity, which are required in all other
private persons, but he has a greater and a more public charge, as the
government of Towns, Cit^ies, or Countries, he must faithfully and wisely
discharge his public place and calling, which is laid upon him. It is not
sufficient that the Magistrate do reprove public disorders, and lament for
them, as private persons may do; but also he must punish and reform all
public abuses, so far as it lies in his power. Many Philosophers have
written of the states of Kingdoms, how they may be happily governed, and
flourish in this world: Amongst sundry men there are sundry judgments, some
hold, that the safety and felicity of government consists in this, that the
Governors serve the time: Others, that they be in league with other Princes
and Kingdoms: Others, that they be well furnished with money, with Armor,
with men. But this Queen reposeth the safety of Salomons* Kingdom in
Judgment, in Justice, in Equity and Righteousness. And herein Solomon
himself is just of her mind, Pro. 14. 34.
saying; Justice exalts a Nation, but sin is ashame to the people. Again,
a King by judgment maintains a Country, but a man receiving gifts,
destroys it. That which Augustine speaks truly of the state of a Christian
Emperors felicity, may be as well spoken of the felicity of Kings, Princes,
Rulers and Governors; Aug. de Ciu. Dei. lib. 5. cap. 6.
We Christians do not say that Christian Emperors are happy, says he,
because they have a long reign, or dye leaving their sons in quiet
possession of their Empires, or have been ever victorious or powerful against
all their opposers: these are but gifts and solacies of this laborious,
ioylesse life; Idolaters, and such as belong not to God (as these Emperors do)
may enjoy them, because God in his mercy will not have these that know him, to
believe that such things are the best goods he gives; but happy they are (say
we) if they reign justly, free from being puffed up with the glozing
exaltations of their attendance, or cringes of their subjects, that they know
themselves to be but men, and remember that if they make their power their
Trumpeter to divulge the true adoration of Gods Majesty, if they love, fear
and honor him, if they long the most for that Empire, where they need not to
have partners, if they be slack to avenge, quick to forgive, if they use
correction for the public good, and not for private hate, if their pardons
promise not liberty of offending, but indeed only hope of reformation, if they
counterpoise their enforced acts of severity, with the like weight of bounty
and clemency, if their lusts be the lesser, because they have the larger
license, if they desire to rule their own affects, rather then others estates,
if they do all things not for glory, but for charity; And withal, and before
all, give God the due sacrifice of prayer for their imperfections: Such
Christian Emperors we call happy, here in hope, and hereafter, when the time
we look for comes, indeed. O happy and thrice happy are such Kings and
Governors that be thus qualified; and they are (no doubt) a great blessing to
the people that have them, and enjoy so happy a government under them. By that
which has been said, and by the words of this Text, we learn that Rulers do
reign not for themselves, not for their own gain, profit, and pleasure, but
for the good of others, for the common benefit of the Church and
Commonwealth. As the head cares for the body, the shepherd for the sheep,
the father for the children: so must Magistrates chiefly be careful for the
common good of their people. The Heathen could say that we are not borne for
our selves, but for our Country and for others. If this be required in every
private person, to seek the common good of others so far as they may, how
much more is it required of Kings, Magistrates and Ministers, who are not
private, but public persons? As the Candle spends it self for the comfort
and directions of others, and as a tree brings forth fruit, not for her
self, but for others: so Magistrates and Ministers are to spend themselves, to
employ their wits, their study, their labor, and care for the common benefit
of the Church and Commonwealth. Esaias 56. 11.
The Prophet complains of the Governors in his time, that they all look to
their own way, every one for his advantage and for his own purpose: And the
Apostle complains, that all sought their own, Phil. 2. 2.
and not that which is Jesus Christ's. But of himself, and of his faithful
Ministers, 2. Cor. 4.
he says; We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves
your servants for Jesus his sake. And he says further, 1. Cor. 11. 28.
that he himself was combred daily with the care of all Churches. And in
another place, 2. Cor. 1. 7* 15.
I seek not yours, but you, and I will most gladly bestow, and will be
bestowed for your cause This should be the care and resolution of every good
Minister and Magistrate. The King of Sodom said to Abraham, Give me the
persons, and take the goods thy self. This King prefers his people before
all worldly substance. The office of good Governors is for the common good,
benefit and commodity of all their subjects, to comfort and countenance the
godly, to restrain and punish the wicked, and this is to do equity and
judgment; And for this end and purpose God has chosen, called, ordained and
placed them in his throne, and this they must do, and will do, if they be
placed in love over the people, and as a blessing to them. The Heathen have
taught, that Magistrates are ordained to live and serve, Plutarke.
not for themselves, but for their subjects, one of the^ says, that Princes
are the servants of God, ordained to take care for men, and to provide for
their preservation, either by ministering to them of their goods, or by
defending them. Another, that they must so maintain the commodity of the
people, Plato.
that every their action without respect of their own private profit, have
respect thereto; and that they tend to the preservation of the whole body of
the people, and that they seek not so to maintain one part, that they forsake
the other. Cicero.
Again, the end of Goueruernours* should aim at the prosperous life of their
subjects, because (as Zenophon says) they be chosen, not to live at ease, and
daintily, but that they which have chosen them, may by their industry live
quietly and happily. Aristo^l
And further, herein (says one) rests a difference between a King and a
Tyrant; that the Tyrant seeks his own profit, but the King seeks the
profit and commodity of his subjects. These be the worthy sayings and
sentences of Heathen men, which may be justly alleged and applied to the shame
and condemnation of many Christian Rulers, who in ruling, seek only (or at
least chiefly) their own ease and private gain; and have little or no regard
to the common good. This is not to do judgment and justice, this is not to
do equity and righteousness: for these, or any of these, taken in a large
sense, do comprehend the whole duty of a Magistrate, according to the rule of
Gods word. The Lord complaining of corrupt Rulers, Esaias. 5. 7*
he says, that he looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for
righteousness, but behold a crying. And in another place he says; Let judgment
run down as waters, Amos. 5. 24.
and righteousness as a mighty river. Righteousness and Justice does contain
all virtues in them: Amb. de Offi.
Righteousness (says one) does more profit others then it self, does
neglect her own profits, preferring the common good, giving to every one that
which is right, and this righteousness is first to God, secondly to our
Country. And another says, Seneca.
whosoever thou art, that desire righteousness, first fear God, and love
him, that thou may be loved of him; thou shall love God, if thou follow him
in this, that thou art willing to do good to all, and hurt to none. The
righteousness of a King is the peace of his people, Ciprian.
the safety of his Country, the comfort of the poor, the calmnesse of the
sea, the temperature of the air, the fruitfulness of the earth, the heritage
of children, and to himself the hope of future blessedness. Aug.
Another does most excellently set out the duty of Princes and Rulers in these
words; The Justice of a King is, that he do not wrongfully oppress any man
by his power, that he judge between man and man without acceptance of
persons, that he be a defense to the stranger, fatherless and widow, that
he suppress theft, punish adultery, exalt not the wicked, mainetaine no
quarrellers, nor lacisciuious persons; root out the perverse, permit no
murderers, nor perjured persons to live; that he uphold the Church, feed the
poor, establish just men in public Offices, retain ancient, wise, and
discreet Counselors; that in any wise he apply not himself, to the
superstition of Deuiners, Magitians, and Pithonicall Spirits; that he defer
his displeasure, and defend his Country from his enemies with Magnaminity and
Justice, that he repose his whole confidence in God, that he be not puffed up
in prosperity, and with patitience to bear adversity; that he mainetaine the
Catholic Faith, and suffer not any wickedness in his children; that he
allot certain hours to prayers to God, and eat not but in due season (for
woe to thee o Land where thy Governors rise early to eat) the performing of
these things do bring prosperity in this life, and does lead the King to a
better Dominion, even to a Celestial and eternal Kingdom: such Justice and
Righteousness in good Rulers is the safety of the people, and does prolong and
defend the State, and is the strongest Guard and the ^^st Physician for the
fafe-gard and health of a Land. Only there is a Commonwealth (says Scipio)
only there is a good state of a Comminalty, where Justice and Honesty has
free execution, whether it be by King, by Nobles, or by the whole People: but
when the King becomes unjust, the Nobles become unjust, and the people
themselves become unjust: then it is not a vicious Commonwealth, but it is
just no Commonwealth at all, and that as in instruments that go with strings
or wind, or as in voices consorted, there is one certain proportion of
discrepant notes under one harmony, the least alteration whereof is harsh in
the ear of the skillful hearer, and that this concord does consist of a number
of contrary sounds, and yet all combined into one perfect Music or Melody; so
in a City that is governed by reason, of all the highest, mean, and lowest
estates; as of soundes, there is one true concord made, out of discord and
natures, and that which is harmony in music is unity in a City: This is the
firmest and surest bond of safety to the Commonwealth, which can never stand
without equity, and justice; and injustice is the decay and overthrow of
Towns, Cities, and Kingdoms. Now that Equity and Justice may flourish in the
Commonwealth, three things are necessarily required; First, there must be
Laws: Secondly, there must be Judges and Officers: thirdly, there must be
execution of Laws.

Now Law is defined to be a constant and perpetual good thing, without which
no House, no City, no Country, no state of men, no natural creature, not the
world it self can consist firm and stable. Chrisippus calls it a knowledge of
all Divine and Humae matters, commanding equity, and expulsing wickedness and
wrong: Polid.
There be three kind of Laws; Virg. lib. 2. chap. 1.
one Natural, that is not only appropriated to man, but also it concerns
all other living things, either in Earth, Sea, or Air; as we perceive all
living creatures naturally have certain familiarity of male and female for
procreation of Issue, and a procliuity to nourish the same, the which
proceeds of a Natural Law, ingraffed in the^ by Nature it self, that is
God. The second is named the Law that all men use, which is called Ius Gentium,
the Law of Nations, generally used through the world, as to show a man the way
to communicate to men, the commodity of the Elements as Water and Fire, to this
appertains the Law of Arms. The third kind of Law is called the Civil Law,
that is the private Law of every Country or City, as of the Romans,
Lacedaemonians, Athenians, this consists in Decrees of Princes, Statutes, and
Proclamations; Such Laws Ceres made first, or as some think Radamanthus, and
afterward others in diverse Countries, devised and ordained Laws, as in Athens,
Draco, and Solon; in Egypt, Mercury; in Creet, Minos; in Lacedemony, Lycurgus;
in Tire, Tharandes; in Argoes, Phorones; in Rome, Romulus; in Italy,
Pythagoras, or as some think the Arcadies, that were under Leuander, as their
Sovereign Lord and chief Captain. Notwithstanding the true Author of Laws
was God, which first planted in us the Law of Nature, and in process of time,
when that was corrupted by Adam and his Posterity, he gave by Moses the Law
written, to reduce us again to our first state. Laws must be known, and
they must be agreeing to the Laws of God, and Nature. The end of Laws the
public good and safety of all, which consists in the worship of God, in
honesty and righteousness; such Laws are to forbid and to restrain, false
worship, Idolatry, and profaneness, disobedience, murder, adultery, theft, and
all wickedness, such Laws must be common to all, there must be no privilege,
no immunity, no impunity, the greatest and the highest must be subject to such
laws, and be willing to perform them, as well as the meanest, for such Laws
are more necessary then the walls in a City, which are for beauty and
defense; but a City may stand without walls, it cannot stand without Laws,
such good Laws of equity and righteousness, they are the very Life and Soul
of a City or Kingdom. To Laws there must be joined of necesssity. Judges
and Officers, which give vigor and life to Laws, the Office of these is to
do Judgment and Justice; that is, to know Causes and then to pronounce
sentence accordingly, that so every man may have right, this is properly Gods
Office, they are in his place, and therefore to deal uprightly: Worthy is that
counsel of Moses to the Judges in his time, Deuteronomy. 1. 16. 17.
saying: Hear the controversies between you brethren, and judge righteously
between every man and his brother, and the stranger that is with him; ye
shall have no respect of persons in judgment, but shall hear the small as
well as the great, ye shall not fear the face of Man, for the Judgment is
GODS. The like counsel gives good King Iehosaphat to his Judges: saying; 2.
Chron. 19. 6. 7.
Take heed what ye do, for ye execute not the judgments of man, but of the
Lord, and he will be with you in the cause and judgment: Wherefore now let
the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it, for there is no
iniquity with the Lord our God, neither respect of persons nor receiving
rewards. And remember that counsels Consider the matter, consult and give
sentence: Judgment must proceed from the light of reason, and not from
Passion, both parties must be heard, every one must have freedom to speak,
that there may be true and upright judgment; the corruptions of Justice are
these, negligence, and want of skill, unnecessary, and unjust delays, desire
of gain, respect of friends and kindred, foolish pity, and sometimes slavish
fear; but all these and such like hindrances of Justice, good Magistrates
must avoid and cast off. To Laws and Judgment there must be added Execution,
for what are Laws without of Execution, but even like bells without clappers.
Laws are like unto young children and Infants, which are left desolate without
parents, and yet have portion and patrimony, but would soon consume it, or
others would deceive them of it, except they have faithful Tutors and
Guardians to guide and protect them; so have Laws need of faithful Patrones
and Keepers, or else they will be brought into contempt, by the
forgetfulness, negligence, and corruption of some, and the malice of others.
For what better is it to have Lawmakers, and faithful Intepreters of the
same, except they be carefully kept and defended. Therefore due punishments to
offenders, are to be justly and rightly executed. To this purpose, says
Solomon; Pr. 20. 8.
A King that sits on the throne of Judgment chaseth away all evil with his
eyes. Verse 26.
Again, A wise King scatters the wicked, and causes the wheel to turn
over them. And in another place; Take the dross from the silver, and there
shall proceed a vessel for the finer; Prou. 25. 4* 5.
take away the wicked from the King, and his Throne shall be stablished in
righteousness. The Apostle says: Romans 13. 4.
If thou do evil, fear; for he bears not the sword for naught, for he is
the Minister of God to take vengeance of him that does evil. This is one
special end of the Magistrates calling, to punish, to restrain, and repress
the wicked. The Magistrate is a minister of Justice and Law, the judgments is
the Lords and not his; the impunity of the wicked is hurtful to themselves, by
this means they run into further sin, and they do encourage others to do
the like; it were better to turn loose, wild Boares, Bears, and Woulues,
amongst the people, then such pestilent men, by the punishment of such, the
Commonwealth and the Church, is freed from the note of infamy, and it is no
small honor to God. And by this, many others are terrified from sin, and are
brought to repentance, and so to salvation; yea, the danger of infection is
removed and taken away: a little leven sowreth the whole lump, and a few
wicked men do much hurt, in drawing, seducing, and infecting others; yea, by
such execution of Justice, the wrath of God and his heavy judgments upon a
Land, are stayed and removed. Josh. 7. 1. 26.
When Achan was put to death, for taking the excommunicate thing, which was
commanded to be destroyed, when he (I say) was stoned to death, then the Lord
turned from his fierce wrath, which before was kindled against his people: The
Prophet David says thus of the people of Israel: Ps. 106. 28. 29. 30. 31.
That they joined themselves unto Baal Peor, and did eat the offerings of the
dead; thus they provoked him to anger with their own inventions, and the
plague brake in upon them, but Phinies stood up and executed judgment, Number. 25.
and the plague was stayed, and it was imputed to him for righteousness, from
generation to generation for ever. Iona. 1.
When disobedient Jonas is cast out of the Ship, storms and tempests cease:
the sea is quiet, the Ship and those that are in it are safe. Magistrates do
punish, because God by these examples will be known to be a God who
descernes betwixt things unjust and just, and is justly angry with sin, and
because he would have these momentary punishments upon few to forewarne all of
judgments to come, and of eternal punishments; and by this means also he
provides for the commodity of others, for the wicked are taken away, so that
they can hurt no more. And this part of Justice is for the credit and honor
of the Magistrate. Therefore says Solomon, He that says to the wicked thou
art righteous; Prou. 24. 24. 25.
him shall the people curse, and the multitude shall abhor him; but to them
that rebuke him shall be pleasure, Prou. 28. 45.
and upon them shall come the blessing of goodness. Again, They that forsake
the Law, raise the wicked; but they that keep the Law set themselves against
them: Wicked men understand not judgment, but they that seek the Lord
understand all things. Again, This Justice is a sweet sacrifice pleasing to
God, it is the Magistrates sacrifice, Pr. 21. 3.
it is more acceptable then other sacrifices. Therefore says the wise man, To
do judgment and justice is more acceptable to the Lord then sacrifice: And the
Lord says thus to hypocrites, Amos 5. 21. 22. 23. 24.
that abounded in sacrifices, but neglecting Justice: I hate and abhor your
feast days, and I will not smell in your solemn assemblies; though you offer
me burnt offerings and meat offerings, I will not accept them, neither will I
regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts, take thou away from me the
multitude of thy songs, for I will not hear the melody of thy Viols, and let
judgments run down as waters. And in another place to such hypocrites as
abounded with plenty of sacrifices, it is said: Mica. 8. 6. 7. 8.
He has showed thee, o man, what is good, and what the Lord has required of
thee; surely to do justly, to love mercy, to humble thy self, and to walk
with thy God. By this Justice the states of Cities and Kingdoms are preserved
and established. Therefore David exhorts his son Solomon, 1. King. 2. 3.
To walk in the Ways Statutes and Judgments of God; that so he might
prosper in all things he went about. Ier. 22. 15. etc.
The Lord by Jeremy declaring how happy Josiah the father had been, and how
cursed Iehoiakim the son should be, and why the one did speed so well, and
the other so badly, says: Shall thou reign because thou closest thy self in
Cedar? Did not thy father eat and drink and prosper, when he executed
Judgment and Justice? when he judged the cause of the afflicted and the poor
he prospered: was not this because he knew me says the Lord; but thine eyes
and thy heart are only for thy covetousness: And therefore the Lord
threatens in the next words to destroy him. This justice is profitable to the
whole Commonwealth, Deu. 21. 21.
both to the good and the bad. Therefore the Lord commanding the rebellious
son to be put to death; So, (says he) thou shall take away the evil from
among you, that all Israel may hear it and fear. Where Justice is neglected
sin reigns: Eccl. 8. 11.
Because sentence against an evil work (says the Wiseman) is not executed
speedily, therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set in them to
do evil. On the contrary it must follow, that where there is true execution
of Justice, there the hearts of men are drawn and terrified from evil. Prou.
20. 30.
The blewnesse of the wound serves to purge the evil, and the stripes within
the bowels of the belly. Pro. 26. 3.
Again, To the Horse belongs a whip, to the Ass a bridle, and arod to a
Fools back: His meaning is, that by such sharp correction foolish men are
stayed and kept in order. And in another place; Prou. 19. 25.
Smite a scorner, and the foolish will beware: Meaning that simple and ignorant
men will be warned when they see the wicked punished, they will take heed by
others men's harms. Prou. 19. 29.
And the Lord has ordained judgments for the scorners, and stripes for the
back of fools. To this duty of Justice the example of God, may incite and
move all Christian Magistrates, they are in his steed, and therefore are to
follow his example in punishing offenders: He is a most just and severe Judge,
and a very consuming fire against sin and wickedness: Psa. 5. 4. 5.
He is a God that loves not wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with him,
the foolish shall not stand in his sight, he hates all them that work
iniquity. Psalm. 11. 5. 6.
Again, The Lord will try the righteous, but the wicked and him that loves
iniquity does his soul hate: upon the wicked he shall reign snares, fire,
and brimstone, storm and tempest, this is the portion of their cup. And in
another place, Surely God will wound the head of his enemies, Psalm. 68. 21.
and the hairy pate of him that walks in his sins. Most fearful examples
of his justice and judgment we have upon the first world, 1. Cor. 10. 5. 6. 7*
upon Sodom and Gomorrah, yea upon his own people Israel. What kind of
offenders, we ought to punish more severely, we may have direction from the
Law of God, that those whom he appointed to die should not be spared, for we
must not make our selves more merciful then God is himself; wilful murder
is death by the Law of Princes, and it is death by the Law of God. Yea, before
the Law written, Gen 9. 6.
it was said to Noah: Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed, for in the Image of God has he made him. And in the Law Written, Leui.
24.
He that kills any man he shall be put to death. And Adultery also is death
by the Written Law of God. Leui. 20. 10.
The man that commits adultery with another man's wife, because he has
committed Adultery with his neighbors wife, Deuteronomy. 22. 22.
the Adulterer and the Adulteress shall die the death. Theft was not so
severely punished, but they were to make restitution, and restore fourfold
that which they had stolen: Theft, in our age, is more severely punished, it is
certain that Theft is a grievous sin against the Law of God, against Equity
and Justice; but I see no reason, why the Thief shall dye a shameful death,
and the Whore-maister escape with lesser punishment, seeing that Solomon
compares the Thief and the Whore-maister together, and shows in diverse
respects that Adultery is a greater and more grievous sin then Theft, because
the Thief may make restitution, Pro. 6. 27. 30. 32.
and so can never the other. This is the corruption of Nature, that men make
more account of money and goods, then of religion or honesty, and Adulterers
being spared, and left alive many questions are raised and propounded, which
can hardly be answered; Namely, whether the innocent party, or nocent party
may marry, whether they may be reconciled again or no. Let the Adulterer and
Adulteress, according to the Moral Law of God, die the death, and then these
questions will be idle and superfluous. And as Magistrates may punish
Murderers, by the same reason they may as well punish Heretics, Idolatours,
false Prophets, for indeed these they murder men's souls, they run a whoring
from God, and they rob him of his honor. We heard partly before, that false
Prophets and Idolatours, were to die the death, and we have examples of good
Kings and Rulers, which have put such to death; and if the Magistrate be the
keeper of both the Tables, then he is to punish the transgression of the one
as well as the other; and if the transgressions of the first Table, be more
heinous and grievous then the transgressions of the second Table, there is no
reason why they should be less, and more slightly punished. Moses said to the
children of Israel, after they had worshipped the golden Calfe; Thus says the
Lord God of Israel, Ex^. 3^. 27. 28. 29.
put every man his sword to his side, go to and fro from gate to gate through
the Host, and s^ay every man his brother, and every man his companion, and
every man his neighbor: so the Children of Leuic did as Moses had commanded,
and there fell of the people the same day about three thousand men: For Moses
had said, consecrate your hands unto the Lord this day, even every man upon his
son, and upon his brother, that there may be given you a blessing this day.
Iehu slew all the Priests of Baal, 2. King. 10. 25. 26. 27.
burnt their Images, destroyed the image of Baal, and threw down the house of
Baal, and made it an house of all filthiness and uncleanness. 2. King. 22. etc.
Josiah puts down the Idols, kills the Priests, the Chemerimes, he
burns the groves, brake down the house of the Sodomites, he defaced the
High places, he took away them that had familiar Spirits, and other
abominations, and compelled all that were found in Israel to serve the Lord.
The like power has all Christian Kings, Princes, and Governors, in their own
Kingdoms and Dominions. The Prophet Prophecieth of the latter times, Zach. 13.
2. 3.
saying as from the Lord: I will cut off the names of the Idols out of the
Land, and they shall no more be remembered: And I will cause the Prophets and
unclean Spirits, to depart out of the Land, and when any shall yet Prophecy,
his father and his mother that begat him shall say unto him, Thou shall not
live, for thou speak lies in the name of the Lord. And his father and mother
that begot him, shall thrust him through when he prophesies. He speaks of
the time of the Gospel, wherein people shall have such zeal, that they cannot
abide nor endure a false Prophet. Christian Governors have power from God to
compel and draw men to the outward worship and service of God: Aug. ad Vincen.
Therefore says Augustine, when men are mad, they mislike force and
chasticement; but when they come to their right mind, they are glad that they
are corrected for their good and recovery. Not every one that spares, is a
friend; nor every one that smites, an enemy: Better are the wounds of a
friend, then the kisses of an enemy. It is better to love with severity, then
to deceive with too much lenity. He that binds a mad man, and he that
raises him up that is in a deadly sleep, he is troublesome to both, but he
loves both. God does not only teach, but punish. Let heretics first be
ouer-throwne and confuted; if that will not serve, use religious severity. The
same Father says; first I was of this mind, that none were to be compelled to
the unity of Christ, that men were to be dealt withal by the word, by
disputation, by reason, least those which we knew to be open Heretics,
should become feigned Catholics: but this my opinion was overcome by examples
before mine eyes; for this my City Hippo, being altogether of Donatus side,
was converted to the Catholic unity, by the fear of Imperial Laws. Princes
and Governors are in no case to suffer any heretical or false worship in
their kingdoms. And therefore let them hearken to this counsel, given them by
a learned man: Let Princes (says he) take heed, how they suffer any wicked
rites and ceremonies to Infidels, within their Dominions. Solomon was guilty of
this fault, not that he compelled any of his subjects to worship Idols, but
that he granted to his Wives and Concubines, being outlandish women, places
and altars, wherein they might worship strange Gods. But God was angry with
him, and requited him according to his fall: for as he divided Gods worship, so
God diuides his kingdom, giving part of it to his son, and part of it to
Jeroboam. This fault of his did spread it self to the posterity: for Achas,
Manasses, and diverse other wicked Kings, had diverse wicked and detestable
worships at Jerusalem, and were sharply reproved of the Prophets for them: And
surely the Magistrate cannot be but reproved and condemned, when he suffers
Idolatry, seeing he has the sword for the punishment of wickedness; therefore
it must be granted, that either Idolatry is no sin, or else the Magistrate is
to punish it as well as other sins. The Magistrate must be careful to
defend the Commonwealth, and to provide as much as may be, that no danger nor
hurt come unto it. But Idolatry is the cause of famine, pestilence, wars, and
other most grievous judgments, and therefore in no case to be suffered, or
tolerated in a Christian kingdom, and all such transgressors of the first and
second Commandment, and of the rest of the Commandments of the first table,
are to be punished, as well as the transgressors of the Commandments of the
second Table; and indeed false Prophets, heretics, Idolaters, Papists,
Jesuits, Seminary Prists, do more hurt to a kingdom then murderers,
adulterers, or thieves, seducing, killing and poisoning the souls of many
thousands; neither is it to be counted cruelty to cut off these and such like
offenders, seeing it is warranted by the authority and commandment of God
himself: It is not cruelty to cut off the cruel, though they account it so;
but he that smites and takes away the evil, in that they are evil, is the
Minister of God, and of the Law; therefore the Magistrates do not defile
themselves with blood, in punishing and executing wicked persons: for they have
a warrant from the Lord so to do, the Lord is with them, and does assist them;
and such executions of notorious persons, by the hand of the Magistrate, is as
a sacrifice pleasing to God. And least it should be a trouble to the
Magistrates mind, or a corsie to his conscience, or any impairing to his
credit to deal so severely as may be thought with such offenders; the Lord
himself does comfort and encourage the Magistrate; for whereas he commands,
that wicked children cursing their parents, shall dye the death; and likewise
adulterers, and other offenders, he adds and repeateth it often to the
comfort of the Magistrate, His blood be upon him; as if he should say, let not
Judges and Magistrates trouble themselves at the death of such offenders, as
though they were guilty of their blood: nay, their blood is upon themselves,
they are guilty of their own blood, they have deserved death, and are worthy
of it; they have cast away themselves, and have justly drawn upon themselves
such grievous punishments, by their own wickedness and just deserts. It is my
commandment and will that such shall dye, and therefore I clear you as
innocent and guiltless; you are in my place, you are my servants and
ministers, and in this work of justice you have done me faithful service. But
here may be a question propounded, whether Princes and Rulers may not remit and
pardon the faults of great offenders. To remit just punishments is against the
direct law of God, and procures and draws the wrath of God upon the
Magistrate. Deuteronomy. 27. 19.
Cursed be he that hinders the right of the stranger, the fatherless and the
widow, and all the people shall say, Leuit. 19. 15.
So be it. Again, You shall not do unjustly in judgment, but thou shall judge
thy neighbor justly. Ier. 21. 12.
The Prophet says, O house of David, execute judgment in the morning, and
deliver the oppressed out of the hand of the oppressor, least my wrath go out
like fire, and burn, that none can quench it, because of the wickedness of
your works. The Magistrate is the keeper of Justice he is to do right to every
one, and therefore he may not realease whom he list. To execute judgment is
a good work, it is profitable to the Commonwealth, it decaieth and takes
away sin; and therefore not to be hindered or stopped of any. It is a special
part of the office of a Magistrate, to punish the offenders, and therefore he
is justly, without partiality, to perform it. Just judgment is the Lords, and
not his, and therefore not in his power to remit it; he is the Minister of the
laws, and therefore to do nothing contrary to law. When Themistocles was
requested of Simonides the Poet, to pronounce a certain unjust sentence, in
his favor; he answered virtuously: As making verses contrary to the Rules of
poetry, thou can be no good Poet: so can I be no good Prince, if I give
sentence contrary to law. Solon said, that the safety of the Commonwealth
consists in these two points, that rewards be distributed after the desert of
virtue, and punishments after the quality of the offense. Justice (says one)
knows not father, knows not mother, but knows the truth; accepts no
person, but follows God. God is a just Judge against wicked persons, and if
any do stay Justice and Judgment through bribes or rewards, their sin and
corruption is the greater; and a Judge may be ashamed to say to any offender,
What will thou give me to show thee favor, or do thee Justice? Is not this as
if it should be said; What will thou give me to deny my self, to loose my
Office, and to sell God himself? There be three things (says one) which
hinder Justice; the favor of friends, flattering praise, and receiving of
rewards. But this latter is of greater force then the two other. There may be
causes, why punishments may be delayed, or lessened: some offenders are greater
then others, and are ringleaders to wickedness: these deserve more sharp
punishment. Others are seduced, and fall by occasion: these are more mildly to
be dealt withal. But the inferior Magistrates can do nothing in such cases,
without the direction and counsel of the superior. As there be differences of
offenders and offenses, so there be differences of laws against the which they
do offend. Some laws have their ground and warrant from the law of God and
Nature: to the transgressers of these, there should be granted no favor or
remission. There be other positive written laws of the country, concerning
lesser and smaller matters: in these the Magistrates have power sometimes upon
good occasion, to remit and pardon; so that it be not against the glory of God.
To this agrees the words of his Majesty to his gracious son: There be some
horrible crimes (says he) not to be pardoned, as Witchcraft, wilful murder,
incest, poyfoning, false coin; and so he concludes, that favor is to be
showed in lesser matters, and specially in such as concern our own private
causes. But see here the corruption of our nature, we are more severe in our
own causes, then in Gods cause: we strive and contend, and make a stir for
our riches, possessions, glory and credit, if any go about to diminish and
impair them, how violent, cruel and implacable are we? But if it be the cause
of God, how modest, how gentle and mild are we? Is not this to prefer our
selves before God? The children of Israel, contrary to Gods commandment, Judge.
2.
suffer the Cananites and the Moabitish women to live. Saul spares Agag, Number.
25
and the remnant of Amalecke. 1. Sam. 15
And another King of Israel spares Benhadad contrary to Gods commandment. And
thus men are willing to spare where God would not have spared, and where they
should be most patient and kind, there they are cruel: Whereas in our own
causes we ought to be patient and merciful; but as for the cause and glory of
God, we are to be in it most zealous and severe. And there be some offenders,
whom the Lord will have cut off in all severity, without any favor, pity or
compassion. Exodus 17. 14. 16.
He says of Amalecke; I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalecke from
under heaven. Yea the Lord swear, that he would have a war with Amalecke from
generation to generation. And he charge his people Israel, that when they had
rest from their enemies, Deuteronomy. 25. 17. 18. 19.
and possessed the good Land he had promised them, that then they should not
forget to execute these his judgments on those people, and root them quite
out. The reason why God did so hate and pursue this people, was their hard and
cruel dealing against the children of Israel; and therefore long after, when
Saul was King, he gives him this charge, 1. Sam. 15. 3.
saying; Go and smite Amalecke, and destroy all that pertaines unto them, and
have no compassion on them, but slay both man and woman, both infant and
suckling, both Oxen and sheep, both Cammell and Ass. But Saul upon a foolish
pity spared Agag the King, and some of the fattest beasts: but the Lord did
not spare him, but thrust him out of his kingdom for his disobedience. And
Samuel said to Agag: Verse. 33.
As thy sword has made women childl^sse, so shall thy mother be childlesse
among other women. And Samuel (being a Judge) hewed Agag in pieces before the
Lord in Gilgall. Ahab a King, spared another King, whom God would not have
spared; but the Lord said to him: 1. King. 20. 42.
Because thou have let go out of thy hands a man whom I appointed to dye, thy
life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people. These be fearful
examples for Kings and Princes, that they take warning by them, how they spare
any upon any sinister respect, whom God in his just judgment would have
smitten with the stroke of death: and this is no cruelty to follow the example
and commandment of God himself. He says to a wicked and rebellious people;
Deuteronomy. 32 41. 42.
If I whet my glistering sword, and my hand take hold on judgment, I will
execute vengeance on mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me. I will
make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall eat flesh, for the
blood of the slain, and the captives, when I begin to take vengeance of the
enemy. And the people pray thus to God against the seed of Esau, because they
conspired with the Babylonians, Remember (say they) the children of Edom, o
Lord, in the day of Jerusalem, which said, Raze it to the foundation thereof. O
daughter of Babel, worthy to be destroyed, blessed shall he be that rewards
thee, as thou have served us. Blessed shall he be that takes and dasheth thy
children against the stones. No pity nor mercy is to be showed to such as be
sworn enemies to the Church and their own Country, to bloody Babylonians,
gross Idolaters. And yet as there must be upright justice in all good
Magistrates, so to this also there must be joined clemency and mercy; there is
use and place of both, and Justice and Mercy both of them may be abused; but
true Mercy and Clemency is an excellent virtue to all Christian Princes and
Governors. They are in the place of God, who is full and rich in mercy and
compassion, and whose mercy is over all his works; they are to follow, the
example and nature of God, whose Image they represent and carry; they govern
and rule, not beasts, but men; and therefore all humanity is to be used
toward them, they are to punish with grief and compassion.

A Physician gives to a patient, his friend, some bitter potion, which he
could be content in love to cast away; but only that he knows, that it
will be for the good and health of his friend. And thus Magistrates are to
think of punishments, as of medicines, whereby the guilty may be amended, and
others by their examples terrified. When the guilty is to be condemned, the
Magistrate is to think thus with himself; This punishment this party has
deserved, and God has decreed it for him, and therefore it is for his good: It
is cruelty to delight in the punishment and torment of others, Judge. 1. 7
as that King did, who had seventy Kings, the Thumbes of their hands and feet
cut off, gathering bread under his table. This cruelty is against the nature of
God, and it is a vice, not of a man, but of a wild beast. It is cruelty also
to be excessive, and too much rigorous in punishing transgressors, and
therefore it is said; If so be the wicked be worthy to be beaten, Deuteronomy. 25
the Judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his face,
according to his trespass, to a certain number. Where there is mercy and
discretion, there punishments are according to the trespasses: But it is
cruelty, for small faults and offenses, to enjoin extreme, severe, and
rigorous punishments; and it is the greatest cruelty of all, to punish in body
or goods, such as have not deserved it, and such as are honest and innocent.
Therefore Magistrates must remember, that not only he that justifies the
wicked, but he also that condemns the just, Pro. 17. 15.
even they both are an abomination to the Lord. This proceeds from cruelty
and rashness; and it is contrary to love, mercy, and justice, and it is
against the end and the calling of the Magistrate, who is ordained, not only
for the punishment of evil doers, but for the praise of them that do well, he
is to be a defense, a protection, a succor and comfort to such. Nay, God
himself does profess, that he is a father and protector to such, and says;
Exo. 23. 7
Thou shall not slay the innocent and the righteous. Pro. 17. 26.
Surely it is not good (says Solomon) to condemn the just, nor that Princes
should smite such for equity. Righteous men are Gods children, servants, and
members, dear and precious in his eyes: he says of them; He that touches
you, touches the apple of mine eye. It is a grievous sin, and a sign of
reprobation, to hate or persecute the servants of God: therefore Cain hates
Abel, Esau hates Jacob, and seeks to kill him, Ismael persecuteth and
mocketh Isaac, Saul hates and pursues David. It is comfort and credit even to
Princes, to have the love and the testimony of the faithful.

This is the commendation of Demetrius, 3. John.
that he had good report of all men, and of truth it self; yea the Apostles
themselves bare record of him. The complaints and cries of Gods servants will
be hard and heavy against their persecuters: Ye shall not (says God) trouble
any widow, Exodus 22. 22. 23. 24.
nor fatherless child: If thou vex or trouble such, and so he call and cry
unto me, I will surely hear his cry; then shall my wrath be kindled, and I
will kill you with the sword, and your wives shall be widows, and your
children fatherless. As God has a special care of widows and fatherless
children, so he has a care of all his sons and daughters, he will regard
their just complaints, which they offer into his bosom, and in time will
hearken to their cries. It is a sin not to encourage, countenance and defend
such; but it is a greater sin to spoil them, and undo them, or to offer them
any wrong. He will reprove Kings for their sakes, Psa. 105.
saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. Kings are the
Lords anointed in a special respect; but yet all the people of God are also
in their place, the Lords anointed, because of the oil of spiritual graces,
plentifully powered upon them; and because they are precious and dear in the
eyes of God. And therefore the Lord said to Pharaoh; Exo. 4. 22 23.
Israel is my son, even my first borne, wherefore I say to thee, let my
son go, that he may serve me: If thou refuse to let him go, behold I will
slay thy son, even thy sirst borne.

Mark (says a learned Father upon that place) mark the Title that God gives
to his Church, and meditate on it earnestly, he calls it his Son, yea his
first borne, noting therein to all flesh, that it is to him, as a man-child to
the father, yea as the the first borne, which commonly is loved most tenderly,
Babin. in Exodus
and in greatest honor. Now then think with your self, what hurt is in you
to the fruit of your body, and to your first borne, think how you could
endure to stand and look upon the abuse offered by any, to the whole, or any
part, as to see but a leg, or an arm cut off by bloody butchers: then think
of God to his Church, and every part of it, whose affection so much excels
yours, as God excels man, and holiness and perfection, misery sin and
corruption. And a little after: Tell Pharaoh he had best take heed what he
does: for I will make his Son and first borne feel it, if he hinder mine,
and will not let them go to serve me. The world you know, contemns and
despises us, counting us the Refuse of the people, or what may be base and
vile; but this love is life, and this regard with God is honor most high: In
the comfort whereof we may suppe up these earthly scorns, if his Grace be
with us. And so much the rather we may do this, because he accounts all
the reproaches, injuries, storms and hard dealings done to his servants, as
done unto himself. And therefore there came a voice from heaven to Saul, then
a Persecuter, but after, Paul a Preacher; that voice said then unto him: Acts:
9. 4 5.
Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? And when he said; Who art thou Lord?
The Lord said; I am JESUS whom thou persecutest; It is hard for thee to kick
against pricks. Christ was then ascended into heaven, Saul did not, neither
could if he would, persecute him, but because he persecuted his poor members
on earth, Christ takes their cause to be his own, and he counts the
cruelty offered to them, to be offered to himself. All good Princes and
Governors even in policy, as much as may be, are to seek and procure the
good will, love and liking of all their subjects; and much more of the better
sort. Rulers are so to govern the people, as the soul governs the body, and
as God governs the world; that is, not only justly, but also kindly and
gently. In God there is not only power, justice and wisdom, but also he is
full of goodness and mercy Pastors and sheapheards are not only with
discretion, but also with lenity, to lead and guide their flock. A good father
does bring up and rule his children in as much love and kindness as may be. A
good ruler must be of the same mind to the people, as the good father of a
family is to the household. And what is a ruler of a City, or a kingdom, but
the father of many children, he is not to abate his authority by too much
lenity, nor the peoples love by too much severity. Hearts of honest men are
gotten by mercy, kindness and goodness, so they wish well, and speak well;
and they desire the continuance and increase of their Rulers advancement.

There be three things (says Augustine) in a Governor. First, a Calling:
Secondly, a fear of him: Thirdly, a love toward him. Calling is requisite, to
the end he may bear himself chearefully in a good conscience; yet if he be
not both loved and feared, he cannot subsist in his Calling: Let him therefore
advise himself to procure love by benefits, and fear by punishing wrong done,
not against himself, but against the Law. The Heathen man could say, that a
Ruler must be affable in speech, easy to be seen, and spoken to, in
countenance amiable, kind to the just, sharp to the wicked. Such a Ruler is
beloved, defended, and reverenced by the whole City; such a Ruler, by his own
benefit is safe, has no need of defense, the hearts of the people are his
armor, Seneca.
his invisible strength and munition is the love of the Citizens, and what is
more pleasant, then to live with the desire, wishing, and good will of all men.
Who dare set himself against such a one, under whom there flourishes peace,
righteousness, security, dignity; and under whom a famous rich City abounds
with plenty of all goodmen. Greg.
Those which govern the people, if they will have their Throne surely
established, let their countenance be full of cheerfulness and grace, least
being too severe and rigorous, through arrogance they procure the hatred of the
people. Chry. in 2. Cor. 7.
There is nothing that makes him, that he has the office of a Magistrate,
more then a study and care of love toward his people, for it does not only
make a father that he has begotten a child, but also that he love him after
he has begotten him. If Nature has need of so much love, how much more
Grace? and thus all the Prophets and Rulers, that were famous amongst the
Hebrews, as Abraham and Moses, Samuel and David, have shined and excelled in
love to their people. Others have said, that preservation of Princes consists
in the integrity of Religion, and in the love of their Subjects, and these
things procure the love of the people: Not to be too strange to them, to be
humble and courteous, to speak kindly to them, to be willing to see their
Subjects, and to show themselves to them as much as may be; to hear causes in
their own persons, not to burden the people too much, but to ease them of
unnecessary burdens; to be liberal and bountiful, where there is need and
desert. Absolon, though he was a wicked man, and had a wicked cause, yet he
had this policy by kindness to draw the hearts of the people to him. When any
man came near to him, and did him obeisance, he put forth his hand, and took
him and kissed him; and on this manner did Absolon to all Israel, that came to
the King for judgment, so Absolon stole the hearts of all the men of Israel.
This was a wicked action in him, but this policy may be followed of lawful
Magistrates, by kind words and deeds, to win and hold, the hearts of their
own people. Good was that counsel, which the ancient men gave to King
Rehoboam. If thou be a servant to this people (say they) this day, and serve
them, and answer them, and speak kind words to them, they will be thy
servants for ever. They show by this their counsel, that kindness is the way
to win the hearts of the people: but that King forsook that good counsel,
and hearkened to the counsel of young men, and by their direction gave the
people this answer. 1. King 12. 6. 7. 14. 16. 19.
My father made your yoke grievous, and I will make your yoke more grievous; my
father has chastised you with rods, but I will correct you with scourges. And
see what followed; When all Israel saw the King regarded them not, the people
answered the King thus: What portion have we in David, we have none
inheritance in the son of Ishai, to your Tents oh Israel, now see to thy house
David, and Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this day. This was
wickedness in the people, to rise and rebel against their King, and a just
judgment of God: But yet, as the Apostle says to natural fathers, so say I
to you that are fathers of the Country; You fathers provoke not your children
to wrath, by austerity and hard dealing: Give no occasion to the people, but
rather as much as may be draw their hearts to you, by humility and kindness.
Nehe. 5. 5.
Nehemiah confesses the poor distressed people to be his brethren, of the
same flesh and blood with him. Job protests that he did not contemn the
judgment of his servants, when they did contend with him thinking themselves
hardly entreated by him, and then he has this in his thoughts: If I had
oppressed others, how should I have escaped Gods Judgments? What then shall I
do when God stands up, and when he shall visit me, what shall I answer?
he that has made me in the womb, has he not made him? has not he alone
fashioned us in the womb? This moved him to pity, and respect his basest
servants, because they were Gods creatures as well as he. David prays for the
peace of Jerusalem, saying; Let them prosper that love thee, peace be within
thy Walls, and prosperity within thy Palaces; for my brethren and neighbors
sakes I will wish thee now prosperity, because of the house of the Lord our
God, I will procure thee wealth. He prays heartily for his Subjects, wishing
them the favor of God and all happiness, and promises to do them what good
he can, and he counts them as his brethren, neighbors, and companions. Let
all Christian Rulers remember that saying of the Apostle: Gal. 3. 28.
There is neither Jew nor Grecian, there is neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus; In the world
there must needs be difference and degrees, it must needs be so, for policy
and order, but in Christ all are one. For God is no accepter of persons, but in
every Nation he that fears him, and works righteousness is accepted of
him, whether he be poor, or rich, Prince or Subject. Tindal.
Excellent is that counsel of a Gracious man; let Kings (says he) if they
had rather be Christians indeed, then so called, give themselves altogether to
the wealth of their Realms, after the example of Christ, remembering that the
people are Gods, and not theirs; yea, they are Christ's inheritance and
possession, bought with his blood; the most despised person in this Realm, is
the Kings brother, and fellow Member with him in the Kingdom of God and of
Christ. Let him therefore not think himself too good to do them service,
neither seek any other thing in them, then a father seeks in his children;
yea, then Christ sought in us, though that the King in his regiment be in the
room of God, and represents God himself, and is, without all comparison,
better then his Subjects, yet let him put off that, and become a brother, doing
and leaving undone all things in respect of the Commonwealth, that all men may
see, that he seeks nothing but the profit of his Subjects. Worthy is the
example of good Mordechai, Ester chapter 2. chap. 3. chapter 4.
who when he was a private man, yet he was a faithful subject in discovering
treasons. Howsoeeuer proud Hammon, coming of that cursed seed of Agag,
informs the King of him and the poor Jews, as though they were enemies to
the State; yet both he and they were faithful both to God and the King, as it
was plainly proved afterward. At that time, and in that state, his care was
for the Church of God, he used all means, and ventured all danger, for the
helping of Gods people. After that the enemy of God, and of the Church, Hammon
was cut off, and Gods people had deliverance, safety and joy, then Mordechai
his faithfulness being known to the King, then (I say) he was advanced to
great honor, and behaved himself as a worthy Ruler, for it is said that
Mordechai the Jew was the second unto King Ahashuerosh, and great among the
Jews, and accepted among the multitude of his brethren, who procured the
wealth of his people, and spoke peaceably to all his seed. Wherein we are to
observe three things necessary in good Rulers, first to have the favor of the
people: secondly, to procure their wealth: and thirdly to be gentle and loving
to them. This good Ruler being advanced, he does not forget himself, he is
not high-minded, he is not careless of his place, but imployeth all his
travel, for the good and preservation of the Church. This care had good
Nehemiah, who though he was safe himself, and great with the King, yet when
he heard of the distress of his Countrymen, he is moved with compassion, he
mourns, weepeth, and fasteth for them, he prays heartily to God, he goes
to the King for his favor, and protection, and uses all means that he can,
and endures many reproaches and dangers, for the comforting of the people, and
for the building of the walls of the decayed Jerusalem.

And thus we see, describing the duties of good Kings and Governors, we see
(I say) the necessity, the authority, the excellency, the blessing of good
Kings, and the happiness of good government; by them the wicked, and notorious
transgressors of the first and second Table are cut down. Good Subjects are
countenanced, Justice, Peace, Honesty, and all virtue is maintained and
cherished. In this government, the Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness of God,
toward mankind, is most clearly to be seen. His Wisdom is declared by
order, which is in deserning virtues and vices, and in the Societies of
Mankind, under lawful government, and in contracts, guided and disposed by
marvelous Wisdom. The Justice of God appears in Civil Government, in that
he will have open sins punished by the Magistrate, and when they that are in
authority do not take punishment on offenders, then God himself miraculously
draws them unto punishment, and proportionably does lay upon grievous sins,
grievous punishments even in this life, as it is said; whosoever takes the
sword shall perish with the sword, and Whore-mongers, and Adulterers God will
judge. In these punishments God will have to be seen the differences of
virtues and vices, and will have us learn that God is Wise, Just, True, and
Chaste. The goodness of God also toward Mankind, is seen, in that he
preserves the society of men after this order, and for that cause does he
maintain it, that from thence his Church may be gathered, and will have
Commonwealths to be places, for the entertainment of his Church.

THE EIGHTH SERMON.
VERSE 9. And made thee King to do equity and righteousness.


THE Princely Prophet David, the Predecessor and Father of Solomon, speaking
of the government of himself, of his household, and also of the Church and
Commonwealth committed to him from God, he says on this manner: Psa. 101. 1.
I will sing Mercy and Judgment, unto thee o Lord will I sing. In which words
he promises and protests openly to God, that when he should place him in
the throne of his kingdom, he would be in his whole government, both just and
merciful; that is, executing justice and judgment against the wicked, and
showing all kindness and mercy to the good and godly. In these two words of
Judgment and Mercy, is comprised the whole duty of good Governors, they must
with David strike upon these two strings, Judgment and Mercy, not only of
Judgment, but also of Mercy; and not only of Mercy, but also of Judgment: for
judgment without mercy is but cruelty, and mercy without judgment, is but
foolish pity: Pro. 20. 28.
therefore says Solomon: Mercy and Truth preserve the King, for his throne
shall be stablished with mercy. And in another place, Pro. 29. 9. 14.
A King by Judgment maintains a Country. Again, A King that judges the
poor in truth, his throne shall be established for ever.

This blessed Queen in describing the office of a King, joins with these two
blessed Kings, David and Solomon, saying; That God has placed Solomon in his
Throne to do Equity and Righteousness. Though she do not name Mercy, yet no
doubt it is included: for this Equity and Righteousness does contain an
upright government both in policy and religion, a government (I say) according
to the rule of Gods law^; punishing the wicked, comforting and defending the
godly. The very proper and principal object of the Magistrate are all the
wicked under his government. Not that he is to be careless of the good, for
those that be good themselves, will have a care of those that are good, seeing
God himself is careful of them. And as for the good, they are soon and
easily ruled: the greatest care, trouble and labor is about the ordering and
government of the wicked; and the removing, punishing, and ordering of them, is
for the defense, comfort, peace, and good of the godly. As the head is to
defend the body from all wrong and injury so far as it may: and as the
sheapheard is to defend his flock against Wolves, Foxes, and wild beasts, so
are good Magistrates to defend their people from all oppressors at home and
abroad. And therefore all worthy Kings and Rulers have fought in open field
against rebels and cruel enemies, in defense of their subjects. Judge. 3. and
4. and 7. and 11.
And thus did Ehud, Deborah, Barak, Gedeon, Iephtah deliver the children of
Israel out of the hands of their cruel enemies.

And thus did Joshua, Iosu. 6.
and the Elders of Israel, and the men of war, they besiedged the City of
Ai, and destroyed it. And Samson, a most valiant Champion, hazarded himself,
and ventured his life for the defense of Gods people against the bloody
Philistims, and both by his life, and by his death slew many thousands of them.
And thus David the King, the valiant Soldier, defended his subjects, the
people of Israel, from the uncircumcised Philistims, and other enemies, and
slew many thousands of them in the open field. 2. Chro. 20.
And so Iehoshaphat set himself against the children of Ammon, Moab, and mount
Seir, which were come against Judah, and the Lord gave him a marvelous victory
against these enemies. This blessed King feared God, and both he and his
subjects gave themselves first to fasting and prayer, and repentance: and so
the Lord blessed their Armies against their enemies. It is lawful for Kings to
defend and maintain their own liberties, and to recover by wars, that which
has been unjustly taken away from them. And as in wars there must be a
good cause, and a good affection, if we look to speed: so the authority and
example of the chief Governors does much encourage the people, and put life
into them.

And as Rulers are to defend their people from the force and violence of
enemies abroad: so they must not suffer them to be oppressed at home by their
own Contrymen. And indeed this is most unnatural and intolerable, that
one subject should oppress another, that Christians, Contrymen, and
brethren should vex and torment one another by hard and cruel dealing in the
time of the Gospel, under Christian Governors.

We have not this many years (blessed be God) been much troubled with
violence of foreign foes, but have lived peaceable a long time. And though
our enemies have sometimes made attempts and assaults against us, yet the Lord
himself has fought for us, to his great glory, and to the shame of our
Adversaries.

Our greatest troubles, exactions, and oppressions are amongst our selves one
with onother. Now this is a special part of the Magistrates calling to relieve
and defend the oppressed. And he may more easily, and sooner, with less charge
and danger defend his own subjects, against domestical oppressors, then set
himself in combat against mighty, many, and cruel enemies abroad. Private
men may not revenge their own wrongs, but they are in place to do it for
them. It is their office to relieve the oppressed, and to avenge their cause.
As a father over his children is both Lord and Judge, forbidding that one
brother should avenge himself of another, but if any cause of strife be
between them, he will have it brought to himself, or his Assigns, to have
it judged and corrected: So God forbids all men to avenge themselves, and
takes that office into his own hand. Therefore says the Apostle; Romans 12. 19.
Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but give place to wrath: For it is
written: Vengeance is mine, and I will repay, says the Lord. But yet in the
next Chapter the same Apostle shows, that God has appointed Princes and
Magistrates as reuengers of wrongs: For he says, that the Prince is the
Minister of God for thy wealth: Romans 13. 4.
but if thou do evil, fear: For he bears not the sword for naught: for he
is the Minister of God, to take vengeance on him that does evil. It is almost
impossible that a manshould be an equal and indifferent judge in his own
cause, lusts and appetites do so blind us. And when thou auengest thy self,
thou make no peace, but stirst up more debate. God therefore has given laws
to all nations, and has in all countries placed Kings, Governors and Rulers
in his own stead, to rule the world through them, and has commanded all
causes to be brought before them; and they are to determine and judge of such
causes, according to the rules of equity and righteousness. This is part of
the counsel which Salomons mother gave unto him: Pro. 31. 8 9.
Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause of the children of destruction: Open
thy mouth, judge righteously, and judge the afflicted and the poor.

The Prophet says to the Governors of Israel: Esa. 1, 17
Learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless, and defend the widow. Therefore such as were distressed, were wont
in their distress, to fly to the refuge of the chief Magistrate, for their
protection and defense. The Shunamite returning from the land of the
Philistims, called upon the King for her house, and for her land, which had
been wrongfully taken away from her, 2. King. 8 3. 5. 6.
and the King said to an officer: Restore thou all that are hers, and all the
fruits of her lands, since the day she left her land, even till this time. He
caused that to be justly restored, which was wrongfully holden away from her.
And herein good Magistrates should follow the example of God, and resemble his
Nature, whose Name and Image they carry: Psa. 145 14.
The Lord vpholdeth all that fall, and lifts up all that are ready to fall:
He executes justice for the oppressed: which gives bread to the hungry: The
Lord loses the Prisoners: Psa. 146. 7. 8. 9.
the Lord gives sight to the blind: The Lord raises up the crooked the Lord
loves the righteous: the Lord keeps the strangers: he relieueth the
fatherless and widow, but he ouer-throweth the way of the wicked. Therefore
says the Lord, Pro. 22. 23.
rob not the poor, because he is poor: neither oppress the afflicted in
judgment: for the Lord will defend their cause, and spoil the soul of those
that spoil them. Pro. 23. 10. 11.
Again he says, Remove not the ancient bounds, and enter not into the fields
of the fatherless; for he that redeemed them is mighty, he will defend their
cause against thee.

When the Children of Israel, were sore afflicted by Pha^aoh, Exodus 3. 7. 8. 9.
and the Aegiptians, the Lord in pity said: I have surely seen the trouble of
my people, which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry, because of their
Taske-maisters: for I know their sorrows therefore I am come down to deliver
them out of the hands of the Egyptians, etc.

And afterward when they were vexed by sundry enemies one after another,
though they sinned against him grievously and sundry times, yet when they cried
unto him in their distress and repented them of their sins, he heard their
cry, and sent them Judges and Deliuerers, to deliver them, and ease them of
their oppressions. Most excellent and worthy, is that worthy speech of that
good Queen Elizabeth, our gracious Sovereign of famous memory. A speech (I
say) recorded by reverend Jewel, in his answer to Pope Pius his seditious
Bull: Thus she speaks to the Council and Judges: Have care of my people,
you have my place, do you that which I ought to do: They are my people, every
one oppresses them, and spoyleth them, without mercy; they cannot revenge
their own quarrels, nor help themselves. See to them, see to them, they are
my charge. I charge you, as God charge me; I care not for my self, my life
is not dear to me, my care is for my people. O blessed and gracious speech
beseeming a gracious Prince, a pattern of piety. We may observe in that
speech, the tender care, pity, and love of her Majesty, to her distressed
Subjects; and that in those times, being in the beginning of her Majesty's
reign about fifty years ago, there were sundry oppressions, and wrongs in the
Land: How more grievously are they increased, and augmented since that time?
Cities, Towns, and Countries, are full of exclamations, of the cries, and
tears, of the oppressed, and few or none to pity, or relieve them. Is not
this lamentable and monstrous, that one Christian should vex, spoil, and
oppress another, being a sin against nature, reason, and all humanity? yea
such a sin as the best sort of the Heathen do detest, and abhor: The
Scripture does reckon any kind of oppression, amongst grievous and crying
sins. And God himself does denounce most greiuous and fearful judgments
against all oppressors whatsoever. Isa. 3. 14. 15.
The Lord shall enter into judgment with the Ancients of his people, and the
Princes thereof: for ye have eaten up the vineyard, the spoil of the poor is
in your houses. What have ye to do, that ye beat my people, and grind the
faces of the poor? says the Lord, Isa. 5. 8. 9
even the Lord of Hoasts. And again, Woe unto them that join house to house,
and lay field to field, till there be no place, that ye may be placed by
your selves in the midst of the earth. This is in mine ears, says the Lord of
Hoasts. Surely many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair without
inhabitant. Isa. 33. 1.
And in another place: Woe to thee that spoylest, and wast not spoiled: and
do wickedly, and they did not wickedly against thee; when thou shall cease to
spoil, thou shall be spoiled, when thou shall make an end of doing wickedly,
they shall do wickedly against thee. Amos 5. 11.
Another Prophet says: Forasmuch as your treading is upon the poor, and ye
take from him burdens of wheat; ye have built houses of hewn stone, but ye
shall not dwell in them: ye have planted pleasant Vine-yards, but ye shall
not drink wine of them. Micah 2. 1. 2. 3.
Another Prophet says: Woe unto them that imagine iniquity, and work
wickedness upon their beds; when the morning is light they practice it,
because their hand has power; And they covet fields, and take them away by
violence, and houses, and take them away. So they oppress a man and his house,
even a man and his heritage. Therefore thus says the Lord; behold, against
this family have I devised a plague, where out ye shall not pluck your
necks, and ye shall not go so proudly; for this time is evil. And again the
same Prophet says: Micah 3. 1. 2. 3. 4.
Hear I pray you o heads of Jacob, and ye Princes of the house of Israel:
Should not ye know judgment? but they hate the good, and love the evil: they
pluck of their skins from them, and their flesh from their bones: And they
eat also the flesh of my people, and flay of their skins from them, and they
break their bones. And chop them in pieces as for the pot, and as flesh with
in the caldron: Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not hear them.
He will even hide his face from them at that time, because they have done
wickedly in their works. Mica. 6. 9. 10. 11.
The same Prophet threatens the heavy judgment of God against the Treasures
of wickedness, against the bag of deceitefull waights. Hab. 2.
The Prophet Habacucke threatens as grievous punishments against all cruel
oppressors, and all such as get their goods, and raise up their houses and
estates, by wicked and unlawful means. All the Prophets, and the whole
Scriptures, is full of cursings and threatenings against all kind of
oppressors. So that their state must needs be fearful and damnable which
live and die in such a case. Our God is a God of truth and mercy, the Law of
God is Equity and Righteousness, and the Laws of the Land (we doubt not) are
grounded upon Reason and Justice; and they were made to this end, that every
man might have his own, that all good Subjects may be releiued, and defended,
against-wrong and injury, against the violence and deceit of men. Now good
Magistrates must see good Laws executed, for the relief of distressed people.
And that ye may the better be stirred up to perform this duty: Let me set
before you two worthy patterns and examples of good Magistrates. The one is
the example of Job who speaks thus of himself. Job. 29. 11. 12. 13. 14. etc.
When the ear heard me it blessed me, when the eye saw me it gave witness
to me; for I delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless and him that
had none to help him. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon
me, and I caused the widows heart to rejoice, I put on justice and it
covered me, my judgment was a Robe and a Crown; I was the eye to the blind,
and I was the feet to the Lame, I was a father to the poor, and when I knew
not the cause, I sought it out diligently. I brake also the laws of the
varighteous man, and plucked the prey out of his teeth. A worthy example for
Judges, Justices, and Magistrates to imitate and follow. Job shows before in
what credit and favor he was among the people: when he came to the place of
Judgment, young men being ashamed of their looseness feared his gravity, great
persons were silent and acknowledged his wisdom; all that heard him praised
his upright dealing, all loved him and reverenced him, and admired him, all
were afraid to offend him; By what means came he to such authority, and
credit? he got it not by any corrupt means, as by pride, pomp, flattery;
but by virtue, by good government, by justice, and mercy. Another worthy
example is Nehemiah, who though he was a Courtier, and lived in the Kings
Palace at case and pleasure, yet he pittieth his dear countrymen the Jews,
he mourns and prays for them. And afterward when the poor people laid
open their want and extremity, in time of dearth, and complained of the hard
dealing of the rich men, oppressing them by Usury; he hears their cries,
pitties their estate, reproves the oppressors, and reformeth them. The poor
people complain that the times were so hard, that they were feign to pawn
their Lands, to make their sons and daughters bond-slaues, and that their
own Countrymen would lend them nothing freely to serve their necessity
withal; but dealt thus hardly with them, with pinching and oppressing them
with Usury; the reason to move pity is, that they were of the same nature, of
the same flesh and blood with them. Nehemiah upon the complaint of these
distressed people is moved with inward compassion, charge the rich men with
their oppressions, sets an assembly against them; to shame them he
alleges the example of Gods mercy, who has redeemed them from the Heathen,
and therefore that they should be merciful to their brethren; He charge
them that their doings is evil and wicked, that they feared not God, that they
gave the Heathen cause to blaspheme God, that they dealt as cruelly as the
Infidels; He causes them to bind themselves with an oath to restore that
which they have unjustly taken, he curses those that will not keep their
oath, he moves them, by his own example, to mercy, liberality, and
hospitality; he and his lend money and corn to the needy, he kept at his
Table an 150. Nehe. 5.
Jews daily in this distress. Both these examples of Job and Nehemiah, are as
looking-glasses and mirrours for Magistrates to look into; wherein they may
see what care and counsel, what pity and compassion they are to have, to ease
and releive the oppressions of their people: And this will be greatly to their
comfort, credit, and honor; And indeed it may be a great discomfort, and
discredit to Princes, to suffer their people to be abused by oppressors and
tyrants, especially, when it lies in their power to help and relieve them.
Lattimer.
A reverend Father, and blessed Martyr, in a certain Sermon, before a King of
worthy memory, shows wherein the honor of a King consists. It is (says
he) the Kings honor, that his Subjects be led in true Religion, that his
Prelates and Clergy be set about their work in Preaching and Studying, and
not to be interrupted from their charge. Also it is the Kings honor that the
Commonwealth be advanced, and that the dearth of things be provided for, and
the commodities of the Realm, be so employed as it may be to the setting of
his Subjects on work, and keeping them from Idleness, and herein consists
the Kings honor and Office. Furthermore, if the Kings honor (as some men say)
stands in great multitude of people; then these Grasiers, Enclosers, and
rent-raisers are hinderers of the Kings honor. For where there has been a
great many of Householders and Inhabitants, there is now but the Shepeheard and
his do, so they hinder the Kings honor most of all. And indded these be the
words of Solomon: In the multitude of the people is the honor of a King, Prou.
14. 28.
and for want of the people comes the destruction of a Prince. Increase and
abundance of people is a great blessing of God, and a credit and strength to
the Prince. They are not Oxen or Sheep, but men, that must fight for Prince
and Country, if the enemies arise and assault the Land. And there be many
oppressions amongst us besides these: Oppressors in the Church and in the
Commonwealth, oppressions in every Court, in buying and selling, and in other
dealings amongst men to the hinderance and undoing of many poor people. But to
let pass the many kinds of oppressions (which the true Magistrate is to look
into, and so far as he can to redress and remove) I speak only of that
one kind of oppression (that is) biting and cruel usury, which Nehemiah
reformed among his people: I will speak of this because it is most common and
general, and yet most pernicious and detestable, though many do count it no
sin at all. Usury had wont to be called the woe and sin of Cities, and it
seems that as pride, and other sins, had their beginnings in great Cities:
so had usury, but it has passed from Cities to the Country, to Towns and
Villages. Every place, and all sorts of persons in the Land are infected with
this pestilence and leprosy; high, and low, rich and poor, men, women, and
children, fathers and mothers, Masters, and Dames, sons and daughters,
men-seruants and maide-seruants, husbandmen, tradesmen, and Laborers; yea,
and some that go from door to door, to beg and crave of others, have learned
this trade of usury. Free lending is hardly to be found; charity is waxen cold,
and this iniquity has gotten the upper hand: so that this sin is not only
now a woe to Cities, but a woe to Towns, to Villages, and to private houses.
It is the ruin and decay of many poor people in most places of the Land; nay,
it is the decay and overthrow of many worthy and great houses and families in
the Land. It has bitten them, it has eaten them, it has devoured and
consumed them to nothing; It is pitiful and lamentable, that such a
destroying and murdering sin should be suffered, or tolerated in a Christian
Land. Those that be true Christians indeed are to abstain from all appearance
of evil: How much more from so gross and apparent evil, directly and
expressly against the Law of God? Ex. 22. 25.
If thou lend money to my people (says God) that is, to the poor with thee,
thou shall not be as an Usurer unto him, ye shall not oppress him with
Usury. Again, Leui. 25. 35.
If thy brother be impouerished and fallen into decay with thee, thou shall
releive him, thou shall take no usury of him nor advantage, but thou shall
fear thy God, that thy brother may live with thee; thou shall not give him thy
money to usury, nor lend him victuals for increase. Psalm. 15.
David shuts out the usurer out of Gods Kingdom, as well as the slanderer,
and him that takes reward against the innocent. Ez. 18. 6. 8. 13.
Another Prophet puts Usury, amongst Idols, Adultery, and other filthy
sins, and threatens the same punishment to one, as to the other. Math. 7. 12.
Christ says: Whatsoever you would men should do to you, even so do ye to
them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. Matthew. 5. 42.
Again, Give to him that asks, and from him that would borrow of thee, turn
not away. A Heathen man being asked what Usury was, he answered, what is it to
kill a man? Another says that it is robbery, Another that it is the death of
life. The ancient learned fathers do utterly condemn it: One says that Usury
swalloweth up men's goods and Lands, and large Patrimony, as it were a Sea, and
yet the Sea is never filled. The Seas, for the most part, are for profit and
gain, but the Usurer can no man use but to his own hinderance: In the Sea
there is profit of many things, but with the Usurer shipwreck of all things.
Again, he that takes usury, commits extortion, raven, and pillage. If he
will say, I have nothing else to live by; so may the Thief say, the Bawd, the
Witch, the Sorcerer. Some compare the loan of money upon use to the poison of
Aspes: Whosoever is stricken and stung of the Aspe, he falls into a sweet
pleasant sleep, and so by sweetness of that sleep dies, for then the
venomous poison disperseth into every member: So he that begins with usury,
thinks for a time that he has a great benefit, but usury runs through
all his riches, and conuerteth all he has to debt. Another father being asked
what usury is, says; It is a poison of patrimony: And being asked what is
usury permitted by Law, he says that it is a Thief that before hand gives
warning what he minds to do. Some say that a Usurer is worse then all
sinners: he is worse then a thief, for he robs in the night, but the
Usurer robs day and night. He is worse then hell, for in hell only the wicked
shall be punished; but the Usurer spoyleth and punishes both the good and
bad, and spares neither holy nor unholy. He is worse then a Jew, for one Jew
will not take usury of another, but the Usurer will take usury of his Christian
brother. He is worse then death, for death kills but the body, the Usurer
kills bodies and souls. He is worse then Judas, for he sold Christ but once
for thirty pence; but they sell Christ continually as often as they can. Judas
restored that which he had unjustly taken: but the usurers never make
restitution.

Some compare the usurer to an hog or pigge, that while he lives, is
profitable and good for nothing: he will ever be rooting up the earth, running
through hedges, and eating up good corn: So does the usurer much hurt while
he lives. Indeed when the hog is dead there is some profit: So it may be
when the usurer dies, the poor shall get something. How many Sermons have been
preached in this and other places against usury? how many Books and Treatises
both long since, and of late have been written by the best learned men of our
own Country, against this monstrous sin? Give me leave to put you in mind
of some of them, to the further shame and condemnation of greedy usurers.
Worthy and reverend Iuell (whose works are now to be seen in every Church)
writing upon the Epistle of the Thessalonians, the fourth chapter, does
bitterly inueigh against usury, saying; That no good and godly man will use it:
that all that fear Gods judgments abhor and condemn it: that it is filthy
gain, and a work of darkness, a monster in nature, the overthrow of mighty
kingdoms, the destruction of flourishing states, the decay of wealthy Cities,
the plague of the world, the misery of the people. It is theft, the usurer is
worse then the thief, it is the curse of God, and the curse of the people:
this is usury.

There was never any religion (says he) nor sect, nor state, nor degree, nor
profession of men, but they have disliked it a Philosophers, Greeks, Latins,
Lawyers, Divines, Catholics, Heretics, all tongues and nations have ever
thought an usurer as bad as a thief; Nature proves it, if stones could
speak, they would say as much. He threatens to excommunicate all usurers of
that City where he preached, to publish their names, and shame them, that all
men may know them and abhor them, as the plagues and monsters of the world.
And thus he concludes; Tell me, thou wretched wight of the world, thou
unkind creature, which art past all sense and feeling of God, which know
the will of God, and do the contrary: how dare thou come into the Church?
It is the Church of God which has said; Thou shall take no usury. How dare
thou read or hear the word of God? It is the word of God that condemns
usury, and thou know it, how dare thou come into the company of thy
brethren? usury is the plague and destruction, and undoing of thy brethren, and
this thou know: How dare thou look upon thy children, thou make the
wrath of God fall down from heaven upon them: thy iniquity shall be punished
in the^ to the third and fourth generation, this thou know. How dare thou
look up unto the heavens? thou have no dwelling there. Thou shall have no
place in the tabernacle of the most high. In many other Treatises usury is
arraigned, convicted, condemned by sundry verdicts, it is proved scandalous,
and of bad report, against the law of God, against the law of nations, against
justice, honesty and charity. All shifts, excuses, objections and exceptions
are taken away and removed. And whereas some learned men do seem to favor,
and in some sort to tolerate this sin, yet it is with these and such like
cautions and limitations, To deal as he would be dealt withal, to lend freely
where they borrow upon necessity, and that the borrowers gains be so much more
as the interest, at least that the Commonwealth have no hurt by it. But before
the usurer will be tied to these conditions and exceptions; he will first give
over his trade. And that all that has been spoken might at least persuade
some usurers to lead a new course, to restore their ill-gotten goods, to lend
freely, in mercy, love and compassion. These usurers to whom Nehemiah spoke,
were touched at this one speech, and as it seems, confessed their fault, and
amended it, and shall men which confess Christ, after so many books written,
and so many Sermons preached against them, shall they yet continue in this
enormious sin without repentance and restitution? how shall they then escape
the vengeance and damnation to come? Howsoever, let Magistrates, as their duty
requires them, after the example of Nehemiah, be careful to ease their people
of this heavy burden and oppression. Let the Magistrate (I say) by counsel, by
example and reproof, and by all possible means that they can, seek (if it
may be) to reform these oppressors, at least to shame and restrain them. And
pity it is that there be not severe and sharp laws for the punishment of
these, as well as of other notorious offenders. We may wish (as one long since)
Good Lord God send to England some Solon for the redress of this, who took
away the usurers books and their gains from them, and forbad such filthy
lucre, and brought in an easement of this burden, for that all debtors were
discharged from all such creditors which had lent their money for usury and
gain; or at leastwise were eased from the usury of it. Thus did Solon in the
detestation of usury. A sharp kind of dealing no doubt, and a strange, but in
great diseases sharp corrosiues must needs be used, when lenitiue salues
will not serve.

I read that long before the Conquest King Edgar that just governor, and
severe Magistrate against all lewd officers in this Land, did amongst other his
good deeds, make proclamation, that all the Wolves should be killed in
England and Wales, because they were ravenous beasts, and deuourers of sheep
and other cattle, to the great hinderance and harm of his subjects. And to
have this the beter done, he appointed many to bring for their fines and
revenues Wolves heads yearly, some more, some less, and such as could not
bring Wolves heads in, paid their fines and revenues in money. Now such force
took this good order in this Land, that within a while there was not a Wolf
to be had nor found, neither in England nor Wales. That learned man wishes,
that likewise all usurers should suffer the pains of death, or be banished
this realm for ever, that there might hereafter no more usurers be found in
England, then are Wolves to be had this day. He does not see but that it is as
necessary to have a law against usurers, as against thieves, and a great deal
more* for thieves steal many times for necessity, whereas usurers rob and undo
all men for greedy gluttony: the one steals a crown in the high way, the
other robs men in the high street of all that they have: the one steals a
little to sustain nature, the other scratcheth up the whole treasure of
England to serve his own covetous and wretched desire, to the utter undoing of
thousands. And if these laws seem bloody (although the hanging of poor
wretches for small matters, is counted nothing bloody at all) then would I that
the old laws of England were put in execution, such as are called King Edwards
laws of the common laws of England, whereof one was, that the goods of an
usurer after his discease should turn to the benefit of the Prince, when
twelve men had found by proof, that the party disceased was an usurer in his
life time. Finally, that learned man in that learned discourse against v^ury,
Fol, 137.
written so many years ago, alleges many sharp punishments appointed by
the civil and common laws. And least he should seem of small credit for to
speak too hardly, and without proof, let us see what Mr Iuell in a letter
speaks of that book; What it should work in others I cannot tell (says
he,) for mine own part if I were an usurer never so greedily bent to spoil
and raven, as usurers be, yet would I think my self most unhappy if such
persuasions could not move me: for what man would not be afraid, to live
desperately in that state of life that he sees manifestly condemned by
Heathens, by Christians, by old Fathers, by the ancient Councels, by Emperors,
by Bishops, by Cannons, by Decrees, by all Sects of all Religions, by the
Gospel of Christ, by the mouth of God. And if it be so, is not usury to be
punished and restrained by all possible means? It is the decree of a Counsel,
that a Clergy man an usurer should be degraded, and therefore it is counted a
deadly sin. Another Council condemns all for Heretics, who held usury
lawful. Another decreed, that manifest usurers should be deprived of the
communion and fellowship of the Christians in their life, and of Christian
burial after death, till their heirs had restored their usury. Considering
therefore the danger and hurtfulnesse of this sin which so commonly reigns
amongst us, let all good Governors (I say) continually set before their eyes,
this worthy example of good Nehemiah, having the like care and compassion that
he had toward his people, using all means they can to ease them of heavy
burdens, and to suppress usury, extortion, and all kind of oppression
whatsoever. Herein they shall be like God himself, Psalm. 103 6.
who is said to execute righteousness and judgment to all that are oppressed.
And not only such as be oppressed with wrongs and injuries are to be
respected of the good Magistrate, but also all they whosoever, that be in want
and necessity, not being able to maintain themselves. All these (I say) are to
be provided for by the care and providence of good Governors; and this is a
part of Justice, Equity and Righteousness. This is a special part of their
office to relieve and help the poor, by their example, counsel and power to
draw others, and if need require, to constrain them to the helping and aiding
of the needy. Magistrates are Pastors, Fathers and Nurses; they must see that
all their sheep and children be fed and nourished. God is the creator of the
poor, and by his providence they are poor. Christ is their Redeemer, and died
for them as well as for the rich; and therefore they must not be contemned,
but much regarded as men; yea as Christian men. God is the God of the poor, of
the ^^iect, of the fatherless, and widows, he is full of compassion to such,
and has a care of them, he has made many laws, gives many precepts, for
the defense and relief of the poor, has ordained Kings, Judges, Magistrates,
and other officers in the Church and Commonwealth, for the comfort, succor,
and help of the poor and needy: and because there shall be always some poor
in the land, therefore he commands, saying; Deuteronomy. 15. 10. 11.
Thou shall open thy hand to thy brother to the needy, and to the poor in the
land. And he says a little before: Thou shall give him, and let it not grie^e
thine heart to give him: for because of this, the Lord thy God shall bless
thee in all thy works, and in all that thou do take in hand to do. Solomon
may be commended to be the poor man's King, for he does commend the poor unto
us by many exhortations and precepts. Pro. 11. 24.
There is (says he) that se^ttereth, and is more increased, but he that
spares more then is right, surely comes to poverty. The liberal person
shall have plenty, and he that waters shall have rain. Pro. 14. 31.
He that ^ppresseth the poor, reproves him that made him: but he honors
him that has mercy on the poor. Pro. 21. 13.
He that stops his ear at the crying of the poor, shall also cry and not
be heard. Pro. 19. 17.
He that has mercy on the poor, lends unto the Lord; and the Lord will
recompense him that which he has given. Pro. 28. 27.
Again, He that gives unto the poor, shall not lack: but he that hides his
eyes shall have many curses. Many such counsels and proverbs he delivers for
the comforting and relieuing of the poor. And as he gave this counsel to
others, so he was careful to follow it himself. David his father prophesies
of him; Psalm. 7. 12. 13.
He shall deliver the poor when he cries, the needy also and him that has
no helper, He shall be merciful to the poor and needy, and shall preserve the
soul of the poor. Christ the true Solomon gives the like counsel touching
the poor, and practices the same in himself, being a most lively and perfect
pattern of mercy and compassion to the distressed. Math. 5 7.
He faith; Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Again, Be
merciful as your father is also merciful. Math. 6 36.
And in another place, Give alms of those things which are within, Luke 11. 41.
and behold all things shall be clean to you. Sell that ye have, and give
alms: Luke 12* 33.
make you bags which wax not old, a treasure that can never fail in heaven,
where no thief comes, neither moth corrupts. And when we make a feast,
he bids us call the poor, Luke 14. 13. 14.
the maimed, the lame, and the blind, and so (says he) thou shall be
blessed, because they cannot recompense thee: for thou shall be recompensed at
the resurrection of the just. He shows the fearful and damnable estate of
the rich man, Luke 16. 19.
who fared delicately every day, but yet had no care to relieve poor Lazarus.
And as the Lord Jesus does persuade all men to mercy: so he himself was most
merciful, ready and willing to do good to the bodies and souls of men. He is
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, Math. 9 36.
and ready to help in time of need. When he saw the multitude he had
compassion upon them, because they were dispersed, and scattered abroad, as
sheep having no Sheapheard.

And when he saw another great multitude which had nothing to eat, he called
his Disciples to him, and said unto them: Mark. 8. 1. 2. 3.
I have compassion on the multitude, because they have now continued with me
three days, and have nothing to eat: and if I send them away fasting to their
own houses, they will faint by the way, for some of them came from far. And
presently he wrought a miracle: for with seven loves* and a few small fishes,
he fed about four thousand souls. He is like that good Samaritane, who when
he saw that man that fell among the thieves, being robbed and wounded, came
nere unto him, and when he saw him, he had compassion on him, and bound up his
wounds, and powered in oil and wine, and put him upon his own horse, and
brought him to an Inn, and made provision for him.

Finally, 2. Cor. 8. 9.
we know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he being rich, for our sakes
became poor, that through his poverty we might be made rich. All the
Apostles had special care of the poor, they put one another in mind of this^
duty, Paul confesses that he had warning from others to remember the poor;
which thing also he was diligent to do. He does in many places put the Church
in mind of this duty.

Concerning the gathering for the Saints (says he) as I have ordained in the
Church of Galatia: 1. Cor. 16* 1. 2.
so do ye also. Every first day of the week let every one of you put aside
by himself, and lay up as God has prospered him, that there be no gathering
when I come.

And in another place he bestows two whole Chapters in persuading them by
sundry reasons to the cheerful relieuing of the poor Saints. 2. Cor. 8. and
9.
You may see that the primitive Church had both ordinary and extraordinary
gatherings for their own poor, and for strangers: these collections were very
fitly on the Lords day. Such works of mercy are works of the Sabbath: then we
hear the word which does stir us up to this duty, then are public prayers
and petitions to God, which should move us to hear the petitions of others, as
we will have God to hear us; then we cry and crave for mercy to him, and
therefore we should snewe mercy to others: then are the Sacraments
administered, which do move us to love and charity one to another: then the
examples of others should provoke us to kindness and liberality toward our
brethren: then we remember and call to mind the remembrance of God toward
us, which should move us to be beneficial to others: then we profess the
communion of Saints, and therefore should be ready to impart such gifts as we
have, to the comfort and benefit one of another. Christians are all one
Corporation and one household; and therefore should have a care of the helping
and relieuing one of another.

The end of riches is not only to serve our own necessities* but specially
the glory of God, and also the necessity of others. The possession of riches is
uncertain, our life uncertain, our state uncertain, being subject to the
same calamities that others are: And therefore while we have time let us do
good to all men, and specially to the household of faith.

And consider (I pray you) who it is that has need, and requires thy help:
It is Man, even one like thy self, of the same nature, and it may be of the
same Spirit and Grace. And what does he ask of thee? but only that which God
does give thee, not only for thine own use, but for the good of others. Nay,
it is God himself that asks, and is become petitioner to thee for the poor.
It is God (I say) that asks, who has given thee body and soul and goods;
who has given his son for thee who loves the poor; and whatsoever is done
to them for his sake, he accounts it as done to himself. And he asks
nothing but his own: for the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is; and
all the beasts of the forest are his, and all the beasts on a thousand
mountains. And he does not ask it to thy hurt and hinderance, but to thy
greater gain and advantage. He that is merciful rewards his own soul: And
he that has mercy on the poor, lends to the Lord, and the Lord will
recompense him that which he has given. This is the best usury, to put out
money and riches to good and holy uses, to put them into the hands of God, to
bestow them according to his will, and then they shall be increased and
multiplied. We are all debtors to God, we owe him all we have, he has ordained
all things for our use, and therefore it is reason we should trust him, and
commit all we have into his hands. A wise creditor will trust a faithful debtor
with any thing. And shall not we trust our God who is most sure of his word,
and the best paymaister of all others? He is God, the faithful God, which
keeps covenant and mercy unto them that love him, and keep his Commandments,
Deu. 7. 5*
even to a thousand generations. Genesis 15. 1.
This God said unto Abraham; I am thy Buckler, and thy exceeding great reward.
God says to thee: Give, and I will give, thou have had me a giver, make me
now thy debtor. The poor man (says a Father) is a fruitful field, and
quickly and plenteously returns that which it has received. The Husbandman
buyeth Oxen, Horse, and feeds them, he tilleth the ground, he casts in his
seed, and all upon hope of a doubtful harvest: but alms is a seed to be
sown, the crop and harvest will certainly follow. Again, If thou will be a
good Merchant, and an excellent usurer, give forth that thou can not keep,
that thou may receive that thou can not loose: Give a little, that thou
may receive an hundred times as much: give a temporal possession for an
everlasting inheritance.

What a folly is it (^aith another) there to lay up thy goods from whence thou
must depart, and not rather to send them before thee to the place where thou
must go to inhabit. Let thy goods be where thy country is, he that hoordeth
up treasure in earth, have nothing to look for in heaven: Why look thou up
to heaven where thou has laid up nothing? 1. Tim. 6.
Charge them that are rich in this world (says the Apostle) that they be not
high-minded, and that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living
God, which gives us abundance of all things to enjoy; that they do good, and
be rich in good work, and ready to distribute and communicate, laying up in
store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may
obtain eternal life. God has ordained (says one) for men two Crowns; for
the poor the Crown of Patience, for the rich the Crown of Liberality. As the
poor do deprive themselves of their Crown by Impatiency and murmuring; so
ought the rich by helping the poor, to strive to obtain the Crown of
Liberality. Worthy is the example of the Primitive Church, of whom it is said
there was such order and charity amongst them that none of them lacked; Acts 4.
34. 35.
for as many as were possessours of lands and of houses sold them, and brought
the price of the things that were sold, and laid it down at the Apostles
feet, and it was distributed to every one as he had need: The number of
believers at that time was about five thousand. They lived in time of
persecution, they wanted the help of a good Magistrate. All Kings and Princes
were enemies to the Church at that time, yet they took such good order, and
were so charitable that they suffered none to lack among them. It is a shame
then for us to suffer any to want necessary sustenance; we (I say) living in
the days of peace and plenty under a Christian King, having so many good Laws
for the provision and relief of the poor. There is a memorable example of the
Christians under Maximinus the Emperor. In the time of famine many of the
Heathens were preserved and saved from death, by the mercy and liberallity of
the Christians, whereupon it came to pass, that those which did deadly hate
them before, did now require their help, and did openly confess that the
bowels of mercy were only found amongst Christians, that therefore Christian
Religion was the true Religion, which taught her worshippers true piety and
godliness: The which, when Iulianus the Apostata, afterward observed and
marked, least Christian Religion should be the more esteemed, because of such
incredible kindness and mercy, showed to all sorts of people; Iulienus (I say)
every where erected Hospitals, and endewed them with yearly revenues. And he
sets down this reason of his purpose, writing to one Arsatius an Idolatrous
Bishop: It is a shame (says he) that the worshippers of the Gods should
neglect their own, when as the wicked Galileans (for so he had wont to call
Christians) releiued not only their own, but also strangers; yea, ^uen the
enemies of their Religion, and suffered none of their own to beg from door to
door. The most unhappy Nation of the Jews, having no certain resting place,
nor any form of Commonwealth, yet do they mainetaine and seed their own,
least they should be constrained to crave help from Christians. The French and
Dutch Churches in this our Land, they set all their own on work, they suffer
none to beg nor to want among them. The Papists our Forefathers, they did
excel in liberallity to the Church and Commonwealth, in Hospitality and Alms
to the poor: We have many Monuments of their liberality amongst us, as
Hospitals and Almes-houses for the releiefe of the needy, with good Revenues
adjoined to them. Nay, the Papists adorned, beautified, and clothed, their
dumb Idols and Images, and shall we suffer poor people to want food and
clothing, which carry upon them the lively Image of God? All these examples
are to our shame and condemnation, and shall be judges and witnesses against
us at the day of the Lord. We profess the glorious Gospel of Christ, we
have the light of Gods word shining before us, we have daily Sermons and
Exhortations stirring us up to the works of mercy, we have many good and
godly Laws, agreeing to the Laws of God, and to the true discipline of the
Church, commanding and enioyning provision and relief of the poor, forbidding
all idleness, commanding all to be set a work, and all that want to be
releiued, according to their necessity, and yet there be many idle persons
amongst us, many would work and cannot get it, many though they do work,
labor, and toil, night and day, as much as may be, yet in respect of the
hardness of the times, all that they get will hardly provide bread for them
and theirs. Others there be that cannot work at all, and others but a very
little, yet these in many places are little regarded or provided for. Good
Laws we have, and in this place, I know there is good order and care taken
for the poor. Here be many means for their relief, which others want: And I
know there be many tender, merciful, and pitiful hearts, pitying the needy
estates of their brethren, stretching forth their hands to their releife; yet
considering the hardness of the time, and how unmerciful and hard hearted
some are, which yet are of great estate and ability, and considering also the
multitude and great number of the poor, which increase daily. Your care your
pity, your liberallity, your collections and alms, public, or secret, had
need be more then ordinary: And therefore I beseech you (dearly beloved) in
the bowels of Christ, as the Elect of God, put on you the bowels of mercy,
consider your own abilities, and the great necessity of so many, and let it
not grieve you to help and releive them, but freely, frankly, and cheerfully
show forth the fruit of your compassion, love, and mercy to your distressed
brethren, and especially you (Right Worshipful Magistrates and Governors,) do
your best endeavors according to your place and callings, to see this service
and work performed; by your counsel and example to persuade and draw as many
as you can to this duty. And as for those that are rich; yet cruel, covetous,
hard-heartd, and unmerciful, compel and force them by rigor of Law, to give
that to good uses which they are unwilling to give at all. All the poor under
your government be they never so many, they are your cure and charge, you must
see them provided for, if any of them perish through your default, their blood
shall be required at your hands. The good Minister is to be a mouth for the
poor to speak and entr^ate for them, and also by his example as much as he
may, to go before others in the duties of mercy: But the good Magistrate is not
only to be a good mouth for the poor, but an hand, an ear, an eye, and a
foot for them; to speak, to hear, to see, to go, to do what lies in him,
both for the defense and relief of the poor. As God forbids all cruelty
and private revenge in the sixth Commandment; so he commands all care and
means to preserve the lives of our brethren; now releife of the needy is a
means to preserve life, he that releeueth not when he may, and when there is
great necessity offends against this Commandment, and is a murderer. Non
pauisti, occidisti* thou have not fed (says one) therefore thou have killed. A
Lamp is quenched not only by blowing it out, but by keeping away the oil to
feed it: A fire is quenched, not only by water but by keeping away wood from
it; In a great drought many herbs do die, not only by plucking up, but for
want of watring; So, many poor people for want of food which they should have
by the care of good Governors and charitable good people; many (I say) for
want of means and provision, do decay, pine, and perish, which is most
shameful, fearful, lamentable, and intolerable in a Christian State. But I
nothing doubt of your care and diligence to perform this so worthy and
necessary duty: I know you are daily put in mind of these things, and
therefore I will cease to urge this point any further. Only by the way let me
give some few instructions and caueats, and some comforts to the poorer sort.
These must know that God has so ordained, and appointed in his providence,
that there shall be some poor as long as the world endures. Let them
therefore be content with their state, seeing God (who knows what is best
for them) has so decreed it in his Wisdom: It may be if they had riches
they would abuse them in pride and wantonness; he can (if he see good) turn
their want into plenty, Let them know that many worthy men have been in want
and necessity; Let them take their poverty as a cross, and let them be patient
and humble, the rather because sometimes their own idleness and looseness of
life has caused it, let them repent of their sins past, let them take heed
hereafter of pride, en^y, slothfulness, and unlawful shifts and means; Let
them depend upon God and cast their whole care upon him, and though they be
poor in the world, let their chief care be to be rich in grace, in
knowledge, and in faith, and so they shall be sure to be greatly in the
favor of God: Phil. 4. 10. 12. 13
Let every one of them say with the Apostle: I have learned in what state I am,
therewith to be content; I can be abased, and I can abound, every where in
all things, I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, and to abound
and to have want, I am able to do all things through the help of Christ which
strengthens me. Let them be kind and pitiful to those which be in like
case with them, seeing they are in the same misery: Let them be thankful
toward their Benefactors; and though some rich-men be hard-hearted and
unmerciful to the^, let them not curse, but bless, and pray to God for them,
who is able to mollify and soften their hard hearts: for it may be God in his
justice does turn the hearts of men from them, because they have turned their
ears and hearts from him: they have been hard hearted against God, against
Gods word, and against their brethren, and therefore the hearts of others are
justly hardened against them. Let them remember and follow the example of poor
Lazarus, which though the rich man dealtmore cruelly with him the^ did his
dogs, and had no pity at all of so poor a creature, yet this poor man did
neither grudge, repine, nor curse: and therefore being full of faith and
patience, he was received into Abraham's bosom. And finally, seeing that God
has such a great care of the poor in making so many Laws for them, in giving
so many preceps for their relief, and takes their cause to be his own, and
seeing he has appointed Ministers to speak for them, and Officers and
Magistrates; yea, Kings and Princes for their defense and relief: Let the
poor (I say) be careful to serve and fear that God, which is so careful of
them; let them reverence and love the Ministers and lovingly embrace that word
which does persuade, move and provoke all men to the duties of mercy, love, and
liberality; Let them honor the Magistrates who are appointed as fathers unto
them, who take care and watch, and take continual pains to comfort and help
them: And let them say in their souls, blessed be God for good Governors: And
thus we have heard many good parts of good Governors, that by their means the
wicked are punished, the good are praised and countenanced, every man
possesses his own; oppressions and wrongs are suppressed, the poor and needy
are comforted and relieved, and all these benefits and duties this gracious
Queen includes in these words Equity and Righteousness. One duty yet
remains, which is also a part of Equity, and that is to establish and
mainetaine true Religion; this is the first and chief duty of a good Prince,
though I have referred it to the last place. Good Princes are not only to have
a care of justice in punishing the wicked, and of mercy in defending the good,
and releeuing the distressed; but also to plant and maintane the worship of God
in their Kingdoms. Thus much we have heard already, that Religion and Divine
Wisdom belongs to all sorts and degrees of men, to rich and poor, to young
and old, to men, women and children, and most of all to Princes and Governors,
who are to be giudes and ringleaders to others. We have examples before our
eyes of a religious Queen coming so great and long a iourny to be resolved in
the truth of religion, and reposing the greatest happiness in true and heavenly
wisdom: Here also is the example of Solomon a mirror of Religion and Divine
Wisdom to all the world; who also planted and established the true worship of
God in his Kingdom. We have heard also that God is the author of the callings
of Kings and Princes, that they are in his steed and carry his Name and Image;
and therefore they, of all others, are to be most Religious, and to be most
careful that the true God, who has so highly advanced them, may be
worshipped and served in their Kingdoms: And this is Equity and Righteousness
to command and establish the Law and Service of their Creator and Protector:
And further we have heard, that it is the duty of Governors to overthrow and
root out all false worship, all false doctrine, heresy, and idolatry: as all
these are to be removed; so in steed of these, good Princes are to plant true
Religion, and to establish faithful Teachers in their Kingdoms: They must be
examples of Religion and Piety to others, they must guide their families so
carefully, religiously, that they may be patterns and presidents to others, If
Religion be first in their own hearts, and also planted in their household and
families, they will be also careful that all the people committed to their
charge may fear God, and be truly Religious. This is part of the counsel of
Iethro, Moses father in law, wishing him that he should provide not only men
of courage, Ex. 18. 21.
and just men, hating covetousness, but also such as feared God. There be
general places in the Scripture, as; Love God with all thine heart, with all
thy soul, with all thy strength: Fear God, and keep his Commandments. Seek
for Gods Kingdom. Labor for the meat that never perishes. These, and such
like commandments, and exhortations, as they belong to all Christians, so also
to Magistrates: They are keepers of both the Tables of the Commandments, and
therefore to maintain the one as well as the other: they must see as well the
duties to God, performed to him, as the duties to me^ one to another. They must
have a care not only of justice, peace, and civil honesty; but also of the
sincerity of Religion: The King is commanded to have the book of the Law, Deuteronomy.
17. 18. 19.
to read in it continually; that so he may learn to fear both his God, and
to keep all the words of the Law. Ps. 2. 10. 11. 12.
David says, Be wise ye Kings, be learned ye Judges of the earth, serve the
Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling, kiss the son least he be angry.
Psa. 148. 11. 12. 13.
And in another place he says; Kings of the earth, all people, Princes, and
all that judge the world* ^ong men and maids, old men and children, let them
praise the Lord: his Name is only to be exalted, and his praise above the
earth, and the heavens. David before his death charge his son Solomon, 1.
King. 2. 3.
to walk in the Ways of God, and to keep his Statutes, that so he might
prosper in that he took in hand. Princes we heard are fathers of the Country,
of the Church, and Commonwealth: Now, the Apostle exhorts fathers to bring up
their children in the fear of the Lord. 1. Chron. 15. 2. 3.
David Prepared a place for the Ark of God, and pitched for it a Tent, and
gathered all Israel together to Jerusalem, to bring up the Arc of G^d to his
place which he had ordained for it; so he and they brought it with great joy.
2. Chron. 6. 1.
Solomon after he had built a famous house for God; He blessed the people, he
praises the Lord, he prays to God for those that should pray in the Temple.
2. Chron. 15. 12.
Asah destroys Idolatry, and commands his people to serve the true God; and
they made a covenant to seek the Lord God of their fathers with all their
heart, and with all their soul, and whosoever will not seek the Lord God of
Israel shall be slain, whether he be great or small, man or woman, and they
swear unto the Lord with a loud voice, and all Judah rejoiced at the oath. 2.
Chron. 17. 4. 9.
Iehoshaphat he walked in the ways of his father David, and sought the Lord
God of his fathers, and walked in his Commandments, and took away Idolatry,
and sent forth Teachers with the book of the Law of the Lord, who went about
through the Cities of Judah, and taught the people. In time of distress he
prayed unto the Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah, and humbled
his soul and asked counsel of the Lord. 2. Chron. 29. and 30
Hezekiah repaireth the Temple, aduertiseth the Leuits of the corruption of
Religion, the King and his Princes sacrifice ian the Temple, he commands the
Passe-ouer to be k^pt and exhorts his people to return to the Lord. 2.
Chro^. 34.
Good Josiah destroys Id^l^, repaireth the Temple, took away all the
abhomination^ out of all the countries that pertain to the children of Israel,
and compelled all that were found in Israel to serve the Lord their God. Nehe.
13.
Nehemiah reproves, and reformeth the profanation of the Sabboath. The Lord
stirred up Cyrus King of Persia, Ezra 1.
to build him an house in Jerusalem: And see the zeal of that King in
furthering the building of that house. Dan. 3. 29.
Nebuchadnezzar makes a decree that every People, Nation, and Language, which
speak any blasphemy against the God of Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego, should
be drawn in ^^eces, and their houses should be m^de a I^kes, because there is
no God that can del^^^r after this sort. Dan. ^. 26.
Darius makes a Decree that in all the Deminions of his Kingdom men tremble
and fear before the God of Daniel, for he is the living God, and remains
for ever. The King of Niniue after he heard the Preaching of Jonah, Jonah 3.
he believed God, he proclaimed a fast, and commanded his Subjects to cry
mightily unto God, and to turn from their evil way. Thus we see by all these
examples that good Princes are to have a care of Religion both in themselves
and others. And here is a further blessing of a good King, that we have not
only by his means, justice, peace, and civil honesty, protection of body and
goods; but also true Religion, and the worship of the true God, and the Gospel
of Christ commanded, and enjoined, and established amongst us by many good
Laws and Statutes.

Now for a conclusion of the duties of good Governors, let them remember these
counsels, directions, and examples. A worthy King by his last will gave this
advise to his son and successor, saying; Be devout in the seriuce of God, be
in heart pitiful, and charitable to the poor, and comfort the^ with thy good
deeds, keep the good Laws of the Realm, take no Subsidies, nor releise of thy
Subjects, but upon urgent necessity, and for to profit the Commonwealth upon
just cause voluntarily. Julius Pollux, Govern or of the Emperor Commodus in
his youth, gives him these titles, calling him Father of the people, Gentle,
Loving, Merciful, Wise, Just, courteous, Courageous, despising Money, not
subject to Passion, but commanding over himself, ouercomming Lust, using
reason, quick of conceit, Sober, Religious, careful for his Subjects,
Constant, no deceiuer, adorned with Authority, ready in his affairs, provided
to do well, slow to revenge, Affable, gracious in speech, open-hearted, a
lover of the virtuous, desirous of peace, valiant in war, an example of good
manners to his subjects, a maker of good laws, and an obseruer of the same.
There was a worthy Table (as is recorded) found at Thebes, by Marcus Aurelius,
and at his death given to his son as a precious Jewel, containing these
protestations and sentences following: I never exalted the proud rich man,
neither hated the poor that was just: I never denied justice to the poor for
his poverty, neither pardoned the wealthy for his riches: I never benefited nor
gave reward for affection, nor punished for passion only: I never suffered
evil to escape unpunished, neither goodness vn-rewarded: I never committed
the execution of manifest justice to another, neither determined that which was
difficult by my self alone: I never denied Justice to him that asked it,
neither Mercy to him that deserved it: I never punished in anger, nor promised
benefit in mirth: I was never careless in prosperity, neither faint-hearted
in adversity: I never did evil upon malice, nor committed villainy for
covetousness: I never opened my gate to the flatterer, nor gave care to the
backe-biter: I always sought to be loved of the good, and feared of the
wicked: Lastly, I always favored the poor, that were able to do little, and
God, who was able to do much, favored me.

A mirror for Magistrates, a pattern for Princes, and happy are they that in
the end of their government can truly say thus: at least let Governors
strive and endeavor to the utmost of their power, to learn and practice these
lessons, and to perform all other duties of their callings.

And thus we have heard the chief and principal doctrines concerning the
Magistrate, as the necessity, authority, and dignity, and duty of their
callings. This doctrine is necessa^y and profitable often to be urged, and
serves for many good uses. By this the Magistrate may be encouraged and
comforted in the execution of all the parts of his calling, having his
allowance and warrant from God. By this he is stirred up and provoked to
zeal, and religion, and holiness of life, seeing he carries upon him the
name, the place and Image of God. By this doctrine he may see the greatness,
the difficulty, and the heavy burden of his calling, which may be a cause
sufficient to humble him in the sight of God and men. In consideration whereof
he may say with the Apostle, who is sufficient for these things? And let him
pray with Solomon; 1. King. 3.
Give unto thy servant an understanding heart, to judge thy people, that he may
discern between good and bad: For who is able to judge this so mighty a
people? This doctrine serves also to reprove, convince, and condemn all
rebels, traitors, and seditious spirits, which make insurrection against their
lawful Sovereign. And hereby all good subjects are encouraged to love, honor
and obey their lawful Rulers; and with this Queen, to bless and praise God
for the happiness of good Government. And considering the manifold blessings
which we receive by good Rulers, as Justice, peace, punishment of evil doers,
defense against foreign and domestical foes, relief for the poor, comfort
to the good, fruition of liberty, yea freedom of the Gospel, and true
Religion. Considering (I say) so many and so great benefits which we enjoy
under Christian Magistrates, let us all with this Queen, bless God for so
happy government. And indeed all true English Christian hearts have just
cause to rejoice and praise God for his Majesty's happy reign amongst us, both
for his entrance and continuance. What fears? what perplexities, and doubts
had we at the death of our late Sovereign? What boasting, what hopes and
triumphing of the Adversaries? who made account they had that day which they
long looked and gaped for.

They had spoken it often, and thought it often in their hearts, saying and
thinking with Esau; Genesis 27. 41.
The days of mourning for my father will come shortly, then will I slay my
brother Jacob. The best had cause to fear, in respect of the horrible and
manifold sins of the Land, deserving such a judgment. But blessed be God,
who cared for us, though we little cared for him: He presently provided another
gracious Sovereign for us, the next in blood, a Christian Prince, a man of
wisdom and experience in Government. After Moses succeeded Iosuah, after
David Solomon.

Let us say with the Prophet: Psalm. 4^ 7. 8.
Thou have saved us o Lord from our adversaries, and have put them to confusion
that hate us: therefore will we praise God continually, and will confess thy
name for ever. It may be said of diverse other Countries: 2. Chro. 5.
There is no peace to him that goes out and in amongst them, but great
troubles are to all their inhabitants. But it may be said of us as the Lord
says to David: 1. Chro. 22. 9. 10 etc.
Behold a Son is borne to thee, which shall be a man of rest: for I will
give him rest from all his enemies round about, therefore his name is Solomon.
And I will send peace and quietness upon Israel in his days, etc.

And that which the Prophet Jeremy speaks, Ier. 23. 5. 6.
is fulfilled amongst us: Behold the days come (says the Lord) that I will
raise unto David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and
shall execute judgment and justice in the earth. In his days Judah shall be
saved, and Israel shall dwell safely. How much are we beholden to God, that
so soon and suddenly turned our sorrow and fear into joy and gladness, and
does still continue and confirm the same unto us? Though weeping was in the
evening, Psa. 30. 5*
yet joy came in the morning. Pro. 25. 25.
As the cold waters to a weary soul, so good news from a far country did
cheer and refresh our hearts. Psa. 147. 12. 13. 14* 19. 20.
Wherefore praise the Lord, o Jerusalem, praise thy God, o Sion, for he has
made the bar of thy gates strong, and has blessed thy children within thee:
He sets peace in thy borders, and satisfies thee with the flower of
Wheat: He shows his word to Jacob, his statutes and his judgments to
Israel. He has not dealt so with every Nation, neither have they known his
judgments. Praise ye the Lord. O that we had hearts to think seriously of
these benefits which we enjoy under his Majesty, and that we were truly
thankful for them: then might we hope for the continuance and increase of
these blessings: But our iniquities have turned away these things, Ier. 5. 25.
and our sins have hidden good things from us. O that we had such hearts and
tongues that we might continually with joy say in our souls: Blessed be God
for his so great and undeserved blessings bestowed upon this sinful land:
blessed be his name for all good Laws, good Governors, and good Government
under his gracious Majesty.

One thing more I observe worthy of commendation, both in this Queen, and in
Solomon: It is worthy of memory in her that she made choice of such a Teacher
and Schoole-maister: And indeed she could not at that time make a better
choice in the world. Dionysius made choice of Donatus for his Schoole-maister
in Grammar, and Victorinus for Rhetoric, and Gregery Nazianzene for Theology.
Theophrastes made choice of Aristotle to be his teacher: Aristotle made choice
of Plato, and Plato made choice of Socrates.

These were all wise in their choice, but this Queen goes beyond them all,
choosing Solomon for her Teacher, who excelled all men in the world, both in
humane and Divine wisdom. And as she made choice of him, so she was content
to be taught by him, and profited much by his instructions, as we have
already heard. Yea she so profited, that in some sort she teaches him, and
puts him in mind of his duty: She remembers Gods mercies toward him,
and admonishes him of the end of his place and calling.

And it is worthy of commendation in Solomon, that as he was willing to teach
her, so he is content to be taught by her. And if Solomon had but remembered
this her admonition, it might have been a precious preservative against those
horrible and gross sins, into which he most fearfully fell in his old days.
But he forgot the love and mercies of God toward him, he forgot his high place
and dignity, he forgot the end why God had placed him, and the rules of Equity
and Righteousness. Yet this is worthy of commendation in him, that at this
time he does not, as some would have done, reject the admonition of this
woman, being far his inferior. He might have said; Do thou take upon thee
to teach me, seeing thou came to learn of me? I know my duty well enough, I
need no teaching. But Solomon does take in good part her good counsel, and
does still most lovingly and kindly entertain her.

From hence we are to learn, that we must be content to receive good counsel,
admonition, and instruction from any, though they be far our inferiors. Such
as be truly humble and lowly in their own eyes, are content to receive good
doctrine from mean persons: they are not ashamed to learn of any, young or
old, learned or unlearned, good or bad, men or women, they are not ashamed to
confess their ignorance, wants and infirmities, they do not contemn the
plain style of teaching, which is agreeing to Scripture: they can be content
to receive good drink, not only in cups of gold and silver, but also in cups
of pewter, wood and stone.

Worthy is that counsel of an ancient Father: Augustin^
There is no age (says he) too late to learn that which is needful; and
though it be more fit for old men to teach then to learn, yet it is better to
learn then to be ignorant. Another says, It is a thing I desire, Gregory.
and is most worthy, to learn even to my last age, because that no age is so
sufficient to learn thoroughly all that we need. Hug^.
Again says another, Be willing to learn of all that which thou knownest not
thy self; because humility can make that common to thee which Nature has made
proper to any: thou shall be wiser then all, if thou be willing to learn of
all: they are most rich of all, which receive from all. Exodus 18*
Moses was content to hearken to the counsel of his Father-in-law in choosing
officers to be assistant to him in his great charge. 1. Sam. 25.
David receives and accepts the counsel of Abigail a woman, and blesses
her in her counsel. 2. King. 5* 3. 13.
Naaman the Syrian hearkeneth to the counsel of his maid, wishing him to send
to Elisha for the curing of his leprosy; and the same noble man obeyed the
counsel of his servants aduising him to do as the Prophet bad him. Luke 2. 19.
The blessed virgin was content to receive instruction from the Sheapheards, of
those things which she knew before. Act. 18. 24. 25. 26.
Apollos, an eloquent man, mighty in the Scriptures, instructed in the way of
the Lord, fervent in the spirit, is content to receive further instruction from
Aquila and Priscilla, which were far his inferiors. The Apostle wishes the
Colossians to put Archippus in mind of his duty, wishing them to say to
Archippus: Col. 4. 17*
Take heed to the Ministry that thou bast received in the Lord, that thou
fulfill it.

The use of this doctrine is chiefly for reproof of proud and scornful
persons, which either scorn all instructions, or at least they reject the
counsels of mean persons, and of their inferiors. Governors scorn to learn
of their subjects, the old disdain to learn of the younger, parents will not
hearken to their children, no^ masters to their servants: Ministers scorn to
receive admonition from the people; yea from their fellow-ministers, if they be
of meaner gifts, or less account in the world. And this is the cause that so
many holy counsels and Sermons of godly Ministers are rejected, or little
regarded, because they themselves are men of no great estimation in the world.
Worthy is that example of the Eunuch, Treasurer of Aethiopia, who did so
willingly hearken to Philip, Acts 8. 30. 31.
and kindly entertain him: for this noble man reading the Prophet Esaias in his
Chariot, being demanded of Philip, if he understood that he read: he did not
taunt nor scorn this poor Preacher, but confessed his ignorance, and
willingness to learn, and kindly entertained Philip, and took him into the
chariot with him. It is pride of heart, and want of humility, that causes men
to scorn good instructions from mean persons, The Lord sends such proud men
to the very beasts, to learn from them. The Ox knows his owner (says he)
and the Ass his Masters cribbe, Isay. 1. 3.
but Israel has not known. Ier. 8. 7.
Again, the Storke in the Air knows her appointed times; the Turtle, the
Crane, and the Swallow, observe the time of their coming, but my people
knows not the judgment of the Lord. Job. 12. 7.
And Job says; Ask now the beasts and they shall teach thee, and the fowls
of the heaven and they shall tell thee. Our Savior Christ, to draw his
Disciples to humility, sets a child before them to be their Teacher,
saying: Verily I say unto you, Mat. 18. 3. 4.
except ye be converted and become as little children, ye cannot enter into
the Kingdom of heaven; whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this
little child the same is the greatest in the Kingdom of heaven. We must be
lowly, tractable, docible, and willing to learn, as good children are.
Solomon, so execellent a man, so extraordinarily wise, so famous in all
learning, is content to receive the instruction and admonition of this woman, a
stranger, his scholar, nothing comparable to him in any grace, yet does he
take in good part her counsel, teaching him nothing but that which he knew
well enough before.

And thus at last we have gone through and finished, as we could, this short,
sweet and worthy Story, wherein we have laid before our eyes an example of a
blessed Queen, of a blessed Hearer, of a blessed Teacher, and of a blessed
King. Now the Lord, the most wise God, the Father of all good gifts, make us
all the true children and scholars of true Wisdom, that we may esteem that
as our chief felicity in earth; that so the King in ruling, the Nobles and
Magistrates in assisting, Ministers in teaching, People in hearing and obeying,
may be truly blessed in this life, and fully blessed for ever in the life to
come, in the place of eternal blessedness, in the Kindome of the true Solomon
CHRIST JESUS who sits at the right hand of his Father, and with Equity and
Righteousness shall judge the quick and dead at his appearing. Amen.

FINIS.

