A SERMON OF ECCLESIASTICAL BENEDICTION: Preached at Oundle at a Visitation,
Apr. 14. 1619. by Master SAMVEL GIBSON, Minister at Burleigh in Rutland.

DEVT. 10. 8. The Lord separated the Tribe of Leui, to bear the Arc of the
Covenant of the Lord, to stand before the Lord, to minister unto him, and to
bless in his name. BY WISDOM PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY.

printer's device: two hands clasping each other below two cornucopias, with a
caduceus above

AT LONDON Imprinted by F. K. for William Barringer, at the great North-doore
of Paul's. 1620.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader: This Sermon ensuing, being by command of public Authority
preached at a Visitation, or public meeting of Ministers, gave such content
and comfort generally to all the Auditory, both for the soundness of the
matter, and fitness of the argument, and specially because it is a point so
seldom so fully handled: that many of us fellow laborers in the Ministry,
have been earnest suitors to the Author (and have prevailed) to commit it to
Press, both to renew the memory of many good things then we heard, and through
our weakness lost them again; but chiefly that others might be made
partakers of the same spiritual good things with our selves. Wherein we have
done much like those good natured Lepers, 2. Kings 7. 9. who having once
tasted, and plentiously refreshed themselves with good things in the Aramites
Tents, were presently desirous to communicate the same with others also. We do
not well, said they, this day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our peace:
if we tarry til daylight, some mischief will meet us. Now therefore, come, let
us go, and tell it to others. Knew thou but the sufficiency of the man of
God that penned and spoke it, his sound knowledge in the Truth, his good order
of teaching, his honest life and conversation, his good report with all men,
his wise, peaceable, and discreet carriage of himself amidst our infinite
distracting controversies: surely all these could not but sweetly allure thee,
or rather violently draw thee on to the perusing of this short Treatise. The
Author of it stands up as a worthy Minister of God, in the midst of four other
Brethren, all the Sons of one Father, all learned, religious, godly
Preachers, a happy Offspring of Blessed Parents, a lively mirror of Gods
blessing upon such as consecrate their posterity to the holy Ministry. They
are right Samuels, first, by their Parents given to God, and again, given of
God to the service of the Tabernacle. Let us rejoice in the good of Sion, and
bless God for the abundant (...) of his Spirit in our days, if ever,
plenteously powered forth upon our old men, and upon our young men, the
Prophets and sons of the Prophets, for the work of the Ministry, for the
gathering together of the Saints, for the building up of the body of Christ.

Thus assured of much comfort and profit unto thee, if thou will vouchsafe the
pains to read it over, heartily craving thy prayers and praises to the Lord
of all Spirits, both for the Author himself, and also for us all his loving
Brethren, we do humbly commend thee to God, and to the Word of his grace,
which is able to build thee further, and to give thee an inheritance among all
them that are sanctified. Farewell in the Lord.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, The Ministers of Okeham Lecture in Rutland. WILLIAM
PEACHYE. H. HARGRAVE. Z. I.


ECCLESIASTICAL BENEDICTION. A Sermon of the power and prerogative belonging
to the public Ministers to bless the people: Preached by S. G. at a
Visitation at Oundle, Ap. 14. 1619.
The Text*
2. CHRON. 30. 27. Then the Priests the Levites arose, and blessed the people,
and their voice was heard, and their prayer came up to his holy dwelling place,
even unto heaven.
The Context.
HEre is the happy ending of a good meeting. The meeting was, to celebrate the
Passover the Sacrament of the Law: the motion hereunto was made by good
Hezechiah: upon the motion, a very great congregation of well-disposed people
came together to Jerusalem to keep the feast; and as that virtuous and
religious King ordered the matter in his great zeal for the glory of God, it
was performed with that solemnity, as the like was never done before since
Salomons days: A diuiso regno non fuit celebrata tanta festiuitas iunctis cum
Iehuda Israelitis: Never since the division of the Tribes, was there such a
festival time so solemnly kept by Judah and Israel together.

Now, to see the zeal and forwardness of the Princes and people in so good an
action, it was no small comfort to the Priests and Levites: they therefore,
when they saw all things done to their own hearts desire, and to the glory of
God, according to their office, in the end they gave the assembly their
Priestly benediction, and obtained a blessing from the Lord upon them, and so
dismissed the Congregation.

The division.
The words may be divided into two parts: The first is concerning the Priests
blessing upon earth: the second touching the blessing of this blessing, from
heaven. The first, in these words, Then the Priests the Levites arose and
blessed the people, and their voice was heard. The second, in the words
following; and their prayer came up to his holy dwelling place, even to heaven.
The subdiuision.
In the first part, every word has his weight, and there are six particulars
obseruable therein. First, the time when this was done. Secondly, the agents by
whom it was done. Thirdly, the preparation thereunto. Fourthly, the action it
self. Fifthly, the object of the action. Sixthly and lastly, the manner of it.

The sense.
First, for the time, Then: that is, Finito sacro, All the solemnity of the
sacrifice being finished, (...), seasonably and opportunely. In conclusion of
that divine service, when the people were to depart, they were dismissed with a
blessing.

Secondly, for the agents or persons blessing, they were consecrate persons
which had a calling to do it: The Priests the Levites blessed.

What the Priests were.
The Priests were men immediately called out of Aarons posterity, and anointed
in the sight of the people, among whom some that were Heads of their families,
were called chief Priests, and the Princes of the Sanctuary, amongst whom
there was one super-eminent person above all the rest, called the High Priest,
who had most glorious attire, and might alone enter into the Sanctum Sanctorum
once a year, and was in his function a figure of Christ.

What the Levites.
The Levites were inferior Ministers, and had offices appointed unto them
under the Priests, as assistants unto them in the service of the Tabernacle,
Numb. 8. 7. And this is the difference between Numb. 8. 7. 19.
the Priests and the Levites: but here it is not said, the Priests and Levites,
but Haccohanim haleuiijm, as it is in the Hebrew text, Sacerdotes Leuitici, as
Iunius translateth, the Leuiticall Priests. For Aaron and all the Priests were
of the Tribe of Leui, and to them it pertained by the Law to bless in the name
of God, Numb. 6. 22.

Thirdly, for the preparation, They arose. Sitting still was not a gesture
reverend enough for them to use in public prayer: kneeling down would have
drowned their voice and hindered the audience; therefore it concerning the
people to hear what they said, that they might say Amen to it, the Priests
stood up that they might be conspicuous, and so be the better understood of the
congregation.

Fourthly, for the action, it is said, They blessed. To bless, has diverse
significations in the Scripture. Psalm. 103. 1.
First, man is said to bless God: then it signifies to praise and give
thanks. Genesis 12. 2.
What it is to bless.
Secondly, God is said to bless man, and then it signifies actually to
confer some good or other. Thirdly, man is said to bless man, and then it
signifies to wish well unto, which is usually done with invocation of the name
of God, the fountain of all good that comes to man, or to any creature in
heaven or earth. Genesis 24. 12.
Now thus a man blesses either himself or others. To let pass the former,
the blessing of others pertains either to all sorts in general, or to some
more specially. Blessing ordinary, by all sorts.
To all sorts it belongs, partly by the law of natural affection: secondly,
partly by the law of courtesy: thirdly, partly by the law of equity: fourthly,
partly by the law of charity.

1. By the law of natural affection. Genesis 24. 60.
First, by the law of natural affection it pertains to all sorts to bless
their friends and kindred: as the friends of Rebecca did, when she was to depart
from them, Thou art our sister, grow into thousand thousands, and let thy seed
possess the gates of their enemies, Genes. 24. 60. Thus children and all those
that are not (...), without natural affection, will upon occasion often pray,
God bless their parents, and their brethren and sisters, and those which are
near unto them in nature.

2. By the law of courtesy. Ruth. 2. 4.
Secondly, by the law of courtesy it pertains to all sorts to bless those
which they meet, or pass by. Which courtesy we find to have been
reciprocal between Boaz and the Reapers, Ruth. 2. 4. The Lord be with you,
said Boaz: The Lord bless thee, said the Reapers. Psalm. 129. 8.
And Psalm. 129. 8. the words of the Prophet show, this was the ordinary practice
of the people. Aug. in Psalm.
Whereupon S. Augustine on that place says, Nostis, fratres, etc. Ye know
(brethren) when men pass by those which are at work, it is the custom to say
to them, Benedictio Domini super vos: The blessing of the Lord be upon you. And
this was more in use amongst the Jews: Nemo transibat, says he: None passed
by and saw any at work in the field, or vineyard, or the like, but they did
so. Nay, Non licebat transire sine benedictione: It was not lawful for any to
pass by, without this blessing salutation. It was against the law of courtesy
to omit it.

3. By the law of equity. 1. Sam. 25. 33.
Thirdly, by the law of equity it pertains to all sorts, in thankfulness to
their benefactors, and such as have been instruments of their good, to bless
them: as Boaz, for the kindness showed to Ruth, is blessed, in these words;
Ruth. 2. 20.
Blessed be he of the Lord, Ruth. 2. 20. Thus every good subject will pray God
bless the King, under whom we live in peace; every good hearer will pray God
bless that Preacher, by whom his soul is comforted; and every thankful poor
man will pray God bless his good master, and save his life, by whom he is
relieved. This is the recompense which the rich have returned unto them from
the poor for their good works and alms, namely, their blessing and prayers
to God for them, the forerunner of a greater and better recompense from the
Lord; for with such sacrifices God is pleased, Heb. 13. 16.

4 By the law of charity.
Fourthly, by the law of charity it pertains to al sorts to bless, even
their enemies, I mean their private enemies. For to convicted enemies of the
Truth it is forbid, Ioh. 2. Epist. 10. Bid not an Antichristian heretic and
convicted false teacher, God speed; but if they be only our personal enemies,
Mat. 5. 44.
Bless them which curse you, says our Savior, Mat. 5. 44.

Bless, and curse not, says Saint Paul, Romans 12. 14. And this is not
consilium, but praeceptum: not an Evangelical counsel, but a moral precept
binding all Christians.

Thus by a fourfold law it belongs to all sorts to bless: by the law of
natural affection, by the law of courtesy, by the law of equity, and by the
law of Christian charity. Superiors to bless.
More specially it pertains to superiors, to bless those under their charge.
These superiors are either the chief in every family, or more public
persons. The blessing that pertains to the chief in private families, is
either domestical or paternall. Blessing Oeconomicall. 1. Chron. 16. 43.
Domestical is that, which is done in the behalf of the whole household: as
it is said, that David returned to bless his house, 1. Chronicles, 16. 43.
Paternall.
Paternall benediction is that which is done by the father to his children or
childrens children. Genesis 27. 27.
This the Patriarks did after a singular manner, having the spirit of prophecy,
whereby they spoke of things to come, as they were moved by the holy Ghost. But
other godly parents have a special prerogative also in blessing their
children: according to that of Siracides, Benedictio patris firmat domos
filiorum: The blessing of the father establishes the houses of children, but
the curse of the mother rooteth out foundations. There are fearful stories
recorded by good writers, of the woeful consequence of the parents curse upon
the children. Therefore it is said by the aforesaid Author, Honor thy father
and mother both in word and deed, that a blessing may come upon thee from them.

Now the blessing which belongs to public persons, is either Political or
Ecclesiastical. Political.
Political, when it is done by the civil Magistrate, as it was by Ioshuah,
when he called the Reubenits and the Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manasses,
and commended them for their obedience, and sent them home with his blessing,
as it is written, So Joshua blessed them and sent them away, Josh. 22. 6. Josh.
22. 6.


Sacerdotall.
The Ecclesiastical blessing is that which appertains to the public
Minister, and is of all other the most effectual and available with God: and
this is the blessing spoken of in the text, when it is said, The Priests the
Levites arose and blessed. Now the object of this benediction is either
personal or real. The real object is not mentioned here, but omitted as a
thing well known: for what they were to pray for in the behalf of the people,
is set down, Number. 6. 23. etc. Numb. 6. 23.
The personal object, is the people, that is, all the people of Judah and
Israel assembled, to keep the Holy Feast, the Priests blessed them all.
Lastly, for the manner; it was with a loud voice: they spoke out when they blessed
them, praying fervently for them, and earnestly desiring the blessing of God
upon them all. This is signified by that, that it is said, Their voice was
heard. Yet not the voice of the Priests only, but the voices of the people
also: all which are spoken of, as if there were but one voice, in regard of the
harmony and accord, all speaking to the same effect: not that the people used
the same words which the Priests used. But they did that which was their part
to do, and said Amen to the Priests blessing, and that alowd, from their
hearts, wishing themselves so happy. Devotion amongst our people is now grown
so cold, that many times in great congregations when the blessing is
pronounced, there is nothing but a little whispering; few say Amen, and speak
out at the end of prayers. But in former times, when people were more devout,
they made such a blessed noise in the Church when they said Amen, that Saint
Jerome likened it to the thunder: Hier. in praefa. lib. 2. in Gal.
and Saint Basil to the roaring of the sea; such a roaring and thundering noise
there was made by the Priests and people at this benediction: Their voice was
heard. After this manner was the blessing performed. And these are the
circumstances obseruable in the first part of the Text. In the second: first,
another name is given to this blessing: secondly, local motion is ascribed unto
it: thirdly, the terminus ad quem, or place whither it passed, is set down.
For the first, the name now given unto it, is prayer, which shows how the
Priests blessed the people, not vainly and superstitiously, by casting of holy
water upon them, or by crossing with their fingers, but by prayer and
invocation of the name of God for his blessing upon them. For the second, it is
said, tauo, it went; which is spoken of prayer metaphorically. Alluding, as it
seems, to a messenger, to which prayer may be aptly compared: for Veluti
officio internuncij fungitur oration pro nobis apud Deum: prayer does the office
of a messenger for us unto God. For the third, the place whither it went, has
two names given unto it. First, his holy dwelling place, or as it is in the
Hebrew, the habitation of his Holiness; secondly, it is called Heaven. God his
habitations, cohabitations.
For the first, it imports not that God had, or has need of any habitation,
as a man has, of a house to dwell in, or that any created place whatsoever can
contain the transcendent Majesty of the Creator.

It is confessed by Solomon, that the heavens, and the heaven of heavens cannot
contain him, 1. King. 8. 27. 1. Kings. 8. 27.
But it has pleased him of his abundant grace to condescend so far, as to
have his cohabitations, where he has decreed to dwell, and to converse more
familiarly with his creatures, and to communicate his goodness unto them.

John 14. 2.
Our Savior speaks of his Fathers house, wherein there are many mansions,
that is, his habitation, or rather cohabitation above, where he does cohabit
and familiarly converse with the Angels of light; and on earth he always had
his dwelling places; before the coming of Christ, he had a material Temple,
called his house, where it pleased him to manifest his presence continually;
and in every good heart he dwells by his holy Spirit.

Now according to the adiunct or appellation of holiness, the Lord his dwelling
place is holy, what ever habitation he has had, or has, it was, and is holy.
The Temple erected for him by Solomon, was holy: and he never dwells in any
heart but that which is sanctified: But to which habitation of his holiness did
this prayer ascend, the other name puts this out of doubt: for the place
whither it went, is also called heaven.

Now heaven is a common name to diverse places and spaces. Three heavens.
First, according to the Scriptures there is coelum elementare, the sublunary
or elementary heaven, where the winds blow, and the birds fly, and the clouds
hang, and Comets and Meteors appear; that is not the heaven here spoken of;
their prayer went up higher then so. Secondly, there is coelum stellatum, the
heavens above, where the Sun, Moon and stars run their courses continually:
neither is this the heaven here meant; their prayer went higher then the
stars. Thirdly, there is coelum supremum, the highest heavens, sometimes
called the third heavens, sometimes coelum coelorum, the heaven of Heavens,
seeds beatorum, the place where the blessed Angels live with their Creator in all happiness. Thither went this happy messenger, the prayer of the Priests. All
this tends to set forth the singular acceptance which this sacerdotall
benediction had with God: it penetrated the clouds, and had speedy passage
through all places, and present access unto the King of glory. It had as happy
success* as Esther had, when she went to Assuerus: Esther 5. 2.
And he held out his golden Scepter unto her, Esther 5. 2. And so it was both
oration benedicens, and oration benedicta: a blessing prayer, and a blessed
prayer; for it drew a blessing from the Lord upon his people.

But why is heaven called his holy habitation, and not rather his glorious
habitation, it being so glorious a place as it is?

Heaven why called holy.
I answer, it may as well, and aptly, and upon as good reason be called his
holy habitation, as his glorious habitation. First, because of all other his
habitations, it is the most holy, the true Sanctum sanctorum, as holy as
glorious. There is the holy Trinity resident; there are the holy Angels, and
Saints; there is no impure person, nor impure action, but all perfect purity
and sanctity. Secondly, how ever carnal men love impurity, and hate holiness,
Leuit. 19. 2.
Almighty God would have us to know that he is holy, and that it is his glory
that he is so, 1. Pet. 1. 16.
and makes all places so where he dwells, and all persons whom he admits
to dwell with him. And thirdly, he would teach us all, not to please our selves
as the most do, with speaking or thinking of the glory of heaven only (which
they that are unholy in heart and life, shall never be the better for) but
specially to take notice of the absolute and perfect sanctity of that happy
place: Knowing, that as many Mansions as there are prepared there, Heb. 12. 14.
yet there is no place for any that is a despiser of holiness, or of a defiled
heart and conscience. So ye see, the Text being thoroughly searched into and
opened, there is a world of matter, and of good matter too, not impertinent to
the present audience, if a man had time to discourse of all points arising from
the words: but breuitas semper grata, aliquando necessaria: as it is now, when
I should much forget my self, if I should not remember those which had need
to be dismissed, not only with benediction, but with expedition. I must
therefore pass over many things worthy the handling, and insist only upon the
principal, as the time will give leave.

It belongs to Ministers to bless the people.
The maine Theological position grounded from the Text, is this, that it
belongs to the public Ministers of the Word, by a peculiar prerogative, to
bless the people in the name of the Lord; and there is special power and
virtue in the prayers and benedictions which proceed out of their mouths.
Here the people were blessed. By whom? By the Priests. The Priests the Levites
blessed the people. Not any of the Laity, not any of the Princes, not King
Hezekiah, though present: but the Leuiticall Priests, Churchmen,
Ecclesiastical persons, Masters of the assembly, that had the managing of
divine affairs at such times.

But were the people ever the better for their blessing?

Yes, their prayer went up to heaven; this was intended in their consecration
and separation. The end of their consecration and separation. Deuteronomy. 10. 8.
The Lord separated the Tribe of Leui, to minister unto him, and to bless in
his name, Deuteronomy. 10. 8. and Numb. 6. 22. there is the ordinance of God touching
the same: The ordinance of God for it. Numb. 6. 22.
the Priests the sons of Aaron are called of God to this office, and
appointed to the constant execution thereof; and a prescript form is given
unto them for the purpose: Speak unto Aaron, says the Lord, and to his
sons, saying, On this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel, saying
unto them, The Lord bless thee, etc. Where first there is a general
benediction, in these words, The Lord bless thee: Five blessings to be desired
for the people.
and then five great blessings are specified.

First, custody or protection.
First, of custody and protection, in these words, The Lord keep thee, tending
to this, that the Lord would ever be the Keeper of Israel, and preserve his
Church and people from all evil.

Secondly, the sense of Gods love.
The second blessing mentioned, is the sense of Gods love, in the next words,
The Lord make his face to shine upon thee. Alluding to the Sun, which when it
shines, is sensible unto us.

Thirdly, mercy to their sins.
The third blessing, is mercy to their sins, in these words, The Lord be
merciful or gracious unto thee; tending to this, that the Lord would in mercy
pass by their offenses, and see no iniquity in Jacob, nor transgression in
Israel.

Fourthly, a plentiful manifestation of Gods love.
The fourth blessing, is a plentiful manifestation of the love of God toward
them, The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee.

Fifthly, peace.
The last, but not the least, is peace: the consequent of the rest, and the
very complement of all: And give thee peace. Meaning not only external
prosperity, but also that happy peace with God, which passes all
understanding, which the world cannot give. Lo, thus did the Lord appoint his
Priests to bless his people: and to that which they should do according to
his holy ordinance, he annexed a most gracious promise, saying further, Ego
benedicam: I will bless them. The Priests blessing more then a prayer. Clau.
Scrip.
Therefore it is to good purpose that Illyricus says, that sacerdotall
benediction is not a bare good prayer, but as it were a pledge and testimony of
the favor of God; and he speaks further of it, as if it were of special
power and efficacy to open heaven to those which are partakers thereof.

A threefold difference between the Priests blessing and others.
In this place of Numbers, we may observe three material differences between
the Priests blessing, and all others, making much for the dignity and authority
thereof.

First, they had a special charge.
First, they are expressly required to bless the Lords people, they have such a
commission and charge given unto them touching the same, as the like is not
given to any other thorowout the whole Scripture; Speak unto Aaron, and to his
sons, etc.

Secondly, a special form.
Secondly, to them is given a prescript form, and only to them, and to no
other. 1. Kings 8. 55. Pet. Mart. in locum.
We read of Solomon, and other religious Kings, who have blessed the people
publicly, but not conceptis verbis, in any prescript form, as did the Priests.

Thirdly, a special promise.
Thirdly, to their benediction a promise of the Lords blessing is annexed in
such sort, as the like is not made to any other.

This threefold difference there is between the Priestly benediction and
others. The Priests, the public Ministers of the Lord, had a special charge,
a special form, and a special promise. First, a special charge to do it.
Secondly, a special form how to do it. Thirdly, a special promise, if they
do it: they should not bless in vain, but the Lord, whose name they thrice
inuocated in the blessing, as if it were with secret reference to the three
persons now better known, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, promised
to confirm and ratify their act, to the benefit of the people. The Priests
pronouncing the blessing as they were appointed, he engaged himself to do
according to their prayer, and to bless them actually and really.

Now this part of the Priests office was not ceremonial, but moral, and of
perpetual use: and therefore we find, that it was put in practice both before
the law, and since the coming of Christ the like has been done by the chief
Ministers of the new Testament. Before the law, we read that Abraham and his
company was blessed, Genesis 14. 18. Genesis 14. 18.
By whom? By a Priest, namely, by Melchizedech, called the Priest of the most
high God: and the Patriarch paid Tithes to him that blessed him. And when our
high Priest came, who is a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedech,
they brought their children to him to be blessed, Mark 10. 16. Luk 24. 50.
And he laid his hands on them and blessed them, Mark. 10. 16. and Luke 24.
50. Before he departed from his Disciples, Priestlike he lifted up his hands
and blessed them. And the Apostles usually blessed the Churches of Christ which
they taught, and from them we have received that form of Evangelical
benediction, The Evangelical blessing.
used in all Churches by the public Ministers: 2. Cor. 13. 14.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God the Father, and the
communion of the holy Ghost be with you all, Amen. Which differs from the
former in words more than in substance. For it comprehends as much as that,
but is so much the sweeter, because in this the sweet and blessed name of
Jesus Christ is mentioned, and all the three persons distinctly: therefore we
use this rather than the other.

But it may be said, Is there any commandment given to the Ministers of the
Gospel to bless? I answer, when Christ sent Preachers abroad into the Cities
whither he would come, he appointed them to bless the places where they came,
and showed them how to do it: Luke 10. 5. Luke 10. 5.
Into whatsoever house (says he) ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house.
There Is a brief form of blessing appointed unto them to use. And if (says he)
the son of peace be there, that is, any worthy of peace which will receive
you, then your peace shall rest upon it; that is, that blessing which you
prayed for, shall be upon that house: but, if not, it shall turn to you
again: you shall be the better for it, but it shall take no effect for their
good. Whereby we see, that as it pertained to the Priests under the Law to
bless the people, so it likewise belongs to the Ministers of the Gospel:
and as the Priestly benediction of old was not merely verbal, but effectual;
so to the blessing pronounced by the Ministers of Christ, a promise of like
efficacy is annexed. And this may serve for confirmation of the point
propounded, and for information of the judgment. I come now to the special
inferences hence, tending to the reformation of practice, not answerable
hereunto.

Now the use concerns either all hearers in general, or Ministers themselves
in special. First, al hearers, of what rank or sort soever, are taught hence
to make more account of the prayers of Ministers, and the better to respect
their persons. Ministers prayers to be preferred before others.
First, their prayers are to be preferred before the prayers of others,
especially public prayer performed by them, and of public prayers, their
blessing prayer particularly: for it is said in the Text, their prayer came up
to heaven, that is, the prayer of the Priests, and the prayer spoken of was
public prayer; and it is meant of the prayer wherewith the Priests blessed the
people. For the first, it is true that the prayer of the righteous is
acceptable, Prou. 15. 8.
as it is Prou. 15. 8. even of any righteous man: but if a righteous Prophet or
public Minister may be had, it is so much the better. When Abimelech was
punished for taking Sarah, it was Abraham's prayer that must do him good,
because he was a Prophet, Genesis 20. 7. Genesis 20. 7.
And S. James for this cause would not have the sick man to content himself
with his own prayers only, but to desire the Ministers help, Iam. 5. 14. The
sick to send for Ministers to pray for them. James 5. 14.
He says indeed, Is any man afflicted? Let him pray. Every one is to pray for
himself, but that is not all that he is to do. Is any sick among you? Let
him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray for him. Is any sick,
be he what he will be, if he be never so good, let him not trust to his own
prayers, if he may have further help. Why but will it not serve the turn as
well, if he send for some good Christian in the town, to pray for him? No,
let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray for him, and it is
promised that there shall be special fruit of their prayers. The sick shall
be raised up, and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him.

But it may be objected: We do not always see this fruit of Ministers
prayers: many times the sick that have their prayers, are little the better
for them.

A difference of Ministers, and of their praying.
I answer, it may well be so: because there is a great difference of
Churchmen, and a great difference of those which have their prayers. First, all
Churchmen are not alike, some are righteous, and some unrighteous: some pray in
faith, others have not that grace. And the Apostle there speaks of the
prayers of the righteous, and instanceth in a righteous Prophet, Elias. And it
is the prayer of faith which he commends for efficacy. A difference amongst
those that are prayed for.
Secondly, all afflicted and sick persons are not alike. First, against some,
almighty God is grown to such displeasure, that he will hear no man for
them: As he said, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could
not be toward this people: cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth,
Iere. 15. 1. Jere. 15. 1.
And elsewhere, Though these three men were in it, Noah, Daniel and Job, as I
live, says the Lord God, they should deliver but their own souls by their
righteousness, Ezech. 14. 14, 16, 18, 20. Ezech. 14. 14.


Secondly, that place before named, Luke 10. 5. Luke 10 5.
may give satisfaction touching this matter, where promise of blessing to the
Ministers prayer for others is but conditional; If they be the sons of
peace, it shall do them good, not else; if they be contemners of our office
and ministry, as many be, they are not qualified and prepared for grace: they
shall have no benefit by our prayers. But for the sons of peace, which humble
themselves, and unfeignedly love the Lords messengers, and reverence their
doctrine, and desire their prayers, God will hear his faithful servants: Such
shall be the better for the prayers of Gods Ministers, which they make for them
unto the Lord in their sickness. Therefore let them do as S. James appoynteth
them, call for the Elders of the Church for this purpose, preferring the
prayers of righteous Ministers, before the prayers of any other whatsoever. But
as their private prayers are specially to be desired, so public prayer
performed by them, is to be preferred before private. Public prayer to be
preferred before private.
Such was the prayer spoken of in the Text, and it went up to heaven. The
distance of heaven and earth, the clouds and celestial bodies between them,
the infirmities of them that prayed could not hinder, but it pierced through
all, and had speedy access unto God, and gracious acceptance with him. When
many join together with one accord, it is pleasing to God, and most auailable
with him, when there is a consort of hearts and voices, and a harmony of
affections, and many have one and the same suite and supplication unto the God
of heaven, it prevails mightily with him, provided that the Minister be the
speaker. So it is appointed, Joel. 2. 16. Joel. 2. 16.
Gather the people. It is not enough for every family apart to pray, but all
families must assemble together and pray, and the prayer must proceed from the
Priests lips: Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, say, Spare thy
people, O Lord: then will the Lord hear and show mercy. Is there any man then
in love with his own private devotion, and thinks that sufficient, and
therefore absenteth himself from the public assemblies, when he might be
present, if he would? Let him know, he erreth, not knowing the Scriptures and
the pleasure of God, and he certainly wrongeth his own soul, neglecting that
which would be most profitable for him. Chrysostom. de Dei natura. Hom. 3.
Non aeque exoras (says Chrysostom) dum solus Dominum obsecras, atque cum
fratribus tuis: Thou do not so soon obtain thy desire when thou prayest
alone, as when thou prayest with thy brethren. And again, Chrysostom. on These.
2. Hom. 4.
That which thou can not obtain, when thou prayest alone by thy self, thou
shall receive when thou prayest with a multitude. Thus antiquity conceived of
the power and efficacy of public prayer above private.

Yea, will the Separatist say, Public prayers (no doubt) are of great power,
if they be conceived prayers.

I answer, Indeed, to conceive prayer, is an excellent gift, and by no means
to be despised, if it be not rashly undertaken by those which have no grace to
perform it in due sort; but I make no question but that a man may pray also as
acceptably unto God in a set form, Prayer in a set form defended.
and so may public prayers as well as private be made also, as the Church has
ever practiced: and it is a vain thing to think that God is so delighted with
varying of words and phrases, that when we have the same suits and requests to
make unto him daily, yet we must alter the words and manner of asking.

Not to press the example of our Savior Christ himself, who had a better
gift in prayer then all the Separatists in the world, and could have varyed
better then them all; yet when he had the same suit unto God, used the same
words diverse times, Mat. 26. 44.
Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me. Nor to urge that of the
Apostles, who could pray before after their manner, and yet desired to be
taught a prayer by Christ himself, Luke 11. 1.
who upon their request gave them a form: as also John's Disciples were taught
by their master. Proved from the Text.
From the Text in hand it may be maintained against all adversaries, that
public prayer in a set form, is well pleasing to God, if other things be
answerable: for here the Priests blessed the people according to the set form
given unto them: No judicious Writer makes doubt of this: and it was a prayer
which they used when they blessed them: so it is called in the Text: and it was
as public as any prayer; and yet of this public prayer used by the Priest in
a set form, it is said, It went up to his holy dwelling place, even to heaven;
to show the singular acceptance it had with God. Wherefore let no man deprave
our Church for this, because we use set prayers in the Congregation; nor let
any despise such prayers as God himself despises not: for we find in the
Scripture use both of conceived prayer and of set forms, and both pleasing
unto God: Our Church allows Ministers to use conceived prayer.
and in our Church as ordinarily we are appointed to use common supplications:
so upon extraordinary occasions, the Preacher has liberty to enlarge, and to
use the best gift he has, as God shall enable him, and his holy Spirit shall
guide his heart and tongue. Let al make use of both unto the glory of God: for
pleasing unto him are the public prayers of the Church, whether extraordinary,
or ordinary. So long as the prayers be good and holy for the matter, whether
they be conceived in a set form, or voluntary, we are to make good account of
them, and use the^ reverently and religiously. But whilst I speak thus in
commendation of public prayer, I am far from falling into the other extreme,
as some have done, who are all for common prayer, and care little for
preaching. Preaching not to be despised.
For as the dignity of preaching is excellent, that sufficiency being required
to that part of Gods service specially, which the vulgar cannot attain to: so
the necessity thereof is exceeding great, both to the esse of a Christian and
the been esse. Necessary it is to the begetting of souls to God, to call
sinners to repentance, to bring home the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

And this has ever bin the ordinary means of converting souls: and therefore
of necessary use at all times, and so in these times wherein iniquity
abounds; though there be an external profession of the true Christian faith,
necessary it is for those that are already the people of God. Preaching
necessary for the converted. 1. Cor. 14. 4, 5, 6, 22.
Prophesying, says the Apostle, is for them that believe. And of old the
Priests office was not only to pray, but to teach: and it is said of the
Leuiticall Priests, For Israel. Deuteronomy. 33. 10.
Deuteronomy. 33. 10. They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law.
Presupposing that the Israelites themselves would always need teaching. Non
minor est virtus, quam quaerere partatueri. Preaching is necessary to the
preservation of those which are brought to the knowledge of the Truth, and to
make them grow in grace. Therefore says the Apostle Peter unto the Christians
of his time, 1. Pet. 2. 2.
As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the Word, that same (...) that
fraudlesse milk, that ye may grow thereby, 1. Pet. 2. 2. The Word read, I
confess, is of good use and profitable, but preaching is necessary to make it
so: Preaching necessary to profitable reading.
for when that noble Eunuch of Ethiopia read the Scripture, though he was a man
of better parts and capacity then hundreds of our people, yet he confessed his
own disability, and said, Acts 8. 31.
How can I understand, without a guide?

Necessary it is also to the due performance of other parts of Gods service;
as, to the more worthy receiving of the holy Sacrament. To worthy receiving. 1.
Cor. 11.
Without the help of a Preacher, or Catechizer, the common sort go to the
Lords Table without preparation, not discerning the Lords body, nor knowing the
end and right use of the sacred mysteries, but by a good Preachers labor,
Communicants are better taught, and come better prepared to that holy Service,
and do it more understandingly and comfortably. What should I say more? To
good praying.
To good praying, good preaching is necessary. As poor people cannot understand
the Scripture without a guide, nor understand the mystery of the Sacrament
without a guide: so they are as ignorant in prayer also: the Lords Prayer they
say often, but understand not; and ignorantly they use other prayers, not
knowing what they say: sometimes they pray for that they hate; as those that
pray that the rest of their life may be pure and holy, when as in heart they
desire no such change in themselves, but hate purity and holiness, and despise
all that follow it: and those that are no prayers, they use for prayers,
thinking them to be so: not only children, but old men think they pray, and
pray well, when they say the Creed and ten Commandments.

There being therefore such necessity of preaching, I can but wonder, that upon
the best Day of the week, many Country people are afraid to do nothing, but to
go forth to hear a Sermon. They dare ride abroad about their worldly
businesses, as often as they list; they dare go to all the profane Wakes in
the Country one Sunday after another, but dare not go to a Sermon so much as
half a Sabbath days journey, though they have none at home, as they would
make men believe for fear of Apparitors and Churchwardens. I do the more
wonder at it, because I persuade my self, that our religious Forefathers,
which had a hand in setting forth the Common prayer book, now established by
authority, held, and would have the people taught the necessity of hearing the
Word of God: for they have appointed prayers to be used, that the Lord would
give Ministers grace to preach diligently, and it is given in charge to the
sureties at Baptism, Those of years to be called upon to hear sermons by
the ordinance of the Church.
that when the baptized come to years, they call upon them to hear Sermons,
not thinking it sufficient for them to hear Service only. And none have
written more effectually of the excellency of preaching, then those learned and
worthy Doctors and Divines, which took pains lately in the translation of the
Bible; See what they have written of this in their Epistle to his Majesty:
Amongst all our joys, say they, there was no one that more filled our hearts,
then the blessed continuance of the preaching of Gods sacred Word amongst us,
which is that inestimable treasure, which excels all the riches of the
earth, because the fruit thereof extends it self, not only to the time
spent in this transitory world, but directs and disposes men unto that
eternal happiness, which is above in heaven, etc.

Thus honorably have they written of the preaching of the Word: and these I am
sure were no Puritans; for they have written against Puritans, and therefore
there can be no such exception taken.

Certainly the doctrine of our Church is, and ever has been, for the
necessity and vtility of preaching and hearing of the Word of God, and herein
it is consonant unto the Scriptures, and to the doctrine of all Orthodoxe
Churches: Esaias 2. 3. 2. Tim. 4. 2. 1. Pet. 2. 2.
and the contrary tends to the dishonor of the most famous Divines, Pastors
and Prelates of our own Church, and of other Churches of Christ, which now
rest from their labors: nay, to the doctrine and practice of the best of the
Fathers Greek and Latin, who in their times were instant this way in season
and out of season; nay, of the holy Apostles; nay, of Christ Jesus the great
Shepherd of our souls, who took incessant pains in preaching and teaching
both in the Temple and elsewhere, accounting the Temple not only a house of
prayer, but a house of preaching also: The Temple a house of preaching, as well
as of prayer. Matthew. 26. 55.
for he says, I sat daily teaching in the Temple. Therefore let comparisons
between praying and preaching be forborne: they are both the holy ordinances
of God, of necessary use for all the Lords people. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
Pray continually, as the Apostle says (meaning it of secret eiaculations of
the heart, not of public prayer.) Pray also in your families. It is a pious
and religious practice well beseeming Christians. Pray also with the
Congregation; despise not the public prayers of the Church, nor neglect them,
but diligently attend them, and make use of them reverently, lest while ye come
to worship God, ye take his name in vain; but withal remember the other
admonition of the Apostle, Despise not prophesying. Let not a pretended zeal
for more praying, iustle out preaching: for this is also the ordinance of God
as well as prayer; of as great necessity for the people; without which, prayer
and all parts of Gods service and worship will be the worse performed. I say no
more; but to magnify preaching with contempt of prayer, is intolerable; and to
extol praying with contempt of preaching, is abominable.

And thus much concerning public prayer, and of the account that we are to
make of it, being performed by a Minister.

Great regard to be had to the blessing pronounced by the Minister.
More particularly, there is special regard to be yielded to the blessing,
prayer or benediction used by the Pastor or Preacher in the Congregation. It is
a disorderly custom in many Churches, that a number will be gone, before the
Evangelical blessing be pronounced. Ignorant people! they understand not the
way of the Lord, and what the Lord has ordained for their good. Almighty God
promised to bless the children of Israel. But how? In that order which
himself appointed; they being first blessed by the Priests. So now, through the
blessing of his Ministers, he will convey a blessing to his people. Leuit. 9.
^2.
As therefore the Minister of Christ is reverently to lift up his hand over the
heads of the people, and with all religious and holy affection to bless them
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: so the
people are to wait for this blessing; and when it is pronounced, attentively to
mark it, and rejoice in it, and in the end devoutly to say Amen unto it; that
so they may depart home comfortably with the blessing of the Church and of the
Lord. And hitherto of the account to be made of Ministers prayers, and
specially of the public prayers and blessings performed by them. All sorts are
also hence taught, to have due regard unto their persons and Calling for this
respect: for their office is honorable and reverend: to them it belongs to
bless, and by them God will bless those whom he will bless. And what says
the Apostle? The less is blessed of the greater, Heb. 7. 7. Pendebat ex
benedictionibus magna ex part Saserdotij dignitas, etc. Gualt. in Mal. 2 Heb
7. 7.


All offices appointed of God to his Ministers, honorable.
And what other office is appointed unto them that is base? They are called to
be Teachers in Israel, to be Guides unto the people, and to show unto them the
way of life: to them it pertains to administer the holy Sacraments, that of
Baptism, and the other, of the Lords Supper, which the Fathers of the Nicene
Council call Can. 12.
Necessarium vitae viaticum: The necessary provision for the soul in her
journey to another world. To them it pertains to pray* for the people, and to
make atonement for them, that they may be reconciled unto God. To them is given
the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and power to bind and loose, and to remit
sins, (...) and declaratiue. Which of all these is base and unseemly for men
of worth to do? Which of them is not high and holy?

Why then is the Calling so contemptible, as it is with many, above all others?
Why is the name of Priest used in contempt? Of all contempt, this is the most
unreasonable: for God has highly honored those of this function, and they are
separated to great and noble services. Behold, God has made them Fathers unto
the people. So Micah called the young Leuite, Judge. 17. 10. Judge. 17. 10. and
18. 19.
Dwell with me, and be a Father and a Priest unto me. And so the Danites call
him after. And worthily is the name given to them; and with the name, the
honor should be given also: for they are instruments of Regeneration, as
parents be of Generation; and as Chrysostom reasons, Chrysostom. de Sacerd.
Parents beget their children unto this life, but the Ministers of Christ beget
them to life eternal: and parents cannot do that for them, which Ministers
may do. Parents may wash their bodily parts, but Ministers are instruments to
wash their souls, when they baptize them. Parents feed them with meat that
perishes: but Ministers, their spiritual Fathers, feed them with that meat
which endures to everlasting life, namely, with the Word of the Lord, and with
the Body of the Lord.

Baptism, which they administer, of old was called and accounted Ianua
salutis: Saluian. diesque auaritiam, lib. 1. page 61. Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 13.
The gate of heaven: in the old Saxon doctrine, The Wellspring of life: in the
best times, The Lauer of Regeneration. And it is written, Titus 3. 5.
Except a man be borne again of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God, Ioh. 3. 5. Ioh. 3. 5.
And elsewhere, Whosoever eats not the flesh of the Lord, and does not drink
his blood, he shall dye eternally, Ioh. 6. 53. Ioh. 6. 53.
And these things, says an ancient Father, cannot be received of the people,
but per sacrosanctas manus sacerdotum: By the sacred hands of the Priests of
the new Testament; to others it pertains not to meddle with the dispensation
of these holy and venerable mysteries: it were presumption in a Prince to
administer either Sacrament: to the Minister it pertains to bless the bread,
and cup of blessing, 1. Cor. 10. 16.
and from their hands the Lords people are to receive the bread of life, and
cup of salvation. But to which of the Angels, says that holy Father, said he
at any time, as he has said unto his Ministers, Matthew. 18. 1^.
Ioh. 20. 23.
Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven. Whosoeuers sins ye
remit, they shall be remitted? These things surpass all the rest. Hence worthy
Pastors of the Church, men of courage, upon weighty occasion, have been bold to
excommunicate Emperors, Theod. lib. 5. cap. 24. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 34.
as Ambrose excommunicated Theodosius; and Fabian excommunicated Philip.

Emperors excommunicated by Ministers. Paulinus in vita Ambrosij.
And it is memorable, that Paulinus writes, that when Ambrose denounced
excommunication against a dissolute person, in the very instant, whilst he
used the words, the man was suddenly taken and rent by the devil. Let these
things be considered of advisedly by such as have hitherto been carried with
the stream, and have rashly by words, or deeds, or both, showed contempt of
the Ministry; and seeing what high and honorable offices and privileges the
most high God has appropriated unto his servants whom he has called to that
function, let them reform their former erroneous judgment of them, and their
carriage toward them: and that the vulgar sort may be the better taught their
duty in this, let those in authority put a difference between those whom God
has so highly honored, and others which have no such privileges given unto
them of the Lord. It is notable that is written of Solomon, 1. Kings 2. 1.
Kings 2. 26.
when Abiathar the Priest had committed a crime worthy of death, yet he would
not put him to death, but said unto him, Get thee to Anathoth, unto thine own
fields, etc. because thou barest the Ark of the Lord God, etc. He put Ioab to
death, a great Counselor of State, but spared the life of Abiathar, in
reverence of his Priesthod. A worthy example. Thanks be to God, we live now
under a religious King, who being learned in the Scriptures, is like-minded to
Solomon this way, and like another Constantine, is exceedingly well-affected to
the Church. Long since he gave instruction to his eldest son, to (...).
cherish none more than a godly Pastor, and to count it one of the fairest of
his Titles, to be a loving nursing Father of the Church. He has since
published his pleasure, to have his Clergy well used; and knowing the power
given unto them of Christ, The King upon the Lords Prayer.
He has advised men to have recourse unto a discreet Churchman, well reputed
for good life, and to reveal his spiritual estate to him, etc. and he has
taken special notice of this ministerial prerogative of blessing, which
others little mind; and therefore he required a religious and zealous Divine,
Doctor King, Bishop of London.
of great note and place in our Church, to preach the Tuesday after the
marriage of his only Daughter, and solemnly to bless the new married couple;
who performed it so worthily, and with his zeal so inflamed the zeal of the
hearers, that it was no other like but his prayer went up to heaven, and the
fruitfulnes of that Princely Lady has since euidenced as much. Vitis Palatina.


I have heard also an honorable person say of Ministers, God bless them by
whom God blesses us. A worthy speech, arguing his observation of that special
prerogative given of God unto his Ministers, to bless in his name. The time
has been, that Preachers have been too disgracefully used by temporal Judges
in the face of the country: but since his Majesty's coming to the Crown,
there has been better respect had toward them: And a great Judge of Assise
professed it publicly, that he would as soon bind a man to his good behavior
for contempt of a Minister, as for contempt of a Magistrate.

Now, in Ecclesiastical Courts, we have reason to expect better regard than in
the Temporal: for to that end those Courts and Consistories were granted at
the first by Princes, as it is confessed by one that is not only in legibus
doctus and peritus, but legum Doctor, Courts Ecclesiastical why ordained.
because the Clergy were like to have more indifferency before a Judge of their
own learning, then before a Judge of another profession; A view of the Civil
and Ecclesiastical Law. p. 105.
it being held, that Laici oppido semper infesti sunt Clericis: Laymen are
seldom Clergy men's friends. And another reason of this, he says, was, that
Clerks suites and quarrels should not be diuulged among the Lay people, to the
discredit of their profession. Otherwise the said Author also shows, how much
anciently the credit of the Clergy was tendered; and he wishes the like regard
toward Ecclesiastical men were still retained, both because it was reverent,
and worthy the dignity of the Ministry, whose office he acknowledges to be
most honorable. Thus he, himself a Judge in the Ecclesiastical Courts, of
great place. That authority therefore is not rightly used, nor agreeable to the
institution thereof, if in Ecclesiastical Courts the Clergy have not only no
injuries and indignities offered unto them; but if they have not, in stead
thereof, protection, and countenance, and encouragement in all good.

I take no delight in finding faults, specially with my superiors and betters;
but yet I hate base adulation. It is thought to be not so well as it should
be, that so many advantages are given unto ill neighbors against their
Ministers. It is good for the greatest to remember what Jesus Christ (before
whom all must appear to give account) has left in record concerning his
Ministers: He that despises you, despises me. Luke 10. 16.


I leave the prosecuting of this further, and advise all that would have
benefit by Ecclesiastical benediction, to deserve the love of those to whom
that office belongs iure diuino: for though we are to bless all, yet we
cannot bless all with the like effect, or with the like affection. Not with
like effect; for all are not the sons of peace: and those that are not, are
incapable of this blessing. Not with the like affection: for in some we have
more, in some less comfort. All not blessed with the like affection.
We cannot bless all with the like affection as we can bless our friends,
and such as are comfortable unto us, and instruments of our good. Genesis 27. 3. 4.
When Isaac had a desire to bless his son Esau, he bids him first provide
him sauoury meat that wonld give him content; and having such brought unto him
by Jacob, when he had eat of the venison, and drunk wine, then he called,
Verse. 27.
Now come near me, and kiss me, my son: God give thee of the dew of heaven,
etc. A thing very remarkable, that before the holy Patriarch undertook to
bless his son, he first would have sauoury meat provided by him whom he
meant to bless; and first he ate thereof, and drank wine, to cheer up his
spirits, that so he might bless him the more heartily and effectually: for
heaviness, and grief, and sorrow, and coffeehouse makes a good man unfit
for the right performance of such duties. 1. King. 3. 15.
Therefore when Elisha was moved against King Iehoram, before he fell to
prophecy, he called for a Musician to allay his anger.

Genesis 44. 22
We may observe also, that when Jacob blessed his sons, he blessed them not
all alike: but blessings flowed most plentifully from him when he came to
Joseph, because he took most comfort in him of all the rest. So the Ministers
of the Gospel are most ready to bless them, whom they have most comfort from,
as they in Luke 7. were forward to speak to Christ for the Centurion, when he
stood in need of help. Luke 7. 4, 5.
Why? He loves our nation, and has built us a Synagogue. And Saint Paul
prayed for all Christians, but not so as he did for Onesiphorus his special
good friend: 2. Tim. 1. 16.
When he remembered him, 2. Tim. 1. 16. he blessed him and his house, and
doubled his blessing upon him, The Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus,
for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain. And again, The
Lordgrant unto him, that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day. 2. Tim. 4.
14.
He prayed not so, Iwis, for Alexander the Copper-smith. These Priests did not,
could not at all times bless the people so cheerfully and effectually as they
did now. Now it is said, that Hezekiah spoke comfortably unto them, and
encouraged them greatly. Now they found the Congregation tractable to good, and
they had extraordinary comfort by them: therefore now their zeal was up, and
they lifted up their voices, and their hearty prayer for them ascended up to
heaven. Excellent therefore is the counsel of the Apostle, Heb. 13. 17. Heb.
13. 17.
Obey them that have the oversight of you, which watch for your souls, that
they may do it with joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for
you. It makes their blessing the more unprofitable. Therefore let those which
would be blessed by them effectually, look they deserve their love, and be
far from contempt of their persons, or calling, or doctrine.

I should also use a word of Exhortation to my brethren of the Ministry: the
more holy and reverent our Calling is, the more it concerns us to look that
we walk worthy thereof, and to beware lest we dishonor it by our words or
deeds. My brethren, it is not for us to be despisers of those which follow
holiness; for our doctrine teaches us, and all others, to be holy; it is not
for us to be childish: for God has called even the youngest of us, to be
Fathers in his Church, and made us (as it were) Patriarchs, to bless the
Israel of God; it is not for us to be youthful with the children of this
world: for we are called Elders; and therefore gravity becomes us. Nugae,
nugae sunt, in ore sacerdotio blasphemiae, B^r.
That which is vanity in others, is double iniquity in us. The excellency of
our Ministerial function aggrauateth our sins before God and men, according
to that of S. Jerome; Malus sacerdos de sacerdotio suo crime^ acquirit, non
dignitate^: If a Minister be bad, this aggrauateth his offense, because he is
a Minister: and his Ministry is no such grace to him, as he is a disgrace to
his Ministry. And observe what comes of it: Those that are scrupulous, care
not for the judgment of such as be scandalous about any point in controversy.

Brownists think they have just cause to separate from our Church, where such
guides are in place of better men. The Jesuit and Seminary Priest takes
advantage thereby to deprave our Religion, and to breed in the simpler sort an
ill opinion thereof: they name, Such are known to be of evil conversation,
and bid, Mark their lives. An unhappy meaning Sir Thomas More.
He had, though he spoke it pleasantly, who said of a vicious Priest, that he
would not for any thing hear him say the Creed, lest it should make him call
the Articles of his faith into question. Certainly those of this sacred
function, which are of ungodly conversation, are an occasion of much mischief.

Many have no mind to have their children baptized by such; and it goes
against their stomakes to receive the venerable Sacrament of Christ his Body
and Blood from their foul hands: and their blessings and prayers they regard
little, because they see they regard wickedness in their hearts: Psalm. 66. 18.
and therefore they think the Lord will not hear them. Many also care not for
their doctrine, because they say, and do not. I justify not all this in them,
but rather think they are transported too far in a preposterous zeal. For
good food being brought unto Elias* 1. Kings 17. 6.
he received it not only from an Angel, but also from a Raven. Matthew. 2^. 3.
And Christ bid the people not only to hear him and his Apostles, but the
Pharisees also, when they taught them that which was good, though they followed
it not themselves. Good water which passes into a Garden through a channel of
stone, does the Garden good, though it do the channel none: and so may the
Word, and Water of Life co^ueied by a bad instrument of a stony heart; it may
do good to the Church of God, though it work not upon himself. And good seed
sown in good ground with foul hands, will fructisie: and so may the good Seed
of Gods Word sown by a Minister of impure conversation. One may be a bad man,
and yet a good Seedesman both in the field and in the Church: yet woe be to
them by whom the offense comes; woe to them which make the people to abhor
the offering of the Lord through their misdemeanour. 1. Sam. 4. 11.
Eli his sons smoked for this. And to many which have prophesied in his name,
Christ will say in his just displeasure, Matthew. 7. 23.
Away from me, ye workers of iniquity.

Therefore to conclude, the Lord give us all grace so to demean our selves in
our places, that his Name may be glorified by us, his Church edified, and our
reverend Calling adorned, that our prayers may be accepted of the Lord, and our
blessing of the people may, with this Priestly benediction, go up unto his
holy dwelling Place, even unto heaven* which he grant for his infinite mercies
sake in Christ* to whom, with the Father and the holy Ghost, be ascribed all
praise and glory now and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

