A discourse of the great cruelty of a Widow toward a young Gentleman, and
by what means he requited the same. Set forth in English Verse by John God.

First read and then judge, but ere thou begin
Despise not the matter contained herein,
Though rude be my style, and knowledge be scant,
Yet of the matter there nothing does want
Imprinted at London, by Henry Binneman, dwelling in Knightriders streat, at
the sign of the Marmayd.

LECTORI.
I Incipe nec sistes totum percurre libellum:
O Omnia lecta docent, quae, nisi lecta iuua^t?
A Ars docet, et veteru^ te lectio cu^cta docebit,
N Nulla tibi virtus clarior esse potest.
N Na^c^pi^ a lectu, metu quod honestat acume^,
E Electu vitae est pa^ta diurna salus.
S Salq cibos condit, sic condit maxima vitae
G Gaudia, non spa^so lectio iusta sale.
O Optima si cupias acquirere mella, studet^,
D Disce loborosos voluere quaeso libros.
D Disce puella precor, fuge, quod mea chartula narrat.
V Vt melius possis imperitare viro.
S Sed mendicanti da praemia quaeso libell^
Sic meliora queo, sit meliora dab^.
The Prefac^ to the Reader.
MArk gentle reader, in this little tr^atis, both fond and affectionate love,
the one proceeding from a loyal and gentle hear^e, rather decked with ve^tue,
than folly, I say rath^r adorned, and beautified with Venus mild and gentle
behavior, than enuironned with the deadly and spiteful rage of uno: the other
from a disdainefull and loths^me stomach puffed up with too much
superstition, under the color of mecke humility. with vainglorie, under the
shadow of constancy: with disdain, under the pretense of perfect and sound
chastity. They that have passed the most part of their time in human
follies, and have rather foll^wed the vanities of fools and insensuate lovers
in matters of love (and the contemplation of heau^nlie things, or else of those
that here on earth may give some entry for man to attain glory and honor of
his name) they I say shall serve me for witnesses to confirm the opinion of
long time rooted in the fancies of men, which is, that the beauty and comely
favor of a woman is the most true and natural Adaman^ that can be found, since
the same stone (for a certain attractiue power and agreeable quality therein
enclosed) does not better draw the iron, than a woman does by a certain hidden
force, which rising under the allurement of her, draws unto it the hearts
and affections of men, which has made many believe, that the same only
essence was sent to us below to serve both for men's torment and joy
together. But yet there is another thing of greater wonder, it is not to hear
tell that Paris forsook, Troy to go visit Helena in Greece, that Hercules had
given over his mace to handle the distaffe at the commandment of a woman, or
that Solomon was s^tted in his wisdom to dally with those which made him a
voluntary slave. But that a woman of whom a man had received no favor nor
courtesy, had forgotten her duty to her servant, if it seem not strange, I
know not what to call wonderful or marvelous. If defense of speech for
love, is not deemed such whereby man is different from brute beasts: (for
reason is altogether r^fuse^ of ^o^ers) and notwithstanding our Fathers have
seen the example of that virtue no long time paste in the person of a
Gentleman, very wise and well trained up in other things, a case so strange,
as declaring the singular force of nature in that matter, wherein she seems
to have given the preferment above all things in the earth. Examples hereof is
the effemination of Hercules, the deprivation of Sampsons force, the loss of
sense, and the Idelatrie of the famous and wise King Solomon, and the
simplicity of a warelesse and vncircumspecte Gentleman, of whom ye shall
read in the History following. Mark I say, (gentle Reader) how fortune
deals with them, which trusting in their force, despise (in respect of that
which they do them selves) the little portion which they judged to be in
others. If the vaineglorie and arrogant presumption of a chastity impregnable,
had not deceived the Gentlewomanne following in this Treatise, if the sugared
hunger of gold had not blinded her, it could not have bin known wherein her
inconstancy consisted, not in the minion delites and alluring toys of a
passionate Lover, but in the covetous desire of filling her purse, and
hypocritical glory of praise a^^ngs men: Notwithstanding, you shall see the
gain which she made; to serve her turn nothing at all, but to the
perpetual reproach of her name, and raised a slander, such as ill speakers
and enemies of womenkinde do burden that sex withal. But the fault of one
which by her own presumption disceiued her self, ought not to obscure the
glory of so many virtuous, fair, and honest dames, who by their chastity,
liberality and courtesy, be able too deface the blot of folly,
covetousness, and cruelty of this Gentlewoman here, and of all other that
do resemble her: notwithstanding in the end reconciling her self, and
abhorring the foolish fantasy of her former life, with an ordinary grief of
him which served her for a spur too her conscience, and continually forced
her too think, that the force of a man is less than nothing where God work^th
not by his grace, who failing in us, our wo^kes can savor but of the stenche
and corruption of our nature, wherein it tumbleth and tosseth as the sow in the
puddles of dirt and mire. This brief discourse gives lessons unto Lovers to
avoid the imm^derate pangues of love, it does (...) the indiscretion of
promised penance, it warns to beware all (...) heastes, least the penalties
of couetous^^^^ and vaineglory be incurred, which shall manifest it self, if
you mark the sense thereof in Reading. And that the same might the more
delighte thee, I have turned it into simple verse, according as my capacity
would serve, but notwithstanding take it in worth, which I know to be full of
errors, and not so eloquent as you require, nor so delectable as I would desire.
Thus greeting thee, I bid thee farewell.

WIthin the reach of Europe land a pleasant soil there is,
Which Thu ri^ hight, a City fair, abounding in great bliss,
Whose pastors green, Euridanus does moysten with his Poole,
The skorching haste of Titans flames, this pleasant stream does cool:
The breadth whereof does meze men's eyes when they the same do view,
That each wight to inhabit there, does daily seek and sue.
Wherein there dwelt a widow fair, and Zilia was her name,
Whose comely port and princely face, did merit lasting fame.
So beautiful of face she was, so feat of lim and joint,
That sure a world it is to see her shape from point to point
So comely to be knit: for wit she bare the bell,
Her comely shape, al other wights for beauty did excel.
But yet one stained spot her body did defile,
Whose haggard wonts, and churlishe deede^ at length did her begile.
Who went astray from natures course, and thereby lost her name:
Her cruel gests and foolish deeds did bring her to disdain:
When Atropos her leche lives threede with kn^fe had cut in twain,
For whom she did Lament and mournt, with sorrow grief and pain.
She bent her self her house to deck with toyling pain and grief,
Is spinning carding and such like to find her self relief.
Whereas before she largely gave, now she does covet all,
Her bounty great, her courteous gifts. are turned now to thrall.
Her maids she does employ with work, though she possess great land.
She thought that nothing well was done, that came not through her hand.
A thing truly of more great praise, than for to view our dames,
Whose fine and dainty fingers loathe to suffer any pains.
Who think their honors to be staind if once they do but hold
Their noses over their household things, who will not be controloe.
Whereas their hands were requisite to help at time of need,
And they in place, their business might be dispatched with speed.
Let Lucrece life a myrror be to those which use that rate,
Not running forth to feasts and games, nor with young girls to prate.
Not fondly gadding here and there, nor masking in the night,
But with her maids to spin and card, it was her whole delight.
She did regard her honor more than so to spend her time:
Ill which our widow Zilia did, as Po^tes do define.
She would not once at feasts be seen, nor seldom come abroad:
Unless to Church she did repair as writers do record,
She would not with the dainty dames to gardens once resort,
Nor to such place where pleasure was nor any place of sport.
She seemde as though she studied the Egiptian law to use,
Because she would not get reproach, nor yet her self abuse.
They paint before dame Venus mouth, a bright and shining kay,
Whereby they mean, that silence did her guide in per^ect way:
And at her feet a Tortus plast, whereby they did devise,
That wandering forth and straying often, was not her use nor guise.
This practice used Zilia, whose tongue was tide from talk,
Whose footestep seek were not at large abrodethe streets to walk.
She seeemd so religious, as though naught were amiss,
She made it strange and very coy to yield from her a kiss
To any wight, which curtesse til this day does remain,
That women ought with chastely kiss, each wight to entertain,
But let us leave her for a while, and mark what chanced then,
With snarling traps bow Cupid often therein does tangle men.
There dwelt hard by that Thurin town a Lord of great renoune,
Who Philiberto had to name, in wealth he did abound.
Of Virle Country he was Lord, a man expert in war,
By dint of sword his foes to quel, whose glory reached far.
It happened thus, that at the Church where Zilia did resort,
This noble Lord was there likewise in comely state and port.
Whose daseling eyes by hap did view this widows worthy face,
Her lively hew did please his mind, his port and lovely grace.
Whose humors fed with fantasy, and pleased with Cupides game,
Could not withdraw those fixed eyes from that his noble dame.
The venomed shaft of Cupides how did take in him such place,
That all his soundest parts of mind were trapt in woeful case.
Thus all the morning viewing well her grace and comely port,
She made no more account of him than of the meanest sort.
The service done, he thought the Priest made very great post have,
For now upon his noble dame his eyes he might not cast.
But coming home, of standers by he did enquire her name,
Who ceased not without delay to she^e to him the same.
Her stubberne state and churlish deeds to tell they did not spare,
Her greedy mind and coyly looks to him they do declare.
He hearing this, was al in dumps, not knowing what to say,
He thought his suit would not prevail, but gets him straight away,
And to his chamber he does wend, and lays him on his bed,
Ten thousand thoughts and careful greefes molest his troubled head.
But bayting yet him self with hope, and tickled eke with love,
This widows heart what so did chance he minded was to prove.
And thus he did him self devise to love her beauty still,
That through long service he might get at length of her his will.
He now the Churc does often frequent, and seems a holy state,
And all to view the Princely port of his beloved mate.
At length he pricked with fiery heat, took courage stout and bold,
And in the Church to speak to her his heart was nothing cold:
He often did conduct her home, that he her heart might win:
But now as far from that he sought as when he did begin.
For if of love he spoke to her, she strenght would turn her tale,
And talk to him of household things which made ^is heart to quail.
Thus they of sundry minds, and diverse eke in thought,
Did not to others talk give ear which he full duly sought.
Thus void of hope he parts, whose cheerful looks be dashed.
His reddy cheeks be turnde to pale, his sprites were all aghast.
This bashful wight comes home and rues his woeful plight,
Because he could no favor find before his Ladies sight.
Yet once again conceiving hope of that he did desire,
Constrained through the parching heat of Cupides burning fire,
He thus devised with him self, to frame his matters so,
Unto a woman there hard by be minded for to go,
Who was familiar with his dame: to her he would complain,
And tell her of his woeful plight that she might ease his pain.
Thus thinking, forth he goes, and tells his woeful state,
Unto the wight who gave her ear unto his wretched fate.
He told her al his woe, his sorrow, grief, and pain,
Wherefore to be releast of those he would be glad and feign:
She marked well his woeful plight, of love she had good skill:
Who knew what meats they feed upon that are at Venus will.
She knew the entermingled drugs and the deceitful wine,
That Cupide quastes unto the guestes with Venus that do dine.
She therefore knowing his disease and waying al his grief,
Did promise for to ease his we and get him some relief,
If she might know the wight, that so his heart did love,
She would put to her hel^ing hand that matter for to prove.
Oh Zilia, Zilia, she it is with doleful tune he cries:
Therefore with present remedy, to help he her desires.
And that she would betwixt them both, an intercessour stand:
Whose pains should well rewarded be, with silver, gold or land.
Mine only hope does rest in you, my comfort and delight
Does all depend of you (he says) to get that princely wight,
And I your soldier here, am pressed to do your will.
In right or wrong to take your part, and still your best fulfill.
This said he holds his peace, and she with mourning cheer,
Was wrapped in woe, and did lament his doleful case to heart.
For she full well did know that she would not consent,
Whose stubborn^ nature was so fierce, that she (...) not present
(...) His cause before her state, least she rebuke should gain:
Therefore of this request and suit she would be rid full fain^.
But waying well his plight, and yelding aid to him,
She would (s^e said) do that for him that might be done therein.
But yet she still persuaded him for to success his love,
But all in vain, his heart was fixed that none could if remove.
He does his neighbor now entreat a letter for to bear,
Unto his love, to give the same and naught at all to fear.
Which she with oath did promise him: wherefore she bad him write,
Without delay or tract of time this letter to endite.
Then to his closet he does go, and pen does fake:
And on this wise he did devise his letter for to make.
The Letter of Seignior Philiberto, unto mistress Zilia.
THe death with trenchant dart does breed in breast such ill,
That I cannot forget the smart that thereby rises still:
Yet nerethelesse since that I am the ill it self in deed,
That death with daily dolours deep within my breast does breed*
I am your lasting thrall, and yet I do not know
If you hear me good will at all, or if you love, or no.
My wound is made so large with bitter woe in breast,
That still my heart prepares a place to lodge a careful guest.
Oh dame, thou have my life and death at thy desire,
Come ease my mind, where fancies flames do burn like Aetna fire.
For wanting thee, my life is death and doleful cheer,
And finding favor in thy sight, my days are happy here.
The God that made my soul and knows what I have felt,
Who causes sighs and sorrows often the siely soul to swelt,
Does see my torments now, and what I suffer still,
And understands I taste more grief than I can show by skill.
To thee fair dame I cry that makst my senses err,
And plantest peace full nere my heart, and then makst sudden war.
Yet at thy pleasure still thou may my sour make sweet,
In granting me the right good will for faithful lovers meet.
Which favor if I get, unto my noble mind,
I do remain a gally slave, as thou by proof shall find.
And so thou shall release my heart from cruel bands,
If I may get the worthy peace, that yield into thy hands.
So rendering all to thee, the Gods may join us both
In one true league of unity, through force of constant trothe.
Then shall thou mistress be of life, of lim and all:
My gold, my honor, land and see shall be so at thy call.

This letter closde, he gave to her, which she with speed did take:
He wylled her to pray his dame, an answer for to make.
When he his talk had finished, his corpse on bed he laid:
But at the last his eyes burst out with tears, and thus he said.
Oh God that rules the skies, in whom my trust does lie:
And thou (oh God) which chiefest art above the golden sky:
And thou oh Lady dear, oh Venus by thy name,
Uouchsafe my woeful cry to hear, thy captive do not blame,
Though that always I sought thy force for to withstand:
Yet now I feel the weighty force of Cupid thy sons hand,
Take pity now therefore, since that a captive I,
Cannot prevail, yet give me salve to cure my misery.
Thus he with doleful cheer did wayle and rue his case,
And none but widow Zilia could in his heart take place.
But let us leave him here oppressed with grief and pain,
And unto widow Zilia let us return again,
Who hard at work, when as the saw her neighbor coming in:
She skant would lift her from her stool where she as then did spin.
Her neighbor full of curtesy said she would with her speak,
Who quick and short desited her with have her mind to break.
She not prolonging time, began with tears and doleful cheer,
To tell the suit and woeful case of her most noble peer.
She told her all his grief and pain was only for her sake:
Desiring her, with willing mind for to become his make.
And there withal drew forth the letter which she had,
The same presenting unto her with countnaunce very sad,
Desiring her to read the same, and straight an answer send
Unto the wight, within whose heart great cares and grief be pende.
The matter lies in you his life to save or spill,
Unless you grant to his request through grief his heart you kill.
Let pity therefore reign within your tender breast,
And show some favor to the ^ight the which does love you best.
This said, she holds her peace: the widow then began
With frowning face and egre looks, and thus her talk did frame:
Your talk I listened well unto, but yet I do not prove:
Your fond intent misliketh me, I mind not for to love.
I marvel much that you would once so fondely speak to me,
And to such loyal lovers that I should with heart agree:
I thought your wit had not been such to spend your time so ill,
Regarding noug^t your honesty, nor how your name you spill.
It had been more convenient for you to been at home:
Than was to gad the stre^ts about, so fondly all alone.
My mind did throb to hear your talk, mine ears began to glowe:
To hear your words, which at the first I thought had not been so.
For if I had, I would at once unto your talk give ear:
To speak to me of such fond things I neither would forbear.
But yet his letter I will read, to hear his foolish mind,
And of his fond pretenced will, to s^e what I can find.
Then she began to read, as you before did h^are:
And being re^, her ruddy cheeks were channgde to heavy chear^.
Her rosy color pale, her sprites were all aghast:
This lovely letter which she red, it made her al abasht
But taking courage bold, and plucking up her sprites
Did argue thus, that she did not ^steeme of those delites,
But pausing yet a while, she felt a wondrous change
Within her breast, now love, now rage within her corpse to raunge.
Her color changed oftentimes, these twain brought her such pain:
But yet the ruddy raynt did come into her face again,
With no less hue and shyning cheer, than when the bloomed Rose
Is newly sprouted forth, then pale away with trice it goes.
But rancour taking place within this widows breast:
Both love and lovely letter she did utterly detest.
Then turning to the messenger, she thus to her did speak:
I thought that you would not have sought my chastitye to break,
Nor go about a thing so fond, whereby great shame might rise:
I truly thought that you had been, more sober, sage and wise.
Why should you thus now go about to get my whole consent:
That ever since my husband dyed, did seek love to prevent?
Has any light behavior of you in me been seen,
That to consent unto your heast at all you once might deem?
I think not so, why should you then presume or be so bold
With foolish talk and fond desire such things for to unfold?
But trust to this, the only love which I to you do bear,
Does make me now keep those things close, which I would not forbear
Unto no wight, except to you: therefore no more of this,
But leave your foolish enterprise, for naught and fond it is.
Let it suffice in time to come for you therefore I say,
To think and steadfastly believe that I am chaste always.
And bid the Lord of Italy leave of and fond desire,
And bid him likewise not at all my chastity require.
For this I choose unto my self, that I will rather dye,
Than to fulfill his lusting will my self I would apply.
And that the same he well may know, let him be sure of this,
That of his private talked he had with me, be now shall miss.
Now therefore get you home, and talk no more of him:
Whose amorous toys and feigned woes I let not by a pin.
The woman when she heard her words, being pinched to the quick.
Whose basty words and cruel looks her heart full sort d^d prick,
She thus did speak with quiet word^s, the Gods with hasty speed,
Send present help unto you both who have thereof great need:
Whose sickness and diseases both are ^ardly healde to be,
Unless the Gods from out the sky^s do send some rem^dy.
And saying thus, she parts, and straight she comes home,
And finds her Lord upon his bed with heavy cheer to groan.
Who seemed rather to be dead than for to be on live.
For that his cares and nipping greefes away he could not drive.
But loking on his neighbor then, who was returnde again:
When that he saw her heavy cheer he cried out amayne,
And would not list unto her words, but wrapped in careful woe,
Lamented sore his heavy case, whose words they sounded so:
O thou unlucky man, whom fortune favors naught:
The love of her who loves thee not, thou have full derely bought.
Thou payest well for pleasures past great usury and gain:
For now in stead of wonted joys, thou suffrest double pain.
Thy liberty thou had once, but now in bondage kept,
And for thy pleasures and delites, great cares and greefes be left.
Thrice happy had thou been, if her thou had not seen:
And if her name thou never heardst, thou might have blessed been.
But since the cruel destinyes, do weaue for thee such woe,
Thou needs must languishe in distress, it is decreed so.
Then speaks he to the messenger, (who did with tears bewail)
His woeful state, but yet his grief her tears could naught avail.
Does Zilia take in grateful wise the letter that I sent:
And did she take them thankfully, when them you did present?
I know not so, wherefore great wrong to you I now have done,
For now your wonted company I know that she will shun.
Ah fickle love, what fool is he that does him self commit
Unto thy rage, and fury fell that lasts such a fit?
The glistring show of Sunny beams, at first did bring my joy:
But now the dark and foggy mist does work me great anoy.
I sailed first with prosperous wind, but storms did come at last:
Who in the surge of foming seas, my corpse do ouercast.
Wherefore an end of my mishaps I think I none shall have,
Nor favor yet of Mistress mine, the which my life would save.
(...) In cruel wenche, what meanest thou my soul thus to torment?
Who would my corpse to do thee good for sacrifice present.
How do thou measure the good will of him that loves thee best?
Who for thy sake in night or day for grief can take no r^st?
Oh toat thy beauty once in thee a fault so foul should see,
As to torment those loving wights which praise and honor thee.
Oh cruel and unkindly deed, those servants to expel,
And set so little by the wight that loves to serve thee well.
O Basiliske so colored and pleasant to man's eye,
And yet within, the bitter gall in secreate wise does lie.
Whose poison is dispersed now throughout my woeful breast,
That all my senses for to do their offices detest.
But yet and if I had some drug to set my heart at ease,
These greefes, these sighs and sobbings often I should full soon appease.
Then for the dame that breeds my woe I would not suit nor sue,
But yet I feel and also prove this sentence to be true:
No physic herbs that grows in field the grief of love can cure,
Nor yet no drug that man inuents that pain can well assure.
Alas the searecloth will not serve to tent my woeful wound:
To launche the same I thinck in vain my grief should then abound.
But to be short, no dressing can so fit for me be found,
Except the hand of her alone that gave to me my wound.
But would to God she saw the depth and bottom of my heart,
And vewde the closet of my mind, and how I suffer smarte:
That she might judge my constant faith, and know the wrong I hear,
Her rigorous deeds and froward will do put me in great fear.
But on unhappy man, I feel that I shall nothing gain,
For all her pleasures and delights do rest upon my pain:
Her ease upon my woe, her joy upon my grief:
My sobbing tears, my groaning sighs do bring to her relief.
And saying thus, he sore did weep and sighed often between,
The Crystal drops ran down his cheeks as he a child had been.
The woman standing by him there, and seeing all his pain,
She vewing well his woeful plight, no longer would remain.
She pityed so his case and did lament his woe:
That she from tears could not abstain to see him vexed so.
But then she told the whole success of Philiberts love,
Unto a Gentleman, who said that he would try and prove
How he might get him health, whose freende and mate he was:
Who careful was and loathe that he, out of the world should pass.
He goes for Phisicions in cunning that excel:
Who with their drugs, and sweet preserues, that they might make him well:
And for to know the cause of grief that so does him molest,
And eke of them to know what kind of medicines be best.
At last he brings Physicians his woeful plight to see,
But none alas is there can tell to cure his malady.
The gentleman does weep and wayle, his woeful friend to see:
At last of them he does enquire, if any help there be.
To whom they answer make with heavy bending cheer,
That naught but death in him at all to their sight did appear,
For lively blood was gone, his pulses did not beat,
His limbs waxt stark for wont of blood and lack of lively heat:
His senses do deny their offices to do,
His breath does fa^^e, and men do look but death for to ensue.
Thus they dispayring of his health, and t^inking ^e would die,
Of money store they having then do leave him by and by.
Which when his friendly mate did see, he could no way devise
How he might get again his health by any kind of wise.
He trudged home to Zilia, desiring her to show
Some pity to the Lord of Virle, but fill she did say no.
He proffred gifts and promises, but all could not prevail:
Which when he saw, her stubborn stat^ he did lament and wayle.
And did not know unto what Saint for succor he might go:
It grieved him to see his friend so wrapped in careful woe.
But in the end, he did devise to go to her again,
That was the former messenger, that she might ease his pain.
And for his purpose finding her, he sp^ke with doleful cheer:
O mistress mi^e mine only aid, I pray you now come near:
I marvel much that of she might you make ^o small account,
Who for ^^ch wi^^t^ in woeful case a ready help was wont.
If any pity reign within your tender breast,
To help the wight that lies half dead be ready bent and pressed:
Whose sighs and tears do pity me when I the same do hear,
Whose shrikes and groans, whose careful mone^ do much abate my cheer.
The Gods do know (quoth she) if I could tell what way,
To cast his woe, or shorten grief, the same I would assay.
But yet to him, I straight will wend, and promise him, that I
With careful head and hasty speed will get some remedy:
Which may h^s pain perchance apease, and then I will debate,
How that our promise we may keep to ease his woeful state.
Thus both at once they go, the patient for to see:
Who when he saw his ^essenger he thought him sa^e to be,
Still thinking that she would an intercessour stand,
And for to ease his pyning grief she should put to her hand.
But thus to her he said: take pity on the wight
Which lies in darkness, and would feign obtain the shining light.
I mea^e, seek to aswage my woe and nipping grief:
Seek to appease my groaning ghost, and get me some relief.
This said she speaks to him, I know not what you mean
Thus to torment your self with wo^ as we have plainly seen,
I trust ere Phoebus twice his banner do display,
And for the clear and shining light does make a perfect way,
To bring the thing about whereby great joy may rise
To you: thus I through cunning ski^ this matter will devise,
That you with her shall speak on whom you so complain,
So that to her with c^urage bold you may declare your pain.
How pleasant is your talk to me? how dul^et be your words?
To speak unto that princely wight I would spend al my goods.
These licours you would have me fast for faithful lovers meet,
Which superficially do seem for to be very sweet,
But afterward, do make my life more wrapped in feeble case
Than at the first, which will with cares my senses all unlace.
What do you then despair (quoth she) and trust not to my words?
You shall of troth go speak with her, without the loss of goods.
Take therefore courage bold, and arm your self with hope:
And thank me at such time, when as you have unto her spoke.
Oh mistress mine, I crave no more of your well helping hand:
Than if before the presence of her grace, I once might stand,
To hear if she will grant unto my whole desire,
Or else deny the whole contents of that I do require.
My weakness now decays, my strength it comes again,
And eke the joyful words you speak do shorten al my pain.
My lively blood reuiues my sprites, my pulses now do beat,
My l^mbs wax strong, my breath wax long, through force of lively heat.
Now could I walk abroad to see that princely wight,
For whom my heart desires so to take of her a sight.
Content your self (quoth she) and set your heart at ease:
I trust to work such means, that I will heal your whole disease.
Then takes she her leave, and unto Zilia goes:
Whereby she might incontinent assuage his careful woes.
And m^e^ing her at Church, she thus to her did speak:
Take pity on the sillye wight that is both faint and weak:
Let him not die remediless, but pity now his case,
And from all grief and ^eauy cheer his heart do now unlace.
Your only presence would make glad his faint and pensive heart,
Who for your love in grievous wise does suffer heavy smarte.
It pityeth me to see him languishe in distress,
And so long time with sighs and groans to lie remediless:
He sleeps not at all, but wayleth all the night,
His sprites be gone, his blood dried up, he wants force and might.
The pangs of death draw nie unless your aid do come
Therefore unto the wight oppressed with cares, show favor some.
Then Zilia which did not before regard his woeful grief,
Did not relent, and purposed to show him some relief.
I thought (quoth she) this suit was done, until that yesterday,
A gentleman did come to me, who now as you, did say.
But seeing he is worse and worse, I will be ruled by you:
And I will seek to ease his woe, for which you now do sue.
For this I know, your honesty and faith it is so great:
That you will naught require of me but that which shall be meet.
And when you shall do what you can, you naught shall win of me,
For to his fond and folishe mind I never will agree.
No private fact I will commit with him, this is most sure,
Nor yet will break my chastity while my life does endure.
But show your counsel yet in this, how shall I once devise
To go to him without suspect whereby no shame might rise?
I rather had to suffer death than so to get me shame,
The people will suspect, and so I quite shall loss my name.
But rather let him come to morrow home to me,
And in a chamber here below, I there will ready be.
The messenger did thank her then, and to his chamber went,
Who then about the same did walk, whose heart to joys was bent.
She did recount to him the whole the which the widow said,
These tidings which to him she told they made him well apayde*
As when a man has lost some jewel rich of prise,
With heavy heart and pensive mind he does begin to rise.
And so the jewel great he serketh round about,
And never cease til that be that jewel has found out
And when that he has found the same up to the skies
He lifts his hands, the joys whereof makes streams run down his eyes
So Philibe^ to now, with tears he bl^ts his face:
And stretching out his paineful arms the woman does embrace.
If life he says you will command, I will obey
By life or death, or what thing else if it please you to say.
And while that life this corpse shall full enjoy and have,
I am the knight that shall perform what thing you beg or crave.
And here I bind me to your mind, your man to be
At all assaies* without delay to do that pleases ye.
Thus said, she takes her leave and to her house does go:
But he in joy and bliss abounds before oppressed with woe.
So now the pleasant dew of heaven begins to fall,
And each man lo his rest to take persuades therwithal.
The silver sky of hue, the darksome shades of night
Does cover clean the Sun and day descended out of sight,
And glistring starr^s do deck the pole of heaven so hi^,
And nature gins his rest to crane, with heavy pensive eye.
Thus Phiiiberto then, ^is rest to take does go,
And wishes that fair ^ilia were there, so none might know.
He rolls, he turns and tosseth, with dreaming often to:
One while he thinks on his love, an other while to do
Some pretty feat, so that he his desire might have,
Another while he counts on his honor for to sane.
Thus on this wise be spends and drives the night away,
Until such time as Phoebus did his banner forth display.
At length Aurora does the bed of Titan fly.
And gius to show her crystal face about the silver sky.
And Phoebus he him self, his golden head does show,
Lifting him self from out the waves our Orison to blow.
And with his fi^ry chair is flowne into the sky,
With sunny beams, that none delights within his bed to lie.
He gladsome of the light, from out his weary bed does rise:
And decks his self with trim array after his wonted guise.
And walking up and down within his chamber, he
Begins in his mind to roll of her the great beauty.
And does her state compare to Venus comely gle^:
And yet within him self he says much fairer lot is she
Than comely Didoes grace or Thisbies beauty bright,
Or Helens eke that Grecian dame so fair and princely wight.
Thus passed he the time which seemed long to him:
He every hour did think a year til he with her had bin.
This is the force of love, whose sting once taking place
Cannot again recovered be in any kind of case.
Unless the help do come from them that cause the fame,
Whose eye lids shut with fancies flames they do regard no shame.
What pains would they endure for their true lovers sake,
Who would their lives in hazard put causing their foes to quake?
Achilles champion stout, what time in Troy he saw
Polixena, he did desire to be the son in law,
To Priamus that king in Troy of great renown.
Sir Paris eke the worthyest knight that was in Ilyon town,
His brother Hector saw to Greece his passage took,
His Aunt the fair Exione within their courts to look.
But being taken with the fiery cleaving dart
Of Helena the queen, whose sight did pierce him to the heart,
That maugre all their heads to ship the Dame he bare,
And boysing up his sails to Troy he began so fare.
So if that Cupid durst these champions stout assail:
What booted them for to resist when naught they could prevail?
To strive against the stream is labor lost in vain,
The more he strives, the more increasth his dolor and his pain.
The noble Pyramus him self for Thisby slew,
Because he thought that he was cause of breaking faith so true.
Thus if these did as here full often we have heard say,
For to prevent this love we ought not once to give assay.
This knight did taste the same as well his pangs did show,
The fiery dart of Cupids bow^ his senses perced so.
But now the long de^ired hour is come that he must go,
S^ee looks and abides for him within the rome below.
Now coming to the wished place of his beloved dame,
He thought not on his for ner greefes, which he abode with pain.
Her unkind words were quite forgot, his mind was bent to joy:
The torments which he felt before, his heart did not anoy.
T^us entering in the place which she appointed had,
She there in place in comely wise with vestures fair was clad.
When she did him epsy accompanied with her maid,
With simple cheer and welcome cold, on this wise to him said
With feigned joy, which moved not his heart: I see (quoth she)
Your late disease was not so ill as it was told to me,
For now the good e^tate and health that you possess,
Does make me judge the contrary, and so I truly guess.
The which henceforth shall make me judge the grief that men endure,
Is only through t^eir feigned woes, the thing for to allure
The which their heart desires, they having then their will,
No longer do regard the same but will detest it still.
To loking glasses therefore, I do mak^ them equal here,
Which al be it they make ^xcesse, of present things to appear,
Yet when the thing once seen does pass, and vanishe quite away,
The fourmes out of our memory, do likewise go astray.
I^ madame, answered he, how easy a thing it is,
The greeslesse wight to counterfaite both joys and fained bliss,
Which only the conceit may not that moves h^s mind detest,
But the object must bide in him as painted in his breast:
Which to a glass may ^ikened be, I mean not such a one
As feigned shapes presented there, so quickly should be gone,
Without the leaving of the trace of some i^prin^ed mark
Within the mind of him, which shape stands steadfast in his heart.
Then in the mirror which through cause of hidden might
Is ardent, have I seen a shape which is my whole delight.
It wrought within my heart. with fervent burning heat,
Which boiling in my tender breast my corpse it made to sweat.
Oh madame think not then I f^ined my disease,
Still thinking and devising both how I your grace might please.
I therefore count my self as whole, obaying still your mind:
To run or ride where so you please you shall me ready find.
I naught esteem the same (quoth she) you naught at all shall need
To take such travail for my sake, leave off therefore with speed
Your folish words, and talk no more of such fond things to me:
Your manners with your comely state, they do not well agree.
O dame have you determined for to torment me so,
To bring again the pangs of death, to double eke my woe:
Who will^ng is to sacrifice his body for your sake,
If once into my service, you would him vouchsafe to take?
It greeueth me to see your heavenly beauty neat,
To make a proof of cruelty, so horrible and great.
What? do you think and still conceive, that I my grief do feign?
And do you still conjecture, that I use dissembled pain,
Alack the tears which I have s^ed, the loss of lust to eat,
The weary night, the sleepelesse lims, not able skant to speak,
May well assure my loyal heart is better worthy praise
Than you esteem: seek not O Dame therefore to short my days.
He then beholding her to fix her eyes upon the ground:
He thought that he some favor had before his Lady found.
And thinking he the heart had won of her beloved grace,
He suffered tears to trickle down, alongs his blubbred face.
He thus his talk did prosecute: Oh fair and gentle dame,
Would you with rage and fury fell your beauty so bestaine?
As seek the death of him who loves you so well:
And thinks amids the troop of dames, you only hear the Bell?
This widow, whether she did not delight to hear him speak:
Or rather doubted in the end her c^astitie to break:
Through his complaint and wayling cheer, least be a breach should make,
For to prevent the same, therefore with egre words she speak:
You now have talked enough, by words and writings eke:
And for to break my chastity you practice still and seek:
I hitherto have suffered you my patience to abuse:
And yet the longer that you talk, the more you me misuse.
I shewde that kindness unto you, which they do not deserve,
That would the chaste life break of those that mind it to preserve.
You euitate with sugared words, my person to beguile,
But yet I well enough perceive your craft and subtle wile.
You would deprive me of the thing which you can not restore:
With faltring words and wily ways, still seeking more and more.
Which shall henceforth a warning be, about my self to look,
And to despise those chaunting charms of the Enchaunters hook:
Least I by opening still mine ear to such fond talk as yours:
Be not at length held fast therein, and bide while life endures.
For to conclude, I you desire to end this final talk,
To move the same to me no more but hence away to walk.
For by my Faith, no favor more to you I mind to show,
Than I have done, therefore of this now let us have no more:
And if that you do still proceed, this folly to maintain,
I will with speed to your great harm, redress seek for the same.
Content your self therefore, my mind for thus it is:
For of these things which I have spoke, naught shall be done amiss.
This lucklesse man, when he had heard this sentence, straight was mute:
Pretending with this wilful dame, no longer to dispute.
And then stood st^ll like to a Saint that was both deaf and dumme:
His sprites aghast to mummers like, which nothing say but mumme.
At length he set despair aside, his senses came again:
He spoke to her with little cheer, abiding grief and pain.
Since it is so, Oh Lady fair, you take from me all hope,
And since of your mere courtesy, I shall not get on soap.
And since that from your presence now, I ne^des must hence depart,
Who of al wights that are on live, are n^xt unto my heart:
Whose eyes perchance shall never see, your person once again:
But languishe in distress and grief, and so to die in pain.
Deny not this my whole request, which I to you do tell:
But yield a kiss now for a ^ledge, of this our last farewell.
In s^cr^te nothing I demand, but which you may fulfill,
In open wise, and yet your name you need not for to s^ill.
This is the whole request that I of you desire:
Perform the same therefore, O Dame, which I of you require.
Let all my pains and greef^s, some recompense obtain,
The same of you I now desire, which are the guide of gain.
The spiteful dame environed with rage and cruel spite,
Spoke thus to him, whose torments were to her a great delight.
I ^treight will see if that the love you vaunt to bear to me,
Wherein you stand so steadfastly, if that it stable be.
Ah madame (said the lover then) the word do once but speak.
Then shall you see how circumspect I am the same to keep.
Yea though I should bestow my life your hest for to fulfill,
I never would disclose the same, but keep your secrets still.
You then shall have the kiss quoth she, which of me you desire:
If you will swear to do the same that I of you require.
The wilful lover then did say, I witness God do make,
I ^il not leave one jot undone, of that I undertake.
He vowing with affection great his true and plighted faith:
His whole req^^st and his desire he now shall have (she says.)
And saying so, she did embrace that lovely corpse of his:
In lou^ng wise upon her lips, he doubled kiss on kiss.
This man not knowing with what price he now had bought the kiss,
He held her still between his arms, as one in heavenly bliss.
And be thus still embracing her, he thought his soul did fly
Up to the heavens, remaining still about the starrie sky.
The poysned Balm which he did suck out of her sugared breath,
Did joy his heart so much, that he did not esteem of death.
She parting then his arms, to him she thus did speak:
You must keep troth as I have done, and not your statute break,
Which is, that in three years you to no wight do speak,
For this nor that, in any wise my statute do not break,
For if that you so do, no wight for your sake I will trust:
But I will compte you still a man perjured and unjust.
But certes now I leave to you this story that do hear:
And if this strange request would not, put any man in fear.
He was yet so religious, so stout of heart withal:
That he would keep and subject be, to that her cruel thral.
He th^n began to play the part of mem which do seem dum,
I l^^e the mum^ers at mum chance by signs he cries mum,
And sh^w^s ^y tokens, that ^ir heast he would obey:
And doing re^erence to her, he gets ^im self away,
And fained he had lost his speech, by means he burst some vain,
Whereby the Rheum or Cata^, did distill from out his brain.
He setting stay for his affairs, providing for his train.
He made him ready to depart to France for all his pain.
Which for the pleasant air, all Countries does excel:
For wealth and plenty of all things it only hears the bell.
But yet before he went, a ^^tter he did write
To Zilia, with cunning skill the same he did endite.
He gave it to a Page, to her the same to bear:
She took the same, and brake the seal, and red as you shall hear.
The Letter sent by Philiberto Lord of Virle, to ZILIA widow.
THe roaring tempest huge, which thou have made me felt:
The raging storms, whereof as now well near my heart has swelt,
By paineful panges, whose waltring waves, by thick and troubled Skies,
And thousands blastes of raging winds, that in those seas do rise
Do promise shipwreck sure, of that thy sailing bark:
When after weather clear, does rise some tempest foul and dark.
For either I or thou, which art of Tigres kind,
In that great storm and raging gulf, some danger sure shall find.
Of that thy nature rude, the destinies foes they be:
And thy great overthrow full well they all the same foresee.
The heavens unto my estate no doubt great friendship show,
They do devise always to end and finish all my woe.
The penance which I bear, by yelding to thy hest,
Great store of joys shall heap to m^, and bring my mind to rest.
And when I am at ease, amids my pleasant haps,
Then I do trust to see thee fall, and snarld in fortunes traps.
Then shall I see thee ban and curse the wreked time,
VVherin thou made me to gulpe such draught of poisned wine.
By which thy mortal cup I am the offered wight,
And eke a vowed sacrifice to that thy cruel spite.
Wherefore my hoping heart does hope to see the day,
That thou for this thy silence now, to me shall be the pray.
O blessed God most just, (whose worthy laud and praise,
With vttred speech in skies aloft, I dare not once to raise:
And may not well pronounce what s^ffaance I sustain:
Ne yet what death I do endure, whiles I in life remain.)
Take vengeance on that traytresse rude, afflict her corpse with woe:
Thy holy arm redress her fault, that she no more do so:
My reason has not so far straide, but I may hope and trust,
To see her for her wickedness be whipped with plague most just.
In the mean while great heaviness my sense and soul does bite:
And shaking fever vex my corpse, for grief of her dispite.
My mind now set at liberty from thee (O cruel dame)
Does give defiance to thy wrath, and to thy curssed name,
Proclaiming mortal war on thee, until my tongue untied,
Shall joy to speak to Zilia, fast weeping by my side.
The heavens forbid that causeless wrong, abroad should make his v^u^t:
Or that an undefiled death forgetful Tomb should haunte.
But that in written book and verse, their names should ever live:
And eke their wretched deeds should die, and virtues still revive.
So shall* he pride and glory both, of her be punished right,
By length ^f ye^res, and tract of time, and I by v^rt^es might,
Full recompense shall have and stand still in good fame:
And she like catiue wretch shall live to h^^ long lasting shame.
Whose f^nde re^arde of beauties grace, contemned has the force
Of my true ^aue full fixed in her: her heart void of remorse,
Esteemde it self right foolishly, and me abused st^l,
Usurping my good honest faith, and credit at her will.
Whose l^yal faith does rest in soul, and still therein shall bide
Until in stinking filthy grave, the earth my corpse shall hide.
Then shall the soul fraught with that faith, to heavens make repair,
And rest among the heavenly ^our, bedeckt with sacred air.
And thou for thy great cruelty, as God above does know,
With ruful voice shall weep and wail, for thy great overthrow.
And when thou would purge thy self, for that thy wretched deed:
No kindness shall to thee be done, extreme shall be thy meede.
And where my ^ong does want at will thy mischief to display:
My hand and pen supply the place, and shall do so always.
For so thou have constrained me by force of thy be^est:
In silence still my ^ong to keep, t'accomplish thy request.
A dew, f^rewel my tormenter, thy foe that is full mute,
Does bid thee farewell once again, and thus he ends his suit.
He that lives only to be revenged of thy cruelti^. Signior PHILIBERTO. Lord
of VIRLE.


She then disdaining al his words, made thereof but a jest:
She did rejoice to see the woe, of that her careful guest.
But let us leave her, and to him let us return again,
Who iorneyd to ye coast of France, leaving his spiteful dame.
Where Charles the seventh the^ did reign, a Noble man in war,
Whose warlike deeds and prowess great, extended very far.
He chased out of all his land, by force the English rout,
Whose army then in Gascoigne lay, the coast of France about.
And fortune favored so that wight, that he did overcome
That nation fierce, and with his host their camp did ouerrun.
He moving then to Normandy his camp, that town to win,
The which through force the English train to hold, did then begin,
And viewing there this Lord of Virle repaired thereunto.
To serve the king at all assayes, his prowess eke to show,
Whose person of the Captains of this king was well known,
Through dint of sweard, and ma^ly might his fame was largely sown.
They sorowed much to see him dumme, that wight they loved so:
But they with him incontinent unto their king do go,
Presenting him unto his grace, commending eke his state:
Who for his virtue, force and might, they said he had no mate.
He doing homage to the king, by signs he did declare,
That for naught else, but him to serve he thither did repair.
He bearing this, did him embrace, and did in heart rejoice:
For that to praise this Noble knight, he heard his Captaine^ voice.
In state he was so comely dight, that else it could not be,
But with his state his manly force therewith should well agree.
Which he full well did surely show, when Roane he did beslege:
The fortress chief in Normandy, to please his Noble leege.
He mounted first upon the walls, and made an open breach:
That all his host, the English rout might with their weapons reach.
And thus through force they drove them forth through mighty stroke of hand.
Since that their guide of wisdom such was ruler of the band.
When news came to the king his grace, of this his noble knight,
And how he all the English host through force had put to flight,
Oh so he did rejoice in heart, that he had such a wight,
Within his court, whose dint of sweard, would put his foes to flight.
To recompense duly with gift, he minded then his pain,
And did appoint, that chiefly he, should be his chamberlain.
He gave to him a pension great, for to extol his name,
And would continue still he said, for to increase the same,
If he did see him prosecute his deeds as he begoon,
And venture still such enterprise as he before had done.
This dumb and speachlesse gentleman gave thanks unto the king:
And to the skies to lift his hands, he did in place begin.
Protesting that he would endure. as long as life should last:
And rather than he would go back of Orcus he would taste.
His signs did much rejoice the king and all his Noble rout,
To see his faith and vowed plights, his courage strong and stout.
Thus lived he in great renoune, whose praise extended far:
For that his forte and manly might he did show forth in war.
But being long in peace and rest, a Just the king did cry,
For to rejoice the Noble knights that long in peace did lie.
He viewing then the warlike deeds of this victorious Knight:
To see his courage and his force, it did him much delight.
But then again, his pensive heart it did molest and grieve:
To see that wight without his speech, which might his sentence give
In matters that belong unto his common wealth,
Whose counsel grave, would much avail to keep his peoples health.
And musing thus, he straight did cause a trumpet to be blown,
Which through al his dominions in short time it was sown:
Proclaiming who could well restore that persons speech again,
Ten thousand frankes in ready gold, he should have for his pain^.
There one mig^t see the thr^ging heaps of these Chirurgian sort,
Who for to help this noble Lord did thither then resort.
But th^s edict the King set forth, that he which durst be bold
To cure the same, and could not end, should forfait all that gold.
Or if so be he could not pay the sum, his life should leese:
When this they heard, they al in troops did flee away as Geese.
This babbling fame was spread so much, this brute so far was blown,
That at the length the same it was well known in Thurin town,
And passed still from mouth to mouth, til at the length it came
Unto the widows ear, and she did like well of the same,
For that she saw his constant troth which he to her did plight:
His perfect faith and steadfast love her heart did much delight.
She likewise hearing all the sum which they should duly take,
By any means or practice strange, this Knight to speak could make.
She did devise immediately, that she this gold might gain,
To wend to France, and ^o restore to him his speech again.
She thought those passions still that he did suffer as before:
She thought his love redoubled was, still daily more and more.
She thought not on the letter which for his farewell he sent:
And though she did, she still did think, that no such thing he meant.
Wherefore she would incontinent to Paris take her way,
And til she came again, all things at home she set in stay.
Not caring for to see her love, but to get praise and thanks:
And causing him to speak, she should obtain ten thousand frankes.
Which she to have already thought, thereof she made account:
Thus thinking still, and sure thereof, on horseback she does mount.
Thus may you plainly see, that she, whom honest love
And ^eruice long could not induce, did streightway mind to prove
Great riches to obtain: whom pi^y could not move,
But under color to attain this gold, she fained love.
Oh fond desire of worldly mucke how long thus will thou blind
The reason both and sprites of men, and bring them so behind?
Oh rag^ng gulf, how many wights thy yauning throat has drunk.
Who with thy lures, and fond procures, in endless hell have sunk,
Whose praise had passed far the clouds in brightness like the Sun,
If they had sought in warely wise thy su^tle ways to shun.
Alas, thy fruits are nothing worth, the which thou bring forth:
The pleasures which thou sowest abroad, I say be nothing worth.
Oh that thy vice should so take place, that men thou should blind:
No joys at all they do conduce the which enjoy the same,
But at the length through greedy mind it does increase their shame.
For still the dropsy lies hid within their heart and mind,
The more they drink, the more they still the thirst thereof do find.
This vice sometime did cause the death of Roman Croessus King
Whose greedy mind I say again him to his death did bring.
Who through gods threatening punishment fell in the Persians hands:
And like a wretch be ended there his life in cruel bands.
What should I speak of many more, the time it would prolong?
It does not well become my pen still for to sing one song.
But now to widow Zilia again let us return,
Who blinded with dame Avarice, her heart like sire did burn.
Thus passing through the Mountains hie, in France she did arrive:
The pleasant soil that there, she saw, her sprites did much revive.
When she came there, she did enquire who had the charge of those
That took on them to heal the Lord, to them she straight way goes.
Who when they came, they asked of her if she durst be so bold
To take on her the cure of him: which she did say she would.
You know (said they) the forfeytures which they shall forfeyt still:
That is to say, the sum of gold or else their life to spill.
All this I know (quoth she) wherefore she them requires
That she might see the patient, that so her heart desires.
For God a certain secret strange, revealed has to me.
That I do trust ere six days pass, so speak you shall him see.
This furthermore they also add, if fiftene days are past,
And he not speak within that time, the wager it was lost.
She did submit her self to all, still thinking that she had
Like power over the Lord of Virle, which still did make her glad.
The deputies with all speed wend to advertise the Knight,
And of his new Physician to him they do recite,
How that there as a woman come, that render will his speech:
And in six days in pain of life, will help their Noble leeche.
These sudden words did mase him much, but yet he never thought
That Zilia, to procure his health by any ways had sought.
He thought that Zilia never would to him bear such good will,
As to procure his health again, his life but rather spill.
Thus musing, still he stands, not knowing what to say,
But yet at length this widow fair to him she took her way:
She came in place where as he was, her patient for to see,
But when he saw her entered in, implete with wrath was he:
He deemed straight that money was the cause of her repair,
Her smiling grace he set naught by, nor yet her looks so fair.
He calling to his mind her rage, and all the cruel woe
Which she did cause him to sustain, his body bringing low
With pining sighs and greefes, esteeming not his care,
But to torment his silly corpse with rigor did not spare:
The like he minded then to show to her aga^ne,
And to molest her froward cor se, with such like grief and pain.
Not showing favor more to her, than she to him,
But still her foe for to endure, as she his foe had bin.
His former love was turned to rage, his friendship into ire,
His heart to choler so was changde, that it did burn like fire.
But in his chamber seeing her, he fained not to know
Her person, nor her great estate: he thought best so to do.
This ma^e the widow sore aghast, she knew not what to say,
Her senses left their wonted use, her sprites were gone away.
But calling to her memory in what strange place she stood,
To make of need a virtue then, she thought it very good.
From whence she could not well depart without the loss of life:
Or cast her honor in the dust, unless she were his wife.
Wherefore she minded for to try dame Fortunes turning wheel,
And thus she speak unto the Knight, her heart as hard as steel.
What is the cause O knight you do not her esteem,
Who thought the time to be full long ere that she had you seen?
And do you now set nothing by, the wight that lones you so?
Who as you said, did guide your heart where so ever you did go?
Have you so soon forgotten her that was your only joy?
Be all your former pleasures now, converted to annoy?
Look better once again, behold your humble wight:
Do not estraunge your self from me, work not so great dispight.
Forgive me now my former faults which once I did commit:
Your former greefes which I did cause, out of your heart let slip.
I am the wight that tide your tongue, now let me loose the same:
And for the first invented wrong, no more repute the blame.
She seeing then this Gentleman would nothing say but mumme,
She cursed within her heart, the hour wherein she made him dumme.
He did declare by outward signs that he could nothing speak,
The trickling tears then suddenly out from her eyes do break.
She then with arms embracing him, his lips did kiss full often,
And in her heart for present aid des^res the Gods aloft
But he which once with sugared words did seek her for to please,
He now inuents all kind of ways her person to displease.
Her cares now unto him be joy, her greefes do glad his heart,
Her sobs and signs do cheer his mind, all c^res he sets apart.
All her words do not avail, her plaints do profit naught:
Now is she quite discouraged of that thing which she sought.
He waked once again by her which once had slain his mind:
The thing which seemed long asleep, he did assay to find.
She more for fear of loss of life, or price of the reward,
Entending by all kind of ways, her life for to sauegarde,
Than for the true and earnest love which she to him did hear,
Did suffer him to have of her, that lovers do desire:
Thus for the space of fiftene days, they lived in great joy:
But yet her friend would nothing speak, which did her much anoy.
She humbly prayed him to show, some favor to her state,
Protesting still while life does last for to become his mate.
Or that she might go free from either loss at hand,
And she would stand as truest friend, that was in all that land.
This gay and lowly talk, she had, to move the Knight,
But not, as ye, mo favor she could find before his si^ht.
At length the king, when that he saw this patient would not speak,
He did commit her to the Iayle in prison fast to keep,
That either she should pay the sum, or else her life should lose:
When this she heard, to sobs and tears her self she does dispose.
How bitter seemed this same drink, let al men bear away,
Who pressed with pain on every side, began thus for to say:
Ah captive wight that wen^st about, an other to deceive,
Have sharpened now the vital sword, thy life for to bereave.
Did it not well enough suffice for to deceive my foe?
But all entangled in his snares, must breed my careful woe.
My fame he does so much dispoile, that every one does mock
My state, to all so I shall be a common laughing stock.
What hap had I that I was not devoured of some beast,
Which in the woods and hills, I past, do take their common rest?
Oh what mischance had I that I brake not my neck,
In tumbling down the steepie hills and so my self to wrecke,
Than here to stand a gazing stock to them that this way pass,
And on a stage to all men's eyes a common loking glass.
But this, O god, is due reward for mine ungodly life.
My heart so fierce in cruelty delighting still in strife.
The Knight contented with her plaints, esteeming not her grief,
Yet at the length constrained was to get her some relief.
Her tears did so bedew her face that he some pity took:
The Crystal drops r^n down her cheeks as from a water broo^e.
He more did wail and c^e her case, than she her lovers did:
Which argued, much a gentle heart within his breast was hid.
He the^ repaired to the King, deliting slanders by,
Who ^hen to hear him speak, on throgs they do^ approach him nie.
He vtters then before the King, the whole discourse of love
Which he did bear to Zilia, as is rehearst above,
And how also she was the cause that he his speech di^ lose,
But now reui^de again by her whose heart with grief it flows.
Wherefore yet now O king (quoth he) this one thing let me crave:
That though she have deserved death, her pardon let her have.
The king the^ speaks: your whole request you certes shall obtain,
Although this widow do deserve to suffer grievous pain.
Your most faithful and gentle heart deserves no less praise,
Than her ill deeds do merit pain, whose shame will last always.
She then likewise contented was, and he to wife her took:
He loved her, she him likewise, till death them twain forsook.
FINIS.
^rinted at London by Henr Binneman, dwelling in Knightrider Streatt at the
Sign of the Mermaid.


