THE HOLLANDER.

A Comedy written 1635.

The Author HENRY GLAPTHORNE.

And now Printed as it was then Acted at the Cockpit in Drury lane, by their
Majesty's Servants, with good allowance.

And at the Court before both their Majesty's.

LONDON: Printed by I. Oaks, for A. Wilson, and are to be sold at her shop at
Grayes-Inne Gate in Holborne. 1640.

The Persons in the Play.
Artlesse, a Doctor of Physic. Vrinal, his man. Mixum, his Apothecary.
Freewit, a young Gentleman, and a Suitor to the Lady Know-worth. Sir Martin
Yellow, a jealous Knight. Popingay, his Nephew. Fortress, a Knight of the
Twibill. Sconce, a Gallant nuturaliz'd Dutchman. Captain Pick. Lady Yellow.
Mistrisse Know-worth, her fister. Mistress Mixum. Dalinea, the Doctors
daughter. Lovering, a Chambermaid disguised.
The Scene London. To the great hope of growing nobleness, my Honorable
friend, Sir Thomas Fisher, Knight, etc.
Sir,
THe knowledge of your still increasing virtue has begot in all men love, in me
admiration, and desires to serve it: as cunning Painters express more
significant Art in model, then extended figures, I have made election of this
little of spring of my brain, to show you the largest skill of my many
indearments to you; and as an Ambassador from the rest of my faculties, to
inform you how much devotion the whole province of my Soul pays to your
worth and goodness. Had I bin endowed with such blessings, (noble young man) I
should have presented you a welmand Hawke, or an excellent Cour^er, gifts
(because more agreeable to your Disposition) more fit to have bin tendered you:
But I am confident you know that a Book (as it is my best inheritance) is the
most magnificent sacrifice my zeal can offer: this Play therefore accept, best
Sir, from him who is nothing more ambitious then of the title of

your true servant and honourer, Hen. Glapthorne,

The Hollander.
Actus primus. Scena prima.
Doctor and his Wife. Doctor. HOw do these new Guests like us?

Mrs. Very well:
That fortnight they have been here, I have observed
From them not the least relish of distaste;
The Lady and her sister are so good
Themselves, their innocence cannot mistrust
Ill in another, specially in us,
Who do assume that formal gravity
Might dash prying eyes: But is the sister
Cured of her Ague perfectly?

Doct. The Spring
Does not produce an Ague but for Physic,
She Is cured, and only does expect her sister,
The Lady Yellow, otherwise I fear
We should not have her company.

Mris. Green-Sicknesse take her,
I thought it had been that, and then my Art
Would have been requisite. I should have found
Some lusty youth that would have given her physic,
More powerful to expel that lasie humor
Than all your Cordialls: Heaven, I can but think
How in this seven years, since we came to town,
The Tide is turned with us: when thou were an Inn-
Keeping Apothecary in the Country,
The furniture of our shop was Gally-pots,
Filled with Conserve of Roses, empty Boxes,
And Aqua vitae glasses: and now thou art
My most admired Doctor, walk'st in Satin,
And in plush, my heart.

Doct. Applaud my wit that has effected it.

Mris. You will grant I hope
An equal share to me? Was it not I
That first advised you to set up a School
For Female vaulters, and within pretense
Of giving Physic, give them an overplus
To their disease. How much this has conduced
To our advancement, forgetfulness it self
Cannot deny.

Doct. Nor will I, my dear associate, I have now
Achieved a wealth sufficient to procure
My self a license, though the murmuring Doctors
That do not bite-backe it, though they watch
All opportunities that may undo
My estimation: we must therefore arm
Our selves with circumspective care: be sure
Those virtuous gentle women, who are now
Domesticke guests, have no cause to suspect
A misdemeanour here, nor that, our daughter,
A virgin could as morning air or Ice.
So timorous of society, that she seems
Neglectfull of mankind, be exposed to every common eye,
Frequents our house, we must be politic, wise, or our state,
Will soon embrace a ruin.

Enter Vrinall. Vrin. Are you the Doctor Artlesse pray sir?

Doct. My name is Artlesse

Vrin. Sir, I am sent from Mr. Mixum, your Apothecary, to give attendance on
you.


Doct. Your name is Vrinall, I take it?


Vrin. you take my name by the right end sir, my father was a brother of master
Mixum's function: marry my mother told me a Doctor got me, for professions sake
I hope you will use me kindly.


Doct. Doubt not good Vrinall, if thou be not cracked can thou hold water.


Mist. Well, that is, be secret, insooth husband, the young man will be very
good at a dead lift, to serve our patients turns, he has a promising
countenance.


Vrin. A good subsidy face mistress, but master Mixum has certified me, that
hither come Ladies and gentlewomen, City wives and country wives, and the
better sort of saylors wives: Nay wives of all sorts, but Oyster wives, some to
have the falling sickness cured, others the inflammation of the blood, the
Consumption of the body and lungs; if I do not to any man or woman administer
a glister, vomit, potion, Iulip, Cordial, or what physic your worship shall
think fit, with dexterity, say I am no sound Vrinall, and beat me to pieces.


Doct. I believe thee, but did Tom Mixum give you naught in charge to say to me?


Vrin. O yes sir, he had me tell you he had a fat Goose in the pens, only
for your pulling: a yunker of a thousand pound per annum.


Doct. Say so, what is he; know thou?


Vrin. I saw him sir, he was a propenman: but I think has not much more wit
then my self, he seems of a good ^ane disposition, and may I believe, be led
by the nose as quietly as the tamest Bear in the garden: he has not wit enough
to be a knave, nor manhood enough to be an honest man: this is my (...) of him
sir, when you see him you will understand him better.


Enter (...), Sir Martine Yellow (...) his (...) Pop. With licenses, is not
this (...) a receiptacle
For sinners?

Doct. Now you are in it perhaps it is, what mean you?


Pop. Pish, seem not to obscure, is it not in plain terms, a house of ease.


Doct. There is one in the garden sir.

Pop. Where one may do his business with (...) fear of Marshall,
Constable, or any one of that most awful tribe.

Vrin. Surely this gentleman comes to take a purge, he talks so eleanely.


Pop. Shall I have answer sir? I come as hot from sea, as a
Hollander from herring fishing, I have an appetite,
The most insatiate citizen who frequents
Your mansion cannot tame; had she been fed
With amber possets, eaten sparrowes eggs, or her accustomed
Bevendy, been the juice of Clare or Sparagus.

Doct. What abuse may this be?
Perhaps your most officious pander (...)
That for a shilling will betray his sister
to prostitution; did mistake, be gone, or I shall
Fetch a gentleman will whip your hot blood out of you.

Vrin. Shall I ^unne for the Bead les mistress?

Mist. No go to the next Justice for a warrant, and make haste, be sure I Will
have the knave smoked for abusing my house.


Pop. This must not fright me, do you not keep a pimping
Roaring varle^ noted as much as pig, have you not constant
She ^^uldiers in your citadell, none such,
Had Hollands Leager, Lambeth Marsh is held
A Nunry to your College.

Virn. And the three Scuirrels in the town; I warrant a very
Sanctuary to it.

Pop. Come here is gold, be not so bashful, Mistress pray receive it,
I know you are open handed.

Mist. Art. Now I desie thee for a Rascall^ Vrinall why run you not to the
Justice, his man would have taken your money ere this time.


Pop. Yet least I should mistake you, though I am by all
Truth confident this is the house: pray resolve me;
Has the Lady Yellow a chamber here?

Vrin. Yes sir, she lies in the yellow chamber, and has done this two months.


Pop. I did believe it.


Vrin. Nay you may believe me if you will: I know neither Lady Yellow, nor
yellow chamber, I have not been here above half an hour.


Doct. Tom Mixum, Sure sent this fellow hither, he is so unmannerly, silence
Vrinall, what if that Lady have a chamber here sir?


Sir Mart. Now he comes to the purpose.


Pop. Nay speak directly suppositions: include a doubtful sense, if she have
not, I shall repent the error of my language and crave your mercy.


Doct. Impudence I think, beyond my own rests in this youth,
I must find out his meaning; it is perchance some one
Sent from her jealous husband, whom she told me,
In discontent was traveled prithee wife go in, and tell the
Lady Yellow, here is one wishes the knowledge of her.

Mrs. Art. Hang him young whisling, he know a Lady, pity of his life first.


Doct. Do as I bid you: Vrinall attend your mistress in.


Vrin. Yes, I will attend her in and in too, to do her any service.

Exeunt Vrinall, and Mistress. Doct. Sir, the uneivill language you have given
me,
Might justly stir a passionate man to rage;
But it no morestirs me then the light wind,
If you have relation to the Lady Yellow:
She Is one who^e virtues merit that respect,
Twould be a stain to manners not to use the meanest of her
Friends with due regard: pray sir what is she to you?

Pop. As any woman else is for my money, only I must confess, I have an itch,
a tickling thought to her before the rest of common prostitutes: I know she will
lodge in none but vicious houses, which inforces me think yours is so.


Doct. It Is a misconceit, I me sorry for her sake (whom I esteem
So chaste, the pure untainted Doves may envy
Her unstained whiteness) should be cast upon
My innocent house, expect I Will send her to you, she will shape you ^
Just answer, would she were as they suspect her.
Ex. Doct.
Sir Mar. This Doctor is dishonest, speaks untruth,
My jealousy is just, that any man
Should so undo his reason; in belief
Of women's goodness, as on their loose souls,
To venture his creation; nay transform
His essence by them: for a cuckold is
Na^ures huge prodigy, the very abstract
Of all, that is wonderful: contempt and shame, are accidents as
Proper to his brow, as baire and whiteness.

Enter Lady Yellow. Pop. Is this she sir?

Sir Mar. I nephew that is the monster.

Pop. If Afric did produce no other monsters, there would
Be more cuckold in it then Lions, but to my business,
Madam the old tradition of this house invites your
Knowl^dge to conceive for what I sent to speak with you.

Lady. As yet indeed it does not.

Pop. Truly it does, I hope I shall obtain
The virgin glories of this days encounter,
Come shalls kiss, and then retire into your chamber.

Lady. My chamber, sure your manners lies in your berd, what do you take me
for?


Pop. An excellent creature* one whose meanest smile
Would tempt a votary earnest at his prayers,
Before the image of his tutelar Saint; to vary his
Fixed brow: yet I must tell you, you are a factress^ of the
Devils, one who fell damnation pleasingly as Asps
Infuse their itching venum: a standing poole,
On whose salt womb the too lascivious sun
Begets of Frogs and Toads a numerous offspring.
Compared with you is empty of corruption.

Lady. ^^so have at him, a strange complement to win a Lady,
Sir by your first discou^^e I had imagined
You came to spend part of this cheerful morn
In amorous dalliance with me, I am apt
For entertainment of it, as a bride
Long time contracted to some exquisite man
Is on her wedding night, but your quick change,
(Did not my glass assure me) no great blemish
Dwells in my cheeks, would urge me to mistrust
An imperfection in them: they are my own sir,
I do not wear (though its common among Ladies)
My face ith daytime only, and at night
Put off the painted visor, this hair believe it,
Was never shop-ware, you may venture on me, let but your
Creature keep the door, my chamber is empty for you.

Sir. Mar. Impudent strumper.

Pop. Ga^ y^u be a woman, and utter this, the hot desire of quails,
To yours is modest appetite, you carry
A stone about you, not to warm your blood
Oppressed with chilly cold, but to inflame it
Beyond all sensual heat, which you would extinguish,
(Had you a soul about you) with your tears,
Or weep with the continuance that tall Pines
Diffuse their gummy drops in summer, and
Faster then trembling Isicles, or snow, at their own dissolution.

Lady. This is stranger yet sir, I see you come to convert me
Prompted with a zeal would choke ten precisians earnest in
Their hot house of convention, alas poor youth thy want
Of practice in the sweet delights of love,
Undoes thy judgment, can there be a joy
Equal to this to have a sprightfull Lady,
Whose every lineament speaks captivity
To the beholder, claspe with the same strictness
That curling billows do embrace a wrack,
Her lovers neck, kiss close, and soft, as moss
Does some oregrowne Oak; but I see it is vain,
To prate to thee whose ignorance may plead
Excuse for thy fond here^ie; go depart,
Turn Eunuch and reserve thy voyee, perhaps ^ will purchase thee
A petty Cannons place in some blind chantry.

Enter Doctor and Dalince. Doct. I Will cut off their discourse, if (...) be right
i will have my benefit out of her: Dalinea attend her Ladyship, Madam I fear you
take cold here, your Sister, Mistress Know^ worth expects you too within;
Gentlewoman you cannot complain you have been used uncivilly; pray now depart,
it is time.


Lady. They may return to the wise man my husband, from whom I Am sure they
come, and tell him my disposition, ha, ha, ha.


Exeunt Lady, and Dalin^a. Sir Mart. Flames rise on flames successively, the
sphere
Has no such fire as I do ^arbour here.

Pop. What divine creature should the other be, well master
Doctor, we shall be even with you.
Exe. Sir Mart. Pop.
Doct. I, do your pleasure sir, the small Riveret
Does in its cold waves, seem to drench the sun
(When liks a riotous drunkard) his hot rays
Suckes up the pea^ly waters, if this Lady
We are in her breast, the burning spots of lust,
They shall increase, and like the Stars, light her soul
To the firmament of pleasure. The business sirrah?

Enter Vrinall and Sconce. Vrin. The business sirrah, he is gotten into the
Lordly phrase
Already, Sir the gentleman I speak off?

Doct. Is this he? would you have ought with me sir?


Scon. Amon Deui, this is the Doctor: Foutra I would feign speak to him, Sir I
should be happy to initiate my knowledge in your acquaintance Master Mixum an
Apothecary, at whose shop I use to eat Eringo Roots, did recommend me to you.


Doct. Honest Tom Mixum, you are welcome; what is your design with me?


Scon. Fame does divulge you to be a man experienced in the Arts.


Vrin. Of cousenage and lying excellently.

Scon. Which does concern our bodily health.

Doct. And you perhaps Iabor of some disease,
And come to seek for remedy, I can
As Gallen or Hipocrates, read a lecture,
On maladies, their causes and effects,
Tell by the countenance of a man, the ill oppresses him,
You by that (...) altitude of your horoscope,
Should be subject to Calentures.

Scon. Neen up mine ^eale min here: ick neet, infection vanish I never was
subject to disease, but the gentile itch which I obtaind in the Low Countries.


Vrin. I was in hot service certainly.


Doct. With license sir, let me desire your character, I long to know you,
Symptoms of worth declare you in my opinion noble.


Scon. I shall explain my self by land shape a far off, my father was a Dutch
man.


Vrin. Which makes him look so like a smoked westphalia ham, or dry Dutch
pudding.


Scon. And one in the conspiracy with Barnevet, at whose hanging he fled ore
hither.


Vrin. And the gentle noose had knit up him, and a hundred of his country men,
^our land would not be pestred so with butterboxes.


Scon. Thinking to have purchased a monopoly for Tobacco: but that the Vintners
took in snuff, and informed the gallants, who had like to smoked him for it.


Doct. An admirable project.


Scon. Afterward he undertook to have drayn'd the Fens, and there was
drowned, and at the ducking time at Crowland drawn up in a net for a widgin.


Doct. Pray sir what tribe was he of?


Scon. He was no Jew Sir, yet he would take pawnes, and their forfeits too, and
has left me such as you see, I am a proper man: a trifling patrimony, a
thousand pounds perannum.


Vrin. I admire no man begs him for a fool, and gets it from him.


Doct. May I request your name?


Sco. My name is Sconce sir, Master Ier^my Sconce, I am a gentleman of a good
family, and can derive my pedigree from Duke Alvas time, my ancestors kept the
inquisition out of Amsterdam.


Vrin. And brought all Sects in thither.


Scon. And took their surname from Kickin pot, the strongest Sconce in the
Netherlands.


Vrin. An excellent derivation for a Dutchman, Kickin-pot.


Scon. I had a good strong cosen taken in by the enemy, last summer, Skinks
Sconce Mr. Doctor, my cozen german once removed by a stratagem of hay boats a
fire on them.


Doct. That should have been before they came there Master Sconce.


Scon. But it is thought our nation had recovered it ere this, but that the
villainous Dunkerkers at sea met with the Herrinbusses and made stocke-fish of
them.


Vrin. They beat them soundly then it seems.


Doct. Have you no brothers Mr. Sconce?


Scon. Not any that I know of, as I am gentleman, nor was there any of my name
till of late, that gallants have begot me namesakes in every Tavern.


Doct. But the business you have with me is unrelated yet, and I have haste,
pray what may it concern?


Scon. A household matter Mr. Doctor; I would be loath to be accounted
troublesome, I should be none of your vulgar guests though: Mixum has informed
me you have fair lodgings in your house, convenient for ease and pleasure,
might I be so much engaged to your goodness, as to afford me a hansome one
for my money, it should be an end earement conspicuously trenching upon my
gratitude, and render me your obliged servant ever lastingly.


Vrin. As long as his money lasts, that is


Doct. If that be all, for Tom Mixums sake, were chambers scar^^r, you should
not be denied. Vrinall bring the gentleman into the dining room, I Will go
acquaint my wife with it.


Scon, Vrinall, art thou styled Vrinall?


Exit Doct. Vrin. It is my right and title to be termed so.


Scon. Come hither my sweet Rascal, can keep council, there is gold for
thee, thou shall have a new case sirrah, will thou be true to me?


Vrin. I will steal nothing from you Mr. Sconce.


Scon. Thou lookst not like a man of theft, I mean in a design.


Vrin. It Is not to convey gold over, in hollow anchors, to pay your Countrymen
soldiers; if it be, I Will hear no more of it.


Scon. Pish, not that neither. Mixum thou know him, do not?


Vrin. It Was he preferred me hither.


Scon. I did imagin't; my fine Vrinall reports thy Mr. to have the rarest salve.


Vrin. The weapon salve I warrant.


Scon. Which would, if I were desperately hurt, cure me without a Surgeons
help.


Vrin. So I have heard indeed.


Scon. Now Vrinall, it is our Country Custom only to Stick or Snee. But
could thou but procure this precious salve, I would confront the glistering
steel, outface the sharpest weapon.


Vrin. My Master is very cautious in parting with it.


Enter Freewit. Free. Save you gentlemen, belong you to this house?


Vrin. No sir, this house belongs to us.


Free. Mistress Know-worth, the Lady Yellowes sister, she is not stirring?


Vrin. It Is a lie sir, she is.


Free. Your wit is very scurvy Sir: if you serve a Creature here to carry
messages; pray deliver one to her.


Vrin. I may choose whether I will or no though.


Scon. Nay, and he shall choose sir.


Free. Prithee good friend let him; i will do it my self.


Vrin. Nay, that you shall not neither: what stand I here for? But sir, it is
not the fashion of this liberal age, to employ a man of merit in a message
without consideration: your Lawyers Clark will not acquaint his Master with a
Clyents cause, until his fist be soundly greased: Why may not I then use the
privilege of my office? Sir, we Doctors men take aurum palpabile for
Restorative: you are not unfurnished sir.


Free. O thou would have money; there is for thee, prithee Entreat her
presence.


Vrin. Instantly, instantly, noble sir, Mr. Sconce pray bear this worthy
gentleman company.

Exit Vri^all.
Free. Why should she lodge here? all similitude
Explaines this house for vicious, and this Doctor
For an impostor: Though she have ^bin sick,
She might have found to remedy her disease,
Another, and more famed Physician
Than this: She stays perhaps to bear
Her sister company. Whatsoere's the cause,
Who dare deprave her innocence, or cast
A thought of blemish on her virtues? Light
Diffused through air (although some thicke-brow'd fogge,
Or sickly vapor do invade airs sweetness)
Suffers no loathed corruption. Thomes may gore
With envious pricking, the discolored leaves
Of the chaste wood-binde, but can never blast
Their unstained freshness.

Scon. Now in the name of madness what (...) this man? Sir are you jealous of
your wife before you have her?


Free. What if I be sir.


Scon. She may chance Cuckold you after you have her for it.


Free. Good Go^^combe hold thy prattling.


Scon. Coxcombe? how Coxcombe to a naturallis'd Dutchman? Death sir, shall I
blow you down with my Can; or show you Twibill.


Free. How Sir?


Scon. Nay, be not angry man, I meant no harm, it is but a complement all
salutation, I purchased of the Mr. of the Order oth' valiant Knights of the
Twibill.


Free. A new Order of Knighthood, that may I know the institution.


Enter Mistress Know-worth, Martha, as Mr. Lovering leads her. Know. Servant
welcome: Lovering entreat
That gentleman to withdraw with Mr. Doctors man.

Love. Sir, my Mistress begs your absence.


Scon. Beggars are no chusers my friend: she shall
Undergo no contradiction: but Madam, it is the fashion
Vrin. As I take it, to salute at meeting, and kiss at parting.
Kisses her.
Vrin. You had best kiss her double Mr. Sconce.


Scon. Lady, serviture vostre and a vous assi Monsieur tresnoble.


Vrin. He looks like a squirrill indeed: this way sir.


Exeunt Lovring, Sconce, Vrinall. Free. I hope you grow to perfect health,
The Native beauty that once sild your cheeks,
Like to the budding Rose puts forth again,
After cold winters violence: and your lips
On whose soft touch, had it bin possible,
Death would have died himself, begin to show
Like untouched Cherries, pale with Morning dew,
Which once shook off, the purple fruit aspires
With amorous blushes to entice the small
Linnet and wanton Sparrow from their Lays,
To doat on its pure tincture, till they eat
What they admired.

Know. -- O you are pleasant servant; did you know
How near I am to death, and for your sake,
Your humor soon would alter.

Free. Truly, fair one,
It is a sweetness in you, I could wish
Were tempered with less passion: (Your much care
Of my unworthy self;) it is but a fortnight,
Since last my eyes enricht their needy sight,
By the reflection of these stars, and had
The least ill seas'd me, you had bin the first
Whose ears would have received it; harms are aptest
To be reported where they are least welcome.

Know. They are indeed, and one of yours is come
To kill my knowledge; such a one, as had
You worn a common heart, no strong disease
Could have dispatched sooner.

Free. -- I feel
No inclination in my faculties
Tending to sickness: I have never yet
By nightly sursets forced my youthful blood^
To a distemper.

Know. Would your youthful blood
Has never forced you one. Perfidious man,
Had I achieved the patience of a Saint
(Seclude my love to thee) I should in rage
Title thee worthless: nay, a name above
That hateful appellation: did you never
Injure a Creature of your mothers one Martha?

Free. Ha: how mean you Lady?

Know. In the black act of Sin, when you designed
Her honor, as a carcass to the Grave,
Wherever since your deed of ill was acted,
'T has slept lost and forgotten.

Free. By just truth.

Know. Invoke your falsehood, if you dare etect
On the black number of your heed less oaths
A monument to perjury. White truth,
Flies from the ranckorous poison of your breath,
As from a stifling dampe. Can you deny
Without a blush what I have urged?

Free. My resolution staggers a tall Oak,
Whose weighty top has discomposed his roots)
When whirlewinds do assault it, fits unmoved,
Balanced with me, to recollect the strength
Of impudence, and deeply contradict
Her mightiest affirmation, were to wage
A feeble war with truth. Say I did Mistress;
It Was ere a thought reciprocal enjoynd me
A serious duty to you and your mercy,
In which you do approach as near heavens goodness,
As heaven does blessed eternity, will pardon that wit less error in me.

Know. Truth I shall not: the harmless Myrtle first shall live in frosts,
And the pale Couslips flourish, ere warm showers
With quickening moisture raises them to tell
The e^rly Violets they are not alone
The Springs prime Virgins: my peculiar wrong
I freely pardon: but if you respect
Your conscience, seek that injured woman, and
Restore by sacred marriage the sad loss
Of her deprived fame. Do it Free-wit, heaven
Will smile at thy integrity; my tears
Shall strive to wash your crime away.
Ex. Mrs. Know.
Free. She weeps: so choice flowers, when extracting fire,
Inforces their lost leaves to a mild warmness,
Do through the Lymbecke temperately distill
Their odoriferous tears. But it is most just
To lose a chaste love, when distained with lust.
Exit.
Explicit Actus primus.
Actus secundus. Scena prima.
Sconce, Vrinall; with a box of weapon salve. Scon. BUt are you certain
Vrinall this ointment is Orthodoxall; may I without error in my faith believe
this same the weapon salve Authentical?


Vrin. Yes, and infallibly the cream of weapon salves, the simples which do
concur to the composition of it, speak it most sublime stuff; it is the rich
Antido^e that scorns the steel, and bids the Iron be in peace with men, or
rust: Aurelius Bombastus, Paracelsus, was the first inventer of this admirable
Unguent.


Scon. He was my Countryman, and held an Errant Conjurer.


Vrin. The Devil he was as soon: an excellent Naturallist, and that was all
upon my knowledge, Mr. Sconce; and it is thought my Mr. comes very near him in
the secrets concerning bodies Physical, as Herbs, Roots, Plants vegetable and
radical, out of whose quintessence, mixed with some hidden causes, he does
extract this famous weapon salve, of which you now are Mr.


Scon. There Is a Welsh Doctor in the City reported skillful in compounding it.


Vrin. He? a mere Digon a whee* his salve, why it is Casebaby to my Masters: I
dare be sworn it is nothing but Methegling boyld to jelly, the blades of Leeks,
mixed with a Welsh Goats blood; then stamped, and straind through a piece of
British Freese, or one of the old laps of Merlins Jerkin.


Scon. Probable Vrinall. That Welsh Doctor I do not like: I did attempt him
for the weapon salve, and like a Turk he answered me, that Hollanders were
Jews.


Vrin. They are a rebellious nation that is certain.


Scon. And that the salve was only made for Christians; there is a City
Captain too; I know not how you style him.


Vrin. Not John a Styles, the Knight of the post is it?


Scon. No, no, a very honest gentleman; but he's^, reported to have achieved
the salve in Lapland among the witches, and to be very liberal in imparting it
to his friends, an Aldermans daughter Vrinall may, and they say a witty
gentlewoman.


Vrin. Is It possible Mr. Sconce? they have few sons of that condition.


Scon. Had a desperate hole made in her by a gentleman, with his But-shaft, as
in her Country garden he was shooting at Penny prick; was, when none else
could do it, eur'd by this Captain.


Vrin. By this light a trifle, a mere trifle, the very scraping of our
Galley-pots performs more monstrous wonders: there was a Puritan Mr. Sconce,
who, cause he saw a Surplisse in the Church, would needs hang himself in the
Bell-ropes.


Scon. Why did not the Sexton ring him by the ears for it?


Vrin. Him my Mr. seeing, did for experience sake anoint the noose wherein his
neck had bin, and it recovered him.


Scon. Is It possible he should so easily escape a hanging! but on good Vrinall.


Vrin. Nay sir I Will tell you a greater miracle: You heard of the great training
last Summer master Sconce?


Scon. O when the whole: City went in Arms to take in Islington; marry I heard
the Ale-wives curse the report of their Muskets, it made their Pies and
Custards quake ith'Oven, and so come out dow-back't, which almost broke the
poor Harlots.


Vrin. I then Mr. Sconce there was at least threescore blown up with a basket
of powder, thirty of their lives my Master saved.


Scon. Rarer, and rarer yet: But how good Vrinall?


Vrin. He dressed the smoke of the powder as it flew up Sir, and it heald them
perfectly.


Scon. O that any body would blow me up, to see how I could eure my self.
Still on good Vrinall.


Vrin. Nay there, are thousands of this kind: but now I think on it since, it
did commit a villainous mischief.


Scon. Could it ever do a mischief Vrinall?


Vrin. Yes, yes, it has done a most notorious one, sufficient to exauctorate
its power, and almost annihilate the virtue of it.


Scon. What was it good Vrinall?


Vrin. I could e'ne weep to tell yousir: it is supposed twill never recover the
favor of gentlemen and City wits, they are quite out of conoeite with it.


Scon. But why should they be so Vrinall?


Vrin, I scaree dare answer Sir, for fear you hate it likewise,
It Was such another mischief.

Scon. Prithee what? nay on my gentility Vrinall.


Vrin. Why sir, it cured two Sergeants, and their yeomen.


Scon. How? two Sergeants.


Vrin. Who otherwise had drunk Mace-Ale with the Devil.


Scon. A Capital crime that same, to cure two Sergeants.


Enter Doctor, his wife: Mixum, his wife. Doct. Tom Mixum I thank thee for the
man
Thou setst me; it is a most serviceable knave;
I Have set him to pull you bird of Paradise, you parcel Dutch: thou sentst him
hither too.


Mix. I knew he was for your purpose, Mr. Doctor: this is the gentleman I told
you had one thousand pound per annum, and would be a match for Mr. Doctors
daughter.


Scon. There was a touch for him indeed Vrinall.


Doct. It will, indeed, now I consider on it, I had rather she should marry a
wealthy gull, than a witty Beggar: Wife and Mr. Mixum, will you discourse a
little with the gentleman, sound his intent and pronenesse to a match, and as
you find him use him; Mr. Sconce I should be glad to wait on you, did not
urgent affairs withdraw me.


Scon. Mr. Doctor I saw you not before: I am sorry sir, you will be gone so
soon, I should have changed some sillables with you.


Doct. Another time sweet Mr. Sconce.


Tom Mixum, Vrinall, Exeunt with Doctor. Mrs. Mix. A very good fortune Mrs
Arilesse for your daughter, and not to be neglected: shall I speak to him, or
will you for sooth?


Mrs. Art. Perhaps he will speak to us: see kind gentleman.


Scon. Lady, my manners does command me leave you: you would perchance be
private by your selves, or peradventure Vrinall were more behoofefull for your
company: then I adieu Vfroes.


Mrs. Mix. Pray stay sir, we have some business with you, (let me alone to
try him Mrs. Artlesse) besides we had rather be private with a gentleman,
then by our selves: they say you Dutchmen are the kindest men, and love a
woman heartily, you kiss so finely too.


Scon. You shall feel that presently [kisses her] there was a touch for you:
Nay Mrs. Artlesse you shall not blame my manners, I have a lip, a piece for you
[kisses her] and there was a touch for you Lady.


Mrs. Mix. So please you sir, I have another touch for you too, [kisses him]
Must try his disposition Mrs. Artlesse.


Scon. A very strong touch that same; she will beleaguer me I think, and her
Cannon shot will be kisses, they almost blow me over. Surely the Minikin is
enamoured on me.


Mrr. Art. Motion it to him Mrs. Mixum.


Mrs. Mix. Pray give me leave to feel his mind first, Mistress Artlesse: It Is
pity sir, you are so long unmarried; you are an exceeding handsome Gentleman.


Scon. Yes, yes, I know that well enough, I might serve for a gentleman Usher,
were my legs small enough: there are Ladies would consume half the revenews
of their Lords, on such a man of Chine and pith as I am.


Mist. Mix. Fie master Sconce, think not of Ladies sir, they are so imperious,
a man must serve them as they do command, at every turn and toy comes in
their head; they will puff and fret else, like their taffata peticoats withoften
brushing up; I will protest to you, you had better set you mind upon some
honest country Gentlewoman, or Citizens daughter, Master Doctor has a handsome
girl (though I say it before her mothers face) only she wants the audacity,
which a man would put into her; would you were married to her: Sir, she may do
worse, I dare assure you.


Mist. Art. Yes indeed may you master Sconce, have you not seen her yet? it is a
pretty puling baggage, so it is, marry ere I would make her a Lady, she should
be a new Exchage wench, your Citizens wives they are the goodest creatures,
live the finest lives.


Mist. Mix. Very right, mistress Artlesse, good souls, did you but know sir,
what tender hearts they have, how kind they will be to a gentleman that comes
to deal for their commodities, they will use him and it were their own
husbands.


Scon. I Will lay my life this musk-melon has a mind to use me so: I care not
much to give her a touch, or so, she is of the right sise, but Mistress Artlesse
should I have your good will, if I could love your daughter.


Mist. Art. Certainly sir, were you of English blood, I should like you better.


Mist. Mix. Fie Mistress Artlesse, when I was a maid, I had a desire to be a
kin to all nations: I have tried some English men, and they are like my
husband, mere meacocks verily: and cannot lawfully beget a child once in
seven years.


Scon. A touch, by this light, that is the reason there are so many bastards in
the city.


Mi. Mix. Your Spaniard as a neighbor of mine, told me who had lived among, is
too hasty, he will not give a woman time to say her prayers after she is bed:
your French is with a woman as with an enemy, soon beaten off, but mistress
Artlesse, if you will marry your daughter to the most complete man, let him be
Dutch: they are the rarest men at multiplication, they will do it so readily.


Seon. They be indeed very good Arithmeticians.


Enter Lady Yellow, Mistress knoworth. Mist. Art. Here comes the Ladies: Mistress
Mixum we will depart, they must not know our conference.

Exe. Mrs. Art.
Mist. Mix. A diew kind master Sconce.


Mrs. Mixum. Scon. Adieu min vroen, I have a pestilent mind to this talking
harlotry, I will to her, but if I should obtain the Neapolitan beneach, a
creek ith'backe, or so, from her, 'twould be but a sourvy touch, that for me,
I should be forced to swim ith tub for it, or be hanged by the arms, and
smoked like a bloat herring, I had forgot my precious salve, should I be
served so, 'twere but dressing the weapon that hurt me (which I can have at
any time) and be sound again, ha other donsella's: Madams, they are creatures of
Plush, and Satin, I Will accost them.


Know. This is the gentleman I told you of, I wonder what his quality may be,
our Landlord the Doctor is a much famed man, and surely very honest.


Scon. It shall be so, my English is not complete enough
To hold discourse with Ladies of regard, my natural
Dutch too is a Clownish speech, and only fit to court
A leagurer in: no your French shall do it, and thank
My memory, I am perfest in it, it is your most
Accomplished language, there is scarce a gallant but does woe
His mistress in the mood, but if they should
Not understand me: well I will experce
Me it.

Sconce cringes to the Ladies. Lady. He means to speak surely in cringes.


Scon. Madametres puissant en lecommand. de touts ceurs de cest monde, ie que
sui semond and invite en tant de lieux que ie ne scay ^u aller pour abrir mon
sayn: a un beauty digne de mon acceptance.


Lady Heyday, what is this, how should he know
Who can speak French.

Know. He supposes it, prithee answer him sister.


Scon. Suiuant vostre treschier virtue, Ie sui si liberal
Que ie abadonnerenie and renounce a tout mis biens
Demon vid mon Engine mon alayne mon sang and mon
Pensir (pour ie ne saurioye, que dire) proueior mon
Ceur mon affection tout a vostre plaiseur.

Lady. Aproche's ie ne vou's morderay pas.

Scon. Si ie ne vous fay tratement t'el que
A vons appartient, ie espere que vostre
Noblez te contera de mon bon intention.

Enter Sir Martine, Popingay, and Vrinall. Vrin. There is the Lady you enquire
for.

Sir Mart. Thank thee my friend, there is for
Thy pains, depart.
Nephew stand clear, observe.

Exit Vrinall. Scon. Sily'a chose en mon petit povoir en quoy ie vous puisse
Servir and aider commandes moy librement.

Lady. Vous Este fort and liberal de suparoll monsieur.

Sir Mar. At it so close, so now he wrings her hand,
And she smiles on him: and her sister laughs
At the lascivious posture, that I could
Command a flash of lightning, or usurp
A minute the prerogative of death
That I might force a ruin on them, sudden
As water falls from mountains, yet so wretched,
They might despair and damn themselves, what say they?

Pop. They speak French, I understand them not.

Scon. kisses the Lady. Mart. O that is the ages bawd to lustful contracts,
Hell seize them, may their lips, like twins
In mischief grow together, that their foul breath
May have no vent, least like some poisonous fogge,
It do infect the air.

Kisses her hand. Scon. Per dona mi Madam apre's le's leures le maine.

Sir Mart. Again, why strait,
If I stand still, they will to the very act,
I shall behold my self transformed to beast,
And like an innocent lamb, when the keen knife's
Prepared to slit his wesand never bleat
But in calm silence perish; villain devil
Had thou as many lives as thou have sins.
This should invade them all with the swift rage
Of fire or whirlewinds.

Runs at Sconce, hurts him in the arm, Sconce disarmes him. Lady. Heavens
bless ye
Innocent gentleman: sister my husband.

Know. I fear he has mischiev'd him.


Scon. You think you have hurt me wonderfully I warrant.


Pop. Good sir be more your self.


Laughs. Scon. Give me thy hand, it is but a touch ith arm man, thou art a
valiant fellow, I warrant thee a right twibiller, run a tilt at a man before
his weapon is drawn, your, Lady would not have don't I me sure, but it is no
matter, thou have done me a courtesy, or otherwise I should not take it so
patiently, (I shall by this means experience my precious weapon salve) hold,
thou will fight no more, there is a twibill for thee, thy sword I Will keep till
we next meet, Ladies beso los doights de vostre blanch mains, adieu comrade
remember I am beholding to thee.

Ex. Sconce.
Pop. He Is gone, but has left his hanger behind him.


Lady. Sister prithee speak to him, he has put me in such a fright,
I cannot.

Pop. Sir be not so extremely passionate,
Discourse your grievance mildely, hear her answer,
Then censure justly of her.

Knor. Brot^er ^ admire
A person of your breeding should transgress,
Civility so highly, to at empt
Upon a gentleman, who to my knowledge
Injured you no way.

Sir Mart. He is your champion, and you his Ladies.

Know. How sir?

Sir Mart. His prostiutes I might have said O creature,
Who art so bad, the present age will question
The truth of history, which does but mention
A virtuous woman; with what impudence
Can thou behold me, and a shivering cold,
Strong as the hand of winter, casts on brooks
Not freese thy spirits up, congeale thy blood.
To an ere'lasting le^hargy. The stars
Like straglers, wander by successive course,
To various seats yet constantly revisit
The place they moved from: the Phaenix whose sweetness
Becomes her sepulcher, ascends again
Vested in younger feathers from her pile
Of spicy ashes, but man's honor lost
Is irrecoverable the force of fate cannot revive it.

Lady. Sir it is past my thoughts,
What should incense you to this jealous rage
Against me your loyal wife, when no one blemish
Lies on my soul that can give testimony
Unto my conscience that I have not ever
Truly and chastely loved you.

Sir Mart. Yes just so the green
Willow and shady Poplar love the brook,
Upon whose banks they are planted, yet infect
By frequent dropping of their witherd boughs,
Its wholesome waters; that thou should be fair
And on the white leaves of thy face bear writ
The character of foulness, swallow up
In thy abyss of sin, thy native pureness,
As the high seas that do with flattering curles
Entice the spotless streams to mix their waves
With the insatiate billows, that intombe the innocent rivers.

Lady. O me unfortunate woman.


Pop. Good uncle speak more kindly to her, alas she weeps.

Sir Mar. I see it nephew,
So violent rain weeps or the purple heads
Of smiling Violets, till its brakish drops
Insmuate among the tender leaves,
And with its weight oppress them: these are tears,
Such as distill from henbane full of poison,
And craft as she they come from: tell me woman,
Who have not shame enough left in thy cheeks
To cause a blush, dare thou usurp the name
Of good or virtuous, when these ears can witness
Thou did solicit yesterday this youth,
To fate the ravenous heat of thy desire,
With all the eloquence well worded lust
Could borrow to adorn its painted fow lenesse.

Lady. Was it you indeed? I Am glad I know it dear sir,
Had I the chastest temper, that frail flesh
Could ever boast of, your strange usage of me,
Would undermine it: to forsake my bed,
Before my blood scarce relished the delights
Attending on young nuptials, so that I
Expect no anger from you, if I seek
That from the charity of other men,
Which your neglect (though you in duty owe it)
Will not allow me.

Know. Well said sister.

Sir. Mar. Life she will tell me straight
She will retain before my face some slave,
Some strong backed monster to perform her hot
Desires with able activenesse, the slow
Motion of snayles that carry on their heads
Their shelly habitations to the pace
Of my dull rage, is swift as erring flames,
Which had it not been leaden winged; as sleep,
Ere this had seized the monster.

Lady. Ha, ha, ha, the man is sure distracted, ha, ha, ha,

Pop. Heyday, here is laughing and crying both with a wind,
As boys do, a juglar's but an ass to a right woman.

Lady. Good sir will you walk? the gentleman he is in a terrible sweat, should
he stand still, he may chance catch an Ague.


Know. A Cardus posset were very sovereign for him, I perceive his fit is
coming.


Lady. How do you husband, sweet heart, what not speak? I thought your
jealousy ere this had driven you into France, but now I see you fear to be
sea-sicke, you have found me out it seems; I hope ere long you will provide
Gossips for the child I go with, mark you ducke.


Sir Mar. If I stay, my rage
Will hurry me to mischief, better leave her
To certain ruin, then betray my self
To danger of it, when strong tides meet tides
In a contracted channel, they theirforce,
Resign to the wearing of the troubled waves
A frothier livery, then when Oceans
Encounter with full liberty, the winds
Imprisond in the Cavernes of the earth,
Break out in hideous earthquakes, passions so
Increase by opposition of all scorns,
It Is most opprobrious to be armed with horns.
Ex. Sir. Mar.
Lady. He leaves you here sir as his spy, does he not?
Pray wait upon your master, I suppose he is so.

Pop. Pardon me Madam, he is my uncle.

Lady. Which of his sisters sons are you?

Pop. The Lady Popingaies.

Lady. My cosen Harry Popingay; I cry your mercy sir: your good mother knows,
and grieves I Am sure, to see her brother wrong me as he does: should I tell her
how you dealt with me too, she would chide you soundly.


Pop. Your goodness Madam will forgive it on my submission and sorrow for it.


Know. Weel beg it for you sir.


Lady. Sister he has it, were it possible
To work a reclamation on this man,
From his fond jealousy, I would not wish
A change to be an Empress.

Enter Dalinea. Dal. Madam, my mother does entreat your Ladyships company in
your chamber, Mrs. Mixum has brought the conserves my father did appoint her.


Pop. It Is the same face, or else some Angel does
Assume this shape to mock mortality,
With the true form of beauty.

Lady. Nephew pray see us oftener, and use all means to gain your distracted
uncle from his frenzy, sister shall's walk; Dalinea be it your care to see my
Nephew forth.

Exe. Lady and Knoworth.
Dal. I shall Madam.


Pop. Life, she speaks too
A tempting language, such was our first mothers voice,
While she was innocent, most perfect woman.

Dal. Would you have ought with me sir?

Pop. Yes bright virtue.

Dal. That title relishes flattery for ought you know: I may be vicio us.


Pop. Goodness deludes it self then,
I cannot flatter Lady, you mistake me:
What I shall speak, comes from an innocence
Yet undefild by falsehood.

Dal. Speak quickly, if it concern me, otherwise I must
Entreat a license to depart.

Pop. You cannot afford example of such cruelty
To following Lovers, to deprive my sight so soon
Of yours, for whose least view, the dark Cimmerian, blinded
With continual sleep, would rowse his heavy eyelids.

Dal. Nay, and you begin to run a complementout of breath,
You' l drive me hence indeed: (believe me sir) had I not liked
You well, my modesty would scarce have suffered the least
Enterchange of words (but since it has done) pray be brief,
What tends your conference to?

Pop. I love you Lady
With the religious fancy, that one Saint
Affects another; such a heat as mine
Was that, with which the first who ere knew love,
Had their souls warmed (essential) not as now
The common garb is to adore a lip,
Or any other lineament, but for
The abstract of perfection, which does glory
In being derived from one so good as you are,
Am I become your captive.

Dal. This to me, sounds as the empty whistling of the air
Does in some hollow vault, unspotted truth
Informs my ignorance, there is not a person
In all the multitude of men loves chastely.

Pop. Be so charitable
As to believe I can, who never yet
Knew flame was vicious, my desires retain
Their maiden purity, no other object
Did ere attract my souls unblinded eyes, but your fair self.

Dal. Then I believe you sir,
No man will be so worthless to dissemble
With me, who cannot think but all the world
Intends the same reality that I do:
Yet it is an error, which persuasion scarce
Shall free me from: that every woman ought
To love a man with that indifferent heat
She fancies other women, without sense
Of difference twixt the Sexes.

Pop. Soul of sweetness,
How equally an Angels intellect
Informs her sacred Reason: to love chastely,
Could not have bin defined with juster strictness,
Had we produced the constancy of Swans,
Or never changing Turtles, as our patterns,
(T'had but described chaste love) the Palm that prospers,
(Not but by's fellow) and the Vine that weaves
Of her own leaves a thin, yet glorious mantle
For her naked lover. Do but emblem what
Her truth has utt'red: but resolve me fair one,
Could you affect so?

Dalin. If that were all
Requisite to love, I could; but there is obedience
A Nuptial wreath brings with it, which I fear
My frailty would scarce keep, and to become
Perfidious to a vow were such a sin
As I should quake to think of.

Pop. You allege
Vain difficulties: I perceive your looks
Would be propitious to me, did your will,
Ashamed perhaps to suffer sudden conquest,
Not play the Tyrant with them, and call back
The crimson Nectar from your well-form'd cheek
To guard your heart from yielding: come, let us kiss,
The modest heat proceeding from my lips
Will thaw your soul to softness.

Dal. Away, we may not;
If true -- chaste love had rested in discourse,
I could have been its votary, but a thought
Of any thing beyond it, is to me
Dangerous as sickness: farewell sir.
Ex. Dal.
Pop. Sure some white Cherubim,
Coming to teach the irreligious earth
The ancient truth; in its swift flight to heaven,
Pronounced that happy farewell to the souls
Its music had converted, I Have not lost
In my first trial, like some ventrous man,
Who finds the Indies, though he get small wealth,
Yet he sets forth again, in hopes at last
To lade his winged vessel: I Will return.
That fire's not out, which does in Ashes burn.
Exit.
Explicit Actus secund^s.
Actus Tertius, Scena Prima.
Sconce solus, dressing his weapon. Scon. SO, now it works: the operation I
believe is not on the sudden, and my wound rancles as fast as if he had
run his Rapier through a Head of Garlic, or washed it in Aqua fortis; and
this weapon salve, so much extold byth' Twiball Knights, commended by Mixum,
deified by Vrinall, and adored by my believing self, procures no more
miraculous effect, than if it were unguentum album. Well, I am confident yet,
there is no defect in the ^^guent; my blood, my blood is sure anathemated; carries
some cursed impediment about it, that disannuls the virtue and incomparable
force of the divine s^lve. This Dutch blood of mine, guilty of Bacon grease,
and potted Butter -- Sof, who are these? my Cozen Fortress, General of the
Twiball Knights; and his assistant Pirke, with Mr. Mixum; twere a detriment to
valor to complain before them.


Enter Mixum, Fortress, and Pirke. Mix. Yonder Is your Cosen talking to
himself: pray Gentlemen draw near. Mr. Sconce I brought these friends to
visit you.


Scon. Thanks good Mr. Mixum, Cosen Fortress, and my Diminutive Captain
Pirke; give your hands, you are welcome, very welcome.


For. Health to the Weather-cocke of my Kin, the noble Signeur I^emias Sconce.


Pirke. Propitious, and auspicious be thy stars, man of renown and merit: ha
thy arm in sling my Palmerin: Confusion Captain Fortress, he wears a wound
about him.


Scon. No, no, a touch, a mere touch, a Flea-bite, Captain Pirke.


Mix. Is It not recovered by the salve Mr. Sconce?


Scon. Yes, as good as whole; the weapon salve will remedy it.


Fort. Yes, past all chance it will: twill mundifie and purge your body Cosen:
I use to combat three of four at once, every spring, purposely to be let blood
a little: it does me good all the year after.


Scon. I am very glad of it. But tell me Cosen Fortress, how fares it with the
residue of the blades, the valiant Twiball Knights, the famous brethren, do
they walk in Coat gelt, or all a mode in Dunkirke Cloaks?


Mix. Those fashioned Cloaks I never heard of before: I mervaile my Tailor gets
not a pattern of them; Pray sir, what is a Dunkirke Cloak?


Pirke. Not know a Dunkirk upper garment, a leag^er Cloak; behold my I^, this
Cane, this staff of office; this we style the Millitarie Caster.


Mix. Twill hardly keep a shoure of rain out that.


Scon. Are they confined to Chamber still, for want of Boots, or Linen? I love
to hear of their prosperities.


Fort. Why Cosen they are well, but in the accustomed garb, the frugall
brimme, and petty feather: they expect most carefully thy admittance into our
Order.


Scon. 'Tshall be done after my wedding Cosen* I have got, do hear, sirrah
Pirke a girl of metal, the Doctors daughter Bully, Fortress. Flesh of Milk
and Roses Blade.


For. But Cosen, it is necessary, you inrole your self into the Family before
you wed: our order, like the Knights of Malta, does admit no persons espoused:
but with this difference, if they receive the Order Batchellours, they may then
marry and yet retain the title.


Scon. Say you so Cosen?


For. Certain truth my Io: we met npon our grand Exchange last night, our
place of trade and consultation, and there concluded some decrees, necessary
for supporting our Commonwealth.


Pir. How perdition Captain? how durst you meet without me? or conceit that
decree valuable, which the voice of Captain Pirke has not assented to. Refuse
me sir, the brethren of the Blades shall me their bold confrontment: vengeance
do you take me for a boy, or some Pigwiggin? consult without me?


Scon. Patience, good Captain Pirke, I would feign hear them.


Pirk. He reads his necke-verse, reads them in my presence: Death rob me of the
privilege of my place and dignity Captain, confound you, I could show you
Twibill for it.


Mix. What does this Tom Thumb mean troe?


For. Why sirrah Dandiprat, you might have given attendance.


Pirke. What without a summons, you can send Jack Shirke your Beadle; to
congregate the meaner branches of the Brotherhood, not a Picke-pocket I warrant
you, but had notice of it: and must I be forgotten? by my manhood it is base.


Scon. You have given the Captain too bold a touch Senior Pirke; thou art just
like the Mouse to the Elephant, borne to vex him (...) p^ethee for my sake let
him read them.


Birke. Your sake prevails, or otherwise --


For. Attend then Cosen Sconce; our Orders I Will assure you are such, as the most
envious Justice, nor their Goose-quill Clarks, that smell at new Bridewell, and
Finsbury shall not exclaim on. Imprimis, it is generally decreed.


Pirk. How, generally without me? Fire of Styx this is insufferable.


Scon. Good Captain Pirke, on cosen Fortress.


Fort. That no knight of the Twibill; as Whiskin or allye gentleman shall
presume to lead or convey any of the sisters of the order, viz. Striker,
Cockatrice, or Gynimeg through the watch after twelve, unless he see them
asleep, or be in see with the Constable, under the penalty of being sent to
the house of Correction.


Pirk. Renounce me sir, this order I Will not sign to, it savors of cowardice,
fear to convey a sister through the watch, it is against Our noble institution


Fort. Next it is enacted, that none of the grooms of our wardrobe shall offer
to deprive any man of cloak, coat, or hat, unless it be in the dark, as
they fear to answer it at the next assizes, and be burned in the hand for it.


Scon. Twould be a hot touch for them cosen Fortress.


Fort. Next it is decreed, that the receivers of our rents and customs, to wit
diverse Rookes, and Saint Nicholas Clearkes shall certainly use no more slights
to get more then they can clearly come off with, under penalty of being
carried up Holborne in a cart, and at Tiburne executed, which may tend to the
dissolution of our whole fraternity.


Scon. But have you concluded nothing for the sisters, I long to hear them?


Fort. O yes cosen, we have confinde them to a certain price, a stipend
reasonable, so that they shall not need to dive into pockets.


Scon. They will do that if you would hang them cosen.


Pirk. I do disclaim that order, Captain Fortress. your wisdom should
have well considerd at wha^ charge they are, for coach or hand litter,
specially those of the gentile garb, next their ushers must be maintaind,
paint paid for, clothes, provided and the matron satisfied, these things
considerd, could you be so cruel as to confine them to a price by valor sir,
I am ashamed on it.


Fort. It Is mended by the next order, they are prescribed from wearing Plush and
Satin, unless in peticoats.


Scon. You will not have them like the Jews at Rome wear party colored
garments, to be known from Christians?


Fort. By no means sir, we would have every one take notice of them, but
Marshalls men, Beadles, and Constables, and therefore have ordained that they
shall wear Beaver Hats, Poak'd Russes, Grogram Gowns, or at the best wrought
Taffata, Fox Skin Musses, Moehaire peticoates, Bodkins and Croscloaths edged
with gold lace.


Mix. This is the habit of our Rotterdamians.


Fort. The only shape to hide a striker in: ever while you
Live, your city is most secure from officers, and most
Notorious to gentlemen, they will take up your city ware at
Any rate. Besides while they ^lanted it in plush,
'Twas an abuse to gentlewomen and Ladies, we have er'd in
Questioning them for females of our tribe, and had our pates
Broake for it.

Scon. But Cosen is this edict generally confirmed by all the society of the
Twibillers Knights and Ladies.


Fort. It Is universal cosen, only for Captain Pirkes name, we left a blanke,
there is the decree sir, read it if you please.


Pirk. It Was the safest course to leave a blanke for me, or I had
Blank'd your whole decree! I had by magnanimity.

Scon. Im^rimis, I Captain Furibundo Fortress.


Mix. A fearful name that same.


Scon. Knight great master of the order of Twibill: Lord of no
Cloak, Viscount Ratan, cane and one spur.

Mix. You are but an ill cock of the game it seems.


Scon. Count Freese, gray Felt, and mony-lacke, Duke of Turnbull, Bloomesbury,
and Rotten Row, Lord paramont of all Garden-Alleyes, Gun Ally, and Rosemary
Lane.


Mix. He has more titles then the great Turk^ Proceed sir.


Scon. Chief commander of all Twibills, dangerfeild and whiskins, who will
quarrel in Tavernes with a man, and not fight in the field with a mouse. And of
the residue of the fraternities of husses, diverse dammes and decoyes, sole
sultan and grand signeur, have to the premises set my mighty hand, together
with hands of our trusty and our courageous assistants (this blanke's for you
Captain Pike) Holafernes Make-shift, Rosiran Knockdowne, and twenty six more
of our principal companions of the order.


Fort. Nay there are others too, bu^y not their appellations in oblivion, they
merit memory.


Scon. To which at our command also are subsign'd our most illustrious and
remarkable sisters (they are slit nosed perhaps) (there was a touch for them
cosen Fortress) Donna Iesabella, Garreta, mother of the maids of Lambeth
Marsh, with her conspicuous consort, at the three skipping Conies in the town.
(a touch that) you mean the three Squirrels, you are cunning cosen Fortress,
together with our most industrious servant Pythagoras Pigge.


Pirk. I gave him that name from his transmigration into cast suites, who has
put his petie toes to it, and finally the woman that sings ballads, has her
name trunled at the tail of it.


Mix. I mervaile master Doctor has not set his hand to this.


Scon. Sealed with the seal at arms of our order, viz. Three Rooks volant in a
field sanguine, two broken jugs the supporters, and a Twibill for the erest,
and given the second day of this present month, at our mansion royal, or place
of meeting in the long gravield walks in our usual fields.


Enter Doctor, Vrinall, Freewit, Sir Martine. Sir Mar. Well Master Doctor you will
remember me,
And have an eye unto my nephew, I trust
Her with you. Farewell sir.
Exit Sir Mart.
Doct. Doubt it not good sir Martime.


Fort. Captain Pirke pray retire unto the brothers of our
Society: entreat them to prepare again tomorrow, for
My cosen Sconces enseasement.

Pi^k. Upon compulsion sir, I should refuse, marry on fair entreaty I do
fly, good and high fates look on you.

Ex. Pirk.
Doct. Son Sconce (I Am bold to call you so) how does your at me?


Scon. Indifferent sir, but yet I have not found
That rare effect in the weapon salve you spoake of,
Vrinall I fear since it cured the two sergeants and their
Yeomen, the virtue has been much extenuated.

Doct. It Was your ill dressing the weapon: give me your sword son, this is of
the right salve the welsh Doctor makes, this shall save my credit. (Annoints
the weapon.) Now Vrinall take this weapon, lap it warm in linen clothes, and
lock it in my son, your anguish son will soon be mitigated.


Scon. I have a touch of it already sir.


Fre. I have seen experience of this weapon salve, and by its most mysterious
working known some men hurt, past the help of surgery recovered.


Mix. Mark you that master Sconce, the gentleman may be believed.


Free. Yet I cannot
With my laborious industry invent
A reason why it should do this, and therefore
Transcending natural causes, I conclude
The use unlawful.

Scon. He is unlawfully begotten sir, dares term it so, there was a touch for
him cosen Fortress; I called him son of a whore, and he would take no notice
of it.


Doct. But pray sir, why should it be unlawful?


Free. Cause Conscience and religion disallow
In the recovery of our impaired healths,
The assistance of a medicine made by charms,
Or subtle spells of witchcraft.

Scon. his mother was a witch, says this maid, so there was another touch for
him cosen Fortress, son of a witch, but he understands not that neither.


Doct. Conceive you this to be compounded so?


Free. I Will prove it master Doctor.


Scon. The proof of a pudding is the eating, in your teeth sir, a pudding in
his teeth: you know what I mean cosen Fortress, another touch for him, but
all is one, he has wit in's anger, and will not understand me.


Fort. If he durst blunder for it Cosen Sconce.

Free. Yet to avoid a tedious argument,
Since our contention's only for discourse,
And to instruct my knowledge, pray tell me,
A (...) you not tha this same salve will cure
At any distance (as if the person hurt
Should be at York) the weapon, dres'd at London,
On which his blood is.

Doct. All this is granted 'twill.


Scon. Nay we will grant you more sir (that it will not) and yet prove it, and you
shall prove your self a (so you shall.) There had been another touch for him
cosen Fortress, but I feared he would have understood me now, ere you shall
prove it.


Fort. Silence cosen Sconce, let us hear the whif^ter if he cannot verify his
words, sink me my Jo, he shall taste arm of dangerfield.


Free. Out of your words sir I Will prove it Diabolical, no cause
Natural; begets the most contemned effect,
Without a passage through the means, the fire
cannot produce another fire until
it be applied to subject apt to take
Its flaming form, nor can a natural cause,
Work at incompetent space: how then can this
Neither consigned to the matter upon which
Its operation is to cause effect;
Nay at so far a distance, work so great
And admirable a cure beyond the reach
And law of nature; yet by you maintained,
A natural lawful agent, what dull sense can credit it.

Scon. Very authenticke this, well if the devil have taken the pains to be my
surgion, my arm I fear will be possessed, I feel an evil spirit in it already.


Fort. Respect the Doctors answer.


Doct. Sir, you speak reason, I must confess, but every cause
Works not the same way; 'we distinguish thus:
Some by a Physical and real touch
Produce: So Carvers hewing the rough Marble,
Frame a well polished statue: but there is
A virtuall contact too: which other causes
Employ in acting their more rare effects,
So the bright Sun does in the solid earth,
By the infusive virtue of his rays,
Convert the for did substance of the mold
To Mines of metal, and the piercing air
By cold reflection so ingenders Ice;
And yet you cannot say the chilly hand
Of air, or quickening fingers of the Sun,
Really touch the water or the earth.
The Lodestone so by operative force,
Causes the Iron which has felt his touch,
To attract another Iron; nay, the Needle
Of the ship guiding compass, to respect
The cold Pole Articke; just so the salve works,
Certain hidden causes convay its powerful
Virtue to the wound from the anointed
Weapon, and reduce it to welcome soundness.

Scon. The salve is legitimate again, Cosen Fortress, O rare Doctor


Mix. Nay, you shall hear him tickle the gentlemen I warrant you.


Free. This, Mr. Doctor, is
A weak evasion, and your purities
Have small affinity; the glorious Sun
As it is a general instrument of heaven,
In all its great productions, and the Air
An Elementall agent, naturally
Engender Mettalls in the earth, and Ice
On the self (...) waters: The Lodestone
As it is a simple body, may afford
That virtue to the steel by secret power
Of all-commanding nature. But that this,
This weapon ^^lve, a compound, should affect
More than the purest bodies can, by ways
More wonderful than they do, as applied
Unto a sword a body void of life,
Yet it must give life, or at least preserve it.

Scon. Pish, he talks like an Apothecary to the Doctor.

Doct. You mistake, it does not,
It Is the blood sticking to the sword atchieves
The cure: there is a real simpathy
Twixt it, and that which has the juice of life,
Moystens the body wounded.

Fort. Rare Parac^lsian, thy Annalls shall be cut in Brass by
Pen of steel.

Free. You may as well
Report a real simpathy between
The nimble soul in its swift ^light to heaven*
And the cold carcass it has lately left,
As a loathed habitation: blood, when like
The sap of Trees, which weeps upon the Axe
Whose cruel edge does from the aged Trunk
Dissever the green Branches from the Veins,
Ravished, forgoes his Native heat, and has
No more relation to the rest, than some
Desertlesse servant, whom his Lord casts off,
Has to his virtuous fellows.

Enter Mistress Know-worth. Know. Mr. Free-wit returned again, and in discourse
With Mr. Doctor: I Will not disturb your conference.

Doct. So please your Ladyship we had even done.
I am glad she is come to rescue me.

Scon. There was a touch for him Cosen Fortress, victus, victa, victum, he
looks like a Schoole-boy vanquished at capping verses: hark you sir, repent
your error, and in time you may be saved; you see the virtue of the salve the
Doctor had dressed his Speaking weapon with it. It hurt you, and it has cured
you Beware you fall not into a relapse: there was another touch for him Cosen


Fortress. Doctor give your hand (father I should have said) some famed
Historian, some Gallo-Belgicus shall Chronicle thee and thy salve, there was a
touch for him Cosen Fortress. Come you shall see my Mistress.


Exeunt Sconce, Fortress, Mixum, and Doctor. Know. Mr. Freewit have you yet
found the injured
Woman out, I motioned at last parting?

Free. Truly Mistress, had she bin worthy the seeking, your
Command should not have been protracted, but
'Twere a stain to my own honor to be inquisitive
After a prostitute, and a blot to your
Discretion, should nice judgments know you enjoined me
So manifest a folly.

Know. 'Twas a greater to be the author of her shame,
Whom now you slight so infinitely.

Free. Could I slight her more,
'Twere a due justice which I owe my self,
(In hazarding the forfeit of your love)
Undone by her, but your most serious thoughts
Will sure convert your soul from the intent
Of my most certain ruin, which your last
Discourse perhaps, for trial of my faith,
Seemed to invert upon me.

Know. You mistake; needless are second trialls, when a first
Proves you perfidious; doubtless you confirmed*
Your love to her, with the same sad protests
You Have done to me (yet left her) for her sake,
And in revenge of woman's innocence, martyred by you,
I here to heaven pronounce a sure disjunction
Of our loves and vows for ever.

Free. O reserve that breath,
Which ought like sacred incense to be spent
Only on heaven, or in delivering notes
May charm the world to peace, when raging wars
Or Earth quakes have affrighted it. Confirm't
On no such use, horrid and ominous,
As if it threatened thunder to the earth,
Or would infect the genius of the air
With Mists contagious (as if composed
Of Viper steame) O had you were wont
To be so good, that virtue would have sighed
(At the unwelcome spectacle) if you
Had appeard woman in a passion,
(Though of the slightest consequence) O do not
Renounce that Saint-like temper, it will be
A change hereafter burthenous to your soul,
As sin to one, who all his life time blessed
With peace of Conscience, at his dying minute,
Falls into mortal enmity with heaven,
And perishes eternally.

Know. These words
Have not the effectual Oratory you first had,
When I was confident, as day of light,
Your youth had been as destitute of vice
As of deformity. So a sweet stream,
Whose bubling harmony allured the Birds
To court its moving music, when it mixes
With impure waters, with the noise affrights
The ears, before delighted in it.

Free. This is too severe a Justice, and extends
To cruelty, had some intemperate rage
Purpled my hand in murder (though the guilt
Would have been written in a larger Text
In Conscience black book; yet the punishment
Had not bin half so hideous. I should for that
Have suffered but a temporary pain
At worst; and my truly repentant soul
Perhaps have had free entrance to the place
consigned to penitents, when now, like so me
Manacled Captive, or diseased wretch,
On whom each minute does beget a death:
I like a slow fire by my own soft flames,
With Tortoyse speed extinguish.

Know. Sir, your words are superficial, as a shadow which
The morning Sun produces and black night
Renders forgotten: and no more excite
Belief in me: that what you utter's truth,
Then Mand rakes groans do a conceit of death
In persons resolute* while I have yet
A specious memory left, that once my heart
Tendered you dearly; I would counsel you
First to endeavor to find out that maid,
(If that succeed not) not to think on me,
As one affianc'd to you by a nearer interest then other women
Are that never had conversation with you.

Free. Had a frost, sharp as a tedious winters Northern blasts,
Congealed your mercy, my unfeigned tears
Should with moist warmth dissolve it, mistress you
Approach so near the attributes of heaven,
That had you lived in the superstitious age,
More precious gums had fumed upon your altars,
Then on all female deities. O forgive me,
A rigorous tyrants breath will scarce pronounce
For one and the first crime, so strict a sentence:
You shall not go yet if you will recall it,
Lovers will bless your piety, and sub scribe to your
Superlative goodness.

Know. Pray desist, afford me liberty to retire, I cannot alter my resolution.


Free. Yet reclaim it; some devils spleen has lately fraught
Your breast, and banished thence mild de pity, (bostrous winds,
Force so the gentle and untroubled seas,
To swallow up some ships, its natural calmness
Would have transported safely with their wealth
To their desired harbors) were my thoughts,
Not fixed with that religion upon you
That are my prayers (when I repent) on heaven,
I should not thus transcend the laws and strength
Of manhood, and like some distressed babe
Left by its parent to the desolate woods,
Or airs cold charity, so long implore
A new and holier union twixt our souls,
Then ere had linked them which when you have tied,
Time shall depend like summer on your brow,
And your whole life be one continued youth,
(Such were the springs in paradise) and when
You pass to be a sharer in heavens bliss,
Virgins and innocent lovers spotless tears,
Hardened to pearl by the strong heat of sighs
Shall be your monument.

Know. I shall relent spite of my settled will, if be continue
These moving supplications: Sir because
You shall not blame my cruelty, or judge
It Is for regard of any thing but my honor,
I do forsake you, if ere to morrow night
You find that woman, get her to renounce
Freely her title to you, ^ again
On (...) of your future loyalty
Will stand the trial of your wavering faith,
Perhaps be yours again: you have
Received my utmost meaning,
Exit Kno^.
Free. How I adore
This constancy of worth in her, though
It make against myself, well I must to my task,
That labor's richest that most pains does ask.

Explicit Actus tertius.
Actus Quartus, Scena prima.
Enter Doctor and Lady Yellow. Doct. IT IS a strange humor Madam, and condemns
Your judgment of much indiscretion,
Did I not know it lawful; nay no way
But that for the recovery of your health,
I should not urge it thus, you are lately fallen
Into a desperate melancholy, and your blood
Can no way purge so well as by
Performance of what I have declared.

Lady. Truth sir I weigh not at so high a rate, my life
That to prolong it to an irke some age,
I should destroy my honor, neither do I
Find any such strange sickness raining on me
As you have urged; pray as you love me sir,
Unless you mean to drive me from
The house, repeat this argument no more.

Enter Sir Martine and Vrinall. Vrin. Why look you sir, my master has
Persuaded her as much as lay in him, and
He has a tongue able to cosen the devil: but twill not do,
She is too honest believe it, for your nephew Sir Martine, she
His kept her chamber ever since she came,
None but my self has seen her.

Sir Mar. It shall be so, the holy law of heaven
Made us one individual; the strickt league
'Iwixt man and wife, ought to confine both souls
To a most constant union, injured woman.

Lady. My husband and on the sudden, speak you to me sir.


Vrin. His mouth opend I Am sure, sir the Dutch Gentleman.


Doct. O my son Sconce, come hither Vrinall.


Lady. This acknowledgement cannot
Be serious from him, good Sir Martine
Has your wild fancy not imposed enough,
Temptations on my fraylty that you come after
So many strange indignities, again to delude me.

Sir Mar. It Is misery of customary sinners when they mean
A real truth, then their precedent ills,
Deprive it credit, Madam not that night,
That sacred night which spread its starry wings,
(Like Curtains shadowing the Altar) ore
Our Hymeneall couch, could witness more
Sincerity of indissolving love'twixt us,
Then does this minute, if your soul,
(Which is so passive it may justly challenge
A Martyrs temper) can dispense with pas'd
Absurd distastes, and like a Saint for humane
Condition is too vengefull freely pardon
What I amiss have acted.

Lady. As you are my husband sir, and consequently my head.

Vrin. How many Lad^ies in town are of that mind.

Lady. And ought to be the guider of my youth,
I will not stand on that nice term of honor,
With you whom duty ties me to observe
With more then superficial care, t'injoyne
A penance for your folly; the light smoke
Finds not a surer burial in the a ire
(To whose embraces with ambitious haste.
On azure wings it soared) then has your guilt,
In this forgiving bosom, this pure kiss seals the agreement.

Sir Mar. She offered first too, and me thought she kis'd
As she would eat my lips, the ravenous touch
Sir Mar. starts. Of her hot flesh has seard me up like grass
In summer time, and her foul breath like blasts
Of Southern winds, has quickened my dead fire
Of jealousy, nay raised it to a greater
Heat then my former.

Lady. What ayle you sir on the sudden?

Sir Mar. Viper, toad, out of my presence, ere my just waked
Rage, get to its height, whence like a Falcon towering
At full pitch ore the trembling foul, it will sease on thee.

Doct. Madam it is best to leave him, I fear he is absolutely frantic; Vrinall
look to him, least he act some violence on himself, please your Ladyship
withdraw.


Lady. Soft patience guard my heart: where is no offense, one safely may rely on
innocence.

Exit Lady and Doctor.
Vrin. Why sir Martine, how do you sir? not speak? now by my life, he looks
like a staggerell newly come to his Horns, flings his head just in that manner
they do not touch the seeling, yet Sir Martine: in time they may be three and
four at top, and serve to hang hats and cloakes on in the best knights hall in
town.


Sir Mar. O Vrinall.


Vrin. O Vrinall, what a pitiful noate was there, that very sound has almost
cracked me to pieces: Sir Martine, good Sir Martine what ails you? or rather
what ails your wife, that you hum and haw so after kissing her* her breath is
savory, I dare be sworn she has neither eaten Onions nor drunk Aquavitae.


Sir Mar. O no, she is like a too ripe, so extremely sweet,
She poisons like the honey which small Bees
Suck from the Aconite, the Panther so
Breaths odors precious as the Sarmaticke gums
Of Eastern groves, but the delicious sent not taken in at
Distance choakes the sense with the too muskie savor.

Vrin. You should have kis'd her as the Court fashion is, upon the cheek, but
pray ^ir, why are you so jealous: yet cannot prove your Lady has a trick with
her toe, or turns oftener then an honest woman (if she do) had not you better
like an old Stag, cast the cognizance of your order into the hedge, then like a
wanton Pricket, run f^ll Butte at every one you meet, as who should say; take
notice of my horns. I am ashamed of it so I am.


S. Mar. Do not believe I am? a hideous cuckold.


Vrin. And must you needs cry Cuckoo therefore. There are knights in town who
know their Ladies to be Hens oth'game, and ^ive by tredding, yet like mettle
Cocks they never hang the Gills for it, they are sure fair Gamesters use to
pay the box well: especially at In, and In, (the Innes of Court Butlers would
have had but a bad Christmas of it else) and what care they, so they can
purchase plush, though their wives pay in the hole for it.


Sir Mar. Can there be such monsters?


Vrin. Monsters, they are men Sir Martine, such as you are; only they are
velvet browd a little: but hear me Sir, if a man would venture fair offer to
give a certain knowledge of your wifes honesty.


Sir Mar. Do that, and be my genius Vrinall.


Vrin. You would have an evil Angel of me, I Will tell you sir, my master
intends privately this night to wed his daughter to the Dutch younker S^once,
the house will be atquiet, and your Lady left alone in her chamber, her sister
Mistress Knoworth, being to go to Church with them.


Sir Mar. What of this?


Vrin. Soft and fair Sir Martine, I will in the evening steal you into the
Ladies chamber when she is in bed, come to her, and in the dark, (that's the
only time to deal with a woman) (and as another man) try what you can do
with her: if she consent (the worst) you do but cuckold your self, if hold
out, being a woman alone, in bed, and in the dark having a man standing by her,
you may then conclude her an honest wife, and your jealousy foolish, as your
vexation needless, you think I have no wit now I warrant.


Sir Mar. According as my soul could wish.


Vrin. Why law you then, who is the fooole now? Sir Martine come in the evening,
I will not fail you.


Sir Mar. Nor I hopes of trial, fare you well,
A jealous man has in his heart his hell.
Ex. Sir Man.
Vrin. well knight, if I do not fit your jealous head, let me be sung in
ballads for an erranter coxcombe then your self.


Enter Mistress Artlesse, Mistress Mixum, and Dalinea. Mist. Art. Well said mi^x,
you will not have him: but you had best consider and do as I and your father
would have you: or you shall trudge for it, you shall be his wife.


Mist. Mix. Nay in sadness Mistress Dal. you are too blame, the gentleman is an
honest gentleman, I and a kind man I warrant him to a woman; your mother and I
have made trial of him, and find him of a very good disposition, come chicke
you shall have him.


Mrs. Art. Nay let her choose and be hanged, proud baggage who will refuse a
gentleman of my own choosing, but I Will send him to you and see if thou dare
deny him, for thy life, come Mistress Mixum.


Exeunt Mistress Artlesse and Mistress Mixum. Dal. Was ever innocent virgin thus
betrayed
By cruelty of parents, who for wealth
Have sold my youth to slavery, the cold
Ashes of injurd maids surround my heart,
Or some divine dew, stead of blood replenish
My swelling veins, circle my thought with Ice,
Thou power of chastity, that like the fresh
Primrose uncropt, by any hand, I may
Return my self as pure and white
To earth, as when I came from't.

Vrin. How do you Mistress Dal. alas poor gentlewoman, would they have thee
coverd with a Frisland horse, a Dutch Stallion: now shame upon their souls
that wish it, he is neighing here already.


Enter Sconce. Scon. Vrinall, my cosen Fortress and the rest oth' Knights will
be here presently; pray you prepare the music and the wine, I would not fail
in the most diminute ceremony.


Vrin. Of a most absolute coxcombe, I shall provide them sir.

Exit Vrinall.
Dal. Now begins my horror, the fatal Bell should it proclaim my death, were
spheare-like music to his night-crowes voice; yet I must hear it and retain
my sense, continue subject to a da^ly noise from the ill boding monster.


Scon. Lady or Madamosell, Vfroe or Seniora, what you please, or in what
language to be entitled the Mistress of my thoughts, the complemental garb is
customary, and though I have learned by conversation with the Twibill Knights
to kiss my hand, believe me I had rather bestow my lips on yours; our natural
Dutch contracting is the best, without deceit or shadow, there we only go to
the tavern and be ungue browd, then drunk together. There Is all our ceremony,
and it is lawful marriage too.


Dal. Would you would sir, better consider with your self and ma^ch where your
own customs are observed, my fear my quality will never suite the liking of
your Dutch manners.


Scon. Manners Lady, you mistake I Have none at all; ere we will disagree about
manners, I Will be as clownish as an Upland Bore, foutra, tell a Dutch man of
manners?


Dal. Yet sir have so much charity.


Scon. We detest that worse then the former, it is Papisticall, and was with that
religion banished our reformed Commonwealth: but to our business, pretty
soul, I shall give thee touch mon and get a burger of thee.


Dal. Gentle sir, there ought to be in manhood a divine
Pity, believe me as I tender truth,
I cannot set the smallest of my thoughts
On your ill welcome love, therefore I beseech you
Not to proceed in my unfortunate match
Which will be fatal to us both, for goodness
Have so much mercy on me.

Scon. An excellent touch that, as if there could be mercy in a Dutchman, and
to a woman? if there had been any, the Nuns at Tilmont had not been used so
horribly last summer: why should you say you cannot love me^tis a false touch I
me certain of it, I shall know anon, till when receive your lips in pledge
that no such words shall issue forth of them, adieu Lady, anon we must to the
old touch of Matrimony.

Ex. Sco.
Dal The hand of death
Shall give me first a bride to some dark grave,
Where I will mix with worms before the Priest
Knit so unjust an union, the kind grass
Will sure be green still on my Sepulcher, and spotless
Virgins annually dance a fairy ring about it.

Enter Vrinall and Popingay in disguised clothes. Vrin. Now if you do not
catch a Roach in her troubled waters, I shall conclude you a gudgion: speak to
her; a woman has ever a hole open to receive a man's tale, believe it you shall
have my assistance, and if I do not second you confidently, may my tongue be
cramped, my wit breech'd; and the machina of my invention ruind perpetually.


Pop. Fairest creature.


Dal. Had you said wretched'st, Mistress you had given me
My proper attribute.

Pop. Can there be on earth,
A savagenesse so great as will conspire
To afflict so rich a goodness? yet by your eyes
Adorned by those clear pearls which do transform
Even sorrow to a loveliness beyond
Indifferent beauty, I conceive some fiend
Rested in humane shape (for man would never
Have dared so vile a sacrilege) in hope
By your pure tears, t'extinguish his own flames
Caused this distemper in you.

Vrin. Pish you are long to speed, be
Short and quick, that pleases Ladies.

Pop. I had a younger brother, though not fully blessed
In your sweet knowledge, yet once his tongue
Was his hearts bold ambassador, and delivered
A true narration of his zealous love,
Which is in him so permanent, that when
his ears receive a notice that your faith
Is plighted to another, twill be ^uice
Of balefull hemlo^ke to his brain, convert it
Either to sudden madness or a sleep, cold and erelasting.

Dol. I remember once a nephew of Sir Martines did solicit
That which he termed my love, but I conceived
His meaning rather was to cause discourse,
Then that his strict intention had resolved
His promises performance.

Vrin. Did I not tell you she would come about?

Pop. Trust me Lady, the solitary Nightingale who sings
To her lost honor a harmonious ditty,
Loves not the thorn so dearly, to whose pricks
She sets her featherd bosom, as I me sure
My brother tenders you, the gaudy light
May sooner be obscured by wandering smoke:
Nay the eternal essence of the soul
Become corporeal and revisite earth,
After its flight to paradise, ere he
Descend to variation of his love, could you affect him.

Dal. Had your brother been
Of the same disposition and soft sweetness
That I perceive in you (though this be our
First enterview) there could not have been molded
(Had I been borne to entertain loves heat)
A man that would so fitly sympathize
With my condition, nor whom I should fancy
With more entire perfection.

Vrin. Strike home, and sure the iron's hot already,

Pop. Behold him Lady,
Whose every motion does as from the sphere,
Receive a lively influence from your looks;
The modest silence of the temperate Even,
When zephire softly murmures to the flowers
A wholesome farewell undisturbed by storms,
May sooner rest in one continued night,
Then can my soul in quiet without just
Assurance of your love, which if you grant,
Times native Belman, the shield Organd Cock
Shall cease to carrol^ (...) to the morn,
The ^arely Lark that whispers to the Sun
A constant Augury of a beauteous day,
Shall lose his light plumes in the che^kerd Clouds,
Ere I my resolute chastity* nor can you
Invent evasions to declare my suite,
Since on its grant relyes the only hopes
Of your redemp^ion from the barbarous arms,
Of him you were espoused to.

Dal. This surprise,
And your strong vows would batter a resolve,
Down in a breast that could be flexible
To easy love, but since I cannot frame
My conscience to a warrantable zeal
Toward any man, I Will rather fix my hate
(For that must of necessity accrue
To him that weds me) on a person worthy
Contempt, then on your self, whose wor^^ does challenge
A noble and reciprocal regard
For your affection, blessings on ye sir, think not amiss of me.
Exit Dalinea.
Vrin. Now the curse of a tedious virginity light on ye, you will not be tupped
by a Dutch Ram, a Hausen Kender, a West-fally Bore-pig, now the iniquity of a
swagbellied Hollands Burgers get thee with child of a dropsy, if thou
marriest him, why how now Master Popingay, stricken with a Plannet? it is a female
Star, as changeable as the Moon, go to your chamber, I hear company
approaching, this Dutch Butter-Firkin shall be melted to grease ere he shall
have her, trust to it.


Pop. Passion on passion fall when hopes are spent,
The best of comforts is a forced content.
Exit.
Vrin. So here comes my blades, now plot but hit,
And Vrinall shall be styled the Lord of wit.
Exit.
Enter Sconce, Fortress, and Knights. Scon. Cosen Fortress welcome, welcome
Captain Pirke, valiant brothers, nay gentlemen, then your accoutrements be of
the vulgar cut, be not daunted, it is hereditary to Low Country soldiers to
wear off reckonings, the time shall come the little worm shall weave, and
silken tribute pay to men of service, give me your hands gentlemen, I shall be
one of you anon, but Cosen F^rtresse, what bashful youth is that that dares
not thrust his nose out of his coat, for fear the wind should blow it to his
face, ha?


Fort. It Is flat enough already, this my Jo, nay show thy Phisnomy, h'is our
quondam trusty attendant, but now Knight of the Twibill, Pithagoras Pig.


Scon. Is this the famous offspring of great hog? we should be kindred
certainly, my Ancestors were Bores, give me thy foref^ot sirrah, and tell me
coz, why do not wander into a new skin? this begins to crackle vilely.


Pirk. O it is forwant of basting sir.


For^. No my Jo, he casts his skin but once a year, like the poor snake:
well, he has done our Order special service; but coz, where are the
preparations the vancarriors coz, to the solemnity of your insta^m^nt? renounce
me, if you vilify the institution by disregard of properties, this hand shall
never cross the Twibill ore thy head, nor give thee thy avaunt chevalier, while
thou art mortal my Jo, I say I shall not.


Pirk. No matter sir Sconce, by the head of valor, my self shall dub thee.


Fort. Who you King Twadle? Mushrome you dub him?


Pirk. Yes, I Gog, Magog, I dub him Garantua.


Ent. Vrin. Scon Nay good cosen Fortress, Captain Pirke, this Vrinall I could
e'ne fill him to the brim with curses, but here is my agent; come where are the
musitioners Vrinall?


Vrin. They will be loud enough by and by, I warrant you.


Fort. This is legitimate blood of the Spanish grape my Jo.


Scon. Lusty sack credit me coz, twill give the touch, Vrinall make fast the
door, and leave us, and give us notice if any body approach.


Vrin. What haste this gull makes to cheat himself in private, must the
music enter?

Exit Vrin.
Fort. No by no means, weel call to them through the door, varlet avoid.
Now coz, to begin our ceremony; first, drink to me.

Scon: I like it well when it begins with drinks, it is a sign twill end
merrily; this cup is abominable to little, one can scarce wet his whistle out
of it, it shall be this goblet, a vostre grace, coz Fortress.


Fort. Sir Pithagoras we do create you skinker, it shall go round my blades,
you shall dible in liquor of account; here brother Make-shift.


Make, Gramercies Captain.


Pirk. Choke you sir, learn manners, offer to drink before betters, it is an
affront to seniority, destroy me if I can suffer this, no forsake me Captain I
cannot.


Scon. There was a touch for you brother Makeshift, but good little Pirke be
patient.


Make. This Preface is very Cannonical my Io, nay, I shall learn the phrases
instantly.


Pig. Have you all had it brothers?


Pig. All but my self Sir Holofernes.


Scon. Who my coz Pig, off sup off thy wash my Jo, at worst thou can but be
swine-drunke; but coz, shall we dispatch? I long to be instald.


Fort. I now we will to it, come hither Captain, sing the hymn preparatory to
Knighthood, but wet your pipes first, Ganimed, they will squeake the better.


Scon. An admirable touch this, what is next troe?


Song. Fort Now coz Sconce, our Order does constrain us to a frisk, a dance
about you, as the Fairies tred about their great King Oberon.


Pirk. But can this music play the Twibill dance, none else will satisfy.


Scon. Music you must play the Twibill dance he says, dance so while.


Dance. They dance, the wine shall tread a sink apace into my belly, you have
lost one of your best heels cosen.


Fort. No me Jo, it was off before the ceremony is half accomplished, you are
our wardrope keeper, brother Knock^downe have you brought the vestments of our
Order?


Knock. Fuse Captain not I.


Pirk. Rot me sir, you would be made to fetch them.


For. How, not our robes of honor the ensigns of our cheval^y?


Knock. Sink me, sir you know they are in tribulation.


For. Hell take the Broker: we must perforce employ one of our own suits.


Knock Take my Buffe Jerkin Captain.


Make. Death keep it on, you will show your dirty shirt.


Pirke. Found you sir, you lie: I fathom in your guts, he has none on.


Make. How, son of foul Adultery, the lie?


For. What do you blunder, whi^^lers Pigge, are you grunting too: shall I whet
my Twibill on your bones mips of debility?


Scon. Nay, Cosen, Gentlemen rather than you shall fall out, I Will be content to
be dubbed in my own clothes: nay pray you Gentlemen.


For. It Is against order, and we must observe ceremony.


Scon. O by all means Coz.


For. First then receive this cap of maintenance.


Scon. Cap of Maintenance do you call it? I will maintain when this old Cap
was new, 'twas a Dutch felt, but now it is nine degrees below a straw Hat; I do
not like this touch: but Coz I shall have my Bever again I hope?


Fort. How? suspicious my Io: Brother Knockdowne disroab his neck of this old
linen, savours of a winding sheet: this is Decimo Sexto, fears no rumpling:
Now Cosen Sconce, you must discuss your doublet.


Scon. That will be damned instantly; pray heaven my skin escape.


For. Here sir, receive this Military Cassocke, 't has seen service.


Scon. 'Thas been shot through both the Elbowes; this Military Cassocke has I
fear, some Military hangbyes: this Twibill Knighthood is but a lousie Order,
would I had he're meddled with it.


Fort. Now you appear something above an Embrio: Makeshift help to untrusse
his breeches.


Scon. I shall be whipped instantly: But Cozen Fortress, is there no redemption
for my Breeches?


Pirke. Sum me Captain, it is not requisite he should put off his Breeches.


Scon Thanks good Captain Pirke, it was a friendly touch that


Pir. May not his transitory money serve to excuse his breeches?


Fort. To him it may.


Pir. A Twibill Knight ought to regard no money, but the glistring steel.


Scon. Well, since it must be so, there take my money.


Knock. Paw sir, you lose the privilege of the Order, if you respect your
money.


Scon. Now do I look like -- as if I were new come from the Lottery: or what
say you Sir Holofernes, to the Picture of the Prodigal in the painted Cloth?
Sure I have now performed all the Ceremonies; if not, I me sure I have nothing
else left to perform withal.


Fort. So, now kneel down, while thus I thee create: Ieremia^ Sconce, Knight
of the order of Twibill. Now avaunt Chevaleire.


Omn. Health to our worthy Brother, Ieremi^^ Sconce, Knight of the Twibill.


Fort. But brothers, there is Sack yet to be drunk, in Celebration of this
Knighthood,


Scon. I like this drinking heartily; there is some goodness in it: will you
begin, my Captain General; I Will call you so now.


Fort. Pythagoras, fill his Bowl up. Capt. Pirk this Cornucopia To my
Leiftenant Generals health: I Will call you so now.


Scon. A place of Mark and Charge that.


Pirke. Man of valor, respect this Cup to the health of our Leift, General.


M^rk. A vous brother Knockdowne.


Knock. Here Sir Barrabas.


Scon. Altogether gentlemen, a health Musicians, sound. Gentlemen all tres
humblement serviture vostre: I ha done you right.


Fort. Expect me Io; heart of my father, you must for consummation of your
installment, drink a cup a piece to each of us.


Scon. It Was my intention General: to you all in general, help Pith. let it
be be two Captain, it is pity to put so many worthy men in a pint pot.


Perk. Soul of my valor, you are shipped sir, you must drink five together.


Scon. You Are wanton Captain, a wag upon my Knighthood, you mean to measure
the profundity of my belly, twill be a hard task to do it to a Dutchman --
look you Captain.


Fort. Thou shall be my Bacchus Io, he drinks as if he had eaten Pickle
Herring.


Scon. This Cup was as deep as Fleet Street Conduit. Sound me my Io, I have
made a new River in my Belly, and my Guts are the Pipes: The Other cup good
wreckling, virtue shall be virtue still, so long as I can stand Captain.


Fort. That will not be long I hope.


Enter Vrin. Scon. This Collar spoils my drinking, or else this Sack has
horseflesh in it, it rides upon my stomach. O Vrinall, I Am a Knight of the
Twibill honest Vrinall.


Vrin. Take heed you will crush me sir to pieces. Gentlemen yonder are the
Constables at the door to apprehend Captain Fortress.


Scon. Some more sack sirrah, I shall be married anon.


For. That Is I, it is for the linen brothers: Hell my Io, how shall I escape them?


Scon. More Sack sirrah, the the other touch sweet Pig, the the other touch.


Vrin. There is no way but one sir, they have beset the house; my Master is
persuading them. Follow me, I Will by a back way set you safely out with your
company.


For. Noble Vrinall: come Blades here is purchase for us.


Exit Vrinall cum Kn^ghts. Scor. This is but four Cups captain Cosen Pigge.
Skinke my parting Cup, and then I me gone: ha! where be you Gentlemen, I am not
blind, or play you at Boe-peep? they are gone, this is a pretty touch, my
touch my Io, with my money and Clothes, a pretier touch still, let me see,
they have left some Sack behind them, there is my comfort yet.

E^t. Poping. and Lovring in woman's cloa^hs. Who Is this? my wife that must be.
Come hither wife, thou see the worst of me
I am but drunk: Kiss me Borankee: never fear, I will not spoil thy gorget.
Hark in thy ear my Io, shall I have a gentle touch? twill do no harm, we
are to be married anon thou know; I shall get wise children on thee.


Lo^. What would thou ravish me libidinous Swine? Strive, and thou dyest.


strikes up his heels. Scon. It Was an unkind touch that, my Io, you might have
fallen under me, 't had been the fitter place for a woman, (pray help me up
again.


Lov. Yes, to thy death, if thou deny to perform what I enjoyne thee.


Scon. How, kill a knight of the Twibill, and in the Ensigns of his own
Order, ere it shall be said to the disgrace of Knighthood, that any of the
fraternity was killed by a woman, I Will do any thing: Lead on, I Will follow you.


Pop. Thus they must strive*
Who in loves subtle Merchandise will thrive.

Exeunt. Explicit Actus quartus.
Actus Quintus, Scena prima.
Enter Doctor, Vrinall, Mrit, Artlesse, and Mris. Mixum. Doct. THis stealth was
unexpected, it is almost
Beyond belief, my daughter should thus change
Her perverse humor, and embrace his love
Which when I motion'd to her, the dark shade
Seemed not a greater enemy to blessed light
Than she appeard to it: and that she should
Cosen my hopes, and without me her mother,
Or any friend resign her will to his,
And strike the match up, puzzles my best faith,
Though I rejoice at it.

^rin. You have reasons sir to do so, your daughter had more wit then you
expected, it is the quality of maids, to deny what they desire: had you but seen
how nimbly she trod over the threshold; you would have sworn she had been
mad of the match: I stood and heard him ask her: shall we go to the Church
(...) not too late (...) ^oo late to do well replied she again: (though it were
at midnight) and then the Dutch you (...) took her up into a (what do you
call it) (...) (and heaven speed) away they went, marry to what Church, he is
gone I know not, only I heard him swear he would not (...) at Pencridge.


Mrs. Art. And why not; it is an ancient Church, and all old things must not be
cast away* there has been many an honest couple given to the lawful bed
there, so there has.


Vrin. No matter for that, he protested he would be marryd in a Tavern ere
that pencridge, there is no drink nere it; but at the Pinder of Wakefield, and
that's abomi^able, and he has vowed to season their bargain with a cup of Sack
ere they return.


Mist. Art. He will not be drunk on's wedding night I hope; my daughter
would have a sweet bedfellow of him, if he should.


Vrin. There is another loving couple gone with them too for company, who will
be man and wife if the Priest say Amen to it.


Doct. who are they of our knowledge?


Vrin. O yes sir, it is Master Lovering, the attendant to Master Know^rth, and
Sir (...) Niece that came but yesterday.


Doct. Is It possible? it was some ^lie policy of her Uncles to bring her hither,
Master Lovering knew her before it seems.


Vrin. Too well I fear sir, they would not have marryd in such post haste else.


Mrs. Mix. Well Master Doctor, I hope my gloves shall be better then the
ordinary, I had no small hand in this match, you know.


Doct. It Is nine a clock at least: twill not belong ere they return, wife pray
go in and see all things in readiness for their lodgings.


Mist. Art. They will have more stomachs to their beds then to their suppers.


Doct. To morrow we will celebrate their nuptial feast: Vrinall be you careful
of the doors* let none come in but our own company.


Vrin. I Will lock them up, and keep the keys my self sir, Mrs. Mixum your
husband is with them, and in his absence I would desire a word with you.


Mrs. Mix. I love to talk with any man in my husbands absence; sweet Vrinall I
will fulfill your pleasure, will you go Mistress?

Ex. Vrin. Mrs. Art. and Mrs. Mix.
Vrin. So now have at her.


Doct. Have I not plotted finely? has my brain
not won the laurel garland the fa^^d breath
That wafts the honor of deserving wits
Among the humorous multitude (as (...)
As it speaks conquering triumphs) shall proelaime
My politic merit, who have raised my self
From worse then no name in the judging world,
To an indifferent wealth, which though^ ve g^t
By ways sinister, such as err from truth:
Nay might incur a punishment no eyes
Has ere discerned them, but with wonder how
I should atchieve such fortune, now complete
In this alliance.

Enter Lady Yellow and Knoworth. Lady. Sister, let us to our chambers and to bed,
That time approaches.

Doct. Your good Ladyship (I hope) will honor me so much
As for an hour to dispense with rest*
And see my bride in bed.

Lady. Your bride good Master Doctor, who should that be?
I understand you not.

Doct. My daughter Ladies, that to me
And all the house seemed so averse from marriage,
Is this night stolen forth with younker Sconce,
And is by this time wedded to him.

Lady. Beyond wonder, well sir,
We Will have her bride garters, it shall go
Hard else, sister could you have thought it?

Doct. You may both credit it, instantly they will return, and
Then I Will wait upon you.
Exit Doctor.
Lady. I pity the p^ore girl,
That she should be so sudden in her choice,
Enthrall her soul in the manacles of fate,
(For such are nuptial bonds) (...) sister
Inforces me to (...) her (...)

Know^ How equally we two^
Divide true, sorrow sympathi^e in grief,
As in our blood and nature: sister you
When your affectionate fancy ^ix'd your heart
Upon your husbands love, had no suspicion
Of his unmanly jealousy, and I
When I c^nfin'd my love to Free (...) breast*
Judged him as void of falsehood, as the spring
When it has rested in green tobes the Earth is
Of bare nakedness, but we are both
Deceived by our cred^lity*

Lady. For you, discretion may (...) you from the care
Of his affection, you are free (as light)
(Which in the darkest night retains some splendour)
From the obedient slavery, due to marriage;
But I no burne-markd captive is engaged
With more officious ^eale to serve his Lord,
Then I my husband, I must either perish
Like the chaste ice, when from a Christ all Rock,
It feels a sad conversion into foul
Corrupted waters, by his jealous flames;
Or break those ties whose dissolution
Would betray my innocent virtue to a ruin,
Sure and eternal.

Know* But yet counsel me,
I love this man so that if honor would
Dispense with his offense, I should forgive him,
And take him to my bosom

Lady. Alas you cannot,
What noble soul (though halse starved) would be fed with
Base reversions, conscience too forbids.
Enter Vrin. The supplantation of another, sister strive to forget him

Vrin. Mrs. there is a gentleman without, this knocked for entrance as if he had
been a Constable, his business is with you, and his name Free^it; I told him
you were in bed and he swore he would come to you through the door, shall I
admit him?


Know. This is his last night, his business carries weight, pray let him in.
Be now propitious Love: is any with him?


Vrin. There is enough of him, unless he made less noise. I Will send him to you.


Lady. Sister, now give him his latest answer, and resolve
Upon some choice more happy: here he comes.

Enter Freewit: Know. How, as a Bridegroom?
Decked with the Ensigns of young Nuptials,
A wreath of Flowers, and Bays, and yet me thinks
His hand displayes a Willow: what should this Emblem?
Master Freewit we scarce expected you thus late.

Free. You Will please to afford my manners an indulgent pardon,
For pressing to your presence thus: but it is
Perhaps our extremest enterview, and so
May challenge the prerogative of excuse,
For the audacious error.

Know. Would I could, with as much safety to my honor, grant Remission to your
other fault.


Free. My thanks, are humble debtors to you for it, Mistress,
The nimble minutes have with crafty theft,
Stolen time away, reduced your limited hour
To an unwelcome period: I have sought
With the same diligence good men seek heaven,
What you enjoined me, but the rain that falls
In Summer time upon the parched dust,
May easier be restored to the moist Clouds,
Then she to my discovery. Wherefore since
Her loss is certain, and the loss of you
Depends on her, to satisfy your soul
That I have man about me, I am come
With the same confidence your scorn has taught me,
To tell you, I as lightly prize your love,
As you have valued mine^ nor can you blame me, since 'twas your own desire.

Know. Credit me I^me very glad on it: but pray tell me sir,
Why yo^ come thus adorned with Nuptial wreathes
Into my presence? is it to invite me to your wedding, or expression
Of your contempt, I have not merited so harsh an usage.

Free. Neither: This branch of forsaken Willow I resign
To your own wearing, that when after times
Shall know our ^^tuall parting; 't may report,
That we were both forsaken, though we sever
With the unwillingnesse that flourishing ^rees,
Divest themselves of greenenesse, yet no blemish
Of harsh unkindnesse shall defile our thoughts:
We'll part fair, though for ever.

Lady. This gentleman seems so noble, I repent that I advised her from him.


Free. This Laurel wreath, that circles
My uncaptiv'd brow, I do justly challenge,
Since I have conquered the greatest enemy,
Mankind can combat (passion) yet the dew
(That on the red lips of the blushing Rose
Bestows a weeping kiss) leaves not so sadly
The amorous flower, that curles its purple leaves,
To hide it from the Suns enforcing Rays,
As do my thoughts your memory, which did once
Preserve it as inviolable, as heaven
Does the bright souls of innocents.

Kno. You might
Have had so much humanity, as to have kept
Your purpose to your self: though your loose sin
Constraines my honor to renounce your love,
I would not have my ears (...) with this
Relation of your contempt, for so
Trust me I take it Freewit.

Free. Why, good Madam? can you condemn my too officious truth,
Of a conceit of falsehood, when the spring
Of my Revolt, derives its head from yours.
You for a trivial, and scarce known offense,
Could without scruple banish me your heart,
When Angels should, for a desertlesse kiss
From an impure lip, have renounced their bliss,
Ere the most urgent reason of suspect,
Should upon me have practiced a contempt
Of you: Had not your breath e^pos'd a mist
Of infidelity before the eyes
Of my clear seeing soul, and left it blind
As the black Mole, that like a Pioner digs
A winding Labyrinth through the earth to find
A passage to the comfortable light,
He never has fruition of.

Lady. But sir, suppose my sister did it for a proof,
Of your affection, and now should reclaim
The harsh prescription she imposed, you would not
Continue in this temper.

Free. Madam ever. The Cedars juice, whose bitter poison gives
The most strong body unavoyded death,
Preserves the Carcass by its dying force,
Void of corruption: so has dealt her love
With me; its reclamation struck me dead,
And since my Exequies has kept my heart
From entertaining a corrupt regard
Of future slavery,

Enter Doct. Vrin. Mris. Artlesse. Vrin. They are entered, sir, I heard Mr. Mix.
say as I let them in, that they were married.


Enter Mixum with a Tore^, Popingaies in Sconce his clothes, leading Dalinea:
Lovering leading Sconce a^tir^d in Poping. woman's clothes. Mix. Nay, come an
end gentlemen and your wives, Mr. Doctor will not be angry though I have usurped
his office, and been the father to his daughter.


Doct. You are not a cunning baggager you would none forsooth when I proposed
it to you; but when the fit came on you, you could then run madding, and
never let the Sexton ring the Bell to give us notice: had it been any one but
Mr. Sconce, you should have fought a portion; but since to him, we pardon it:
take her son, heavens give thee joy of her.


Vri. You would scarce say so, knew you as much as I do.


Pop. We thank you sir, and rest your dutiful children.


Lad. Ha^ my Nephew Popingay!


Doct. Mr. Popingaies. Sir (...) Nephew! I am abused, undone, my daughter's
cousend Vrinall, a (...) put on me, Mr. Popingay to wed my daughter.


Pop. ^ was with her own consent Sir, and she my wife by your free gift.


Mrs. Art. Your wife, your whore she is as soon, she is Master Sconces wife,
and that you shall find, so you shall, let me come to the baggage husband,
(...) her eyes out.


Doct. (...) he shall enjoy her, I Will spend the best part of my wealth he shall
not have a penny portion with her, depart my house I charge you^ vrinall call
in my neighbors, ere (...) he used thus*


Vrin. (...) I know you and your ways.


(...) (...)


Vrin. Go to, be patient, then give this gentleman your daughter; nay be
friends, and love him too, or all shall out.


Doct. Thou will not betray me villain?


Vrin. But I shall discover you and your practices, nay to the Justice,
This gentleman is the same Sir Martin brought hither as his Niece.

Doct. Plots upon plots against me.


Vrin. But the great one is still behind: if you will be friends quickly with
them, so; if not, your impostures all come out.


Doct. Is it even so? well since I am ore-reach'd.
Better sit down in peace, than with disgrace:
Mr. Popingay consideration of your just desert,
Now his persuasion has suppressed my heat,
Enjoins me to forgive your loving theft*
Accept my daughter with as good a heart
As she is mine: come hither wife, say you so too?

Mr^s. Art. Nay, since you say it, it must be so.


Pop. Humbly I thank you: such another gift,
Should Nature offer all her precious store,
Could not be given Mortality: but truly sir*
I had much ado to win her.

Dal. You have me now;
But I profess until we came to be
Conjoined in the Church, I took you for Mr. (...), but now rejoice
I was deceived so, I shall study to love you^

Doct. Now you name, where is Mr. Sconce?


Scon. It Is my cue now. O father I me here they have given me a touch, a very
scurvy touch, I am a brother of the Twibills, and I am married too, but I need
not fear being a Cuckold.


Vrin. Mris. you know the Gent.


Know. My servant Lovering married to Mr. Sconce!
You Will get brave boys I doubt not.

Scon. I and wenches too; come hither, we will be man and wife, that is
certain, nay and lie together, so we will, you shall behave your self well
enough like a woman: but that you have a (...) ^^pediment for-bearing Children:
but give me thy hand, shal's be drunk together?


Vrin. He is scatoe sober yet I think.


Scon. ^e tell you father, ere I* went to the Church I had gotten a touch in
the 'Crowne, the Twibil Knigh^^ (...) my (...) had made me'drunke, and got my
(...) by these I know not: But ha, let me see, this should be my suite, it is it,
by valor it is: do you hear good man Fox, how crept you into this Lions
case?


Pop. What means this new married man?


Scon. Do you jeare me, with a touch of that? hark you husband, Though I be
your wife, you shall not hinder me from claiming my own Breeches. Mistress a
word with you too you put a gentle touch upon me did you not? But I shall know
you hereafter, I Will say no more, and touch you boldly for it.


Lov. You Are very merrily disposed Sir: had it not been to have done Sir
Martines Nephew, I should not have been fooled so. I Will try his temper though.


Know. No matter Lovring thou art a Gent.
And since I am resolved from Master Freewit,
That heel not have me now, (though I were willing)
To toote the least remembrance of him
Out of my breast, by this my happyer choice,
I Will marry thee.

Scon. But let him marry you though if he dare, i will sue the Statute of Bigamy
upon him, he shall be hanged for being double married.


Free. In this one act
She only appears woman, all her Saint,
Speak her a Saint. I did not think her heart
Could have resumed (though than rejected me)
A baser choice, Sir you have good Fortune: Mris
I will not wish you ill success in your
So sudden Love: but it was eruell in you
To give away your soul, (as in despite)
In my loathed presence: yet to show how much
I prize your satisfaction, I resign^
My interest in you to him, and thus freely
Bestow him on you: will you have him Lady^

Pulls of Loverings Periwigs, he is discovered to be Marth^. Lady. Heaven
bless me sister, this is the same maid
Whom Master Freewit is reported to have
Got with Child: this is strange^

Free. Nay, be not amazed Mistress it is she:
You had best call her to a strict account
How long it is since I lay with her.
(...) Freewit, what means this mad delusion?

Scon. My wife turned a woman indeed: this is a touch indeed, I had best be^
gone, for fear she challenge me.


Vrin. O stay your patience good Mr. Sconce.


Free. Now let heaven, and all that can be titled good beneath
Divinity, conjoyne to frame a piece
Of virtue great as this; yet be deficient
In the achievement* for some c^^^ing Artist
To draw her in this posture (to be placed
(In Alablaster, white as her own figure)
Or some green meade or flowery valley, where
Posterity of Virgins yearly might
Offer a tear to the blessed memory
Of perfect feminine goodness. Let me dye,
Gazing on you and I shall fly to heaven
Through your bright eyes.

Doct. Sir, what means this ecstasy?


Free. I Will tell you, and Mrs trust each word*
As the just accent of Oraculous truth:
Knowing your and e^t love to me, I feared
It might embrace a change, and therefore shaped this woman^
In the habit of a man got her unknown to you,
Preferred to serve you: (which she could not have bin without
Discovery, in her own shape) not too'^^-looke your life.
Or watch your actions, but to raise report
That I had bin false: so to try if that
Would stagger your resolve, which I have found^
So noble, that the happiness of Fates,
Can give no more addition to my bliss.
Madam beg you my pardon.

Know. O sir you have it, and I my best of wishes, but why did you
Employ a woman thus dis^^is'd suppose
She had been got with child you must
Have been the father of it.

Free. I knew she was too honest, and beside,
I put her to the acting often because
She being the accuser of me for her self
Might without the least seruple of (...)
Free me from her own calumny, nay here is another,
Can witness this for truth.

Know How Vrinall Master: Doctor's man turned to (...) Mr. Freewits man, and
Marthies brother?


Vrin^ So it appears by the story Mrs. I am glad sir you put my sister in this
disgu^se, she has got a good husband by the shift, take your wife sir, she is
no worse a woman then my own sister.


Scon. But let me see and feel you better, it is no periwigge this but are you
my husband, a woman; wife?


Live. I your wife am sir.


Sc^n. Master Doctor you wish me well I know, I have married here I know not
whom, you have excellent salves and unguents sir.


Doct. They are at your service all.


Scon. Thank you good Mr. Doctor, have you never a one that will eat off the
wen of manhood, make all whole before that will eunuchise a man, I would ^aine
be a Her maphrolite, or a woman to escape this match, I do not like it


Enter Mrs. Mi^^um. Mris. Mix. Help gentlemen, help Mr. Doctor, yonder is a man
would ravish me whether I would or no, nay killed me, I think he has pulled out
the longest naked weapon, O there he is.


Ent. S. Mar. drawn. S. Mar. She shall not escape me were she
Fenced with fire, strumpet thou die.

Doct. Who Is this, Sir M^^tin, what do you mean sir?


Mris. I, this is he Thomas do you see what a terrible thing he has got? was
that sit to use to a woman? I was but laid in the next room, to sleep, and he
would have done something to me so he would had not I been the honester
woman.


Lady. Is It so Sir Martine? I have now just cause
To suspect your loyalty, and that your fond
Jealousy proceeds out of intemperate lust,
Could I not serve, but underneath my nose
You must be rioting upon another?

Sir Mart. Shame and confusion sease me.


Vrin. You may see Sir what comes of your jealousy, but fear not Sir, your
wife will pard on it, there is no harm done.


Mrs. Mix. But there might have been, had not my honesty been the greater.


Lady, Well Sir martine, though you have injurd
Me most infinitely, I do re^^t all if you will protest
Nere to be jealous more.

S. Mar. Amasement and my shame hinders my utterance,
Let me breath in sighs my true repentance,
And henceforth
That jealousy in man if it be injust
Is ill, nay worse then in a woman's lust.

Know. But pray you brother, who brought you hither?
We shall tejoyce to have you at out wedding,
And see this reconcilement.

Vrin. I Madam, I; under pretense to have attempted his wife, but I sent him in
to Mrs. Mixum, who I knew would fit his turn.


Mrs. Mix. And so I could have f^^ed him as well as another woman.


Scon. Brother Vrinall you are a ^^ave, brother Vrinall, and have showd all a
^^^ehing touch.


Vrin. No sir I saved you from being cozend, my sister shall have some portion,
here is a hundred pieces in this pu^^e.


Scon. Sink me my ^o, my own purse.


Vrin. It, is indeed Sir, I got it from your 'Twibill brothers, and this your
watch too, and your cloths which Mr. Popingay wears, by locking them into a
room, and threatening punishment, if^ they denied, the blades shall now resume
freedom* this key will let them out, come forth gentlemen, he^e is your
brother Master Sconce.


Enter the (...) Knights. Scon. Captain general, give thy hand bully,
Captain Pirke, my cosen Pig, and all of you; though you would have cheated me
it is no matter, you shall dance at my wedding, and be drunk too, my Joe, you
shall.


Pirk. Confusion rot the bones of Vrinall perdition shall slay him;


Free. Madam I hope we shall keepeour nuptial feast with Master Doctor.


Know. As you dispose it sir, I have resigned my will to yours.


Pop. Uncle I hope you will pardon me, that I deceived your expectation in
watching my Aunt, she is too ver^^ous: father your blessing, and then we are
happy.


Doct. Take it.
Thus all are pleased I hope: what this night cannot
(For celebration of these feasts) perform,
To morrow shall, and from this (...) I
Renoun^e all ways sinister to get (...)
Things that in the p^riod prosperously^ succeed,
Though cros'd before, are acted well indeed.

FINIS.

