Meditations upon the hundred and sixteen Psalm Very profitable for all
Christians. With An Application to the present times, showing the true Use of
our late Deliverance.

By THOMAS GIBSON Minister.

Psalm 18. 48, 49. O my Deliverer from my enemies, even thou have set me up
from them that rise against me, thou have delivered me from the cruel man.

Therefore I will praise thee, O Lord, among the nations, and will sing unto
thy Name.

Proverbs 24. 21. My son, fear God, and the King, and meddle not with them
that are seditious.

For destruction shall rise suddenly, and who knovveth the ruin of them both.

AT LONDON Printed by VALENTINI SIMS 1607.

TO THE RIGHT HO nourable, his singular good Lord, the Lord HARINGTON, Baron of
Exton. And to the right Honorable, the Lady HARINGTON, his wife, my very good
Lady: Thomas Gibson wishes all true felicity, continuance in health, and
increase of Honor, and graces eternal.
MOst worthy and true is that saying of Solomon (right Honorable) He Prou.
26. 27.
that diggeth a pit shall fall therein: and he that rolleth a stone, it shall
return unto him: as if he should say, The treacherous dissembler, and
deceiptfull person, shall feel that mischief which he prepared for another.
For, even as sometimes it comes to pass, that the pit which a man diggeth to
catch his neighbor in, takes his own foot: and that the stone which aman
casts upward to hit his neighbor therewith, falls upon his own head. So
the evil which the wicked person prepares for the innocent, on a sudden,
contrary to his expectation, returns upon himself. A like saying has David
in the Psalms, Behold, Psalm. 9. 14.
says he, the wicked shall travel with wickedness, for he has conceived
mischief, but he shall bring forth a lie: he has made a pit and dug it,
and is fallen into the pit that he made: his mischief shall return upon
his own head, and his cruelty shall fall upon his own pate. And in another
place, the same Prophet Psalm 37. 12.
says thus, The wicked practices against the just, and gnasheth his teeth
against him, but the Lord shall laugh him to scorn, for he sees that his day
is coming. The wicked have drawn their sword, and have bent their bow, to
cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of upright
conversation: but their sword shall enter into their own heart, and their bows
shall be broken. And herein David spoke upon his own experience, How often did
Saul purpose and attempt to kill him? how often did he devise and plot to cast
him into the hands of the Philistines, to be slain ^y them? ^ut David always
escaped, and Saul himself, at the length, was ouerthrown by these enemies, and
miserable end^d his days. Haman Ester 3. 9.
purposed and plotted the death of Mordecai and the poor Jews, he had
authority from the King, Letters were sent by the Posts into all ^rouinces,
to ^co^^ out, kill, and destroy all the Jews, both young and old, children,
and women in one day: but the Lord so provided, by the means of good Ester,
that Haman himself was hanged upon the gallows he had prepared for others.
Daniel his accusers procure him to be cast into the Lions den, but the Lord
preserves him safe from the rage of the Lions, and his accusers are cast into
the den, and devoured of the same Lions. And thus he that lays a stone in
his neighbors way, shall stumble thereon: he that lays a snare for another,
shall be taken in it himself: he that works evil, shall be wrapped in
evil. Sibi parat malum, qui alteri parat malum, He prepares evil for
himself, that prepares evil for another. Therefore, says one, this is the
mercy and goodness of God, to give such nature to subtle devices, that the
nets and snares, are turned upon the deuisers and workers of them, that they
should cease to hurt the innocent, and their friends, or devise any
mischievous plotte against them.

Perillus gave to Phalaris King of the Argentines a Bull of brass, into the
which, men being enclosed alive, they might be bruned, that so the Bull would
utter a voice. The King first burned this cunning workman in that Bull, that
he might have experience whether it was so as he said or no: whereupon the
Poet says, Neque lex iustior vlla, quam necis artifices art perire sua: that
is, There can be no iuster law then that the inuenters, and workmen of death,
should perish by their own art. Eusebius in the life of Constantine, writes
of Maxentius, that he covered a river with a bridge, that he might destroy
Constantine coming over it, but by Gods providence he lost himself, and many
of his by it. There is a worthy example in the life of Hildebrand the Pope, set
out by Cardinal Benno, I have read it in sundry Authors of good credit, and it
is recorded in the book of Martires. The Emperor was wont often to repair to
prayer to the Church of S. Marie, which is in the Mount Auentine: but this
Hildebrand, whenas by his spies he had made diligent inquiry after all his
works, he made the place be marked where the Emperor was wont to pray, and
persuaded one by promising him money, to lay great stones upon the beams of
the Church secretly, and that he should so order them, that he might throw
them down from above upon the Emperors head as he was at prayer, and so beat
out his brains. Which thing when he was appointed to do, he made haste to
accomplish so great wickedness, and sought to lay a huge stone upon the
beams: with the weight thereof, the stone drew him down, and the boardes
being broken under the beams, both the stone, and the miserable man, by the
just judgment of God, fell down into the Church floor, and by the said stone
he was quite crushed in pieces. Of the which fact after the men of Rome knew,
and of the order thereof, they tied a rope to the wretches foot, and caused
him to be drawn three days through the streets, for the example of others.
See the Popes treachery and impiety, respecting no person, time, nor place, and
the just judgment of God upon the malefactor.

In all the former testimonies and examples, we are to consider the malice, and
subtilty of wicked men against the innocent: the wisdom, power, and goodness of
God, in preserving his children in the greatest dangers, and his justice upon
the inuenters, and authors of mischief. Of all this, we our selves, and this
whole land have had experience often heretofore, and now of late most of all.
In that mischievous and bloody plot, intended and prepared against us, by our
adversaries the Papists, pittes they have deeply, and cunningly dug,
subtle snares, and trains they have laid, but to their own shame and
confusion: the goodness of God has turned their mischief upon their own
heads, these things are new and fresh in memory, and we cannot but still daily
speak and think seriously of them, and I doubt not buy your Honor has in
private, and that in good earnest thought upon them, and I am sure, that in
that famous City, so well governed and taught, many worthy sermons have bin
publicly preached, showing in far more excellent manner then I can, the
greatness of our dangers, the greatness of our deliverance, and the right use of
the same. As for my own part, I cannot satisfy my self in wondering at the
bloody plots, and malicious practices of our enemies, and in admiring much more
the admirable mercy of God to this sinful land. The best of us all are too
forgetful and careless, and many dull, and ignorant, and want means to
instruct them, and stir them up: therefore I have thought fit, for the
further instruction of the simpler sort, and to stir up all to some holy
duties, to write and publish this little Treatise, to the view of the world:
my purpose in it, is to draw all, to an utter dislike, and hatred of popery,
to a sincere love of the truth, to fidelity, and obedience, to their sovereign
Lord and King, and to hearty thankfulness to our good God, the King of all
Kings: for this purpose I have chosen this worthy Psalm 116. how fitting it is
to this purpose, may appear in the treatise following.

The reasons moving me to dedicate this my poor labor to your Honor, are
these. First, because you are the chief in this country, both in power, and
professession of the Gospel: and therefore no doubt, will endeavor to the
uttermost, to defend the truth, and suppress the enemies of the same.
Secondly, to testify my good will and thankfulness, for all your great and
manifod favors, and kindness to me and mine, which I am unable any way to
requite. For the which, I pray with the Apostle, The Lord grant unto your
Honor, that you may find mercy with the Lord at that day: and I say to you
severally, Diligat te Deus, quia Dei seruos diligis: The Lord love thee,
because thou love the servants of God. Thirdly, because the matters here
handled, as they are pleasing to all Christians and good subjects: so much more
to your Honor, then to many, whose danger had been in some respect greater, so
the deliverance more: and therefore more thanks and duty required.

But some perhaps, may think this Treatise unseasonable, coming forth so long
after our Deliverance: they will say, it is now too stale, and forgotten, and
many books are extant long since of this kind of Argument. Indeed I confess
it was ready for the Press, and approved long since, but it was neglected and
slacked by those to whom it was committed. But if our Deliverance from so great
a danger be forgotten, (as I doubt it is with many) then have we need of new
pr^uocatio^s, and remembrances to call it again to our minds and memories. And
though there has been already much printed, and preached to this purpose, yet
I doubt not, but still from age to age, that famous, or rather infamous and
notorious bloody plot of the Papists, and so great and memorable a Deliverance*
will be spoken of, privately and publicly, in Print and Pulpit, to the end of
the world: not only in ^hese our lands, but in foreign countries, to the great
glory of God, the shame of the adversary, and the comfort of Gods children.
And therefore upon good ground, to stir us up to a perpetual memory and
thanksgiving, for so great a mercy, has our Church by Act of Parliament,
decreed and commanded that day of our Deliverance, yearly to be kept holy:
seeing that Act was made, only one day has been as yet generally observed
to that purpose, I hope this treatise will not be thought unseasonable.

And yet if any distaste this kind of Argument, as stale, being so ^ft handled
by others, let them know, there be many comforts and instructions in the
handling of this gracious Psalm; and sundry points of Popery confuted in the
Application, will be pertinent and profitable to all Christians at all seasons.

And thus entreating your honor in all duty, and humility, to accept
favorably this my simplepresent, and craving pardon for my boldness, I c ease
from further troubling your Honor at this time, beseeching the Lord of Lords to
preserve you from all evil, to prolong your days upon earth, to multiply his
best, and richest blessings upon you, and yours, to his honor, the good of
his Church, and the comfort of your own souls, through Christ Jesus Amen.

Your Honors in all duty bounden, THOMAS GIBSON.

Meditations upon the hundred and sixteen Psalm.
1 David being in great danger of Saul in the desert of Maon, perceiving the
great and inestimable love of God tovvard him, magnifieth such great mercies,
13 and protests, that he will be thankful for the same.
Verse 1 I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice, and my prayers.

2 For he has inclined his care unto me, when I did call upon him in my days.

3 When the snares of death compassed me, and the griefs of the grave caught
me: when I found trouble and sorrow.

4 Then I called upon the Name of the Lord, saying, I beseech thee, O Lord,
deliver my soul.

5 The Lord is merciful and righteous, and our God is full of compassion.

6 The Lord preserves the simple: I was in misery, and he saved me.

7 Return unto thy rest, O my soul: for the Lord has been beneficial unto
thee.

8 Because thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and
my feet from falling.

9 I shall walk before the Lord in the land of the living.

10 I believed, therefore did I speak: for I was sore troubled.

11 I said in my fear, All men are liars.

THe excellency and worth of this Psalm appears plainly, both by the
Writer of it, and by the matter therein contained. The Writer is David, a King,
a Prophet, a man according to Gods own heart. The sweet Singer of Israel,
extraordinarily qualified, with especial graces of the holy ghost. The matter
is excellent, and pertinent, a Psalm gratulatory, of joy and thanksgiving for
some great deliverance from his enemies; so that he writes and speaks in
this Psalm by his own feeling and experience: he himself was in great
distress, both in body and mind: his case seemed desolate and desperate, yet
calling upon God, he was heard; and being heard, rejoices and praises God.
He is the best teacher that speaks upon feeling, and experience in himself
of that which he teaches others. Therefore says one, that speech is
willingly received of the hearer, which is vttred by the Preacher with
compassion of the mind: he knows best to speak well, who has learned first
to do well; and then does the seed of the word bring forth fruit when the
godliness of the Preacher does water it in the breast of the hearer. Let us
therefore hear this royal and holy teacher, first feeling and practicing in
himself that which he teaches others. This Psalm consists of two parts: In
the first is set out the great goodness of God to David, and his love and
faith to God in the first eleven verses; in the second part, from thence to the
end, he sets down his protestation, profession, purpose, vows, and
promises of thankefulnes to God for so great a goodness, in delivering him from
so great and iminent dangers. The goodness of god he amplifies, in relating the
greatness of this distress, that he was near to death, and that it seemed
impossible by man's help to avoid the anguish that was seized upon his heart.
The greatness of his distress he sets out in many words, that the snares of
death compassed him, the griefs of the grave caught him, that he found grief
and sorrow, that he was delivered from death, his eyes from tears, and his
feet from falling; that upon the feeling of the present distress, he began
to be somewhat impatient, and to distrust God: his faith to God appears in his
earnest prayers to God, and in his conquest and victory over all his
temptations.

The ground of his prayers and victory, is the mercy and truth of God; the Lord
(says he) is merciful and righteous, and our God is full of compassion, the
Lord preserves the simple, and this he applies to himself to be an example to
others: I was in misery says he, and ho saved me. Thereupon he rejoices and
triumphs, saying, return to thy rest, O my soul. His protestation and
profession of thankfulness, he expresses under variety of phrases and several
forms of speech, he enters into disputation with himself, amplifying the
goodness of God, his own willingness to requite, and yet insufficiency to
perform in the twelfth verse of this Psalm, saying, What shall I render to
the Lord for all his benefits toward me? as if he should say, I do
acknowledge his wonderful and great benefits, and I have some care and desire
to show my self thankful; but what is in me? or what have I wherewithal I
may requite his kindness? yet I will do what I can; I will take the Cup of
Salvation: I will pay my vows, I will offer the sacrifice of praise publicly
in his house. The sum and meaning of all is this, that he will for this great
deliverance, extraordinarily joyfully with mouth and heart, and openly, praise
his God in the public congregation. And this Psalm agrees with many other
Psalms; the beginning of it agrees with the beginning of the eighteen
Psalm; the first six verses of that Psalm; the end of it agrees with the
eight, nine, and ten verses of the sixth Psalm; and the whole Psalm agrees*
with the thirty one Psalm: and many other Psalms there be of the like
argument with this: and now let us first observe from these great dangers and
distresses that David was in, that the holiest men are subject to the greatest
dangers.

This is so plain, we need no proof of it, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with
the rest of the Patriarchs, the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles had
sufficient experience of this. Let us consider but one example for all: The
Apostle saint Paul says thus of himself, 2. Cor. 11. 23. that he was in
labors abundant, in stripes above measure, in death often; that of the Jews
he received five times forty stripes save one, that he was thrice beaten with
rods, once stoned, that he suffered thrice shipwreck, that he was night and
day in the deep sea, in iourneying often, in perilles of waters, in perilles
of robbers, in perilles of his own nation, in perilles among the Gentiles, in
perilles in the city, in perilles in the wilderness, in perilles in the sea,
in perilles among false brethren, in weariness and painfulnesse, in watching
often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness. The
manifold and great distress which David was in, both in body and mind, we may
see in the sixth, eighteenth, and one and thirty Psalms, before alleged in
this present Psalm, and many more.

And let us further note to our comfort, that in the greatest calamities, the
Lord does not leave his, but does either lessen their grief, comfort them
inwardly, or quite deliver Psalm. 9. 9.
them. Therefore the Prophet says in another place, The Lord will be a refuge
for the poor, a refuge in due time, even Psalm. 34. 19.
in affliction: and again, Great are the troubles of the righteous, but the
Lord delivers them out of all. But malice shall slaie the wicked, and they
that hate the righteous shall perish: the Lord redeemeth the souls of his
servants, and none that trust in him shall perish. And in another Psalm he
says, In the multitude of my thoughts in my heart thy comforts Psalm. 94. 19.
have rejoiced my soul. When the waters were upon all the earth, and drowned
all creatures which were out of the Arc, yet the Lord remembered Noah and his,
and provided Genes. ^. 1.
for them. When Abraham seemed to be in great fear and danger, the Lord
appeared to him in a vision and said, Genes. 15. 1.
Fear not Abraham, I am thy buckler and exceeding great reward. When the
Disciples of Christ were in a great tempest in the sea with their master, in
such great fear and danger, Mat. 8. 24.
that they cried, Master, save us, we perish: Christ arose and rebuked the sea
and the winds, and there was a great calm. S. Paul and his company being in
danger of shipwreck, he said unto them, Be of good courage, for there shall be
no loss of any man's life among you, save of the ship only: For there stood by
me this night the Angel of God, whose I am, whom I serve, Act. ^7. 22.
saying: fear not Paul, for thou must be brought before Caesar, and lo^, God
has given to thee all that are with thee: Wherefore sirs, be of good courage,
for I believe God, that it shall be so as it has been told me: and so it came
to pass, that they came all safe to land. And of this mercy of God, in
delivering his servants in the greatest distress, S. Paul in other places had
experience and assurance in himself, for thus he writes 2. Cor. 1. 8.
to the Corinthians. Brethren, we would not have you ignorant of our affliction
which came to us in Asia, how we were pressed out of measure, passing strength,
so that we altogether doubted, even of life: yea we received the sentence of
death in our selves, because we should not trust in our selves, but in God,
which rayseth the dead, who delivered us from so great a death, and does
deliver us, in whom we trust, that yet hereafter he will deliver us. And in
another 2. Tim. 4. 16.
place he says thus, At my first answering, no man assisted me, but all
forsook me: I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge.
Notwithstanding the Lord assisted me, and strengthened me, that by me the
preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles should hear, and I
was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion. And the Lord will deliver me from
every evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom. In this
place we have heard the great dangers that David was in, that he was as a bird
taken in a snare, that his enemies were ready to compass and entrap him, that
he was in danger of life; yet he said, the Lord heard his prayers, the Lord was
beneficial unto him and delivered him: and he learned this by experience, that
the death of Gods Saints are precious in his sight, that he does dispose them,
and has a care of them: And now let us consider how David behaueth himself in
these his great dangers; he does not murmur, nor despair, but calls upon
God, and trusts in him: indeed he confesses his weakness in the eleauenth
verse, that sometimes he began to doubt of Gods promises, as though God had
left him, and would not be as good as his word, spoken by Samuel, in
establishing him in his kingdom. There are imperfections in the Saints of God,
their knowledge is mixed with ignorance, their patience with some impatience,
Job. 3.
their faith with some infidelity. Job a most perfect pattern of patience, yet
the greatness and continuance of his temptations caused him sometimes to speak
foolishly and impatiently. The Apostle S Paul confesses, that he found in
himself the law of the members resisting against Romans 7.
the law of the spirit: in another place he says, That the flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. But though there be this
combat in the Saints of God, yet grace and the spirit preuayleth against the
flesh. Job in the end confesses Job. 39. 37.
his folly and impatience, saying to God, Behold, I am vile, what shall I
answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth: Once have I spoken, but I will
answer no more, yea twice, but I will proceed no farther. And after he does
abhor himself for his rashness, and does repent himself in dust and ashes.
Job. 42. 6.
And David says of himself, Though I said in my haste, I am cast out of thy
sight, yet thou heardest the voice of my prayer when Psalm. 31. 22.
I cried unto thee: where he confesses his own infirmity, but yet that by
grace he overcame it. And in another place being greatly troubled and dismayed,
by the prosperity of the wicked, and affliction of the godly, at length he
goes to the sanctuary of God, and there learneth to overcome this temptation,
and to conclude, that God is good to Israel.

And the Prophet Jonas says thus of himself to the Lord, Iona. 2. 3.
Thou had cast m^e into the bottom in the midst of the sea, and the floods
compassed me about, all thy surges and all thy waves passed over me: then I
said, I am cast away out of thy sight, yet will I look again toward thine
holy temple: When my soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord. The wicked
in their distress, they despair with Caine, and are ready to hang themselves
with Judas; but the godly, howsoever they have many temptations, and trialles,
and great combats between the flesh and the spirit, yet they have a happy end
and issue; their faith prevails, and overcomes all. David in this place,
howsoever he confesses his own weakness, yet the spirit of God overcomes
it; he calls upon God and rests on him. Let us learn of him in all
troubles and dangers, to fly unto God by hearty prayer, he uses no doubt all
good means of strength and policy for his own safety, but yet he contenteth
not himself with that, his chief refuge is, to call upon God, as he says in
the fourth verse: Then I called upon the name of the Lord, saying, I beseech
thee O Lord deliver my soul. Prayer is the key of heaven. Oration ascendit,
gratia descendit, says one, that is, Prayer ascends, grace descends: in
sickness, in health, in plenty, in penury, in adversity, and prosperity; in
life, in death, prayer is one special comfort, hope, stay, refuge, and
sanctuary of Gods children, it is their chief weapon, armor, triumph, and
victory. The name of the Lord is a strong tower faith Solomon, the righteous
runs unto it and is exalted. Therefore Prou. 18. 10. Psalm. 32. 6. Exodus 17.
11.
says David, Every one that is godly will make his prayer to God when he may be
found. When Amalek fought with Israel, so long as Moses held up his hand,
Israel prevailed, but when he let his hand down, Amalek prevailed. Whereby we
see, how dangerous a thing it is to faint in prayer, and that the prayer of the
righteous avails much, if it be fervent, being the chief weapon against our
enemies. When Samuel and the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, the 1.
Sam. 7. 10.
Lord thundered with a great thunder that day upon the Philistines, and scattered
them, so they were slain before Israel. When the King of Ethiopia came
against Judah with an host of ten hundred thousand, and three hundred charets,
as he went out before him, and set his battle in array, Aza cried to the Lord
his God, saying, Lord, it is nothing with thee to help with many or with no
power, help us O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, and in thy name are we
come against this multitude. O Lord, thou art our God, let not man prenaile
against thee: so the Lord smote the Ethiopians before Aza, and before Judah,
and they were overthrown, so 2. Cro. 14. 9.
that there was no life in them; for they were destroyed before the Lord, and
before his host. When there came a 2. Cro. 20. 22.
great multitude of enemies against Iehosaphat, he set himself to seek the
Lord by fasting and prayer, and it had this effect, that the enemies slew one
another, so that none escaped. When Ezekiah received the letters of Saneherib
full of blasphemy and threatening, he spread the letter before the Lord, and
calls, and cries heartily and mightily unto the Lord, and then he heard from
Esaias the Prophet, that the Lord would defend that city, and that the King of
Asshur should not enter into it.

Then the Angel of the Lord went out and smote in the camp of Assh ur, an
hundred fourscore and five thousand, so when they rose early in the morning,
they were al dead corpses; and the same wicked King afterward, as he was in
his Temple worshipping his false god, was slain with Isaiah 37. 14. 33. 36.
a sword by his own sons. And David himself in another place says* When I
cry, then mine enemies shall turn back: this I know, for God is with me: and
in this place he cried to God, and was delivered from the rage of his enemies.
And mark I pray you the notable and lively faith of David, being assured that
the Lord would preserve and save him: his prayer had nothing auayled without
faith, but by faith it was 1. Ioh. 5. 4.
pleasing and acceptable unto God. Faith says S. John overcomes the world.
Above al says S. Paul, take the shield of faith Ephesians. 6. 16.
wherewith you may quench all the fiery darts of the Devil. By faith (says
the holy Ghost) our Elders were well reported of, they subdued kingdoms,
wrought righteousness, obtained the promises, Heb. 11. 33.
stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge
of the sword, turned to flight the armies of the alients, etc. By this faith
David overcame all his* temptations; but let us see how true and lively a faith
he had.

The ground of his faith was chiefly the mercy and truth of God: the Lord
says he is merciful and righteous, where he describes the nature of God to
be ready and willing to help; and therefore that we should not be terrified,
either with afflictions, or with our sins, this mercy he describes more
fully in another place: The Lord is full of compassion Psalm. 103. (...)
and mercy, slow to anger, and of great kindness: he will not always chide,
neither keeps he his anger for even: he has not dealt with us after our
sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities: For as high as the heaven
is above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him. As
far as the East is from the West, so far has he removed our sins from
us. As a Father has compassion upon his children, so has the Lord compassion
upon them that fear him. For he knows whereof we be made, he knows that we
are but dust. Parents are moved and touched with the calamities of their
children, and as much as they can, they will ease and relieve them* yet they
are sometimes willing and not able to help* but our heavenly father is both
willing and all-sufficient.

This is a sure pillar and proppe of faith. The Lord is also righteous, that
is, true and faithful in his promise; he has promised the protection of his
children, he must needs perform it, he cannot go from his word, he cannot
lie. It is the Lords mercy (says Jeremy) that we are not consumed, because
his compassions fail not, they are renewed every morning, great is thy
faithfulness. David upon the assurance of this truth and mercy of God, does
apply and appropriate God to himself: Our God (says he) is full of
compassion; accompting God to be his God as well as the God of others. That God
has bound himself to him, that he is within his covenant, and under his
protection: an other ground of his faith arising from the mercy and truth of
God, that it is the nature and practice of God to preserve the simple, that is,
such as lie open to the enemies, such as are soon deceived, such as trust not
in themselves, but in God, and desire help of him. The Lord (says David) in
an other place, does build up Jerusalem and gather together the dispersed of
Israel; he heals all those that are broken in heart, and binds up their
sores: he applies this to him self, I was in misery, says he, and he saved
me. Upon these grounds he gathers this confidence and boldness, and does
stir up himself, and triumph, saying, Return to thy rest, O my soul, for
the Lord has been beneficial unto thee. I shall walk before the Lord in the
land of the living; that is, I shall not die as mine enemies would have me, but
the Lord will preserve and save my life. And again, he says in this Psalm,
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints: that is, I
perceive that God has a care over his, and that the wicked can not take them
away at their pleasure, and that God hereafter will keep me under his
gracious protection. Mark the boldness, confidence and assurance of the
Prophet; he does not now doubt nor waver, his faith prevails against all: he
speaks to his own soul, saying, Return to thy rest, as if he should say,
thou have been much disquieted, thou have had great grief and trouble, but be
of good cheer, rest upon God, I have found how sweet he is to me. And mark
how he reasons from the experience of Gods mercy in others, and himself, to
assure him of his favor in time to come, and thus he reasons in the 22.
Psalm, verse 4. Our fathers trusted in thee, they trusted, and thou did dest
deliver them, they called upon thee, and were delivered, they trusted in thee,
and were not confounded: thereby he gathers, that God would hear and help
him, because he had heard and helped others. And when Saul had discouraged
David, 1. Sam. 17. saying, Thou art not able to go against the Philistine
great Goliath to fight with him, for thou art a boy, and he is a man of war
from his youth. David answered unto Saul, Thy servant kept his fathers sheep,
and there came a Lion, and likewise a Bear, and took a sheep out of the
flock, and I went out after him, and smote him, and took it out of his mouth;
and when he rose against me, I caught him by the beard, and smote him, and slew
him: so thy servant slew both the Lion and the Bear: therefore this
uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he has railed on the
host of the living God. In which place, David, by the experience which he had
in time past of Gods help, does assure himself of his help in time to come.
This is a sweet kind of reasoning, to reason from the former proof and
experience of Gods mercies, and thereby to gather confidence and comfort in time
to come; so that we may say thus to our selves; we have often tasted of the
sweet mercies of God, we have often bin in great dangers heretofore, and yet
he has delivered us; that God is as willing and able to help us now, as
before; and he will be still good and gracious unto us for ever, if we depend
upon him.

Thus David, upon the feeling and taste of Gods former mercies, gathers the
assurance of his favor hereafter; indeed he confesses, that for a while
there was in him some doubt and distrust, when he says, I said in my haste,
all men are liars. Wherein he seems to reject Gods promises, and rashly to
censure that promise of God, made by Samuel, touching his advancement to the
kingdom. But as we have seen before, that by his faith he overcame this
temptation. The Sun sometimes is hid under clouds, but yet it shines
again; so the faith of Gods servant is sometimes covered and darkened by
troubles and sins, yet it will break forth again to their comfort. The
ship of the sea is tossed up and down with storms and tempests, and seems
sometimes to be in danger of shipwreck; but so long as the anchor holds, it
cannot perish: so the godly have many temptations and trialls, yet so long as
they have any true faith, which is the sure and steadfast anchor of the soul,
they cannot utterly quail. The trees seem dead in winter, but yet being sound
at the root, and having juice in them, in the summer they bud, flourish, and
bring forth fruit: so the godly, though sometimes, in respect of their great
sins and afflictions, seem as dead, yet their faith, hidden for a time in
their heart, will flourish and show it self; as we may see here in David's
example, so that now he is bold and confident, and full of the assurance of
Gods favor. This makes against the damnable doctrine of popish doubtfulnes,
the spirit of God is not the spirit offeare, but of boldness and assurance. The
Sacraments are seals of the same, and every faithful believer faith, I
believe forgiveness of sins, and life everlasting.

Romans 8. 38.
The Apostle says, I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus 2. Cor. 13 5.
our Lord. The same Apostle says, Prove your selves whether you are in the
faith, examine your selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus
Christ is in you except ye be reprobates? And David pronounces that man
blessed whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered, and to whom
the Lord imputes not iniquity. Now what blessedness can this be, except a man
do feel and find this in himself, and be sure of it? Indeed the best
servants of God are subject to fear, to distrust, to doubtfulnes, and
unbelief; but yet they strive against these, and prevail in the end. And
against all temptations, the faith of Gods children is stayed and settled upon
these three props and pillars. The first is the mercy of God, being willing
and ready to save us, and promising freely salvation unto us. The second is
Gods truth, who cannot lie, and must needs be as good as his word: these two
were the proppes of David's faith, God is merciful and righteous. The third
which is mentioned in many places, and whereof we have in our selves
sufficient proof, is his all-sufficient power, that he is able to perform
whatsoever he promises. Let us oppose these pillars of our faith against all
the objections and temptations, and fiery darts of the Devil, when we
consider our selves, our own miseries, our manifold sins, the justice of
God, we have cause to fear and tremble; but yet having these grounds, we may
cast off fear, and triumph, and rejoice. When a man stands upon the top of
a tower or steeple looking down to the ground, he fears and quaketh, but
when he sees all is sure under him, and about him, he casts off fear: so
we, when we look into our selves as before, we oftentimes waver, doubt, and
stagger: but when we consider the mercy of God, being willing to save us, his
truth whereby he binds himself unto us, his power whereby he is able to
bring it to pass, then we may boldly and confidently say with David, Return
unto thy Psalm. 42.
rest O my soul. And as he says in another place, Why art thou cast down my
soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? wait on God, for I will yet
give him thanks, he is my present help, and my God. And thus David by his
faith overcomes all doubts and fear, and makes this use of his great
deliverance, to assure himself of Gods favor toward him hereafter. And mark
further another fruit of his faith, that as he believed in heart, so did he
profess and publish the same to the world, I have believed (says he)
therefore have I spoken. Faith is like fire covered in the ashes, which if it
be opened and blown, it will flame and kindle: so faith in the heart, as
occasion serves, will show it self by open confession, and therefore the
Apostle says, With the heart the Romans 10. 10.
man believes to righteousness, and with the mouth the man confesses to
salvation. And our Savior Christ says, Whosoever Mar. 8. 38.
shall be ashamed of me and of my words among this adulterous and sinful
generation: of him shall the son of man be ashamed also, when he comes in
the glory of the father, with his holy Angels. And this Prophet says in
another place, I have declared thy Psalm. ^0 9.
righteousness in the great congregation, lo I will not refrain my lips. O
Lord thou know, I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart, but I have
declared thy truth, and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy mercy, and thy
truth from the great congregation. By this are confuted al those which are
ashamed to profess Christ, or which never make any profession of religion, but
hide and keep, as they say, their conscience to themselves: but if they had
any conscience, any faith, any religion, they would profess it. If the heart
believed, the mouth would confess; if they did believe, they would speak: such
are of no religion at all, neither hot nor cold, and therefore God will spue
them out of his mouth. Another use of this deliverance is David's love to God,
which he protests in the first verse, when he says, I love the Lord. And
though by course I should have first spoken of this, yet I have reserved it to
this place, because his love proceeded from the experience of Gods great
mercy, in delivering of him, and because his love to God is the ground of his
thankfulness which follows, I love the Lord (says he) because he has
heard my voice and my prayers: so that his love did arise from the remembrance,
and feeling of Gods goodness toward him.

First he was in great dangers, then delivered; whereupon he found joy,
comfort, and confidence; thereupon he protests, I love the Lord. And thus
he begins the eighteenth Psalm, upon like experience wherein he shows
his inward affection to God, and that he was inwardly kindled and ravished with
his love, as if he should say, I loved the Lord before, but now, upon trial of
new benefits I love him much more, I love him only, and above al things I have
fixed my love upon him, I will love him, not for a time, but for all my life;
he has spared my life, he has heard my prayers, he has frustrated my
enemies, therefore I will never cease to love him: the more we receive, the
more we must love; increase of benefits, require increase of love; every
deliverance requires love; the more our friends do for us, the more we are to
love them; there must be first a feeling of Gods love, before we can love him:
We 1. Ioh. 1. 19.
love him says S. John, because he loves us first. There be many arguments of
Gods love to us which should move us to love him again. He has created all
things for our use, whereupon David exclaymeth, O Lord how manifold are thy
works! in wisdom have thou made them all, the earth is full of thy riches. But
herein chiefly God sets out his love toward us, that while we were sinners,
Christ died for us, whereupon one says, Sitotum me debeo pro me facto, quid
debeo pro me refecto? etc. If I do owe my self to God wholly for creating me,
what do I owe him for my new creation, and that in so wonderful a manner? and
again, O dnri, ac induratifili! etc. that is, O hard and indurate children,
whom such a love does not mollify, such a flame of love, such a true and
vehement lover: O soul, thou art greatly indebted unto God, thou have received
much, and had nothing of thy self: for all this thou have nothing to give
again but only love, and that which was given by love, cannot be better
requited then by love again.

And another says, Bone Domine, quid est homo quem visitas tantis beneficijs?
etc. O good Lord, what is man, whom thou visitest with so great benefits? thou
sendest thy son, thy only son for him, thou sendest thy holy spirit a
comforter, thou reseruest thy self as a reward for thy children. O Lord (if it
be lawful to speak it) thou art too liberal, too prodigal to thine. We are
wholly the Lords, we must wholly love him, he is sufficient, let us content
our selves with him. Therefore the Prophet says in another place, Whom have I
in heaven but thee? and, I have desired none in the Psalm. 73. 25.
earth with thee. As Gods love to us is sincere and constant, so our love to
him must be sound and stable, and therefore it is said, Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind. And the
Church, in the Canticles, is said to be sick of Christ's love. The christian
Cant. 2.
soul is never satisfied wi^h the love of Christ, he does think all love too
little for him. The repetition and remembrance of Gods benefits, increases
this love; ignorance, and forgetfulness of his benefits, hinders love. David
upon the trial of Gods great goodness toward him, bursteth out in these
words: I love the Lord.

This point I end, with the exhortation of a reverend Father upon these words:
Cantet hoc anima quae peregrinat^r a Domino, etc. Let the soul which is a
stranger here from God, sing this, let the sheep which went astray, sing
this; let the same which was as dead, and yet made alive, that was lost, and
yet found, let him sing this song, I love the Lord, because he has heard my
voice and my prayers. Let al our souls, my brethren and dear children, sing
this: let us be instructed, and hold, and with the Saint, sing this: I love the
Lord because he heard my voice and my prayers. So that we are to love God,
because he has heretofore many times heard our prayers, and delivered us from
great miseries, and we have good hope and assurance that he will hear them
hereafter.

Verse 12 What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me?

13 I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.

14 I will pay my vows unto the Lord, even now in the presence of all his
people.

15 Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

16 Behold Lord: for I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thy
bandmaide: thou have broken my bonds.

17 I will offer to thee a sacrifice of praise, and will call upon the name of
the Lord.

18 I will pay my vows unto the Lord, even now in the presence of all his
people.

19 In the courts of the Lords house, even in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem
praise ye the Lord.

NOW let us come to the second part of the Psalm, contained, as we heard in
the beginning, in the 12. 13. and the rest of the verses following. But I mean
to rest only upon those two verses, containing the sum of all, viz. a
profession and thankfulness to God for so great a goodness, in delivering him
from so great dangers. In the first of these verses, he reasons, questioneth,
and consulteth with himself what is to be done, how he may gratify some ways
the Lords kindness. In the next, he plainly sets down his full
determination, as if he should say, I will publicly profess, and magnify the
name of the living God. I will make a holy feast, and offer to him the
sacrifice of praise, What shall I render to the Lord? etc. As if he should
say, I have heretofore, and of late, many ways tasted the Lords mercy, in
preserving me from extreme dangers; his goodness is so great to me, I cannot
express it: for the which, I love him more then ever I did, and I would feign
testify my love by some recompense if I could; but his benefits are so many and
so great, and I so unable and weak, that I can in no case requite them: but yet
I have a care, a purpose, a desire, and will to do it. I would make him amends
if I could, oh that it lay in my power to requite his kindness! oh that I could
devise any way to gratify him! my heart is willing though power be wanting,
his benefits are innumerable, I am more bound to God then I can any way
requite. And then he determines and resolves with himself, this is all that
God requires, this is all that I can do, and will in some measure perform, to
offer to him the sacrifice of praise, wherein he promises thanks for benefits
past, and prayer for increase and continuance of grace. Where he says, I will
take the cup of salvation: he alludeth to the custom of the law, when those
whom the Lord delivered from extraordinary distress, did use in a solemn
banquet, to take the cup and drink, making a public and thankful
acknowledgement of their deliverance, and with joy, offered sacrifices unto the
Lord, which did put them in mind of Christ, and that they received all
blessings from God for Christ's sake.

They were also admonished to give and consecrate themselves wholly to God, and
whereas some part was offered unto God, they confessed that they received al
things from his hand, and therefore to refer the glory of all unto him. To
these holy feasts made in token of joy, David in this 1. Cor. 16. 29.
place alludeth, so that in effect he promises hearty and cheerful
thanksgiving for his deliverance; then he says, I will call upon the name of
the Lord, which does not only signify a publishing of Gods praise, but also
prayer and invocation: so that to the former two uses of his deliverance,
videlicet confidence, and love to God, he ioynes two other, namely,
thankefulnes and prayer. His thankefulnes arises from the former love, so that
love is the ground of thankefulnes; and except we love God, we can never
truly praise him; and whosoever loves him aright, they will truly praise
him: neither is our praise, nor any other duty pleasing unto him, except we
love him. Many pray, give thanks, hear, receive, and do many good works,
but they do it for custom, company, vaineglory, or some sinister affection.
It is not the love of God that settes them on work, and therefore they cannot
please God. We must learn then, that the love of God is the root of all true
piety: therefore says God, And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God
require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and
to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all
thy Deuteronomy. 10. 12.
soul? And our Savior Christ comprehends the whole law in these two
points, to love God above all, and our Mat. 22. 40.
neighbor as our selves: On these two commandments (says Christ) hangs all
the law and the prophets. The 2. Cor. 5. 14.
Apostle says, that the love of Christ constrained him to do his duty. And
David, having before set down God his goodness, upon experience of which, he
protested that he loved him: now from that love he brake out into these
words; What shall I render unto the Lord? Before he says, I love the Lord:
now he says, What shall I render unto him? so that as one says, Praises not
issuing from love, are either flatteries, or hypocrisies. God and David entered
into covenant each with other, God promising to multiply upon him his
blessings: David promising to Psalm. 89. 3. 35.
God again, love, kindness, and obedience. God says, I have made a covenant
with my chosen. I have sworn once by my Holiness, that I will not fail David,
David again swear to the Lord, and vowed to the mighty God of Jacob, saying, I
will not enter into the tabernacle of my house, nor come upon my pallet, or
bed, nor suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor my eye-liddes to slumber, until I
find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob:
wherein he promises to have more care of Gods religion, and of his glory,
than of any worldly thing whatsoever. And in this place he promises all love
and kindness unto God: but first note here David's humility, confessing his
own insufficiency to perform any duty to God, as if he should say, though
I have a care to be thankful, yet I owe more than I am able to repay; I am
laden with Gods blessings, and altogether weak, impotent any way to requite
him. He confesses there is no proportion betwixt Gods benefits, and his power
to requite. This humility was in Jacob when he says, I am not worthy the least
Genesis 32. 10.
of all the mercies and trueths which thou have showed unto thy servant. And
David in an other place says, My well Psalm. 16. 2.
doing extends not to thee. And giving thanks to God with his people, he
says, We thank thee O God, and 1. Cor. 29. 1^.
praise thy glorious name: but who am I, and what is my people, that we should
be able to offer willingly after this sort? for all things come of thee, and of
thine own hand we have given thee. Gods benefits do make the wicked proud,
honors change manners in them; they are puffed up, and forget themselves, as we
may see in Saul, Nabuchadnezzar and others. Thus the Lord speaks to the Church
of Laodicea, Thou say I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need
of nothing, and know not how thou art wretched, miserable, blind, poor
and naked. I counsel thee to buy of me, gold tried by the sire, that thou
may be made rich, and white raiment, that thou may be clothed, that thy
filthy nakedness do not appear, Apoc. 3. 17.
and anoint thy eyes with eye salve that thou may see: Hypocrites understand
not their own infirmities, the perfection of Gods law, the severity of his
justice; and therefore they boast of their own righteousness with the Pharisee
in Luc. 12.
the Gospel, but good men are lowly and humble, and the more humbled by the
blessings of God. Thankfulness must arise from the consideration of Gods
benefits, and our own unworthiness, and so we move our benefactor to be more
beneficial unto us. True thankfulness does not glory of merits, does not boast
of worthiness; for this is, of a benefactor, to make God a debtor unto us, and
so we turn his affection from us. The Apostle says, I count that the
afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the glory which shall be
showed unto us. There can be no greater, nor better work, than to suffer for
Christ's sake, to leese living and life, and all for him, and yet this does not
merit eternal life: therefore there is no work meritorious in the holy sight
of God, only the work of Christ's death does merit salvation for us.

And here again is the mercy, and liberality of God, who requires not equal
recompense of us for his benefits; he is perfect, nothing can be added unto
him, his blessedness and glory is everlasting, he has no need of us at all.
Christ says, I receive not praise of men: whatsoever good thing we have, it is
from him, and it is he that must give us hearts to praise him: and our best
service, as it comes from us, is stained and polluted: yet is our good and
gracious God content to accept from our hands our weak prayers, praises, and
other duties, if they proceed from faith, love, and kindness unto him. And
though we cannot merit at all, though we be weak and imperfect in every
duty, yet there is required of us, a care, and desire to perform all duties:
this is a sure and perfect note of Gods Nehem. 1. 11.
children. Therefore Nehemiah thus prays, O Lord I beseech thee, let thine
ears now harken to the prayer of thy servants, Psalm. 40. 8.
who desire to fear thy name. And David says thus of himself, I desired to
do thy good will, O my God, yea thy law is within my heart. And he says in
another place, that the loving kindness of the Lord, endures for ever and ever
upon them that fear Psalm. 103. 17.
him, and his righteousness upon childrens children, unto them that keep his
covenant, and think upon his commandments to do them. Romans 7. 22.
And the Apostle says of himself, That howsoever he found his flesh
rebellious, yet he did delight in the law of God concerning the inwardman. So
in this place David's desire and delight is to praise God, and in this his
praising of God, he is not content to name some one benefit, but he calls to
mind all former benefits: so he says in another place, My soul praise the
Lord, and forget not all his benefits. The multitude and number of Gods
benefits are of great force to moon us to thankfulness. How great is thy
goodness, says David to Psalm. 31. 19.
God, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, and done unto them that
trust in thee before the sons of men? And he says in another place, that the
Lord did prevent him with liberal blessings. Psalm. 40. 5.
And again, O Lord my God, thou have made thy wonderful works so many, that
none can count in order to thee thy thoughts toward us, I would declare and
speak of them, but they are more then I am able to express. Again, Let
Israel wait on Psalm. 103. 7.
the Lord, for with the Lord is mercy, and with him is great redemption. And
in another place, Praised be the Lord says he, even the God of our salvation,
which ladeth us daily with benefits. So that we are to call to mind all kind
of benefits, great and small, old and new, that so we may say with the Prophet,
What shall we render unto the Lord for all his benefits bestowed upon us? Let
every one say, O Lord thou have made heaven, earth, sun, moon, stars, and
Angels for me, what shall I render to thee for these benefits? Let every one
say, thou have created me in my mothers womb, preserved me, fed me, provided
for me, and delivered me from many dangers, what shall I render to thee for
these benefits? Let every christian say, God has called me, justified me,
sanctified me, he has given me his word, his spirit, his sacraments, his own
Son and kingdom: oh what shall I render unto the Lord for all these his
unspeakable benefits bestowed on me? and let us all say, thou have O Lord many
times heretofore preserved us in great dangers, private, and public, when we
thought never to escape, and now of late from most subtle and bloody enemies,
who had vowed and plotted the destruction of us all. Now what shall we render
unto thee for all these great benefits bestowed upon us? O good God, enlarge
our hearts and mouths to praise thee. And mark further in David, that in the
time of his distress, he calls and cries unto God as we heard before, now
being delivered, he does stir up himself unto thankfulness, so that the
same spirit which teaches to pray, the same spirit teaches to give thanks.
Pray continually says the Apostle, in all things give thanks, for this is the
will of God in Christ Jesus toward you. Many pray, especially in time of
dangers, but few give thanks. In time of troubles the very wicked and
hypocrites are forced to call upon God: wicked Pharaoh, when the plagues were
upon him, desired Moses and Aaron to pray for him. God says of his people, In
their affliction they will seek me diligently: and indeed afflictions are
good means to whet on the prayers of Gods children, but yet to our prayers we
must join thanksgiving. As we are ready and willing in our miseries and wants
to call upon God, and to cry to him for his help; so being helped and
delivered, we must be as ready and willing to give him thanks. Our Savior
Christ vpbraydeth, and reprooueth the nine Lepers which were cleansed by him,
for their unthankfulness: for when one of Luc. 17.
them (being ten in number) saw that he was healed, turned back, and with a
loud voice praised God, and fell down on his face at his feet, and gave him
thanks, Jesus said unto him, Are there not ten cleansed? but where are the nine?
there are none found that returned to give God thanks save this stranger: so
that the greatest number are forgetful, and unmindful of this duty of
praising God. And mark I pray you, who it is in this place, that is so
careful and resolute to perform this duty. It is David, a holy man according
to Gods own heart, he excels in praises, so that it is no natural, no
common gift, but a gift of Gods spirit, peculiar Psalm. 65. 1.
to his own people, to praise him: therefore says David, O God, praise waits
for thee in Sion. Again, God is known in Judah, his name is great in Israel,
therefore the praise of God is restrained to the righteous. Whereupon the
Prophet says, Praise the Lord you that fear him, magnify him all the seed
of Psalm. 22. 23. Psalm. 118. 2.
Jacob, all the seed of Israel. And again, Let Israel now say, that his
mercy endures for ever: he says the like to the house of Aaron, and to them
that fear the Lord. The godly only can truly, and rightly praise him, they
only have true joy of spirit, and peace of conscience, their service is only
pleasing to God. The sacrifice of the wicked, says Solomon, Prou. 15. 8.
is an abomination to the Lord, but the prayer of the righteous, is acceptable
unto him, and the Lord does utterly renounce, and reject Esa. 1.
the sacrifices, oblations, and prayers of wicked hypocrites. Therefore let
every one depart from iniquity, that calls on the name of the Lord. Again,
David, a King, a Prophet, excels in faith, in love, and thankfulness. All
Princes and magistrates must learn by this example to go before their
inferiors, and to excel them in this; and in all other holy duties, they have
common benefits with others: they are especially consecrated unto God, and
therefore to shine above others in all godliness, they are more especially
qualified with gifts of the spirit, whereby they may the better perform all
holy duties, and draw others to do the like by their example, and so both
Rulers, and Ministers should be the lights of the world, the salt of the earth,
examples to the people, and followers of holy Kings and Prophets, and yet it is
the duty of al, not only of these, to worship and praise God. All are partakers
of infinite blessings, and therefore have infinite causes to praise him: and the
exhortations of the Scriptures are general to all sorts of men: Kings of the
earth, and all people says David, Princes, and all Judges Psalm. 148. 11.
of the world, young men and maidens, old men and children, let them praise the
name of the Lord for his name is only to be exalted, and his praise above the
earth, and the heavens. Therefore, as our Savior Christ says to his
Disciples, Those things that I say unto you, I say unto nll men, watch: So I
say, that which is Mar. 13.
said of magistrates and ministers, is said unto all, that they should praise
the Lord, and magnify his majesty for his benefits. According to this David
says, Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord. And again, let us
observe in David's example, that he does not only promise outward sacrifices,
as bullockes, goats, and rams; these were then to be offered, and hypocrites
were ready and bountiful in offering of them; and therefore they say,
Wherewithal shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the Mic. 6.
6.
high God? Shall I come before him with burnt offerings, and with calves of a
year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten
thousand rivers of oil? Shall I give my first borne for my transgression, even
the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? etc. But all these are nothing
without faith and obedience. And therefore Samuel 1. Sam. 15. 22. Ier. 7.
says to Saul, To obey is better than sacrifice. And in Jeremy the Lord tells
the hypocrites, the chief thing he required, was to obey his voice. And David
says, Thou desire no sacrifice, though I would give it, thou delightest not
in burnt offerings; the sacrifice of God is a contrite spirit, a contrite and
a broken heart, O God, thou will not despise. Those external sacrifices were
easily performed by hypocrites: but God then chiefly, and now also, requires,
love, obedience, and thankfulness. David promises and performs public
and great praises, for public and great benefits. He says after in this
Psalm, I will pay my vows unto the Lord, even now in the presence of all his
people, in the courts of the Lords house, even in the midst of thee, Psalm.
22. 22.
O Jerusalem. And in another place he says, I will declare thy name unto my
brethren, in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee. A public
confession and praising of God is required for public benefits; but many are
ashamed openly to profess God; they are not ashamed to sin, but are ashamed
to do well. They are not ashamed openly to receive blessings, be they never so
many, but are ashamed openly to praise God for them. The people of God had wont
to have two kinds of extraordinary holiedayes, the one of sorrow, the other of
joy, the one for humiliation, and the other for thanksgiving. In time of
public dangers, they had their days of fasting; after great deliverances,
they had their days of joy and thanksgiving: for proof of both, let us
consider but two examples. The one is of King Iehosophat, who when he saw his
enemies ready to invade him, he proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah, and
they came all together, and humbled themselves in fasting and prayer before the
Lord. But when the Lord gave them a happy victory over their enemies, they
assembled themselves in the valley of Beracah, for there they blessed the Lord,
therefore they called the name of that place, the valley of Beracah unto this
day, that is, the valley of blessing and thanksgiving. The meaning is, they had
a 2. Chron. 20. 3. 26.
holy assembly, an extraordinary day of public rejoicing before the Lord for
so great deliverance. The other is, the example of Queen Ester, who when she
saw, that the death Ester 4. 15.
of Mordecai, and the Jews was conspired and decreed by the means of proud
Haman, she commands Mordecai Ester 8. 17.
to assemble all the Jews that are found in Shushan, and that they should fast
and humble their souls extraordinarily, and she promises that she and her
maids will do the like. But after, when the faithfulness of Gods people was
known to the King, they were delivered, and the treachery of Haman was
revealed, and he himself hanged upon the gallows he prepared for another:
then there was another holiday kept by the Jews, a feast and good day, a day
of joy and gladness for their deliverance. And mark further, the zeal, desire,
and feruencie of David in praising God, What says he shall I render to the
Lord, etc. The best are slow and slack, heavy and dull in performing any
duty to God, but yet the Saints of God when they set themselves to praise him,
they cannot be satisfied, they cannot stay themselves, they think all too
little, they are overwhelmed with Gods mercies, they cannot comprehend them,
they are astonished at them, they would gratify him if they could, they stir
and provoke themselves to do what they can, they would do more if they could,
their desire and affection is more then they can perform. And David of all
other, here, and other-where, is a lively pattern of true thankfulness. In
this place there be in him many notes and marks of a true thankful heart.
First, he acknowledges Gods benefits. Secondly, he does amplify and magnify
them. Thirdly, he confesses his own weakness and insufficiency. Fourthly, he
desired, and joyeth to gratify the Lord any way. Fifthly, he bursteth out into
open thanks and praise, both by tongue and action in other places he stirs
up himself to praise God, saying, Awake Psalm. 108. 2.
viole and Harp, I will awake right early. My soul, praise thou the Lord,
and all that is within me, praise his holy name: my soul praise the Lord, and
forget ^ot all his benefits. Sometimes Psalm. 33. 1.
he stirs up others, even all the faithful, to praise God* Rejoice in the
Lord (says he) O ye righteous, for it becomes vprightmen to be thankful.
Psa. 133. 1. And again: Praise ye Psalm. 34.
the Lord wi^h me, and let us magnify his name together. Sometimes his zeal
carried him so far, that he stirs up the very Angels to praise God.
Praise the Lord ye his Aungells, says he, that excel in strength, that do
his commandment, in obeying the voice of his word. Praise the Lord, O ye all
his hosts, ye his servants that do his pleasure. Psalm. 103. 20. Sometimes to
reprove our dulnes, and to awaken us, he exhorts the dumb creatures to
praise God. Praise ye him (says he) sun, moon, stars, waters, fire,
hail, snow^, wind; mountains, trees, beasts, cattle, and feathered fowls.
Psalm. 148. 3. He praises God himself, not only with tongue, but also with
heart and soul. O God (says he) my heart is prepared, so i^ my tongue, I
will sing and give praise. Psalm. 108. 1. He promises to praise God
continually, I will always give thanks to the Lord, says he, his praise
shall be in my month connnually. And again. I will praise the Psalm. 146. 2.
Lord during my life, as long as I have any being I will sing unto my God. He
will praise God openly as before. In an other place he says, I will praise the
Lord among the people, I will sing unto thee among the nations, he will also
praise God in secret and privately. At midnight, says he, will I rise to give
thanks Psalm. 108. 3.
unto thee, because of thy righteous judgments. And again, Seven times a day
do. I praise thee, because of thy righteous judgments. Psalm. 119. 62, 164.
He praised God for all kind of benefits, small and great, temporal and
spiritual, as we have seen partly already, and may see further in the Psalm
104. and 147. His delight and solace was to praise God. My soul, says he,
shall be satisfied with mar^w and fatnes, and my mouth shall praise thee with
joyful lips. Psa. 63. 5. Whereby he means, that the remembrance of Gods
mercies, and praising of him, was more sweet unto his heart, than all the
dainties and pleasures of the world: finally, in praising God, he ascribes the
whole glory to God, not to himself at all, nor to any other creature. Not
unto us, O Lord, not unto us, hut unto thy name give the glory, Psalm. 105. 1.
for thy loving mercy, and for thy trueths sake. Again, I will lift Psalm. 121.
1.
mine eyes unto the mountains from whence my help shall come, my help comes
from the Lord which has made heaven and earth. How often does he vow and
promise to be thankful? how many argumeuts does he use, to move and provoke
himself and others to true thankfulness? how many Psalms be there of praise
and thanksgiving? how many begin and end with this exhortation, Praise ye
the Lord? Let therefore all Christians learn from this Doctor and
practitioner of thankfulness, to be truly thankeful. And let us observe
further from this example, that David does not only consult, purpose, and
promise to be thankful, but does indeed perform it, as we may see in the
verses following in this Psalm. Many promise and purpose good things, and yet
never perform them. Every lawful promise is debt, and therefore to be truly
paid. When thou have vowed a vow to God, says the Wiseman, defer not to
pay it, for he delights not in fools: Pay therefore that thou have vowed. It
is better that thou should not vow, than that thou should vow, and not
pay it. Eccl. 5. 3. David says, Psalm. 66. 13.
I will go into thine house with burnt offerings, and will pay thee my vows
which my lips have promised, and my mouth has spoken in my affliction. And
again, I Psalm. 119. 106.
have sworn, and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments.
Therefore he says in an other place, vow and perform unto the Lord your God,
all ye that are round about Psalm 76. 11.
him: Let them bring presents unto him that ought to be feared, work again the
quickenesse and expedition of David, in performing this duty of praise without
any delay at all: and therefore he says in the verse following, I will pay my
vows unto the Lord, even now in the presence of all his people; he does not
defer and put it off, but upon a receipt of new benefits, he offers new
songs of praise unto God. Delays are dangerous, especially in Psalm. 119. 60
Gods matters. Therefore says David, I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy
commandments. Therefore, worthy is that saying to be marked of all,
especially of Kings and Ezra 7. 23.
Magistrates. Whatsoever is by the commandment of the God of heaven, let it be
done speedily for the house of the God of heaven. And finally, let us observe
the constancy of David, he is no changeling, but the same, both in adversity
and prosperity. In his troubles he calls and cries mightily upon God; after
his deliverance he is occupied in praising God, and magnifying his most holy
name.

Neither adversity nor prosperity does hinder him, but further him in the
worship of God. In his dangers he cries to God for help, and now being
delivered, all his care is to love God, to please God, and to praise him. Being
pursued unjustly, and maliciously, by Saul and his adherents, he does not
rebel, nor take armor against the Lords anointed, but his chief armor and
weapons are tears, patience, and prayer: and now having escaped, he is not
careless, wanton, proud: he does not give himself to carnal pleasures, but to
spiritual joy and thanksgiving. Thus David, both in the time of his
affliction, and in the time of his prosperity, shows himself, a godly,
holy, and religious man, If any be afflicted, says James, let him pray, if any
Iam. 5. 14.
be merry, let him sing Psalms. Wherein he teaches us, how we are to behave
our selves after David's example, both in the time of our troubles, and in the
time of our peace: we must not, as many do, when they are afflicted, frette
and fume against God, curse and blaspheme, or use any unlawful means, but fly
to our God, by earnest and hearty prayer for his comfort and help. We must not
in time of prosperity, and after great deliueraunces, live in security and
wantonness, but in greater obedience and thankfulness unto God.

Deuteronomy. 32. 15
The Lord complains thus of his people; He that should have been upright,
when he waxed fat, spurned with his heel; Thou art fat, thou art gross,
thou art laden with fatness, therefore he forsook God that made him, and
regarded not the strong God of his salvation. And it is said of king Vzziah,
that when he was strong, his heart was lifted 2. Chro. ^6. 16
up to his destruction, so that he transgressed against the Lord his God.
Therefore, says Solomon, Ease slays the foolish, and the prosperity of
fools destroys them. Many fall away Proverbs 1
from God by afflictions, through impatience and despair; but more fall away
from him by prosperity, through security, pride, wantonness, and
unthankfulness. But David is constant to God, and sticks fast to him, both
in the time of his dangers, and in the time of his safety, in neither of
these states, he falls from God, but holds fast the course of godliness. And
that we may follow this worthy pattern, because we are of our selves, weak,
and dull, let us consider some motives and arguments, to move and enforce us
to this holy duty of thankfulness. And first, the knowledge, feeling, and
remembrance of Gods benefits will move us to this duty; therefore let us
not forget, but keep in memory, a register of the blessings of God. Hereupon
David, when Abigail, by her counsel stayed him 1. Sam. 25. 32.
from sheding of Nabals blood, he gives thanks, both to God, and her, saying,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me, and
blessed be thy counsel, and blessed be thou, which have kept me this day from
coming to shed blood, and that my hand has not saved me. And David in many
Psalms does often remember and record the manifold blessings of God, to
provoke himself to thankefulnes. And the Lord himself, for the furtherance of
our memory has ordained and set up many monuments of his benefits, as the
Sabath of the creation of the world, and our redemption, the Rainebowe, a
monument of not drowning the world, the Passover, of their deliverance out of
Aegipt, the twelve Stones set up in Gilgal, as a monument of their passing
through Jorden. And finally, the Lords Supper was ordained as a perpetual
memory of the Passion of Christ. Secondly, if we will be rightly thankful,
there must be in the heart, a true inward joy: after feeling of joy follows
praise: giving of thanks is according to the quantity and measure of joy: and
where there is no joy, there is no praise. And therefore the people Psalm 126
of God say thus, When the Lord brought again the captivity of Sion, we were
like them that dreamed, then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue
with joy. Thirdly, the persuasion of our heart, that the blessings of god
proceed from the love and favor of God to us, will greatly move us to be
thankful. Our Savior Christ says, If ye which are evil, can give good
gifts to your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the
holy ghost to them that desire it? By which place he teaches, that God is
the father of the faithful, that they are his children, that whatsoever he
bestows upon them, is in love; and therefore they must show them love again,
by giving of thanks. The blessings of God upon the wicked, are not in love,
but in wrath, and therefore no marvel though they be unthankful. Fourthly, All
the creatures of God move us to thankfulness, every creature a benefit to man,
to provoke him to praise; the beauty, order, power, and workmanship of the
creatures do call upon us to glorify the Creator; they are all for our use,
and serve us. He might have made us like the vilest, but he has made us most
noble, and the chief of all creatures in the earth. All these considerations
should move us to praise him. It is recorded of a godly man, that said in
this manner; Blessed be God who has made innumerable and wonderful creatures,
whereof there is none but he teaches me to praise him. Another answered, how
does a toade teach thee to praise God? Very much, says he, For when I behold
that creature, so ugly, foul, and venomous, I consider, that God might have
made me so; but he has made me an excellent and reasonable creature: so that
hereby I have occasion to praise God. Another, when he saw a foul great
toade, cried and wept: and being asked why? he said, because I never praised
God for making me so noble a creature in body and mind, whereas he might have
made me a worm, or a foul toade: and this he has done to me, not of my
desert, but of his mere mercy, for which I was never yet thankful. O the
filthy blot of unthankfulness, for the which, why should I not all my whole
life consume my self with tears? Many thousands in the world have cause to
mourn, who were never yet thankful at all, for creation, or redemption, and
other blessings temporal and spiritual, and the best of us all have cause to
be grieved for our great unthankfulness to God for his manifold and great
blessings so long time bestowed upon us. So many creatures as there be in the
world, so many benefits as we have received, are so many arguments and motives
to draw us to thankfulness. Fifthly, Let us consider the excellency and the
majesty of the Giver, our own unworthiness and ingratitude, the great and
manifold blessings so long time bestowed vhpon us. The giver is God the
creator of heaven and earth, almighty, immortal, invisible, holy, just, and
glorious: we are mortal, dust and ashes, poor worms of the earth, wretched
and miserable, profane, unholy, and sinful, the children of wrath and
condemnation: the benefits which he bestows upon us, are great, and many,
private, public, temporal, spiritual. Concerning this life, and the life to
come, through him we live, move, and have our being; by him we are fed, and
preserved from many dangers, he has made us his own children, he has
chosen, and redeemed us, and he has promised to glorify us; he has given us
his word, his sacraments, his own Son and Spirit; from him we have al
comforts both of soul and body. The due consideration of all these things
together may cause us to say with the Prophet, Lord, what is man that thou art
mindful of him, and the son of man that thou visitest him? Psalm. 8. 4. And
to say again with him in this place, What shall I render unto the Lord for all
his benefits bestowed upon me? Sixthly, thanksgiving is a part of Gods
worship, and the compliment of prayer, so that prayer is imperfect and lame
without it; therefore the Phil. 4. 6.
Apostle says, In all things let your requests be showed unto God in prayer and
supplication, with giving of thanks. Seauenthly, Thankfulness is a means to
imbolden and assure us of further graces hereafter, and does cause us to use
those well, holily, and rightly which we have: and therefore says one,
ascending of thanks, is the descending of grace. And again, Desunt gratis,
quia nos ingrats: that is, Graces are wanting, because we are unthankful. And
how can we look for any more blessings at Gods hands? With what face can we
desire them of him, if we be unthankful for those which we have received
already? And this makes us also rightly to use the gifts of God; for how can
it be, that we should abuse them, if we confess that we receive them from the
hands of God, enjoy them as in his presence, and be thankful for them as
meats and drinks; so all other blessings are sanctified by prayer, and
praising of God. Eighthly, By thanksgiving we receive benefit and profit, as
we have partly seen; as it is our due^y, so it is our own good: therefore one
says, Benignus exactor, and non egenus, qui non crescit ex redditis, sed in se
facit crescere redditores: that is, God is not a needy, but a kind demaunder,
who does not increase with that which is given him, but causes it to increase
in them which gives him. Ninthly, Thanksgiving is a debt to God, and therefore
to be duly paid; by his benefits we are greatly indebted unto him, and this
the Prophet confesses in this place, What shall I render unto the Lord? as if
he should say, I am far indebted unto the Lord, I am bound in equity to pay
it, and I am ready and willing, so far as lies in my power. Tenthly,
thanksgiving is a part of our spiritual sacrifice: and the apostle says, Let
us by Christ offer the sacrifice of praise always to God, that Hebr. 13. 1^*
is, the fruit of the lips which confess his Name. It is no base service or
work, but a spiritual sacrifice, the exercise of the Saints in earth and
heaven; nay, it is a royal and angelical work to praise God, as we may see
in the 103. Psalm, and in the fourth and fifth chapter of the Apocalips:
Finally, thankfulness is an honor due to Gods name, it is the law of Equity
and Nature, the very heathen having victories, have praised their false gods:
all creatures in their kind praise God, we can never sufficiently praise him.
It is a good thing, it is pleasant, and praise is comely, says the Prophet;
therefore, let us all with heart and tongue, and life, privately and openly
praise our good God for his wonderful and manifold blessings continually
bestowed upon us.

An Application to the present times, Showing The treachery of Popish
religion, and the right use of our late Deliverance.
Of the great dangers we were in of late by our cruel adversaries. Section I.
Having thus gone through the chief matters and points of this worthy
Psalm, let us now come to apply that which has been spoken, to our
selves. This Psalm, as I take it, is very pertinent, and fitting for these
times, and therefore I have made especial choice of it. David assaulted by his
enemies, was in danger of his life, as you may see before: we have been in
like state of late. David yet escaped by the goodness of God, and so have we
done. David thus delivered, made a holy use of it; his trust in God and love to
him, is more increased by this deliverance, he is stirred up to thankfulness for
these mercies past, and to prayer for further graces in time to come. Let us
see what, in duty and conscience, we are bound to do, for our late and great
preservation. First let us speak of the dangers we were in, by the malice
and subtilty of our enemies. Secondly, of the greatness of our deliverance.
Thirdly, what profit and use we are to make of it. Many plottes and practices
sundry times heretofore have bin devised against our Prince, Church, and
Country by the wicked Papists: many subtle and bloody conspiracies have bin
plotted and attempted by them; but this of late surpasses and surmounteth all,
so that this plot is rightly called by one, Legion, which contains the number
of six thousand devils: for howsoever their intent and meaning may be, was
heretofore to overthrow the Gospel, and professors of it; yet their chief
attempt, was most, and directly against the life of her Majesty, our gracious
sovereign good Queen Elizabeth indeed then (under God) the breath of our
nosthrilles. But now this late plot was more cruel and bloody, purposing in
one day, by one terrible blow, not only to cut off our gracious King, but
Queen, and royal issue, nobles, counsel, gentry, the chief in blood,
wisdom, learning, gravity in the whole land, the higher and lower house of
Parliament, the strong man, the man of war, the Judge and the prophet, the
prudent and the aged, the honorable and the counselor, and the eloquent man,
the worthies of our land, the horsemen and the chariots of Israel. This was
their plot and purpose, and they made full account of it, in a moment to
overthrow all these. But I lack skill and cunning, words and eloquence, to
lay out sufficiently the malice, subtlety, barbarous cruelty, the height,
breadth, and depth of this so treacherous an attempt. For the further and more
full description of it, I refer you to the gracious speech of his Majesty,
and the discovery of this treason, in a book published by authority. Oh in
what case had this poor land been in, if they had brought their purpose to
pass! Those which remained alive, had been at their wits end, as a body
without a head, sheep without a shepherd, and so a present prey to the
woolfe. If this had come to pass, then the Papists had got their day which
they long gaped for: all sound preachers and professors had been cut off, the
Gospel suppressed, the idolatrous mass set up and established. Who can
express the woeful miseries, calamities, and desolations of this land, if the
plottes of our ennemies had taken place? Let the aged be asked, let ancient
histories be read, let Chronicles be thoroughly searched, and see if there were
ever any the like cruelty or treachery, to this treachery in the Vault. Simeon
and Leui (says Jacob) brethren in evil, the instruments of cruelty, are in
their habitations, into their secret let not my soul come: my glory, be not
thou joined with their assembly, for in their wrath they slew a man, and in
their selfe-wil they dug down Genesis 49. 5
a wall, cursed be their wrath that was fierce, and their rage for it was
cruel. The treachery and cruelty of Simeon and Leui is set out in another
place, when their sister Dina was Genesis 34.
ravished by Shechim the son of Hamor, and after he was content to marry her,
and he and the Shecamites were content to be in league with Jacob, and to be
circumcised: these two sons of Jacob, Simeon and Leui came upon Hamor and
Shechim, and their people being sore, and slew them with the sword. This was a
cruel and treacherous part, but they had some color and pretense for it; their
sister was defiled and made a whore, and thed did it in revenge. But our
enemies can have no such just color or pretense. It was a great cruelty in
Pharaoh, to purpose, and command to kill every manchilde of the Hebrews, but
yet this was by public Exodus 1.
Edict; and they were the children of his vassals. It was most Matthew 2.
savage cruelty in Herod, to kill all the male-children that were in Bethlem,
and in all the coasts thereof, but he did it to secure his own state, as he
thought, shaken by prediction, hearing that a Child was borne which should be
king of the Jews. Unnatural, and most cruel was Abimelech, in killing his
brethren, about seauenty persons. As cruel was Iehoram, in killing his
brethren with the sword. As cruel was Athaliah who destroyed all the kings
seed of the house of Judah; but yet the rage and fury of these was stayed and
stanched in the blood royal. But our bloody enemies are not satisfied with
this, their purpose and meaning was, to be drunken with the blood of many
thousands besides. But O cursed caitiffes! cruel Papists! notorious rebels!
Do you thus requite the kindness of your gracious Sovereign? He might have
cut you off before this time, but he has spared you, and given you life and
living, hoping by gentleness and mercy to win you. Is this your recompense
for his gracious meekness and patience toward you? Are these your good
works, your meritorious deeds, the notes of the true catholic church? Is this
your charity, conscience and religion? What do I speak of religion, when you
are void of good nature, humanity and civil honesty?

Of the Papists unthankfulness, requiting evil for good. Sect. II.
THe Barbarians, the heathen, the Publicans, the Turks, Pagans, Infidels, the
brute beasts will not be cruel Prou. 17. 13.
and unkind to those that are kind to them; he that rewards evil for good,
says Solomon, evil shall not depart from his house. There be, says an
ancient father, six differences, Reddere bona pro malis, non reddere mala pro
malis, etc. That is, first, to do good for evil: second, not to do evil for
evil: these are the properties of good men, and the first is the better:
third, to do good for good: fourth, and evil for evil: these are (as some
think) indifferent) but the first is nearest to good: fifth, not to do good
for good: sixth, to do evil for good: these are the properties of the wicked,
and the last is the worst. The Prophet complains Ierem. 18. 19.
thus to God, Hearken unto me, O Lord, and hear the voice of them which contend
with me, shall evil be recompensed for good? for they have dug a pit for my
soul: Remember that I stood before thee to speak good for them, and to turn
away thy wrath from them, therefore deliver up their children to famine, and
let them drop away by force of the sword, and let their wives be robbed of
their children, and be widows; let their husbands be put to death, and let
their young men be slain by the sword in the battle, let the cry be heard
from their houses, when they shall bring an host suddenly upon them, for they
have dug a pit to take me, and hid snares for my feet: yet Lord, thou
know all their counsel against me tends to death: Forgive not their
iniquity, neither put out their sin from thy sight, but let them be
overthrown before thee: deal thus with them in the time of thine anger. Thus
the prophet prays and prophesies against unkind, malicious, and wicked
ennemies. How far are you from following that counsel of our Savior Christ,
who says, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you, and pray for them which hurt you, and persecute you; that ye
may be the children of your father which is in heaven? for he makes his sun
to arise on the Matt. 5. 44.
evil and the good, and sends rain on the just, and unjust: for if ye love
them which love you, what reward shall ye have? Do not the Publicans even
the same? and if ye be friendly to your brethren only, what singular thing do
ye, do not even the Publicans likewise? But these our enemies are most
unkind and cruel against their Prince, their fathers, their friends, their
kindred, and country. The Apostle says, Be not overcome with evil, but
overcome evil Romans 12. 21.
with goodness. And again, See that no man recompense evil 1 Thessalonians. 5. 15*
for evil unto any man. It is said of our Savior Christ, that when he was
reviled, he reviled not again: when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed it to him that judges righteously. When the two Disciples James and
John 1. Pet. 2. 24.
saw the vnkindesse of the Samaritans, who would not entertain Luke 9.
their master and his company, they said, Lord, will thou that we command
that fire come down from heaven and consume them, even as Elias did? Christ
perceiving their rash and carnal affection, said, Ye know not of what
spirit ye are. As if he should say, what a desire is this! how rash, and how
uncharitable! which makes you forget yourselues. It is the work of the evil
spirit, to destroy men, but ye are my Disciples, and therefore must follow the
direction of my Spirit, which is meek, and humble, patient of injuries,
ouercomming evil with goodness. And yet the Disciples might seem to have
some good ground for their desire of revenge. It was against the Samaritanes,
who would not receive Christ and his company, who were idolaters, and ennemies
to Gods people; yet Christ forbids and rebukes the desire of revenge in the
Disciples, though against wicked people, he tells them, they must have
another spirit in them, savoring of meekness and patience. The Spirit of
God is not the Spirit of revenge, of treason, of blood, but the spirit of
truth, of humility, and love.

How horrible a sin it is to murder any, much more Princes. Section, III.
IT is a horrible sin, wilfully, maliciously, presumptuously to murder one
man, though a private person. The royal Law says, Thou shall not kill; the
Lord hates the hands which sheede innocent blood. The talking of the wicked,
says Solomon, is to lie in wait for blood. Again, Pro. 12. 6, 10
a righteous man regards the life of his beast, but the mercies of the wicked
are cruel. Again, The man that does Pro. 18. 17.
violence against the blood of a person, shall fly unto the grave, and they
shall not stay him. If a man (says God) come presumptuously upon his neighbor
to slay him with Exo. 21. 12, 28
guile, thou shall take him from mine Altar, that he may die. And in the same
chapter he says, If an ox goare a man, or woman, that he die, the ox
shall be stoned to death, and his flesh shall not be eaten. Wilful murder is
against the very light and law of Nature; and therefore before Genesis 42. 21
the Law was given, when the brethren of Joseph went into Egypt, to buy corn,
and they were taken for Spies, they said one to another, We have verily
sinned against our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul when he
besought us, and we would not hear him; therefore is this trouble come upon
us. Therefore the Mariners who were Jonas 1. 12.
in the ship with Jonas, and he bade them cast him into the sea, and so the
tempest should cease; for I know, says he, that for my sake this great
tempest is upon you: yet they rowed and labored to bring the ship to land,
but they could not. Then they cried unto the Lord, and said, We beseech thee,
O Lord, we beseech thee, let us not perish for Acts 28.
this man's life, and lay not upon us innocent blood. When Paul was at Mileta,
the Barbarians used him kindly, and kindled a fire for him and his company: and
Paul gathering a few sticks, and laying them upon the fire, there came a viper
out of the heat, and leaped upon his hand, which when the Barbarians saw,
they said amongst themselves, this man surely is a murderer, whom though
he has escaped the sea, yet vengeance has not suffered to live: by which
place we see, that although the judgment of these men was rash against Paul,
yet, that murder is detestable in the judgment of Barbarians and Infidels.
Murder overthrows the Image of God, innocent blood cries for vengeance. The
devil is said to be a murderer, and murderers, if they die in their sin,
are shut out of Gods kingdom. Now if murdering of any person wilfully be so
heinous a sin, what a bloody murder had this been, to kill so many
thousands, as they intended to kill? Rebels and Traitors are in the highest
degree of murder. The Lord says, He that smites father and mother, let
him die the Exodus 21. 15
death. Some heathen Rulers have made no law at all against such, because they
thought none to be so wicked; But how unnatural are these, which would have
killed so many worthy fathers of church and commonwealth? The Lord Exodus 22.
28
says, Thou shall not rail upon the Judges, neither speak evil of the Ruler
of thy people. Curse not the King, says Eccles. 10. 20
Solomon, no not in thy thought, neither curse the rich in thy bedchamber,
for the foul of the heaven shall carry the voice, and that which has wings
shall declare the matter. Eccles. 10.
If we are not so much as to speak or think irreverently of Kings, much
less are we to devise mischief against them, much less are we to rise,
conspire, and rebel against them. He that resists, says the Apostle,
procures to himself damnation. David would not lay hands on Saul the Lords
anointed, though his ennemie, though wicked, though he had just title to his
kingdom, having him at an aduanrage, in a secret place; and being set on by
his men to kill Saul, he did only cut off the lap of Saules garment privily,
and yet he was touched in his heart, and repented of it, and said to his men,
The Lord keep me from doing that thing to my Master the Lords anointed, to
lay my hand upon him, for he is the anointed of 1. Sam. 24 4.
the Lord. And when Saul came out of the cave, David said to him, O my Lord
the King, and inclined his face to the earth, and bowed himself: he tells
him what he has done, purges himself of false reports, and puts Saul in
mind of his hard dealing toward him: whereupon Saul answered thus kindly
unto David, his conscience compelling him to it. Is this thy voice, says he,
my son David? And Saul lifted up his voice, and wept, and said to him, Thou
art more righteous than I, for thou have rendered me good, I have rendered thee
evil: wherefore, the Lord render thee good for that thou have done unto me 1.
Sam. 26. 7.
this day. And in an other place, when David found Saul sleeping, and Abishai
said to David, God has closed thine enemy into thy hand this day, now
therefore I pray thee let me smite him once with a spear to the earth, and I
will not smite him again. David said to Abishai, Destroy him not, for who can
lay his hand on the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? Moreover, David said,
As the Lord lives, either the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to
die, or he shall descend into battle and perish; the Lord keep me from
laying my hand on the Lords anointed: But I pray thee take the spear that is
at his head, and the pot of water, and let us go hence. And after, when one
came and told him, that Saul being in anguish, he furthered his death, whereas
the party looked for thanks at David's 2. Sam. 1. 13
hands, he said unto him, How wast not thou afraid to put out thy hand to
destroy the anointed of the Lord? Then David called one of his young men and
said, Go near and fall upon him, and he smote him that he died. Then said
David unto him, Thy blood be upon thine own head, for thine own mouth has
testified against thee, saying, I have slain the Lords anointed, and yet
Saul fell upon his own sword, and being yet alive, in anguish, desired and
wished the party to dispatch him.

That Papists and other persecuters, are like Hunters and Fishers. Sect. IIII.
But the Papists seek all occasions, devise all plottes, and practices, to
sheed innocent blood; they spare none, they thirst and hunt after the blood of
men. The Lord says Jeremy 16. 16
by Jeremy* I will send out many Fishers, and they shall fish them: and after,
I will send out many Hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and
from every hill. By the Fishers and Hunters he means Babylonians, and
Chaldeans, enemies of the Church. There is hunting of beasts, and thus Esau
hunted; and this kind of hunting is not unlawful, so that we have respect to
our company, so that we offend not God, by cursing and blaspheming, so that we
be not hindered thereby from the duties which we owe to God and our neighbor.
There is also a hunting of the blood of men, the chief hunter this way is the
devil himself, who compasses the earth to and fro, and is ever 1. Pet. 5. ^.
ranging for his prey, and like a roaring lion walks about, seeking whom he
may devour. This is the great red dragon which persecuteth the woman, and is
come down to the earth with great wrath, knowing that he has but a short
time. And such a hunter was Nimrod, he was a mighty hunter before the Lord;
wherefore it is said, As Nimrod Geuesis 10. 9.
the mighty hunter before the Lord. The meaning is, that he was not ashamed,
nor afraid to commit cruelty in the Lords presence. Of such Hunters speaks
Solomon, Prouer. 1. 16
Their feet run to evil, and make haste to sheede blood: certainly, as
without cause the net is spread before the eyes of all that has wing; so they
lay wait for blood, and lie Prouer. 6. 26.
privily for their lives. And he says again, because of the whoorish woman, a
man is brought to a morsel of bread, and such a woman will hunt for the
precious life of a man. Of such complayneth Gods people, Mine enemies chase me
sore, like a bird, without cause, Lam. 3. 52 Again, they hunt our steps,
that we cannot go in our streets, our end is near, our days are fulfilled,
for our end is come, our persecuters are swifter than the Eagles of the heaven,
they pursued us upon the mountains, and laid wait for us in Lament. 4. 18.
the wilderness. The breath of our nosthrills, the anointed of the Lord was
taken in their nets. Such cursed and bloody hunters are these our enemies the
Papists, and by some of them, under the pretense of the other kind of hunting.
There was about the time of the day which they looked for, a hunting match
appointed by sir Euerard Digby, and others at Dunchurch in Warwickeshire,
though their mind was Nimrod-like, about a far other manner of hunting, more
bent upon the blood of reasonable men, and of the woorthiest persons in the
country, than of bruit beasts. Numbers of people being flocked together, upon
pretense of hunting, they meant to make a sudden surprise of the Kings eldest
daughter that gracious, virtuous, and sweet Lady, she being under the
careful and faithful tuition of most honorable persons, not far then from
that place. But because the Scripture compares such bloud-suckers and enemies
to Hunters and Fishers, let us see wherein they agree. Hunters walk and lie in
wait for their prey openly and privily, day and night, enduring labor, hunger
and cold, they pursue wild beasts, they take no pity to kill, but it is a
sport to them: they observe diligently the nature of beasts, they mark, time,
place, instruments how to take them, and sometimes they catch the subtilest
beast; such are the bloody enemies of the Church, such are our adversaries,
they have been as Hunters, Fishers, and Fowlers, to catch, snare, and entrappe
us a long time, night and day they consulted to overthrow our state, they have
had the counsel of Achitophel, they have had advise from Rome and Rheimes.
What plot is abroad, what practices in Ireland, and at home. How many treasons
and treacheries heretofore? They spare for no cost nor labor, they thirst
after blood, there is no pity nor compassion in them at all; it is their
delight and joy, to kill, murder, and spoil. They have tried all ways, all
devises, all subtle means; and now at last, that which was most mischievous,
and (as they thought) the overthrow of us all; but yet the cunningest hunter,
fisher, fowler, speedeth not always, they often loose their labors, so these
bloody Hunters have missed of their purposes, their train is discovered, their
baits are espied, their snares and nets are broken, and we are still in
safety. Though these Hunters have set their toil, these Fowlers have dug
their pitte-falles closely and cunningly, these Fishers have spread and laid
their nets so privily, that they made account to take and catch us all
unawares; although they have had the assistance, advise, policy, cunning,
craft, counsel of the greatest, wisest, in taking, catching, betraying,
killing, and bloud-hunting in the world, though the chief workman the
devil, that red dragon, the chief hunter and destroyer of mankind has set
them on work, although they have many other cunning and mighty adherents,
assistants, helpers, furtherers, and frinds; yet all is in vain, and God does
pursue them as murderers, and traitors, his just and heavy hand is upon them:
and we have just cause to say with the people of God, Praised be God which has
not given us as a prey to their teeth, our soul is escaped even as a bird out
of the snare of the fowler, the snare is broken, and we are delivered, our
help stands in the name of the Lord which has made heaven and earth: and we
see that performed that is spoken of in Job, Job 4. 8.
I have seen them that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, to reap the same;
with the blast of God they perish, and with the breath of his nostrils are they
consumed. The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the lioness, and the teeth
of the lions whelpe are broken; the lion perishes for lack of a prey, and the
lions whelps are scattered abroad. And in the next chapter, He scatters the
devises of the crafty, so that their hands cannot accomplish that which they
do enterprise, he takes the wise in their craftiness, and the Job 5. 12.
counsel of the wicked is made foolish, they meet with darkness in the day
time, and groape at noone day as in the night; but he saves the poor from the
sword, from the mouth, and from the hand of the violent manne. And Prouer. 1. 30
Wisdom says to such as refuse her, They would none of my counsel, but
despised all my correction, and therefore shall they eat of the fruit of
their own way, and be filled with their own devises* And again, He that
sows iniquity shall reap affliction, and the rod of his anger shall fail.

Of the miserable end of Traitors. Section V.
ANd mark now, Oye Papists, and consider it well, the just and heavy hand of
God, always stretched out against traitors and rebels. The people of Israel,
because they rebelled against Moses, have this punishment laid upon them by
the Lord, that they are shut out from the sight Numb. 16.
of the land of Canaan, promised to their fathers, Korah, Dathan, and Abiram:
because they rebelled against Moses and Aaron, the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed them up, with their families, and all the men that were with them, 2.
Sam. 18.
and all their goods. Absol^n rebelleth against his own father, draws the
hearts of the people from him. David was still kind to him, and would have
spared him, but the Lord cut him off, he was hanged in an Oak, he was slain,
and cast into a pit. Sheba raises Israel against David, but in 2. Sam. 20.
the end, his head was cut off, and delivered unto Ioab. Adoniah 1. Kings 1.
would have the kingdom from Solomon, contrary to Gods appointment, and his
fathers mind, but in the end, he was put to death, by the commandment of
Solomon. The servants of Ammon conspired against him, and slew 2. Kings 21.
the King in his own house, but the people of the land slew all them which
conspired against king Ammon. Zedekiah because 2 Kings 25. 7
he rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar, which had caused him to swear by God, he
was condemned for his perjurie 2. Chron. 36.
and treason, though it was against a wicked and idolatrous king, his eyes were
put out, and he was bound in Ester 2. 22.
chains, and his sons were slain before him. When Mordecai sat in the kings
gate, and saw two of the kings Eunuchs, that they sought to lay hand on the
king Ahashuerosh, he told it to Queen Ester, and Ester certified the king
thereof in Mordecai his name; and when inquisition was made, it was found so,
therefore they were both hanged upon a tree. Thus we see the manifold
examples, the miserable end of traitors and rebels, that either they are cut
off by the hand of man, or else the Lord himself does execute judgment upon
them. And let me add yet one more, the fearful example of Judas an Apostle,
a professor and preacher of the Gospel, and yet the child of perdition, and a
traitor against his own Master Christ Jesus. After he had wrought his
treason, and betrayed Christ into the hands of his enemies, he became
desperate, and hanged himself. And let us consider our own times, has not
God always discovered the manifold treasons and treacheries against our
gracious Queen Elizabeth? Have not the chief Authors of them had experience
of this hand of God? Have not some fled their country, some killed themselves?
And were not others cut off by the sword? And touching these late conspirators,
has not the Lord brought them to shame and confusion? Were not some of the
chief of them maimed, and some killed with powlder, wherewith they made
account to have killed many thousands. Wherein we may observe the just
judgment of God upon them, and we see that verified, In quo peccamus, in
eodem plectimur; In the same thing we sin, in the same thing we are
punished. Many other of this conspiracy are in hold, and abide the sword of
the Magistrate, and I doubt not but God will more and more discover and bring
to shame, the authors, favorers, and friends of this bloody conspiracy.

That the Popes curse is unjust. That he himself and all his adherents are
cursed. Section VI.
But these rebels will object and say for themselves, that both our King, and
we, are heretics, and therefore excommunicated and cursed by their holy
father the Pope, so that they may justly, and by authority from him, cut us
Acts 24. 14.
off. But we answer with Saint Paul, By that way which you call Heresy, we
worship the Lord God of our fathers, believing all things which are written in
the Law and the Prophets. You indeed count him an heretic which obeys not
all the Popes Decrees, Legends, and Fables: but if we were such as ye would
have us, who has given the Pope authority to curse our King, and us: Where
has he any power from Patriarch, Prophet, Christ, Apostles, God, or Angels,
to curse the Lords anointed? Even as much as he has for treasons and
rebellions; but of this more hereafter. I will now answer you as one answers
the brutish thunderbolt of Pope Sixtus the fifth, against Henry the most
excellent King of Navarre, and the most noble, Henry Bourbon prince of Condie,
he answers, that the Pope is a Judge incompetent and insufficient, therefore
the sentence is void. The Pope, says he, has been long ago condemned by
the most part of Christendom, viz. England, Scotland, Denmark, Sweueland,
the most part of Germany, and the most part of Heluetia, for seven grievous
crimes: First, for impitie. Secondly, for tirannie. Thirdly, for corrupt
religion. Fourthly, for sacrilege. Fifthly, for treason. Sixthly, for rebellion.
Seauenthly, for forgery. Now till he purge himself of these and other
grievous crimes, he is not fit to judge or accuse the basest amongst us; and
indeed no man may be Judge in his own cause. And further he says, that the
cause of unjust excommunication, redoundeth upon the head of him that
accurseth, according to the saying of Augustine, intemerarium, rash judgment
does for the most part hurt him nothing: upon whom judgment is rashly given;
but him that judges rashly, must the rashness of necessity hurt. And it
follows, what does it hurt a man, that man's ignorance will blot him out of
that table, if so be an evil conscience does not blot him out of the book of
the living? Think of Augustine what thou will, only let not my conscience
accuse me in the eyes of God. And again, though thou be condemned of man for
a time, the earthly seat is one, and the heavenly throne is another: from the
lower thou receiuest sentence, from the higher a crown. I will say that
boldly, and not rashly, that if any of the faithful be unjustly accused, it
shall rather hurt him that does, then him that suffers this injury. For the
holy ghost that dwells in the Saints, by whom every man is bound and loosed,
does not punish any man undeservedly. To this agrees Solomon, as the sparrow
by flying, Prouer. 26. 2.
and the swallow by flying escape, so the curse that is causeless, shall not
come. Indeed there is difference betwixt Gods curse, and man's curse; I will
bless them that bless thee, says God to Abraham, and curse them that curse
thee, Genesis 12. 3*
so long as we are sure that we are the children of Abraham, and so have part in
Gods blessings, we do not care for the Popes curse, and how can he curse
others, that is accursed himself? Now both Pope and Papists are all accursed,
and excommunicated by the mouth of God himself; cursed be the man says God,
that shall make any carved or molten image, which is an abomination unto the
Lord, the Deuteronomy. 27. 1^*
work of the hands of the craftesmen, and puts it in a secret place, and
all the people shall answer and say, so be Psalm. 97 6. Psalm. 73. 25.
it. Confounded be all they, says David, that serve graven images, and glory
in Idols. And again he says, They that withdraw themselves from thee, shall
perish, thou destroyest all them that go whooring from thee. Woe to him says
the Prophet, that says to the wood, awake, and to the dumb stone, rise up it
shall teach thee; behold it is laid over with gold, silver, and there is no
breath in it. By all these places the Pope and Papists are cursed, they command
and set up images, they worship stocks and stones, they give divine honor to
creatures, and so commit spiritual whoredom. Cursed be he, says God, that
curses his father and mother, and all the people shall say, so be it. And
again, Cursed be he that smites his neighbor secretly, Deu. 27. 16, 24
and all the people shall say, so be it. The Papists curse fathers and mothers,
Kings and Queens, they allow, command, and practice murder and treasons
against them. Cursed says God be he, that makes the blind go out of the way,
and all the people shall say, so be it: Cursed Pope and his clergy, they are
blind leaders of the blind, false prophets, seducing, and corrupting poor
souls to their own destruction: Woe to them says God, that speak good of
evil, and evil of good: which put darkness for light, and Esaias 5. 20.
light for darkness: that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for sower. Cursed
Papists which commend errors and fables, Verse 21.
and disgrace the true faith and religion of God. Woe to them that are wise in
their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight. Cursed Pope and Papists,
which prefer your own cursed and foolish inventions, before the true Verse
23.
and heavenly wisdom of God. Woe to them says God, which justify the wicked
for a reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him. Woe
then to Pope and Papistes^, which justify heretics, idolaters, false
teachers, traitors, and rebels, which disgrace and condemn the Lords
anointed, true christians, true subjects, and the true and faithful ministers
of God. Woe to rebellious children, says the Lord, that take counsel, but
not of me: Woe then to Papists, which despise the counsel of Esaias 31.
God against themselves. Cursed be the man says God, that trusts in man, and
makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart from the Lord. Cursed Pope and
Papists, Ierem. 17. 5
which trust in creatures, in Angels, in Saints, in the Virgin, in the Apostles:
they pray unto them, therefore they trust in them. For how shall they call on
him, in whom Romans 10. 14.
they have not believed says the Apostle? Christ pronounces many woes against
the Scribes and Pharisees, because they shut up the kingdom of heaven before
men, because under pretense of long prayers, they devoured widows houses,
because they did tithe minte, annisse, and cumin, and left the weightier
matters of the law, because they made clean the outside of the cup, and left
it foul within. Woe then to the Pope and his clergy, for they shut and lock
up the means of salvation from Gods people, they under pretense of devotion,
have devoured houses, towns, countries, and a great part of the world. They
strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel, urging toies, trifles, ridiculous
ceremonies, before the commandments of God: they are notorious hypocrites,
making show to the world of devotion, conscience, holiness, mortification, and
yet are full of profaneness, idolatry, pride, covetousness, whordomes,
treasons, and rebellions. If an Angel from heaven, says the Galat. 1. 8.
Apostle, preach any other ways unto you, then that which we have preached
unto you, let him be accursed. And the holy ghost says in another place, If
any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the curses that
are written in this book. And if any man shall diminish of the words of this
prophecy, Apocal. 22. 18
God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy
city etc. Cursed Pope and Papists, for they hold and teach another Gospel,
they make their own rraditions equal with Gods word, cursing must needs be
upon them, because they curse others, and delight in cursing: therefore says
David as he loves cursing, so shall it come upon him; and as he loves not
blessings, so shall he be far from them. The Pope, and Papists, and popery, are
cursed by their Trident confess. 6. can. 21.
own canon: the words of their canon are these. If any shall say, that Christ
Jesus was given from God to men as a redeemer to whom they should trust, and
not also as a law giver to whom they should obey, let him be accursed. They
themselves are all cursed by this canon; for howsoever in words they may say
it, yet in deed they deny it: for if Christ be a redeemer to whom we should
trust, why do they not wholly, and only trust in him? And if Christ be the only
Lawgiver of the Church, to be heard and obeyed, then O seduced and blind
Papists, your religion must fa^l to the ground, being contrary to the law of
this Lawgiver. Where have you any word of Christ for your Images, invocation
of Saints, purgatory, prayer for the dead, for the Popes supremacy, his
offices, orders, discipline, and traditions? How is the authority of the
Church, their decrees and devises above Christ's laws? If he be the only
lawgiver of the Church, if we are to hear and obey him only in matters of
religion, he commands prayers, and obedience to Kings, and not murders, and
rebellions: so that Papists are cursed by this their own canon, seeing they
take not Christ, but the Pope to be the law giver to their conscience.

How popish Priests and Jesuits accuse one another. Sect. VII.
BUT the Pope is a deceiuer, that beast, that Antichrist, that man of sin,
and your chief teachers are blind guides, false prophets, and plotters of
treason, even your great Doctors the Jesuits, which will needs have their
name from Jesus. They have had heretofore, and have still, a chief hand in
such practices, they are ringleaders, authors, deuisers, perswaders,
furtherers, and teachers of such bloody actions; even those which pretend most
religion, devotion, and holiness; they have done, and do still most mischief.
They have seduced and drawn you to errors, superstitions, idolatries,
treasons, and rebellions: and except you repent, to the utter perdition both of
your souls and bodies. And though we know by experience this to be true, yet
for further proof, lest you should think we speak falsely, or of malice, I
tell you truly what I have read in a book come forth of late years, being a
complaint of your secular Priests against the Jesuits. They make mention of
bitter contention amongst themselves, the Priests account the Jesuits
Macheuilians, Pharisees, Hipocrites, they charge them with dissension amongst
themselves, with pride, and covetousness, that they are the firebrands of all
sedition, the causes of all the discord in England, that they have driven some
to desperation, enforcing them to leave England, and to enter into some
religious order, that by cunning sleights they have gotten into their hands all
authority, and all the stock, and treasure of many, above the sum of 50000.
pounds English, that they attempt to make England a Province, that they pill
and pole Catholics in England, under the color of holy uses, that they have
swallowed up kingdoms, and monarchs, that in every Catholic house, (and such
houses are in steed of the Church) either themselves would be Pastors, or
depute others in their rooms, they endeavor that al relief given to
prisoners* or in case of dispensations may come into their hands, they
challenge to themselves a spiritual monarchy over all England, they fawn
upon noble and rich men, and inueagle them by all fair means to sell all they
have, and enter into their society: they have induced women to become Nuns,
and to leave such goods as they have to them. The Priests charge them further,
that they are the inuenters of rumors and news, that they will be superiors
over the clergy, that they delight in equivocation, that is, in a subtle, and
dissembling kind of speech, they accuse one another, the Jesuits accuse the
Priests of drunkenness, and who redome, the Priests accuse them of pride, and
ambition, of donatisme, and account them as knaves, and Devils. It is an old
saying and a true, When thieves fall out, true men shall come by their goods.
You may see, O foolish Papists, that there is neither that unity nor holiness
amongst your teachers, as they profess and pretend: yet these are your best
guides, your holy fathers, your great doctors to whom you commit the
government of your souls, and these you follow, and are led by them in all
things, so that as the Apostle says of the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 11. 20
who suffer themselves to be abused by false Apostles, You suffer, says he, if
a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour you, if a man take your goods,
if a man exalt himself, if a man smite you on the face. And with Iesabel you
are content to reverence and entertain Baals Priests, but ye cannot abide any
of the true prophets of God, ye will not harken to them at all which teach you
truth and obedience; ye are like the Pharisees to whom Christ said, I am come
in my fathers name, and you receive me not, if another shall come in his own
name, him will ye receive.

Against rash ^athes and vows. Sect. VIII.
But ye will say, ye have made a vow to the Popes religion, to do what he
commands, though it be to practice treasons. You have taken the Sacramen^
upon it, and have bound your selves to it: you are promised the Popes pardon,
you are born in hand, that it is a meritorious work, and that you shall be
remembered at the Altar; at the Halter, I might have said. But are ye so far
blinded? do ye suffer your selves to be so much seduced? Is any work good but
that which God allows? Is any work meritorious but the work of Christ's
death? Are notorious sins against the law of God and Nature, are these
meritorious? Indeed it is true, they merit hell fire. Can any mortal man
pardon sin? Are you blinder than the Pharisees, who Mar. 2. 7.
held this truth firmly, that none could forgive sins but God only; and
thought it blasphemy for any man to take authority upon him to forgive sins?
And can any Pope or Angel dispense with the royal law of God? And is the
Sacrament of the holy supper a sacrament of blood, of treasons, murder,
mischiefs? Is it not a sacrament of grace, peace, and love? How do you abuse
the Lords sacrament? Or what kind of Sacrament have you? Did ever any of the
Apostles, or any of the faithful, take this Sacrament for any such wicked
purpose? Are we not by the Sacrament more nearly united to Christ and his
member? Is it not a means of growth in grace, in love, in thankfulness and
holiness? From hence let me use an argument against transubstantiation;
Christ says in the sixth of John, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, he dwells in me, and I in him. But Christ dwells not in traitors and
murderers: and therefore ye were not truly partakers of his flesh and blood,
ye took the Sacrament of the Lord against the Lord, he took with Judas, a
soppe, and then went with him to betray your master. But ye say you have
bound your selves to the performance of these plotts and practices, by vows,
promises, oaths; and therefore must needs perform them. Indeed many are so
foolish, that they think all promises and oaths are to be kept: that which
they are not bound to keep, they are most careful to keep. That which God
commands, and which they by promise are bound to do, they have least care
and conscience to keep. Such oaths and promises as are against the rule of
faith and charity, may safely be broken. Indeed the Lord says, Whosoever
voweth a vow to the Lord, or swears an Number. 30. 3.
oath, to bind himself by a bond, he shall not break his promise, but shall
do according to all which proceeds out of his mouth. But it follows; if a
woman vow a vow to the Lord, and bind her self by a bond, being in her
fathers house, in the time of her youth, and her father hear her vow and bond
wherewith she has bound her self and her father hold his peace concerning
her, then all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith she has bound
her self, shall stand. But if her father disallow her, the same day that he
hears all her vows and bonds, wherewith she has bound her self, they
shall not be of value; and the Lord will forgive her, because her father
disallowed her; by the which place we may see, that all vows are not to be
Judge. 8. 33.
kept. When Gideon was dead, the children of Israel forgate the Lord their God,
which had delivered them out of the hands of their enemies on every side, and
they turned away and went a whooring after Baalim, and bound themselves by
covenant to make Baal their god; yet afterward by the alowance of God, they
forsook Baal, and worshipped the Lord. David hearing of Nabals churli^nesse
and unkindness against him, he makes a rash vow to destroy Nabal and all his
house. But after he heard the good counsel of Abigail, he recanted his
promise, and stayed himself; It is better to sin only in words, than to
join wicked deeds to them. It is better to sin once, than to add sin
unto sin: he that swears rashly and perfourmeth it, doubleth his sin,
and offends God more; and therefore it is a Proverb, Satius est recurrere,
quam male currere: It is better to run back again, than to run amiss.
This is a common rule, In stul^s promissis rescinde fidem; In foolish promises
break thy faith. If in foolish promises, much more in bloody and wicked
promises. In the Popes decrees heretofore there is great disputation about
this point; but the conclusion is, that all oaths are to be broken which are
against the word of God and our salvation; and this is a common rule, that the
inferior can not bind himself to that which in it self is unlawful, and
against the obedience of the superior. God therefore is excepted, against whom
if any thing be commanded, he is to be obeyed before men. The ancient fathers
are also of this mind, It is against duty Ambros. lib. pri* offic. ca. 50
sometimes, says Ambrose, to keep an oath, as Herod, who promised to the
daughter of Herodias whatsoere she would ask, and then murdered John the
Baptist, to fulfill his oath; and he brings in the example of Iepthah, and
concludes* It were better never to promise any such thing, than for keeping of
promise, to murder. Augustine says, That an oath was not ordained for this
purpose, that it should be a bond of iniquity, of murdering, mother, or
brother, or committing of any other sin. This amongst other things he
speaks writing to Seuerus a Bishop: and in his Sermon of beheading John the
Baptist, he says; In that David did not fulfill his promise and oath, in
sheeding innocent blood, it was the more godliness in him. Iurauit David
temere, sed non impleuit maiori pietate: David, says he, swear rashly, but
through greater piety he did not fulfill his oath. Hesy^hius says, In Leuit.
libr. sexto ca. decimo nono. Greg. lib. 5. expos. in pri. lib. reg. ca. 14* De
summo bono lib. 2. ca. 32.
not only that is an unjust oath which is broken, but that which is unjustly
kept. And Gregory says, when we have taken an evil oath, it is better that it
be broken, then that we commit grievous sins, to the which, by our oath, we
have bound our selves. Isidorus says, that that oath is not to be kept,
whereby unwarily we promise to do some evil, as if a man should promise
continual company with a harlot. It is better, not to fulfill that promise,
then to live in filthy whoredom. And in another place he says, In turpi
voto, muta decretum, etc. In a filthy vow change thy mind, it is a wicked
promise which cannot be fulfilled without wickedness: and this is Beda his
counsel writing on Matthew. If it fall out, says he, that we take a rash oath,
which if we keep will turn to a bad end, we know that we may freely upon
better advise change our minds, and rather in such a necessity to forswear
our selves, then for the avoiding of perjurie to fall into greater sins.
Bernard in his Epistle 219. to three Bishops: No wise man says he, doubts
but that unlawful oaths may be broken. Peter Lombard in the third book of
Sentences, dis. 39. speaking of rash vows and oaths, makes this conclusion;
that some oaths are not to be kept, and he that swears rashly sins, he
that changes, does well, he that changes not, his sin is double. And Hugo de
sanct. Victore, he that Lib. pri. p^. ^* ca. 14.
swears to do evil, sins. It is better then to break the oath, then to
keep it: yet so, that he avoid the evil to the which he has sworn, and also
acknowledge his fault in swearing rashly. And in the To^tane Council, 8. cap.
2. it is said, that it is more tolerable to reject the vows of foolish
promises, then by keeping them, to fulfill the measure of grievous sins. We
are to consider which is the greater or lesser evil. When we are compelled to
break our oath, we offend God: but we do then only discredit our selves, when
we keep wicked and hurtful promises. We do proudly contemn the
commandments of God, we do hurt our neighbors by wicked cruelty, and we
kill our selves with a more cruel sword. In the other we are stricken with a
double dart of sins, but here we are thrust through with a three fold dart.
And mark this, O ye foolish Papists, which stand so much upon your bloody
vows, and wicked oaths, by the judgment of this Council you offend three
ways. First, against many express commandments of God. Secondly, against
your sovereign King and country. And thirdly, the most terrible blow is upon
your own souls, without great and speedy repentance.

Against toleration of Religion. Sect. IX.
BUT ye will yet say, ye would feign have toleration of religion: you have long
looked for it, you have been so bold as to make petitions to his Majesty in
this behalf, you hoped for it, and are disappointed, and this is the cause of
your grief and coffeehouse: but do ye not know, that in religion there
must be no halting, no compounding, 1. Kin. 1^. 21.
no dissembling? Elia says to the people, How long halt ye betwixt two
opinions? if the Lord be God, follow him, if Baall be he, then go after him.
We must do as the Lord God commands us, and not turn aside to the right
hand Ose. 17. 8.
nor to the left. Ephraim, says God, has mixed himself among the people,
Ephraim is a cake on the harth not turned. In the which place, the Lord
rebukes them, because they were neither hot nor cold, and suffered mixture
of religion. There is but one true shepherd, and one true fold: and as the
Apostle says, there is one Lord, one faith, one baptism. And again he says,
Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the 1. Cor. 10. 21.
cup of Devils: ye cannot be partakers of the table of the Lord, and of the
table of Devils. And in another place, What concord has Christ with Belial? or
what part has the believer with 2. Cor. 6. 15
the Infidel? and what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? Gods people
might have no fellowship with the idolaters. The true Church is a spouse, an
honest wife, not a strumpet, who admits and imbraceth all. A lamb, and a
lion, Isaac and Ismael, the ark of God and Dagon, Christ and Antichrist cannot
agree together. Will any man be so mad as to suffer fire in his bosom? the
pestilence in his house? will any suffer wolves amongst sheep? and serpents
amongst his children? And you that stand for this toleration, why do not you
suffer the Gospel, where popery bears sway? why do you not tolerate the
professors of it? why does not the Pope give toleration to true christians, in
Rome, in Italy, in Spain, and other places of his dominions? Why does he
deal so cruelly in those places with any that do truly profess the name of
Christ? your religion is an apostasy from Christ, and antichristianity: your
Mass a dumb and dead service, without edification, piety, or comfort. O that
you once knew how you are deluded in it, and how injurious it is to the blood
of Christ! ye your selves are gross heretics and idolaters, as we have
often proved, and are ready still to prove to your faces. Now such are in no
case to be tolerated in the Church of God, but to be severely punished. He
that offers unto any Exodus 22. 2^
Gods, says Moses, save unto the Lord only, shall be slain. In the first and
second commandment, we are taught to worship God alone, and are forbidden a^
strange and false worship. The magistrate is the keeper of both the tables of
Gods commandments, he may as well put to death Idolaters, as murderers,
whoremongers, and thieves: and indeed those do spiritually murder the soul,
commit spiritual whoredom, and rob God of his honor, so that they may as
lawfully give toleration to murder and theft, and adultery, as to false worship
and idolatry.

They must first of all and chiefly, urge, maintain, and defend Gods true
religion. There can be no true subjects to them, except they be first subject
to God. Obedience of the second table flows from obedience to the first, and
they of conscience serve the Prince, which of conscience serve God. They will
never be true to Princes, which are false to God: So that rebels and
traitors, are either of no religion, or else of a false religion. Therefore al
good Kings have been most careful to defend soundness of religion, and
severely to punish all seducers and idolaters according Deuteronomy. 13.
to the law and commandment of God. The false Prophet, though he be never so
dear and near unto us, who draws us to Deuteronomy. 17. 2.
strange Gods, must be stoned and put to death. Again, If there be any found
among you, says the Lord, man, or woman, that has wrought wickedness in the
sight of the Lord, and has gone and served other Gods, and worshipped them, as
the sun, or the moon, or any of the host of heaven; and if this be true,
thou shall bring forth that man, or that woman, which have committed that
wicked thing unto the gates whether they be man, or woman, and shall stone Exodus
32.
them with stones that they shall die. Moses in a great zeal slew the
idolaters to the number of 3000, because they worshipped 2. Kings 10. 2. Chro.
15. 16
the golden Calfe. Iehu is commended for his zeal in killing the Priests of
Baal. Asa the King deposes his mother, because she had made an Idol in a
grove. And he brake down her idol, and stamped it, and burned it. Josiah
takes away all abominations out of Judah, and Jerusalem, he put down the
Chemerims, and them that burned incense to Baal. Elias kills many false
Prophets of Baal. This is the commandment of a King: Whosoever will not do
Ezra 7. 29.
the law of God, and the Kings law, let him have judgment without delay,
whether it be unto death, or unto banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or
to imprisonment. This is the decree of Nabucadnezar That every people, nation,
and language that speaks any blasphemy against the God Shadrack, Mezech, and
Abednego, Dan. 3. 29.
shall be drawn into pieces, and their houses shall be made a Iakes, because
there is no God that can deliver after this sort. And it is dangerous to Kings,
to spare those whom God would have cut off; and therefore the Lord said to Ahab
for his foolish pity in sparing Benhadad, Because thou have let go out 1.
Kings 20. 42
of thy hands a man whom I appointed to die, thy life shall go for his life,
thy people for his people. How shall Kings, says one, serve God in fear, but
by forbidding and punishing those things, which are done against the
commandment of God? as they are Kings, they are put in mind to use the power
and sword committed unto them for the defense of the true faith, and the
suppressing of the wicked. And another says, Let Princes take heed, how they
grant to Infidels, wicked rites, and ceremonies in their kingdoms. And he
brings in the fearful example of Solomon, who because he tolerated false
religion, and divided Gods worship, that therefore his kingdom after was
divided and rent, so he concludes, that it is not lawful for Kings to suffer
false worship in their kingdoms, and that it is their duty to urge and
maintain such ceremonies and rites only, which are consonant and agreeable to
the word of God.

When Valentinian the younger was requested to wink at the renewing of an
Altar for the Pagans in Rome, S. Ambrose disswadeth him, saying, lib. 5. ep.
30. All men serve you that be Princes, and you serve the mighty God: he that
serves this God, must bring no dissimulation nor conniuence, but faithful
zeal and devotion: he must give no kind of consent to the worship of Idolles
and other profane ceremonies, for God will not be deceived, which searches all
things, even the secrets of our hearts: therefore Asa and his people make a
covenant to serve the Lord. The words of the covenant were these: whosoever
will not seek 2. Chron. 15.
the Lord God of Israel, shall be slain, whether he were small or great, man or
woman, and they swear unto the Lord, and all Judah rejoiced at the oath.
Iehoiada made a covenant between the Lord, and the King, and the people, that
they should be the Lords people: likewise between the King and the people. 2.
Chro. 34. 33
Josiah compelled all that were found in Israel to serve the Lord their God.
He had charge over all, and must answer for every one that perished:
therefore he thought it his duty, that all should make profession to receive
the word of God. Nehemiah, and his people make a sure covenant, to keep Gods
commandments, and they write it, and their Princes, Levites, and Priests seal
to it. Augustine confesses, that he was once of this mind, that none were to
be compelled to the faith, but that they were to be drawn by persuasion; yet
he changes his mind upon experience which he had in his own city Hippo,
where he was Bishop, which was at the first full of Donatists, but by
severity of laws, they were quite overthrown; so that as he says, the city
was clear from that heresy. He that binds and whippeth a mad man, may seem
to be his enemy, though he do it in love, but after he is come to his right
mind again, he takes him for a friend, and prayseth God for him: So it
seems grievous to some, to be forced to hear the word of truth, but after
they have heard, if they have any taste or grace, they will hear gladly and
willingly of their own accord, and praise God for those laws which compel
them to hear. Augustine says, while ye compel the unwilling against their
will, ye often make them willing. Chrysostom tells the people of Antioch,
that they bound their horses, and fettered them, and with horns, powered in
medicines into their months: and shall they suffer their brethren to run
headlong into iniquity? If I stay not a man (if it lie in my power) that is
ready to kill himself, I am guilty of his death. Princes may not give leave
to rob, much less to rob God of his honor. Princes may not give leave to
murder, much less for any to murder themselves. They may not tolerate
corporal whoredom, much less spiritual whoredom. Princes may not, nor will
not give leave for any to work treasons against their own persons, much less
are they to tolerate treasons against God. Further reasons against this
toleration from old and new Testament, from Canons, Councels, Fathers, from
Acts, Laws, Decrees, Constitutions, Edicts of Emperors, etc: you may see
largely, and learnedly set down by master Gabriell Powell, in his Refutation
of an Epistle Apologeticall.

The just judgment of God upon Papists, with an exhortation to repent. Sect. X.
But though the Prince do not grant your wills, nor that toleration which
you looked for, are ye therefore to rise and rebel? What warrant or example
have you for it? And do you not see the curse and heavy judgment of God upon
you? because you dis-honour him he has given you up to the monstrous sins
of murder and treasons, and so to bring you to shame and confusion in the
world. Ye will not hearken to the sweet voice of God, but unto your own
cursed inventions, and therefore the Lord has given you over to shame and
confusion. It is said of the sons of Eli, that they obeyed not the voice of
their father, because the Lord would slay them, so that to obey Gods
admonition, is Gods mercy, and to disobey them, is his just judgment for sin.
The Prophet says to Amazia, when 2. Chro. 1^.
he threatened him for reproouing his idolatry, I know, says he, that God has
determined to destroy thee, because thou have done this, and have not obeyed my
counsel. The Apostle says of the Gentiles living in ignorance and idolatry,
Romans 1. 28.
that as they regarded not to know God, even so God delivered them up to a
reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient, being full of all
unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, full of envy, of murder,
backebiters, haters of God, proud, inuenters of evil things, disobedient to
parents, without understanding, couenant-breakers, without natural affection,
merciless. Let the world judge, and your own consciences, O blind Papists,
whether you be not guilty of all these monstrous sins. And the Apostle in an
other place speaking of such as yet are deluded by Antichrist, he says, they
be such as perish, because they receive not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved. 2. These. 2. 11.
Therefore God shall send them strong delusions, that they shall believe lies,
that all they may be damned which believe not the truth, but have pleasure in
unrighteousness. And is not this heavy judgment of God upon you? Because ye
will not believe the truth of his word and the faithful ministers of the
Gospel; he has given you over to believe legends, lies, fables, false,
seditious, treacherous, bloody antichristian teachers. And are ye not ashamed?
do ye not blush? do ye not quake and tremble, to think of this unnatural,
brutish, monstrous, and bloody late conspiracy? the like whereof is not heard
of amongst the Pagans and Infidelles. And though I doubt not but some of you
are not so far past grace, but that your hearts will melt and mourn for
these bloody finnes; yet it is said of some, that they be so desperate and
impudent, that they are sorry for nothing, and repent of nothing they have
done, but only this is their grief, that their malicious and cursed plott
had not that effect which they looked for. But O graceless wretches, if ye
had brought to pass your cursed purposes, yet God no doubt would have been
revenged of you. The Lord might justly have done it for our sins, though you
had no such meaning to correct sin in us. It is not sin, but grace, and our
profession which you hate and persecute: If that had come to pass which you
looked for, you had bin Gods rods to whippe us; but after that God had
whipped us by you, would he not have cast the rods in the fire? Do ye
think you should have escaped? Would not the Lord have been revenged for
shedding of so much innocent blood? Had ye not still bin guilty of horrible
treasons and murders? Could not the Lord have set you one against another?
Could he not have stirred up others to revenge our cause? Could he not have
tormented your consciences, and driven you to desperation, and so have made you
a hangman to your own selves? Could he not many ways have cursed you, your
wife and children? And must ye not both now and then perish eternally, without
great repentance? What a cursed name should you, and shall still leave behind
you, of rebels, traitors and murderers, so long as the world endures? And
finally, who would ever have trusted you, so long as ye had lived, having
been so false and treacherous to your Sovereign and native country? And now,
as it is, remember the sayings of Solomon, The Pro. 16. 14, 15.
wrath of a King is as messengers of death, but a wise man will pacific it. In
the light of the Kings countenance, is life, and his savor is like as a cloud
of the latter rain. And again, The fear of the King, is like the roaring of
a lion, Prou 26. 2
he that provoke him to anger sins against his own soul. And in another
place, My son, fear the Lord, and Pro. 24. 11.
the King, and meddle not with them that are seditious: for then destruction
shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both? And in another
place, I advertise thee Eccles. 8. 2.
to take heed to the mouth of the King, and to the word of the oath of God.
Haste not to go forth of his sight, stand not in an evil thing; for he will
do whatsoever it pleases him. Where the word of the King is, there is power,
and who shall say to him, What do thou? he that keeps the commandment,
shall know no evil thing, and the heart of the wise, shall know time and
judgment, that is, the wise man knows when time is to obey, and what he
should obey. And let this voice sound always in your ea^es, Touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no Psalm. 105. 1^.
harm. And think of those words of David, spoken to such as rebel against
him, as though his Majesty should speak this himself unto you from the
fourth Psalm, Oye sons of men, though ye be never so great, yet are ye but
mortal, and men, how long will ye seek to take my kingdom from me, and so
bring me to shame? you have often gone about it, when will ye surcease and
leave off such wicked enterprises? your hearts love, and your practice follow
vanity, vain counsels which deceive you, lying imaginations which shall not
prevail.

The Lord has placed me in the kingdom, he will defend me, and provide for
me: tremble therefore O ye rebels, though ye fear not men, fear God, and
sin not so hainouslie against the Lord and his anointed, in such bloody
conspiracies and practices. Examine, ponder, think well on the matter, advise
when ye are quiet and alone, by your selves, from your other companions and
counselors, think thus with your selves, What right have we to the kingdom?
what hurt has our King done unto us? wherein has he offended us? with what
conscience and equity can we thus rise against our lawful king? consider this
well, and so repent and stay your selves. And whereas it may be you pretend
religion, and under color of it, will observe ceremonies, and offer
sacrifices, and so make show of devotion and holiness to the world; Know ye
not O rebels, that the Lord will have mercy, and not sacrifice; and that
without this, all devotion and profession is nothing worth, but utterly
renounced, and rejected of God? So long as your hearts, and hands are full of
blood, confess your sins, trust in God, and not your selves, offer to God
the sacrifice of righteousness according to the rule of his own word: offer the
sacrifice of mercy, innocence, holiness, obedience: offer unto God, honest,
contrite, and upright hearts, for with such sacrifice God is pleased. As for
the service and sacrifice of the wicked, they are abomination unto the Lord.
Thus I have showed you our late dangers and troubles intended against us, and
ready to fall upon us; and thereupon I have dealt somewhat largely and roundly
with the authors, instruments, and plots of it, so that we may say justly with
David, The snares of death compassed us, and the griefs of the grave caught
us, we were very near the pit, and brinke of death.

The second part of the Application.
Our great deliverance of late. Section XI.
LET us now in the second place consider our great deliverance. Our enemies
were many and subtell, a long time with great advise by the counsel of
Achitophell had long laid their plots, purposed, resolved to bring it to pass,
they took the Sacrament upon it, binding themselves by oath, and promise to
effect it; they made full reckoning and account to bring it to pass; they
fully determined, as you have heard, to destroy King, Queen, royal Seed,
Counsel, and whole Parliament, and all Professors in the land; and to set up
their idolatrous Mass, they had, as they thought, fit time, place, and
means to work this bloody massacre, they thought them selves sure, and that
nothing could disappoint them. The time and the day that they long looked and
gaped for, drew very near, they were resolved, that God and man would concur
with them in this their bloody attempt, to give us such a terrible blow, and
yet we should not know who did hurt us: so that we may say with David, Thine
enemies O Lord have made a tumult, and they that hate thee have lifted up their
head, they have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and have consulted
against thy secret ones: they have said, come, let us Psalm 83.
cut them off from being a nation, and let the name of Israel be no more in
remembrance: for they have consulted together in heart, and have made a league
against thee: the tabernacles of Edom, and the Ismalites, Moab, and the
Agarins, Gebal, and Ammon, and Amaleck, the Philistines, with the inhabitants of
Tyrus: Ashur also is joined with them, etc. But see still the kindness and
goodness of God to this sinful land; though our sins deserved this judgment,
and more too, though al these plots and practices, were conceived, contrived,
determined, and ready to be put in execution, yet they are discovered and come
to naught, to the shame of our enemies: so that we may say with the Prophet,
Why do the heathen rage, and people murmur in vain? they are assembled
together against the Lord, and against his anointed, but he that dwells in
the heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision. And again, the
Psalm 2.
Lord breaks the counsel of the heathen, and brings to naught Psalm. 33. 10.
the devises of the people. The counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever, and
the thoughts of his heart throughout all ages. And in Psalm. 118. 12
another place, They came about me like bees, but they were quenched as a fire
of thorns: for in the name of the Lord I shall destroy them. Thou have thrust
sore at me that I may fall, but the Lord has helped me. We may say with the
people of God, If the Psalm 124. 1.
Lord had not been on our side may Israel now say, if the Lord had not been
on our side when men rose up against us, they had then swallowed us up quick,
when their wrath was kindled against us. Then the waters had drowned us, the
stream had gone over our fowls, then had the swelling waters gone over our
souls. And in another place, They had often afflicted me in my youth may
Israel now say, they have often afflicted me in my youth, but they could Psalm.
129. 1.
not prevail against me. The plowers plowed upon my back, and made long
furrows, but the righteous Lord has cut the cords Esaias 8. 9.
of the wicked, etc. And thus Esaias speaks by the enemies of the Church,
Gather together on heaps, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces, and
harken all ye of far countries, gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in
pieces, gird your selves and you shall be broken in pieces, take counsel
together, yet shall it be brought Micah 4. 12.
to naught, pronounce a decree, yet shall it not stand. And Micah says, Many
nations are gathered together against thee, saying Sion shall be condemned, and
our eyes shall look upon Sion: but they know not the thoughts of the Lord,
they understand not his counsel, for he shall gather them as the sheues in the
barn. After the flood, Nimrod and his company waxed proud, and said, Go to,
let us build us a city and tower, whose top may reach to heaven, that we may
get us a name, lest we be scattered upon the whole earth: but the Lord came
down to see the city and tower Genesis 11 4
which the sons of men did build, and he scattered them thence upon all the
earth, and they left off to build the city: therefore the name of it was
called Babel, that is, confusion, because the Lord did there confound the
language of all the earth. Pharaoh pursuing Exodus 14.
the Israelites, and purposing to destroy them in the sea, the children of
Israel walked as on dry land through the middle of the sea, the water was as a
wall unto them on the right hand, and on the left, but the Egyptians followed
them, and were drowned. Aram and Ephraim join together to fight against
Jerusalem, and when Gods people were in fear, the Lord said to Esaias, Go forth
now to meet Ahas and say unto him, take heed, and be still, fear not, neither
be faint hearted, for the two tails of these smoking fire-hrandes, for the
furious wrath of Rezin, and of Aran, and of Remaliahs son, because Aran has
taken wicked counsel against thee, and Ephraim, and Remaliahs son saying, Let
us go up against Judah, let us waken them up, and make a breach Esaias 7. 1.
therein for us, and set a King in the midst thereof, even the son of
Tabiol. Thus says the Lord God, it shall not stand, neither shall it be. There
were more then forty Jews, which bound themselves with an oath, saying, they
would neither eat Acts 23. 12.
nor drink till they had killed Paul, but this their conspiracy was made
known by Paul's sisters son, and so the conspirators were disappointed, and
Paul at that time preserved. God has so many means to deliver his children
out of danger, as there are creatures in the world: so that their adversaries
cannot conspire so craftily against them, but he has infinite means to
defeat their wicked practices. Of this power and mercy of God, we have of
late sufficient experience. We may say with the Prophet Jeremy chap. 11. 18.
The Lord has taught me, and I know it, even then thou shewedst me their
practices. But I was like a lamb, or a bullock that is brought to the
slaughter, and I knew not that they had devised thus against me, saying, let us
destroy the tree with the fruit thereof, and cut him out of the land of the
living, that his name may be no more in memory. And in the next words he
prays and prophecieth by the spirit in a zeal of Gods glory, against those
subtell and malicious enemies, saying: But O Lord of hoasts, thou iudgest
righteousl^e, and triest the reins, and the heart, let me see thy vengeance on
them: for unto thee have I opened my cause. The mischiefs which our
adversaries intended against us, are by the just judgment of God, fallen upon
their own heads; so that we see that performed, which the Lord speaks by his
Prophet, They that devour thee, shall be devoured: if any kill with a sword, he
must be killed with a sword. We may say as the father says of the prodigal
son when he was come home, and he rejoiced and was glad: This my son was
dead, and is alive again, he was lost, and is found. We were al as dead and
lost, in the intention, preparation, and account of our enemies; but behold, we
are alive, we are found, our enemies have not their wills of us: they are
disappointed of their hope, we still enjoy our King, our Queen, the royal
issue, the Counsel, the Nobles, the rest of the worthy ones, our Ministers,
and people: we still enjoy our kingdom, our cuntry, our livings, our liberties,
our wives, and children: our friends, our houses, and lands: our peace, our
plenty, and the Gospel: which al these our enemies would have taken from us. So
many lives as are kept from their cruel hands* so many deliverances we have; so
many blessings as we still enjoy, are as it were new blessings, and new
mercies, so that we may say with the Prophet in this Psalm, We were in misery,
and the Lord saved us, he has delivered our souls from death, our eyes from
tears, and our feet from falling.

Our former unthankfulness, and other sins. Sect. XII.
AS our dangers were great, so was our deliverance great, which I need not
to amplify any further. There is none so senseless, so dull, or forgetful,
but still he remembers it, he has experience in himself; he has, and does
find, feel, and taste, how sweet, how loving, how kind and merciful the
Lord has been to us, in this late deliverance; so that we may say with the
Prophet, It is the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, he has not dealt
with us after our sins, neither rewarded us according to our iniquities. This
we must know and confess, so long as we live, whether we will, or no, unless
we be too unthankful, and void of all grace; now let us see what profit and
use we are to make of this so great a benefit; we have tasted of many mercies
heretofore, of sundry and strange deliverances, but we have been still,
careless, unkind, and forgetful, and are never the better for them: we have
not said, nor thought with the Prophet, What shall we render unto the Lord? we
have ill requited the Lord for his former benefits; we have requited him evil
for good, we have for all his goodness and manifold benefits rendered him all
unkindness, disobedience, rebellion, profaneness, blasphemy, contempt of his
word, his ministers, and faithful servants: so that the Lord may justly
complain of us, as he did of his people the Jews, saying; Hear, O heavens,
hearken, O earth, the Lord has said, I have nourished and brought up
children, but they have rebelled against me; the Ox knows his owner, and the
Ass his masters crib, but Israel has not known; my people do not
understand. Ah sinful nation! a people laden with iniquity, a seed of the
wicked, corrupt children, they have forsaken the Lord, Esaias 1. 2.
they have provoked the holy one of Israel to anger, they are gone backward.
And again, counting Israel his vineyard, Esaias 5.
which he had planted and fenced, he complains that when he looked it should
bring forth grapes, it brought forth wild grapes; he looked for judgment,
but behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a crying. And Ierem. ^.
6.
Jeremy complains, I hearkened and heard, but none spoke aright, no man
repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? every one turned to
the race, as the horse rusheth into the battle, even the storke in the air
knows her appointed times, and the turtle, and the crane, and the swallow
observe the time of their coming, but my people knows not the judgment of
the Lord. Many are more ignorant of the times of Gods mercies, and of the times
of his judgments, than those birds are of their appointed seasons. The Lord
may take up that just complaint against us, Hear ye, O mountains, the Lords
quarrel, and ye mighty foundations of the earth, for the Lord has a quarrel
against his people, and he will plead with Israel; O my people, what have I
done unto thee? or wherein have I grieved thee? Testify against me: Surely, I
brought thee up out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of
servants: and I have sent before thee, Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, O my people,
remember now what Balac Micah. 6. 2.
king of Moab has devised, and what Balam the son of Beor answered him from
Shittim unto Gilgal, that ye may know the righteousness of the Lord. And
Christ, if he were upon the earth might complain and mourn for us Luke 13.
34.
as he did for Jerusalem, saying; O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the
Prophets, and stonest them which are sent to thee, how often would I have
gathered thy children together, Luke 19. 42.
as the hen gathers her brood under her wings, and ye would not? O if thou
had even known at least in this thy day those things which belong to thy
peace! For this our unthankfulness, and our manifold other sins, he might
justly have deprived us of all his former mercies, and long before this time
have powered out the full violence of his wrath upon us: But, O the unspeakable
mercy of God! O his undeserved goodness! O his incomparable long sufferance,
and patience! he still compasses us with his favors, he increases and
multiplieth his new benefits upon us, he has followed us, prosecuted and
pursued us with his goodness; though we be careless of him, he is careful
of us, though we be secure and slothful, yet he watches for us, when we
are asleep. We have been ungracious children a long time, yet has he been
a kind and loving father unto us. We have been stubborn, and rebellious
subjects against him, yet has he been to us a most gracious and loving
Prince; though we be unkind to him, he is kind to us; though we be sinful,
yet he is merciful; though he might justly of late have given us over into the
hands of our bloody enemies, yet he has prevented them, brought them to shame,
stood for us, kept and preserved us from their malicious, cruel, and subtle
snares.

The third part.
Of the uses of this deliverance. Section XIII.
True repentance. Use I.
LET us now then at length see, what this warning and deliverance may teach us.
First, we learn that the Lord by this, would call us all generally to true
and ernest repentance: our sins have provoked the Lord to stir up these
ennemies against us, as we may see in the book of Judges: when Israel
offended God by their sins, he always stirred up one enemy or other against
them. We have rebelled against the Lord, and therefore our enemies may justly
rebel against us. We have set our selves one against another, and therefore
they may justly set themselves against us. We devise plots one against another,
and therefore the Lord may justly stir up cur enemies against us, to devour
us all. The sins of the land, are great, grievous, and crying sins; the
sins of the first world, the sins of Zodome, the sins of Israel, the sins
of Jews and Gextiles, the sins of Turks and Pagans; all these are rife
amongst us; and we surpass them in profanenes, in unthankfulness, in contemt of
the word and of good men, in pride, covetousness and cruelty. So that the Lord
may justly complain, and say as he does against Israel, hear the word of the
Lord, ye children of Israel, for the Lord has a controversy with the
inhabitants of the land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge
of God in the land, by swearing, lying, killing, stealing, and whooring; they
break out, and blood touches blood; and that which is worst of all, as it
follows Ose. 4. 1.
in that place, yet let none rebuke, or reprove another: as if he should say,
that it were in vain to rebuke them: for no man can abide it, yea they will
speak against the Prophets and Priests, whose office it is chiefly to rebuke
them. Esaias 30. 10.
And as another Prophet says, They say to the Seers, see not, and unto the
Prophets prophecy not unto us right things, but speak flattering Amos 5. 10.
things unto us, prophecy errors. And as Amos says, they have hated him that
rebukes in the gate, and they abhorred him that speaks uprightly. Besides
these and all other sins, let us repent of such sins, as in some sort
(though not by law) yet before God, do make us accessory with these Papists
and rebels. For though, as I said before, God in his just judgment had given
them up, yet would they never have bin so bold, they would never have come to
that strength, number, and head, but that we have given many occasions, to
strengthen, bolden, and increase them. It is strange and wonderful, that after
so many years under the Gospel, that there should grow so many thousands of
resolute Papists in this land: but the especial fault has bin in idle and
ignorant Ministers, which either could not, or would not teach the truth,
confute errors, and use all forcible means to convert them. The Lord
complains that Esaias 56.
the watchmen of Israel are blind, and have no knowledge: and again, my people
perish for want of knowledge; Because thou have refused knowledge, I will
refuse thee, that Ose. 4.
thou shall be no Priest to me. Ignorance is the cause of errors, treason, and
murders. Some other Ministers have flattered these Papists openly, and
secretly; they have holden and maintained points of popery: and is it any
marvel, though Papists grow and increase? Many great men, magistrates, and
other officers, have been careless in executing good laws against them, they
have winked at them, countenanced them, kept them company, showed them more
favor and kindness, then to the good friends of the Gospel. Many have matched
and married with them, and has not all this encouraged and emboldned Papists?
We have bin careless and cold in our own religion, we have despised and
disgraced the best friends of it: the lives of many professors and preachers
has been very bad, and is it any marvel if Papists increase and grow? they
have seen jarres, contentions, and controversies amongst us, they have been
suffered to grow in wealth and power, they have been suffered to bring and
breed up their children this forty and seven years in popery, either by
being not baptized at all, or else being baptized by popish Priests, who after
instructed, and confirmed them: so that now young men, maids, and children,
are become desperate Papists, and resolute traitors. Lot every one look to him
self, and examine his own heart, how he has been faulty this way, and
repent of it, lest before God he be arraigned, and judged as accessory with the
Papists of their errors, and bloody treasons: and no doubt this warning and
deliverance calls for true repentance.

The mercy of God, his long suffering and patience, does move and draw us to
repentance. Our Savior Christ teaches Iac. 13. 6.
this by a parable, saying: A certain man had a fig tree planted in his
vineyard, and he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none, then said he to
the dresser of his vineyard, behold, this three years have I come and sought
fruit of this tree and found none, cut it down, why keeps it the ground
barren? and he answered and said unto him, let it alone this year also, till
I dig round about it, and dung it, and if it bear fruit, well, if not, then
after thou shall cut it down. We have been a long time trees in the Lords
vineyard, he has these many years looked and waited for good fruit, and
sweet figs from us, but he has found none, but cursed, naughty, and rotten
figs: he has had a purpose oftentimes to cut us down, sometimes by
pestilence, sometimes by sword, sometimes by famine, sometimes by treasons; and
of late has he not said and threatened to this Church, cut it down? but yet
still as heretofore, so now of late he has spared this tree, and suffered it
to stand one year longer, to see if we would bring forth better fruit. But if
we still remain unfruitful, let us know, the axe is put unto the root of
the trees: therefore, Mat. 3. 10.
enery tree which brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast
into the fire. This late warning and deliverance, speaks and cries with a
loud voice; it is as many sermons sounding in our ears, repent: therefore I
say as Christ said to the man that was made whole, Sin no more, lest a worse
thing come unto thee. It is the note of wicked men without grace, neither by
mercies nor judgments, to be drawn to repentance: therefore the Prophet
complayneth, Seeing Esaias 26. 9.
thy judgments, O Lord, are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world shall
learn righteousness, let mercy be showed to the wicked, yet he will not learn
righteousness: in the land of vprightnes will he do wickedly, and will not
behold the majesty of the Lord.

A greater care to suppress Popery hereafter. Sect. XIIII. Use II.
WE are to make this use of this great deliverance: We are to conceive a
greater hatred of popery, greater care to suppress Papists and their religion,
seeing they bring forth such cursed, and bloody fruits of treason and murder.
Indeed we may learn something, and make some profit by these rebels, Gods
enemies and ours. They join their hands, hearts, and purses together about
mischief, they help and relieve those of their own profession liberally: let
us be as liberal to Gods servants: they refuse no pains to draw as many as
they can to their false religion; they are devout, zealous, and watchful in
their prayers, and idolatrous Mass: let us be as zealous in the true worship
of God. They stand stoutly in defense of their own traditions, let us be as
stout in maintayning the perfection and sincerity of Gods word. They are hot
and resolute for the defense of idolatry and superstition, and are ready to
venture life and living for it: let us be as constant in defense of the
Gospel. They do reverently esteem of their idolatrous Priests, of their
false guides and teachers, and do liberally maintain them: let us be as kind
and liberal to the faithful ministers of God. They refuse no pains, by day
nor night, by sea and land, to bring their wicked purposes to pass, they spare
for no cost, they fear no danger, they refuse no labor, to further their
false religion, to work mischief, and murder: let us be as careful, and
painful to further true religion, and to bring good things to pass. The
children of this world, says our Savior Luc. 16. 8.
Christ, are wiser in their generation, then the children of light: this I
speak to our shame, but yet I do not justify the Papists, nor their religion
at all, they are odious and abominable, and to be utterly detested and
suppressed of all good and honest men, so far as lies in their power. Now to
draw us to the hatred of popery, and suppressing of it, though we have done it
partly before, let us consider the blasphemy, cruelty, and treachery of
Papists, and their religion. They are gross idolaters, they make more gods
then one; as the Virgin, the Saints, the Pope, the Cross: they ascribe that to
them, which is due to God. They are notorious hypocrites, they stand upon their
own righteousness, they prefer their own inventions, before the commandments
of God. They would seem to be that which they are not, they profess in mouth
one God, one Savior, but in deed and practice, they have many. They profess
holiness, conscience, and charity; and yet their hearts and hands, are full of
impiety and blood. They are like the Pharisees of whom we spoke before: of
such Prou 30.
a generation speaks Solomon, that are pure in their own conceit. They are
like the false Apostles in Corinth, deceitful workers, transforming themselves
into the Apostles 2. Cor. 11. 13.
of Christ; and no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of
light. They are enemies to Christ Jesus the son of God, they deny the virtue
and power of his redemption: they quite overthrow his three offices, being
Priest, King, and Prophet. They overthrow his kingly office, by the Popes
supremacy. They overthrow his priestly office, by their idolatrous Mass. They
overthrow his prophetical office, by their traditions. They are enemies to
the Gospel of Christ, they count it insufficient, a dead letter, a dumb
master, the black Gospel, dead ink, inkie divinity, a nose of wax, a leaden
rule; they count it doubtful and uncertain. They say that it receives
authority from the Church, as though the subject were above the Prince, the
creature above the Creator, man above God. They make their traditions equal
with Gods word, if not above it: their religion as you have heard, (and shall
see further) is flat against the Gospel. They keep the Scriptures in a strange
tongue, they burn the blessed Bible, and the preachers and professors of it.
They add and diminish, they abase, and wrest the blessed word of God at their
pleasures, they are enemies to the true Catholic faith. They hold and teach
wavering and doubting, therefore they are enemies to faith: no Papist, as they
themselves confess, can by their faith assure themselves of their salvation. A
cursed, desperate, and damned religion, that can not assure any that profess
the same, to be saved. It is their own Cannon in their Tridentine Counsel,
canon 15. Si quis dixerit hominem renatum, etc. that is, If any man shall say,
that a man renewed and borne again, and justified, is bound by faith to
believe, that he is certainly of the number of those that are predestined,
anathema sit, let him be accursed. They are enemies to good works, though
they think to be saved by them: they practice, defend, and tolerate sinful
works, as idolatry, sorcery, slewes, dissembling, perjurie, treasons, and
murders: they are ennemies to christian Princes, in making themselves slaves
to an Italian Priest, in holding the Popes supremacy, and in conspiring
against lawful governors. They are ennemies to their own native country, and
kindred, seeking their overthrow, and that strangers should rule over them: and
judge by all this, if they be not most enemies to themselves, their wives, and
children, and most of all to their own souls: consider their wilfulness and
obstinacy, the long time of patience and mercy toward them. Many of them
might have had conference, some have had it, others refuse it: how gently have
they been dealt withal? how long suffered, and yet not better, but worse? No
means can prevail with them, neither mercy, nor threatening, nor conference:
they will not hearken to the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely:
Nothing will reclaim a desperate and resolute Papist; the duty, love, and
fear of God can not hold a Papist from blasphemy against God. The duty of
faith, and alegiance of a Papist to his Prince cannot keep him from treason to
his Prince. The duty of dear love to his natural country, cannot withdraw
a Papist from assenting to, nor from procuring, the spoil, destruction, and
alienation of his country. The duty of kind, and natural pity, cannot stay
a Papist from murdering the feeble sex, nor seely tender innocence, nor
reverent old age. The duty of familiarity, and youth of friendship in grauer
years, of continual society during all the life past, with heaps of mutual
commodities, cannot pull back a Papist from cruelty, in killing his dearest
friends. The duty of honor of children to parents, or love of parents to
children, remooueth not a Papist from unnatural cruelty. The duty of entire
love and fellowship between man and wife, holds no place in the hearts of
Papists. No duty of kindred, no estimation of learning, or virtue; no good
respect that moves good men to love and compassion once touches a stubborn
Papist. And let us consider the bloody cruelty of Papists at all times against
the dear servants of God, the friars in Spain have planted a holy house,
resembling the tortures of Neroes garden. Remember that horrible massacre at
Paris in France 1572. when they saw they could not prevail against the
Protestants by open force, they began by two crafty means to intrappe them:
the one by pretending a power to be sent into the Low Countries, whereof the
Admiral to be captain, not that they so meant, but so to understand what
power he had under him, and who they were: the other, by a certain marriage,
suborned between the Prince of Navarre, and the Kings sister. The Admiral
coming from the counsel table, was stricken with a piece, after they slew him,
cut off his arms and privy members, and drawing him three days through
Paris, they dragged him to the place of execution, and there hanged him by the
heels. After the ma^tirdome of this good man, the armed soldiers kill with
rage, all the Protestants they find, and Story records 10000. men and
women to be slain within three days, so that the street did run with
goare blood of slain bodies, and not only in Paris this vproare was
contained, but extended further to other cities, as Lions, Orleans, Tholous,
Roan, so that within one month 30000* of the religious Protestants at the least
were slain. O cruel and bloody Papists! In Rome at this time there was great
joy, procession, gunshot, singing; and in France, amongst the Papists,
bonefires, and ringing, so that as the Wise man says, It is a pastime for the
fool to do wickedly. It is the joy of the Papist to sheede innocent blood.
But to come home to our selves, remember their cruelty to the blessed Martires,
they spared none, they cut off all they could, in few years they made
havoc of the Church; there was no mercy at all with them, but faggot, fire,
and sword. In the time of Queen Marie, being about five years, there were
imprisoned, famished, tormented, put to fire, of men, women, maidens, and
children, almost four hundred: diverse being men of gravity and learning,
women above three score, children above forty. Amongst women, some great with
child, out of whose belly the child by fire was expelled alive, and yet also
cruelly burned: examples beyond all heathen cruelty, and they have not only
been cruel to the living, but to such as were dead and buried. Bucer and
Phagius, two reverend learned preachers, because when they were alive they
preached the Gospel soundly, and confuted popish errors, they commanded their
bodies to be taken out of the graves, and being deprived from holy orders,
delivered them to the hands of the secular power. They take the chests wherein
the corpses lay, they bring them to the market place in Cambridge, a great
post set in the ground to bind the carcases to, a great heap of wood to bind
them withal, there they burn chests, corpses, and books. O cruel Papists! O
abominable and beastly act! such as stand by, scorned and laughed at their
cruelty, and folly, using such rigor, weapons, and chains to the dead. The
like cruelty they showed to Peter Martirs wife, an honest, virtuous, religious,
and charitable Matrone. She died in Oxford in King Edwards time, they got
commission to take her out of the grave, they dig her up, and lay her out of
christian burial, because she was interred nigh to S. Fredswikes relics,
they took her up, and buried her in a dunghill. O cruel Papists, void of
humanity, and cruel to the very dead! Let us consider further, the grounds and
chief positions of their religion, maintained by their greatest and learned
Divines. They hold the Pope to be Lord of earthly, and heavenly Empire; they
prefer his sentence before all other. They hold that he is to be judged of
none, though he draw many thousands to hell. They teach, that he only has
fullness of all power, quod sit lex animata in terra, that all knowledge is
shut up in his breast, that he has power to make laws, and himself subject
to none. They hold, that he can change the nature of things, that he can make
holy, Dan 7. 25.
and unholy. Is not this like the beast whereof Daniell speaks, which shall
speak words against the most high, and shall consume the Saints of the most
high, and think that he may change times and laws? They hold, that all the
Popes doctrine is true, that the church of Rome cannot err, that it has
superiority over all other Churches, that they are to refer their faith to
it, and to hang upon the Popes Revel. 13. 5.
determinations. Is not this the beast spoken of in the Apocalips, to whom was
given a mouth that spoke great things, and blasphemies, and he opened his mouth
with blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them
that dwell in heaven: and it was given to him to make war against the Saints,
and to overcome them: and power was given him over every kindred, tongue and
nation: therefore all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose
names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb. What blasphemies and
fooleries, do the Papists, and great Doctors hold, of S. Francis, and Dominick*
that they were better then John the Baptist, that they did more miracles then
Christ, and all the Apostles. This they delivered unto the Church to be
believed, under the pain of a curse. They hold our profession heretical, our
Sacrament, no Sacrament; our Ministers, no Ministers; our Coronations of no
force; our King, no King. They teach and hold, that the Pope has right to both
swords, that Emperors and Kings are his vassalles: therefore Pope Alexander
the third, troade with his feet upon the neck of the Emperor Frederick
Barbarossa, his clergy abusing and singing that Scripture, Thou shall walk
upon the Lion and Aspe, the young Lion and Dragon, shall thou tread under
feet. The Papists and their Doctors teach and hold, that it is a meritorious
deed, to kill christian Kings, that no faith, fidelity, or oath is to be kept
with us, whom they call heretics. They hold, that all Protestants are
excommunicated, that they have no faith, no religion, no Christ, but are mere
infidels: that their religion dissolueth the duty of servants, subjects, wives
and children. They teach and hold, that the doctrine of the Popes supremacy is
to be holden, upon pain of damnation. They deny election, and succession of
Princes; they detract al obedience from them; they defend violent deposing of
them; they count it lawful to take arms against them; they intend, design,
and practice the murdering of them; they commend and approve such, and do
canonize them as Martirs: but by their leave (as one says) they are rather
martirers than martirs; and though the Pope put them in the Calendar of
martirs, he must not be offended though the hangman put them in his book, for
rebels and traitors. And such as their doctrine is, such is their practice, as
we have seen by long experience. Duke Rodulph persecuted Henry 4. by force of
arms, by the instigatio^ of the Pope. Clemens the Monk kills K. Henry: and
Sixtus Quint. makes an oration to his Cardinals, in commendation of that fact.
The K. of France, says he, is slain by a Monk, this is a notable, rare, and
memorable act: thus he commends the traitor. This K. Henry, was a papist,
only favored the protestants, and especially the Prince of Navarre. The same
Pope sends out a thundering Bull against the K. of Navarre, and the Prince of
Cond^, he calls them the two sons of wrath, and pronounces them heretics;
he depriueth them and their posterities for ever of their kingdoms, he freeth
al from oath, and faith, and obedience to them; he commands that they should
be set upon by sword and arms. This Bull is answered in a book called Brutum
fulmen. Pi^s Quintus, the greatest Bishop of the fullness of the Apostolic
power, declares our gracious Queen Elizabeth to be bereaved of her pretended
right of her kingdom; and also of all, and whatsoever dominion, dignity, and
privilege, and also of the Nobles, people, and subjects of the same kingdom,
and all others which had sworn to her any manner of ways, to be absolved for
ever from such oath, and from all debt and duty of fealty, etc. with many
threatening curses, to all that durst obey her and her laws. Doctor Sanders, a
firebrand in Ireland, writes in his visible Monarchy, and says, That the
same Pope 1569* sent the reverend Priest Nicholas Morton an English man, for
the denouncing and execution of this Bull, and for the same purpose were
faculties granted afterward to Robert Parsons, and Edmund Campion for
England. The father must needs be borne before the child be gotten. After
Pope Pius his Bull, came the rebellion in the North; after that, many treasons
against her Majesty, in England and Ireland: by Sanders Throgmorton, Stanley,
Babington, Arden, Summeruile, Parrie, Cullen, Squire, Lopus, and now, a furnace
provided to consume a kingdom at once: and for this no doubt they M. Norton.
have direction and authority from the Pope. So that as one says, writing
against the Northren rebels, the Popes Bull has begotten many calves, some
traitorous calves, as the practisers and underminers of the State, some
rebellious and seditious calves, some dainty calves with white faces, that is,
dissembling hipocrites which watch their time, some calves with black faces,
bleaters, and common raylers at true religion: some apostaticall calves, that
have forsooken the faith, and do impugn the known truth. Some tame and
drowsy calves, that with their brutish superstition, cannot raise up their
heads from the ground, nor lift up their eyes to heaven, some running and
gadding calves; for these gadde and run about nine hundred miles, and no
marvel: for they desire not to suck milk, but blood. Some calves with
horns, some without; some with power running fiercely, some pushing with their
unarmed heads as eluishly as they be able: some Doctor calves, some Proctor
calves, and some of other degrees, some whom no fence will hold, no not the
broad sea. All these, since they received their Syres blessing, are waxen
wilder and madder then they were, no heard-men can rule them; but as if the
gad-flie were in their tails, they run whisking about, and with mere
eluishnes will taste no wholesome and natural food.

And let no man be offended, that the foolish and seditious Papists are
compared to calves, for in the Scripture sottish people are compared to oxen,
and asses, horses, and mules: contemners, persecuters, and murderers, are
compared to bulls, and lions, to wolves, and vipers, to dogs, and swine. But
let us see, how one in a book entitled Papa confutatus, brings in Queen
Elizabeth, answering Pope Pius his seditious Bull in this manner: If I had
received these notes of infamy from any other, but only of thee O Roman
Antichrist, I would have used a more exact speech in defense of my self; now
what is more for my true credit, and everlasting glory, then to be persecuted
of thee a chief enemy of Christ? no man can be his friend, except he be thy
enemy, and this is an honor, and credit to me, that thou with Seba do
persecute me, with other holy friends of God, the cause not being mine, but
Christ's. Thou ragest against me for the doctrine of Christ, which I profess
against all thy curses: therefore that voice of the Gospel does greatly
comfort me. Blessed* are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake,
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven: Blessed are you, when men revile you and
persecute you, and Math 5.
say all manner of evil against you for my sake falsely, rejoice and be glad,
for great is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they the prophets which
were before you. And because the Pope does claim for the defense of himself,
the fulness of the Apostolic power, Where did Christ, Peter, or the rest of the
Apostles, challenge, or execute any such power, or give it to Mat. 17.
their successors? Christ and Peter were subject to Caesar, and paid tribute to
him. Christ forbids all princely Luke 22. John 18. Romans 13.
power to his Apostles. Christ says, that his kingdom is not of this world,
and he refused to be made a King. S. Paul says, let every soul be subject to
the higher power. Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople, upon that place says,
that under the name of every soul, is comprehended Apostles, Prophets
Evangelists, Monks. Bishop Bilson in the difference betwixt christian
subjection, and unchristian rebellion, proves, that Popes were subjects, and
servants 1. Pet. 2. 13.
to christian Princes 850. years after Christ. S. Peter, whose successor the
Pope will needs be, says, Submit your self unto all manner ordinances of man
for the Lords sake, whether it be to the king, as to the superior, or unto
governors, as unto them that are sent of him, we have heard before, that we
must not rail upon the judges of the people, nor curse the King in our bed
chamber. And S. Jude describing certain deceivers, he says, they despise
government, and speak evil of them that are in authority. Where did Christ or
the Apostles take upon them any such authority, to depose kings, though they
were infidels, to free people from their allegiance? nay we see their doctrine
and example to the contrary. That seditious Bull of Pope Pius the sixth long
ago learnedly confuted by Bishop Jewel.

An other learned man, long since, speaks to the same purpose: I dare warrant
the Prince this (says he) before God and man, it is both good policy, and
good divinity, to punish Gods enemies, and his enemies, and yet retain the
name of a mild and merciful Prince: he may be just and severe, yet merciful
and mild. This was the Decree of a King, Ezra 7. Whosoever will not do the
law of God, and the Kings law, let him have judgment without delay, whether it
be unto death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to
imprisonment. David destroyed all Gods enemies, and that in the morning of his
kingdom, Psalm. 101. Thus doing, he was a man according to Gods heart. Let no
Prince look to have Gods heart, if he do contrary to David; and if a Prince
loose Gods heart, he loses more than man's heart can think. It is said of
Moses, that he was the mildest of all men that lived on the earth; and yet
Moses killed an Aegiptian that molested his countriman, Exodus 2. 12. And when
the golden Calfe of idolatry was erected, he willed them to arm their hands,
and to thrust their swords in the flesh of their near kinsmen, and to make
havoc of their lives, and so there were killed three thousand: and Moses
said they had made holy their hands unto God. The mildest man that ever was
in the world thus behaved himself to Gods enemies. And notwithstanding the
just punishment of al these idolaters, Moses shall ever keep still his praise
and be called justly, Mild Moses, Exodus 32. Solomon that was so mild and
peaceable whenas an evil hauty hearted subject named Adoniah, through feasting,
and banqueting, and popular behavior, had strengthened himself with
friendships, and partly, through kinsmen, and partly, through friends, being
drawn into a great spirit, to gape for the Crown, had gotten the kings own
mother to speak for him, to marry the Shunammite, by whom he might make title
to the Crown. Then mild Solomon thus answered his mother, 1. Kings 2. 22. And
why do thou ask Abishag the Shunammite for Adoniah? Ask for him the
kingdom also: for he is mine elder brother, and has for him both Abiathar the
Priest, and Ioab the son of Zeruiah. Then king Solomon swear by the Lord,
saying, God do so to me, and more also, if Adoniah has not spoken this word
against his own life; now therefore, as the Lord lives who has established
me, and set me upon the throne of David my father, who also has made me an
house, as he promised, Adoniah shall surely die this day. And king Solomon sent
by the hand of Benaiah the son of Iehoiada, and he smote him that he died.
Solomon was wise, yet Solomon could punish. King David himself says, That his
Song should be of mercy and judgment: So that music stands upon two
strings, mercy the one, and judgment the other. King David touched both the
strings, and struck them both: and therefore in his regiment there was good
music. Our Prince has yet stricken but the one string, and played upon mercy;
but if she would now strike upon both the strings, and let her song be of mercy
and judgment, then there should be a goodly music in her regiment, and all
things would be in much better tune than now they are.

Ambrose in his book of Offices says, Beatus qui tenet mansuetudinem and
rigorem, etc. Blessed is he that keeps both mildness and rigorous justice,
that by the means of one, innocence be not oppressed, and by the means of the
other, discipline be kept. Gregory in his Moralls says, Let rigor so rule
mildness, and mildness so beautify rigor: Let the one so take the
commendation from the other, that neither rigor be too rigorous, nor mildenes
too loose. Correct a wise man with a nodde, and a fool with a club. If these
Northern rebels had bin of any sober wit, by this time so many noddes would
have stayed them; but it is well enough considered, I think, of those which
have most cause to consider it, that nodding will not serve, nor becking will
not serve, and checking will not serve: therefore it must be a clubbe, or it
must be a hatchet, or it must be a halter, or something it must be; or else of
a surety some of their heads will never be quiet. As it is true, that two and
two makes four; that when the Sun is in the midst of heaven, it is noone
time; that every part of the circle differs equally from the center; that
when the Sun arises, it is morning; so is it infallibly true, that no
perfect Papist can be to any Christian Prince, a good subject. And this I prove
by these reasons: Every one that is a good subject; must be upon a right
conscience a good subject: but Papists have corrupt consciences, seared with a
hot iron; therefore they cannot be good subjects. Again, whosoever will be a
subject for conscience sake, as all true subjects must be, that conscience must
be informed by the word of God: the Papists are not informed by Gods word, but
falsely informed: therefore they cannot be true subjects. Thirdly, he cannot be
a true subject, that can loose himself from his duty to his Prince when he
lists, but the Pope at al times when he list, will dispense with his, and
discharge them from all duties to all men: therefore, the Papists are no good
subjects, but by the Popes permission are subjects, or not subjects, and play
at under or over with the Prince as they list. Fourthly, no man can serve two
masters, the Pope is one master, the Prince another: for their laws be in
diverse points quite contrary. Therefore he that will be a perfect Papist, must
needs be a halting subject to our Prince. Fifthly, they hold this for
infallible, and inflexible, that Fides non est ^eruanda cum haeretiois: but our
Prince is a gospeler Prince, which they call an heretic: therefore they mean
infallibly not to keep any troth with their Prince. Sixthly, both they and we
hold this, that none ought to keep company with any excommunicated person: but
our Prince is excommunicate, as they say, by the Pope, and they think in
conscience, the Pope cannot err: therefore their conscience while they are
Papists, will not let them think the Prince worthy of their company: then they
will not be subjects as they ought to be. The worse traitors to God, and
rebels to the Prince are these Papists; upon them therefore first and
principally let the sword be drawn, and since they be so great fools, and will
never learn their duty, let them in Gods name feel the punishment of a club,
a hatchet, or a halter: and in so doing I dare say, God will be highly pleased.

Of the perfection of the Gospel against p^pish^raditions. Sect. XV.
BUT they will say, the Church was not perfect in the Apostles times, and they
had not power then to set themselves against Princes: Was not the Church
perfect in the Apostles times, when Christ the head was with them, and fully,
and perfectly instructed the Apostles in all things, have they of late time some
new revelations from heaven, John 15. 15
have they any better, more full, or perfect doctrine then the Gospel? did not
the Apostles receive it from Christ himself, who taught all things needful
and necessary to salvation? I have says he, called you friends for all things
that I have heard from my father, I have made known to you. Christ gives no
further commission to the Apostles, Matthew. 28.
and their successors, but this, that they should teach all nations to observe
every thing which he commanded them. The Apostles had the spirit of truth, the
holy Ghost which called al things to their remembrance which Christ taught
them. To the receiving of this doctrine, Christ has added Mark 16.
the promise of salvation: he that believes this shall be saved: and these
things were written that we might believe, John 20.
and in believing might have life. Christ offers prayers to his father for
those that believe this doctrine: I John 17. 20.
pray not for these alone, meaning the Apostles, but I pray, says he, for them
also which shall believe in me through their word. Cursed therefore Prince,
Pope, or Prelate; nay cursed Angel which teach another Gospel. Your
traditions you foolish Papists are abominable, and no part of Gods word.
Christ taught that which he heard from his father; the Disciples taught that
which they had from Christ: true ministers teach that which they learn from
the Apostles. These be true traditions, from the Father to the Son, from the
Son to the Apostles, from the Apostles to us. All other which have not this
original, are counterfeit and cursed. The Gospel is the Testament and last
will of Christ, nothing to be added to any man's to any man's will, though never
so poor, nothing to be taken from it. Kings will not suffer any men of their
private authority to counterfeit, or clippe his coin, to deface his picture,
his arms, or seal: to make the common waits, balances, or measures, greater
or less: and will God suffer the like injury and dishonor to be done against
his sacred word? men's traditions are uncertain, and injurious to the word and
spirit of Christ, they make men hipocrites, and not sound christians, they are
the causes of persecution, discord, of trouble, and torment of conscience, some
of the fathers curse such traditions as are not warranted from the legal or
evangelical Scripture, some account them sinful traditions, which are
obtruded without any warrant from Gods word, and we may easily see, that the
cause of al errors in popery, of murders and treasons, is this, because they
rest not wholly and only upon the perfection of the Scripture, but upon
Counsels, traditions, and unwritten verities.

An answer to such reasons as are alleged for the defense of rebellion.
Sect. XVI.
BUT they say the Church in the Apostles times, was weak, and had not power
then to depose Kings, but they are now many and mighty, and able to do it. Had
not the Prophets and Jewish Church under wicked Kings power and strength to
have deposed them? but what good man ever went about to do it? had not Christ
and the Apostles power to do miracles? did not Paul make Elimas the sorcerer
blind? does not Christ reproouing Peter's rashness in cutting off Mal^hus care?
does he not say to him, think thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and
he will give me more then 12. legions of Angels? was not the church at one time
about the number of 5000? were there not many thousands in Asia, Macedonia, and
in all the Churches planted by the Apostles? Yet the Apostles do not wish them
to rebel, though they had power, and lived under tirants and heathen Princes:
and if it had been lawful, and a deed meritorious as you hold it, though they
had been fewer and weaker, yet they might by subtle practices, by poisons,
stabbing, or shot, have cut off the rulers, as some of your sect have done
often, and as you teach, allow, and Ambros. epist. ad marcel 33. lib. 5.
attempt still to do. Ambrose would not suffer the people of Millaine to defend
him against the Emperor. We beseech thee, says he, O Emperor, we offer no
arms, we fear not to die, but we entreat thy clemency. And Augustine Psalm.
124.
upon the Psalms; Sometimes, says he, the powers are good, and fear God,
sometimes they fear not God. Iulianus the Emperor, an Infidel, an Apostata,
an Idolater: christian soldiers serve this unbelieving Emperor, when they
came to the cause of Christ, they acknowledged none but him which is in heaven;
when the Emperor commanded them to worship Idols, to offer incense to false
Gods, then they preferred God before him: when he said unto them, bring your
weapons, arm your selves, go against such a nation, they straitwaies obey
him: these christian soldiers they make a difference betwixt their eternal
Lord, and their temporal Lord, and yet they are subject to their temporal
Lord; not for lack of force to resist him, but for respect of their
everlasting Lord in heaven. Tertullian ^aketh mention, that they then prayed
for all Emperors, that they might have a long life, a secure Empire, a safe
house, strong arms, a good people, and a quiet world. Orat. 2. cont. Julian.
Nazianzen says, whom have we stirred up to rise against you? to whom have
we brought any danger of life? The Martirs though they continued in the
profession of their religion, yet they never in life or death denied their
lawful Prince, they never maintained any open, or foreign enemies against him,
they never procured any rebellion or civil war, they did never sow any
sedition in secret corners, nor withdraw any subjects from their lawful
obedience, as the Pope and his sworn servants have continually done. But the
chief place they allege for the Popes power in cursing, deposing Kings, is
that of Jeremy, when Ier. 1. 10.
the Lord says to him, Behold, this day have I set the^ over the nations, and
over the kingdoms, to pluckevp, ^o root out, to destroy, to throw down, to
build, and to plant. But let us I pray you, see the true meaning of that place,
and how grossly the Papists abuse it. Gregory says, the Prophet is willed first
Past. 3. part.
to destroy, because the foundation of truth is never well laid, except the
frame of error be subverted. Bernard Considerat. lib. 2.
faith, by a certain resemblance of the husbandmans pains the spiritual
labor of the preacher is expressed: Learn, that thou must have a hook to
weed* not a scepter to rule; if thou will do the work of a Prophet. Lyra
upon that place does expound planting and building, to be the denouncing, that
the Jews should be builded, and planted again in their own country, and
that he should build virtues, root out vices, and beat down heresies. Jerome
upon the same words says; that every plant which the heavenly father does
not plant, shall be rooted up, and the building which has not his foundation
on the rock, but on the sand, is undermined and overthrown by the word of
God. Theodoret upon the same place says, he prophesied not only the Jews
captivity, but their deliverance by Cirus: so that the Prophet in that place
shows the authority of Gods Ministers, which by his word have power to beat
down the proud, and raise up the humble, and those are the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, whereof our Savior Christ speaks. The weapons of our
warfare Mat. 18.
says S. Paul, are not carnal, but mighty through God, to cast down holds,
casting down the imaginations, and 2. Cor. 10. 4. Mica. 6.
every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing
into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. And the Lord himself
in the same place of Jeremy, says to the Prophet, Behold, I have put my
words in thy mouth, so that he speaks of the ministry of the word, and not
of any earthly dominion, or power: and how. I pray you did Jeremy reign or
rule over Kings, over Princes, as the Pope would have it? The Prophet lived
after Io^i^s days under wicked Kings, I^^chas, Ioachi^, Iech^ma^. Zedekiah,
whom does he excommunicate? which of them does he depose from his kingdom?
where does he teach rebellion? whom does he free from their oath and
obedience to Kings? Jeremy, an humble, poor, and faithful servant of God, is
vexed, afflicted, carried into captivity: yet he obeys, and teaches
obedience: he does acknowledge wicked Kings for his Sovereigns, and Lords;
he prays for them; he exhorts others to pray for the safety and peace of
the King of Babylon; he did never take arms against any of these Kings,
neither taught others to do it, though he was unjustly smitten, and cast into
a dungeon. But they allege the examples of Ehud, who killed King Eglon, and
the examples of Samuel, Elias, Iehu, Moses etc. which are extraordinary,
peculiar, and not to be imitated. Iehu was willed by God to take the sword, and
root out Ababs house, the Pope may not do the like, till he have like
precept; until God speak, neither Apostles, Prophets, Priests, nor Popes may
presume to dispose kingdoms: to put down Kings is an honor reserved unto God.

They are thieves and murderers, that use the sword without the Magistrates
authority, Princes must be left to Gods righteous judgment, It is against the
Law of God and Nature for subjects to punish their Princes, and strangers have
less to do with crowns than subjects of the same kingdom, and no law gives
lea^e to the son to dishonor, dis-herite, and smite his father, no power
grants to Israel to depose then kings. Murderers, and traitors, always
punished of God, as we heard before. It was the will of God, that
Nabuchadneser should be obeyed, and he was angry with Zedekiah, for his
defection, when the Lord would cut off some kings of Judah, he did it by
Babylonians, Assirians* Egyptians, not by the Jews. If it were lawful for the
people to depose their Princes ruling ^uilly, then none should be safe at all,
for though they rule never so well, so holily, or righteously, yet they can not
please all their people, E^ud, Ged^on, Sampson, I^p^tha^, and others before
named were led by the spirit of God, and not by private authority. These be
rules in divinity, that examples prove not, that we live not by examples, but
by rules, that we must rest upon the precepts and commandments of God, and
not upon the examples of men, God delivers his people from tyrants three
ways: first, by miracle and power from heaven, as in drowning Pharaob and the
Egyptians in the red sea: secondly, by channging their minds against their
wills, as in Darius and Cyrus: thirdly, he sometimes raises up deliuerers
for his people, which have an extraordinary and divine calling as the Judges.
All kings, though tyrants, reign by God, he transposeth and disposes
kingdoms, being oppressed, we must leave revenge to God, and fly to his
^ribunall seat.

That Kings are to be obeyed only in the Lord, but in no case to be resisted.
Sect. XVII.
Indeed holy men, and good subjects, have sometimes disobeyed, but never
rebelled. Saul commanded his 1. Sam. 2^.
servants to kill the Priests of the Lord, but they would not obey him in this
wicked commandment. Pharaoh commanded Exodus 1.
the Midwiues of the Hebrews, to kill all their male children, but their
Midwiues feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt commanded rhem, but
preserved alive the male children. The three children, Shadrack^, M^zek, Dan. 3.
and Abednego would not obey the kings commandment, in worshipping their
golden image* yet they were obedient to the commandment of the great King of
kings. The Lord threatens to punish his people, because they did willingly
walk after the commandment of king Iereboam. 1. Kings 1^.
And again, he th^ea^eth judgementes against them, because they kept the
Statutes of king* Ahab and Omry his son. It is the answer of the Apostles to
the rulers, it is better to obey God than man. The cruill power differs from
Gods power, the divine empire of God is the foundation of all humane
government, all man's power is subordinate, and subject to the supreme power
of God, the lesser, and the inferior power must be subject to the superior.
The power of God is most general and most large, all things in heaven and
earth are subject unto him. The power of men, be they never so great* is
restrained and limited, the power of God is essential in him and eternal, the
power in men is from God, and but for a time, the divine power cannot be
deceived in judging, it is pure and unblameable, and the execution of it can
not be stayed. The greatest and the best men are sometimes deceived, they are
subject to errors and sins, though they be kings and Princes, and their
courses are often crossed, stopped, and interrupted, so that the powers and
wills of kings must be subject to God, that has place only in God, sic volo,
sic iubeo, etc. So I will, so I command, my will shall stand for reason;
therefore holy men have always obeyed Princes, so far as they obeyed God. If
Princes pass their commission, and command that which is ungodly we may
answer as Augustine does the Ruler, Daveniam imperator tu minaris carcerem,
sed Deus iehennam, etc. Thou will have me (O Emperor) obey thy will for fear of
thy prison and sword, but pardon me I pray thee, I must obey Gods will for
fear of eternal fire and condemnation: and Tertullian says, Colimus
imperatorem vt hominem a Deo secundum and solo Deo minorem: we honor the
Emperor as a man next to God, and inferior only unto God. Indeed such holy
men have been accused, though unjustly, as seditious, turbulent, and
troublesome, Elias is accused as a troubler of Israel. The people of God are
accused of rebellion. Mordecai and the Jews are accused by Hammon not to keep
the Kings laws. Amaziah the Priest, sent to Jeroboam King of Israel Hester 3.
saying; Amos has conspired against thee in the midst of the house of
Israel. The land is not able to bear all his Amos 7.
words. Christ is counted no friend to C^sar, and Paul is said to be a pestilent
fellow; but these were slanders and false accusations, no such thing ever
proved against them. Though the Pope were the universal Bishop, though
Christ's Vicar, and Peter's successor: yet, O ye blind Papists, you are not
bound in conscience to obey him in such wicked laws, commanding false worship,
murders, and treasons.

Against perfidie, and perjury to Princes. Sect. XVIII.
ANd though princes be never so wicked, yet we are not to break our oath and
promise of faith and allegiance to them. And therefore cursed is your Pope,
which does take upon him to free you from all such oaths, and promises; and
so you become truce breakers, perfidious, and perjured persons. Sigisbertus
says, that it is a pernicious heresy, to believe that the Pope can discharge
subjects from their oath and bond of allegiance. The very Pagans and Infidels
have made a conscience of an oath and promise. The men of Israel spared the
Gibeonites who had Ios. 9.
deceived them, yet because they had sworn to them, by the Lord God of Israel,
they would not touch them. We have heard of Zedekiah, who was grievously
punished because he brake his promise and fidelity, though it was to a wicked
King: and see what the Prophet Ezechiel says: Behold, the King of Babel is
come to Jerusalem, and has taken Iechonia the King thereof, and the Princes
thereof, and led them with him to Babel, and has taken one of the Kings
seed, and made a covenant with him, but he rebelled against him. Shall he
prosper says the Lord? shall he escape that does such things? or shall he
break the covenant and be delivered? he has despised the oath, and broken the
covenant: therefore thus says the Lord God, as I live, I will surely bring my
oath that he has despised, and my covenant that he has broken upon his own
head, and I will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my Ezech. 17.
net, and I will bring him to Babel, and will enter into judgment with him
there, for the trespass that he has committed against me. And for the full
conclusion, and determination of this point, I will rest upon the Canon, and
sentence of that Toletane Council 4. Canon 7. There is such treachery and
untruth amongst many nations, as it is reported, that they contemn an oath
made to their Kings, and by their mouth they dissemble the profession of an
oath, when in their mind they should hold the impiety of falsehood. They
swear to their Kings, and yet break their faith which they have promised.
They fear not that book full of curses against those which swear falsely:
what hope of such people fighting against their enemies? what trust is to be
had to them? what covenant will they not break? how shall they keep their
oaths to their enemies, seeing they do not keep it to their own Kings? who
is so mad, that would cut off his own head with his own hand? They, as it is
known, being forgetful of their own salvation, do kill themselves with their
own hand, by turning their force against themselves and their own Kings. And
whereas the Lord says, touch not mine anointed: and David says, who can lay
hands upon the Lords anointed and be innocent? these fear nothing at all to
commit perjurie, and to kill Kings. Leagues and promises that are made to the
enemies, are to be kept, and not to be broken. If faith be to be kept in
war, much more in other things. It is sacrilege to break promise, which
people have made to their Kings, because they do offend, not only against them,
but against God, in whose name they take their oath. And after in the same
Council and Canon, if we will avoid the anger of God, and desire his mercy,
let us religioussie worship and fear God, let us keep our promises made unto
our Kings: let there not be in us as in other nations, falsehood, subtlety,
perjurie, and heaps of conspiracies. Let none among us take the kingdom by
presumption, let none stir up seditions, let none purpose nor devise the
death of Kings. If this admonition cannot correct our minds, nor draw our
hearts to common safety, then harken to this sentence: Whosoever of us by any
conspiracy or devise, shall break the bond of an oath for the state of his
country, for the preservation of the Kings safety; or shall kill the King, or
put him from his kingdom; or by tyrannical presumption shall usurp the royal
seat, anathema sit, let him be accursed in the sight of God the father his
Angels, and let him be cut off from the catholic church, which he has
profaned by his perjurie: and from the company of all christians, with all the
companions of his impiety, and let him be condemned with the Devil, and his
Angels in everlasting torments. This sentence was the second and third time
denounced, and the consent of all that were present required to it, and it was
answered by all the people; He that shall presume against this Canon, anathema,
maranatha, that is, let destruction be upon him in the coming of the Lord
Jesus, and let him, and his fellows have their part with Judas Iscariot, Amen.
Wherefore we, and all the clergy do admonish the Church, and people of
Christ, to fear this fearful sentence, lest we be condemned here, and
hereafter: but that keeping our faith, and league to our glorious Lord and
King, we may draw upon our selves, not only the mercy of God, but also may
deserve the kindness and favor of our King. Seauenty Bishops, besides many
other of great learning, subscribed to this Canon. I told you before, that the
Pope and Papists were cursed many ways: now by the Canon of this Council,
both the Pope, his Cardinals, Priests, Jesuits, and his whole clergy, yea all
traitors, plotters of treason, all adherents, and favorers of false,
treacherous, and perjured persons against their Sovereign, are here accursed,
and condemned to hell.

That Papists be put to death with us for treason, not religion. Sect. XIX.
ANd we may plainly see, that howsoever the Pope canonize all those for Martyrs
and Saints, which rise and conspire against Princes; yet in very deed, they are
notorious traitors, and they are punished, and put to death, not for Religion,
but for Treason: as it is proved in the book of Execution of Justice, and in
an Answer to N. D. The Jesuits and Priests which have been executed in this
land, have been put to death for seducing the people from obedience to their
Prince; others have been cut off for rebellious and traitorous plots and
practices: none that live peaceably, and meddled with none such seditious
actions, have been put to death for their Conscience. Those that have died,
have holden these dangerous positions in her Majesty's time, That she was no
lawful Queen of England, That all her subjects were discharged of their oath
and obedience, and warranted to disobey her laws, That they would not disallow
the Popes hostile proceedings in open war against her Majesty, That all
subjects ought to obey that seditious Bull of Pope Pius, and it is an axiom of
Theology, holden and defended by the Jesuits, to murder Princes: this is
holden by their greatest Doctors, Sanders, Parsons, Allen, Stapleton, and
diverse others of their chiefest late Divines, so that popish religion teaches,
allows, and defends Treasons and Periuries. And here remember what his
Majesty said in his last gracious Speech before the Parliament, Although
(says he) particular men of all professions of religion, have been, some
thieves, some murderers, some traitors; yet ever when they came to their end,
and just punishment, they confessed their fault to be in their Nature, and not
in their Profession, these Romish Catholics only excepted. Who will not hate
and abhor Popery, which professes, teaches, nourishes, and maintains
rebellions, treasons, and most horrible murders? Such by the laws of the
Romans were counted guilty of Treason, that did attempt against the State, or
him that had sovereign authority, that stirred up sedition, that gave
counsel, or sent letters or messengers to public enemies, or that shall run
to the enemie^, or take on oath against the State, or assist public enemies by
any means; or that make enemies of friends, or enter into any faction against
the State, or receive or give an oath, or note of faction, or that with a
traitorous mind leaves his country, or makes league with the Princes
enemies, or reuealeth the Princes secrets. Judge O ye traitorous Papists,
whether ye be not guilty of greater and higher treasons than these? All
laws condemn practices against Prince or State: treason has been always
amongst the very Heathen, execrable and intolerable, Omnium communis est
hostis qui hostis est suorum, he is a common enemy of all, which is an enemy
to his own: So much more dangerous is treason, says one, by how much it is
more difficult to take heed of traitors, than enemies. With our enemies we are
to be reconciled, but traitors are never to be trusted. True Martyrs have had
always true faith, and true charity, which ye have not: they Epis. 21. ad
Dulcis.
never rebelled against their Prince, as you do. Augustine says, Non potest
mortem habere Martyrum, qui vitam non habet Christianorum, non enim poena facit
Martyrem, sed causa: that is, He cannot have the death of Martyrs, which has
not had the life of Martyrs, for not the punishment, but a cause makes a
Martyr. Now, is this a good cause? is this the life of Christians, to murder
and rebel? Let none of you suffer, faith Saint Peter, as a murderer, or as a
thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busie-body in other men's matters, but if
any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed; but ye have no cause to
rejoice in your sufferings, but to mourn and confess, that all the
punishments and torments ye suffer, are just upon you for your horrible sins.
And I have showed already, that howsoever traitors escape the punishments of
laws, yet the heavy hand of God does follow and pursue them.

Let us consider but some more few examples, Doctor Sanders, a natural borne
subject, but an unnatural rebel, being the Popes Irish Legate, and had power
from the Pope to take Arms, and move wars in Ireland; but what was his end?
he wandered in the mountains without succor, died rauingly in a frenzy. And
before him, one James Fitz-morris, the first traitor in Ireland, next to
Stukeley the rakehell, a man not unknown in the Popes palace for a wicked
crafty traitor, was slain at one blow by an Irish noble young gentleman, in
defense of his fathers country, which the traitor sought to burn.

Another of singular note was John of Desmont, brother to the Earl, a very
bloody faithless traitor, a notable murderer of his familiar friends,
wandering to seek some prey as a Woolfe in the woods, was taken and beheaded
after his own usage, being as he thought sufficiently armed with Popes Bulls,
and certain Agnus Dei, and one notable ring about his neck, sent from the
Popes finger, as it was said; but these he saw saved not his life, and sure God
the defender of his anointed, and an enemy to traitors, has always brought,
and will bring the like to miserable end. Kings reign by his goodness, and by
his blast traitors are wasted and confounded.

And thus you see the fruits of Popery to be lying, dissimulation, treachery,
false doctrine, open rebellion, foreign invasion, mischievous treasons, bloody
usurpations, and unjust invasions.

That the Pope is opposite to Christ, and very like the devil. Sect. XX.
THey never learn any of these things from Christ, nor his Apostles, whose
successors they profess themselves to be; nay you see their doctrine and
examples are quite contrary: and let us see how far differing and opposite
the Pope is to Christ. Christ is most humble, and therefore he faith, Learn
of me, for I am humble and m^eke: so humble heo was, that he washed his
Apostles feet. The Pope, howsoever in words he pretend humility, calling
himself, Seruus seru^rum, yet we have seen before his diabolical pride, and
indeed he will be Lord of all Lords. Christ's relig^on is spiritual, and he
says, He that will worship the Father, must worship him in truth and spirit.
The Popes religion is carnal and hypocritical, pleasing to the cie and ear,
but nothing edifying the soul, consisting of men's traditions, of ridiculous
and superfluous ceremonies. Christ honored marriage, had married Apostles,
commands all to marry which have not the gift of continency: The Pope
disalloweth the holy Ordinance of God, and forbids it to his Clergy: Christ
condemns all whoredoms and uncleanness; many Popes have been adulterers,
brothellers, some incestuous persons, some Sodomites, and the Popes holiness
at least tollerateth stews, curtizans, harlots in Venice and Rome, and gets
much gain by this tolleration, contrary to that law of God, There shall be no
whore of the daughters of Israel, neither shall there be a whore-keeper of the
sons of Israel: Thou Deuteronomy. 23. Verse. 17.
shall neither bring the hire of a whore, n^r the price of a dog into the
house of the Lord thy God for any vow, for even both these are an abomination
unto the Lord thy God. Christ and the Apostles Mat. 8.
were in such poor estate, that Christ says, Foxes have holes, and the birds
of the air baue nests, but the son of man has not where to lay his head.
And Peter says, Silver and gold have I Act. 3.
none: but the Popes at this hour are said to have 18000. duccats every day:
Pope John Auinion left in store five and twenty millions of gold. The Pope
has store of towers, palaces, castles. Christ reprooueth Peter for drawing his
sword, forbidding him to smite, though it was in zeal and love of his master.
Pope Boniface the 8. shows himself one day in his pontifical apparel of a
Bishop, the next day clad in armor like an Emperor, bearing before him two
swords, proclaiming these words, Ecce duo gladia hi^, Behold two swords are
here. And see how foolishly the Pope goes about to prove that the temporal
sword belongs unto him; Surely, says he, whosoever denies that Peter's
sword is temporal, he does ill mark the word of the Lord, who says, Turn
back thy sword into thy sheath: therefore both swords are in power of the
Church; namely, the spiritual and material sword. But was Peter's sword which
he had at his girdle* that which Paul mentions? Romans 13. And because Christ
commands him to put it up, is it therefore lawful for the Pope to use it,
and at his pleasure? Again the Pope says, the spiritual sword is exercised
by the Church; the temporal, for the Church; the former by the hand of the
Priest, the latter by the hands of Kings and Soldiers, but at the beck and
sufferance of the Priest. Christ liberal, merciful, pitiful to all, no
tyrant, no oppressor; the Popes most greedy and covetous oppressors,
extortioners, and robbers. Theodore Nihemius tract. 6. 37. complains of the
oppression of Rome, on this manner: The Popes treasure-house, says he, is
like the sea, into which all rivers run, and yet it does not ouerflow: for so
into this, are carried out of diverse parts of the world, thousand weights of
gold, and yet it is not filled; wherein there is a generation which changes
swords for teeth, that it may eat up the needy upon earth, and the poor
from among men: wherein there be many blood-suckers, which say, Bring, Bring:
the officers of such treasury are called Gentes camere, and that truly, for
Gentiles be barbarous nations, which have manners discrepant from manners of
men; right Gentiles, which shall have their lot with infernal furies, or
harepies; and with Tantalus, being athirst and never satisfied. Christ drives
out buyers and sellers out of the Temple: the Popes establish merchants in the
Temple to sell pardons, masses, indulgences. Christ would not worship the
devil, nor consent to him: Twenty and two Popes as Platina and others
testify, being abominable Necromancers, bound themselves slaves for ever to
the devil, to be made Popes. Some of their Popes were void of all religion,
and very Atheists. Pope Leo the tenth, when Cardinal Bembus was communing with
him of certain Evangelical histories, he made this godles answer, Quantum
nobis and nostro cetui profuerit ea de Christo fabula, satis est omnibus
seculis notum: How much that fable of Christ has profited us and our company,
it is known well enough to all ages. Another Pope confessed at his death, that
he always doubted whether there was a God, that he doubted of the
immortality of the soul, and of the last judgment. Rome it self, accounted
by the Papists, the Popes chair, and the Catholic Church, is indeed the shop
of all wickedness, whorish Babylon, filthy Sodom, the school of Errors, and
a shameless strumpet.

Bernard complained in his time, on this manner: The very offices of the
dignity of the holy Church, are gone into filthy gain, and the business of
darkness; neither is the salvation of souls, but the riot of riches sought
in these: for this they will be bounced, for this they frequent Churches, and
say Masscs: they strive impudently for Bishoprics, Archdeaconries, Abbots
places, and other dignities; so that the revenues of the Churches, are wasted
upon the uses of superfluity, and vanity.

It remains, that the man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition, a
devil, not only of the day, but also of noone day; which is not only
transfigured into an Angel of light, but is exalted above all that is called
God, or is worshipped. And Petrarcha in his Epistles makes this grievous
complaint against Rome, Whatsoever is read, says he, concerning Assyria,
Egypt, or Babylon, whatsoever is read concerning the Laborinths, whatsoever is
read touching hell, being applied to this hell, is nothing: here is the
turretting, and terrifying Nimrod, here is Semiramus with her quiver, here is
Minos that cannot be entreated; here is Radimantus, here is Cerberus, that
denounces all things: here is Monuments of lust, not to be named. Last of all,
you may see here whatsoever is confused, whatsoever is black, whatsoever is
any way horrible, or is fained so to be.

To be brief, here is a sink of all sinful and wicked things. This is, O
foolish Papists! your mother and catholic church: these are your holy fathers,
and as you count them, Christ's Vicars, and successors of the Apostles, which
cannot err. But you will say, these are personal abuses, and though some of
your Popes have been bad* yet others have been good: let it be so, yet such
wicked ones are not fit to curse, judge, and condemn others, and this may stop
your mouths, which are open against the bad lives of preachers and professors;
seeing there can be none worse then your selves are. But the best of your Popes
cannot clear themselves of pride, covetousness, ambition, and diverse other
crimes, they cannot purge themselves of here sie, idolatry, hypocrisy,
perjurie, treasons, rebellions, murders: which both you and they do profess,
and practice: and therefore they are not the successors of Christ, they sit not
in Peter's chair, they are not like Christ at al, but quite contrary, and
opposite to his doctrine and example: but are rather like, and very like to the
Devil himself. He is said to be the accuser of the brethren, the Pope is a
shameless accuser of christian Kings and Churches. The Devil is Satan, that
is, an adversary to man's salvation: the Pope by all means possible, shows
himself an utter enemy to all means of grace and life. The Devil is said to
be a tempter, because he does solicit, and draw all men to evil as much as he
can. The Pope by sea and land seeks by all means to draw whom he can to his
cursed religion. The Devil is called the old serpent, because he is subtle
and deceitful. The Pope professes, and practices all kind of subtilty,
deceit, and crafty dealing. The Devil is a liar, and father of lies: the Pope
teaches and commands notorious lies, legendes, and fables. The Devil is a
murderer, a lion, that cruel and red dragon: the Pope as we have heard,
approoueth, and commands horrible murders.

A learned man long since, has more fully compared the Pope and the Devil
together. First, the Devil, says he, is called Satan, that is, a hinderer:
the Pope is Christ's greatest hinderer, and chiefest hurter. 2. The Devil is
called (...) that is, aslaunderer: the Pope slaundereth us whilst we live, and
slaundereth us when we die: as the death of Luther, Zwinglius, etc. 3. The
Devil is called inimi^us homo, that is, the envious man: the Popes rancour is
the destruction of the Church. 4. It is said of the Devil, Satan fell like
lightning from heaven: it is said of the Pope and his, Vidi stellas cadentes a
coelo: I saw stars fall from heaven. 5. The Devil was a liar from the
beginning: It is said of the Pope, that he spoke great things, that is, lies,
and blasphemies. 6. The Devil did not stand in the truth, no more did the
Pope: according to that saying, this day is poison entered into the Church. 7.
The Devil is a roaring Lion, so is the Pope, so his Spanish inquisitors. 8.
The Devil is that serpent which persecuteth the woman in the earth; the Church
in this earth has no such persecuting serpent, as that serpentine persecutor
of Rome. 9. Paul when he enuieth against Elymas the sorcerer, and calls him
the Devils son, Acts 13. he seems to expound this word: the Diuelles son
in this description, a man full of all manner of deceit, an enemy of all
righteousness, and one that cease not to pervert the right ways of God. This
touches the Pope of Rome most nearly in every point. If this be the
definition of the Devils son, he is undoubtedly the Devils own dear son.
10. The Devil promised Christ all the wealth in the world, if he would fall
down and worship him: the Pope promises Kingdoms, Earledomes, Lordships,
Bishoprics, Abbeys, etc. 11. The Devil is called a Whale, because he rules
in the tumultuous waves of the sea: the Pope is a whale, because he bears
swinge in the vain waves of this busy world. 12. The Devil is called a
Dragon, because he deuoureth souls: the Pope is a Dragon, because he deuoureth
both bodies, and souls. 13. The Dragon drew the third part of the stars out
of heaven: the Pope withdrew, by livings, and giuings, the third part of the
best learned men in Christendom from the true doctrine: so that I say again,
the Pope is a foul head, because the Devil is a foul head. And this woman,
or Church of Rome, is as foul as the Devil: because her head the Pope is as
foul as the Devil.

Sundry conclusions, from the opinions and practices of Papists. Sect. XXI.
THE end of all my speech against Pope, Papist, and popery, is, to draw us to a
hatred, and detestation of them, and that we should by all means, seek to
overthrow and suppress them. And here I pray you consider some collections,
gathered by a learned man, writing against the Northern rebellion, very
profitable to be considered of all, and especially, of Kings and Magistrates.
From experience of the opinions, dispositions, and practices of Papists, he
says, that all true Christians, and all true English subjects, ought to
believe, and may well know, that these are true conclusions.

1 That every Papist, that believes all the Popes doctrine to be true, is an
enemy, and traitor against the Prince, and honor of God; against the crowns
and dignities of all Kings, and temporal Rulers; against the wealth and safety
of all civil kingdoms, policies, and commonweals.

2 That every such English Papist, is a traitor to the King of England, and
hates his life, wishes the alteration of his government, and lives in hope
of another world; which even by an ordinary byword it is said, that themselves
do call their golden day.

3 That every such English Papist, is an especial traitor to the Realm of
England, and has no regard, into what slavery, conquest, subjection to
foreign tyranny, dishonor, or other misery it be thrown, so that their
false, idolatrous, and superstitious religion be restored, with liberty to
spoil and murder, without respect of dignity, age, sex, learning, reverence,
honesty, or nature.

4 That as it is reason, that the owner of a sheepe-biter mastiue dog,
knowing his dogs qualities, should either hang up his dog, or pay for the
sheep his dog wearieth: so those that have notorious sheepe-biters,
murderers of Gods flock in their custody and power, must make their account,
either to hang up, or otherways, to dispatch such curies, or else to answer
to God for the blood of his sheep, both such as they have destroyed already,
and such as they may destroy by any possibility hereafter.

5 That by boldness and sharp execution upon enemies, the friends are
encouraged; and so contrariwise, if the dangerous traitor be not removed, the
true subject may be left in peril, and thereby, the rest of the good subjects
disabled, or at least, discouraged to venture so far again; and the freedom
of consultation in the mean time for preserving the Prince impeached.

6 That is truly said, Improbum hominem prestat non accusasse quam absoluere:
It is better not to meddle with a naughty man, then to let him go. For what
were it else then to set an house on fire, and to run away by the light?

7 That many times it is as small an offense to give a warrant to kill a true
man, as to pardon a murderer, or traitor. As a wife shepherd will rather give
leave to a hunter to kill the best lamb in his flock, then to let go a Fox,
or a woolfe.

8 That the lives of Kings and Princes, are the lives, and as it were the
souls of their kingdoms and commonweals, whereby they are to consider, that
being prodigal of their own safety, in excess of clemency to traitors, or
in security of exposing their persons to perils, largiuntur ex alieno, they are
liberal of that, which is not altogether their own to give.

9 That he is justly to be suspected, that shall practice with any devise, or
pacification, or colored clemency, or extenuating the Princes peril, to
rebate, or blunt the edge of the Princes sword, or so tie it in the scabbard,
as if such qualifiers, hiders, cloakers, should seek to abuse that most holy
and reverend sign of majesty to no good end, or to other end then God
ordained.

10 That God cannot well take it, if he be less zealouslie served then the
Devil; that there be less feruencie showed by truly learned Princes for
advancing Gods honor against his enemies, then has been by abused, and
deceived Princes, for setting up the kingdom of the Devil and Antichrist.

11 That Gods commandments of placability and forgiveness, extend to our own
enemies, not to his enemies, against the revenge of private displeasures, and
not against severity and sharp execution in cases of Gods honors and commonweals.

Now considering these worthy conclusions, and the dangerous opinions, and
practices of Papists, as we have seen before, seeing they are the arch-enemies
of Religion, State, Prince and Country: if our Prince be dear unto us, if our
Church and country be dear unto us, if we make account of our wives,
children* lives, and liuinges, let us seek by all means possible, so far as
our callings reach, the conversion, or confusion of Papists; let us seeeke the
utter overthrow of popery, which seeks, intends, voweth, professes, and
practices the overthrow of us all.

The best means how to suppress Popery. Sect. XXII.
ANd now let me shortly add some direction, whereby this cursed religion may
be suppressed amongst us.

1 Let all good laws already in force be strengthened, and better executed
against the resolute professors of popery: good laws without execution, are
like belles without clappers.

2 Let the company of such be avoided: reject him says Paul, that is an
heretic, after once or twice admonition; Tit. 3. Deuteronomy. 7.
and the Lord forbids his people to match or marry with idolaters, lest they
ensnare them, and be a cause of their ruin. Let these enemies of the Church,
be kept under, and weakened: as Solomon set the strangers of his land to work,
2. Cor. 2. 18.
and to bear burdens. Let them not in any case abound in wealth, and munition,
for then they will be insolent and do the more mischief.

3 Let their children be taken from them so soon as they be borne, and
brought up on their charges with religious persons, and that they match with
such: or else, if all the Papists in the land may have liberty to bring up
their children themselves as they list, and to poison them with popery even
from their cradle, there will continually spring up a new brood of Papists and
rebels.

4 Let al helps, props, hopes, pro^ocations, occasions, and encouragements to
popery, be quite removed and taken away. The Lord wishes his people as a true
testimony of their unfeigned repentance, not only to cast away their idols, but
all that belongs unto them. You shall says he, pollute Esaias. 30. 22.
the covering of the images of silver, and the rich ornament of thy images of
gold, and cast them away as a menstruous cloth, and thou shall say unto it,
get thee hence. When the word of God grow mightily, and prevailed in Ephesus,
and many believed Acts 19.
and repented, such as used curious arts, brought their books and burned them
before al men, though they were worth a great sum of money. By the which
place, we learn, that true repentance does not think much to cast away any
thing, be it never so dear unto us, that is invented by man against the honor
of God. Therefore the good kings, Ezekia and Iosia, destroyed and burned the
Altars and ornaments of Idols, yea the very groves, which might have bin put to
good uses: yet Iosia, to show his zeal, and hatred against idolatry, and to
cut off occasions in time to come, would not spare them. The Papists
themselves, a generation zealous and devout in their own religion, burned the
Bibles, defaced scriptures written upon walls, and cut off all occasions and
means, whereby the the Gospel might any way flourish. Let us be as zealous to
root out all furtherances and monuments of their religion, as books,
crucifixes, pictures, and all other things whatsoever, of that kind and nature.

5 Let all sound professors of the Gospel, be kindly entertained, and
preferred: let resolute or counterfeit Papists, be discarded, disclaimed,
discountenanced; yet let all good means be used, privately and openly, for
their conversion, as private conference, counsel of learned men: and let them
be all compelled to hear the word of the Lord in the public congregation.
These are the best means for the conversion or suppression of Papists, these
are the best means to discourage them, and stop all treacherous courses
hereafter. This is the best, most just, and most holy revenge against them; but
yet above all things, let there be planted and placed in every congregation in
the land, at least so far as may be, a painful, sound, and resident
preacher: by the word soundly preached, Ignorance a chief pillar of Popery,
is beaten down, all errors and heresies are confuted, all sort of sins are
reproved, and moved to repentance; the true sense of the holy scripture, which
the Papists pervert and wrest to their own destruction, is faithfully
delivered, all men are taught true obedience to God and their Prince,
Antichrist is overthrown, and consumed with the spirit of Gods mouth: there is
no light without the sun, no fructifying the earth, without the windows of
heaven be opened, no lamp burning without oil; so no true religion, faith,
nor obedience, is begun, or continued* without the word of grace be soundly
delivered and established. Therefore quench not the spirit, despise not
prophesying. And mark, I pray you, how many arguments might be gathered for
the necessity of preaching, from that one chapter, being the 10. of S. Luke
his Gospel; there Christ Jesus the Savior of the world, in pity and
compassion of men's souls, sends forth at one time, 70 preachers, he
commands to pray to the Lord of the harvest, to send forth more such
laborers into his harvest, he complains that the number of such are few:
he confirms their ministry, by threatening judgments against such as
contemn their doctrine: he takes such contempt to be against himself. And
when the Disciples returned, and told him of the good success and effects of
their preaching, he said unto them, I saw Satan like lightening fall down
from heaven. The meaning is, that the devil has, as it were, a kingdom in
the hearts of men, through ignorance, errors, and sin; but this power of
Satan is beaten down by the preaching of Act. 26.
the Gospel. Saint Paul speaking of the power of the Ministry says, That it
opens the eyes, that it turns from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan to God. After the plentiful preaching of the word, it follows, It
Apoc. 14.
is fallen, It is fallen, Babylon the great city, the kingdom of sin, of
Satan, and of Antichrist, is ouerthrown by the preaching of the Gospel. It
follows in that place of Luke, that when our Savior Christ heard of the good
success of the Gospel, and of the plentiful preaching, and power of it, he
greatly rejoices in spirit, and heartily thanketh his heavenly Father for it.
In the same Chapter, this Savior of the world, as he was often publicly
occupied in preaching, so he preaches privately in the house of Marie and
Martha; and Marie being a careful and attentive hearer, he commends her for
it, and accounts this to be the one thing needful, and the good part which
should never be Prou. 29. 1^.
taken from her. I end this point, with that sentence of Solomon, Where there
is no vision, the people decay and perish.

True Obedience. Sect. XXIII. III. Use.
ANd now at length, let us come to the third use of this our Deliverance, which
is true and unfeigned obedience, to the will of this our good God, who has thus
delivered Deuteronomy. 23. 1.
us. All blessings, as plenty, peace, and health, are promised to such as obey
Gods commandments: all fearful curses are pronounced against the
disobedient. Behold says the Lord to his people, I send an Angel before thee,
to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee to the place which I have prepared;
beware of him, and hear his voice, and provoke him not, for he will not spare
your misdeeds, Exodus 23. Verse. 20.
because my name is in him: but if thou hearken unto his voice, and do all that
I speak, then will I be an enemy to thy enemies, and afflict them that
afflict thee. O that my people had hearkened unto me, says God, and Israel had
Psalm. 81. Verse. 13.
walked in my ways! I would soon have humbled their enemies, and turned my
hand against their adversaries. And Psalm. 105. 44.
in another place, David setting down the mercies of God to his people, he
says, He gave them the land of the Heathen, and they took the labors of the
people in possession, that they might keep his statutes, and observe his laws:
whereby he teaches, that the end why God preserves his Church, is this; that
they should serve him, and obey him. All the benefits of God, past and present*
old and new, great and small, his manifold mercies, which we have so long
time enjoyed, do call for obedience at our hands.

A hearty love to the friends of the Gospel. Sect. XXIIII. IIII. Use.
THe fourth use that we are to make of this Deliuer^ce, is, that all we that
are sound professors of the Gospel, that we be knit together, with a holy
concord and kindness, and that we love one another without dissimulation. The
faithful friends of the Gospel, are few, the enemies many, therefore they
had need to be linked together: we profess one God, one Savior, one
Baptism; we are members of the same body, branches of the same vine, heirs
of the same kingdom: therefore let us love one another. By this shall John 13.
men know that ye are my Disciples, says Christ, if ye love one another. And
the Apostle says, If ye bite and devour one Gal. 5.
another, take heed lest ye be consumed one of another. Especially let all the
ministers of God be joined together in hearty love: we teach love, nothing is
more to edification. The enemies joy, and take advantage by our contention, and
discord. To love all the friends of God, and especially Gods ministers, is a
token that we love God himself. The godly man's delight, is upon the Saints on
the earth, he makes much of them which fear the Lord. The contempt of good
men, procures the judgments of God upon us. Moses prays thus bitterly
against the enemies of Gods ministers, Deuteronomy. 33. Verse. 11.
Sinite, O Lord, says he, through the loins of them that rise against him,
and of them that hate him, that they rise not again. The Lord threateneth
pestilence and sword against Zidon, because Ezech. 2^.
they were a grievous and pricking thorn unto the house of Israel, and despised
them.

Now seeing our enemies agree, and love together, they stick together like
burres against us, let us join together against them; they meant to have
destroyed us all, and to cut our throats, or to have blown us up: let us all,
who should have been slain by them, be knit together in an holy love, unity,
and kindness: and seeing our enemies hate us, and pursue us, for the Gospel, for
our profession; and seeing they hate those most, that are most forward in the
same; let us love them best, countenance, maintain, and defend them, which are
the greatest enemies to popery: and the surest friends, professors, and
defendors of the Gospel.

Other uses of this our Deliverance, we may learn from David, in this Psalm;
wherein I will be shorter, because I partly touched them before.

To trust confidently in God hereafter. Sect. XXV. Use V.
THerefore the fifth use is, with David in this place, a bold confidence and
assurance, gathered from the feeling of Gods former mercies, of his loving
favor hereafter. Psalm. 3.
Hereupon David says, I laid me down and slept, and rose up again, for the
Lord sustained me: I will not be afraid for ten thousand of people, that should
be set me round about. In another place, Psalm. 23.
Though I should walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear
no evil, for thou art with me, thy rod, and thy staff, they comfort me. And
again, in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his tabernacle, in the
secret place of his pauilion shall he hide me, and set me upon a rock, and now
shall he lift up my head above my enemies round about me. And Psalm. 46.
again, God is our hope and strength, and help in troubles, therefore will we
not fear, though the earth be moved, and though the mountains fall to the
midst of the sea. And in another place, Ye that fear the Lord, trust in
Psalm. 115.
the Lord, he is their helper, and their shield, the Lord has been mindful
of us, he will bless us, he will bless the house of Israel, he will bless
the house of Aaron. The Lord says, He is with me, therefore will I not fear
what man can do unto me: The Lord is with me, amongst them that help me,
therefore shall I see my desire upon my enemies. Psalm. 118.
It is better to trust in the Lord, then to have any confidence in man: it is
better to trust in the Lord, then to have confidence in Princes: All nations
have compassed me, but in the name of the Lord I shall destroy them. And
again, Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, for there is no
help in him, his breath departs, and he returns to his earth, then his
thoughts perish: blessed is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose
hope is in the Lord his God.

Greater love to God. Sect. XXVI. Use. VI.
THe sixth use is, that by this Deliverance we be moved and stirred up to love
the Lord more sincerely, and seruently then ever we did before. All the
blessings and benefits of God, do call for love at our hands, and the more we
receive from him, the more we are to love him. Let those that never loved him*
begin to love him, seeing that God has yet spared them, given them time to
repent. Let them which have loved him, love him still, and more than they have
done, seeing he has been unto them so kind, so gracious in this Deliverance.
Love ye the Lord all his Saints, says David, for the Lord preserves the
faithful, and Psalm. 31. v. 2^.
rewards abundantly the proud doer. Let us love the Lord, by loving all that
he loves, and by hating all that he hates.

This use David made of his deliverances: I love thee dearly, O Lord my
strength, the Lord is my rock and my fortress, and Psalm. 18. v. 1.
he that delivers me, my God, and my strength, in him will I trust, my
shield, the horn of my salvation, and my refuge. And in this Psalm, after
that he felt the sweetness of Gods mercies in delivering him from so great
dangers, then he exclaymeth and protests; I love the Lord, as we heard before.

Continual prayers and thanksgiving. Sect. XXVII. Use VII.
A Seventh use of this deliverance, is hearty praise and thanksgiving to God.
What it is, we have heard it before, and reasons to move us to it. It is the
chief thing that God requires of us, there is nothing more detestable in his
eyes, then unthankfulness; there is nothing more against nature and humanity.
The dumb creatures acknowledge their benefactors, and are thankful to them in
their kind, we are to be thankful for the least benefit, for the least
deliverance out of any danger, though it be private; much more for so great
and wonderful preservation, from so great, manifold, and public dangers.
Abraham having gotten a victory against his enemies, and delivered his Gen 14.
kinsman Lot: Melchizedeck says, Blessed be the most high God, which has
delivered thine enemies into thy hands. The Egiptians being drowned in the red sea, and the people of God delivered, then sang Moses, and the children
of Israel this Exodus 15.
song unto the Lord, and said in this manner. I will sing unto the Lord, for he
has triumphed gloriously, etc. When Si^era was ^^aine, and all his host,
then sang Debora, and Barack, Judge 5.
saying, Praise you the Lord for the auenging of Israel, and for the people that
offered themselves willingly: bark ye Kings, harken ye Princes, I, even I
will sing unto the Lord, I will sing praise to the Lord God of Israel. King
Ezekia when his life was prolonged, Esaias. 38.
he sang a song unto the Lord, saying, The Lord is ready to save me, therefore
will we sing my song all the days of our life i^ Ier. 20.
the house of the Lord. Sing to the Lord says Jeremy, praise ye the Lord,
for he has delivered the soul of the poor from the hand Ier. 51.
of the wicked. And again he says, The Lord has brought forth our
righteousness, come and let us declare in Sion the work of Iona. 2.
the Lord our God. Jonas being in the whales belly, promises to sacrifice unto
the Lord the voice of thanksgiving, Psalm. 30. Psalm. 54.
and to pay his vows when he was delivered. David says, I will magnify thee O
Lord, for thou have exalted me, and have not made my foes to rejoice over me.
And again, I will sacrifice freely to thee, I will praise thy name O Lord,
because it is good, for he Psalm. 9.
has delivered me out of all trouble, and mine eye has seen my desire upon
my enemies. And in another place, Sing praises unto the Lord which dwells in
Sion, show the people his works, for when he makes inquisition for blood, he
remembers it, and forgets not the complaint of the poor. Psalm. 56.
Thy vows says he, are upon me O God, I will render praise unto thee, for
thou have delivered my soul from death, my feet from falling, that I may
walk before God in the light of the living. Let us all say with David, Praised
be the Lord God of our salvation, which ladeth us daily with benefits; this is
our God, even the God that saves us, and to the Lord belong the issues of
death* Surely God will wound the head of his enemies, and the ha^e^y part of
him that walks in sins.

That we may rejoice for the overthrow of the wicked. Sect. XXVIII. Use VIII.
BUT are we to give thanks for the destruction of the wicked, and to rejoice
at their fall? does not Solomon Prou. 24. 17.
say, be not thou glad when thine enemy falls, and let not thy heart rejoice
when he stumbleth, lest the Lord see it, and it displease thee, and he turn
his wrath from him? and does not David mourn and make great lamentation for
the 2. Sam. 1.
death of Saul? Indeed in respect of our adversaries, considering their
horrible sins, there is cause of sorrow: the finnes of Sodom vexed the
soul of righteous Lo^ from day to day: and David says, mine eyes gush out
with ri^ers of tears, because men keep not thy law: and the Prophet 2. King.
8. 13.
Elisha wept, when he thought upon the cruelty, and bloody murders of Hasael.
And is it not lamentable, that subjects should rise and rebel against their
native Prince? that our countrymen should be so unthankful, so ungracious,
undutiful, proud, desperate, and mad, that they should have no care of
fidelity, no care of themselves, their lives, lands, bodies, goods, wives, and
children, but wilfully hazard all? Lamentable it is to see, their miserable,
and desperate death. And no doubt it is grievous to Kings, Counselors, Judges,
which examine, decree, pronounce sentence of death against them, and thus they
think with grief and pity: God has decreed this punishment to these
malefactors, and therefore it is good for them, and thus they think of hard
tortures, as of medicines good for the offenders, or that others by their
examples may be terrified from the like sins.

There cannot but be much grief in magistrates, and all good subjects, both
for the monstrous sins of these rebels, and their heavy deserved
punishment; and yet we have great cause of joy, that they have not brought to
pass their mischievous devises: we are not indeed to rejoice for the fall of
our enemies, upon hatred and desire of revenge in our own private causes: our
joy must proceed from a zeal of Gods glory, that the wicked being suppressed,
the word of God flourishes: that innocents are delivered from the hands of
cruel enemies; that sin is stayed: and thus we rejoice, that the treacheries
of these rebels are discovered, that they are stopped in their wicked
courses, that our King, Queen, royal Seed, Counsel, Governors, and whole
State, are still in safety in despite of these enemies.

We wish that our enemies had never attempted any such wickedness, and with
all our hearts, we wish and desire their true repentance. When the Ark of God
was safe, and Psalm. 58.
the Philistines destroyed, David leapeth and daunceth for joy, and he says in
the Psalms, The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance* he shall
wash his feet in the blood of Apoc. 18.
the wicked. And the Holy Ghost exhorts all the faithful, to rejoice at the
fall and destruction of Babylon, saying, O Heaven rejoice of her, and ye holy
Apostles and Prophets, for God has given you judgment on her*

And this use David makes of his Deliverance, rejoicing and praising God for
it.

Prayer for Gods favor in time to come. Sect. XXIX. Last Use.
THE eight and last use, is, that which David in this place makes, that he
will call upon the name of the Lord, he will not only praise him for benefits
past, but he will continually pray for the continuance and increase of Gods
favor toward him. The experience and feeling of Gods former mercies does
encourage and imbolden us to pray continually for further graces: we have need
still of many things, we are weak, the power of our adversaries, and subtlety
is great, we are subject still daily to many dangers, and therefore have need
continually to call upon God for his help.

Let us pray for the whole Church, for this land, and especially, for our
gracious Sovereign. The devil an enemy to all, but especially to Kings,
because they are enemies to his kingdom, therefore he stirs up continually
wicked instruments to overthrow them; so that the state of Kings is dangerous,
and they of all other, have need of the prayers of the Church: and no doubt,
God has heard the prayers of his children, we fare the better for them, they
have cried day and night, and do cry still in seruency of their souls, for
the good of the Lords anointed, our governors, and whole state. And here
remember that which is graciously spoken in his Majesty's late Speech; Although
I confess, says he, as all mankind, so chiefly Kings, as being in highest
places, like the highest trees, or staiest mountains, and steepest rocks, are
most subject to the daily tempests of innumerable dangers, and therefore have
need of the continual, and hearty prayers of Gods children: and though we be
delivered, and have escaped great dangers, yet we are still subject to more;
and the rage, malice, and subtlety of our enemies, is not yet stayed: they are
like their father the devil, seeking continually, so far as they can, the
destruction of the bodies and souls of men. Let this be our chief weapon and
armor against our enemies, to fly unto God by hearty prayer; let us pray with
David, Be not Psalm. 22. 19.
thou far off O Lord my strength, hasten to help me, deliver my soul from
the sword, my desolate soul from the power of the dog, save me from the
Lions mouth, etc. Again, Plead thou my cause, O Lord, with them that strive
with me, fight thou against them that fight against me. Deliver me, O God, out
of the hand of the wicked, out of the Psalm. 35.
hand of the evil and cruel man. Deliver me from mine enemies, defend me from
them that rise up against me.

Some special things required in prayer. Sect. XXX.
ANd that our prayers may be heard, and be acceptable in the sight of God,
remember that exhortation of ^ph. 6. 15.
the Apostle, Pray always, with all manner of prayer, and supplication in the
spirit, and watch thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all
Saints, wherein we are to observe these things in our prayers.

1 They must be continual, we must be ready to pray upon all occasions
offered.

2 We must pray in all manner of prayers, we must desire all good things we
need, and remoouing of all evil: we must pray privately, and publicly, and
praise God for benefits received.

3 We must pray in spirit, that is, with understanding and attention. I will
pray with the spirit says Paul, I will pray with understanding.

4 We must be watchful in prayer, praying early and late, day and night, and
our souls must watch from sin.

5 There must be continuance, and perseverance in prayer, we must not faint
and give over; the Scripture exhorts us to pray continually, that is, to be
diligent, careful, and constant in praying.

6 We must pray for all Saints, for the whole Church of God, we are fellow
members, and fellow soldiers, let us join our forces together, vis vnita
fortior, strength being united is the stronger: and if the prayers of one man
be of great force, how much more the prayers of many? and here Iam. 5.
remember the saying of S. James, the prayer of the righteous, avails much if
it be fervent: wherein note two especial things required in prayers, which
pearce the heavens, they must not be cold, weak, and careless, but they must
be zealous, hearty, fervent, and importunate, setting before our eyes, the
majesty of him to whom we pray, and the necessity of those things for the
which we pray, without the which we cannot be saved. And again, he does not
say the prayers of any man avails, but the prayers of the righteous; God
hears not the prayers of the wicked, the prayers of hypocrites, as we have
heard partly before.

Job. 11. 13*
Therefore I end with that holy counsel of Job, If thou prepare thy heart
says he, and stretch out thy hands toward him, if iniquity be in thy hand,
put it far away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy tabernacle, then truly
shall thou lift up thy face without spot, and shall be stable, and shall not
fear. Job following this good counsel himself, being a righteous man, and
repenting of his sins, the Lord heard his prayers which he made for his friends.

The Lord bless our gracious Sovereign, our Queen, the Prince, the royal
Issue: The Lord bless the Counsel, Nobles, Magistrates, Ministers, and people
of this land: and preserve them still from the malice, and cruelty of their
enemies: The Lord grant that we may all make a holy use of our late
deliverance, that thereby we may be drawn to repentance, to the hatred of
popery, to obedience, to love one another, to confidence in God, to the love of
God, to thankfulness and prayer: The Lord confound Antichrist, give his Gospel
a free passage, and deliver his Church, from unreasonable and evil men. This
he grant for Jesus Christ his sake, his only Son, and our only Savior.

Amen.

