A DISPVTE AGAINST THE ENGLISH-POPISH CEREMONIES, O^^RVDED UPON THE CHVRCH OF
SCOTLAND. WHEREIN Not only our own ^RG^MEMTS against the same are strongly
(...) (...) likewise the ANSWERS and DEFENC^^ of our Opposites, SVCH AS
HOOKER, MORTOVNE, BVRGES, SPRINT, PAYBODY, ANDREWS, SARAVIA, TILEN, SPOTSWOOD,
LINDSEY, FORBESSE, etc. particularly confuted.

JEREM. Chap. 9. verse. 12. 13. 14. VERSE. 12. Who is the wise man that he may
understand this, and who is he to whom the mouth of the LORD has spoken, that
he may declare it, for what the Land perishes. 13. And the LORD says;
Because they have forsaken my Law, which I set before them, and have not obeyed
my voice, neither walked therein. 14. But have walked after the Imagination of
their own heart, and after Idols.

Printed in the year of our Lord 1637.

TO ALL AND EVERY ONE IN THE REFORMED CHVRCHES OF SCOTLAND, ENGLAND, AND
IRELAND, who love the LORD JESUS, and mean to adhere unto the Reformation of
Religion: Grace, Mercy, and Peace, from GOD our Father, and from the Lord.
JESUS CHRIST.
AS Satan's malice, and man's wickedness, cease not to molest the thrice happy
estate of the Church of CHRIST, so has the eternal council of the only wise
GOD, predetermined the coming of Offenses, Persecutions, Heresies, Schisms,
and Divisions, that Professors may be proved before 1. Cor. 11. 19.
they be as approved, and made manifest. And hence, Math. 18. 17.
it must needs be that offenses come: neither has the Church ever enjoyed both
purity and peace any long time together. But whiles the Church of God thus
disquieted, as well with dangerous alterations, as with doleful altercations,
is presented in the Theater of this World, and cries out to beholders, Lament,
1. 12.
Have ye no regard, all ye that pass by? A pity it is to see the crooked
and sinistrous courses of the greattest part, every man moving his period
within the enormous confines of his own exorbitant desires. The Atheistical
Nullifidian, nothing regards the assoyling of Ecclesiastical controversies:
he is of Act. 18. 17.
Gallio's humor, and cares for none of those things. The sensual Epicurean
and riotous Russian, (go Church matters as they will) eats and drinks, and
takes him pleasure. The Cynicall Critic spe^eth out bitter aspersions, gybeth,
and justleth at every thing that can be said or done in the cause of Religion.
The Scenicall Iester plays fast and loose, and can utter anything in sport,
but nothing in earnest. The a varitious worldling has no tune but Give, Give,
and no antheme pleases him but Have, Have. The aspyring Diotrephes puffs
down every course which can not puff up. The lofly Favorite takes the
pattern of his religion from the Court ^chnographie, and if the Court swim,
he cares not though the Church sink. The subdolous Machiavellian accounts
the show of religion profitable, but the substance of it troublesome: he
studieth not the Oracles of God, but the Principles of Satanicall guile, which
he learneth so well, that he may go to the Devil to be Bishopped. The
turne-coa^ Temporizer wagges with every wind, and (like Diogenes turning about
the mouth of his voluble hoggeshead, after the course of the sun,)
wheresoever the bright beams of corruscant Authority do shine and cherish,
thither follows and flitteth he. The gnathonick Parasite swears to all that
this benefactor holds. The mercenary Pensioner will bow before he break.
He, who only studieth to have the praise of some witty invention can not
stricke upon another anwile. The silly Idiote, (with 2. Sam. 15. 11.
Absolons two hundredth) goes in the simplicity of his heart, after his
perverse leaders. The lapped Nicodemite, holds it enough to yield some secret
assent to the truth, though neither his profession nor his practice testify so
much. He, whose mind is possessed with praejudicate opinions against the
truth, when convincing light is holden forth to him, looks asquint, and
therefore goes aw^y. The Pragmaticall A diaphorist with his spanne-broad
faith, and elve-broad conscience, does no small harm: the poor pandect of his
plagiary profession, in matters of faith, reckons little for all, and in
matters of practice all for little. Shortly, if an expurgatory Index were
compiled of those, and all other sorts of men, who either through their
careless and newtrall on looking, make no help to the troubled and disquieted
Church of Christ, or through their nocent accession, and overthwart
intermedling, work out her greater harm! alas. How few feeling members were
there to be found behind, who truly lay to heart her estate and condition?
Nevertheless in the worst times, either of raging persecution, or prevailing
defection, as God Almighty has ever hitherto, so both now and to the end he
will reserve to himself a remnant according to the election of Grace, who
cleave to his blessed Truth, and to the purity of his holy worship, and are
grieved for the affliction of Joseph, as being themselves also in the body. In
confidence whereof, I take Boldness to stir you up at this time, by putting
you in remembrance. If you would be rightly informed of the present estate of
the reformed Churches, you must not acquiesce, in the parge ting verdict of
those who are wealthy and well at ease, and mounted aloft upon the uncogged
wheels of prosperous fortune (as they call it.) Those whom the love of the
world has not inhaunced to the serving of the time, can give you the soundest
Judgment. It is Bo^in. m^h. hist. cap. 4. p 47.
noted of Dionysius Halicarnasseus (who was never advanced to magistracy in
the Roman Republike,) that he has written far more truly of the Romans,
then Fabius, Salustius, or Cato, who flourished among them with riches and
honors.

After that it pleased God, by the light of his glorious Gospel to dispell the
more then Cimmerian darkness of Antichristianisme, and by the antidote of
Reformation, to avoid the poison of Popery; for as much as in England and
Ireland, every noisome weed which Gods hand had never planted, was not pulled
up, therefore we now see the faces of those Churches overgrowne with the
repullulating twigges and sprigges of Popish superstition. Rep. to the answ. p.
269.
Mr. Sprint aknowledgeth the Reformation of England to have been defective,
and says, It is easy to imagine of what difficulty it was, to reform all
things at the first, where the most part of the privy Council, of the
Nobility, Bishops, Judges, Gentry, and People, were open or close Papists:
where few or none of any countenance stood for Religion at the first, but the
Protector and Cranmer. The Church of Scotland was blessed with a more glorious
and perfect Reformation, then any of our nighbour Churches. The Doctrine,
Discipline, Regiment, and Policy established here by Ecclesiastical and
Civil Laws, and sworn and subscribed unto by the Kings Majesty, the several
Presbetries, and Parish Churches of the Land; as it had the applause of
foreign Divines, so was it in all points agreeable unto the Word; neither
could the most rigid Aristarchus of these times, challenge any irregularity in
the same. But now alas, even this Church, which was once so great a praise in
the earth, is deeply corrupted, and has Exodus 32. 8.
turned aside quickly out of the way. So that this is the Lords controversy
against Scotland: Ierem. 2. 21.
I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed: How then art thou turned
into the degenerat plant of a strange vine unto me?

It is not this day feared but felt, that the rotten dregs of Popery, which
were never purged away from England and Ireland, and having once been spewed
out with detestation, are licked up again in Scotland; prove to be the unhappy
occasions of a woeful recidivation. Neither is there need of Lyncean eyes, for
if we be not poreblind, it can not be hid from us, what doleful and
disasterous mutation (to be bewailed with tears of blood) has happened to the
Church and Spouse of Christ in these Dominions? Her comely countenance is
miscoloured with the farding luster of the mother of Harlotes. Her shamefaste
forehead has received the mark of the Beast. Her lovely-lockes are frizled
with the crisping pins of Antichristian fashions. Her chaste Ears are made to
listen to the friends of the great Whore, who bring the bewitching Doctrine of
enchaunting Traditions. Her doves Eyes look pleasantly upon the well attired
Harlot. Her sweet Voice is mumming and muttering some missall and magical
Liturgies. Her fair Neck bears the halter-like tokens of her former
captivity, even a burden some chain of superfluous and superstitious
Ceremonies. Her undefiled Garments are stained with the meretricious braverie
of Babylonish ornaments, and with the symbolizing badges of conformity with
Rome. Her harmless Hands reach brick and mortare to the building of Babel.
Her beautiful Feet with shoes, are all besmeared, whiles they return apace
in the way of Egypt, and wade the ingruent brooks of Popery. Oh transformed
Virgin! whether is thy beauty gone from thee? Oh forlorn Princes Daughter! how
art thou not ashamed to look thy Lord in the face? Oh thou best beloved among
Women what have thou to do with the inveagling appurtenances and abilement of
Babylon the Whore? -- But among such things as have been the accursed means
of the Churches desolation, those which peradventure might seem to some of you
to have least harm or evil in them, are the Ceremonies of kneeling in the act
of receiving the Lords Supper, Cross in Baptism, Bishopping, Holy Days, etc.
which are pressed under the name of things indifferent. Yet if you survey the
sundry inconveniences and grievous consequences of the same, you will think
far otherwise. The vame shows and shadows of these Ceremonies have ^id and
obscured the substance of Religion. The true life of godliness is smoared
down and suppressed by the burden of these human inventions. For their sakes,
many, who are both faithful Servants to Christ, and loyal Subjects to the
King, are evil spoken of, mocked, reproached, menaced, molested. For their
sakes, Christian brethren are offended, and the weak are greatly scandalized.
For their sakes, the most powerful and painful Ministers in the Land, are
either thrust out, or threatened to be thrust out from their callings. For their
sakes, the best qualified and most hopeful Exspectants are debarred from
entering into the Ministry. For their sakes, the Seminaries of Learning are so
corrupted, that few or no good plants* can come forth from thence. For their
sakes, many are admitted into the sacred Ministry, who are either Pop shand
Arminianized, who minister to the flock poison in stead of food; or silly
ignorants, who can dispense no whollesome food to the hungry; or else vicious
in their lives, who draw many with them into the dangerous p^ecipies of
Soule-perd^ion; or lastly, ^o ^rthly minded, that they savor only the things
of this earth, not the things of the Spirit of God, who feed them selves, but
not the flock, and to whom the great Shepherd of the Sheep will say. Ezech.
34. 4.
The deseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was
sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought
again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost.
Simple ones, who have some taste and relish of Popish superstition, (for many
such there be in the Land) do suck from the intoxicate dugs of Conformity,
the foster-milke which makes them grow in Error. And who can be ignorant, what
a large spread, Popery, Arminianisme, and reconciliation with Rome, have taken
among the Arch-urgers of the Ceremonies? What marvel, that Papists clap their
hands? for they see the day coming which they wish for. W^e to thee O Land,
which bears professed Papists and avouched A heists, but can not bear them
who desire to 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
abstain from all appearance of evil: For Isa. 59. 14. 15.
truth and equity are fallen in thee, and he that departs from evil makes
himself a prey.

These are the best wares which the big hulke of Conformity, favored with
the prosperous gale of mighty Auctority, has imported amongst us. And whiles
our Opposites so quiverly go about to spread the bad wares of these encombring
inconveniences, is it time for us luskishiy to ^it still, and to be silent?
Ier. 6. 4.
Woe unto us, for the day goes away, for the shadows of the evening are
stretched out.

Moreover, besides the prevailing inconveniency of the controverted Ceremonies,
the unlawfulness of them is also plainly evinced in this ensuing Dispute, by
such convincing Arguments, as being duly pondered in the equal balance of
an attentive mind, shall by Gods grace afforde satisfaction to so many as
purpose to buy the Truth, and not to sell it. Wherefore referring to the
Dispute the points themselves which are questioned, I am in this place to
beseech you all by the mercies of God, that remembering the word of the Lord; 1.
Sam. 2. 30.
Them that honor me I will honor, and they that (...) me shall be lightly
esteemed: remembering also the Judge. 5. 23.
curse and condemnation of Meroz, which came not to help the Lord against the
mighty: Neh. 3. 5.
of the nobles of Tekoa, who put not their necks to the work o^ the Lord: and
shortly, of all such as Ier. 9 3.
have no courage for the Truteh, but Phil. 2. 21.
seek their own things, not the things which are Jesus Christ's: and finally,
taking to heart how the Lord Jesus, when he comes in the Glory of his Father
with his holy Angels, Mark. 8. 38.
will be ashamed of every one who has been ashamed of him and his words, in
the midst of a sinful and crooked generation; you would with a holy zeal and
invincible courage, against all contrary error, superstition, and abuse
whatsoever, set your selves both to speak and do, and likewise (having a
calling) to suffer for the True^h of Christ, and for the purity of his worship,
Phil. 1. 28. 1. Pet. 3. ^4.
being in nothing terrified by your Adversaries. Which that ye may the better
perform, I commend to your thoughts these wholesome Admonirions which follow.

I. When you see so much diversity both of opinion and practice in things
pertaining to Religion, the rather you ought to give all diligence, I.
Phil. 1. (...)
for trying the things which are different. If you Judge us before you hear
us, then Io. 7. 51. Act. 5. 16.
do you contrary to the very Law of Nature and Nations. Neither will it help
you at your reckoning, to say, we believed our spiritual Guides, our Prelates
and Preachers whom God had set over us. Nay: What if your Guides be blind? Then
they do not only fall in the ditch themselves, but Math. 15. 14.
you with them. Io. 5. 33. 34. 39.
Our Master would not have the Jews to rest upon the Testimony of John Baptist
himself, but would have them to search the Scriptures: by which touchstone
Act. 17. 11.
the Bereans tried the Apostles own Doctrine, and are commended for so doing.
But as we wish you not to condemn our cause, without examining the same by the
Word, so neither do we desire you blindly to follow us in adhereing unto it.
For what if your seeing Guides be taken from you? How then shall you see to
keep out of the ditch? We would neither have you to fight for us, nor against
us, like the blind swordeplayers Andabatae, a people who were said to fight
with their eyes closed. 2. Tim. 2. 7.
Consider therefore what we say, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

II. Since the God of Heaven is the greatest King, who is to rule and reign
over you by his Word, which he has published to II.
the world, and tunc vere, etc. Then is God truly said to reign in us when no
wordly thing is harbored and haunted in our souls, says E^arr. in Luc. 17.
Theophylactus: since al^o Romans 8. 7.
the wisdom of the flesh is enimi^y against God, 1. Cor. 1. 20.
who has made foolish the wisdom of this world: Therefore never shall you
rightly deprehend the truth of God, not submit your selves to be guided by the
same, unless laying aside all the high soaring fancies and presumptuous
conceits of natural and worldly wisdom, you come in a unfeigned humility and
babe-like simplicity, to be edifyed by the Word of righteousness. And far
less shall you ever take up your cross and follow Christ, (as you are
required,) Math. 16. 24.
except first of all you labor and learn to deni^ your selves, that is, to
make no reckoning what come of your selves and of all that you have in the
world, so that God have glory, and your selves a good conscience, in your
doings or sufferings.

III. If you would not be drawn away after the error of the wicked, III.
neither fall from your own steadfastness, 2. Pet. 3. 18.
the Apostle Peter teaches you, that ye must grow both in Grace and in
Knowledge. For if either your minds be darkened through want of Knowledge, or
your affections frozen through want of the love of God, then are you naked and
not guarded against the tentations of the time. Wherefore, as the perverters of
the Truth and simplicity of Religion, do daily multiply errors, so must you
(shunning those shelfes and quicke-sands of deceiving errors, which witty,
make-bates design for you,) labor daily for increase of Knowledge. And as
they to their errors in opinion do add the overplus of a licentious practice
and lewd conversation, so must you (having so much the more ado to flee from
their impiety) labor still for a greater measure of the lively work of
sanctifying Grace. In which respects de ^ivit. Dei. lib. 18. cap. 51.
Augustine says well, that the Adversaries of the Truth do this good to the
true members of the Church, that the fall of those makes these to take better
hold upon God.

IV. Be not deceived, to think that they who so eagerly press IV.
this course of Conformity, have any such end as Gods glory, or the good of his
Church and profit of Religion. When a violent urger of the Ceremonies
pretends religious respects for his proceedings, It may be well answered in
lib. contra constant. Augustum
Hilaries words; Subrepis nomine blandienti, occidis specie religionis: thou
privily creeps in with an entising title, thou kills with the pretense of
religion. For, 1. It is most evidently true of these Ceremonies, which Synops.
Papism. contr. 13. q. 7. page 593.
our Divines say of the gestures and Rites used in the Mass: They are all
frivolous and hypocritical, stealing away true dovotion from the heart, and
making men to rest in the outward gestures of the body. There is more sound
religion among them who refuse, then among them who receive the same, even our
enemies themselves being Judges. The reason whereof let me give in the words
of Davenant. in Col. 2. 8. p. 186.
one of our Opposites: Supervacua haec occupatio circa traditiones humanas,
gignit semper ignorantiam and contemptum praeceptorum divinorum. This needless
business about human traditions, does ever beget the ignorance and contempt
of divine commandments. 2. Where read we that the servants of God have at any
time sought to advance Religion, by such hideous courses of stern violence, as
are intended and assayed against us by those who press the Ceremonies upon us?
The girking and gnibling of their unformall huggermugger, comes nearer to
Sycophaucy then to Sincerity, and is sibber to appeaching Hostility, then
fraternall Charity. For just so they deal with us, as the Arrians did with the
Catholics of old. Osiand. hist. Ecclescent. 4. in Epist. dedic.
Sin^ros, etc. The sincere teachers of the Churches they delated and accused
before Magistrates, as if they alone did continually perturbe the Churches
peace and tranquillity, and did only labor that the divided Churches might
never again piously grow together: and by this calumny they persuaded politic
and civil men (who did not well enough understand thu business) that the godly
teachers of the Churches should be cast forth into exile, and the Arrian wolfes
should be sent into the sheepfolds of Christ. Now, forasmuch as God has said,
Is. 9. 11.
they shall not burt nor destroy in all my holy montaine, And will not have his
flock to be ruled Ezech. 34. 4.
with force and with cruelty: Nec potest (says lib. 5. cap. 20.
Lactantius) aut veritas cum vi, aut Iustitia cum crudelitate conjungi: Neither
can either truth be conjoined with violence, or righteousness with cruelty:
Therefore, if our Opposites would make it evident, that they are in very deed
led by religious aims, let them refile from their violent proceedings, and
deal with us in the spirit of meekness, showing us from Gods Word and good
reason, the equity of their cause, and iniquity of ours. Wherein we require no
other thing of them, then that which (r) Lactantius required of the Adversaries
of his profession, even that they would debate the matter verbis potius quam
verberibus: by words rather then by whippes. Distringant aciem ingeniorem
suorum: si ratio eorum vera est, asseratur: parati sumus audire, si doceant.
Let them draw out the sharpness of their ingines: If their reason be true let
it be averred: we are ready to hear, if they teach us. 3. If their aims were
truly for the advancement of Religion, how comes it to pass, that whiles they
make so much ado, and move every stone against us for our modest refusing of
obedience to certain ordinances of men, which in our consciences we are
persuaded to be unlawful, they manumisse and set free the Simony, Lying,
Swearing, profanation of the Sabbath, Drunkenness, Who ordome, with other
gross and scandalous vices, of some of their own side, by which Gods own
Commandments are most fearfully violated? This just recrimination we may well
use for our own most lawful defense. Neither do we hereby intend any man's
shame (God knows) but his reformation rather. We wish from our hearts we had
no reason to challenge our Opposites of that superstition taxed in the
Pharisees, quod argnebant, etc. that they accused the Disciples of little
things, and themselves were guilty in great things; says enarrat. in Math. 15.
Nicolaus Gorranus.

V. Do not account Ceremonies to be matters of so small importance, V.
that we need not stand much upon them, for as Eccl. pol. lib. 5. s. 65.
Hooker observes, a Ceremony, through custom works very much with people.
praef. of the answ. page 14.
Dr. Burgess alleges for his writing about Ceremonies, that the matter is
important, for the consequence of it. Popish praefud c. 10.
Camero thinks so much of Ceremonies, that he holds our simplicity to
notify, that we have the true Religion, and that the Religion of Papists is
superstitious, because of their Ceremonies. To say the truth, a Church is in so
far true or hypocritical, as it mixeth or not mixeth humane inventions with
Gods holy worship. And hence, Cent. 2. cap. 2. col. 109.
the Magdeburgians profess, that they write of the Ceremonies, for making a
difference betwixt a true and a hypocritical Church. Vera enim Ecclesia, etc.
For a true Church as it retains pure Doctrine, so also it keeps simplicity of
Ceremonies, etc. but a hypocritical Church, as it departs from pure Doctrine,
so for the most part, it changes and augmenteth the Ceremonies instituted of
God, and multiplieth its own Traditions, etc. And as touching our controverted
Ceremonies in particular, if you consider what we have written against them,
you shall easily perceive that they are matters of no small, but very great
consequence. Howbeit these be but the beginnings of evils, and there is a
worse galamafrie gobbet-wise prepared. It has been Cron. Turcic. Tom. 3. l.
4. p. 63.
observed of the warring Turks that often they used this notable deceit, to
send a lying rumor and a vain tumult of war to one place, but in the mean
while to address their true forces to another place, that so they might
surprise those who have been unwarrily led by pernicious credulity. So have
we manifest (alas too too manifest) reasons, to make us conceive, that whiles
the chief urgers of the course of Conformity, are skirmishing with us about the
triffeling Ceremonies (as some men count them,) they are but laboring to hold
our thoughts so bent and intent upon those smaller quarrels, that we may
forget to distinguish betwixt evils immanent and evils imminent, and that we
be not too much awake to epsy their secre^t slight in compassing further aims.

VI. Neither let the pretense of Peace and Unity cool your fervor, or make
you spare to oppose your selves unto those idle and idolized Ceremonies,
against which we dispute. For whiles our Opposites make a vain show and
pretense of Peace, they do like the August. de civ. Dei. lib. 3. c. 25.
Romans, who built the Temple of Concord just in the place where the seditious
outrages of the two Gracchi Tiberius and Cajus had been acted: ib. c. 26.
which Temple, in the subsequent times, did not restrain, but by the contrary,
give further scope unto more bloody seditions. So that they should have built
Discord a Temple in that place rather then Concord, as Augustine pleasantly
tickleth them. Do our Opposites think that the bane of Peace, is never in
yielding to the course of the time, but ever in refuising to yield? or will
they not rather aknowledge, that as a man Ovid. Metam. lib. 15.
is said to be made drunk by drinking the water of Lyncestus a river of
Macedonia, no less then if he had filled himself with the strongest wine, so
one may be inebriat with a contentious humor, in standing stiffly for yielding,
as well as in standing steadfastly for refuising? Peace is violated by the
Oppugners of the Truth, but established by the Professors of the same. For (as
was rightly said apud Binium Tom. 4. Council. part. 1. page 630.
by Georgius Scholarius in the Council of Florence) the Churches Peace can
neither stay among men, the truth being unknowen; neither can it but needs
return, the truth being known. Nec veritate ignorata manner inter homines
potest, nec illa agnita necessario non redire. We must therefore be mortaised
together, not by the subscudines of Error, but by the bands of Truth and unity
of Faith. And we go the true way to regaine Peace, whiles we sue for the
removal of those Popish Ceremonies, which have both occasioned and nourished
the Discord: We only refuse that Peace (falsely so called) which will not
permit us to brook Purity: and that because (as No peace with Rome sect. 2.
Joseph Hall notes) James. 3. 17.
S. James describes the wisdom which is from above, to be first pure, then
peaceable. Whence it comes that 2 Cor. 6. 15. 16.
there can be no concord betwixt Christ and Antichrist, nor any communion
betwixt the Temple of God and Idols. Atque ut Caelum, etc. And though Heaven
and Earth should happen to be mingled together, yet the sincere worship of God
and his sacred Truth, wherein eternal Salvation is laid up for us, should
irorthily be unto us of more estimation then a hundredth worlds, says lib.
Epist. col. 298.
Calvine. Medit. in Apoc. 2. and 3.
John Fox judges it better, to contend against those who prefer their own
Traditions to the Commandments of God, then to be at peace with them. True it
is, -- Pax optima rerum, Quas homini novisse datum est. -- Yet I trust, we may
use the words of that great Adiap^orist de offic. pii viri.
Georgius Cassander. Ea demum vera, etc. That alone (says he) is true and
solid Christian Peace, which is conjoined with the glory of God, and the
obedience of his will, and is sejoyned from all depravation of the Heavenly
Doctrine and divine worship.

VII. Beware also you be not deceived with the pretense of the VII.
Churches consent, and of uniformity as well with the ancient Church, as with
the now-reformed Churches, in the forms and customs of both. For, 1. our
Opposites can not show that the sign of the Cross was received and used in
the Church before Tertullian, except they allege either the Montanists or the
Valentinian Heretics for it. Neither yet can they show, that apparel proper
for Divine Service, and distinguished from the common, is more ancient then
the days of Pope Caelestinus. Nor lastly, that kneeling in the act of
receiving the Communion was ever used before the time of Pope Honorius the 3.
They can not prove any one of the controverted Ceremonies to have been in the
Church the first two hundredth years after Christ, except the feast of Easter
(which yet can neither be proven to have been observed in the Apostels own
age, nor yet to have been established in the after age by any Law, but only to
have crept in by a certain private custom) and for some of them they can not
find any clear Testimony for a long time thereafter: Now, in the 3. Centurie,
Osiand. hist. eccl. Cent. 3. lib. 3. cap. 11.
Histeriographers observe, that Paulatim Ceremoniae auctae sunt, hominum
superstitiosorum opinionibus: Vnde in Baptismo unctionem Olei, Crucis
Signaculum, and Osculum addiderunt. Ceremonies were by little and little
augmented, by the opinions of superstitious men: whence it was that they added
the unction of Oil, the sign of the Cross, and a Kiss in Baptism. And in
the Fourth Centurie Magd. Cent. 4. cap. 6. col. 440.
they say, Subinde magis magisque, Traditiones humanae cumulatae sunt. Forth
with humane Traditions were more and more augmented. And so from that time
forward, vain and idle Ceremonies were still added to the worship of God, till
the same was under Popery wholly corrupted with superstitious Rites. Yea and
Cassand. Anglic. page 104.
Mr. Sprint has told us even of the first two hundereth years after Christ,
that the Devil in those days began to sow his tares (as the watchmen
began to sleep) both of false Doctrine and corrupt Ceremonies. And now,
though some of the controverted Ceremonies have been kept and reserved in many
(not all) the reformed Churches, yet they are not therefore to be the better
liked of. For the reason of the reservation, was, because some reverend Divines
who dealt and labored in the reformation of those Churches, perceaving the
occurring lets and oppositions which were caused by most dangerous Shismes and
Seditions, and by the raging of bloody wars, scarcely exspected to effectuat
so much as the purging of the Church from fundamental errors and gross
Idolatry: which wrought them to be content, that lesser abuses in Discipline
and Church policy should be then tolerated, because they saw not how to
overtake them all at that time. In the mean while they were so far from
desiring any of the Churches to retain these Popish Ceremonies, which might
have convenient occasion of ejecting them, (far less to recall them being
once ejected,) that they testified plainly their dislike of the same, and
wished, that those Churches wherein they lived, might have some blessed
opportunity to be rid of all such rotten Relics, riven Rags, and rotten
Remainders of Popery. All which, since they were once purged away from the
Church of Scotland, and cast forth as things accursed into the Iakes of
eternal detestation, how vile and abominable may we now call the resuming of
them? Or what a piacular prevarication is it, to borrow from any other Church
which was less reformed, a pattern of policy for this Church which was more
reformed. But, 2. though there could be more alleged for the Ceremonies, then
truly there can be, either from the customs of the Ancient, or Reformed
Churches, yet do our Cassand. Ang. p. 83. 85. 93. 110.
Opposites themselves profess, that they will not Justify all the Ceremonies
either of the Ancient or Reformed Churches. And inded who dare take this for a
sure rule, that we ought to follow every ancient and universaly received
custom? For as Casaubone Exerc. 14 cap. 11.
shows, though the Churches consent ought not to be contemned, yet we are not
always to hold it for a Law or a right rule. And do not our Marlor. in Romans
15. 22.
Divines teach, that nihil faciendum est ad aliorum exemplum, sed juxta Verbum,
Nothing is to be done according to the example of others, but according to the
Word Vt autem, etc. As the multitude of them who err (says Hist. eccl. Cent.
4. l. 3. cap 38. page 3^2.
Osiander,) so long prescription of time purchases no patrociny to error.

VIII. Moreover, because the foredecke and hindecke of all our VIII.
Opposites probations, do resolve and rest finally into the Auctority of a
Law, and Auctority they use as a sharp knife to cut every Gordian knot which
they can not unloose, and as a dreadful pale to sound so loud in all ears,
that reason can not be heard: therefore we certiorat you with lib. Epist. col.
446.
Calvine, that Si acquievistis imperio, pessimo laqueo vos induistis. If you
have acquiesced in Auctority, you have wrapped your selves in a very evil
snare. As touching any ordinance of the Church, we say with de auth. Scrip.
lib. 1. page 129.
Whittakers, Obediendum Ecclesiae est, sed jubenti ac docenti recta. We are to
obey the Church, but commmanding and teaching right things. Surely, if we have
not proven the controverted Ceremonies, to be such things as are not right to
be done, we shall straight obey all the Ceremonial Laws made thereanent. And
as for the Civil Magistrates part, is it not holden, (w) that he may not
injoyne us to do that, whereof we have not good ground to do it of faith? And
that, although all thy external condition is in (u) Tailor upon Tit. 3. 1.
page 552.
the power of the Magistrate, yet internal things, as the keeping of faith and
obedience and a good conscience, are not in his power. For Romans 14. 12.
every one of us shall give account of himself to God. But until you hear
more in the Dispute of the power which either the Church or the Magistrate has
to enact Laws anent things belonging to the worship of God, and of the binding
power of the same, let me add here touching humane Laws in general, that
where we have no other reason, to warrant unto us, the doing of that which a
humane Law prescribes, beside the bare will and auctority of the Lawmakers, in
this case a humane Law can not bind us to obedience. 1a 2a. q. 95. art. 3.
Aquinas holds with Isidore, that a humane Law (among other conditions of it)
must both be necessary for removing of some evil, and likewise profitable for
guiding us to some good. Cas Consc. lib. 3 cap. 3. number. 60.
Gregorius Sayrus following them herein, says, debet lex homines a malo
retrahere, and ideo dicitur necessaria: debet etiam promovere in bonum, and
ideo dicitur utilis. A Law ought to draw back men from evil, and therefore is
called necessary: it ought also te promove them unto good, and therefore is
called profitable. Humane Laws (in Eccl. pol. l. 1. sect. 10.
Mr. Hookers judgment) must teach what is good, and be made for the benefit of
men. Natal. Commit. mythol. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Demosthenes describes a Law, to be such a thing cui convenit omnibus parere,
which it is convenient for every one to obey. pr^lect. tom. 1. page 367.
Camero not only allows us to seek a reason of the Churches Laws (non enim
(says he) verae Ecclesiae libet leges far quarum non reddat rationem. It
pleases not the true Church to make and publish Laws whereof she gives not
a reason:) but ibid. page 372.
he will likewise have us, in such things as concern the glory and honor of
God, not to obey the Laws of any Magistrate, blindly and without a reason.
There was one says Sermon on Ioh. 16. 7.
the Bishop of Winchester, that would have his will stand for reason. And was
there none such among the people of God? Yes: we find 1. Sam. 2. one of whom it
was said, Thus it must be, for Hophni will not have it so, but thus. His reason
is, for he will not. And God grant none such be found among Christians. From
Scripture we learn that Romans 13. 4.
neither has the Magistrate any power, but for our good only, Ephesians 4. 12.
nor yet has the Church any power, but for our edification only. Lawmakers
therefore may not injoyne quod-libet, that which likes them, nay nor always
quod licet, that which is in it self lawful, but only quod expedit, that which
is expedient and good for edifying. And to them we may well say with apolog.
cap. 4.
Tertullian, Iniquam exercetis dominationem si ideo negatis licere, quia
vultis, non quia debuit non licere. You exercise unjust dominion, if therefore
you deny any thing to be free, because you will so, not because it ought not
to be free. Besides all this, there is nothing which any way pertains to the
worship of God left to the determination of humane Laws, beside the mere
circumstances, which neither have any holiness in them, forasmuch as they have
no other use and praise in Sacred, then they have in Civil things; nor yet
were particularly determinable in Scripture, because they are infinite. But
sacred significant Ceremonies such as Cross, Kneeling, Surplice, Holy days,
Bishopping, etc. which have no use and praise except in Religion only, and
which also were most easily determinable (yet not determined) within those
bounds which the wisdom of God did set to his written Word, are such things
as God never left to the determination of any humane Law. Neither have men any
power to burden us with those or such like ordinances: For Revel. 2. 24. 25.
says not our Lord himself to the Churches, I will put upon you none other
burden: but that which ye have already hold fast till I come. Wherefore pro
hac, etc. Conrad. Pfeilen clav. theol. art. 9. page 373.
For this liberty we ought stoutly to fight against false Teachers. Finally, it
is to be noted. that though in some things we may and do commendably refuse
obedience to the Laws of those whom God has set over us, yet are we ever
obliged (and accordingly intend) still to subject our selves unto them. For to
be subject, does signify (as comm. in Ephesians. 5. de subject.
Zanchius shows) to be placed under, to be subordinat, and so to give honor
and reverence to him who is above, which may well stand without obedience to
every one of his Laws. Yea and of the Church lib. 4. cap. 34.
Dr. Field also tells us, that subjection is generally and absolutely required,
where obedience is not.

IX. Forasmuch as some ignorant ones are of opinion, that when IX.
they practice the Ceremonies neither perceiving any unlawfulness in them,
(but by the contrary being persuaded in their consciences of the Lawfullnesse
of the same) nor yet having any evil meaning (but intending Gods glory and the
peace of the Church) therefore they practice them with a good conscience. Be
not ye also deceived, but rather advert unto this, that a peaceable conscience
allowing that which a man does, is not ever a good conscience, but often times
an Erring, Bold, Presuming, Secure, yea perhaps a Seared conscience. A good
Conscience, the testimony whereof gives a man true peace in his doings, is,
and is only such a one, as is rightly informed out of the Word of God. Neither
does a good meaning excuse any evil action, or else they who killed the
Apostles were to be excused, because in so doing Io. 16. 2.
they thought they did God good service. It is the observation even of Aquin.
2^. 2^. q. 43. art. 1. Stella in Luc. 17. 1.
Papists, that men may commit many a soule-ruinating scandal, though they
intend no such thing as the ruin of souls.

X. If once you yield to these English Ceremonies, think not that thereaf^er
you can keep yourselves back from any greater X.
evils or grosser corruptions which they draw after them. For as it is just
with God These. 2. 10. 11.
to give such men over to strong delusions, as have not received the love of
the Truth, nor taken pleasure in the sincerity of his worship: so there is not
a more deceitful and dangerous tentation then in yielding to the beginnings of
evil. He that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much Luc. 16. 10.
says he who could not lie. When Vrijah the Priest had once pleased King Ahaz,
in making an Altar like unto that of Damascus, he was afterward led on to
please (q) 2. King. 16 10. to the 16.
him in a greatter matter, even in forsaking the Altar of the Lord, and in
offering all the Sacrifices upon the Altar of Damascus. All your winning or
losing of a good conscience, is in your first buying: for such is the
deceitfullnesse of sin, and the cunning convoyance of that old Serpent, that
if his head be once entering in, his whole body will easily follow after, and
if he make you handsomely to swallow gnats at first, he will make you swallow
Camells ere all be done. O happy they, Psalm. 137. 9.
who dash the little ones of Babylon against the stones!

XI. Do not reckon it enough to bear within the enclosure of XI.
your secret thoughts, a certain dislike of the Ceremonies and other abuses
now set afoot, except both by profession and action you evidence the same, and
so show your faith by your fact. We are constrained to say to some among you,
with Elijah, (How long halt ye (s) 1. King. 18. (...).
between two opinions? and to call unto you with Moses, Exodus 32. 26.
Who is on the Lords side? Who? (w) Be not deceived: God is not mocked. And
Math. 6. 24.
No man can serve two masters. Howsoever Mark. 9. 40.
he that is not against (u) Gal. 6. 7.
us, protanto, is with us, that is, in so far, as he is not against us, in as
far he so obliges himself unto us that he can not lightly speak evil of
our cause, and Phil. 1. 18.
we therein rejoice, and will rejoice; yet simpliciter, Math. 12. 30.
he that is not with us is against us, that is, he who by Profession and
Practice shows not himself to be on our side, is accounted before God to be
our enemy.

XII. Think not the wounds which the Church has received by the means of
these nocent Ceremonies to be so deadly and desperate, XII.
as if there were no balm in Gilead. Neither suffer your minds so far to
miscarry, as to think that ye wish well to the Church and are heartily sorry
that matters frame with her as they do, whiles in the mean time you assay no
means, you take no pains and travel for her help. Esther 4.
When King Ahasswerus had given forth a decree for the utter extirpation of the
Jews, Mordecay feared not to tell Esther that if she should then hold her
peace, enlargement and deliverance should arise unto the Jews from another
place, but she and her fathers house should be destroyed. Whereupon she,
after three days humiliation and Prayer to God, put her very life in hazard by
going in to supplicat the King, which was not according to the Law. But now
(alas) there are too many Professors who detract themselves from undergoing
lesser hazards for the Churches liberty, yea, from using those very defenses
which are according to the Laws of the Kingdom. Yet most certain it is, that
without giving diligence in the use of the means, you shall neither convince
your Adversaries, nor yet exoner your own consciences, nor lastly have such
comfort in the day of your suffering as otherwise you should. I know that
principally and above all we are Heb. 5. 7.
to offer up to God, Prayers and Supplications with strong crying and tears,
which are the weapons of our spiritual warrefare: but as this ought to be
done, so the atchieving of other secundary means, ought not to be left undone.

If you misregard these things whereof in the name of God I have admonished
you, and draw back your helping hands from the reproached and afflicted cause
of Christ, for which we plead, then do not put evil far from you, for wrath
is determined against you. And as for you, my dear brethren, and Country men
of Scotland, as Speed. Hist. of Brit. book 6. chap. 9. s. 9.
it is long, since first Christianity was preached and professed in this Land:
as also it was blessed with a most glorious and much renounned Reformation: and
further, as the Gospel has been longer continued in purity and peace with us
then with any Church in Europe: Moreover, as the Church of Scotland has
treacherously broken her bonds of oath and subscription, wherewith other
Churches about us were not so tied: and finally, as Almighty God, though he
has almost consumed other Churches by his dreadful Judgments, yet has showed
far greater longsuffering-kindnesse toward us, to reclaim us to repentance,
though (notwithstanding of all this,) we go on in a most doleful security,
induration, blindness, and backsliding. So now in the most ordinary course of
Gods Justice, we are certainly to exspect, that after so many mercies, so great
longsuffering, and such a long day of grace, all despised, he is to send upon
us such Judgments as should not be believed though they were told. O
Scotland! understand and turn again, or else as GOD lives, most terrible
Judgments are abiding thee.

But if you lay these things to heart, if you be humbled before God for the
provocation of your defection, and turn back from the same, if with all your
hearts, and according to all your power, you bestow your best endeavors for
making help to the wounded Church of Christ, and for vindicating the cause of
pure Religion, yea though it were with the loss of all that you have in the
world Lactant. lib. 5. c. 20.
(augetur enim Religio Dei, quo magis premitur, Gods true Religion is enlarged,
the more it is pressed down;) then shall you not only escape the evils which
shall come upon this generation, but likewise, be recompensed a hundredth fold
with the sweet consolations of Gods Spirit here, and with the immortal Crown
of never fading glory hence. Now, our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even
our Father, which has loved us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and
good hope through grace, stablish you and keep you from evil, that ye may be
presented before his Throne. The Grace of our Lord JESUS CHRIST be with you all.

AMEN.
A Dispute against The English-Popish Ceremonies, OBTRVDED Upon the CHVRCH of
SCOTLAND, Consisting of four Parts.
THE PROLOGVE.
HOW good reason those Wisemen had for them, who did not allow of the
English-Popish Ceremonies, at the first introducing of these novations into the
Church of Scotland, foreseeing the bad effects and dangerous evils which might
ensue thereupon; and how greatly the other sort were mistaken, who did then
yield to the same, apprehending no danger in them; it is this day too too
apparent to us, whose thoughts concerning the event of this course, can not
beholden in suspense betwixt the apprehensions of fear, and exspectations of
hope, because doleful experience has made us feel, that which the wiser sort
before did fear. Since then this Church which was once a praise in the earth,
is now brought to a most deplorable and daily increassing desolation by the
means of these Ceremonies, which have been both the sparkles to kindle, and
the bellows to blow up the consuming fire of intestine dissentions among us;
it concerns all her children, not only to cry out Ah, and Alas! and to Is.
16. 9.
bewail with the weeping of Iazer, but also to bethink themselves most
seriously, how to sucoour their dear (though distressed) Mother in such a
calamitous case. Our best endeavors which we are to employ for this end, next
unto Psalm. 122. 6.
praying earnestly for the peace of Jerusalem, are these, 1. Phil. 3. 16.
So far as we have attained to walk by the same rule, to mind the same
thing, and to labor as much as is possible that the course of the Gospel, the
Doctrine of godliness, the practice of piety lie not behind, because of our
differing one from another about the Ceremonies, lest otherwise (...) grow to
be (...). 2. In such things whereabout we agree not, to make diligent search
and enquiry for the Truth. For to have our Judgments in our heels, and so
blindly to follow every opinion which is broached, and squarely to conform
unto every custom which is set afoot, becomes not men who are endued with
reason for discerning of things beseeming from things not beseeming; far
less Christians, Heb. 5. 14.
who should have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil, and
who have received a commandment 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
to prove all things, before they hold fast any thing; and least of all does it
become us who live in these most dangerous days, wherein error and defection
so much abound. 3. When we have attained to the aknowledging of the Truth,
then to give a Testimony unto the same, according to our vocation, contending
for the Truth of God against the errors of men, for the purity, of Christ
against the corruptions of Antichrist. For to understand the Truth, and yet
not contend for it, argues Cowardlinesse, not Courage; Fainting, not Fervor;
Lukewarmenesse, not Love; Weakness, not Valor. Wherefore since we can not
impetrate from the troublers of our Israe^l that true peace which derogateth
not from the Truth, we may not, we dare not leave off to debate with them.
Among the Laws of Solon, Plut. in vita. Solon.
there was one which pronounced him defamed and unhonest who in a civil
uproare among the Citizens sits still a looker on and a Newter: much more
deserve they to be so accounted of, who shun to meddle with any controversy
which disquieteth the Church, whereas they should labor to win the
Adversaries of the Truth, and if they prove obstinate, to defend and propugne
the Truth against them. In things of this life (as in Epist. ad protect. Angl.
Calvine notes) we may remit so much of the right, as the love of peace
requires, but as for the regiment of the Church which is spiritual, and
wherein every thing ought to be ordered according to the Word of God, it is not
in the power of any mortal man, quidquam hic aliis dare, aut in illorum
gratiam def^ectere. These considerations have induced me to bestow some time,
and to take some pains in the study of the Controversies which are agitated in
this Church about the Ceremonies, and (after due examination and discussion of
the writings of such as have played the Proctors for them) to compile this
ensuing Dispute against them, both for exonering my self, and for provocking of
others to contend yet more Is. 6. 21.
for the Truth, and for Zions sake not to hold their peace, nor be at rest,
until the amiable light of long wished for peace, break forth out of all
these confusions: which, O Prince of Peace, hasten, who (i) Is. 26. 12.
wilt ordain peace for us: for thou also have wrought all our works in us.

THE ORDER.
BEcause Polemicke and Eristicke discourses must follow the Adversaries at the
heels, withersoever they go, finding them out in all the lurking places of
their elaborate subterfugies, and conflicting with them wheresoever they pitch,
until not only all their blows be awarded, but themselves also all derouted:
Therefore perceiving the informality of the Formalists to be such, that some
times they plead for the controverted Ceremonies as necessary, some times as
expedient, sometimes as lawful, and sometimes as indifferent; I resolve to
follow the trace, and to evince by force of reason that there is none of all
those respects to Justify either the urging or the using of them. And albeit
pref. libror. de rep. Eccl.
the Archbishop of Spalato comes forth like an Olympicke Champion; stoutly
brandishing and bravading, and making his account, that no Antagonist can match
him except a Prelate: Albeit likewise the Proc. in Perth Assemb. part. 3. page
55.
Bishop of Edinbrugh would have us to think that we are not well advised to
enter into combat with such Achillean strength as they have on their side: Yet
must our Opposites know, that we have more daring minds, then to be dashed with
the vain flourish of their great words. Wherefore in all these four ways
wherein I am to draw the line of my Dispute, I will not shun to encounter and
handle strokes with the most valjant Champions of that faction, knowing, that
-- Trophaeum far me a forti viro, pulchrum est: Sin autem and vincar, vinci a
tali nullum est probrum. But what? shall I speak doubtfully of the victory, or
fear the foil? Nay, I consider that there is none of them so strong as he was
who 2 Cor: 13. 8.
said, we can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth, I will
therefore boldly adventure to combat with them, even where they seem to be
strongest, and to discuss their best Arguments, Allegations, Answers,
Assertions, and Distinctons. And my Dispute shall consist of four parts,
according to those four pretenses which are given out for the Ceremonies:
which being so different one from another, must be seaverally examined. The
lawfullnesse of a thing, is, in that it may be done: the indifferency of it in
that it may either be done or left undone: the expediency of it, in that it is
done profitably: and the necessity of it, in that it may not be left undon. I
will begin with the last respect first, as that which is the weightiest.

The first part Against the necessity of the Ceremonies.
CHAP. I.
That our Opposites do urge the Ceremonies as things necessary.

THis I prove, 1. from their practice. 2. from their P. Mart. in. 1. Reg. 8. de
Templ. dedic.
Haec sua inventa Deealago anteponunt, and gravius eos multarent, qui ea
violarent, quam qui divina praecepta transgrederentur. Wherefore seeing they
make not only as much, but more ado, about the controverted Ceremonies, then
about the most necessary things in Religion, their practice herein makes it too
too apparent, what necessity they annexe to them.

And if we will hearken to their pleading, it tells no less; for howbeit M. G.
Powell in the consideration of the Arguments directed to the high Court of
Parliament, in behalf of the Ministers suspended and deprived, As 3. to the
16. Arg.
has these words: yea these particulars, Subscription, Ceremonies, etc. being
imposed by the Church, and commanded by the Magistrate are necessary to be
observed under the pain of sin. The Bishop of Edinburgh resolves
usconcerning the necessity of giving obedience to the Laws of the Church,
enacted anent the Ceremonies, thus Epist. to the Past. of the Church of Scotl.
Where a man has not a Law, his judgment is the rule of his conscience, but
where there is a Law, the Law must be the rule. As for example, before that
Apostolical Canon that forbade to eat blood or strangled things, every man
might have done that which in his conscience he thought most expedient, etc.
but after the making and the publication of the Canon that enjoined abstinence,
the same was to rule their consciences. And therefore after that time, albeit a
man had thought in his own private judgment, that to abstain from these
things was not expedient, etc. yet in that case he ought not to have eaten,
because now the will of the Law and not the judgment of his own mind, was the
rule of his conscience. The Archbishop of Sainctandrews to the same purpose
says, In things indifferent, we must always esteem that to be best and most
seemly, which seems so in the eye of public Authority, neither is it for
private (d) Sermon. at perth. assem. insert by Dr. Lindsey
men to control public judgment, as they can not make public Constitutions,
so they may not control nor dissobey them, being once made, indeed Authority
ought to look well to this, that it prescribe nothing but rightly, appoint no
Rites nor Orders in the Church, but such as may set forward godliness and
piety, yet put the case that some be otherwise established, They must be
obeyed by such as are members of that Church, as long as they have the force of
a Constitution, etc. But thou will say, my conscience suffers me not to obey,
for I am persuaded that such things are not right, nor well appointed. I
answer thee, in matters of this nature and quality the sentence of thy
Superiors ought to direct thee, and that is a sufficient ground to thy
conscience for obeying. Thus we see that they urge the Ceremonies, not only
with a necessity of practice, upon the outward man, but also with a necessity
of opinion, upon the conscience, and that merely because of the Churches
determination and appointment. Yea Dr. Mortoune makes kneeling in the act of
receiving the Communion, to be in some sort necessary in it self, for he
Practic. def. cap. 3. sect. 20.
maintains, that though it be not essentially necessary as food, yet it is
accidentally necessary as Physic. Nay, some of them are yet more absurd Dr.
forb. Iren. lib. 1. cap. 5.. 6. and cap. 7.. 1. and 9. etc. 9.. 6
who plainly call the Ceremomonies necessary in themselves beside the
constitution of the Church. Cassand. Anglic. page 270. 11.
Others of them who confess the Ceremonies to be not only unnecessary, but
also inconvenient, do notwithstanding plead for them as things necessary. ans.
to the repl. pref. page 43.
Doctor Burges tells us, that some of his side think that Ceremonies are
inconvenient, but withal, he discovers to us a strange mystery brought out of
the unsearchable deepnesse of his pearcing conception, holding ib. p. 53.
that such things as not only are not at all necessary in themselves, but are
inconvenient too, may yet be urged as necessary.

The urging of these Ceremonies as necessary, if there were no more, is a
sufficient reason for our refusing them. To the precepts of God de cas. consc.
lib. 4. c. 11. cas. 3.
says Balduine, nothing is to be added, Deuteronomy 12. now God has commanded these
things which are necessary; the Rites of the Church are not necessary, whefore
if the abrogation, or usurpation of any Rite be urged as necessary, then is an
addition made to the commandment of God, which is forbidden in the Word, and
by consequence it can not oblige me, neither should any thing herein be yielded
unto. Who can purge these Ceremonies in controversy amongst us of gross
superstition, since they are urged as things necessary? But of this
superstition we shall hear afterward in its proper place.

CHAP. II.
The reason taken out of Act. 15. to prove the necessity of the Ceremonies,
because of the Churches appointment, confuted.

THE Bishop of Edinbrugh, to prove that of necessity our consciences must be
ruled by the will of the Law, and that it is necessary that we give obedience
to the same, albeit our consciences gainesay, alleges that Apostolical Canon
Act. 15. (l) ubi supra
for an example, just as Bellarmine de cult. Sanct. c. 10.
maintains, festorum observationem ex se indifferentem esse, sed posita lege
fieri necessariam. Hospinian answering him, will acknowledge no necessity of
the observation of (n) de orig. fest. christian. cap. 2.
Feasts, except Divine Law could be showed for it. So say we, that the
Ceremonies, which are aknowledged by Formalists, to be indifferent in
themselves, can not be made necessary by the Law of the Church, neither does
that example of the Apostolical Canon make any thing against us, for according
to Repl. to the ans. page 258.
Mr. Sprints confession, it was not the force or authority of the Canon, but
the reason and ground whereupon the Canon was made, which caused the necessity
of abstaining, and to abstain Calv. com. in hunc locum.
was necessary for eshewing of Scandal, whether the Apostles and Elders had
enjoined abstinence, or not. The reason then why the things prescribed in that
Canon, are called necessary Verse. 28. is not because being indifferent before
the making and publication of the Canon: they became necessary by virtue of the
Canon after it was made, as the Bishop teaches, but quia tunc charitas
exigebat, ut illa sua liberate qui ex Gentibus conversi erant, propter proximi
edificationem inter judeos non uterentur, sed ab ea abstinerent, de exam. part.
1. de bon. oper. page 180.
says. Chemnitius. This law Synt. part 2 disp. 27. these. 30.
says Tilen, was propter charitatem and vitandi offendiculi necessitatem ad
tempus sancita. So that these things were necessary before the Canon was made.
Necessaria fuerunt Bell. enerv iom. 1. lib. 3. c. 7,
says Ames, antequam Apostoli quidquam de is statuerant, non absolute, sed
quatenus in iis charitas jubebat morem gerere infirmis, ut Cajetanus not^t.
Quamobrem ubi supra these. 31.
says Tilen, cum charitas semper sit colenda, semper vitanda scand^la. Charity
is necessary annot. in Act. 15. 29.
says Beza, even in things which are in themselves indifferent. What they can
allege for the necessity of the Ceremonies, from the authority and obligatory
power of Ecclesiastical Laws, shall be answered by and by.

CHAP. III.
That the Ceremonies thus imposed and urged as things necessary, do bereave us
of our Christian liberty, first, because our practice is adstricted.

WHo can blame us for standing to the defense of our Christian liberty, which
we ought to defend and pretend in rebus quibusvis cens. lit. angl. cap 2.
says Bucer? shall we bear the name of Christians, and yet make no great
account of the liberty which has been bought to us, by the dearest drops of
the precious blood of the Son of God? Sumus empti comm. in 1. Cor. 7. 23.
says Pareus: non igitur nostri juris ut nos mancipem^ hominum servitio: id
enim manifesta cum injuria redemptoris Christi fieret: sumus liberti Christi.
Magistratui autem Synt. part. 2. disp. 44 these 33.
says Tilen, and Ecclesia praepositis, non nisi usque ad aras obtemperandum,
neque ullum certamen aut periculum pro libertatis per Christum nobis partae
defensione defugiendum, siquidem mortem ipsius irritam fieri, Paulus asserit,
si spiritualis servitutis jugo, nos implicari patiamur. Gal. (...). 1.
Let us stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free,
and not be entangled again with the yoke of bondage. But that the urging of
the Ceremonies as necessary, does take away our Christian liberty, I will make
it evident in four points.

First, they are imposed with a necessity of practice. B. Spotswood (b) tells
us, that public constitutions must be obeyed, and that private ((...)) ubi supra
men may not dissobey them, and thus is our practice adstricted in the use of
things which are not at all necessary, and aknowledged gratis by the urgers to
be indifferent, adstricted (I say) to the one part without liberty to the
other, and that by the mere authority of a human constitution, whereas
Christian liberty gives us freedom, both for the omission, and for the
observation of a thing indifferent, except some other reason do adstrict and
restrain it, then a bare humane constitution. Chrysostom speaking of such as
are subject to Bishops, Homil 1. in Ep* ^d Tit.
says, In potestate positum est obedire vel non. Liberty in things indifferent
Synt. theol. lib. 6. cap. 38.
says Amandus Pol^s, est per quam Christiani sunt libe^i in usu vel
abstinentia rerum adiaphorarum. Calvine speaking of our liberty in things
indifferent, Instit. lib. 3 (...). 19. sect. 7.
says, We may ^as nunc usurpare nunt omittere indifferenter, and places this
ib. c. 10.
liberty, tam in abstinendo quam in utendo. It is marked of the Rites of the
ancient Church Ch^. exam part. 2. de rit in adm. Sacr. page 33.
that liberae fuerunt horum Rituum observationes in Ecclesia. And what means
the Apostle whiles he says, Col. 2. 20. 21, 22.
If ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why as though
living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances, (touch not, taste not,
handle not, which all are to perish with the using) after the commandments and
Doctrines of men? Sure he condemns not only Zanch. comm. in Col. 2. 20.
humana decreta de Ritibus, but also subjection and obedience to such
ordinances of men, as takes from us liberty of practice in the use of things
indifferent, obedience (I say) for conscience of their ordinances merely. What
means also that place, 1. Cor. 7. 23. Be not ye the servants of men? It
forbids us apol. part 3. c. 1^ sect. 5.
says Paybody to be the servants of men, that is in wicked or superstitious
actions according to their perverse commandments or desires. If he mean of
actions that are wicked or superstitious in themselves, then it follows that
to be subject unto those ordinances, touch not, taste not, handle not, is not
to be the servants of men, because these actions are not wicked and
superstitious in themselves. Not touching, not tasting, not handling are in
themselves indifferent. But if he mean of actions which are wicked and
superstitious in respect of circumstances, then is his restrictive gloss
senseless, for we can never be the servants of men, but in such wicked and
superstitious actions, if there were no more but giving obedience to such
ordinances, as are imposed with a necessity upon us, and that merely for
conscience of the ordinance, it is enouch to infect the actions with
superstition. Sunt hominum servi says comm. in 1 Cor. 7. 23.
Bullinger, qui aliquid in gratiam hominum faciunt. This is nearer the truth,
for to tie our selves to the doing of any thing for the will or pleasure of
men, when our conscience can find no other reason for the doing of it, were
indeed to make our selves the servants of men. Far be it then from us, to
submit our necks to such a heavy yoke of humane precepts, as would overloaden
and undo us. Nay, we will steadfastly resist such unchristian Tyranny, as goes
about to spoil us of Christian Liberty, taking that for certain, which we
find in Cyprian. de haeret. Baptiz.
periculosum est in divinis rebus, ut quis cedat jure suo.

Two things are here replied, 1. That there is reason for adstricting B. Lind.
Epist. to the past. of the Church of Scotl.
because we are commanded to obey them that have the rule over us, and to
submit our selves, Hebr. 13. 17. And to submit our selves to every ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, 1 Pet, 2. 16. and Spots. Sermon. at perth. assemb.
that except public constitutions must needs be obeyed, there can be no order,
but all shall be filled with strife and contention. Ans. 1. As touching
obedience to these that are set over us, if they mean not to 1. Pet. 5 3.
Tyrannize over the Lords Inheritance, and to Mark. 7. 9.
make the Commandments of God of no effect by their Traditions, they must give
us leave to try their precepts by the sure rule of Gods Word, and when we
find that they require of us any thing in the worship of God, which is either
against or beside his written Word, then modesty to refuse obedience, which is
the only way for order, and shunning of strife and contention. It will be said
again, that except we prove the things commanded by these who are set over us,
to be unlawful in themselves, we can not be allowed to refuse obedience to
their ordinances. Ans. This unlawfulness of the Ceremonies in themselves, has
been proved by us already, and shall yet again be proved in this Dispute. But
put the case they were lawful in themselves, yet have we good reason for
refusing them. David thought the feeding of his body was cause sufficient to
break the Law of the shewbread. Christ thought the satisfying of the Disciples
hunger; to be cause sufficient to break the Ceremony of the Sabbath: He
thought also, that the healing of the leapers bodies was a just excuse to
break the Law that forbade the touching of them Much more then may we think
now in our estimation, that the feeding of other men's souls, the satisfying of
our own consciences, together with the consciences of other men and the
healing of men's superstition and spiritual leprosy are causes sufficient to
break the Law of the Ceremonies and of the Cross, which are not Gods but men's
of the Cross cap. 5. sect. 11.
, says Parker 2. As touching submission or subjection we say wi^h Dr. Field of
the Church lib. 4. cap. 34.
that subjection is generally and absolutely required where obedience is not,
and even when our consciences suffer us not to obey, yet still we submit and
subject our selves, and neither do nor shall (I trust) show any the least
contempt of Auctority.

Secondly, it is replied, that our Christian liberty is not taken The Christian
Liberty Apol. part. 3. c. 1. sect. 4. s^ Dr. Forb. Iren. l. 1. c. 11.. 5. and 6.
says Paybody, is not taken away by the necessity of doing a thing
indifferent, or not doing, but only by that necessity which takes away the
opinion or persuasion of its indifferency. So Manuduct. p. 42.
says Dr. Burgess, that the Ceremonies in question are ordained to be used
necessarily, though the judgment concerning them, and immediate conscience to
God, be left free. Ans. 1. Who doubts of this that liberty of practice may be
restrained in the use of things which are in themselves indifferent? but yet if
the bare auctority of an Ecclesiastical Law, without any other reason, then
the will and pleasure of men, be made to restrain practice, then is Christian
Liberty taken away. These. theol. de libers Christ these. 10.
Iunius, says that externum optis ligatur from the use of things indifferent,
when the conscience is not bound; but in that same place he shows, that the
outward action is bound and restrained, only quo usque circumstantiae ob quas
necessitas imperata est, se extendunt. So that it is not the auctority of an
Ecclesiastical Law, but the occasion and ground of it, which adstricts the
practice, when the conscience is left free. 2. When the auctority of the
Churches constitution is obtruded to bind and restrain the practice of
Christians in the use of things indifferent, they are bereaved of their Liberty
as well as if an opinion of necessity were borne in upon their consciences.
Therefore we see when the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7. gives Liberty of Marriage, he
does not only leave the conscience free in its Judgment of the lawfullnesse of
Marriage, but also give liberty of practice, to marry or not to marry. And Coll
2. 21. When he gives instances of such human ordinances as take away Christian
Liberty, he says not, you must think that you may not touch, etc. but, touch
not, etc. telling us, that when the practice is restrained from touching,
tasting, handling, by the ordinances of men, then is Christian liberty spoiled,
though the conscience be left free. Camero speaking of the servitude which is
opposed to Christian liberty Frel. in Math. 18. 7. tom. 2. p. 340.
says, that it is either animi servitus, or corporis servitus. Then if the
outward man be brought in bondage, this makes up spiritual thraldom, though
there be no more. But, 3. The Ceremonies are imposed with an opinion of
necessity upon the conscience it self, for proof whereof, I proceed to the next
point.

CHAP. IV.
That the Ceremonies take away our Christian liberty, proved by a secound
reason, namely, because conscience it self is bound and adstricted.

BIshop Lindsey has told us ubi supra
that the will of the Law must be B. Spotswood ubi supra
will have the sentence of Superiors to direct the conscience, and will have
us to esteem that to be best and most seemly, which seems so to them. B.
Andrews Sermon. of the worshipping of Imaginations.
speaking of Ceremonies, not only will have every person inviolably to observe
the Rites and Customs of his own Church, but also will have the ordinances
about those Rites, to be urged under the pain of Anathema. I know not what the
binding of the conscience is, if this be not it. Til. Synt. part. 2 disp. 27.
these. 38.
Apostolus gemendi parts relinquit, non cogendi auctoritatem tribuit Ministris
quibus plebs non auscultat. And shall they who call themselves the Apostles
Successors, compel, constrain, and inthrale the consciences of the people of
God? Charles the 5. as popish as he was, Thu^. hist. lib. 124. page 922.
did promise to the Protestants, Nullam vim ipsorum conscientiis illatum iri
And shall a Popish Prince speak more reasonably then protestant Prelates? But
to make it yet more and plentifully appear, how miserably our Opposites would
inthrale our consciences, I will here show, 1. What the binding of the
conscience is, 2. How the Laws of the Church may be said to bind. 3. What is
the judgment of Formalists touching the binding power of Ecclesiastical Laws.

Concerning the first of these we will hear what Dr. Field of the Church, lib.
4. cap. 33.
says, To bind the conscience says he, is to bind the soul and spirit of
man, with the fear of such punishments (to be inflicted by him that so
binds) as the conscience fears, that is, as men fear, though none but God
and themselves be privy to their doings, now these are only such as God alone
inflicteth, etc. This description is too imperfect, and deserves to be
corrected. To bind the conscience is illam auctoritatem habere, ut conscientia
illi subjicer^ sese debeat, it a ut peccatum sit, si contra illam quidquam fiat
de conse. lib. 1. cap. 2.
says Ames. The binder Treat. of consc. cap. 2. sect 3.
says Perkines, is that thing whatsoever, which has power and auctority over
conscience to order it. To bind, is to urge, cause, and constrain it in every
action, either to accuse for sin, or to excuse for well doing, or to say,
this may be done, or it may not be done. To bind the conscience Theol. cas.
cap. 2.
says Alsted, est illam urgere and adigere ut vel excuset and accuset, vel
indicet quid fieri aut non fieri possit. Upon these descriptions which have
more truth and reason in them, I infer, that whatsoever urges, or forces
conscience to assent to a thing as lawful, or a thing that ought to be done,
or disassent from a thing as unlawful, or a thing which ought not to be done,
that is a binder of conscience, though it did not bind the spirit of a man with
the fear of such punishments as God alone inflicteth. For secluding all
respect of punishment, and not considering what will follow the very obliging
of the conscience for the time Ames. de consc. l. 1. cap. 3.
ad assensum is a binding of it.

Touching the 2. it is certain, that humane Laws, as they come Neque enim cum
hominibus sed cum uno Deo negotium est conscientiis nostris, Inst. lib. 4. cap.
10. sect. 5.
says Calvine. Over our souls and consciences, nemini quicquam juris nisi Deo
Synt. part. 2. disp. 32. these. 4.
says Tilen. From Hieromes distinction, that a King praeest nolentibus, but a
Bishop volentibus, Marcus Antonius de Dominis well concludes de Rep. Eccl. l.
5. c. 2. N. 12.
Volentibus gregi praeesse, excludit omnem jurisdictionem and potestatem
imperativam ac coactivam, and solam significat directivam ubi viz. in liberate
subditi est and parere and non parere, ita ut qui praeest nihil habeat quo
nolentem parere adigat ad parendum. This point he proves in that Chapter at
length, where he disputteth both against temporal and spiritual coactive
Jurisdiction in the Church. If it be demanded, to what purpose serves then the
enacting of Ecclesiastical Laws, since they have not in them any power to
bind the conscience? I Answer. The use and end for which Ecclesiastical Laws
do serve, is. 1. For the plain discovery of such things as the Law of God or
Nature do require of us, so that Law which of it self has power to bind,
comes from the Priests and Ministers of the Lord, neither (...) nor (...) but
declarative, Mal. 2. 7. 2. For declaring to us what is fittest in such things
as are in their own nature indifferent, and neither enforced by the Law of God
nor Nature, and which part should be followed in these things, as most
convenient. The Laws of the Church then are appointed to let us see the
necessity of the first kind of things, and what is expedient in the other
kind of things, and therefore they are more propperly called Directions,
Instructions, Admonitions, then Laws. For I speak of Ecclesiastical Laws
qua tales, that is, as they are the constitutions of men who are set over us,
thus considered, they have only Til. Synt. p. 2. disp. 27. these. 39.
vim dirigendi and monendi. It is said of the Apostles, that they were
constitute Chem eu. amp. 2. de bon. oper p. 179.
doctrinae Christi testes, non novae doctrinae legislatores. And the same may
be said of all the Ministers of the Gospel, when Discipline is taken in with
Doctrine. He is no Nonconformist, who Marc. Ant. de dom. de R^p. Eccl. lib. 6.
cap. 10. number. 67.
holds Ecclefiam in terris agere parts oratoris, seu legati obsecrantis and
suadentis. And we may hitherto apply that which Gerson, the Chancelour of Paris
says, apud field of the Church lib. 4 cap. 34.
The wisest and best among the guides of Gods Church had not so ill a meaning,
as to have all their Constitutions and Ordinances taken for Laws properly so
named, much less strictly binding the conscience, but for Threatenings,
Admonitions, Counsels, and Directions only, and when there grows a general
neglect, they seem to consent to the abolishing of them again, for seeing,
lex instituitur, cum promulgatur, vigorem habet, cum moribus ut entium
approbatur.

But as we have seen in what respect the Laws of the Church do Ratio Legis,
the Reason of the Law, without which the Law it self can not bind, and which
has the chiefest and most principal power of binding. An Ecclesiastical Law
Animad. in Bell. contr. 3. lib. 4. cap. 16. nota 87.
says Iunius (...) sive depositio, non vere lex est, sed (...) aut Canon, ac
proinde dirigit quidem ut Canon agentem voluntary: non autem necessitate
cogit, ut Lex, etiam involuntarium quod si forte ante accedit coactio, ea non
est de natura Canonis sed aliunde pervenit. An Ecclesiastical Canon Synt. p.
2. Disp. 27. these. 39.
says Tilen, ducit volentem, non trahit nolentem: quod si accedat coactio, ea
Ecclesiastici Canonis natura est prorsus aliena. Calvines Judgment is, Inst
lib. 4. c. 10. sect. 32.
that an Ecclesisticall Canon binds, when manifestam utilitatem prae se fert,
and when either (...) or charitatis ratio does require, that we impose a
necessity on our liberty. It binds not then by its own auctority in his mind.
And what says the Canon Law it self? decr. part. 1 did. 61. c 8.
Sed sciendum est quod Ecclesiasticae prohibi tiones proprias habent causas,
quibus cessantibus, cessant and ipsae. Hence Iunius ubi supra, art 21.
says, that the Law binds not per se, but only propter ordinem, charitatem,
and cautionem scandali. Hence Ames, de consc. l. 1. cap. 2.
quamvis ad justas leges humanas, justo modo observandas, obligentur homines in
conscientiis suis a Deo; ipsae tamen leges humanae, qua sunt leges hominum, non
obligant conscientiam. Hence Alsted: Theol. casuum c. 2.
Laws made by men of things indifferent, whither they be civil or
Ecclesiastical, do bind the conscience in so far as they agree with Gods
word, serve for the public good, maintain order, and finally, take not away
liberty of conscience. Hence the Professors o^ Leiden say, Syn. pur thiol disp.
35. these. 19.
that Laws bind not primo and per se, sed secundario and per accidens, that is
Ames. Bell. enerv. tom. 1. lib 3. cap. 7.
quatenus in illis lex aliqua Dei violatur. Hence I may compare the
constitutions of the Church with responsa juris consultorum among the Romans,
which obliged no man, nisi ex aequo and bono says de pol. Christ. lib. 5. cap.
1.
Danaeus. Hence it may be said, that the Laws of the Church do only bind
Scandali and contemptus ratione, as de orig. fest. Christ. cap. 2.
Hospinian, and in case libertas fiat cum scandalo, as Comm. in 1 Cor. 14. 40.
Paraeus: for it were scandal, not to give obedience to the Laws of the
Church, when they prescribe things necessary or expedient for the eshewing of
scandal, and it were contempt to refuse obedience to them, when we are not
certainly persuaded of the unlawfullnesse or inexpediency of the things
prescribed.

But out of the case of scandal or contempt, Divines teach, that conscience
Extra casum scandali and destinatae rebellionis, propter commune bonum, non
peccat qui contra constitutiones istas fecerit, says These theol de lib.
Christ. these. 11.
Iunius. If a Law Treat. of consc cap. 2. sect. 8.
says Perkins concerning some external Rite or thing indifferent, be at some
time, or upon some occasion omitted, no offense given, nor contempt showed to
Ecclesiastical Auctority, there is no breach made in the conscience. Alsted his
rule is (h) Leges humanae non obligant quando omitti possunt sine ((...))
theol. cas. cap. 2.
impedimento finis ob quem feruntur sine scandalo aliorum, and sine contemptu
Legislatoris. And Tilen teaches us, that when the Church has determined the
mutable circumstances, in the worship of God, for public edification, Synt.
part. 2. disp. 27. these. 9.
Privatorum conscientiis liberum est quandoque ista omittere, modo offendicula
vitentur, nihilque ex contemptu Ecclesiae ac Ministerii publici petulanti (...)
vel (...) facere videantur.

We deny not then that the Churches Canons about Rites which Calv. resp. ad
libel. de pii viri officio. p. 413.
Scimus enim quaecunque ad decorum and ordinem pertinent, non habenda esse pro
humanis placitis, quia divinitus approbantur. Therefore we think concerning
such Canons, that they Th. Bez. confess. c. 5. art 18. Perk. ubi supra. and
Meisner. Philos. sobr. part. 3. sect. 2. quest. 12.
are necessary to be observed so far forth only; as the keeping of them
maintains decent order, and preventeth open offense.

If any say, that I derogate much from the Auctority of the Ans. 1. I give
far more reverence to the direction of the Church, then to the admonition of
a Brother, because that is Ministerial, this fraternall: that comes from
Auctority, this only from Charity: that is Public, this Private: that is given
by many, this by one: And finally, the Church has a calling to direct me in
some things, wherein a brother has not. 2. If it be still instanced, that in
the point of obedience, I do no more for the Church then for any brother,
because I am bound to do that which is made evident to be lawful and
expedient, though a private Christian do but exhort me to it, or, whether I be
exhorted to it or not. For answer to this, I say, that I will obey the
directions of the Church in many things, rather then the directions of a
brother; for in two things which are in themselves indifferent, and none of
them inexpedient, I will do that which the Church requires, though my brother
should exhort me to the contrary. But always I hold me at this sure ground,
that I am never bound in conscience to obey the ordinances of the Church,
except they be evidently lawful and expedient. This is that, fine quo non
obligant, and also that which does chiefly bind, though it be not the only
thing which binds. Now for making the matter more plain, we must consider,
that the constitutions of the Church, are either lawful, or unlawful: if
unlawful, they bind not at all: if lawful, they are either concerning things
necessary as Act. 15. 28. and then the necessity of the things does tind,
whether the Church ordain them or not; or else concerning things indifferent,
as when the Church ordains, that in great Towns there shall be Sermon on
such a day of the week, and public prayers every day at such an hour, here
it is not the bare Auctority of the Church that binds, without respect to the
lawfullnesse or expediency of the thing it self which is ordained, (else we
were bound to do every thing which the Church ordaines, were it never so
unlawful, for quod competit alicui qua tali, competit omni tali. We behold the
Auctority of the Church making laws, as well in unlawful ordinances as in
lawful:) not yet is it the lawfullnesse or expediency of the thing it self,
without respect to the ordinance of the Church, (for possibly other times and
diets were as lawful, and expedient too, for such exercises, as those ordained
by the Church:) but it is the Auctority of the Church prescribing a thing
lawful or expedient. In such a case then neither does the Auctority of the
Curch bind, except the thing be lawful and expedient, not does the
lawfulness and expediency of the thing bind, except the Church ordain it,
but both these jointly do bind.

I come now to examine what is the judgment of Formalists, touching Dr. Field,
(h) says, that the question should not be proposed, whether ((...)) of the
Church l. 4. cap. 33.
humane laws do bind the conscience, but, Whether binding the outward man to
the performance of outward things, by force and fear of outward punishment to
be inflicted by men, the not performance of such things, or the not performance
of them with such affections as were fit, be not a sin againest God, of which
the conscience will accuse us, etc. Unto this question thus proposed, and
understood of humane Laws, and where no more is considered, as giving them
power to bind, but only the Auctority of those who make them; some Formalists
do give (as I will show,) and all of them (being well advised) must give an
affirmative answer. And I pray what did de Pont. Romans lib. 4. cap. 20.
Bellarmine say more, when expressing how conscience is subject to humane
Auctority, he taught, that conscience belongs ad humanum forum, quatenus homo
ex praecepto ita obligatur ad opus externum faciendum, ut si non faciat,
judicat ipse in conscientia sua se male facere, and hoc sufficit ad
conscientiam obligandam? but to proceed particularly.

I begin with Field himself, whose resolution of the question proposed, ubi
supra.
that we are bound only to give obedience to such humane Laws as prescribe
things profitable, not for that humane laws have power to bind the
conscience, but because the things they command are of that nature, that not to
perform them, is contrary to Justice or Charity. Whereupon he concludes out
of Stapleton, that we are bound to the performance of things prescribed by
humane Laws, in such sort, that the not performance of them is sin, not ex
sola legislatori^ voluntate, sed ex ipsa legum utilitate. Let all such as be of
this man's mind, not blame us, for denying of obedience to the constitutions
about the Ceremonies, since we find (for certain) no utility, but by the
contrary much inconveniency in them. If they say, that we must think those
laws to be profitable or convenient, which they, who are set over us, think
to be so, then they know not what they say: for, exeeming conscience from being
bound by humane laws in one thing, they would have it bound by them in another
thing. If conscience must needs judge that to be profitable, which seems so
to these that are set over us, then (sure) is power given to them for binding
the conscience so straightly, that it may not judge otherwise then they judge,
and force is placed in their bare Auctority, for necessitating and constraining
the assenting judgment of conscience.

Some man perhaps will say, that we are bound to obey the laws Ans. We know
that humane Laws do bind in the case of scandal or contempt. But that
Nonconformity is neither scandal nor contempt, Parker of the Cross cap. 5.
Sect. 14. 15.
has made it most evident. For as touching contempt, he shows out of
Fathers, Counsels, Canon law, Schoolmen, and modern Divines, that non ob^dire
is not contempt, but nolle ob^dire, or sup^biendo repugnare. Yea, out of
Formalists themselves, he shows the difference betwixt subjection and
obedience. Thereafter he pleads thus, and we with him: What signs see men in
us of pride and comtempt? What be our cetera opera that bewray such an humor?
let it be named wherein vvie go not two mile, when we are commanded to
go but one, yea wherein we go not as many miles, as any shoe of the
preparation of the Gospel will bear us? What payment, what pain, what
labor, what taxation made us ever to murmr? Survey our charges where we have
labored, if they be not found to be of the faithfullest subjects that be in
the Land, we deserve no favor. Nay, there is, wherein we stretch our
consciences to the uttermost to conform, and to obey in diverse matters. Are
we refractary in other things as Balaams ass said to his Master? have I used
to serve thee so at other times? And as touching scandal, he shows first,
that by our not conforming, we do not scandalize Superiors, but edify them;
although it may be we displease them, of which we are sorry, even as Ioab
displeased David, when he contested against the numbering of the people, yet did
he not scandalize David, but edify him. And secoundly, whereas it might be
alleged, that Nonconformity does scandalize the people, before whom it
sounds as it were an allarum of disobedience, we reply with him? Daniel will
not omit the Ceremony of looking out at the Window toward Jerusalem. Mordecai
omitteth the Ceremony of bowing the knee to Haman; Christ will not use the
Ceremony of washing hands, though a tradition of the Elders and Governors of
the Church then being. The auctority of the Magistrate was violated by these,
and an incitement to disobedience was in their Ceremonial breach, as much as
there is now in ours.

But some of our Opposites go about to derive the obligatory pral. tom. 1. de
potest: eccl. contr. 2. page 371.
Camero speaks of two sorts of Ecclesiastical Laws, 1. Such as prescribe
things frivolous or unjust, meaning such things as (though they neither detract
any thing from the glory of God, nor cause any damnage to our nighbour, yet)
bring some detriment to our selves. 2. Such as prescribe things belonging to
order and shunning of scandal. Touching the former, he teaches rightly, that
conscience is never bound to the obedience of such Laws, except only in the
case of scandal and contempt, and that if at any time such Laws may be
neglected and not observed, without scandal given, or contempt showed, no man's
conscience is holden with them. But touching the other sort of the Churches
laws, he says, that they bind the conscience indirectly, not only respectu
materiae praecepti (which does not at all obliege, except in respect of the
end whereunto it is referred, namely, the conserving of order, and the not
giving of scandal;) but also respectu praecipientis, because God will not have
those who are set over us in the Church to be contemned. He foresawe (belike,)
that whereas it is pretended in behalf of those Ecclesiastical Laws which
injoyne the controverted Ceremonies, that the things which they prescribe
pertain to order and to the shunning of scandal, and so bind the conscience
indirectly in respect of the end: one might answer; I am persuaded upon
evident grounds, that those prescribed Ceremonies pertain not to order, and to
the shunning of scandal, but to misorder, and to the giving of scandal.
Therefore he labored to bind such a ones conscience with another tie, which
is the Auctority of the Lawmakers. And this Auctority he would have one to
take, as ground enough to believe, that that which the Church prescribes,
does belong to order and the shunning of scandal, and in that persuasion to
do it. But, 1. How does this Doctrine differ from that which ibid. page 366.
himself sets down as the opinion of Papists, posse cos qui praesunt
Ecclesiae, cogere fideles ut id credant vel faciant, quod ipsi judicaverint? 2.
It is well observed by our Par. com. in Romans 14. dub. 7.
Writers, that the Apostles never made things indifferent to be necessary,
except only in respect of scandal, and that out of the case of scandal, they
still left the consciences of men free, which Observation they gather from Act.
15. and 1 Cor. 10. ubi supra, p. 372.
Camero himself notes, that though the Church prescribed abstinence from
things sacrificed to Idols, yet the Apostle would not have the Faithful to
abstain for conscience sake, why then holds he, that beside the end of
shunning scandal and keeping order, conscience is bound even by the Churches
own Auctority? 3. As for the reason whereby he would prove that the Churches
Laws do bind, even respectu praecipientis, his form of speaking is very
bad: Deus (says he) non vult contemni praepositos Ecclesia* nisi justa and
necessaria de causa. Where falsely he supposes, not only that there may
occur a just and necessary cause of contemning those whom God has set over
us in the Church, but also, that the not obeying of them infers the
contemning of them. Now, the not obeying of their Laws, infers not the
contemning of themselves, (which were not allowable) but only the contemning
of their Laws, And as In Dan. 6.
Hierome speaks of Daniel, Et nunc Daniel Regis jussa contemnens, etc. So we
say of all Superiors in general, that we may sometimes have just reasons for
contemning their commandments, yet are we not to contemn, but to honor
themselves. But, 4. Let us take Cameros meaning to be, that God will not have
us to refuse obedience, unto those who are set over us in the Church: none of
our Opposites dare say, that God will have us to obey those who are set over us
in the Church, in any other things, then such as may be done both lawfully and
conveniently for the shunning of scandal; and if so, then the Churches precept
can not bind, except as it is grounded upon such or such reasons.

B. Spotswood, and B. Lindsey, in those words which I have heretofore Spotswood
will have us without more ado, to esteem that to be best and most seemly,
which seems so in the eye of public Auctority. Is not this to bind the
Conscience by the Churches bare Will and Auctority, when I must needs
constrain the judgment of my conscience, to be conform to the Churches
judgment, having no other reason to move me hereunto, but the sole Will and
Auctority of the Church? Further, he will have us to obey even such things as
Authority prescribes not rightly, (that is such Rites as do not set forward
Godliness) and that because they have the force of a Constitution. He says,
that we should be directed by the sentence of Superiors, and take it as a
sufficient ground to our Consciences for obeying. de pont. Romans lib. 4. cap. 20.
Bellarmine speaks more reasonably: leges humanae non obligant sub paena
mortis aeternae, nisi quatenus violatione legis humanae offenditur Deus.
Lindsey thinks, that tho will of the Law must be the Rule of our consciences;
he says not, the Reason of the Law, but the Will of the Law. And when we talk
with the chief of our Opposites, they would bind us by sole Auctority,
because they can not do it by any reason. But we answer out of ubi supra.
Pareus, that the particular Laws of the Church bind not ^r se, or propter
ipsum speciale mandatum Ecclesiae. Ratio: quia Ecclesia res adiaphoras non
jubet facere vel omittere propter suum mandatum, sed tantum propter justas
mandandi causas, ut sunt conservatio ordinis, vitatio scandali: quae quamdiu
non violantur, conscientias liberas relinquit.

Thus we have found, what power they give to their Canons about Luther, that
com. in 1 Pet. 5. 3.
unum (x) Enchirid. class. 3. cap. 14.
Dominum habemus qui animas nostras gubernat. With Hemmingius, that we are free
ab omnibus humanis Ritibus, quantum quidem ad conscientiam attinet. With the
Professors of Leiden, that this is a part of the Liberty (y) Syn. pur. Theol.
Disp. 35. These. 17.
of all the Faithful, that in things pertaining to Gods Worship, ab omni
traditionum humanarum jugo liberas habeant conscientias, cum solius Dei sit,
res ad Religionem pertinentes praescribere.

CHAP. V.
That the Ceremonies take away Christian Liberty, proved by a third reason,
viz. because they are urged upon such, as in their consciences do condemn
them.

IF Christian Liberty be taken away, by adstricting conscience in any, much
more by adstricting it in them who yet thus are we dealt with. B. Lindsey
gives us to understand, that after the making and publication of an
Ecclesiastical Canon, about things of this nature, albeit a man in his own
private judgment think another thing more expedient then that which the Canon
prescribes, yet in that case his conscience must be ruled by the will of the
Law, and not by his own judgment. And B. Spotswood, to such as object, that
their conscience will not suffer them to obey, because they are persuaded that
such things are not right, answers; That the sentence of their Superiors
ought to direct them, and make their conscience yield to obedience. Their words
I have before transcribed. By which it does manifestly appear, that they
would bear dominion over our consciences, not as Lords only, by requiring the
willing and ready assent of our consciences, to those things which are urged
upon us by their sole Will and Auctority, but even as Tyrants, not caring if
they get so much as constrained obedience, and if by their Auctority they can
compel conscience, to that which is contrary to the (...) and full persuasion
which it has conceived.

It will be said, that our consciences are in an error, and therefore ought to
be corrected by the sentence of Superiors, whose Auctority Ans. Giving and not
granting that our consciences do err in condemning the Ceremonies, yet so
long as they can not be otherwise persuaded, the Ceremonies ought not to be
urged upon us, for if we be made to do that which our consciences do
condemn, we are made to sin. Romans 14. 23. It is an audacious contempt in
com. in Romans 14. 5.
Calvines judgment, to do any thing repugnante conscientia. The learned
Casuists teach us, that an erring conscience, though non obligat, yet ligat;
though we be not obliged to do that which it prescribes, yet are we bound not
to do that which it condemns. Quicquid fit repugnante and reclamante
conscientia, peccatum est, etiamsi repugnantia ista gravem errorem includat,
says Theol. cas cap. 2.
Alsted. Conscientia erronea obligat, sic intelligendo, quod faciens contra
peccet Enchir. class. 2. cap. 7.
says Hemmingius. This holds ever true of an erring conscience about matters
of fact, and especially about things indifferent. If any say, that hereby a
necessity of sinning is laid on them, whose Consciences are in an error, I
answer, that so long as a man keeps an erroneous conscience, a necessity of
sinning lies on him, and that through his own fault. This necessity arises
from this supposition, that he retain his erring conscience, and so is not
absolute, because he should inform his conscience rightly, so that he may both
do that which he ought to do, and do it so from the approbation of his
conscience. If it be said again, what should be done to them, who have not laid
down the error of conscience, but do still retain the same? I answer, Bald
de consc. cas. lib. 1. cap. 8.
eligatur id quod tutius and melius est. If therefore the error of conscience
be about weighty and necessary matters, then it is better to urge men to the
doing of a necessary duty in the service of God, then to permit them to neglect
the same, because their erring conscience disapproveth it: for example; It is
better to urge a profane man to come and hear Gods Word, then to suffer him
to neglect the hearing of the same, because his conscience allows him not to
hear. But if the error of conscience be about unnecessary things, or such as
are in themselves indifferent, then it is pars tutior, the surest and safest
part not to urge men, to do that which in their consciences they condemn.
Wherefore, since the Ceremonies are not among the number of such necessary
things, as may not be omitted without the peril of Salvation; the invincible
disallowance of our consciences, should make our Opposites not press them upon
us, because by practicing them we could not but sin, in that our consciences
judge them unlawful. If any of our weak Brethren think, that he must and
should abstain from the eating of flesh upon some certain day, though this
thing be in it self indifferent and not necessary, yet de conse. cas. lib. 1.
cap. 7.
says Balduin, he who is thus persuaded in his conscience, if he should do
the contrary sins.

Conscience then though erring, does ever bind in such sort, that he who
does against his conscience, sins against God. Which 1^ 2^. q. 19. art. 5.
Thomas. But without any more ado, it is sufficiently confirmed from
Scripture. For, was not their conscience in an error, who thought they might
not lawfully eat all sorts of meat? yet the Apostle shows, that their
conscience, as erring as it was, did so bind, that they were damned if they
should eat such meat as they judged to be unclean. Romans 14. 14. 23. The reason
wherefore an erring conscience binds in this kind is, Ames. de consc. lib.
1. cap. 4.
quoniam agens etc. Because he who does any thing against his conscience,
does it against the Will of God, though not materially and truly, yet
formally and by way of interpretation, for so much as that which conscience
counsels or prescribes, it counsels it under the respect and account of
the Will of God He who reproacheth some private man, taking him to be the King,
is thought to have hurt not the private man, but the King himself. So he that
contemns his conscience, contemns God himself, because that which
conscience counsels or advises, is taken to be Gods will. If I go with
certain men upon such a course, as I judge and esteem to be a treasonable
conspiracy against the King, (though it be not so indeed) would not his Majesty
(if he knew so much) and might he not justly condemn me, as a wicked Traitor?
But how much more will the King of Kings condemn me, if I practice the
Ceremonies, which I judge in my conscience to be contrary to the Will of God,
and to rob him of his royal prerogative?

CHAP. VI.
That the Ceremonies take away Christian Liberty, proved by a fourth reason,
viz. because they are pressed upon us by naked Will and Authority, without
giving any reason to satisfy our consciences.

WHen the 1 Cor. 7. 23.
Apostle forbids us to be the servants of men, propter hominem and non
propter Deum? as (h) Becane the Jesuit expounds it, illustrating ((...))
Manual. lib. 4. cap. 4.
that which he says, by another place, Ephesians. 6. 6. 7. Zanch. com. in illum
locum.
Christian servants thought it an unworthy thing, to serve wicked men, neither
yet took they well with the serving of godly men, for that they were all
Brethren in Christ. The Apostle answers them, that they did not the will of
man, because it was the will of man, but because it was the Will of God, and so
they served God rather then man: importing, that it were indeed a grievous Yoke
for any Christian, to do the will of man, if he were not sure that it is
according to the Will of God. Should any Synod of the Church take more upon
them, then the Synod of the Apostles did, who enjoined nothing at their own
pleasure, but Act. 15 28.
only what they show to be necessary, because of the Law of Charity? Or should
Christians, who Ephesians. 4. 14.
ought not to be children, carried about with every wind, who Heb. 5. 14.
should be able to discern both good and evil, Col. 3. 16.
in whom the Word of God ought to dwell plentifully, who are Math. 10. 17.
commanded to beware of men, 1 Ioh. 4. 1.
not to believe every spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
to prove all things, and to 1 Cor. 10. 15.
judge of all that is said to them, should they (I say) be used as stocks and
stones, not capable of reason, and therefore to be borne down by naked Will
and Auctority? yet thus it fares with us. ubi supra
B. Lindsey will have the will of the Law to rule our consciences, which is by
interpretation, Sic volo, sic jubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas. He gives us not
the reason or equity of the Law, but only the will of it, to be our rule. ubi
supra.
B. Spotswood will have us to be so directed by the sentence of our Superiors,
that we take their sentence as a sufficient ground to our consciences for
obeying. Which is so much as to say, you should not examine the reason and
utility of the Law, the sentence of it is enough for you: try no more when you
hear the sentence of Superiors: rest your consciences upon this as a
sufficient ground: seek no other, for their sentence must be obeyed. And who
among us knows not, how in the Assembly of Perth, free reasoning was shut to
the door, and all ears were filled with the dreadful pale of Auctority?
There is this much chronicled in Perth assemb. p. 8. 9. 10. and B. Lindsay in
the proceedings set down by him. p. 63. 64.
two Relations of the proceedings of the same, howbeit otherwise very
different, They who did sue for a Reformation of Church Discipline in England,
complained, Park of the cross cap. 5. sect. 10.
that they received no other answer but this, there is a law, it must be
obeyed, and after the same manner are we used, yet is this too hard dealing, in
the judgment of Camer. prael. tom. 1. de potest. Eccl. contr. 2.
a Formalist, who says, that the Church does not so deal with them whom
Christ has redeemed, ac si non possint capere quid sit religiosum, quid minus,
itaque quae ab Ecclesia proficiscuntur, admonitiones potius and hortationes
dici debent, quam leges. And after he says of Ecclesiastical Auctority,
tenetur reddere praescripti rationem. I grant Apol. part. 3. cap. 1. sect. 25.
says Paybody, it is unlawful to do in Gods Worship any thing, upon the
mere pleasure of man. Chemnitius exam. part. 3. de calib. Sacerd. page 38.
takes the Tridentine Fathers, for not expounding rations decreti. Animad. in
Bell. contr. 3. lib. 4. cap. 16.
Iunius observes, that in the Council of the Apostles, mention was made of
the reason of their decree. And Hist. of the counc. of Trent. lib. 2.
a learned Historician, observes of the ancient Councels, that there were in
them reasonings, colloquies, discussions, disputes, yea, that whatsoever was
done or spoken, was called the acts of the Council, and all was given unto
all. Caeterum says Polit. Christ. lib. 5. cap. 3.
Danaeus, quoniam ut ait Tertullianus in Apologetico, iniqua lex est quae se
examinari non patitur; non tam vi cogere homines ad obsequium quam ratione
persuadere debent caeleges, quae scribuntur a pio nomotheta. Ergo fere sunt
duae cujusvis legis parts, quemadmodum etiam Plato. lib. 4. de legibus
scribit, nimirum praefatio and lex ipsa. i. e. jussio lege comprehensa.
Praefatio causum affert, cur homiuum negotiis sic prospiciatur. Ecclesiastical
Auctority should prescribe what it thinks fit, magis docendo, quam jubendo;
magis monendo; quam minando, as Epist. 64.
Augustine speaks. Non oportet vi vel necessitate constringere, sed ratione
and vitae exemplis suadere, in apologet.
says Gregory Nazianzen, speaking of Ecclesiastical Regiment. They therefore
who give their Will for a Law, and their Auctority for a Reason, and answer all
the Arguments of opponents, by bearing them down with the force of a public
Constitution, and the Judgment of Superiors, to which theirs must be
conformed, do Ezech. 34. 4.
rule the Lords flock with force and with cruelty, 1 Pet. 5. 3.
as Lords over Gods heritage.

Always, since men give us no leave to try their decrees and constitutions, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 25.
a warrant to do it (without their leave) from his own Word. Non numeranda
suffragia, sed appendenda in Psalm. 39.
says Augustine. Our Divines hold, that Chem. exam. part. 1. de bon. oper.
page 180.
all things which are proposed by the Ministers of the Church, syn. pur. theol.
disp. 49. these. 72.
yea by Oecumenicall Councels, should be proved and examined; and that when
the Guides of the Church do institute any Ceremonies as necessary for
edification, yet Magd. cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. co. 443.
Ecclesia liberum habet judicium approbandi aut rebrobandi eas. Nay, the decr.
part. 1. did. 12. cap 1.
Canon law probiting to depart or suerve from the rules and discipline of the
Roman Church, yet excepteth discretionem justitiae, and so permits to do
otherwise then the Church prescribes, if it be done cum discretione justitiae.
The Schoolmen also give liberty to a private man, of proving the statutes of
the Church, and neglecting the same, if he see cause for doing so, Aquin 2. 2a.
4. 147. art. 4.
Si causa fit evidens, per se ipsum licite potest homo, statuti observantiam
praeterire. If any be not able to examine and try all such things, debebant
omnes posse, Dei jussu: deficiunt ergo sua culpa, says Pareus Si recte
probandi facultate (q) comm. in. 1 Cor. 10. 15.
destitui nos sentimus, ab eodem spiritu qui per prophetas suos loquitur
petenda est, com. in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
says Calvine. We will not then call any man Rabbi, nor jurare in verba
magistri, nor yet be Pythagorean disciples to the Church herself, but we will
believe her, and obey her, in so far only, as she is the pillar and ground of
truth.

CHAP. VII.
That festival days take away our liberty which God has given us, proved:
and first out of the Law.

THat which has been said against all the controverted Ceremonies Ergo. Our
Opposites deny not the assumption, which is plain from the fourth
commandemen^, Sixth days shall thou labor, etc. But they would have somewhat
to say against the proposition, which we will hear. Eccl. pol. lib. 5. n. 71.
Hooker tells us, that those things that the Law of God leaves arbitrary and at
liberty, are subject to the positive ordinances of men. This (I must say) is
strange divinity, for if this were true, then might the Laws of men prohibit
Marriage, because it is left arbitrary, 1 Cor. 7. 36. Then might they also have
discharged the Apostle Paul to take wages, because herein he was at liberty, 1.
Cor. 9. 11. 12. 13.

Tilen lends the cause another lift, and Paraes. ad Scot. c. 16. page 64.
answeareth, that no sober permissionem Dei, principibus suum circa res medias
jus imminuere, number enim ob permissum hominibus dominium in volucres caeli, in
pisces maris, and bestias agri, impiae fuerint leges principum, quibus aucupii,
piscationis, and venationis libertatem, subditis aliis indulgent, aliis
adimunt. Ans. That case and this are very different. For every particular man
has not dominion and power over all Fowls, Fishes, and Beasts, (else, beside
that Princes should have no privilege of inhibiting the use of those things,
there should be no propriety of heritage, and possession among subjects:) but
power over all these is given to mankind. comm in illum locum
Pareus observes, hominem collective intelligi in that place, Genesis 1. 26. and
pralect. in eundem locum.
Innius observes, nomen Adam de specie esse in telligendum. But each
particular man, and not mankind alone, is permitted to labor six days.
Wherefore it is plain, that man's liberty is not abridged in the other case, as
in this, because mankind has dominion over these Creatures, when some men
only do exerce the same, as well as if all men did exerce it.

B. Lindsey his answer is no better, Viz. Proc. in Perth. Assemb. part. 3.
page 13.
That this liberty 1. Cor. 7. 23.
we are forbidden to be the servants of men, or Gal. 5. 1.
to be entangled with the yoke of bondage.

Yet we must hear what the Bishop can say against our proposition. ubi supra
If under the Law (says he) God did not spoil his people of liberty, when he
appointed them to rest two days at Pasche, one at Whitsonday, etc. how can the
Kings Majesty and the Church, be esteemed to spoil us of our liberty, that
command a cessation from labor on three days, etc. O horrible blasphemy! O
double deceitfulness! Blasph my: because so much power is a scribed to the
King and the Church over us, as God had over his people of old. God did justly
command his people under the Law to rest from labor on other days beside the
Sabbath, without wronging them, therefore the King and the Church may as
justly, and with doing as little wrong, command us to rest likewise: because God
by a Ceremonial Law, did hinder his people from the use of so much liberty, as
the Moral Law did give them; T^erefore the King and the Church may do so
also. Deceitfulness, in that he says, God did not spoil his people of
liberty, etc. We know, that by appointing them to rest on those days, God did
not take away liberty from his people, simply and absolutely, because they had
no more liberty then he did allow to them by his laws, which he gave by the
hand of Moses, yet he did take away that liberty, which one part of his laws
did permit to them, Viz. The fourth Commandment of the Moral Law, which
permitted them to labor six days. The B. knew, that this question in hand,
has not to do with liberty in the general notion of it, but with liberty
which the Moral Law does permit. We say then, that God took away from his
people Israel, some of the liberty, which his moral Law permitted to them,
because he was the Law giver, and Lord of the Law, and that the King and the
Church can not do the like with us, because they are no more Lords over Gods
Law, then the people who are set under them.

But he has yet more to say against us. If the King (says he,) may command a
cessation from oeconomicall and private works, for works civil and public,
such as the defense of the Crown, the liberty of the Country, etc. What reason
have ye, why he may not injoyne a day of cessation from all kind of bodily
labor, for the honor of God and exercise of Religion, etc. Ans. this kind of
reasoning is most vicious, for three respects, 1. It supposes, that he who may
command a cessation from one kind of labor, upon one of the six days, may
also command a cessation from all kind of labor, but there is a difference:
for the Law of God has allowed us to labor six days of every week, which
liberty no human power can take from us. But we can not say, that the law of
God allows us six days of every week, to Oeconomicall and private works,
(for then we should never be bound to put our hands to a public work.) Whence
it comes, that the Magistrate has power left him to command a necessa^ion
from some labor, but not from all. 2. The Bishop reasons from a cessation
from ordinary labor for extraordinary labor, to a cessation from ordinary
labor for no labor: for they who use their weapons for the defense of the
Crown or liberty of the Country, do not cease from labor, but only change
ordinary labor into extraordinary, and private labor into public: Whereas
our Opposites plead for a cessation from all labor upon their holy days. 3.
He skippeth de genere in genus: because the King may command a cessation for
civil works, therefore he may command a holy rest for the exercise of
Religion, as if he had so great power in Sacred as in Civil things.

The B has yet a third dart to throw at us. If the Church ibid. page 26. 27.
says has power upon occasional motives to appoint occasional Fasts or
Festivities, may not she for constant and eternal blessings, which do
infinitely excel all occasional benefits, appoint ordinary times of
commemoration or thanksgiving. Ans. There are two reasons, for which the Church
may and should appoint Fasts or Festivities upon occasional motives, and
neither of them agrees with ordinary Festivities. 1. Extraordinary Fasts
either for obtaining some great blessing, or averting some great judgment, are
necessary means to be used in such cases: likewise, extraordinary Festivities
are necessary testifications of our thankfulness for the benefits which we
have impetrate by our extraordinary Fasts; but ordinary Festivities for
constant, and eternal blessings, have no necessary use. The celebration of set
Anniversary days, is no necessary mean for conserving the commemoration of
the benefits of redemption, Because we have occasion, not only every Sabbath
day, but every other day, to call to mind these benefits, either in hearing,
or reading, or meditating upon Gods Word. Dies Christo dicatos tollendos
existimo judicoque says apud ^ald. de casconsc. lib. 2. c. 13. cas. 1.
Danaeus: quotidienobis in Evangelii praedicatione nascitur, circumciditur,
moritur, resurgit Christus, 2. God has given his Church a general precept for
extraordinary Fasts, Joel, 1. 14. and. 2. 15. as likewise for Extraordinary
Festivities, to praise God, and to give him thanks in the public assembly of
his people, upon the occasional motive of some great benefit which by the
means of our fasting and praying, we have obtained, Zechar. 8. 19. with. 7. 3.
If it be said, that there is a general command for set Festivities, because
there is a command for Preaching and hearing the Word, and for praising God for
his benefits; and that there is no precept for particular Fasts, more then for
particulare Festivities? I ans. albeit there is a command for preaching and
hearing the Word, and for praising God for his benefits, yet is there no
commnad (no not in the most general generality,) for annexing these exercises
of religion to set anniversary days, more then to other days: whereas it is
plain, that there is a general command for fasting and humiliation, at some
times, more then at other times. And as for particularities, all the particular
causes, occasions, and times of fasting, could not be determined in Scripture,
because they are infinite, as pr^l. tom* 1. de pot. Eccl. contr. 2.
Camero says, But all the particular causes of set festivities, and the number
of the same, might have been easily determined in Scripture, since they are
not, nor may not be infinite: for the ubi supra page 16.
Bishop himself acknowledges, that to appoint a festival day for every week;
can not stand with Charity, the inseparable companion of piety. And albeit so
many were allowable, yet who sees not, how easily the Scripture might have
comprehended them, because they are set, constant, and anniversary times,
observed for permanent and continuing causes, and not moveable or mutable, as
Fasts which are appointed for ocurring causes, and therefore may be infinite. I
conclude, that since Gods Word has given us a general command for occasional
Fasts, and likewise particularly determined sundry things, anent the causes,
occasions, nature, and manner of Fasting: we may well say with ag. the Rhem.
annot. on Gal. 4. 10.
Cartwright, that days of fasting are appointed at such times and upon such
occasions, as the Scripture does set forth: wherein because the Church
commands nothing, but that which God commands, the Religious observation of
them, falls unto the obedience of the fourth Commandment, as well as of the
seventh day it self.

The ubi supra page 16. 17.
Bishop presses us with a fourth Argument, taken from Par^n ad Scot. c. 16.
page 64.
Tilen also beats upon. Ans. There is huge difference betwixt the rest which
is enjoined upon anniversary Festivities, and the rest which is required,
during the time of the weekly meetings for Divine Worship. For, 1. Upon
Festival days, rest from labor is required all the day over, whereas upon
the days of ordinary and weekly meetings, rest is required, only during the
time of public Worship. 2. Cessation from labor for Prayers or Preaching on
those appointed days of the week, at some occasions may be omitted, but the
rest, and commemoration appointed by the Church to be precisely observed upon
the anniversary Festival days, must not be omitted, in the ubi supra page 25.
Bishops judgment. 3. Men are straightly commanded and compelled to rest from
labor upon Holidays, but to leave work to come to the ordinary weekly
meetings, they are only exhorted. And here I mark how the Bishop contradicts
himself: for in one place where his Antagonist maintains truly, that the
Craftsman can not be lawfully commanded nor compelled to leave his work, and
to go to public Divine Service, except on the day that the Lord has
sanctified: ibid. page 17.
He replieth, if he may be lawfully commanded to cease from his labor, during
the time of divine service, he may be as lawfully compelled to obey the
command. Who can give these words any sense, or see any thing in them said
against his Antagonists position, except he be taken to say, that the Craftman
may be both commanded and compelled to leave his work, and go to Divine
Service, on the week days appointed for the same? Nay, he labors to prove
thus much out of the 9. head of the first book of Discipline, which says: In
great Towns, we think expedient that every day there be either Sermon or
common Prayers, etc. Where there is nothing of compulsion, or a forcing
command, only there is an exhortation. But ere the Bishop have said much, he
forgets himself, ibid. page 27.
and tells us, that it were against Equity and Charity, to adstrict the
husbandman to leave his plough, so often as the days of weekly preaching do
return, but that on the Festival days, reason would, that if he did not
leave his plough willingly, by Auctority he should be forced. Which place
confirms this difference, which we give betwixt rest on the holidays, and
rest at the times of weekly meeting.

CHAP. VIII.
That Festival days take away our Christian Liberty, proved out of the
Gospel.

MY second Argument, whereby I prove, that the imposing of the observation of
Holy days, does bereave us of Gal. 4. 10. Where he finds fault with the
Galatians, for observing of days, and gives them two reasons against them:
the one, verse. 3. They were a yoke of bondage which neither they nor their
Fathers were able to bear: another verse 9. They were weak and beggarly
rudiments, not beseeming the Christian Church, which is liberate from the
Pedagogicall instruction of the Ceremonial Law. The other place is, Col. 2.
16. Where the Apostle will have the Colossians, not to suffer themselves to be
judged by any man in respect of an Holy day, i. e. to be condemned for not
observing a Holy Day, for, Calv. com. in illum loc.
judicare hic significat culpae reum facere; and Zanch. com. ibid.
the meaning is: suffer not your selves to be condemned by those false
Apostles, or by any mortal man, in the cause of meat, that is, for meat or
drink taken, or for any Holy Day, or any part of an Holy Day neglected. Two
other reasons the Apostle gives in this place, against Festival days; one,
verse. 17. What should we do with the shadow, when we have the body? another,
verse. 20. Why should we be subject to humane ordinances, since through Christ
we are dead to them, and have nothing ado with them? Now, by the same reasons
are our Holy Days to be condemned, as taking away Christian Liberty; and so
that which the Apostle says, does militate as well against them, as against
any other Holy Days: for whereas it might be thought, that the Apostle does
not condemn all Holy Days, because both he permits others to observe
days, Romans 14. 5. And he himself also did observe one of the Jewish Feasts,
Act. 18. 21. It is easily answered, that our Holy Days have no warrant from
these places, except our Opposites will say, that they esteem their Festival
days holier then other days, and that they observe the Jewish Festivities.
Neither of which they do aknowledge; and if they did, yet they must consider,
that that which the Apostle either said or did hereanent, is to be expounded
and understood of bearing with the weak Jews, whom he permitted to esteem
one day above another, and for whose cause he did in his own practice, thus
far apply himself to their infirmity at (...) time, when they could not
possibly be, as yet, fully and thoroughly instructed, concerning Christian
Liberty, and the abrogation of the Ceremonial Law, because the Gospel was as
yet not fully propagated: and when the Mosaicall Rites were like a dead man not
yet buried, as Augustines simile runs. So that all this can make nothing for
Holy Days, after the full promulgation of the Gospel, and after that the
Jewish Ceremonies are not only dead, but also buried, and so, deadly to be
used by us. Hence it is, that the Apostle will not bear with the observation
days in Christian Churches, who have known God as he speaks.

The defenders of Holy Days, answer to these places which we allege Proc. in
Perth. Assemb. part. 3 page 43.
B. Lindsey follows so hard, that he sticks not to hold, that all the days
whereof the Apostle condemns the observation, were Judicial days prescribed
in the Ceremonial Law, etc. And this he is not contented to maintain
himself, but he will needs father it upon his Antagonist, by such logic
forsooth, as can infer quidlibet ex quolibet. The Apostle comports with the
observation of days in the weak Jews, who understood not the fulness of
the Christian Liberty, especially, since those days having had the honor to
be once appointed by God himself, were to be honorably buried: but the same
Apostle reproves the Galathians, who had attained to this liberty, and had once
left off the observation of days. What ground of consequence can warrant such
an illation from these premises, as this which the Bishop forms, namely,
that all the days whereof the Apostle condemned the observation, were
judaicall days? etc.

Now for confutation of this forged exposition of those places of annot. on
Col. 2. 16.
that the Apostle condemns only Jewish days, but not Christian days, and
annot. on Gal. 4. 10.
that we do falsely interpret his words against their Holy Days. annot. ibid.
Carthwright answers them, that if Paul condemned the observing of Feasts
which God himself instituted, then much more does he condemn the observation
of Feasts of man's devising. So de cult. sanct. cap. 10.
Bellarmine alleges, loqui ibi Apostolum de judaeorum tantum festis. de orig.
fast. Christ. cap. 2.
Hospinian answering him, will have the Apostles words to condemn the
Christian Feasts, more then the judaicall. de templ. and fest. in Enchirid.
contr. inter. Evang. and Pontif.
Conradus Vorstius rejects this position, Apostolus non nisi Iudaicum
discrimen dierum in N. T. sublatum esse docet, as an Popish error. 2. If the
Apostle mean only of judaicall days, either he condemns the observing of
their days materialiter or formaliter, i. e. either he condemns the
observation of the same Feasts which the Jews observed, or the observing of
them with such a meaning, after such a manner, and for such an end, as the
Jews did. The former, our Opposites dare not hold, for then they should grant
that he condemns their own Easter and Pentecost, because these two Feasts
were observed by the Jews. Nor yet can they hold them at the latter, for he
condemns that observation of days which had crept into the Church of
Galatia, which was not Jewish nor Typical, seeing the Galatians, believing
that Christ was already come, could not keep them as figures of his coming, as
the Jews did, but rather as memorialls that he was already come, says ubi
supra.
Cartwright. 1. If the Apostles reasons wherewith he impugnes the observation
of days, hold good against our Holy Days, so well as against the Jewish or
Popish days, then does he condemn those, no less then these. But the
Apostles reasons agree to our Holy days. For, 1. according to that reason, Gal
4. 3. they bring us under a Yoke of bondage. Epist. 118. adlanuar.
Augustine complaining of some Ceremonies, wherewith the Church in his time was
burdened, thought it altogether best that they should be cut off, etiamfi
fidei non videantur adversari; quia religionem quam Christus liberam esse
voluit, servilibus oneribus premunt. Yea, he thought this Yoke of servitude
greater bondage, and less tolerable, then the servility of the Jews, because
they were subject to the burthenes of the Law of God, and not to the
presumptions of men. The Yoke and Bondage of Christians in respect of Feasts,
is heavier, then the Yoke of the Jews, not only for the multitude of them,
but because Christianorum Festa* ab hominibus tantum, judaeorum vero a Deo
fuerint instituta, says de orig. Fest. Christ. cap. 2.
Hospinian. Have not we then reason to exclaim against our Holy Days, as a
Yoke of bondage, heavier then that of the Jews, for that our Holy days are
men's inventions, and so were not theirs? The other reason, Gal. 4. 9. holds
as good against our Holy days. They are Rudimentall and Pedagogicall Elements,
which beseem not the Christian Church, for as touching that which Paraen. ad
scot. cap. 16. p. 66.
Tilen objecteth, that many in the Church of the New Testament, are still babes
to be fed with milk, it makes as much against the Apostle, as against us, for
by this reason, he may as well throw back the Apostles ground of condemning
Holy days among the Galatians, and say, because many of the Galatians were
babes, therefore they had the more need of those Elements and Rudiments. The
Apostle, Gal. 4. 3. compares the Church of the old Testament, to an infant,
and insinuates, that in the days of the New Testament, the infancy of the
Church has taken an end. And whereas it might be objected, that in the Church
of the New Testament there are many babes, and that the Apostle himself
speaks of the Corinthians and Hebrews as babes. It is answered by com. in
illum locum.
Pareus. Non de paucis personis, sed de statu totius Ecclesiae intelligendum
est quod hic dicitur. There were also some in the Church of the old Testament
adulti fide heroes: but in respect of the state of the whole Church, Luke 7. 28.
he who is least in the Kingdom of God, is greater then John Baptist. Lex
says annot. in Gal. 4 3.
Beza, vocatur elementa, quia illis velut rudimentis, Deus Ecclesiam suam
erudivit, postea pleno cornu effudit Spiritum Sanctum tempore Evangelij. 3 That
reason also taken from the opposition of the shadow and the body, Col 2. 17.
does militate against our Holy Days: for the Apostle there speaks in the
present time (...): whereas the Judicial Rites were abolished, whereupon com.
in illum locum.
Zanchius notes, that the Apostle does not so much speak of things by past,
as of the very nature of all Rites. Definiens ergo ipsos ritus in sese, dixit
eos nil aliud esse quam umbram. If all Rites, then our Holy Days among the
rest, serve only to adumbrate and shadow forth something, and by consequence,
are unprofitable and idle, when the substance it self is clearly set before
us. 4. That reason, Col 2. 20. does no less irresistably infringe the
Ordinances about our Holy Days, then about the Jewish; for, if men's Ordinances
about things once appointed by God himself, ought not to be obeyed, how much
less should the precepts of men be received about such things in Religion, as
never had this honor to be Gods ordinances, when their mere Auctority does
limit or adstrict us, in things which God has made lawful or free to us.

Thus we see, how the Apostles reasons hold good against our ubi supra page 40.
he tells us, that the Jewish observation of days, was to a typical use, and
whereas it is objected by us, that the converted Jews did not observe them as
shadows of things to come, because then they had denied Christ: he answers
thus. Howbeit the converted Jews did not observe the Jewish days, as shadows
of things to come, yet they might have observed them, as memorials of bypast
temporal and typical benefits, and for present temporal blessings, as the
benefit of their delivery out of Egypt, and for the fruits of the earth, which
use was also typical. Ans. 1. This is his own conjecture only, therefore he
himself propounds it doubtfully, for he dare not say, they did observe them
as memorials, etc. but, they might have observed: to which guessing, if I
reply, they might also not have observed them as memorials of those bypast or
present benefits, we say as much against him, and as truly, as he has said
against us. 2. His form of reasoning is very ^ncouth, for to prove, that the
observation of days by the converted Jews was to a typical use, he
alleges, that they might have observed, etc. Thus proving a position by a
supposition. o brave! 3. There is no sense in his conjecture, for he yields,
that they did not observe those days, as shadows of things to come, and yet
he says, they might have observed them as memorials of by past typical
benefits: now they could not observe those days as memorials of types, except
they observed them also, as shadowing forth the antitypes. Pentecoste says
com. in Col. 2. 17.
Davenant, and illa legis datae celebratio, Spiritus Sancti missionem, and
legis in tabulis cordium per cundem Spiritum inscriptionem, adumbravit.
Scenopegiae festum peregrinationem hominis pij per hoc mundi desertum ad
caelestem patriam delineabat, etc. So that the Feast of Pentecost, if it had
been observed, as a memorial of the promulgation of the Law, could not but
shadow forth the sending of the holy Spirit into our hearts, to write the Law
in them. And the Feast of Tabernacles, if it had been observed as a memorial
of the benefits, which Cod bestowed on his people in the wilderness, could not
but shadow out Gods conducting of his children, through the course of their
pilgrimage in this world, to the heavenly Canaan. 4. If Feasts which were
memorials of temporal benefits, were for this reason mystical, then he must
grant against himself, that much more are our Feasts mystical, which are
memorialls of Spiritual benefits, and consecrated to be holy signs and
symbols, for making us call to mind the mysteries of our Redemption. 5. Before
this Dispute take an end, we shall see out of the best learned among our
Opposites, infra part. 3. in the arg. of superstition.
that they observe the Holy days as mystical, and more mystical, then the B.
here describes the Jewish days to have been, and so we shall see the falsehood
of that pretense, that they are observed only for order and policy, and not
for mystery. 6. If we would know the true reason, which made the converted
Jews to observe those days, it was not any mystical use, but that which made
them think themselves obliged to other Mosaicall Rites; even propter
auctoritatem legis, says animad. in Bell. contr. 3: lib. 4. cap. 16. nota 20.
Iunius: for albeit they could not be ignorant, that these Rites were shadows
of things to come, and that the body was of Christ, in whom, and in the virtue
of whose death, they did stablish their Faith, yet they did not at first
understand, how such things as were once appointed by God himself, and given
to his people, as ordinances to be kept by them throughout their generations,
could be altogether abolished, and for this cause, though they did condescend
to a change of the use and signification of those Ceremonies, as being no more
typical of the Kingdom of Christ, which they believed to be already come: yet
still they held themselves bound to the use of the things themselves, as things
commanded by God.

Thus much may be collected from Act. 15. 21. Where James gives a reason,
wherefore it was expedient, that the Gentiles should observe some of the Jewish
Rites for a time, as com. in illum locum.
Calvine, annot. ibid.
Beza, and animad. ad Bell. contr. 3. lib. 4. cap. 16. nota 32.
Iunius expound the place: His reason is, because the Jews, being so long
accustomed with the hearing of the Law of Moses, and such as did preach the
same, could not be made at first to understand, how the ordinances which God
gave to his people by the hand of Moses, might be cast off and not regarded:
which imports as much as I say, namely, that the reason wherefore the
converted Jews were so apt to be scandalized by such as cared not for the
Ceremonial Law, and held themselves obliged to observe the same, was, because
they saw not how they could be exeemed from the ordinances and statutes of the
Law of Moses with which they had been educated and accustomed.

Rests the second respect of difference given by the B. Further, ubi supra.
says he, they did observe them with opinion of necessity, as things
instituted by God for his worship and their salvation, which sort of
observation was legal. Ans. 1. Be it so: he can not hereupon infer, that the
Apostle does only condemn the observation of Judicial days, for he sees
nothing of observing days with opinion of necessity, but simply and absolutely
he condemns the observing of days, and his reasons reflexe on our
Holy Days, as well as the Jewish. 2. Their opinion of necessity, he either
refers to the institution, which these days once had from God, or else to the
use which at that time they had for Gods Worship and their Salvation. That they
observed them with opinion of necessity, as things which had been instituted by
God, it is most likely: but that they observed them with opinion of necessity,
as things necessary for Gods Worship and their Salvation, is more then can be
made good; it is more probable, that they observed them merely and simply, for
that they had the honor to be instituted by God in his Law. For to say, that
they observed them to the same use and end, for which God did institute them,
is false; because then they had observed them as types and shadows of the
coming of Christ, and so had denied Christ. 3. If the Apostle condemn the
observing of days instituted by God, with opinion of necessity, much more
does he condemn the observing of days instituted by men, with such an
opinion. And such is the observation of days urged upon us. Though the B.
pretend, that the observing of our Holy Days is not imposed with opinion of
necessity, shall we therefore think it is so? Nay, Papists do also pretend,
Bell. de Euchar. lib. 6. cap. 13.
that the observation of their Ceremonies is not necessary, nor the neglecting
of them a mortal sin. I have proved heretofore out of our Opposites their
own words, that the Ceremonies in question, (and by consequence Holy Days
among the rest) are urged upon us with opinion of necessity, and as their
words, so their works bewray them, for they urge the Ceremonies with so
exorbitant vehemence, and punish refusers with so excessive severity, as if
they were the weightiest matters of the Law of God. Yet they would have us
believe, that they have but sober and mean thoughts of these matters, as of
circumstances determined for order and policy only: Just like Proverb. 26. 18.
19.
a man who casts firebrands and arrows, and yet says, Am not I in sport?
They will tell us, that they urge not the Ceremonies as necessary in
themselves, but only as necessary in respect of the Churches determination,
and because of the necessity of obeying those, who are set over us. But I pray,
is not this as much as the annot. on Math. 6. 15. sect. 5.
Rhemists say, who place the necessity of their Rites and observances, not in
the nature of the things themselves, but in the Churches precept?

CHAP. IX.
Showing the weakness of some pretenses which our Opposites use for Holy Days.

SInce it has been evinced by unanswearable reasons, that com. in Col. 2. 16.
Dr Davenant would conciliate his readers mind to allow of the Churches
ordinances about Holy Days, (peradventure because he saw all that he had said
of that purpose to be too invalide proof,) by six Cautions, whereby all
superstition and abuse, which may ensue upon them, may be shunned. For,
whatsoever does manifestly endanger men's souls, being a thing not necessary in
it self, at which they take occsiaon of superstitious abuse, should rather be
removed altogether out of the way, then be set about with a weak and easily
penetrable hedge of some quidditative Cautions, which the ruder sort do
always, and the learned do too often, either not understand or not remember.
Now ubi supra page 7.
B. Lindsey confesses and puts it out of all doubt, that when the set times of
these Solemnities return, superstitious conceats are most pregnant in the
heads of people; therefore it must be the safest course to banish those days
out of the Church, since there is so great hazard and no necessity of retaining
them.

What they can allege for holy days, from our duty to remember the
inestimable benefits of our redemption, and to praise God for the same, supra
c. 7. sect. 7.
has been already answered. And as touching any expediency which they imagine
in Holy Days, we shall see to that Infra. part. 2. c. 2.
afterward.

The act of Perth A ssembly, alleges the practice of the ancient Paraen. ad
Scot. cap. 16. page 65.
and Tilen alleges the judgment of antiquity to the same purpose. Ans. The
Festivities of the Ancient Church can not warrant ours, for, 1. In the purest
times of the Church here was no Law to tie men to the observation of
Holy Days. Observandum est Cent. 2. cap. 6. col. 119.
say the divines of Maldeburge, Apostolos and apostolicos viros, neque de
pashate neque de aliis quibuscunque festivatibus legem aliquam constituisse.
Socrates lib. 5. cap 22.
reports, that men did Celebrat the Feast of Easter, and other Festival
days, Sicuti voluerunt, ex consuetudine quadam. Nicephorus lib. 12. cap. 32.
says, that men did celebrat Festivities, sicuti cuique visum erat, in
regionibus passim ex consuetudine quadam per traditionem accepta adducti. In
which place, as the reader will plainly perceave, he opposes tradition to an
Evangelicall or Apostolical ordinance. lib. 7. cap. 19.
Sozomen tells us, that men were left to their own judgment about the keeping
of Easter, in Gal. 4.
Hierome says of the Feasts, which the Church in his time observed, that they
were pro varietate regionum diversa. Hospin. de orig. fest. Christ. p. 71.
The first who established a Law about any Festival day, is thought to have
been Pius 1. Bishop of Rome, yet it is marked, that the Asiatican Doctors, did
not care much for this constitution of Pius. I conclude with annot. on Math.
15. 9.
Cartwright, that those Feasts of the Primitive Church came by custom, and not
by commandment, by the free choice of men, and not by constraint. So that from
these, no commendation arises to our Feasts* which are not only established by
Laws, but also imposed with such necessity and constraint, as spoyleth us of
our liberty; 2. The festival days observed by the Ancient Church, were not
accounted more excellent then other days: for faith ubi supra
Hierome, non quod celebrior sit dies illa qua convenimus, etc. But our
festival days are made aliis diebus celebriores, yea are taken to be holyer
then other days, as I will part. 3.
afterward prove.

Moreover, the Proctors for holy days among us, think to make Genevah in
Savoy, and the Church of Strasburge in Germany did abolish Festival days, as
Io Calv. epist. and resp. edit Genev. an. 1617. col. 137.
Calvine writteth. Yea, In hac tota provincia aboliti fuerunt dies Festi, says
he. The Church of Zurich in Helvetia did also banish them all away, as Ibid.
138.
Bullinger writes to Calvine. 2. The practice of the greatest part of the
reformed Churches in observing Holy Days can not commend them in the Church of
Scotland. 1. Because she did spue them out with so great detestation, that she
is more bound to abhor them, then other Churches which did not the like, and
I may well apply to them that which ib col. 119.
Calvine says of the Ceremonies of the Interim, to Valentinus Pacaeut. Vt
concedam faetidas illas sordes quibus ^purgatae fuerunt vestrae Ecclesiae, in
rebus mediis posse censeri: earum tamen restitutio eritne res media? 2. The
Church of Scotland is tied yet with another bond, to hate Holy Days, of which
other Churches are free; for by a solemn oath sworn to the God of Heaven, she
has abjured all Antichristian and Popish Rites, and dedicating of days
particularly. When (i) Tilen would make answer to this Argument, (l) paraen
c. 16. page 68.
he says, that men's consciences should not be snared with rash oaths, and
superstitious vows, and if that such bonds be laid on, they should be broken
and shaken of. What? calls he this a superstitious vow, which abjured all
superstition and superstitious Rites? or calls he this a rash oath, which upon
so sage and due deliberation, so serious advisment, so pious intention, so
decert preparation, so great humiliation, was religiously, publikly, solemnly
sworn throughout this Land, and that at the strait command of Auctority? who
is ignorant of these things, except he be a stranger in our Israel? But say
the oath had been rash and temerarious, shall it not therefore oblige? his
Judgment is, it does not. And so thinks the Sermon. on Ier. 4. 2.
B. of Winchester, who teaches us, that if the oath be made rashly, paenitenda
promissio non perficienda praesumptio; he had said better thus paenitenda
praesumptio, perficienda promissio. For was not that a very rash oath which the
Princes of Israel did swear to the Gibeonites, not asking Counsel at the
mouth of the Lord? Ios. 9. 14. 15. 16. yet it bound both them, Ios. 9. 19. and
their posterity some hundredth years after, 2 Samuel 21. 1. if the matter then be
lawful, the oath binds, were it sworn never so rashly.

As touching the judgment of Divines, we say, 1. many Divines Belgike Churches
in their Synod anno 1578. Wished, that the sixedayes might be wrought upon, and
that the Lords day alone might be celebrated. And Luther in his book de bonis
operibus wished, that there were no Feast days among Christians but the Lords
day. This wish of theirs declares plainly, that they allowed of no Holy day
except the Lords day; yet B Lindsey must make a fashion of saying something for
an answer. This wish ubi supra page 84.
(says he) Luther and the Belgike Churches conceived, out of their
miscontentment at the number, corruptions, and superstitions, of the Festival
days beside the Lords day, as ye do. Aus. 1. Their wish imports a simple
and absolute misliking of all Festiyall days besides the Lords day, and not of
their number, and corruptions only. 2. It is well, that he acknowledges both
them and us to have reason of miscontentment at Holy Days, from their
corruptions and superstitions. The old Waldenses also Alsted. in Chronol.
testium veritatis.
(whose Doctrine was restored and propagated by John Husse, and Hierome of
Prauge after Wikliffe, and that with the congratulation of the Church of
Constantinople) Aen. Silv. apud Didocl. alt. Damasc. page 707.
held, that they were to rest from labor upon no day, but upon the Lords day.
Whereby it appears, that Holy Days have had adversaries before us. I find,
that they pervert some places which they allege against us out of Calvine.
Paraen. cap. 16. page 64.
Tilen alleges Calvin. Inst. l. 2. c. 8.. 32. aknowledging alios quoque dies
festos praeter Dominicum, etc. I marvel, how a judicious Reader could imagine
such a thing to be in that place, for both in that and the subsequent section,
he is speaking of the Lords day against the Anabaptists, and if any man will
think, that. 32. he is speaking of holy assemblies of Christians in the
general, yet he can see nothing there of any Festival days beside the Lords
day dedicated to holy meetings. There is an other place of Calvine abused by
Sermon at Petth. Assemb.
Bishop Spotswood, and ubi supra page 83.
B. Lindsey, taken out of one of his epistles to Hallerus: which I find in the
volume before quoted, page 136. 137. that which they gripe to in this Epistle,
is, that Calvine, speaking of the abrogation of Festival days in Geneva,
says, hoc tamen testatum esse volo, si mihi delata optio fuisset, quod nunc
constitutum est, non fuisse pro sententia dicturum. Ans. That which made
Calvine say so, was not any liking which he had to Festival days, for he
ibid. page 138.
calls the abolishing of them ordo been compositus. But as himself shows in
the following Epistle which bears this title. Call. Ministro Burensi, S. D.
The reason, why he durst scarcely have so determined, if his judgment had been
required, was, because he saw neither end nor remedy for the prevailing tumult
of contention raised about Festival days, and likely to impede the course of
Reformation, therefore fovendae pacis studio, he professes, that he durst not
make mention of the abrogation of those Holy Days. Because he would have
tolerated Holy Days, because he durst not at that time, and as the case then
stood, have spoken of the abolishing them, can it be hereupon concluded, that
he allowed of them? No sure. But it is observable, how both these Prelates
pervert Calvin's words. B. Spotswood alleges his words anent the abolishing of
these Festival days, thus: Ego neque suasor neque impulsor fui, atque hoc
testatum volo, si mihi delata optio, etc. Whereas the words in that Epistle lie
thus, ego tametsi neque suasor neque impulfor fui, sic tamen accidisse non
moleste fero. Quod si statum nostrae Ecclesiae aeque compertum haberes, non
dubitares meo judicio subscribere. Hoc tamen testatum esse volo, si mihi delata
optio, etc. The B. would have made his hearers believe, that Calvine was not
content with the abolishing of the festival days, whereas his words testify
the very contrary. B. Lindsey is as gross in perverting the end of that
Epistle. Nec tamen est cur homines adeo exasperentur, si liberate nostra ut
Ecclesiae edificatio postulat utimur, etc. from which words he concludes, that
in Calvines judgment the observation and abrogation of those days, is in the
power and liberty of the Church. But the reader will perceave, that Calvine
there speaks only of the Churches liberty to abrogate Holy days, and no
thing of her power to observe them, for he is showing that howbeit he durst not
have given advise to abolish them, if the decision had been referred to him,
yet they had no reason for them who were offended at the abolishing of them in
Geneva, because that Church had done no more then she had power and liberty to
do for edification, 3. Other Testimonies they produce, which can not help them
much. That which ubi supra page 91.
B. Lindsey alleges out of Zanchius his confession, makes him but small
advantage, for though Zanchius there allows of the sanctification of some
Festival days, yet writing on the fourth Commandment, he aknowledgeth that
it is more agreeable to the first institution, and to the writings of the
Apostles, that one day of the week only be sanctified. What meant the ibid.
page 41.
B. to say, that this place is falsified and mutilated by his Antagonist? who
quotes it not to prove that Zanchius dissallowed of Festival days, but to
prove that in Zanchius his judgment, the sanctification of the Sabbath only,
and no other day in the week, agrees best with Divine and Apostolical
institution: was there any need to allege more of Zanchius his words then
concerned the point which he had to prove? ibid. page 95.
the B. alleges also a Testimony out of Perkins on Gal. 4. 10. which makes
him but very little help: For albeit Perkins thought good, in some sort to
excuse the observing of days, in his own mother Church of England, yet I find
in that place, 1. He complains that the greatest part respects those
Holy Days more then they should. 2. He allows only the observing of days
for orders sake, that men may come to the Church to hear Gods Word: which
respect will not be enough to the B. if there be not a solemnizing and
celebrating of the memory of some of Gods inestimable benefits, and a
dedicating of the day to this end and purpose. 3. He says, that it is the
privilege of God to appoint an extraordinary day of rest: so that he
permits not power to the Church, for appointing a set, constant, and
anniversary day of rest, for such a day becomes an ordinary day of rest. 4.
He prefers the practice of those Churches of the Protestants, who do not
observe Holy Days, because (says he,) the Church in the Apostles days, had
no Holy Day beside the Lords day, and the fourth Commandment injoynes the
labor of six days.

The B. meets with another answer in his Antagonist, which ubi supra page
83.
B. objecteth against this answer, that Calvine Epist. 51. advises the
Monbelgardens not to contend against the Prince for not resuming (he should
have said, for not receiving, if he had translated Calvines words faithfully)
of all Festival days, but only such as served not to edification, and were
seen to be superstitious. Ans. 1. Albeit he spoke sparingly against Holy days,
when he gave advice to that distressed and lately reformed Church, jest the
work of Reformation should habe been let, yet he did not allow Holy Days
among them. Fot in Io. Calv. epist. and resp. col. 592.
another Epistle written to them, he says, De pulsu campanarum and diebus
festis ita sentimus, ferendas-potius esse vobis has ineptias, quam stationem in
qua estis a domino collocati descrendam, modo ne approbetis; modo etiam liberum
vobis sit reprehendere, quae inde sequentur superstitiones; And this he sets
down for one of these superstitions, quod dies a die discernitur; where also
he dondemneth both the observing of days to the honor of men as
superstitious, and the observing of them for the honor of God as judaicall. If
holy days in Calvines judgment be foolries; If he gave advyce not to approve
them; If he thought them occasions of superstition; If he held it superstition
to distinguish one day from another, or to esteem one above another; If he
call them Judicial, though kept to the honor of God; judge then what
allowance they had from him. 2. If the B. stand to Calvines judgment in that
place which he quotteth, he must allow us to refuse some Festival days though
enjoined by the Prince. In festis non recipiendis cuperem vos esse
constantiores, sic tamen ut non litigetis de quibuslibet. Then he allowed them
to contend against some Holy Days, though the Prince imposed them. 3. The
Church of Scotland did remove Festival days in another manner, and bound her
self never to receave them, by another bond then ever the Monbelgardens did;
so that having other bonds lying upon us, then other Churches have, we are so
much the more straightly obliged, neither to receave Holy Days, nor any other
Antichristian and Popish Ceremony.

The second part, Against the expediency of the Ceremonies.
CHAP. I.
Against some of our Opposites, who aknovvledge the inconveniency of the
Ceremonies, and yet would have us yield to them.

THE Archbishop of Sainctandrewes, now Lord Chancellor Perth, Sermon. at Perth
Assemb. insert. by B. Lindsey.
says, The convenience of them for our Church is doubted of by many, but not
without cause, etc. novations in a Church even in the smallest things are
dangerous, etc. had it been in our power to have dissuaded or declined them,
most certainly we would, etc but now being brought to a necessity, either of
yielding, or disobeying him whom for my self, I hold it religion to offend,
etc. Dr. Burgess ans. to the repl praef. page 43.
confesses, that some of his side think and believe, that the Ceremonies are
inconvenient, and yet to be observed for peace and the Gospels sake; And how
many Formalists let us hear their hearty wishes, that the Ceremonies had never
been brought into our Church, because they have troubled our peace, and
occasioned great stryf^? When they are demanded why do they yield to them,
since they aknowledge great inconveniency in them? They answer; left by their
refusal, they should cast their coall to the fire, to entertain and increase
discord, and lest shunning one inconveniency, they should draw on a greater.
Mr. Sprint says, (c) It may be granted, (c) repl. to the ans. page 270.
that offense and hinderance to edification, do arise from those our
Ceremonies. Cassand anglis. p. 46.
He confesses also, That the best Divines wished them to be abolished, as
being many ways inconvenient. Notwithstanding, he has written a whole
Treatise, of the necessity of conformity in case of deprivation.

But let us understand, how he proves, ib p. 23.
that sometimes it is expedient and necessary to conform unto such burdensome
and beggarly Ceremonies, as are many ways inconvenient, and occasions of
sundry evil effects. His principal reason is, ibid. page 8.
That the Apostles by direction of the Holy Ghost, and upon reasons of common
and perpetual equity, did practice themselves, and caused others to practice,
yea advised and enjoined (as matters good and necessary to be done) Ceremonies
so inconvenient and evil in many maine and material respects, as the
Ceremonies enjoined and prescribed in the Church of England are supposed to be;
whence he would have it to follow, that to suffer deprivation for refusing to
conform to the Ceremonies of the Church of England,, is contrary to the
doctrine and practice of the Apostles. Ans. These Jewish Ceremonies in the use
and practice of the Apostles, were no way evil and inconvenient, as himself
every where confesses; whereas therefore Ibid. p. 9. 10. 11.
he tells us, that those Ceremonies were abused to superstition, were of
mystical signification, imposed and observed as parts of Gods worship,
swerving from the general rules of Gods word, not profitable for order,
decency, and edification, offensive many ways, and infringing Christian
liberty; he runs at random all the while: for these things agree not to the
Jewish Ceremonies, as they were rightly used by the Apostles themselves, and by
others at their advise, but only as they were superstitiously used with
opinion of necessity by the obstinate Jews, and by the false teachers, who
impugned Christian liberty. So that all that can follow upon Mr. Sprints
Argument, is this, That notwithstanding of the evils and inconveniences which
follow upon certain Ceremonies in the superstitious abuse of them by others,
yet if in our practice they have a necessary or expedient use, then (after the
example of the Apostles) we may well conform unto them. Now all this comes
not near the point, which Mr. Sprint undertaketh to prove, namely, That
granting the controverted Ceremonies to be in out use and practice of the
same, many ways evil and inconvenient, yet to suffer deprivation for refusing
to conform to the same, is contrary to the doctrine and practice of the
Apostles. And as touching the comparison instituted betwixt our controverted
Ceremonies, and these antiquated Ceremonies of the Jews, practiced and
prescribed by the Apostles, after the ascension of Christ, and before the full
promulgation of the Gospel, many evils there be in ours which could not be
found in theirs. For, 1. Ours, have no necessary use and might well be spared:
Theirs, had a necessary use for avoiding of scandal, Acts 15. 28. 2. Ours,
produce manifold inconveniences (whereof we are to speak hereafter) in our use
and practice of the same, which is prescribed: Theirs, in the use and practice
of the same, which was enjoined by the Apostles, were most expedient, for
winning of the obstinate Jews, 1 Cor. 9. 20. and for keeping of the weak, 1
Cor. 9. 22. And for teaching the right use of Christian liberty, to such as
were strong in the faith, both among the believing Jews, and converted
Gentiles, Romans 4. etc. 1. Cor. 8. and 10. 3. Ours, are proven to be in their
nature unlawful: Theirs, were (during the foresaid space) in their nature
indifferent, Romans 14. 6. Gal. 6. 15. 4. Ours, are imposed and observed as parts
of Gods Worship (which we will prove Infra part. 3. chap. 1.
afterward:) Theirs, not so, for where read we, that (during the foresaid
space) any holiness was placed in them by the Apostles? 5. Ours, have certain
mystical significations. Theirs, not so: for it is no where to be read, that
the Apostles either practiced or prescribed them as significative resemblances
of any mystery of the Kingdom of God. 6. Ours, make us (though unnecessarily)
like unto Idolaters in their Idolatrous actions: Theirs, not so. 7. Ours, are
imposed with a necessity both of practice and opinion, even out of the case of
scandal: Theirs, not so. 8. Ours, are pressed by naked will and Auctority:
Theirs, by such special grounds of momentaneous reason, as made the practice
of the same necessary for a certain time, whither the Apostles had enjoined it
or not. 9. Ours, are urged even upon such, as in their consciences judge them
to be unlawful: Theirs, not so. 10. Ours, have no better original then humane
and Antichristian invention. Theirs, had their original from Gods own
institution. 11. Ours, are the accursed monuments of Popish Idolatry, to be
ejected with detestation: Theirs, were the memorials of Mosaicall policy, to be
buried with honor. 12. Ours, are pressed by such pretended reasons, as make
them ever and every where necessary: Theirs, by such reasons, as did only
conclude a necessity of using them at sometimes, and in some places. 13. Ours,
are urged after the full promulgation of the Gospel, and aknowledgement of
Christian liberty: Theirs, before the same. 14. Ours, are urged with the
careless neglect of pressing more necessary duties: Theirs not so. These and
other differences, betwixt the controverted, and Jewish Ceremonies, do so
break the back of Mr. Sprints Argument, that there is no healing of it again.

His second reason, whereby he goes about to prove, the necessity ubi supra
page 24. 28.
he takes from this ground: That when two duties commanded of God, do meet in
one practice, so as we can not do them both, in this case we must perform the
greatter duty, and neglect the lesser. Now, whereas he says, when two duties
do meet, etc. he means not, that both may be duties at once, for then a man
shall be so straightened, that he must needs commit a sin, in that he must needs
omit one of the duties. But (as he explaineth himself) he calls them duties,
being considered apart: as, to hear a Sermon at the Church on the Sabbath, and
to tend a sick person ready to die at home at the same time, both are duties
being considered apart, but meeting together in our practice at one time, there
is but one duty, because the lesser work binds not for that present. Now he
assumes, that the doctrine and practice of suffering deprivation for refusing
to conform to inconvenient Ceremonies, does cause men to neglect greater
duties, to perform the lesser. For proof whereof, he enlarges a needless
discourse, tending to prove, that preaching is a greater duty and of higher
bond, then the duty of laboring unto fit Ceremonies, or of refusing
inconvenient Ceremonies; which can not help his cause. That which he had to
prove, was, that not to suffer deprivation for refusing of inconvenient
Ceremonies, is a greater duty, then the refusing of inconvenient Ceremonies.
But it will be said, that to suffer deprivation for refusing of inconvenient
Ceremonies, does cause men to neglect the preaching of the Word, and that is a
greater duty, then the refusing of inconvenient Ceremonies. Ans. 1. Mr. Sprint
him self lays down one ground, which proves the refusing of inconvenient
Ceremonies to be a greater duty, then the preaching of the Word: for ibid. p.
52.
he holds, that the substantials of the second Table do overrule the
Ceremonials of the first Table, according to that which God says, I will have
mercy and not sacrifice, Math. 12. 7. And ibid. page 28.
elsewhere he teaches; that to tend a sick person ready to die, is a greater
duty, then the hearing of the Word. Now to practice inconvenient and scandalous
Ceremonies, is to commit Soule-murther, and so to break one of the most
substantial duties of the second Table. Therefore according to Mr. Sprints
own ground, the refusing of inconvenient and scandalous Ceremonies, is a
greater duty, then the preaching of the Word, which is but a Ceremonial of the
first Table, and if the neglect of tending a sick persons body, be a greater
sin, then to omit the hearing of many Sermons, much more to murder the
souls of men by practicing inconvenient and scandalous Ceremonies, is a
greater sin then to omit the preaching of many Sermons, which is all the
omission (if there be any) of those who suffer deprivation for refuising to
conform unto inconvenient Ceremonies. But, 2. We deny, that the suffering of
deprivation for refusing to conform unto inconvenient Ceremonies, causes men
to neglect, or omit the duty of preaching. Neither has Mr. Sprint alleged any
thing for proof hereof, except that this duty of preaching can not be done
with us ordinarily, as things do stand, if Ministers do not conform: for by
order they are to be deprived of their Ministry. Now what of all this? for
though by the oppressing power of proud Prelates many are hindered from
continuing in preaching, because of their refusing inconvenient Ceremonies, yet
they themselves, who suffer deprivation for this cause, can not be said to
neglect or omit the duty of Preaching: most gladly would they preach, but are
not permitted; And how can a man be said to omit or neglect that, which he
would feign do, but it lies not in his power to get it done? All the strentgh
of Mr. Sprints Argument lies in this; That forasmuch as Ministers are hindered
from preaching, if they do not conform, therefore their suffering of
deprivation for refusing conformity, does cause them neglect the duty of
preaching. Which Argument, that I may destroy it with his own weapons, let us
note, ibid. p. 62.
that he allows a man (though not to suffer deprivation yet) to suffer any
civil penalty or external loss, for refusing of inconvenient Ceremonies
commanded and enjoined by the Magistrate. Now, put the case, that for refusing
inconvenient Ceremonies, I be so fined, spoiled, and oppressed, that I can not
have sufficient wordly means for my self and them of my household; hence I
argue thus, (if Mr. Sprints Argument hold good) that forasmuch as I am by
strong violence hindered from providing for my self, and them of my household,
if I do not conform, therefore my suffering of those losses for refusing of
conformity, does cause me to neglect the duty of providing for my self, and
for them of my family, which neglect should make me worse then an infidel.

Mr. Sprint now adds a third, proving, that to suffer deprivation (n) ibib p.
63.
many ways inconvenient, is contrary to the royal law of love: which he
labors to evidence three ways. First, he says, that to suffer deprivation
for refusing to conform, does by abstaining from a thing in nature in
different (such as our Ceremonies (says he) are proved to be) needelesly
deprive men of the ordinary means of their salvation, which is the preaching
ministry of the Word, etc. Ans. 1. That the controverted Ceremonies are in
nature indifferent, neither he, nor any of his side has yet proven: they
suppone, that they are indifferent, but they prove it not. 2. We deny, that
the suffering of deprivation for refusing to conform to the prescribed
Ceremonies, does deprive men of the preaching of the Word. Neither says Mr.
Sprint ought for proof hereof, but that which we have already confuted, viz.
that as things do stand, all such as do not conform are to be deprived:
whence it follows only, that the injury and violence of Prelates, (not the
suffering of deprivation for refusing to conform) depriveth men of the
preaching of the Word. Secondly, he says, page 67.
that the doctrine and practice of suffering deprivation for inconvenient
Ceremonies, condemns both the Apostolical Churches, and all Churches since
their times, because there has been no Church, which has not practiced
inconvenient Ceremonies. Ans. It is most false which he says of the
Apostolical Churches, for those Jewish Ceremonies practiced by them, were most
convenient, as we have said before. And as for other Churches in after ages, so
many of them as have practiced inconvenient Ceremonies, are not herein to be
followed by us. Better go right with a few then err with a multitude.
Thirdly, page 68. 69. 70.
he says, That the suffering of deprivation for refusing to conform, breeds
and produces sundry scandals. First says he, It is the occasion of fraternall
discord. O egregious impudency! who sees not that the Ceremonies are the
incendiary sparkles, from which the fire of contention has its being and
burning? so that conforming, (not refusing) is the furnishing of fuel, and
casting of faggets to the fire. Secondly he alleges, that the suffering of
deprivation for refusing to conform, twofold more scandalizeth the Papist then
conformity, for he does far more insult to see a godly Minister thrust out,
and with him all the truth of God pressed, then to see him wear a Surplice,
etc. Thirdly he says, it twofolde more scandalizeth the Atheist, Libertine and
Epicure, who by the painful Ministers deprivall, will triumph to see a door
opened for him without resistance, to live in Drunkenness, Whooredome,
Swearing, etc. Now, for answer to his second and third pretenses, we say: 1.
Mr. Sprint implies indirectly, that when nonconforming Ministers are thrust
out, Papists, Atheists, Libertines, and Epicures, exspect but small Opposition
from those conforming Ministers who come in their rowmes. Our Opposites have a
skillful Procter (forsooth) of Mr. Sprint. And indeed if Papists and Atheists
were so affrayed of Conformists, as of Non conformists, they would not thus
insult. 2. We must distinguish betwixt deprivation and the suffering of
deprivation. Papists insult indeed, that their assured frinds the Prelates, are
so powerful, as to thrust out from the public Ministry, the greatest enemies
of Popery. But as for the Ministers, their suffering of themselves to be thrust
out, and deprived for refusing of Conformity, it is so far from giving to
Papists any matter of insulting, that it will rather grieve them and gall them
to the heart, to understa^d, that sundry powerful, painful, and learned
Ministers, are so averse from Popery, that before they conform to any Ceremony
of the same, they will suffer for refusal: and that their constancy and
courage in suffering for such a cause, will confirm many Professors, in the
persuasion of the truth of their Doctrine, which they taught against
conforming unto Popish Ceremonies. But to go on; Fourthly (says he) it
twofolde more scandalizeth such a one; as does truly fear the name of God, who
could be more contented, to enjoy the means of his Faith and Salvation with a
small inconveniency of some Ceremonies, which he grieveth at, then to loose his
Pastor, the Gospel, and the ordinary means of his Faith and Salvation. Ans.
1. Mr. Sprint supposes, that such a one, as for no respect whatsoever, would
be contended with the practice of some inconvenient Ceremonies, does not truly
fear the name of God. And who is the Puritan now? Is not Mr. Sprint, who
stands in such a huge distance from all who are of our mind, and so far
prefers himself and his followers to us, as if we did no truly fear the
name of God? Secondly, he supposes, that when Nonconforming Ministers are
thrust out, the ordinary means of Faith and Salvation are not dispensed (to
the comfort and contentment of such as truly fear the name of God) by those
conforming Ministers, who are surrogate in their stead. Which, how his fellows
will take with, let them look to it. 3. Forasmuch as the fear of God is to
depart from evil, therefore such a one as does truly fear the name of God, in
so far, as he does fear the name of God, and quatenus, he is such a one,
will never take well with the practice of inconvenient Ceremonies, which is not
a parting from, but a cleaving unto evil. 4. They, who truly fear the name of
God, are indeed scandalized by the Prelates their depriving of Ministers for
refusing to conform: but by the Ministers, their suffering of deprivation for
this cause, they are not scandalized, but edified. But fifthly says Mr. Sprint,
it offends the Magistrate, by provoking him (persuaded and resolved as he is)
to disgrace these otherwise well deserving Ministers, and to strike them with
the Sword of Auctority. Ans. Our refusal to conform to inconvenient
Ceremonies, being a necessary duty, if the Magistrate be provoked therewith,
we are blameless: neither can it any otherwise provoke him to disgrace those
well deserving Ministers, then Moses his seeking of liberty for Israel to go
and serve God according to his will, provoked Pharaoh the more to oppress
them; or then Christ's preaching of the truth, and his abstaining from the
superstitious Ceremonies of the Pharisees, provoked them to disgrace him, and
plot his hurt. Howbeit we are not ignorant, that the Magistrate is not provoked
by our refusing to conform, except as it is misreported, misdeemed, and
misconstructed to him by the false Calumnies of our Adversaries: which being
so, he is not incited by our deed, but by theirs.

Now sixthly says Mr. Sprint, it unjustly condemns the Harmony Ans. That the
Ceremonies practiced by the Apostles and Apostolic Churches were not
inconvenient, it has been already showed. That since their times, sundry
Churches both ancient and reformed have practiced inconvenient Ceremonies, we
deny not: yet (q) Mr. Sprint himself will not defend all the practices of
those Churches, whose practice he alleges against us. But that all sound
Teachers, of all times and places, have taught the necessity of conformity to
inconvenient Ceremonies, in case of deprivation, he neither does, neither can
make good. It is but a bare and a bold affirmation to deceive the minds of the
simple. Hist. of the Waldens. part. 3. lib. 1. cap. 6. Thuan. Hist. lib. 6.
page 189.
Did not the good old Waldenses, notwithstanding of all the hot persecutions
raised against them, constantly refuse to conform unto any of those Ceremonies
of the Church of Rome, which they perceaved to have no necessary use in
Religion, and to occasion superstition, rather then to serve for edification?
And we verily rejoice to be ranked with those Waldenses, of whom Thuan. ibid.
p. 186.
a Popish Histeriographer speaks thus: Aliis in libris Cathari dicuntur,
quibus respondent qui hodie in Anglia puriorem doctrinam prae se ferunt.
Moreover, it can not be unknown, to such as are acquainted with the History of
the Reformation, how that not Flacius Illiricus only, but Alsted. Chronol.
Rolb. p. 550.
many others, among whom was sie his treatise entitled vera Ecclesiae
reformandae r^tio.
Calvine, and Alsted. ibid.
the Magdeburgian Doctors, and Sleid. com lib. 21. page 388.
all the Churches of nether Saxony subject to Maurice, opposed themselves to
those inconvenient and hurtful Ceremonies of the Interim, urged by the
Adiaphorists. And howsoever they perceaved many great and grievous dangers,
ensuing upon their refuising to conform to the same, yet they constantly
refuised: and Sleid. ib. page 393.
many Ministers suffered deprivation for their refusal. Besides, do not our
Divines require, that the Churches Canons, even in matters of Rite, Polan. Synt.
lib. 7. cap. 17.
be profitable to the edification of the Church; and Calv. ^ast. l. 4. c. 10.
32.
that the observation of the same, must carry before it a manifest utility;
Chem. exam. part. 2. p. 121.
that in Rites and Ceremonies the Church has no power to destruction, but only
to edification? Do they not F^nner. theol lib. 2. cap. 2.
put this clause in the very definition of Ecclesiastical Rites, that they be
profitably ordained; considering, that otherwise they are but intolerable
misorders and abuses? Do they not teach, Paraeus in 1. Cor. 14. 26.
that no idle Ceremony, which serves not unto edifying, is to be suffered in
the Church; and Ioh. Calv. epist. and resp. col. 478.
that Godly brethren are not holden to subject themselves unto such things, as
they perceave neither to be right nor profitable? Calv. in 1. Cor. 10. 23.
Tailor on Tit. 1. 15. page 295.
That whatsoever either would scandalize our brother, or not be profitable to
him for his edification, Christians for no respect must dare to meddle with it?
Do they not stand so much upon expediency, that this tenent is received with
them? That the negative precepts of the Law, do bind, not only at all times,
but likewise to all times, (whereupon it follows, that we may never do that
which is inconvenient or scandalous,) And that the affirmative precepts though
they bind at all times yet not to all times, but only quando expedit;
(Whereupon it follows, that we are never bound to the practice of any duty
commanded in the Law of God, except only when it is expedient to be done?) But
ubi supra page 55.
Mr. Sprint excepteth against this rule, that it is not generally true; for
evidence whereof, he alleges many things, partly false, partly impertinent,
upon which I hold it not needful, here to insist. As for such examples
objected by him, as carry some show of making against this rule, which he dare
not admit, I will make some answer thereto. He says, that some times even
negative precepts have been lawfully violated: for these precepts were
negative; none but Priests must eat shewbread, yet David did lawfully violate
it: Thou shall do no work upon the Sabbath; yet the Priests brake this, and
are blameless: let nothing of Gods good creatures be lost; yet Paul and his
company did lawfully cast away their goods in the ship, to save their lives,
etc. Ans. Mr. Sprint might easily have understood, that when Divines say, the
affirmative precepts bind at all times, but not to all times, the negative
precepts both at all times; and to all times, they ever mean, specie actionis
manente eadem: so long as a action forbidden in a negative precept, cease not
to be evil, as long the negative precept binds to all times: whereas even
whiles an action commanded in an affirmative precept, cease not to be good,
yet the affirmative precept binds not to all times. So that the rule is not
crossed by the alleged examples; for David's eating of the shewbread; the
Priests labor upon the Sabbath; and Paul's casting of the goods into the sea;
were not evil, but good actions (the kind of the action being changed by the
circumstances.) In the mean time, the foresaid rule still crosses Mr. Sprints
tenet. For he holds, that even whiles certain Ceremonies remain evil in
their use, and cease not to be scandalous and inconvenient, yet we are not ever
bound to abstain from them, but may in the case of deprivation practice them.
Which directly contradicts the rule.

The position therefore which we mantaine against Mr. Sprint, and Mr. Sprint
would have us to conform in the case of deprivation are, and remain
scandalous and inconvenient in our practice and use of them, according to his
own presupposall; It follows, that the use and practice of the same is
altogether unlawful unto us. 2. That which is lawful in the nature of it, is
never lawful in the use of it, except only when it is expedient for
edification, as teaches the Apost. 1. Cor. 6. 12. and 10. 23. The Corinthians
objected that all indifferent things were lawful Paraeus. in. 1. Cor. 6. 12.
The Apostle adds a limitation, esse licita quatenus conducunt, they are
lawful to be used in so far as they are expedient. 3. It is the Apostles
commandment, 1. Cor. 14. 26.
let all things be done unto edifying: Therefore whatsoever is not done unto
edifying, ought not to be done. 4. 1. Cor. 8. 13.
The Apostle says, if meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh
while the world stands. Now put the case the Apostle had been hindered from
preaching the Gospel, for his precise abstaining from those meats, whereat his
brother would be offended, would he in that case have eaten? Nay, he says
peremptor^y, that whiles the world stands he would not eat. 5. Say not Calv.
in 1. Cor. 10. 23. and Paraeus ibid.
our Writers, that we must flee and abstain from every thing which is not
expedient for the edification of our brother? And does not the Bishop of Sermon.
on 10. 16. 7.
Winchester teach, that in our going out, and coming in, and in all our
actions, we must look to the rule of expediency? And says not Bishop Sermon. at
Perth. assem.
Spotswood, it is not to be denied, but they are Ceremonies, which for the
inconveniency they bring, ought to be resisted? 6. Dare Mr. Sprint deny that
which Ames fresh suit cap. 2. page 12.
says he heard once defended in Cambridge, viz. that quicquid non expedit,
quatenus non expedit, non licet? whatsoever is not expedient, in so far as it
is not expedient, it is not lawful. Does not In 1 Cor. 10. 23.
Pareus likewise show out of Augustine, that such things as are not expedient,
but scandulous, and do not edify, but hurt our brother, fiunt ex accidenti
illiceta and peccata, proinde vitanda? 7. To conform unto inconvenient and
scandalous Ceremonies, in the case of deprivation, is at the best, to do evil
that good may come of it: which was the pretense of those Councillors, of Pope
Pius the 5. Thuan. hist. lib. 39. page 367.
who advised him to suffer stews at Rome, for preventing a greater evil of
abusing chaste women and honest matrons. So the Pseudo- Nicodemites allege for
their abstaining from flesh upon the days forbidden by the Church, that this
they do for shunning a greater evil, which is the scandal of Papists.
Paraeus in 1. Cor. 8. 13.
Our Divines answer them, that evil ought not to be done that good may come
of it. But says page 44. 45.
Mr Sprint, this rule Romans 3. 8.
of the Apostle must be limited, and in some cases holds not: for a man may
for doing of good, do that which is evil in use, circumstance, and by
accident, so it be not simply and in nature evil. Ans. 1. he begges the thing
in question: for that rule is alleged against him to prove, that nothing which
is evil in the use of it, may be done for any good whatsoever. 2. The
difference betwixt that which is simply evil, and that which is evil in use
and by accident, is in that the one may never be done, the other is unlawful
only pro tempore: but in this they agree, that both are unlawful; for Paraeus
in 1. Cor. 10. 23.
that which is evil by accident, whiles it is such, is unlawful to be done,
no less then that which is in nature evil. 3. Divines hold Alsted. theol cas.
c. 12 p. 199.
absolutely, that inter duo vel plura mal^ culpae (such as things scandalous
and inconvenient) nullum est eligendum Paraeus in Romans 3. 8.
That though in evils of punishment, we may choose a lesser, to shun a
greater, yet in evils of fault, election has no place, neither may we do a
lesser fault to shun a greater, nec ullum admittendum malum, ut eveniat
aliquod bonum, siv^ per se sive per accidens; But let us hear what Mr. Sprint
can say to the contrary. He alleges, the Priests their breaking of the
Sabbath, David his eating of the shewbread, and the Apostles their practicing
of very hurtful Ceremonies; all which things being unlawful, were done
lawfully to further greater duties.

We have answered already, that the Priests their killing of the sacrifices on
the Sabbath, and David's eating of the shewbread, were not unlawful, because
the Circumstances changed the kind of the actions. Also, that the Jewish
Ceremonies used by the Apostles, were in their practice, no way hurtful, but
very profitable. Mr. Sprint alleges another example out of. 2. Chron. 30. 18.
19. 20. 21. To perform Gods worship not as it was written, was a sin (says
he,) yet to further Gods substantial worships, which was a good thing, was not
regarded of God. Ans. One can not guess from his words, how he thought here to
frame an Argument, which might conclude the lawfulness of doing some evil,
that some good may come of it. Howsoever, that we may have some light in this
matter, let us distinguish betwixt these two things, 1. The peoples legal
uncleanness, when they came to eat the Passover. 2. Their adventuring to eat
it, notwithstanding their uncleanness. That they were at that time unclean,
it was a sin. But whiles they prepared their hearts truly to seek God, and
repented of their uncleanness, that in this case they adventured to eat the
Passover, was no sin: because ^it is the will of God, that such as prepare
their hearts unfainedly to seek him, lament their wants, and repent for that
they are not so prepared and sanctified for his worship as they ought, (there
being no other thing to hold them bake, beside some defect of sanctity in
themselves) notwithstanding of any defect which is in them, draw near to him in
the use of his holy ordinances. As touching the former, no man will say that
they choosed to be unclean, that they might further Gods worship. But as for
the latter, repenting of their uncleannes, they choosed to keep the Passover,
this they did to further Gods worship, and this was no sin, especially if we
observe with Tremellius, that it is said verse. 20. The Lord healed the people,
that is, by the virtue of his Spirit purified and cleansed them, so that, that
which was lame, was not turned out of the way, but rather made straight and
healed.

And now we leave Mr. Sprint, who has not only conformed to p. 210. 211.
has also made it very questionable, whether in the case of deprivation he
ought to conform to sundry other Popish Ceremonies, such as shaven Crown,
holy water, cream, spitle, salt, and I kow not how many more, which he
comprehends under etc. all his pretenses of greater inconveniences following
upon not conforming, then do upon conforming, we have hitherto examined. Yet
what says ubi supra.
B. Spotswood to the cause? He also alleges there is a great inconveniency in
the refuising of the Ceremonies, namely, the offending of the King. But for
answer unto this, look what is the largest extent of the Princes power and
privilege in matters belonging unto Gods worship, which either Gods Word, or
the judgment of sound Divines does allow to him, none shall be found more
willingly obsequious to his commandments then we. But as touching these
Ceremonies in question, we are upon evident grounds persuaded in our
consciences, that they are both unlawful, and inexpedient for our Church: and
though they were lawful in themselves, yet we may answer as the Bald. de.
cas. consc. lib. 4. cap. 11. cas. 3.
oppugners of the Interim replied to those who urged yielding to the Ceremonies
of the same, Surplice, Holy days, Tapers, etc. because of the Emperors
commandment. That the question is not about things indifferent, but about a
maine Article of Faith, namely Christian Liberty, which admits not any yoke
to be imposed upon the conscience, no not in things indifferent. Our gracious
Prince who now by the blessing of God happily reigns over us, will not (we
assure our selves) be offended at us, for having regard to our consciences,
Gods own deputies placed in our souls, so far, that for all the world we
dare not hazard their peace and quiet, by doing any thing with their
repugnance and aversation; Wherefore, we are more then confident, that his M.
will graciously accept from us, such a reasonable Apology, as Sleid. com. l.
21. p. 381.
they of Straesburge used to Charles the 5. Quantum omnino fieri potest, parati
sumus tibi gratificari, non solum Civilibus, verum etiam in rebus Sacris.
Veruntamen oramus invicem, ut cogites, quoniam sui facti rationem opportet
unumquemque Deo reddere, merito nos de salute nostra solicito^ esse, and
providere nequid contra conscientiam a nobis fiat. And ib. l. 25. p. 485.
as the estates of Germany to Ferdinand, when they besought him only not to
grive nor burden their Consciences. Te quidem sumum and a Deo nobis datum
Magistratum agnoscimus, and libentissime quidem, ac nihil est omnium rerum,
quod non possis aut debeas a nobis expectare, sed in hac una re propiti^m te
nobis esse flagitamus. If these hoped that Popish Princes would accept such
answeares from them, shall not we? O shall we not be persuaded! that the
defender of the faith, will not refuise to take them from us? especially seeing
his M. shall ever find, that he has none more Loyal and true Subjects, who
will more gladly employ and bestow, their Lives, Lands, Houses, Holds, Goods,
Gear, Rents, Revenues, Places, Privileges, Means, Moities, and all, in his
Highness service, and mantainance of his Royal Crown; and moreover, have so
deeply conceived a strong and full persuasion of his Majesty's Princely
virtues, and much renouned propension to Piety, and Equity, that they will urge
their consciences, by all good and lawful means, to assent unto every thing
which he injoynes, as right and convenient, and when the just aversation of
Conscience upon evident reasons is invincible, will notwithstanding be more
willing to all other duties of subjection, and more averse from the least show
of contempt.

CHAP. II.
Against those of our Opposites, who plead for the Ceremonies, as things
expedient.

AS for those who allege some convenience in the Ceremonies, partic. def. cap.
1. sect. 1.
Dr. Mortone alleges for the Surplice, that the difference of outward
garments can not but he held convenient, for the distinguishing of Ministers
from Laics, in the discharge of their function. Ans. This convenience is as
well seen to, without the Surplice. If a man having a black gown upon him, be
seen exercising the function of a Minister, it is very strange, if any man
think him not sufficiently distinguished from Laics. The act of Perth, anent
Confirmation and Bishoping of Children, would make it appear, that this
Ceremony is most profitable, to cause young Children in their tender years,
drink in the knowledge of God and his Religion; Ans. 1. If this Rite be so
profitable for the instruction of Children, then why do Prelates appropriat it
to themselves, who use to be employed in higher affairs, that permit them not
to have leisure for exact Catechizing of Children? Or, 2. Though they might
attend the discharging of this duty; why should it be made their peculiar? Is
not the pa^ish Minister able to Catechize them? Or, 3. If it must depend upon
Prelates, and wait upon their leisure; what has imposition of hands ado with
Catechizing? 4. How comes it, that Children who are not Bishopped, are as well
Catechized, as they who are Bishopped.

Tilen Paraen. (...). 16. p. 65.
sets out the expediency of Holy Days, for imprinting Ans. 1. There is no
mean so good for this purpose, as Catechizing and Preaching, out of season and
in season. 2. What could he say unto them, who have attained his end without
his mean? I find people better instructed, and made more sensible of those
benefits, where the Feasts are not kept, then where they are. 3. Think they
their people sufficiently instructed in the grounds of Religion, when they
hear of the Nativity, Passion, etc. What course will they take for instructing
them in other principles of faith? Why do they not keep one way, and
institute a Holy Day for every particular head of Catechize?

But B. Lindsey thinks yet to let us see a greater expediency for observing
Holy Days. Certainly Proc. in Perth. assem. part. 3. page 7.
says he, nothing is so powerful to abolish profaneness, and to root out
superstition of men's hearts, as the exercise of Divine Worship, in Preaching,
Praying and Thanksgiving, chiefly then when the superstitious conceits of
merit and necessity, are most pregnant in the heads of people; as doubtless
they are, when the set times of Solemnities return; for then it is meet to
lance the oposteme, when it is ripe.

Ans. This is a very bad cure; and is not only to heal the wound of the
people slightly, but to make it the more inve^rate and festered. I might
object, that little or nothing, is preached or spoken by him and his companions
at the revolution of those festivities, against the superstitious keeping of
them; but though they should speak as much as can be against this
superstition, their lancing being in word only, and not indeed, the
recidivation will prove worse then the disease. The best lancing of the
oposterne were, not to observe them at all, or to preach against them, which
are tried to work this effect more powerfully, then the Bishops cure has
done: for all know, that there is none so free of this superstition, as those
who observe not the Holy Days.

The same ibid. p. 121.
Prelate pleads for the expediency of giving the viaticum, when they were a
dying. Apol. part. 3. cap. 3. sect. 45. and 51.
Paybody thinks kneeling in the act of receaving the Communion, to be expedient
for the reverend using and handling of that holy Sacrament, and that much
reverence arises to the Sacrament from it. Ans. I verily believe, that more
reverence arises to the Sacrament from kneeling, then is due to it; But I am
sure, there is no less true reverence of that holy Sacrament, among such as
kneel not in the receaving of it, then among such as do kneel. I hope it is
not unknowen, how humbly and reverently many sincere Christians, with fear and
trembling, do address themselves to that most holy Sacrament, who yet for all
the world, would not kneel in receaving it. Thus we see, that these
expediencies pretended for the Ceremonies, are attained unto as well and better
without them, then by them. But I will go forward, to show some particular
inconveniences found in them.

CHAP. III.
That the Ceremonies are inexpedient, because they are preparatives for greater
evils.

FIrst then, the Ceremonies are inexpedient, because our most holy Faith, for
which we should earnestly contend, receaveth no small harm and prejudice, and
is like to receave still more and more by their means. Our case is not much
different from the estate of the Churches in Germany, when Charles the 5.
caused the book called Interim to be published, Sl^id. com. lib. 20. p. 365.
and 371. Alsted. in Chronol. Religionis an. 1548.
expediency then was pretended, of settling the peace of Germany by this as the
best way: but it produced a very great inconveniency, and in stead of
effectuating peace, it brought forth a hotter contention, as well between the
Protestants themselves, as between them and Papists. Expediency is now no less
pretended for the Ceremonies, yet no more truly. But before the bad effects of
the Interim were seen, the wiser sort of Protestants Sleid. com. lib. 21. p.
377.
wrote against it, and warned men, ut ab eo tanquam a praesentissima peste sibi
caverent. Notwithstanding that the Emperor had straitely inhibite all
impugning of it. And Sl^idane tells us, the reason which made them so mislike
it, was, ibid. p. 388.
because they thought such as were upon that course, were opening a way to the
Popish Religion, peradiaphora seu res medias, and ibid. p. 393.
because they wished to retain the saving Doctrine puram and salvam a technis
illorum, qui nunc dum Ceremonias restaurare videri volunt, colluviem totam
doctrinae Pontificiae rursus introducunt. The like reason have we to mislike
Conformity with Antichrist, in these Ceremonies which are obtruded upon our
Church; for may we not justly fear, that hereby we shall be drawn on, to
conform with him also in dogmaticall and fundamental points of Faith? Nay,
what talk I of fear? we have already seen this bad consequence in a great
part, for it is well enough known, how many Heterodoxe Doctrines, are
maintained by Formalists, who are most zealous for the Ceremonies: an^nt
Universal Grace, Free Will, Perseverance, Justification, Images, Antichrist,
the Church of Rome, Penance, Christ his Passion and descending into Hell,
necessity of the Sacraments, Apocrypha books, Christ's presence in the
Eucharist, assurance of Salvation, etc. Their errors about those heads we will
demonstrate, if need be, to such as doubt of their mind. In the mean time it
has been preached from Pulpits among our selves; That Christ died for all
alike; That the Faithful may fall away from Grace; That Justification is a
successive action; That none can be assured of Salvation in this life; That
Images in Churches are not to be condemned; That Christ descended locally unto
the place of the damned; That the Pope is not Antichrist; That Rome is not
Babylon the Whore; That the Government and Discipline of the Church must alter
like the Frensh fashion, at the will of Superiors; That we should not run so
fair away from Papists, but come as near to them as we can; That abstinence
and Alms, are satisfactions or compensations for sin. These and sundry such
like tenets, have not been spoken in a corner.

How far Conformity to the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, has drawn
Conformists of greatest note, to conform to her Faith also, I may give
instance in the Archbishop of Spalato, Reg. Eccles. lib. 7. cap. 1. 2. number. 107.
He holds, that many Rites of the Roman Church are ancient and approveable,
that others, though neither, ancient nor universal, yet because of Custom
should be tolerated; and that few only are either to be abolished, or by
some prudent and easy way purged and refined. Now, will we know how far this
unity in Ceremonies, drew him to a unity in substance, then let us hear, what
is his verdict of Protestants, as well as of Papists, who suffer for their
Religion. ibid. number. 120.
Certepotius martyrs mundi, quam Dei sunt, qui ex utraque part sub titulo
conscientiae sanguinem frustra fundunt: quasi vero fides and Religio Romana,
and Fides ac Religio protestantium sunt duae Fides and duae Religiones, etc.
ibid. number. 132. see to the same purpose Dr Potter in his bock called. Want of
charity justly charged page 76.
He tells us moreover, that if the Protestants will not have peace with those
whom they call Papists, and communicate with them, then are they Schishmatikes,
and are not in the true Church. And in the declaration of the motives,
whereupon he undertook his departure out of the territory of Venice, he
expresses his judgment of such books as are framed against the Doctrine of
the Church of Rome, that he held them above measure detestable. Neither does he
stand alone in this pitch, for among the sect of Formalists, is swarming a sect
of Reconcilers, who preach and profess unity with the Church of Rome in
matters of Faith. For example, Field of ^he Church. append. to the 3 book cap.
11. p. 298. B Andrews Sermon on Ier. 23. 6. page 79. 80. 81. 82.
they^ say, that that which the learned Papists hold concerning Justification,
is Orthodoxe, and therefore they will not contend against them, except it be
for their contending with us, who do agree with them.

These Reconcilers are too far on in the way to Popery already. (d) Sleid.
com lib 21. p 3. 77.
forth to meet them midway. The Interim of Germany te^ded to Recociliation, yet
the Papists wrote against it. Cassander sought this Reconciliation, but de
I^icis cap. 19.
Bellarmine confuteth his opinion. The Archb. of Spalato was upon the same
course of Reconciliation, but his books were condemned as Heretical, in the
decree given at Rome, an. 1616. by the congregation of Cardinals deputed by
Pope Paul^ the 5. for the making and renewing of the Index, of prohibited
books. annot. in 1 Timothy 6. 20.
The Rhemists tell us, that they will avoid not only our opinions, but our
very words which we use: our adversaries profess, that they reject some
expositions of certain places of Scripture, against which they have no other
reason, but because they are our expositions. Are their minds so aliened from
us? and must we be altogether drawn overstayes to them? Are they so unwilling
to be reconciled to the prejudice of their errors? And shall we be so willing
to be reconciled with them to the prejudice of the truth? O strange and
monstrous invention! That would reconcile Christ with Antichrist; agree the
temple of God and Idols; mix light and darkness together. Rep. Eccl. lib. 7.
cap. 12. n. 134.
He had good reason for him who objected to the Archbishop of Spalato, that
qui ubique est, nusquam est. For in stead of reconciling Protestants and
Papists, they make themselves a third party, and raise more controversy. O
bellua multorum capitum!

Thus we perceave, what prejudice has arisen, and yet arises, to Rome in
these Ceremonis. But because some Formalists approve not of this course of
Reconciliation, they (I know) would purge the Ceremonies of the blame of it; I
will therefore show, that Reconcilers are set forward in their course of
Reconciliation, by means of the Roman Rites remaining in Reformed Churches.

G. Gassander in his book de officio pijviri, relates unto us, how he was
entered into this course, and conceived this purpose of Reconciliation: and
tells, that from his youthood he was most observant of Ecclesiastical
Ceremonies, yet so, that he abhorred all superstition. And when he had read the
Writers of that age, who promised some Reformation and Repurgation of
superstitious worships and absurd opinions, he says, mire illorum institutum
placuit: qui tamen ita superstitiones and abusiones, quae nonnullis Ceremoniis
Ecclesiasticis admixtae erant, exos as haberem ut ipsam Ecclesiasticam
politiam, quae his Ceremoniis fere constat, non sublatam and eversam, sed
repurgatam and emendatam esse vellem. We see the first thing which induced him
to a Reconciliation, was his liking which he had to Popish Ceremonies, and
their remaining in Protestant Churches. And as this course has been attempted,
so is it also advanced by the Ceremonies: for thereby Park. of the cross.
part. 2. page 80.
people are induced to say, as they said once, when Popish Ceremonies did
reenter in Germany. We perceave now, that the Pope is not so black as Luther
made him. And as for the Reconcilers themselves, may they not conceave strong
hopes to compass their end? may they not confidently imbarke in this
business? may they not with great exspectation of prosperous success atchieve
their project? when once they have footing upon our union with Rome in
Ceremonies and Church policy; they can not but hereupon conceive no small
animosity to work out their intended purpose.

Do I talk of a Chimaera, and imagine now that which is not? Nay, I will
really examplify that which I say, in that Proteus and Versipelles the
Archbishop of Spalato. For in the narration of the passages which were betwixt
his Majesty and him, collected by the Bishop of Durham, we find, page 32.
that he thought the procuring of concord betwixt the Church of England, and
the Church of Rome, to be easy. And his reasons were, because ibid. page 34.
he was verily persuaded, that the Pope would approve the English Liturgy, and
the public use of it, as he professed in his colloquy with the Bishops of
London, and Durham, and the Deane of Winchester. And further, ibid. page 41.
he told he was of opinion, that the Churches of Rome and of England, excluding
Puritans, were radically one Church. This made him say; ibid. page 42.
I do find here, why to commend this Church, as a Church abhorring from
Puritanisme, reformed with moderation, and worthy to be received into the
Communion of the Catholic Church. In the following words he tells, that he
could carry something out of the Church of England, which should comfort all
them who hate Puritan strictness, and desire the peace of the Church,
(meaning them who desired the same Reconciliation with himself.) What is more
clear, then that the English Ceremonies, were that which made him prosequute,
and gave him hope to effectuate, a Reconciliation betwixt the Church of
England, and that of Rome?

But put the case, that as yet we had seen no greater evils following
Spotswood, that novations in a Church, even in the smallest things, are
dangerous. Who can then blame us to shun a danger, and fearing the worst, to
resist evil beginnings? to give no place to the Devil; to crush the Viper
while it is in the shell; to abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 Thessal
5. 22. And to take the little ones of Babylon; whiles they are young, and dash
their heads against the stones?

It skils not, that many will judge us too precise for doing so. What? do they
think this preciseness any other, then that which the Law of God requires
even Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
observing of the Commandment of God, without adding to it, or diminishing
from it, and Deu^. 28. 1^.
keeping the straight path, without declining to the right hand or the left? or
do they think us more precise then Mordecai, Esth. 3. 2.
who would do no reverence to Haman, because he was an Amalekite, and so not
Deuteronomy. 25. 19.
to be countenanced nor honored by an Israelite? Are we more precise then
Daniel, Dan. 6. 10.
who would not close his window when he was praying, no not for the Kings
Edict, knowing, that because he had used to do so aforetime, his doing
otherwise had been both a denying of his former profession, and a insnaring of
himself by yielding in small things, to yield in greater, and after an inch to
take an elle? Are we more precise then the Apostle Paul Gal. 2. 5.
who gave no place to the Adversaries of Christian liberty, no not for an
hour* Are we more precise then David, Psalm. 16. 4.
who would not do so much as take up the names of Idols into his lips, left
from speaking of them he should be led to a liking of them: or may not the
sad and doleful examples, of so many and so great abuses and corruptions,
which have crept into the Church, from so small and scarcely observable
originals, make us loath at our hearts, to admit a change in the Policy and
Discipline, of a well constitute Church, and rightly ordered before the change,
and especially in such things as are not at all necessary?

O! from how small beginnings did the Mystery of iniquity advance it is
progression? How little moates have accresced to Mountains? Wherefore Iun.
animad. in Bell. de cult. sanct. lib. 3. cap. 5.
simplicitatem Christi nos oportet coler^, a qua ubi primum ^xtulit pedem
vanitas, vanitatem sequitur superstitio, superstitionem error, errorem
presumptio, presumptionem impietas Idololatrica. We have cause to fear, that
if with Israel Number. 25. 2. 3.
we come to the sacrifices of Idols, and eat of Idolothyts, and bow down or
use any of superstitious and Idolotrous Rites; thereafter we be made to join
our selves to these Idols, and so the fierce anger of the Lord be kindled
against us, as it was against them.

CHAP. IV.
That the Ceremonies are inexpedient, because they hinder edification.

THat the Ceremonies are a great hinderance to edification, Natal. commit.
Mythol. lib. 1. cap. 15.
labored, per varietatem Ceremoniarum, rem in pretio retinere. The use for
which Papists appoint their Ceremonies, Bell. de effect. Sacram. cap. 31
is, ut externam quandam Majestatem sensibus obijciant: And so are the
Ceremonies urged upon us, Hooker Eccl. Pol. lib. 4. n. 1.
thought to conciliate reverence and due regard to Divine Worship, and to
stir up devotion. In the mean while it is not considered, that Hospin.
Epist. dedic. pr^fix. libris de orig. monach.
mentes humanae mirifice capiuntur and fascinantur, Ceremoniarum splendore and
Pompa. Videmus siquidem says Bucer, censur. Liturg. Angl. cap. 9.
vulgus delectari actionibus scanicis, and multis uti signis. exam. part. 2. de
Rit. in administ. Sacr. p. 32.
Chemnitius marks of the cumulating of Ceremonies in the ancient Church, that
it drew to this, ut tandem in theatricum ferme apparatum Ceremonia illa
abierint. com. in Ioh. 4. 24.
Musculus reprehends Bishops, for departing from the Apostolical and most
ancient simplicity, and for adding Ceremonies unto Ceremonies in a worldly
splendour and spectability, whereas the worship of God ought to be pure and
simple.

The Policy then which is most simple and single, and lest lustered with the
pomp and bravery of Ceremonies, can not but be most expedient for edification.
Psalm. 45. 13.
The Kings daughter is most like her self, when she is all glorious within,
not without, and Luke 17. 20. 21.
the Kingdom of God appears best what it is, when it comes not with
observation: But superstition (says Popish prejudic. cap. 10.
Camero, the mother of Ceremonies, is lavish and prodigal; Spiritual
Whooredome as it is, it has this common with the bodily; both of them must
have their paintings, their trinkets, their invenglements.

Secondly, the Ceremonies are impediments to the inward and spiritual worship,
because they are fleshly and external. Calv. com. in Exodus 20. 5.
In the second omnes Ritus, qui a spirituali Dei cultu discrepant. The Kingdom
of God is within you, Luke 17. 21.
says Christ. Now if the Apostle, 1. Tim. 4. 8. say, that bodily exercise such
as fasting, watching, etc. which are requisite as helps and furtherances to
the humiliation of the soul, do but profit a little, then may we say of our
unnecessary and unprofitable Ceremonies, that they are exceedingly nocent and
harmefull to true and spiritual worship. The Apostle is not speaking of plays
and pastimes, as Bellarmine would have us to think. Who can believe that
Timothy was so much addicted to play, that the Apostle had need to admonish
him, that such exercise profits little? He is speaking then of such bodily
exercises, as in those primitive times were used religiously, as fasting,
watching, lying on the ground, and such like; and he would have Timothy, rather
to exercise himself to the life and power of Godliness, and to substantial
worship, then to any of these outward things. Neither does the Apostle,
condemn only the superstitious use of those exercieses, as com. in illum locum.
Calvine well observes: alioqui in totum damnaret: Whereas he does only
extenuate and derogate from them, saying, that they profit little. Ergo (says
he) ut maxim integer sit animus, and rectue finis, tamen in externis
actionibus nihill reperit Paulus quod magnifaciat. Valde necessaria admonitio,
nam semper propendet mundus in illam partem, uti Deum externis obsequiis velit
colere; But what, will some say? Do we allow of no external Rites and
Ceremonies in Divine worship?

de diverse grad. ministr. evang. contra Bez. cap. 24 s. 25.
Saravia, tells us, that dum vitia vitant stulti, in contraria ruunt, and that
he is no less in the fault, qui nullas in externo Dei cultu Ceremonias
admittit, quae tantum decori serviunt, hominesque sui admoneant officii, quam
qui quasvis citra delectum recipunt, etc. Wherefore, because a transition from
idolatry and Superstition, is more easy to Atheism and the profanation of
holy things, then to the golden mediocrity, he says, he could have wished,
that Beza had not generally condemned all Ceremonies without making any
difference.

Ans. Neither Beza, nor any other, who mislike the English Ceremonies,
condemns such Rites and circumstances in the external worship of God, a^
serve only for decency, but those sacred and significant Ceremonies, which
admonish men of their duty, are not of this sort. What shall we say then, of
such a conjunction as this, que tantum decori serviunt, hominesque sui
admoneant officii? Why would not Saravia write a Chronology, I say not
Magnarum (as others), but mirandarum conjunctionum, and record, that at such a
time he found out the conjunction and compatibility of two things, which were
ever thought incompatible in former ages, namely, Rites serving only for
decency, and holy significant Ceremonies admonishing men of their duty in Gods
worship? Had there been no Moralist (trow we) then to note, that decency and
things serving only for decency have place in civility and all moral actions,
in which notwithstanding there is no significant nor admonitory sacred signs
of men's duty in Gods worship? And thus should these two things be seavered,
which he has conjoined and confounded.

To conclude, we condemn the English controverted Ceremonies which are
regarded as holy and significant, as most in expedient, because they derogate
from the true inward and spiritual worship; for man's nature says Popish.
prajud. cap. 10.
Camero, is delighted in that which is fleshly and outward, neglecting that
which is spiritual and inward. And this is the reason, why least spiritual,
lively, and holy disposition has followed upon the addition of unnecessary
Ceremonies; and why there was never so much zeall, life, and power of Religion
inwardly, in the Church of Christ, as then, when she was freest of Ceremonies.
This much Camero Ibid.
a Formalist of great note, is forced to a knowledge. Let us consider says he,
the Primitive Church, flourishing more in times of the Apostles, then ever it
did afterward: Who will not admire her great simplicity in all points, and
especially in Ceremonies? for excepting the celebration of Baptism by washing
of water; and of the holy Supper, according to the Lords institution, in taking
the Bread and Wine, and distributing them after thanksgiving: excepting also
the imposition of hands upon those who extraordinarily received the holy Ghost,
whether it were in a general calling, or a particular, to a charge in the
Church, and availing for a miraculous effect, of healing the sick; I say,
these excepted, there will not be found any other Ceremony in those primitive
times, so admirable was their simplicity.

Thirdly, the Ceremonies are a great hinderance to edification, which might be,
and (if they were removed) should be spent more profitably for godly edifying.
That which is said of the Ceremonies which crept into the ancient Church,
agrees well to them. Hospin. ubi supra.
Ista Ceremoniarum accumulatio tum ipsos doctores tum etiam ipsos auditores, a
studio docendi atque discendi verbum Dei abstraxit, atque impedivit necessarias
and utiles divini eloquii institutiones.

Pulpits sound oftentimes with declamations for the Ceremonies, when there is
need of pressing the power of Godliness upon the consciences of people, and
when there are many more necessary things to be urged. The Press also sends
forth idle discourses and defenses of the Ceremonies, which might be employed
more profitably.

And moreover, faithful men whose labors might be very profitable to the
Church, in the Holy Ministry, have neither a door of entrance, nor a door
of utterance licentiated to them, and that because they will not consent, nor
yield themselves to be the unhappy instruments of imposing this yoke of
Ceremonial bondage upon the necks of Gods people. Others who have entered, and
have been both faithful and painful Laborers in the Lords Vineyard, are
thrust from their charges, for no other quarrel, but that of Nonconformity. O
unhappy Ceremonies! Woe unto you; you mischeivous lets and prejudices to the
edification of the Church!

CHAP. V.
That the Ceremonies are inexpedient, because they are occasions of injury and
cruelty.

THe Ceremonies serve to be instruments of cruelty against Absolons sacrifice,
to be clokes of wicked malice, they occasion the fyning, confyning, depriving,
imprisoning, and banishing of very worthy and good men.

Genesis 49. 5.
Such instruments of cruelty, brought into the habitation; not of the sons of
Jacob, but of the God of Jacob, are to be accursed by all who love the peace of
Jerusalem, or bear the bowels of Christian compassion within them, because
they are not of Christ the meek (r) Isa. 42. 2. 3.
lamb of God, who did not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard
in the street, who did not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking
flax, but they are of Antichrist: Apoc. 17. 7.
to whom it is given to make war with the Saints.

Surely, those bowels of mercies, kyndnesse, meekness, and forbearance, which
Col. 3. 12 13.
the Apostle requires, as they should be in every Christian, so chiefly in iu
qui praesunt, as com. in illum locum
Melanchton notes; in them, toward all, but chiefly toward these who are
both good Christians, and good subjects; toward these in all things, but
chiefly in matters of Ceremony and indifferency. In such matters always but
chiefly when there is no contempt nor refractary disposition, but only a modest
and Christian desire, to conserve the peace of a pure conscience, by forbearing
to do that which it is persuaded is not right. Let Magistrates remember well.
Parcere subjectis and debellare superbos.


If there were no more, but such a doleful and woeful effect, as

Dr. Burgess in a Sermon preached before King James, related a speech of the
Emperor Augustus, who commanded, that all the glasses should be broken, that
no man might incur such a fright as one Pollio was put into, for breaking one
of his masters glasses. Whereby (as pr^f. of the answ. page 17.
he expounds himself) he meant to intimate unto that wise King, that it were
better to take away the Ceremonies then to throw out the Ministers for them.
Yet it is the verdict Sarav. N. fratri and amico art. 17.
of some, that the blame lies not upon the Ceremonies, but upon Ministers
themselves, who leave their places, and draw all this evil upon themselves.
This is even as 1. Sam. 23. 10.
Naball blamed David for breaking away from his master, when he was chased away
against his will; And as Socrat. lib. 3. c. 12.
Julian, when he had impoverished the Christians, laughed them to scorn, as if
they had impoverished themselves, to get that blessing which Christ had
promised to the poor.

The Canon Law speaks for the Lords Bishops, which are persecuted from city
to city. decr. part. 2. causa. 7. q. 1. c. 36.
Nec ipsi in hoc peccant, quoniam non sponte sed coacte hoc agunt: sed illi qui
eos persecuuntur: nec ipsis Episcopis hoc imputari potest, sed illis qui eos
hoc agere cogunt. How is it that they are not ashamed, who say that ministers
leave their own places and callings, when they would feign abide in them, and
with heavy hearts are thrust from them.

Neither is this all the injury which is occasioned by the Ceremonies:
Puritans, except they can swallow the Camel of Conformity. Our consciences
bear us witness, how without all reason we are branded with the name of those
ancient Heretics, the pastor and the praelat p. 36.
from whose opinions and manners, O! how far are we? And as for our selves,
notwithstanding all this, we shrink not to be reproched for the cause of
Christ, we know the old Waldenses before us, Histor. of the Waldens. lib. 1.
cap. 3.
were also named by their adversaries, Cathares or Puritanes: and that without
cause has this name been given both to them and us. But we are most sorry,
that such as are walking humbly with their God, seeking eagerly after the
means of grace and salvation, and making good conscience of all their ways,
should be made odious, and that Piety, Humility, Repentance, Zeal, Conscience,
etc. should be mocked, and all by occasion of the Ceremonies.

CHAP. VI.
That the Ceremonies are inexpedient, because they harden and confirm the
Papists.

THe Papists make advantage of the Ceremonies, and thereby divide and impera.
They set us by the ears among our selves, that they may be in peace, and that
intestine discord may make us forget the common adversary. John Calv epist. and
resp. col. 132.
Calvine wrote to the Earl of Summerset, fieri non posse quin Papistae
superbius insolescerent, nisi mature compositum esset dissidium de Ceremoniis;
way to the Church ans. to sect. 33.
Dr. White says, that our strife about Ceremonies is kindled and nourished by
Papists. If we were liberate from the Ceremonies, then might we do more
against the Papists, and they should not insult as they do.

But they have yet more advantage from our Formalists: for they like very well
the course of Conformity, as the way of returning to

epist. ad regin. Elis: lib. 1. Epistolar p. 112.
Zanchius told, that he seemed to himself, to hear the Monks and Jesuits
saving among themselves, Ipsa quoque Regina Angllae doctissima and
prude^tissima, paulatim incipit ad Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae redire Religionem;
resumptis jam Sanctissimis and Sacratissimis Clericorum vestibus: sperandum est
fore ut reliqua etiam omnia, etc. Papists count all to be Calvino-Papistae, i.
e. half Papists, who are not Puritans, and daily invite them to an association
with them against the Puritans, as of the Cross. c. 9. sect. 1.
Parker shows out of a Treatise entitled, Concertatio Ecclesiae Catholicae in
Anglia contra Calvino Papistas and Puritanos. And we may perceave out of expos.
confess. Angl. art. 37. and problem. 2. de praedest.
Franciscus a Sancta clara, that they dispare of any agreement with Puritans,
yet hoping that Formalists will agree with them. In these hopes they are still
more and more confirmed, whiles they observe this conformity in Ceremonies to
be yet prevailing and proceeding, and not like to take a stand. Whereupon they
(poor souls) delight to stay still in Babylon, finding us so fast turning
back thither, as if we repented we come out from thence.

Some would here defend the Ceremonies, as being most expedient Man. don. com.
in Math. 8.
they flee from us quam longissime: their overpassing and overreaching
Pharisaicall zeal, makes them hold fast the least point of their Religion, and
adhere to the whole entire fabrike of the Roman both Doctrine and Discipline.

Of the gaining of the Adversaries, de verb. dom. sermon. 6.
Augustine speaks better, for if you demand, unde vincantur pagani, unde
illuminentur, unde ad salutem vocentur? He makes this answer, deserite omnes
solennitates es ipsorum, deserite nugas eorum: and si non consentiunt veritati
nostrae, saltem pud^at (m) Conrad Schlusselburg. apud Park of the Cross. p. 2.
page 97.
paucitatis suae. Nulla est concedenda gratia adversariis (say the Divines of
Germany,) in mutatione Ceremoniarum, nisi prius nobiscum consentiant in
fundamento, hoc est, in vera doctrina and usu Sacramentorum. They that yield to
the Adversaries in matters of Rite, eos hoc ipso in impietate sua confirmant;
and the Adversaries cessione ista non parum adjuvantur says de cas. consc.
lib. 4. cap. 11. cas. 3.
Balduin. Bellarmine rejects de laici^ cap. 19.
Cassander his reconciliation, for this reason among others, because according
to the judgment of the Fathers, we should not change nor innovate the smallest
matters, for gratifying of Heretics.

The best way then which we can use, for winning of the Papists, is Phil. 2.
15. 16.
to shine as lights in the world, holding forth the word of life by a pure and
plain profession: to be blameless and harmless, the sons of God without
rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, 1. Tim. 6. 1.
that so the name of God and his Doctrine be not blasphemed. If thus we hold
fast the profession of the truth, and walk in all honest conversation
according to the truth so many as are ordained to eternal life shall be
converted, and 1. Pet. 2. 12.
made to glorify God in the day of visitation.

If it be said, that the Apostle observed some Jewish Ceremonies Act. 18. 21.
and 20. 16. and 21. 26. and that it appears, we may by the same reason yield
to some Popish. Ceremonies, for winning of the Papists. Ans. 1. There is not
alike reason of the weak Jews, who then could not have been fully instructed
concerning Christian liberty; and obstinate Papists who might have been, and
yet may be instructed, but will not. Nor 2. is the same to be done in the
bright shining meridian light of the Gospel, which was done before the full
promulgation of the same. Io. Calv. epist. and resp. col. 451. 452.
Nor 3. Is so much honor to be given, and so great respect to be had to
Popish and Antichristian Rites, as to the Ceremonies which were ordained by God
himself. These were to be suffered a while, that they might be honorably
buried: to those we are to say with detestation Get you hence, Nor 4. can the
same things be done at Antioch, which are done at Jerusalem; At Antioch Peter
sinned by using Jewish Rites; because there the greatest part were Gentiles,
who had both heard his preaching and seen his practice against the Ceremonies
of the Jews. But at Jerusalem Paul had to do with the weak Jews, who had
heard little or no preaching against those Ceremonies, and had seen as little
practice contrary unto them; Now Scotland must not be likened to Ierufalem: no
not to Antioch; for Scotland has been filled both with preaching and practice
contrary to the Ceremonies of the Papists, yea has moreover spewed them out
openly and solemnly, with a religious and strict oath never to lick them up
again.

CHAP. VII.
That the Ceremonies are inexpedient, because they disturb the peace of the
Church.

THe great evils which have befallen to many famous Churches minima crescunt,
so by discord maxima dilabuntur.

Now, the Ceremonies are the bane of our Churches peace, and the unhappy
instruments of lamentable discord among brethren who should dwell togiter in
unity. I know, that the refusers of the Ceremonies are blamed, as if they were
the troublers of the peace of the Church, and the tumultuating contentious
spirits, who make so much ado about matters of Rite and Ceremony. But I know
also, that none have been more ordinarily and commonly blamed for troubling
the peace of the Church, then they who least deserved to be blamed for it. So
was (...). Reg. 1^. 17.
Elijah himself thought to be he that troubled Israel, when he contended
against the corruptions of the Church in his time. I will therefore observe
four marks where by it may be known, when contentions are in a Church, which
side is reprehensible, and also who are to be blamed (...) the troublers of our
Israel.

In contentions raised in the Church, we are to consider the motive, Act. 19.
25. 1. Tim. 6. 5. Now, as for those in our Church, who contend for the
Ceremonies, many of them are led by such argumenta inartificialia, as,
wealth, preferment, etc. and if conscience be at all looked to by them, yet
they only throw and extort an assent and allowance from it, when worldly
respects have made them to propend and incline to an anterior liking of the
Ceremonies. We do not judge them, when we say so, but by their fruits we know
them. As Platin. in vita Innoc. 7.
Pope Innocent the 7. whiles he was yet a Cardinal, used to reprehend the
negligence and timidity of the former Popes, who had not removed the schism
and trouble of the Church of Rome, yet when himself was advanced to the
Popedom, he followed the footsteps of his Predecessors, governing all things
tumultuously, and making the schism worse: so among our Opposites, not a few
have been overcome with ease, pleasure, riches, favor, preeminence, etc. to
like well of the Ceremonies, which never had their first love; When they had
both spoken and disputed against them; What drew them overstayes to contend for
them, except (I say not the seeking of (lest I be thought uncharitable) but)
their being sought by some worldly benefit? And how could such a one excuse
himself, but by Paris his Apology, Ingentibiis ardent, judicium domis
sollicitare meum. And what marvel that Numb. 22. 17.
Balaks promotion, and Saul's 1. Sam. 22.
fields and vineyards, prevail with such as 2. Tim. 4. 10.
love this present world.

The Popish oil and Chrisme were defended by Islebius and Sidonius, Sleid.
com. lib. 21. page 376.
ut ipsi nimirum discederent unctiores. How like to them have we known many
Formalists? The best respect which epist. co the past. of the kirk of Scotl.
B. Lindsey names for kneeling at the Communion, is, the eshewing the Prince
his offense; But as for us, let it be told who has ever of a Conformist become
a Nonconformist, for any worldly benefire which he might exspect by his
non-confirmity? What worldly respect have we to move us to refuse the
Ceremonies? What wealth? What preferment? What ease? What pleasure? What
favor? Do we not expose our selves to the hazard of all these things? Only
our consciences suffer us not to consent to such things as we see to be
unlawful and hurtful for the Church.

2. Let it be considered, which side exceeds in contending, they are in the
fault, 1 Timothy 6. 4. Now our Opposites do far overmatch us and overstride us
in contention. For, 1. They harbor a inveterate dislike of every course and
custom which we like well off; and they carpe at many deeds, words, writings,
opinions, fashions, etc. in us, which they let pass in others of their own
mind. Whereas we (God knows) are glad to allow in them, any thing which we
allow in others, and are so far from nitimur in vetitum semper cupimusque
negata, that most heartily we condescend to apply our selves by all possible
means to observe them, please them, and entertain peace with them, who impose
and urge upon us, a unconscionable observation of certain Ceremonies, and to
do as much for them as any ground of conscience or reason can warrant. Phil.
3. 16
So far as we have attained, we walk by the same rule with them, and so
exceed not in the measure. 2. It may be seen, that they exceed in contending
with us, if we be compaired with the Papists: against them they contend more
remissely, against us more intensively. Sarav. N. fratri and amico art. 17.
Saravia professes, that he thinks worse of us, then of Papists. He has
reason Park of the cross cap. 6. sect. 21.
who complains of Formalists their desire not to stir and contend against
the Papists, and their fierceness against their own brethren. This (says
he) is ill provided for, and can have no excuse; that some not to contend with
Papists should contend with their brethren, and displease the sons of their
own mother, to please the enemies of their Father, and beat not the dog
before the Lion, but the Lion for favor of the dog, and make the natural
child to weep, while the son of the bondwoman does triumph. 3. That they
exceed, appears from the effects of their contending: hurt and damnage is a
maine effect of contention. Calvine, Perkines, and Pareus observe upon Gal. 5.
15. that contentions breed hurtful and pernicious effects, which tend to
consumption and destruction. Now wherein do we injure or harm our Opposites,
in their persons, callings, places, etc? yet in all these and many other things
do they wrong us, by defamation, deprivation, spoliation, incarceration, etc.
How much better were it, to remove the Babylonian baggage of Antichristian
Ceremonies, which are the mischievous means, both of the strife and of all the
evil which arises out of it? Put away the Ceremonies, cast out this Ionus,
and behold, the storm will cease. A wise Pilot, will in a urgent storm, cast
out even some precious wares; that the rest may be safe. And shall we then
says ibid. sect. 22.
Park^, cast out the Pilots of the ship themselves, and all to spare the wa^ of
Ro^ which are no lavvfull trafficque?

3. Let the matter be looked to, for which each side contendeth; Brethren
says the Sermon. at Perth. Assmb.
Archb. of Sainctandrews, to contend is not a fault, if so it be for a weighty
matter, but to be contentious in a light business this is faulty. Now I wish it
may please him to understand, that when we contend about the removal of the
Ceremonies, we contend for a very weighty matter, for we prove the removal of
them, to be necessary in respect of their inconveniency, and unlawfullnesse.
They who urge the Ceremonies, contend for things which are not necessary, and
we who refuse them, contend for things which are most necessary, even for the
Doctrine and Discipline warranted by Gods Word, against all corruptions of
Idolatry and Superstition. That the Ceremonies can neither be purged of
Superstition nor Idolatry, I have proved in the 3. part of this Dispute.

4. If the manner of contending be observed, our Opposites will Perth Assembly.

B. Lindsey him self relating the proceedings of the same, part. 1. p. 63.
tells us, that Mr. John C^icholl and Mr. William Sco^e alleged, that if any
would prese to abolish the order which had been long kept in this Church, and
draw in things not received yet, they should be holden to prove, either that
the things urged, were necessary and expedient for our Church, or the order
hitherto kept, not meet to be retained. This was denied, upon this ground; that
is was the Prince (who by himself had power to reform such things as were
amiss in the outward policy of the Church) that required to have the change
made: Well, since they must needs take the opponents part, they desired this
question to be reasoned: (...) (...) or (...) at the Communion were the fitter
gesture? This also was refused, and the question was propounded thus. His
Majestydesires our gesture of sitting at the Communion to be changed into
kneeling: why ought not the some to be do^? At lentgh when Mr. John Carmichall
brought an Argument from the custom and practice of the Church of Scotland,
ibid page 64
it was answered that albeit the Argument held good against the motions of
private men, yet his Majesty requiring the practice to be changed* matters
behoved to admit a new consideration, and that because it was the Prince his
privilege, etc.

I must say, the B. was not well advised to insert this passage, which (if
there were no more) lets the world see, that free reasoning was denied. For his
Majesty's Auctority, did both exeeme the affirmers from the pains of
probation, (contrary to the laws of disputation) and state the question, and
also answer Arguments.

And moreover, when the Articles were put in voting, the Archbishop in calling
on the names did inculcate these and the like words: have the King in your
mind: (...) on the King: look to the King. This, B. Lindsey passes over in
deep silence, though it be challenged by his Antagonist. nature. Hist l^b. 10.
cap. ult.
Plinius proves, that animalia infecta do sometimes sleep, because sometimes
when light is holden near them, yet they stir not. And may not we conclude,
that the B. was sleeping, when tho both in this, and diverse other places, such
convincing light was holden out before him, yet has he said nothing nor
sturred himself at all for the matter? Yet further, we find that B. Spotswood
in his Sermon at that pretended Assembly, answeareth all such as can not yield
to the Ceremonies with the peace of their consciences; That without any more
ado, they may not control public judgment, but must always esteem that
to be best and most seemly, which seems so in the eye of public auctority;
That even such Rites and orders as are not rightly established; must be obeyed
so long as they have the force of a constitution; That the sentence of
Superiors ought to direct us and be a sufficient ground to our conscience for
obeying. This is the best of their reasoning, and before all fail. Sermon. on 1
Cor. 11. 16.
The B. of Winchester reasons from bare custom. Have we not cause to renew
the complaint which Thuan. Hist. lib. 16. p. 506.
Ioh. Lascus made in behalf of the Protestants in Germany: nulla cognitione
causa per colloquium aut a^icam suffragiorum collationem habita, sed prajudicio
tantum ipsorum sententiam damnari.

CHAP. VIII.
That the inexpediency of the Ceremonies, in respect of the Scandal of the
weak, may be plainly perceived, 12 propositions touching Scandal are
premitted.

THere remains yet another inconveniency found in the Ceremonies, which is
Scandal; They hinder our spiritual Math. 5. 29. 30.
The best members of the body should be cut off, when they offend, much more
the superfluous humors, such as the Popish Ceremonies must be reckoned to be.
And what if some wide consciences think the Ceremonies no stumbling blocks?
Nay, what if some pretend, that they edify? Plin nature. Hist. lib. 24. cap. 1.
Ferulae asinis gratissime sunt in pabulo, ^teris vere jumentis praesentanto
vtneno. It is enough to evince the inconveniency of the Ceremonies, that some
are scandalized, yea many tender consciences are made to stumble by their
means. We learn from our Master, Math. 18. 6.
that the Scandal of one is to be cared for, much more the Scandal of many,
especially if those many, be of the number of the little ones which believe in
him. But for our clearer proceeding in this Argument, I will premit these
propositions, of which we are to make use.

I. (...); Scandal or offense is not the Scandulum (says com. in Math. lib.
2. c. 15.
(...)) nos offendiculum, vel ruinam and impactionem pedis possumus dicere:
quando ergo legimus, quicunque de minimis istis scandalizaverit quempiam: hoc
intelligimus: quicunque dicto factove occasionem ruina cuiquam dederit.
Scandalum says synt. Theol. lib 6. cap. 3. Col. 19.
Almandus Polanus, est dictum vel factum, quo alius deterior redditur.

II. This occasion of halting, stumbling, or swerving, which we call Scandal,
is sometimes only given on the part of the offender, sometimes only taken on
the part of the offended, sometimes both given on the one part, and taken on
the other. The first sort is, Scandal given, and not taken; The second is,
Scandal taken, and not given; The third is, Scandal both taken and given.

III. All these three kinds of Scandal are sinful. The first is the sin of
the offender; for it is a fault to give my brother occasion of stumbling,
though he stumble not. The second is the sin of the offended, who should not
take offense where he has no cause. The third is a sin on both sides; for as
it is a fault to lay an occasion of falling before another, so it is a fault in
him to fall, though he have occasion.

IV. A Scandal given or active, is not only such a word or deed, whereby we
intend the fall of our Brother, but Aquin. 2. 2a. q. 43. art. 1. Marc. Ant. de
dom. de Rep. Eccl. lib. 5. cap. 10. n. 44.
also, such a word quod de sui ration^ habet, quod sit inductivum ad peccandum,
puta cum aliquis public facit peccatum, vel quod habet similitudinem peccati.
Ioh. 16. 2. Put the case a man stay away from the Christian Assemblies, and
public worship of God, intending to employ his studies all this time, for the
good of the Church by writing; such a man does not only not intend the fall of
others, but by the contrary he intends edification; yet does he scandalize
them, because ratio and conditio operis is scandalous and inductive to sin.

V. An active Scandal is given (and so is faulty) many ways. If it be in a
thing lawful, then it makes our brother condemn our lawful deed, yea
animates him by our example, to that which in his conscience he condemns,
both which are sin. If it be in a thing unlawful, then is the Scandal given
and peccant, if either our brother be made to fall into the outward act of
sin; or 2. If he be made to stumble in his conscience, and to call in
question the way of truth; or 3. If it do so much as to make him halt, or
weaken his plerephory or full assurance; or 4. If it hinder his growth and
going forward, and make him, though neither to fall, nor to stumble, nor to
halt, yet to have a smaler progress. Or 5. If none of these evils be produced
in our brother, yet when either through our intention, and the condition of the
deed together, or through the condition of the deed alone, occasion is given
him of sinning any one of these ways. Opu^ nostrum (r) says a great Proctor
for Popish Ceremonies, quot^s sive natura sua, sive superaddito accidente
alicujus circumstantiae, ((...)) Marc. Ant de dom. de rep. Eccl. lib. 1. cap.
11. n. 18.
est inductivum proximi ad peccatum, sive causativum magni mali, sive
turbativum boni spiritualis; sive impeditivum fidei etc. quamvis etiam effectus
non s^queretur, malum est and peccatum.

VI. A passive Scandal, which is taken and not given, is not only faulty,
when it proceeds of malice, but also, when it proceeds Scandalum
pusillorum, may be Scandalum acceptum, on the part of the offended faulty, as
well as Scandalum Pharis^orum. When weak ones are offended at me for the use
of a lawful thing, before I know of their weakness, and their taking of
offense, the Scandal is only passive, and so we see, that weak ones may take
offense where none is given, as well as the malicious. Now, their taking of
offense, though it proceed of weakness, yet is sinful, for their weakness
and ignorance is a fault, and does not excuse them.

VII. A Scandal may be at first only passive, and yet afterward become
active. For example, Gedeons Ephod, and the brazen Serpent, were monuments of
Gods mercies, and were neither evil, nor appearances of evil, so that when
people were first scandalized by them, the Scandal was merely passive, but the
keeping and retaining of them, after that Scandal rose out of them, made the
Scandal to become active also, because the reserving of them after that time,
was not without appearance of evil.

VIII. The occasion of an Scandal which is only passive should be removed, if
it be not some necessary thing, and we are not only to com in 2m. 2a. q. 43.
art. 7.
both Cardinal Cajetan, and Dominicus Bannes say, that we should abstain even
(...) spiritualibus non necessariis when Scandal rises out of them.

IX. Neither can the indifferency or lawfullnes of the thing done, nor the
ordinance of Auctority commanding the use of it, make the Scandal following
upon it, to be only passive, which otherwise, i. e. in case the thing were
neither lawful, nor ordained by Auctority, should be active. Not the former;
for He^ming. Enchir. Theol class. 3. cap. 17. Magde. burg. cent. 1. lib. 2. cap
4. Col 448. 449.
our Divines teach, that Scandalum datum rises sometimes, ex facto-in se
adiaphoro when it is done intempessive, contra charitatis regulam. Not the
latter; for no humane Auctority can take away the condition of Scandal, from
that which otherwise should be Scandal, because Ames. lib. 5. de consc c. 11.
q. 6.
nullu^ homo potist vel charitati, vel conscientiis nostris imperare, vel
periculum scandali d^ti prestar^, says a learned Casuist.

X. A Scandal is passive and taken by the scandalized, without the fault of
the doer, only in this case, Ames. ibid q 3.
cum factum unius est alteri occasio peccandi, prater intentionem facientis,
and conditionem facti so that to the making of the doer blameless, is not
only required, that he intend not his brothers fall, but also that the deed be
neither evil in it self, nor yet done inordinately, and with apperance of
evil.

XI. The Scandal not to be cared for, is only in necessary things, Scandalum
quod oritur ex rebus per s^ bonis and necessariis, non licet evitare, etc. at
rerum legittimarum sed non necessariarum disparest ratio, etc. Cam^ro praelect.
in Mat. 18. 7. de scand.
says a great Formalist.

XII. We ought for the Scandal of the malicious, to abstain from all things
from which we ought to abstain for the Scandal of the weak; for we ought not
to abstain from necessary things for the Scandal of the weak, no more then
for the Scandal of the malicious, and from things that are not necessary, we
ought to abstain for the Scandal of the malicious, as well as for the
Scandal of the weak. So that weakness and malice in the offended non variant
speci^m scandali, but only gradum ejusdem speciei. Both his fault who is
offended through malice is greater, then his fault who is offended through
weakness, and likewise his fault who offends the weak in the Faith, is
greater then his fault who offends those who are malicious against the Faith,
because as we ought to do good to all men, so chiefly to those of the household
of Faith. Nevertheless, the kind of Scandal remains the same, whether we
have to do with the malicious or the weak.

They are therefore greatly mistaken, who conclude from Paul his not
circumcising of Titus, Gal. 2. 4. 5. that he cared not for the Scandal of the
malicious. The Argument were good if those false brethren had been scandalized
by his not circumcising of Titus; but they were only displeased hereby, not
scandalized. The Apostle saw, that they were to be scandalized by his
circumcising of Titus, therefore of very purpose he circumcised him not;
Because he foresaw statim for^ ut illi traherent in calumniam says com. in
illum locum.
Calvine: Ne eo circumciso gloriarentur Evangelieam libertatem quam Paulus
praedicabat sublatam says comment ibid.
Bullinger. If they had compe^led him to circumcise Titus, falsis fratribus
parata erat calumniandi ansa adversus Paulum, says com. ib.
Par^us, who also infers well from this place, that we are taught to beware
of two extremes, to wit, the Scandal of the weak on the one part, and the
pervicacie of false brethren on the other part: si enim (says he) us^ rerum
mediarum videmus, vel illos offendi, hoc est in fide labefactari, vel istos in
fals^ opinione obfirmari, omittende potius sunt, quia. ^nc per accidens fiunt
illicita. Whereupon I throw back the Argument, and proves from this place, that
Paul cared to shun the Scandal of the malicious, which should have followed
upon his circumcising of Titus, as well as he cared to shun the offense of
the weak, which should have followed upon his not circumcising of Timothee.
And that Paul cared for the Scandal of the malicious, is further confirmed by
his not taking wages at Corinth; they who would have been offended at his
taking wages there, were malicious, and did but seek occasion against him, 2
Cor. 11. v. 12. yet his taking wages there, not being necessary (as appears
from, 2 Cor. 11. 9.) he abstained.

Christ his not caring for the Scandal of the Pharisees, is also objected to
prove, that if the thing be lawful or indifferent, we are not to care for
the offense of the malicious. But of the cross part. 2. p. 57.
Parker answers well. The Scandal there not cared for, is, when the
Pharisees are offended at his abstaining from their washings, and his preaching
of true Doctrine: both of which were necessary duties for him to do. And Luke
13. 15.
when he defends his healing on Sabbaths; and his Disciples plucking cares,
upon this reason, they are duties of necessity, and charity, he plainly
insinuates, there (e) Math. 12. 7.
is no defense for deeds unnecessary when the malicious are scandalized. When
the thing was indifferent, does he not forgo his liberty for to please them,
as Math. 17. 27.
when he paid Tribute lest he should offend them, although he know they were
malicious.

Thus have I evinced a maine point, namely, that when Scandal is known to
follow upon any thing, if it be not necessary, there is no respect whatsoever
which can justify it.

CHAP. IX.
All the defenses of the Ceremonies, used to justify them against the Scandal
imputed to them, are confuted.

FRom that which has been said, it follows inevitably, same, are brought in
by Eccl. Pol. page 246.
Hooker making their Apology on this wise. Touching the offense of the weak,
we must adventure it, if they perish, they perish etc. our Pastoral charge is
Gods absolute commandment, rather then that shall be taken from us, etc. The
opinion of such, beside that it will be hateful and accursed to every one who
considers it, I have supra cap. 1.
said enough against it heretofore.

Wherefore I will here meddle only with such, as go about to Mal^nat. com. in
illum locum.
A Jesuit shall correct them, and teach them from Math. 17. 27. That Christ
shunned a Scandal, which would have been merely passive, and therefore that
this is not to be taken for a sure and perpetual rule, Scandalum datum, non
acceptum esse vitandum. Pareu^ com. ibid.
One of our own Writers upon this same place notes, that this Scandal which
Christ eshewed, had been a Scandal taken only, because the exactors of the
tribute money, ought not to have been ignorant of Christ his immunity and
dignity, yet because they were ignorant of the same, lest he should seem to
give a Scandal; cedere potius sua liberate voluit. Ideo non tantum dicit: ne
scandalizentur: sed ne scandalizemus cos, hoc est, ne scandali materiam eis
demus.

Their answer is also false; 1. There is no scandal taken, but (if com. in
Ephesians. 4. 13.
Zanchius observes, yet was that Scandal given and peccant, upon their part
who used their liberty of eating all sorts of meats, and so cared not for the
offense of the weak. Think they then that our taking of offense can excuse
their giving of offense? Nay, since the things whereby they offend us, are no
necessary things, they are greatly to be blamed.

That the Ceremonies are not necessary in themselves our Opposites a knowledge;
and that they are not necessary in respect of the Churches determination, I
have proven in the first part of my Dispute. Wherefore having no necessity in
them, they ought to be abolished, when scandal is known to arise out of them.

2. Giving and not granting, that the Scandal of them who were first offended
at the Ceremonies, was only passive, yet the using of them after Scandal is
known to rise out of them, must be an active Scandal, because the keeping of
a thing which is not necessary, after scandal rises out of it, is an active
Scandal, though the Scandal which at first rose out of it, had been only
passive, as I show in my seventh Proposition.

3. The truth is, that both first and last, the Scandal of the Ceremonies is
active and given; for an active Scandal is dictum vel factum vere malum, aut
mali speciem habens, quo auctor aliis peccandi occasionem praebet, say Polan.
Synt. theol. lib. 6. c. 3. col. 19.
our Divines. An active Scandal is ever a sin in him who offends, quia vel
ipsum opus quod facit est peccatum, vel etiam si habeat speciem peccati, etc.
Say the Aquin. 2. 2^. q. 43. art. 2.
Schoolmen. A scandal given and faulty, id opus aut ex se malum, aut
apparenter, say Marc. Ant de dom. de rep. eccl. lib. 1. c. 11. n. 18.
Formalists themselves.

Now to say the least that can be said, the Ceremonies have a very Cent. 1.
lib. 2. cap. 4. col. 450.
The Divines of Magdeburge infer from 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. speciem mali etiam
scandala conficere. com. in Daniel. 1. 8.
Iunius teaches that Scandal is given sive exemplo malo, sive speciem habente
mali. de rep. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 10. n. 44.
M. Ant. de dominis makes the scandal sin, ubi quis opere suo aliquo, vel
de se malo, vel indifferenti, aut bono, sed cum specie apparentis mali,
proximum inducit ad peccandum, etiamsi intentio ipsius ad hoc non feratur.

But to discover the appearance of evil which is in the Ceremonies, let us
consider with comm. in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
Zanchius, that the appearance of evil, from which the Apostle exhorts to
abstain, may be expounded two ways. First, it may be referred to the
preceding words, and so meant of Prophecy and trying the Doctrine of Prophets
or Preachers, for we should be ware in this matter, of all which has any
appearance of evil, that is, from all things, quae ab Haereticis in suam
sententiam, malamque consequentiam trahi possunt. For example says Zanchius,
Nestorius said that we are saved by the blood, not of the Son of God, but of
the son of man. Now if any suppressing that negative, should say, we are
saved by the blood of the son of man, though this might receave a right
explication, yet it has an appearance of evil, because from it Nestorius
might confirm his heresy. Appearance of evil thus expounded, will be found
in the Ceremonies in question. If a Phrase or form of speaking, from which
Heretics may draw bad consequences, and confirm their errors, though not
truly, yet in show, be an appearance of evil; then much more are visible
Ceremonies and received Customs, from which Heretics get occasion to confirm
their heretical errors and damnable superstitions, very plain and undeniable
appearances of much evil.

Now Papists confirm many of their superstitions by the English Ceremonies. of
the cross cap. 3. sect. 6.
Parker gives too many clear instances, namely, that by the English Cross,
Martial justifyeth the Popish Cross; And Saunders, the Popish Images; That
the English Service book, is drawn by Parsons and Bristowe, to a
countenancing of their Massebooke: That Rainold draws private Baptism, to a
proof of the necessity which they put in that Sacrament: That the Rhemists
draw the Absolution of the sick, prescribed in the Communion-booke, to an
approbation of their Absolution, Auricular Confession, and Sacrament of
Penance. To these Instances I add, that annot. on Gal. 4. 10.
the Rhemists confirm their Feast of the assumption of Mary, from the other
Feasts which the Church of England observes. And so does, confer. with Rain.
c. 8. div. 2. page 408. 410.
I. Heart.

It will be said, that Papists have no ground nor reason to confirm com. in 1.
Cor. 10. 28.
Pareus notes: yet from this, the Idolater had no reason to confirm himself
in his Idolatry; but because the Idolater seeing it, might draw it to a
confirmation; the Apostle will have it for that respect foreborne. When the
Arrians abused Trin immersion in Baptism, to signify three natures of the
three persons, lib. 1. epist. 41.
Pope Gregory and Can. 5.
the fourth Council of Toledo ordained, that in Spain, thrice washing should
no longer be used in Baptism, but once only. The Arrians had no just reason to
draw such a signification from the Ceremony of Trin-immersion: yet was it
abolished when those Heretics did so abuse it. If any say, that we are saved
by the blood of the son of man, the phrase is orthodoxe, because of the
communication or rather communion of properties, and the Nestorians can not
with good reason by it confirm their Heresy, yet are we to abstain from this
form of speech, in Zanchius his judgment, when it is drawn to the
confirmation of that error.

I conclude with that which ubi supra.
Parker alleges out of the Harmony of Confessions. Cum adiaphora rapiuntur ad
confessionem, libera esse desinunt. Mark rapiuntur. 2. The Ceremonies do
indeed greatly countenance those superstitions of Papists: because Bald. de
cas. consc. lib. 2. cap. 14. cas. 7.
Communio rituum est quasi symbolum communionis in Religione: So that Papists
get occasion from the Ceremonies, of confirming, not only those Popish Rites
which we have not yet received, but also the whole Popish Religion, especially
since they see Conformists so siding with them against Non-Conformists, and
making both their opinions and their practices to be better, then we reckon
them to be.

N fratri and amico art. 13.
Saravia perceaving how much the Popish Sacrament of Confirmation, is
countenanced and confirmed by our Bishoping, thinks it best to put the fairest
face he can, upon the Papists judgment of that bastard Sacrament. He would have
us believe, that the Papists do not extol the dignity of the Sacrament of
Confirmation above Baptism. But he should have considered that which Annot. on
Act. 8. sect. 5.
Cartwright marketh out of the first Tome of the Counsels, that in the Epistle
which is ascribed to Eusebius and Melciades Bishops of Rome, it is plainly
affirmed, that the Sacrament of Confirmation is more to be reverenced then the
Sacrament of Baptism.

Zanchius has another exposition of the appearance of evil, which does also
agree to the Ceremonies. The appearance of evil which nullam praebentes
occasionem proximo nostro aliquid mali de nobis suspicandi. He instanceth for
example, the ea^ing of Idolothytes in Paul's time, 1. Cor. 10. now if the eating
of Idolothyte Meats, was an appearance of evil, and so scandalous, because it
gave the weak occasion to suspect some evil of such as did eat them; much
more Idolothyte Rites which have not only been dedicated and consecrated to
the honor of Idols, but also publicly and commonly used and employed in
Idolatrous ^ship; surely whosoever uses such Idolothytes, gives great occ^on
to his brother to suspect some evil of him, because of such evil favored
appearances. And thus we see, how great appearance of evil, is more then
manifest in the Ceremonies, which makes the Scandal active, if there were no
more. But afterward we shall see the Ceremonies to be evil and unlawful in
themselves, and so to be in the worst kind of active Scandal.

Two things are objected here by our Adversaries, to make it appear This says
Park. of the cross part. 2. page 57. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. Romans 14. 16. 1. Cor. 9.
12. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7. Act. 20. 34. Math. 18. 6.
he, if it be true, then see we an end of all the duty of bearing with the
weak: of forbearing our own liberty, power, and auctority in things
indifferent, for their supportance: yea an end of all the care to prevent their
offense, by giving them occasion Cornel. Iansen. conc. Evang. c. 71.
aut condemnandi factum nostrum, aut illud imitandi contra conscientiam, which
we have Aug. de mor. b Manich l. 2. cap. 14. Romans 14. 20.
so often, so seriously, with so many reasons, obtestations, yea woes and
threatenings commanded to us throughout the Word What needed Paul to write so
much against the scandal of meats, and against the scandal of Idolothious
meats? This one precept might have sufficed, let the strong give a reason for
his eating, etc. Though be has given many reasons to them of Corinth for the
lawfullnesse of taking wages: though he has given diverse reasons for the
lawfullnesse of all sorts of meats to them of Rome; yet neither will he take
wages himself, nor suffer others to eat all sorts of meats, when others are
offended. And what is that which he writes Romans 14 Take and receave the weak
for their supportance, and not for contraversy and disputation? etc.

It will be said, that they are to be thought obstinate, who after a reason
given, are still scandalized. But the answer is in readiness, Ames. lib. 5.
de consc. c. 11. q. 6.
Fieri potest ut quidam nondum sint capaces rationis redditae, qui idcirco
quamvis ratio sit illis reddita, habendi sunt adhuc pro pusillis. They are
rather to be thought obstinate in scandalizing, who perceiving the scandal to
remain notwithstanding of their reason given, yet for all that, take not away
the occasion of the scandal. But say Dr Forbesse Iren. lib. 2. c 20. number. 27.
some, whoever ought to be esteemed weak, or not capable of reason, Ministers
must not be so thought of. Whereunto I answer with Didoclavius; Infirmitatem
in doctiores cadere posse, neminem negaturum puto, and superiorum temporum
historia de dimicatione inter doctores Ecclesiae, ob Ceremonias, (l) Alt.
damasc cap. 9. page 556.
idipsum probat. Parati etiam sunt coram Deo testari se non posse acquiescere
in Formalistarum foliis ficulneis. The reason which they give us commonly, is
Will and Auctority; or if at any time they give another reason, it is such a
one as can not clear nor resolve our consciences. But let their reasons be so
good as any can be, shall we be thought obstinate for being offended not with
standing of their reason? Dare they say that those who contended so much of old
about the Celebration of Easter, and about the Fast of the Sabbath, were not
weak, but obstinate and malicious, after a reason was given? Why consider they
not, Park. of the cross part. 2. page 75.
that men may for their science be profitable ministers, and yet fail of that
measure of prudency whereby to judge of a particular use of indifferent things.

2. They say, they give no Scandal by the Ceremonies, because Ans. A
scandalous and inordinat quality, or condition of an action any way inductive
to sin, makes an active Scandal, though the doer have no intention to draw
into sin. This I made good in my 4. Proposition; and it is further confirmed
by that great Scandal whereby Peter compelled the Gentiles to judaize Gal. 2.
14. He constrained them says com. upon this place.
Perkins, by the auctority of his example, whereby he caused them to think
that the observation of the Ceremonial Law was necessary. It was then the
quality of his action which made the Scandal active, because that which he did
was inductive to sin, but we are not to think that Peter had an intention to
draw the Gentiles to sin. Tom. 1. an. 55. n. 39.
Cardinal Baronius labors to make Peter blameless, and his fact free of
all fault; quia praeter ipsius spem id acciderat, and it fell forth only ex
accidenti and inopinato, ac praeter intentionem ipsius. de rep. eccl. lib. 1.
cap. 11. n. 18.
M. Ant. de dominis consuteth him well: Est scandalum and cum peccato, quando
quis licet non intendat peccatum alterius, facit tamen opus aut ex se malum aut
apparenter, ex quo scit, aut scire debet, consequuturum alterius peccatum, aut
quodcunque malum: nam etiam dicitur illud volentarium interpretative.

I will yet descend more particularly to confute our Opposites their several
answeares and defenses, which they have used against As for the Godly amongst
us Sermon. at Perth. assemb.
says he, we are sorry they should be grieved, but it is their own fault: for
if the things be in themselves lawful, what is it that should offend them?

Ans. 1. He does not well express Scandal (whereof he is there speaking) by
grief, for I may be grieved, yet not scandalized, and scandalized, yet not
grieved, according to my first proposition touching Scandal.

2. To what purpose tells he, it is their own fault? Thinks he that there are
any offended without their own fault? Non enim solum scandalizare, sed etiam
scandalizari peccatum, est, quia infirmitatis est says Maldonat. upon Math.
18. 7.
To be offended is ever a fault, as I show in my 3. and 6. Propositions; so
that if a Scandal be not removed, where it is men's own fault that they are
offended, then no Scandal shall ever be removed; because all who are
scandalized, commit a fault in being Scandalized. Nihil potest esse hominicausa
sufficiens peccati, quod est spiritualis ruina, nisi propria voluntas, and ideo
dicta vel facta alterius hominis possunt esse solum causa imperfecta
aliqualiter inducens ad ruinam, says 2. 2a. q. 43 art. 1.
Aquinas; giving a reason why in the definition of Scandal, he says not, that
it gives cause, but that it gives occasion of ruin.

3. Why thinks he, that if the things be in themselves lawful, they are
purged of Scandal? 1. Cor. 10. 23.
what if they edify not? what if hey be not expedient? are they not therefore
scandalous, because in themselves lawful? this shift is destroyed by my 9.
Proposition. And I pray, were not all meats lawful for the Gentiles in the
Apostles times? yet this could not excuse their eating all sorts of meats, when
the Jews were thereby offended.

4. Whereas he demands, if the things be in themselves lawful; what is it
that should offend them? I demand again; though adultery, murder etc. be in
themselves unlawful, what is it that should offend us? should we offend or be
scandalized for any thing? hay, then we should sin, for to be offended is a
sin.

5. He had said to better purpose; what is it that may offend them, or does
offend them, that it may be voided? whereunto I answer, that there is a
twofold Scandal which may be and has been given by things lawful in
themselves, (as I touched in my. 5. Proposition) Viz. the giving of occasion to
the weak to condemn our lawful deeds, and the animating of them to follow
our example against their own consciences: both ways we make them to sin.
The Apostle 1. Cor. 10. 29. where he is speaking of a certain kind of
Idolothyts which are in themselves lawful, and only evil in the case of
Scandal, shows, that if the weak in a private banquet, see the strong
eating such meats as have been offered to Idols, notwith standing of warning
given, then is the weak one scandalized; because would the Apole say, Pare us
com in illumlocum.
velipse etiam edet tuo exemplo, vacillante conscientia, vel tacit factum tuum
damnabit. Behold what Scandal may arise, even out of things which are in
themselves lawful, which also arises out of the Ceremonies, (let them be as
lawful as can be.) 1. We are provoked to dissallow of lawful things, and to
condemn the doers, as superstitious and popishly affected. 2. We are animated
by the example of Formalists to practice Conformity, which in our consciences
we condemn, and by consequence do sin, because he that doubts is damned,
and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

Let us see next how the Bishop of Edinburgh can help the cause. Epist. to the
past. of the Church of Scotland
says he, by obedience to a lawful ordinance, no man gives Scandal. And if
any take offense, both the cause and occasion thereof is the perverseness only
of the person offended. Tertullian says well, res bona neminem offendit nisi
malam mentem.

Ans. 1. I show in my 9. Proposition, that the ordinance of Superiors can not
make that to be no scandal which otherwise should be Scandal. If this be not
taken well from us, let Dr. Forbesse Iren. lib. 2. cap. 20. number. 19.
one of our Opposites speak for us; who aknowledgeth, that human power can not
make us do that which we can not do without giving of Scandal, and that in
this case, the pretext of obedience to Superiors shall not excuse us at the
hands of the Supreme judge.

2. I would learn of him what makes a lawful ordinance about matters of fact
or things to be done? Not the will of Superiors; else there shall be no
unlawful ordinances; (for every ordinance has the will of the ordainer:) Not
the lawfullnesse of the thing in it self which is ordained neither; for then
every ordinance, which prescribes a thing lawful in it self, were it never
so inexpedient in respect of supervenient circum stances, should be lawful. To
a lawful ordinance then required, not only that the thing ordained be lawful
in it self, is also that it be not inexpedient. So that a thing may be lawful
in itself, yet not lawfully ordained, because the ordinance commands the
doing of it, whereas there are many things lawful which ought not to be done,
because they are not expedient, 1. Cor. 6. 12.

3. Since it can not be a lawful ordinance which ordains a thing
inexpedient, it can not be a lawful obedience which is yielded to such an
ordinance.

4. If by a lawful ordinance he mean (as it seems he does) an ordinance
prescribing, that which is lawful in it self, then his answer is false. What
if an ordinance of Superiors, had ordained the Corinthians to eat freely of
all meats which were in themselves clean? Durst the Bishop say, that this
ordinance of Superiors had been of greater weight and superior reason, then
the Law of Charity which is Gods Law? Had no man given scandal by obedience to
this ordinance? And would not the Apostle, for all that, have forbidden as he
did the using of this liberty with the offense of others?

5. When any man is offended at a thing lawful prescribed by an ordinance, the
cause thereof is indeed in himself (yet it is not always his perverseness,
but oftimes weakness:) but the occasion of it, is the thing at which he
offends, which occasion should ever be removed when it is not a thing
necessary, as I show already.

6. As for that sentence of Tertullian, it must admit the exception of a
reverend Divine. He signifies (says comm. in. 1 Cor. 8. 9.
Paraeus) scandal not to be properly committed, save in things evil in
themselves, or else indifferent: quanquam interdum circa bonas intempestive
factas etiam committi possit.

In the third place we will look what weapons of war Dr. lib 2. c. 20. number.
5. and 6.
Forbesse Irenicum, falsely so called. And first, he will not hear us touching
Scandal, except we first a knowledge the Ceremonies not to be evil in
themselves: otherwise he thinks we debate in vain about Scandal, since we
have a more convenient way to exterminat the Ceremonies by proving them to be
evil in themselves, and also because when we are pressed with the weight of
Arguments, we will still run back to this point, that nothing which in it
self is unlawful, can be done without Scandal.

Ans. 1. The Argument of Scandal is not vainly or idly debated, for though we
prove the Ceremonies to be evil in themselves, yet fitly we argument also from
the Scandal of them, because this makes yet more. 1. ad rem; For the Scandal
of a thing is more then the unlawfullnesse of it: every unlawful thing is not
scandalous, but that only which is done to the knowledge of another. 2. ad
hominem; For that we may either content or convince our Opposites, we argument
ex ipsorum concessis, to this purpose; that since they yield the Ceremonies to
be in themselves indifferent, therefore they must a knowledge that they are to
be foreborne, because scandal follows upon them, and they should abstain
from things indifferent, in the case of scandal.

2. Whereas he thinks we will still turn back to the unlawfullnesse of the
Ceremonies in themselves, albeit we may justly make use of this answer, when
they go about to purge the Ceremonies from Scandal by the lawfullnesse of
them in themselves, (because the Argument of Scandal does not presuppose our
concession of the lawfulness of the Ceremonies, but theirs;) yet he deceives
himself in thinking that we can not handle this Argument without it, for were
they never so lawful in themselves, we supra sect. 4. 5. 6.
evince the Scandal of them from the appearance of evil which is in them, so
that without respecting the unlawfullnesse of the Ceremonies in themselves, we
can and do make good our Argument of Scandal, so far as concerns the
Ceremonies considered by themselves.

But when our Opposites object, that many are scandalized by us who refuse the
Ceremonies, we here compare the Scandal of Nonconformity, if there be any
such (for though some be displeased at it, I see not how they are scandalized
by it,) with the Scandal of Conformity, and show them that the Scandal of
Nonconformity is not to be cared for, because it is necessary, and that by
reason of the unlawfullnesse of the Ceremonies. I will make all this plain by
a simile.

A Pastor dealing with a Fornicator, lays before him both his sin and the
Scandal of it too. Now as touching the Scandal, the Fornicator cares not for
it, because he is in the opinion that Fornication is indifferent. Whereupon the
Pastor thus proceeds. If it were indifferent, as you say, yet because
Scandal rises out of it, you should abstain. And so amongst many Arguments
against Fornication, the Pastor uses this Argument taken from the Scandal of
it, both for aggravating the sin in it self, and for convincing the sinner,
and this Argument of Scandal, the Pastor can make good against the Fornicator,
out of his own ultroneous and unrequired concession of the indifferency of
Fornication (because things indifferent and in the case of Scandal, and when
they are done with the appearance of evil, should be forborne) without ever
mentioning the unlawfulness of it. But if in an froward tergiversation, the
Fornicator begin to reply, that he also is scandalized and provoked to go on
in his Fornication obstinately, by the Pastors rebuking him for so light a
matter, and that the Pastors reproof to him has appearance of evil, as much
as his Fornication has to the Pastor: Albeit here it may be answered, that the
Pastors reproof is not done inordinate, neither has any appearance of evil,
except in the Fornicators perverse interpretation, yet for stopping the
Fornicators mouth as well more forcibly as more quickly, the Pastor rejoyndeth,
that if any scandal follow upon his reproof, it is not to be regarded,
because the thing is necessary and that because Fornication being a great
sin, he may not but reprove it.

So, albeit our Argument of Scandal holds out against the Ceremonies
considered by themselves, without making mention of the unlawfulness of them
in themselves: albeit also when the Scandal of Nonconformity (if there be
any such) is compared with the Scandal of Conformity, we say truly, that this
has appearance of evil in its own condition, and that has none, except in
the false interpretation of those who glory in gainsaying.

Yet for further convincing of our Opposites, and darting through their most
subtle subterfuges, with a mortal stroke, we send them away with this final
answer; you should abstain from the Ceremonies when Scandal rises out of
them, because you confess them to be in themselves indifferent. But we do
avouch and prove them to be unlawful, wherefore it is necessary for us to
abstain, though all the world should be offended.

The ibid. number. 7.
Dr. proceeds to throw back the Argument of Scandal upon our own heads, and
to charge us with scandalizing both the

But Number. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14.
the Dr. goes forward, denying that there is in the Ceremonies so much as any
appearance of evil, to make them Scandalous. Where I observe, that he dare not
adventure to describe how a thing is said to have appearance of evil, and
consequently a scandalous condition. The man is cautelous, and perceives
peradventure, that the appearance of evil can be made to appear no other
thing, then that which does more then appear in the Ceremonies. And this I
have heretofore evinced out of Zanchius.

The Number. 15, 16.
Dr. holds him upon kneeling in receiving the Sacramental Elements, and
denies that it is scandalous, or any way inductive to spiritual ruin. But
(if he will) he may consider, that the ruder sort who can not distinguish
betwixt worshipping the Bread, and worshipping before the Bread, nor discern
how to make Christ the passive object of that worship, and the Bread the
active, and how to worship Christ in the Bread, and make the worship relative
from the Bread to Christ; are by his example induced to Bread-worship, when
they perceive bowing down before the consecrated Bread, in the very same form
and fashion, wherein Papists are seen to worship it, but can not conceive the
nice distinctions which he and his companions use to purge their kneeling in
that act from Idolatry. As for others who have more knowledge, they are also
induced to ruin, being animated by his example to do that which their
consciences do condemn.

There occurreth next an objection taken from Paul his not taking wages at
Corinth, (though he might lawfully) for shunning the offense both of the
malicious and the weak: In the solution whereof Number. 17.
the Dr. spends some words. The substance of his answer is this: that Paul
taught it was lawful to take wages, and that they should not be offended at
it, and if we do as he did, we must teach that the Ceremonies are lawful in
themselves, yet not using our power for the time, lest the weak be offended,
or lest the malicious glory: but for all that, not denying our right and
liberty, nor suffering a yoke of bondage to be imposed upon us by contumacious
men. And besides, that the Apostle was commanded by no Ecclesiastical decree
to take wages from the Corinthians, as we are commanded by the decree of Perth
to receive the five Articles: so that Paul might without contempt of
Ecclesiastical Auctority, abstain from taking of wages, but we can not
without contempt of the Church, reject the Articles.

Ans. 1. This imports, that if the question were not de jure, and if we
misliked the Ceremonies, and were offended at them, for some other reason then
their unlawfulness, for this offense they would abstain. It may be his
reverend Fathers return him small thanks for this device. For let some men be
brought forth, acknowledging the Ceremonies to be in themselves indifferent,
yet offended at them for their inexpediency, whether they be weak or
malicious, the Dr. thinks he should abstain for their cause.

2. How knows he, that they who were offended at Paul his taking of wages at
Corinth, thought not his taking of wages there unlawful, even as we think the
Ceremonies unlawful?

3. Why judges he that we are not scandalized through weakness, but through
malice and contumacy? So he gives it forth both in this place, and Iren. lib.
1. cap. 10.. 2.
else where. Who art thou that judges another man's servant?

But 4. If we were malicious in offending at the Ceremonies as things
unlawful, and in urging of Nonconformity as necessary, should they therefore
contemn our being scandalized? Those that would have Titus circumcised, were
they not malicious? Did they not urge Circumcision as necessary? Held they it
not unlawful, not to circumcise Titus? yet did the Apostle abstain, because
they were to be scandalized, that is, made worse and more wicked calumniators,
by the circumcising of Titus, as supra cap. 8. sect. 6.
I have showed; so that albeit we are not to care for the displeasing of men,
that maliciously and contumaciously, urge (as necessary) abstaining from that
which is lawful to be done; yet must we care for scandalizing them and making
them worse: rather ere that be, we ought to abstain from the use of our
liberty.

5. If an Ecclesiastical decree had commanded Paul at that time to take wages
at Corinth, the Dr. thinks he had contemned Ecclesiastical Auctority in not
taking wages, though some should be offended at his taking wages. What? could
an Ecclesiastical decree command Paul to take wages in the case of Scandal?
or could he have obeyed such a decree in the case of Scandal? We have seen
before, that no humane Auctority, can make that no Scandal, which otherwise
were Scandal: so that Paul had not contemned Ecclesiastical Auctority, by not
obeying their command, in this case of Scandal which had followed by his
obeying: for he had not been bound to obey, nay he had been bound not to obey
in such a case, yea further, albeit Scandal had not been to follow by his
taking wages, yet he had no more contemned the Church by not obeying a command
to take wages, then he had done by living unmarried, if the Church had
commanded him to marry. The bare Auctority of the Church could neither
restrain his liberty nor ours in things in different, when there is no more to
bind but the Auctority of an ordinance.

6. Why holds he us contemners of the Church, for not receiving the five
Articles of Perth? we can not be called contemners for not obeying, but for not
subjecting our selves, wherewith we can not be charged. Could he not
distinguish betwixt subjection and obedience? Art thou a Doctor in Israel, and
know not these things? Nay, art thou a Conformist, and know not what thy
Field of the Church lib. 4. cap. 34. and Bills. apud Parker of the Cross part.
2. page 33.
fellow Conformists do hold?

One point more rests, at which ibid. l. 2. cap. 20. number. 14.
the Dr. holds him in this Argument, namely, that for the offense of the
weak, necessary

Ans. 1. Obedience to Superiors can not purge that from Scandal which
otherwise were Scandal, as supra cap. 8. sect. 5. and cap. 9. sect, 10.
we have seen before.

2. That information and giving of a reason, can not excuse the doing of that
out of which Scandal rises, ibid. sect. 7.
we have also proven already.

3. That the Ordinance of Superiors can not make the Ceremonies necessary, I
have proven in the first part of this Dispute. This Morney mister. of iniq. in
the conclus.
is given for one of the chief marks of the man of sin, That which is
indifferent, he by his laws and prohibitions makes to be sin, and shall
they who profess to take part with Christ against Antichrist, do no less
then this? It will be replied, that the Ceremonies are not thought necessary in
themselves, nor Nonconformity, unlawful in it self, but only in respect of
the Churches ordinance. Just so Aquin. 3. q. 66. art. 8. Rh^m. annot. on Math.
16. sect. 5. Bell. de Pontif. Romans lib. 4. cap. 18. and de sacrif. miss^ lib.
6. c. 13.
the Papists profess, that the omission of their Rites and observances, is not
a sin in it self, but only in respect of contemning the Churches Customs
and Commandments. How comes it then, that they are not ashamed to pretend such
a necessity for the stumbling blocks of those offending Ceremonies among us,
as Papists pretend for the like among them?

But the English Formalists have here somewhat to say, which we will hear.
Eccl. Pol. lib. 4. 11. 12.
Mr. Hooker tell us, that Ceremonies are scandalous England abuse them unto
evil.

Ans. 1. Though all this were true, yet forasmuch as they have been abused by
the Papists unto Idolatry and superstition, and are monuments of Popery, the
trophies of Antichrist, and the relics of Romes whoorish bravery: they must
be granted, at least for this respect, to be more then manifest appearances of
evil, and so scandalous.

But 2. It is fall which he says, for kneeling in receiving the Communion, is
in its own nature evil and Idolatrous, because religious Adoration, before a
mere creature, which purposly we set before us in the act of adoring, to have
state in the worship, especially if it be an actual Image in that act
representing Christ to us, (such as the Bread in the act of receiving,) draws
us within the compass of coadoration or relative worship, as shall be
copiously proven afterward.

Other of the Ceremonies that are not evil in their own nature, yet were
devised to evil, for example, the Surplice. The cap. 1. sect. 3.
replier to Dr. Mourtons Particular defense, observes, that this superstition
about apparel in Divine worship, began first among the Frensh Bishops, unto
whom Caelestinus writes thus. Discernendi, etc. We are to be distinguished
from the common people and others, by Doctrine, not by Garment, by
Conversation, not by Habit, by the Purity of mind, not by Attire: for if we
study to innovation, we tread underfoot the order which has been delivered
unto us by our Fathers, to make place to idle superstitions; wherefore we ought
not lead the minds of the Faithful into such things: for they are rather to
be instructed then played withal: neither are we to blind and beguile their
eyes, but to infuse instructions into their minds. In which words Caelestinus
reprehends this apparel, as a novelty which ^nded to superstition, and made
way to the mocking and deceiving of the faithful.

Lastly, whereas he says, the Ceremonies are not abused by them in England I
instance the contrary in Holy Days. expos. of the creed art. of Christ's birth.
Perkins says, that the Feast of Christ's Nativity, so commonly called, is not
spent in praising the name of God, but in riffling, dycing, carding, masking,
mumming, and in all licentious liberty, for the most part, as though it were
some Heathen Feast of Ceres or Bacchu^. And com. on Gal. 4. 10.
elsewhere he complains of the great abuse of Holy Days among them.

As touching the rule which is alleged against the Ceremonies out of Paul's
Doctrine, namely, that in those things from which Hooker answeareth to it. 1.
That the weak brethren among them, were not as the Jews, who were known to
be generally weak, whereas says he, the imbecility of ours is not common to
so many, but only here and there some such a one is found. 2. He tells us, that
these scandalous meats, from which the Gentiles were exhorted to abstain for
fear of offending the Jews, can not represent the Ceremonies; for their using
of meats, was a matter of private action in common life, where every man was
free to order that which himself did; but the Ceremonies are public
constitutions for ordering the Church, and we are not to look that the Church
is to change her public laws and ordinances, made according to that which is
judged ordinarily and commonly fittest for the whole, although it chance that
for some particular men, the same be found inconvenient, especially when there
may be other remedies also against the sores of particular inconveniences. Let
them be better instructed.

Ans. 1. This is bad divinity, that would make us not regard the scandalizing
of a few particular men; Christ's Math. 18, 6.
woe stricketh not only upon them who offend many, but even upon them who
offend so much as one of his litls ones.

2. That which he says of the few in England, and not many, who are
scandalized by the Ceremonies, has been answered by a Parker of the cross
cap. (...). sect. 10.
Countryman of his own. And as for us, we find most certainly, that not a few
but many, even the greatest part of Scotland one way or other are scandalized
by the Ceremonies: some are led by them to drink in superstition, and to
fall into sundry gross abuses in Religion; others are made to use them
doubtingly and so dammably. And how many who refuse them, are animated to use
them against their consciences, and so to be damned? who is not made to
stumble? and what way do they not impede the Edification of the Church?

3. What if there had been a public constitution, commanding the Gentiles to
eat all meats freely, and that this had been judged ordinarily and commonly
fittest for the whole, even to signify the liberty of the Church of the New
Testament? should not the Gentiles notwithstanding of this constitution, have
abstained because of the Scandal of the Jews? How comes it then that that
which the Apostle writes against the Scandal of meats, and the reasons which
he gives, are found to hold ever good, whether there be a constitution or not?

4. As for his remedy against the Scandal of particular men, which is to
instruct them better, it has been answered sect, 7.
before.

Now if I reck on Paybody to be no body, perhaps some body will Apol. part. 3.
cap. 5.
by him to those places, Romans 14. and 15. 1 Cor. 8. and 10. Muth. 18. 6. which
are alleged against the use of things indifferent, when we can not use them
without Scandal.

First, he says, that all those Scriptures which are quotted as condemning the
scandalizing of others in things indifferent, speak only of scandalizing them
who are weak.

Ans. 1. be it so: thought he that they are all malicious, and none weak, who
are offended by the Ceremonies? He himself describes the weak whom we are
forbidden to scandalize, to be such as are weak in knowledge and certainty of
the truth. Now there are many who are in this respect weak, scandalized by the
Ceremonies. But I say moreover, that his description is imperfect, for there
are some who know the truth, and that certainly, who are notwithstanding to be
accounted weak, in regard of the defect of that prudence which should guide,
and that stability which should accompany all their actions, in the particular
usage of such things as they know certainly in their general kind to be
agreeable to truth and righteousness. Such Christians are impeded by the
Ceremonies from going on in their Christian course, so fast as otherwise they
would, if not also made to waver or stumble. And thus are they properly
scandalized according to my fifth Proposition. Si quis nostra culpa vel
impingit, vel abducitur a recto curs^, vel tardatur, cum dicimur offendere
says com. in Mat. 18. 6.
Calvine. Porro scandalum est dictum vel factum quo impeditur Evangelij cursus,
cujus ampliationem and propagationem, totius vitae nostrae scopum esse oportet
says com. 1 Cor. 8.
Martyr.

2. It is a fault to give offense even to the strong, or else Math. 16. 23.
Peter was not to be blamed for giving offense to Christ. Yea it is a fault to
offend the very malicious by-things that are not necessary, as I have proven in
my 12 Proposition.

Secondly says he, all those Scriptures condemn only the Scandal of the
weak, which is made at that time, when we know they

Ans. 1. If he speak of certain and infallible knowledge, none but God
knows whether a man shall be scandalized or not, by that which we are to do:
He must mean therefore of such knowledge as we can have of the event of our
actions: and so his answer brings great damnage to his own cause.
Formalists know, that their weak brethren have been of a long time
scandalized by the Ceremonies, and they hear them professing that they are yet
scandalized, and how then can they but know that Scandal will still follow
upon that which they do?

2. Albeit they know not that their brethren will be scandalized by the
Ceremonies, yea albeit their brethren should not be scandalized thereby, yet
because the Ceremonies are appearances of evil; inductive to sin; and
occasions of ruin; Scandal is given by them, whether it be taken by their
brethren or not, according to my 4 and 5 Propositions.

Thirdly says Paybody, all those Scriptures condemn only that

Ans. 1. I have proven heretofore, that the commandment of Auctority, can not
make the use of a thing indifferent to be no Scandal, which otherwise were
Scandal.

2. I have also proven in the first part of this Dispute, that an
Ecclesiastical constitution can not bind us nor take away our liberty in the
using or not using of a thing indifferent in it self, except some other reason
be showed us then the bare Auctority of the Church. As touching the civil
Magistrate, his place and power, to judge and determine in things pertaining to
the worship of God, we shall see it afterward, and so shall we know how far
his decisions and ordinances in this kind of things, have force to bind us to
obedience.

3. He should have proven, that obedience to the Magistrate in a thing
indifferent, is a better duty then abstaining from that which scandalizeth many
Christians: he should not have opposed pleasing and scandalizing (for perhaps a
man is most scandalized when he is most pleased;) but edifying and
scandalizing, according to my first Proposition. Now will any body, except
Paybody, say, that obedience to the Magistrate in a thing indifferent, out of
which Scandal rises, is a better duty then forbearing for the edification of
many Christian souls, and for shunning to scandalize them. This we must take
to be his meaning, or else he says nothing to the purpose.

His fourth answer is, that all those Scriptures condemning scandal, Peter
and his companions coming to Antioch, were in danger of a double scandal;
either of the Jews by eating with the Gentiles, which was the less, or of the
Gentiles in refuising their company, as if they had not been brethren, which
was far the greater: Now Paul blamed Peter very much, that for the avoiding
the lesser scandal he and and his companions fell into the greater.

Ans. 1. He is greatly mistaken, whiles he thinks that a man can be so
straited betwixt two scandalls, that he can not choose but give the one of
them; Ames. lib. 5. de consc. c. 11.
For Nulla datur talis perplexitas, ut necessarium sit pio homini sive hoc sive
illud faciat, scandalum alicui dare.

2. That sentence of choosing the least of two evils, must be understood of
evils of punishment, not of evils of sin, as I show supr^ cap. 1.
before, so that he is in a foul error, whiles he would have us to choose the
least of two scandalls.

3. As for the example which he alleges, he deceives himself to think that
Peter had given scandal to the Jews, by his eating with the Gentiles. Cum
Gentibus cibum capiens, recte utebatur liberate Christiana, say cent. 1. lib.
2. c. 10. col. 560.
the Magdeburgians: but when certain Jews came from James he withdrew
himself, fearing the Jews, and so quod ante de liberate Christiana
edificarat, rursus destruebat: By eating then with the Gentiles he gave no
scandal, but by the contrary he did edify. And further I say, that his eating
with the Gentiles was a thing necessary, and that for shunning of two great
scandalls; the one, of the Gentiles, by compelling them to judaize; the other,
of the Jews, by confirming them in judaisme, both which followed upon his
withdrawvving from the Gentiles; so that by his eating with the Gentiles no
scandal could be given, and if any had been taken, it was not to be carred
for. Wherefore there was but one scandal, which Peter and his companions were
in danger of, which also they did give, and for which Paul reprehended them,
namely, their withdrawing of themselves from the Gentiles, and keeping company
only with the Jews; whereby both the Jews and the Gentiles were scandalized,
because both were made to think, (at least occasion was given to both for
thinking) the observation of the Ceremonial law necessary. That which
deceives Paybody, is the confounding of scandalizing and displeasing. Peter by
eating with the Gentiles perhapes had displeased the Jews, but he had thereby
edifyed them though: The scandal which he gave them was by judaizing;
Iudaizabat olim Petrus per dissimulationem says de auserib. pap^ consider 12.
Gerson: by this judaizing through such dissimulation and double dealing, as
was his eating with the Gentiles first, and then withdrawing of himself, when
certain Jews came; for keeping company with them only, he scandalized the
Jews and confirmed them in judaisme, as comm. in illum locum.
Paraeus notes. How then can it be said, that he had scandalized them by his
eating with the Gentiles: for here upon it should follow that there was a
necessity of doing evil laid upon Peter, so that he behooved to offend the
Jews, either by his eating with the Gentiles, or by his not eating with the
Gentiles, for he could not both eat with them and not eat with them. This is
therefore plain, that if he scandalized the Jews by his not eating with the
Gentiles, as I have showed, then had he not scandalized them, but edifyed them
by his eating with the Gentiles.

4. I perceive he would say, that the scandal of Nonconformity is a greater
scandal, then the scandal of Conformity; and so he would make us gain little
by our Argument of scandal. ubi supra. p. 441.
He is bold to object, where one is offended with our practice of kneeling,
twenty; I may say ten thousand are offended with your refusal. O Adventurous
Arithmetique! O huge Hyperbole! O desultorious Declamation! O roving Rethorike!
O prodigal Paradoxe!

Yet I reply, 1. Though sundry (yet not ten thousand for one) are displeased by
our refusal, who can show us, that any are thereby scandalized, that is, made
worse, and induced to ruin? This man is bold to say well to it; but we have
solidly proven, that scandal rises out of kneeling, and the rest of the
Ceremonies, let it be measured to us, with the same measure wherewith we met.

2. Put the case that ten thousand were scandalized by our refusal, will it
thereupon follow, that our refusal is a greater scandal then their
practicing? Nay then, let it be said that the Cross of Christ is a greater
scandal, then a private man's Fornication, because both 1. Cor. 1. 23.
Jews and Greeks were offended at that, whereas perhaps a small Congregation
only is offended at this.

3. Our refusal is necessary, because of the unlawfulness of the Ceremonies
which we refuise, so that we may not receive them, but must refuse them,
notwithstanding of any scandal which can follow upon our refusal. If he had
ought to say against this answer, why is he silent? he might have found it at
home. Our forbearance of Conformity says of the Cross part. 2. page 79.
Parker, is a necessary duty, there is therein no fault of any scandal in us.

4. Our Opposites should do well to assoyle our Argument of scandal, before
they propound another Argument against us, for ^o long as they make it not
evident, that the scandal of the Ceremonies, which we object, is no active or
faulty scandal; as long they can not object the scandal of Nonconformity to
us; because if the scandal (which is to be avoided) be in their practicing of
the Ceremonies, it can not be in our refusing of them.

5. We know many are grieved and displeased with our Nonconformity, yet that
every one who is grieved is not by and by scandalized, the Bishop of Winchester
teaches as well as we. Many times Sermon. on 10. 16. 7.
says he, men are grieved with that which is for their good, and earnestly set
on that which is not expedient for them. But in good earnest, what do they
mean, who say they are scandalized, or made worse by our Nonconformity? for
neither do we make them condemn our lavvfull deed as unlawful, nor yet do
we animate them by our example to do that which in their consciences they
judge unlawful. They themselves aknovvledge, that sitting is as lavvfull as
kneeling; that the not observing of the fyve Holy Days is as lavvfull, as the
observing of them; that the not Bishoping of children is as lavvfull as the
Bishopping of them. Do they not aknovvledge the indifferency of the things
themselves? Do they not permit many of their people either to kneel, or to sit
at the communion? Have not many of themselves taken the Communion sitting in
some places? Have not our Conformists in Scotland hitherto commonly omitted
Bishopping of Children, and the ministration of the Sacraments in private
places? As for our selves, we make our meaning plain, when we object the
scandal of Conformity, for many ignorant and superstitious persons are by the
Ceremonies confirmed (expertus loquor) in their error and superstition: so that
now they even settle themselves upon the old dregs of Popish superstition and
formality, from which they were not well purged. Others are made to practice
the Ceremonies, with a doubting and dissalowing conscience, and to say with
Naaman, in this the Lord be merciful unto us, if we^ err: with my own ears
have I heard some say so. And even those who have not practiced the Ceremonies,
for that they can not see the lawfullnesse of them, yet are animated by the
example of practicing Conformists, to do these things which in their
consciences they condemn as unalwfull (which were to sin damnably:) and if
they do them not, then is there no small doubting and disquietnesse, trouble
and trepidation, harbored in their consciences. And thus one way or other,
some weakening or deterioration comes to us by the means of the Ceremonies.
And if any of our Opposites date think, that none of us can be so weak as to
stumble or take any harm in this kind, because of the Ceremonies; we take God
himself to witness who shall make manifest the counsels of the heart, that
we speak the truth, and lie not.

Finally, let that be considered, which Divines Parau^ comm. in Romans 15. 1.
Sermon. on. I^. 16. 7.
observe to be the perpetual condition of the Church; namely, that as in any
other family, there are found some great, some small, some strong, some weak,
some wholesome, some sickely; so still is there found such an inequality in the
house of God, which is the Church; and that because some are sooner, some are
later called; some endued with more gifts of God, and some with fewer.

The third Part, Against the lavvfulnesse of the Ceremonies.
CHAP. 1.
That the Ceremonies are unlawful, because superstitious, which is
particularly instanced in holy days, and ministering the Sacraments in private
places.

THE strongest tower of refuge to which our Opposites

My first argument against the lawfulness of the Ceremonies, I draw from the
superstition of them. I cannot marvel enough how Dr. Mourtoun and Dr. Burges
could think to rub the superstition upon non-conformists, whom they set forth
as fancying their abstinence from the Ceremonies to be a singular piece of
service done to God, placing Religion in the not using of them, and teaching
men to abstain from them for conscience sake. Fresh suit ag. Cerem. cap. 9.
pa. 96. 100.
Dr. Ames has given a sufficient answ^r, namely, that abstaining from sin is
one act of common obedience, belonging as well to things forbidden in the
second table, as to those forbidden in the first, and that we do not abstain
from those Ceremonies, but as from other unlawful corruptions, even out of the
compass of worship. We abstain from the Ceremonies even as from lying,
cursing, stealing, etc. Shall we be houlden superstitious for abstaining from
things unlawful? The superstition therefore is not on our side, but on theirs.

For first, superstition is the opposite vice to Religion, in the excess Porro
says lib. 1. de vit ext. cult oppos. Col. 501. 502.
Zanchius in cultum ipsum excessu peccatur, si quid illi quem Christus
instituit, jam addas, aut ab aliis additum sequaris: ut si Sacramentis a
Christo institutis, alia addas Sacramenta: si Sacrificiis, alia sacrificia: si
Ceremoniis cujusvis Sacramenti, alios add. is Ritus: qui merito omnes
superstitionis nomine appellantur. We see he accounts superstition to be in
the addition of Ceremonies, not instituded by Christ, as well as in the
addition of more substantial matters. Superstitio, (as some derive the word)
is that which is done supra statutum; and thus are the controverted Ceremonies
superstitious, as being used in Gods worship, upon no other ground then the
appointment of men.

2. Superstition is that which exhibites divine worship, vel cui non debet, vel
non co modo quo debet, says the Aquin. 2. 2a q 92. art. 1.
Schoolmen; Now our Ceremonies, though they exhibit worship to God, yet this
is done inordinately, and they make the worship to be otherwise performed then
it should be; for example, though God be worshipped by the administration of
the Sacraments in private places, yet not so as he should be worshipped. The
Syn. pur. Theol. Disp. 44. these. 53.
Professors of Leyden condemn private Baptism as inordinate, because Baptism
as publici ministerij, non privatae exhortationis est appendix. It Magdeb.
cent. 4. cap. 6. Col. 427.
is marked in the fourth centurie both out of Councels and Fathers, that it was
not then permitted, to communicate in private places, but this custom was
thought inordinate and unbeseeming. If it be said, that the communion was given
to the sick privately, in the ancient Church. I answer: sometimes this was
permitted, but for such special reasons as do not concern us; for as we may
see plainly by the 14 Canon of the first counsel of Nice (as those Canons are
collected by Ruffinus;) the 69 Canon of the Council of Eliberis; and the 6
Canon of the Counsel of Ancyra, the communion was only permitted to be given
in private houses to the Paenitentes, who were abstenti and debarred from the
Sacrament, some for three years, some for fyve, some for seven, some for ten,
some for thirteen, some longer; and who should happily be overtaken with some
dangerous and deadly sickness, before the set time of abstention were expired.
As for the judgment of our own Divines, Calviniani says de cas. consc. lib.
2. cap. 12. cas. 13.
Balduine, morem illum quo Eucharistia ad aegrotos tanquam viaticum defertur,
improbant, tamque non nisi in caetibus publicis usurpandam censent. For this he
alleges Beza, Aretius, and Musculus. It was a better ordinance then that of
Perth, which said Conil. Laodic. can. 58.
non oportet in domibus oblationes ab Episcopis sive Presbyteris fieri: but to
return.

3. The Ceremonies are proven to be superstitious, by this reason, Hist. of the
Waldenses part. 3. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Waldenses and Albingenses taught, that the Exorcismes, Breathings, Crossings,
Salt, Spittle, Unction, Chrisme, etc. Used by the Church of Rome in Baptism,
being neither necessary nor requisite in the administration of the same, did
occasion error and superstition, rather then edification to Salvation.

4. They are yet more superstitious, for that they are not only used in Gods
worship vnnecessarely and unprofitably, but likewise they hinder other
necessary duties. They, who though they serve the true God, yet with needless
offices, and defraud him of duties necessary, are superstitious in Eccles. Pol.
lib. 5. sect. 3.
Hookers Judgment. I wish he had said as well to him, as from him. What offices
more unnecessary, then those Roman Ritualls? yet what more necessary duties,
then to worship God in a spiritual and lively manner, to press the power of
Godliness upon the consciences of Professors, to maintain and keep faithful
and well qualified Ministers in the Church, to bear the bowels of mercy and
meekness, not to offend the weak, not to confirm Papists in Popery, to have
all things in Gods worship, disposed according to the word, and not according
to the will of man, not to exercise Lordship over the consciences of those whom
Christ has made free, to abolish the monuments of bypast, and badges of
present Idolatry: yet are those and other necessary duties shut quite out off
doors by our needless Ceremonial service.

5. The Ceremonies are not free of superstition, in as much as Augustine apud
Aquin. 2. 2 q. 93. art. 2.
alleges that which is said Luc. 17. The Kingdom of God is within you,
against superstitious persons, who exterioribus principalem curam impendunt.
The Christian worship ought to be in spirit, without the carnal Ceremonies and
rites, says I. Rainoldes, confer: with I. Heart cap. 8. divis. 4. p. 489.
one of our Divines, yea the Kingdom of God comes not cum apparatu aut Pompa
mundana, ita ut observari possit tempus vel locus, says Stella com. in Luc.
17. 20. Sect. 6.
a Papist. Carnal worship therefore, and Ceremonial observations are (to say
the least) superfluous in Religion, and by consequence superstitious.

6. Worship is placed in the Ceremonies, therefore they are most superstitious.
To make good what I say, Holiness and necessity are placed in the Ceremonies,
ergo, worship. And 1. Holiness is placed in them. Eccl. pol. l. 5. l. 70.
Hooker thinks festival days clothed with outward robes of holiness; nay he
says Ibid. s. 69.
plainly, No doubt as Gods extraordinary presence has hallowed and sanctified
certain places, so they are his extraordinary works that have truly and
worthily advanced certain times, for which cause they ought to be with all men
that honor God, more holy then other days. Ibid. s. 65.
He callerh also the Cross an holy sign. Of the lawfulness of kneeling. cap.
3.
Dr. Burgess defends, that the Ceremonies are, and may be called worship of
God, not only ratione modi, as belonging to the reverend usage of Gods
prescribed worship, but also ratione medij, though nor medij pe^se, of and by
it self, yet per aliud, by virtue of sommewhat else. Now do not Papists place
worship in their Cross and Crucifixe? yet do they place no holiness in it
per se, but only per aliud, in respect of Christ Crucified thereby
represented, and they tell us, Aquin. 3. 4. 25. art. 4.
that creaturae insensibilinon debetur honor vel reverentia, nisi ratione
rationalis naturae; and that they give no religious respect unto the tree
whereon Christ was crucified, the nails, garments, spear, mang^r, etc. but
only quantum ad rationem contactus membrorum Christi. Says Dr. Burgess any
less of the Ceremonies? Nay he places every way as much holiness, and
worship in them, in the forequotted place. And ubi supra cap. 15. p 42.
elsewhere he teaches, that after a sort the Ceremonies are worship in
themselves, even such a worship as was that of the freewill offerings under the
Law, ibid. p. 41.
and such a worship as was the building and use of Altars here and there,
(before God had chosen out the standing place for his Altar) though to the same
end for which the Lords instituted Altar served. Thus we see, that they offer
the Ceremonies, as worship to God: yet put the case they did not, the Aquin. 2.
2 q. 95. art. 2.
School says* that a thing belongs to the worship of God, vel quo ad
offerendum, vel quo ad assumendum. Whereupon it follows, that superstition
is not only to be laid to their charge, who offer to God for worship, that
which he has not commanded, but theirs also who assume in Gods worship, the
help of any thing as sacred or holy, which himself has not ordained. 2. They
place as great a necessity in the Ceremonies, as Papists place in theirs,
whereby it shall also appear, how superstitiously they place worship in them,
for quaecunque obseruatio quasi necessaria commendatur, continuo censetur ad
cultum Dei pertinere, says de vera eccl reform. page 367.
Calvine. annot on Matthew. 15. Sect. 5.
The Rhemists think, that meats of themselves, or of their own nature, do
not defile, but so far as by accident they make a man to sin: as the
disobedience of Gods commandment, or of our Superiors, who forbid some meats
for certain times and causes, is a sin. And they add; that neither flesh
nor fish of it self does defile, but the breach of the Churches praecept
defiles. 3. q. 66. art. 6.
Aquinas defends that trin-immersion is not de necessitate baptismi, only he
thinks it a sin to baptize otherwise, because this rite is Instituted and
used by the Church. Do not formalists place the same necessity in the
Ceremonies, while-as they say they urge them not as necessary in themselves,
but only as necessary in respect of the determination of the Church, and the
ordinance of those, who are set over us? Nay Papists place not so great
necessity in many ordinances of their Church, as Formalists place in the
Ceremonies. If the cause be doubtful 2. 2 q. 147. art. 4.
Aquinas sends a man to seek a dispensation from the Superior. But sicausa sit
evidens, per se ipsum licite potest homo statuti observantiam praeterire. What
formalist dare yield us such liberty, as by our selves, and without seeking a
dispensation from Superiors, to neglect the observation of their statutes,
when we see evident cause for so doing? they think that we have no power at
our own hand to Judge, that we have an evident cause of not obeying those who
are set over us, yet thus much is allowed by this Papist, who also 3. q. 66.
art. 10.
elsewhere acknowledges that there is nothing necessary in baptism, but the
form, the minister, and the washing of water, and that all the other
Ceremonies which the Church of Rome uses in baptism, are only for solemnity.
de sacr. M^ssae l. b. 6. cap. 13.
Bellarmine says, that the neglecting and not observing the Ceremonies of the
Church, with them is not a mortal sin, except it proceed excontemptu. And de
Pont. Romans lib. 4. cap. 18.
that he who entering into a Church does not asperge himself with holy water,
sins not, if so be he do it citra contemptum. Now to be free of contempt,
will not satisfy our formalists, except we obey and do that same very thing
which we are commanded to do. Conc. Evang. cap. 60.
Cornelius Iansenius commenting upon these words; In vain do they worship me,
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men, says that the commandments
of men there, forbidden and condemned, are those which command nothing divine,
but things merely hamane. And therefore he pleads for the constitutions of
the Church about feasts, choice of meats, festivities, etc. and for obedience
to the same upon no other ground then this, because pius quisque facile videt
quam habeant ex scripturis originem and quomodo eis consonant, eo quod faciant,
ad carnis castigationem and temperantiam, aut ad fidelium unionem and
aedificationem. I know it to be false which this Papist affirms: yet in that
he thus pleads for those constitutions of the Church, from scripture and
reason, forsaking the ground of humane Auctority, he is a great deal more
modest and less superstitious, then those our opposites, who avouch the
Ceremonies as necessary, and will have us bound to the practice of them, upon
no other ground, then the bare will and auctority of Superiors, who have
enjoined them, as has been showed in the first part of this Dispute. Yea some
of them place a certain and constant necessity in the Ceremonies themselves,
even beside and without the Churches constitution (which is more then Papists
have said of their Ceremonies.) Iren lib. 1. cap. 5.. 6 and cap. 7.. 7.
Dr. Forbesse calls the Articles of Perth, pauca necessaria, etc. a few
things necessary for Gods glory, and the promoving of piety in our Church, for
order, peace, unity, and charity, and particularily he teaches, that a
minister may not lawfully omit to administer the sacraments in private places,
and without the presence of the congregation, to such as through sickn esse can
not come to the public assemblies; which he calls eis necessaria
ministrare. To say the truth, the ministration of the Sacraments in private
places, imports a necessity in the matter it self, for which cause, the apud
Zanch epist. lib. 1. page 111.
Divines of Geneva resolved that in Ecclesiis public institutis, baptism
might not be administrat in private places, but only publicly in the
congregation of the faithful* partim ne sacramenta, etc. partly say they, lest
the Sacraments being separat from the preaching of the word, should be again
transformed in certain magical ceremonies, as in Popery it was; partly that
that gross superstition of the absolute necessity of external Baptism, may be
rooted out of the minds of men. Sure, the defenders of private baptism place
too great necessity in that Sacrament. eccl. Pol. lib. 5. s. 60.
Hooker plainly insinuates the absolute necessity of outward baptism, at
least in wish or desire, whch is the distinction of the Schoolmen, and followed
by the modern Papists, to cloak their superstition. But whatsoever show it
has, it was rightly impugned in the Council of Hist. of the Connc. of Trent.
lib. 2.
Trent by Marinarus, who alleged against it that the Angel said to Cornelius,
his prayers were acceptable to God, before ever he knew of the sacrament of
baptism, so that having no knowledge of it, he could not be said to have
received it, no not in vow or wish: and that many holy Martyrs were converted
in the heat of persecution, by seeing the constancy of others, and presently
taken and put to death, of whom one can not say, but by divination, that they
knew the Sacraments and made a vow.

7. I will now apply this Argument taken from superstition, particulary to holy
days. Superstitiosum esse docemus says Conf^ss. cap. 5. art. 41.
Beza, arbitrari unum aliquem diem altero sanctiorem. Now I will show that for
malists observe holy days, as mystical and holyer then other days: howbeit
Proc. in Perth. assemb. part. 3 page 18.
B. Lindsey thinks good to dissemble and deny it. Times says he, are
appointed by our Church for morning and evening prayers in great towns, hours
for preaching on tuesday, thursday, etc. hours for weekly exercises of
prophesying, which are holy in respect of the use whereunto they are appointed;
and such are the fyve days, which we esteem not to be holy for any mistick
signification, which they have, either by Divine, or Ecclesiastical
institution, or for any worship which is appropriated unto them, that may not
be performed at an other time, but for the sacred use whereunto they are
appointed to be employed as circumstances only, and not as mysteries. Answ.
this is but falsely pretended, for as Alt. Damasc. cap. 10. p. 878.
Didoclavius observes aliud est deputare, aliud dedicare, aliud sanctificare.
designation or deputation is when a man appoints a thing for such an use, still
reserving power and right to put it to an other use, if he please, so the
Church appoints times and hours for preaching upon the week days, yet
reserving power to employ those times other wise, when she shall think fit.
Dedication is when a man so devotes a thing to some pious or civil use, that
he denudes himself of all right and title, which thereafter he might claim
unto it: as when a man dedicates a sum of money for the building of an
Exchange, a Iudgment-hall, etc. or a parcel of ground for a Church, a
Churchyard, a Glebe, a School, a Hospital; he can claim no longer right to
the dedicated thing. Sanctification is the setting apart of a thing for a holy
or religious use, in such sort, that thereafter it may be put to no other use,
Prove. 20. 25. Now, whereas times set apart for ordinary and weekly preaching,
are only designed by the Church for this end and purpose, so that they are not
holy, but only for the present they are applied to an holy use; neither is the
worship appointed as convenient or beseeming for those times, but the times are
appointed as convenient for the worship: festival days are holy both by
dedication and consecration of them. And this much the ubi supra page 29.
B. himself forbeareth not to say, only he labors to plaster over his
Superstition with the vnte^pered mortar of this quidditative distinction; ibid.
pa. 28.
that some things are holy by consecration of them to holy mystical uses, as
water inbapt isme, etc. but other things are made holy by consecration of them,
to holy political uses. This way (says he) the Church has power to make a
thing holy, as to build and consecrate places to be Temples, howses to be
Hospitalls, to give rent, lands, money, and goods to the ministry, and to the
poor, to appoint Veshells, and vestures, and Instruments for the public
worship, as Table, Tablecothes, etc. Ans. 1. The B. (I see) takes upon him to
coin new distinctions at his own pleasure, yet they will not (I trust) pass
current among the Judicious: to make things holy by consecration of them to
holy uses for policy, is an uncouth speculation, and I dare say, the Bishop
himself comprehends it not. Gods designation of a thing to any use which
serves for his own glory, is called the sanctification of that thing or the
making of it holy: and so the word is taken Isa. 13. 3. and Ier. 1. 5. as G.
Sanctius notes in his commentaries upon these places, and Calvine commenting
upon the same places expounds them so likewise. But the Churches appointing
or designing of a thing to an holy use, can not be called the making of it
holy. It must be consecrated at the command of God, and by virtue of the Word
and Prayer: thus are bread and wine consecrated in the holy supper. Res Sacrae
says Theol. lib. 6. cap. 3.
Fennerus, sunt quae Dei verbo in praedictum usum sanctificatae and dicatae
sunt. Synt. lib. 6. c. 5^. page 433.
Polanus speaking of the Sacramental elements, says, sanctificatio rei
terrenae est actio ministri, qua destinat rem teurenam ad sanctum usum, ex
mandato Dei, etc. The Syn. pur. Theol. Disp. 21. These. 7.
Professors of Leiden call only such things persons, times, and places holy,
as are consecrated and dedicated to God and his worship, and that divina
praescriptione. If our ordinary meat and drink can not be sanctificed to us,
so that we may lawfully and with a good conscience use those common things, but
by 1 Timothy 4, 5.
the word of God and prayer; how then shall any thing be made holy for Gods
worship, but by the same means? and I pray, which is the Word, and which be
the Prayers, that make holy those things, which the Bishop avoucheth for things
consecrated and made holy by the Church, namely, the ground whereupon the
Church is built, the stones and timber of an hospital, the rents, lands,
moneys or goods, given to the Ministry, and the poor, the veshels, vestures,
tables, napkines, basens, etc. appointed for the public worship?

2. Times, places, and things which the Church designeth for of their
application to holy uses, for then (as fresh suit cap. 5. page 59.
Ames argues) the air is sacred, because it is applied to the Minister his
speech whiles he is preaching, then is the light sacred which is applied to his
eye in reading, then are his spectacles sacred which are used by him reading
his text, etc. But neither yet are they holy, by virtue of the Churches
dedicating of them to those uses for which she appoints them: for the Church
has no such power as by her dedication to make them holy. Comm. in 1 Reg. 8.
de templ. dedie.
P. Martyr condemns the dedication or consecration (for those words he uses
promiscuously, whereby the Papists hallowe Churches, and he declares against
it the Judgment of our Divines to be this, licere imo jure pietatis requiri, ut
in prima cujusque rei usurpatione, gratias Deo agamus, ejusque bonitatem
celebremus, etc. Collati boni religiosum ac sanctum usum poscamus. This he
opposes to the Popish dedication of Temples and Bells, as appears by these
words quanto sanius rectiusque decernimus. He implies therefore that these
things are only consecrated, as every other thing is consecrated to us. Of
this kind of consecration he has given examples. In libro Nehemiae dedicatio
maenium civitatis commemoratur, quae nil aliud fuit nisi quod muris urbis
instauratis, populus una cum Levitis and Sacerdotibus, nec non principibus, co
se contulit, ibique gratias Deo egerunt de maenibus reaedificatis, and justam
civitatis usuram postularunt, qua item ratione prius quam sumamus cibum, nos
etiam illum consecramus. As the walls of Jerusalem then, and as our ordinary
meat are consecrated, so are Churches consecrated, and no otherwise can they
be said to be dedicated, except one would use the word dedication, in that
sense wherein it is taken, Deuteronomy. 20. 5. Where Calvine turns the word
dedicavit. Arias Montanus, initiavit. Tremellius, caepit ^i. Of this sort of
dedication Gaspar Sanctius writes thus, Alia dedicatio est, non solum inter
prophanos, sed etiam inter Haebreos usitata, quae nihil habet Sacrum, sed
tantum est auspicatio aut initium operis, ad quod destinatur locus aut res,
cujus tunc primum libatur usus. Sic Nero Claudius dedicasse dicitur domum suam
cum primum illam habitare coepit. Ita Suetonius in Nerone. Sic Pompejus
dedicavit theatrum suum, cum primum illud public is ludis and communibus usibus
aperuit; de quo Cicero lib. 2. Epist. 1. Any other sort of dedicating Churches,
we hold to be superstitious. Peter Valdo, of whom the Waldenses were named. is
Hist. of the Valdens. lib. 1. cap. 1.
reported to have taught, that the dedication of Temples was but an invention
of the Devil. And though Churches be dedicated by preaching and praying, and
by no superstition of sprinkling them with holy water, or using such magical
rites, yet even these dedications says Cent. 4. cap. 6. col. 408.
the Magdeburgians, ex judaismo natae videntur sine ullo Dei praecepto. There
is indeed no warrant for such dedication of Churches, as is thought to make
them holy. Bellatmine would warrant it by Moses his consecrating of the
Tabernacle, the Altar, and the Veshells of the same, but De orig. templ. lib.
4. cap. 2.
Hospinian answers him, Mosis factum expressum habuit Dei mandatum: de
consecrandis autem templis Christianorum, nullum uspiam in verbo Dei praeceptum
extat, ipso quoque Bellarmino test. Whereupon he concludes, that this
Ceremony of consecrating or dedicating the Churches of Christians, is not to
be used after the Example of Moses, who in building and dedicating of the
Tabernacle, did follow nothing without Gods express commandment. What I have
said against the dedication of Churches, holds good also against the dedication
of Altars; The Table whereupon the Elements of the body and blood of Christ are
set, is not to be called holy: neither can they be commended who devised
Altars in the Church, to be the seat of the Lords body and blood, as if any
Table, though not so consecrated, could not as well serve the turn. And what
though Altars were used in the ancient Church? yet this custom a Iudaica, in
Ecclesiam Christi permanavit ac postea superstitioni materiam praebuit, say
cent. 4. cap. 6. Col. 409.
the Magdeburgians. Altars savor of nothing but Iudaisme, and the borrowing of
Altars from the Jews, has made Christians both to follow their Priesthood,
and their sacrifices. Haec enim tria, scilicet Sacerdos, Altar, and
Sacrificium, sunt correlativa, ut ubi unum est, caetera duo adesse necesse sit,
says comm. in Mal. 1. 11.
Cornelius a Lapide.

3. If sometimes, places, and things, be made holy by the Churches Eccles. Pol.
lib. 5. s. 16.
Hooker teaches us, that the service of God, in places not sanctified as
Churches are, has not in it self (mark in it self) such perfection of grace
and comeliness, as when the dignity of the place which it wishes for, does
concur; and that the very Majesty and holiness of the place where God is
worshipped, bettereth even our holiest and best actions. How much more soundly
do we hold with confer. with I. Heart. cap. 8. divis. 4. page 491.
I. Rainoldes, that unto us Christians, no land is strange, no ground unholy;
every coast is Iewry: every town Jerusalem: and every house Sion: and every
faithful company, yea every faithful body, a Temple to serve God in? The
contrary opinion ubi supra.
Hospinian rejects as savouring Iudaisme, alligat enim religionem ad certa
loca. Whereas the presence of Christ among two or three gathered together in
his name, makes any place a Church, even as the presence of a King with his
attendants makes any place a Court. As of places, so of times our opposites
thinks most superstitiously. For of holy days Eccl Pol. lib. 5. s. 69.
Hooker says thus. No doubt as Gods extraordinary presence has hallowed and
sanctified certain places, so they are his extraordinary works, that have
truly and worthily advanced certain times, for which cause they ought to be
with all men, that honor God, more holy then other days. What is this but
Popish superstition? for just so the annot. on 1 Timothy 4. 5.
Rhemists think that the times, and places of Christ's Nativity, Passion,
Burial, Resurrection, and Ascension, were made holy: and just so decult.
Sanct. cap. 10.
Bellarmine holds, that Christ did consecrate the days of his Nativity,
Passion, and Resurrection, eo quod nascens consecrarit praesepe, moriens
crucem, resurgens sepulchrum. Hooker has been of opinion, that the holy days
were so advanced above other days by Gods great and extraordinary works done
upon them, that they should have been holyer then other days, even albeit the
Church had not appointed them te be kept holy. Yet B. Lindsey would have us
believe, that they think them holy, only because of the Churches consecration
of them to holy Political uses. But that now at last, I may make it appear to
all that have common sense, how falsely (though frequently) it is given forth
by the Bishop, that holy days are kept by them only for order and policy,
and that they are not so superstitious, as to appropriate the worship to those
days, or to observe them for mystery and as holier then other days.

First, I require the B. to show us a difference betwixt the keeping ubi supra
page 21.
Bishop alleges five respects of difference, but they are not true. First, he
says, that the Lords day is commanded to be observed of necessity, for
conscience of the Divine ordinance, as a day sanctified and blessed by God
himself. Answ. 1. so have we heard from Hooker, that holy days are sanctified
by Gods extraordinary works, but because the B* dare not say so much,
therefore I say. 2. This difference can not show us, that they observe holy
days only for order and policy, and that they place no worship in the
observing of them, as in the observing of the Lords day, (which is the point
that we require) for worship is placed in the observing of humane, as well as
of Divine ordinances; otherwise worship has never been placed in the keeping
of Pharisaicall and Popish traditions. This way is worship placed in the
keeping of holy days, when for conscience of an humane ordinance, they are
both kept as holy, and thought necessary to be so kept. 3. The B. contradicts
himself, for Ep. to the Past. of the Church of Scotl.
elsewhere he defends, that the Church has power to change the Lords day.
Secondly, he gives us this difference, that the Lords day is observed, as the
Sabbath of Jehovah, and as a day whereon God himself did rest after the
creation. Ans. 1. This is false of the Lords day, for after the creation, God
rested upon the seventh day, not upon the first. 2. Dr Douname says on praec.
5.
, that festival days also are to be consecrated as Sabbaths to the Lord.
Thirdly, the B. tells us, that the Lords day is observed in memory of the Lords
Resurrection. Ans. 1. He shall never make this good, for, we observe the Lords
day in memory of the whole work of Redemption. 2. If it were so, this could
make no difference, for just so Christmasse is observed in memory of the Lords
Nativity, Good Friday, in memory of his Passion, etc. His fourth and fifth
respects of difference, are certain mysteries in the Lords day, But we shall
see by and by, how his fellow Formalists who are more ingenuous then himself,
show us mysteries in the Festival days also. Lastly, albeit the B. have told
us that there is no worship appropriated unto the Festival days, which may
not be performed at any other time, yet this can not with him make a difference
betwixt them and the Lords day: for in his Epistle which I have quotted, he
declares his judgment to be the same of the Lords day, and teaches us, that
the worship performed on it, is not so appropriated to that time, but lawfully
the same may be performed at any other convenient time, as the Church shall
think fit. Now as the worship performed on the Lords day, is appropriated (in
his judgment) to that time, so long as the Church alters it not, and no
longer, just as much thinks he, of the appropriating to Festival days, the
worship performed on the same.

2. If the holy days be observed by Formalists only for order and Semel Deo
dicatum non est ad usus humanos ulterius transferendum, says one of the
Bonifac. 8. de reg. juris. reg. 51.
Popes. And by the dedication of Churches, the founders surrender that right,
which otherwise they might have in them, says one of the Hook. eccl. pol lib.
5. s. 12.
Formalists themselves. If then the Church has dedicated holy days to the
worship of God, then has she denuded her self of all power to change them, or
put them to another use: which were otherwise, if holy days were appointed to
be kept, only for order and policy. Yea further, times and places which are
applied to the worship of God, as circumstances only for outward order and
policy, may be by a private Christian applied to an civil use, for in so doing
he breaks not the ordinance of the Church: for example, Material Churches
are appointed to be the receptacles of Christian assemblies, and that only for
such common commodity and decency, which has place as well in civil as in
holy meetings, and not for any holiness conceived, to be in them, more then in
other houses. Now if I be standing in a Churchyard when it raineth, may not I
go into the Church that I may be defended from the injury of the weather? If I
must meet with certain men, for putting order to some of my wordly affairs,
and it fall out that we can not conveniently meet in any part but in the
Church, may we not there keep our tryst? A material Church then, may serve
for a civil use, the same way that it serves to a holy use. And so for times
appointed for ordinary preaching upon week days in great towns, may not I
apply those times to a civil use, when I can not conveniently apply them to
the use for which the Church appoints them? I trust our Prelates shall say, I
may, because they use to be otherwise employed the^ in Divine worship, during
the times of weekly preaching. Now if holy days were commanded to be kept only
for order and policy, they might be applied to another use, as well as those
ordinary times of weekly meetings in great towns: whereas we are required of
necessity to keep them holy.

3. If the holy days be kept only for order and policy, why do Sermon. on Mat.
6. 16.
B. Andrews call the feast of Easter, the highest and greatest of our
religion? And does not ubi supra page 25.
B. Lindsey himself with Chrysoftome call the festival of Christ's Nativity,
metropolim omnium festorum? By this reason does de cult. sanct. cap. 10.
Bellarmine prove, that the feasts of Christians are Celebrated, non solum
ratione ordinis and politiae, sed etiam misterij, because otherwise they should
be all equal in celebrity, whereas Leo calls Easter festum festorum, and
Nazianzene, celebritatem celebritatum.

4. If the holy days be kept only for order and policy, then the
sanctification, of them should be placed, Zanch. in. 4. praec. p. 682.
in ipso actuali externi cultus exercitio. But Hooker has told us before, that
they are made holy, and worthily advanced above other days, by Gods
extraordinary works wrought upon them. Where upon it follows, that as
Paraeus comm. in Genesis 2. 3.
Deus diem septimum sanctificavit vacatione sancta, and ordinatione ad usum
sanctum; so has he made festival days no less holy in themselves, and that
as the Sabbath was holy from the beginning, because of Gods resting upon it,
and his ordaining of it for a holy use, howbeit it had never been applied by
men to the exercises of Gods worship: even so festival days are holy, being
advanced truly and worthily, by the extraordinary works of God, and for this
cause commended to all men that honor God, to be holier with them then other
days, albeit it should happen that by us they were never applied to an holy
use. If B. Lindsey think that all this touches not him, he may be pleased to
remember, that Vbi supra page 20.
he himself has confessed, that the very presence of the festivity, puts a man
in mind of the mystery, howbeit he have not occasion to be present in the holy
assembly. What order or policy is here, when a man being quiet in his Parlour
or Cabinet, is made to remember of such a mystery on such a day? What has
external order and policy to do with the internal thoughts of a man's heart,
to put in order the same?

5. By their fruits shall we know them; look whether they give their holy
days, for staying from the public worship, and attending wordly business, as
they do at the diets of weekly and ordinary preaching: yet they would make the
simple believe, that their holy days are only appointed to be kept, as those
ordinary times set apart for Divine service on the weeke-dayes. Nay, moreover
let it be observed, whether or not they keep the Festival days more
carefully, and urge the keeping of them more earnestly, then the Lords own
day. Those Prelates that will not abase themselves to preach upon ordinary
Sabbaths, think the high holy days worthy of their Sermons. They have been
also often seen to travel upon the Lords day, whereas they hold it religion
to travel upon a holy day. And whereas they can digest the common profanation
of the Lords day, and not challenge it, they can not away with the not
observing of their festivities.

6. By their words shall we Judge them. Says not ubi supra page 29.
B. Lindsey, on praec. 4.
Dr. Douname holds, that we are commanded in the fourth commandment, te keep
the feasts of Christ's Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and
Pentecost, and that these feasts are to be consecrated as Sabbaths to the Lord.
B. Andrews, a man of the greatest note amongst our opposites, affoordeth us
here plenty of testimonies for proof of the point in hand, namely, that the
anniversary Festival days are kept for mystery and as holier then other
days. Sermon. on Psalm. 85. 10. 11. he says of Christmasse, that mercy and
truth, righteousness and peace, of all the days of the year, meet most
kindly on this day. Sermon. on Psalm. 2. 7. he says of the same day, that of all
other hodie's, we should not let slip the hodie of this day, whereon as the law
is most kindly preached, so it will be most kindly practiced of all others.
Sermon. on Hebr 12. 2. he says of Good-fryday, let us now turn to him, and
beseech him by the sight of this day. Sermon. on 1 Cor. 5. 7. 8. he says of the
keeping of the Christian Passover upon Easter, that then it is best for us to
do it, It is most kindly to do it, most like to please Christ, and to prosper
with us. And indeed if at any time we will do it, quando Pascha nisi in
Pascha, etc. so that without any more ado, the season pleads for this
effectually, etc. Sermon. on Coll. 3. 1. he says, that there is no day in the
year so fit for a Christian to rise with Christ, and seek the things above,
as Easter day. Sermon. on Ioh. 2. 19. he says, that the act of receiving Christ's
body is at no time so proper, so in season, as this very day. Sermon. on 1 Cor.
11. 16. he tells us out of Leo, This is a peculiar that Easter day has, that
on it all the whole Church obtains remission of their sins. Sermon. on Act.
2. 1. 2. 3. he says of ^he Feast of Pentecost, that of all days we shall not
go away from the holy Ghost empty on this day; it is dies donorum: his giving
day. Sermon. on Ephesians. 4. 30. he says, this is the holy Ghosts day, and not for
that originaly so it was: but for that it is to be intended, ever he will do
his own chief work upon his own chief Feast, and opus diei, the days
work upon the day it self. Sermon. on Psalm. 68. 18. he says, that love will
be best and soonest wrought, by the Sacrament of love, upon Pentecost, the
Feast of love. Sermon. on Act. 10. 34. 35. he says, that the receiving of the
holy Ghost in a more ample measure is opus diei, the proper of this day. Sermon.
on Ia. 1. 16. 17. he calls the gift of the holy Ghost, the gift of the day of
Pentecost, and tells us that the holy Ghost the most perfect gift of all, this
day was, and any day may be, but chiefly this day will be given, to any that
will desire. Sermon. on Luk 4. 18. he says of the same Feast, that because of
the benefit that fell on this time, the time it self it fell on, is and can
not be but acceptable, even eo nomine, that at such a time such a benefit
happened to us. Much more of this stuff I might produce out of See Sermon. on
Gal. 4. 4 Sermon. on Luke 2. 10. 11. Sermon. on Lament. 1. 12. Sermon on Io. 20. 19.
Sermon. on Job. 19. 23 Sermon. on Io. 20. 17. Sermon. on Heb. 13. 20. 21. Sermon. on
Math. 6. 16. Sermon. on Act. 2. 16. Sermon. on Io. 5. 6. etc
this Prelates holy days sermons, which I supersede as more tedious then
necessary; Neither yet will I stay here to confute the errors of those and such
like sentences of his; for my purpose is only to prove against B Lindsey, that
the Festival days, whereabout we dispute, are not observed as circumstances
of worship, for order and policy; but that as the chief parts of Gods worship
are placed in the celebration and keeping of the same, so are they kept and
celebrate most superstitiously, as having certain sacred and mystical
significationes, and as holier in themselves then other days, because they
were sanctified above other days by the extraordinary works and great
benefits of God, which happened upon them: So that the worship performed on
them, is even appropriated to them: all which is more then evident from those
testimonies which I have in this place collected.

And finally, the page 67.
Author of the nullity of Perth assembly proves Hooker say, that the days of
public memorials should be clothed with the outward robes of holiness. They
allege for the warrant of anniversarij festivities, the Ancients, who call
them Sacred and mystical days. If they were instituted only for order and
policy, that the people might assemble to religious exercises, wherefore is
there but one day appointed betwixt the Passion and the Resurrection? forty
days betwixt the Resurrection and Ascension? ten betwixt the Ascension and
Pentecost? wherefore follow we the course of the Moon, as the Jews did; in
our moveable Feasts? etc. Wherefore is there not a certain day of the month
kept for Easter, as well as for the Nativity? etc. That which is here alleged
out of Hooker and ^he Ancients, B. Lindsey passes quite over, and neither
inserts nor answers it. As touching those demands which tie him as so many
gordian knots, because he can not unloose them, he goes about to break them,
ubi supra page 23.
telling us, that they order these things so for unity with the Catholic
Church. This is even as some natural Philosophers, who take upon them to give
a reason and cause for all things in nature, when they can find no other, they
flee to Sympathia Phisica. When it is asked, wherefore the loadstone does
attract iron rather then other metal? they answer, that the cause thereof is
sympathia phisica inter magnetem, and ferrum. With such kind of etimology does
the B. here serve us, yet peradventure he might have given us another cause.
If so, my retractation is, that if he be excused one way, he must be accused
an other way, and if he be blameless of Ignorance, he is blameworthy for
dissimulation. The true causes why those things are so ordered, we may find in
B. Andrews his Sermons, which I have made use of in handling this argument. For
example, Sermon. on Mat. 12. 39. 40.
the reason why there is but one day betwixt the Passion and the Resurrection,
is, because that Jonas was but one day in the Whales belly, and Christ but one
day in the bosom of the earth, for in their going thither, he sets out
Good-fryday: in their being there Easter-eve: in their coming thence Easter
day. As for the 50 days betwixt Easter and Pentecost, Sermon. on Luke 4. 18. 19.
he says, fifty is the number of the Iubilee; which number agrees well with
this feast, the Feast of Pentecost. What the one in years, the other in
days. So that this is the Iubilee as it were of the year, or the yearly
memory of the year of Iubilee: that, the Pentecost of years: this, the
Iubilee of days. In the end of the same Sermon he tells us the reason, why
there are ten days appointed betwixt the Ascension, and Pentecost. The feast
of Iubilee says he, began ever after the high Priest had offered his
Sacrifice, and had been in the Sancta Sanctorum, as this Iubilee of Christ
also took place from his entering into the holy places, made without hands,
after his propitiatory sacrifice, offered up for the quick and the dead, and
for all yet unborne, at Easter. And it was the tenth day, that: and this now is
the tenth day since. He has told us also Sermon. on Math. 6. 16.
. why there is not a certain day of the month appointed for Easter, as there
is for the Nativity, namely, because the fast of Lent must end with that high
feast, according to the Prophecy of Zachary. Wherefore I conclude, aliquid
misterii alunt, and so aliquid monstri too.

CHAP. II.
That the Ceremonies are unlawful, because they are monuments of bypast
idolatry, which not being necessary to be retained, should be utterly
abolished, because of their idolatrous abuse: all which is particularly made
good of kneeling.

I Have proven the Ceremonies to be superstitious; now I will prove them to be
Idolatrous. These are different arguments, not Idolatry, as is rightly by
Synop. pur. Theol. disp. 19. these. 30.
some distinguished. As for the Idolatry of the controverted Ceremonies, I will
prove that they are thrice Idolatrous. 1. reductive, because they are monuments
of bypast Idolatry. 2 participative, because they are badges of present
Idolatry. 3. formaliter, because they are Idols themselves. First then, they
are Idolatrous, because having been notoriously abused to Idolatry heretofore,
they are the detestable and accursed monuments, which give no small honor to
the memory of that bypast Idolatry, which should lie buried in hell. Manduct.
page 38.
Dr. Burgess reckons for Idolatrous, all Ceremonies devised and used, in and
to the honoring of an Idol, whether properly or by interpretation such. Of
which sort says he, were all the Ceremonies of the Pagans, and not a few of
the Papists. If an opposite writting against us be forced to aknowledge this
much, one may easily conjecture, what enforcing reason we have to double out
our point. The Argument in hand I frame thus:

All things and rites, which have been notriously abused to idolatry, if they
be not such, as either God or nature has made to be of a necessary use, should
be utterly abolished and purged away from Divine worship, in such sort that
they may not be accounted nor used by us, as sacred things, or rites pertaining
to the same.

But the Cross, Surplice, kneeling in the act of receiving the Commuion, etc.
are things and rites, etc. and are not such as either God or nature, etc.

Ergo, they should be utterlie abolished, etc.

As for the proposition I shall first explain it, and then prove it; I say,
all things and rites, for they are alike forbidden as I shall show. which have
been notoriously abused to idolatry, because if the abuse be not known we are
blameless for retaining the things and rites which have been abused. I say,
if they be not such as either God or nature has made to be of a necessary use,
because if they be of a necessary use, either through Gods institution, as the
Sacraments, or through natures law, as the opening of our mouths to speak (for
when I am to preach or pray publikly, nature makes it necessary, that I open my
mouth to speak audibly and articularly,) then the abuse can not take away the
use. I say, they may not be used by us, as sacred things and rites pertaining
to Divine worship, because without the compass of worship, they may be used to
a natural or civil purpose. If I could get no other meat to eat, then the
consecrated host which Papists Idolatrize in the circumgestation of it, I
might lawfully eat it, and if I could get no other clothes to put on, then the
holy garments wherein a Priest has said Mass, I might lawfully wear them.
Things abused to Idolatry, are only then unlawful, when they are used no
otherwise then religiously, and as things sacred.

The proposition thus explained, is confirmed by these five proofs, 1. Gods
own praecept, Isa. 30. 22. Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven
images of silver, and the ornament of thy molten images of gold: thou shall
cast them away as a menstrous cloth, thou shall say unto it, get thee hence.
The covering of the Idol here spoken of, comm. in illum locum.
Gaspar Sanctus rightly understands to be that, quo aut induebantur simulacra
Gentilico ritu, aut bracteas quibus ligneae imagines integuntur, aut quo
homines Idolis sacrificaturi amiciebantur. So that the lea^t appurtenances of
Idols are to be avoided. When the Apostle Iud. 23.
Jude would have us to heat the garment spotted with the flesh, his meaning
is, detestandam esse vel superficiem ipsam mali five peccati, quam tunicae
appellatione subinnuere videtur, as our own comm. in These. 5. 22.
Rolloke has observed. If the very covering of an Idol be forbidden, what
shall be thought of other things which are not only spotted, but irrecoverably
polluted with idols? many such praecepts were given to Israel, as Exodus 34.
13. Ye shall destroy their altars, break their images, and cut down their
groves. Deuteronomy. 7. 25. 26. The graven images of their Gods shall ye burn with
fire: thou shall not desire the silver and gold that is on them, nor take it
unto thee, lest thou be snared therein: for it is an abomination to the Lord
thy God. Read to the same purpose Numb. 33. 52. Deuteronomy. 7. 5. and 12. 2. 3.
Secondly, God has not only by his praecepts commanded us to abolish all the
relics of Idolatry, but by his promises also manifested unto us, how
acceptable service this should be to him. There is a command Number. 33. 52. that
the Israelites should destroy the Canaanites, evertantque res omnes
idololatricas ipsorum: cui mandato says anal. in illum locum.
Iunius, subjicitur sua promissio, namely, that the Lord would give them the
promised land, and they should dispossess the inhabitants thereof, Verse. 53.
yea there is a promise of remission and reconciliation to this work. Isa. 27.
9. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to
take away his sin: when he makes all the stones of the Altar as chalk
stones, that are beaten asunder, the groves and images shall not stand up.

Thirdly, the Churches of Pergamos and Theatyra are reproved for suffering the
use of Idolothyts, Apoc. 2. 14. 20. Where the eating expos. upon Revel. 2. 14.
Perkins notes. Paybody therefore is greatly mistaken, when he thinks, that
meats sacrificed to Idols, being the good Creatures of God, were allowed by
the Lord, out of the case of scandal, notwithstanding of Idolatrous pollution,
for Apoc. 2. the eating of things sacrificed to Idols, is reproved as
Idolatry, and 1. Cor. 10. 20. the cating of such things, is condemned as a
fellowship with Devils. Now Idolatry and fellowship with devils, I suppose
are unlawful, though no scandal should follow upon them. And whereas he
thinks meats sacrificed to Idols, to be lawful enough out of the case of
scandal, for this reason, because they are the good Creatures of God, he
should have considered better the Apostles mind concerning such Idolothyts.
Which In praec. 2. p. 534.
Zanchius sets down thus, Verum est, per so haec nihil sunt, sed respectu
eorum quibus immolantur aliquid sunt: quia per haec, illis quibus immolantur,
nos consociamur. Qui isti? Daemones. For our better understanding of this
matter, we must distinguish two sorts of Idolothyts, both which we find 1 Cor.
10. Of the one, the Apostle speaks from the 14 Verse of that Chapter, to the
23. Of the other, from the 23. verse to the end; This is Beza his distinction
in his Annotations on that Chapter. Of the first sort, he delivers the Apostles
mind thus; that as Christians have their holy banquets, which are badges of
their communion both with Christ and among themselves, and as the Israelites by
their sacrifices did seal their copulation in the same religion, so also
Idolaters cum suis idolis aut potius daemonibus, solemnibus illis epulis
copulantur. So that this sort of 1 Cor. 8. 10.
Idolothyts were eaten in Temples, and public solemn banquets, which were
dedicated to the honor of idols. annot. on 1 Cor. 10. 21.
Cartwright shows, that the Apostle is comparing the Table of the Lord, with
the Table of Idolaters: whereupon it follows, that as we use the Lords Table
religiously, so that Table of Idolaters of which the Apostle speaks, had
state in the idolatrous worship, like that feast Number. 25. 3. quod in honorem
falsorum Deorum celebrabatur, says com. in illum locum.
Calvine. This first sort of Idolathyts, anal. in 1 Cor. 10.
Pareus calls the sacrifices of Idols, and from such he says, the Apostle
dissuadeth by this argument, Participare e^pulis Idolorum, est idololatria. Of
the second sort of Idolothyts, the Apostle begins to speak Verse. 23. The
Corinthians moved a question, whether they might lawfully eat things sacrificed
to Idols? In privatis conviviis, says ibid.
Pareus. The Apostle resolves them that domi in privato convictu they might
eat them, except it were in the case of scandal, thus annot. ibid.
Beza. The first sort of Idolothyts are meant of Apoc. 2. as Beza there notes,
and of this sort must we understand de bono conjugali, cap. 16.
Augustine to mean, whiles he says, that it were better mori fame, quam
Idolothytis vesci. These sorts are simply and in themselves unlawful. And if
meats sacrificed to Idols be so unlawful, then much more such things and
rites as have not only been sacrificed and destinated to the honor of Idols,
(for this is but one kind of Idolatrous abuse,) but also of a long time,
publikly and solemnly employed in the worshipping of Idols, and deeply
defiled with Idolatry, much more I say, are they unlawful to be applied to
Gods most pure and holy worship, and therein used by us publicly and
solemnly, so that the world may see us conforming, and joining our selves unto
Idolaters.

Fourthly, I fortify my proposition by approven examples: and first, we find
that Jacob, Genes. 35. 4. did not only abolish out of his superstitionis
insignia, as Calvine; res ad idololatriam pertinentes, as Iunius; monilia
idolis consecrata, as Pareus calls them; all writting upon that place. We
have also the example of Elijah, 1. Kings 18. 30. he would by no means offer
upon Baals Altar, but would needs repair the Lords Altar, though this should
hold the people the longer in exspectation. This he did in P. Martyrs Judgment,
because he thought it a great indignity, to offer sacrifice to the Lord, upon
the Altar of Baal. Whereupon, comm. in illum locum
Martyr reprehendeth those who in administering the true Supper of the Lord, uti
velint Papisticis vestibus and instrumentis. Further we have the example of
Iehu, who is commanded for the destroying of Baal out of Israel, with his
image, his house, and his very vestments. Read, 2. Kings, 10. from the 22.
Verse to the 28. And what example more considerable, then that of Hezekiah, who
not only abolished such monuments of Idolatry, as at their first institution
were but men's inventions, but brake down also the Brazen serpent (though
originally set up at Gods own command,) when once he saw it abused to
Idolatry? 2 Kings 18. 4. This deed of Hezekiah, Pope apud wolphium com. in 2
Reg. 18. 4.
Steven does greatly praise, and professes that it is set before us for our
imitation, that when our predecessors have wrought some things, which might
have been without fault in their time, and afterward they are converted into
error and superstition, they may be quickly destroyed by us who come after
them. Io. Calv. epist. and resp. page 79.
Farellus says, that Princes and Magistrates should learn by this example of
Hezekiah, what they should do with those significant rites of men's devising
which have turned to superstition. Yea, the sermon. on Phil. 2. 10
B. of Wincester aknowledgeth, that whatsoever is taken up at the injunction of
men, when it is drawn to superstition, comes under the compass of the
Brazen serpent, and is to be abolished. And he excepteth nothing from this
example, but only things of Gods own prescribing, Moreover, we have the
example of good Josiah, 2 Kings 23. for he did not only destroy the houses and
the high places of Baal, verse. 19. but his vessels also, verse. 4. and his
grove, verse 6. 14. and his Altars, verse. 12. yea the horses and charrets, which
had been given to the Sun, verse. 11. The example also of penitent Manasseh,
who not only overthrewe the strange Gods, but their Altars too 2 Chronicles. 33. 15.
And of Moses the man of God, who was not content to execute vengeance on the
Idolatrous Israelites, except he should also utterly destroy the monument of
their Idolatry, Exodus 32. 27. 20. Lastly, we have the example of Daniel, who
would not defile himself with the portion of the Kings meat, Dan. 1. 8,
because says com. in locum illum
Iunius, it was converted in usum idololatricum, for at the banquets of the
Babylonians and other Gentiles, erant praemessa sive praemissa, quae dijs
praemittebantur. They used to consecrate their meat and drink to Idols, and
to invocate the names of their Idols upon the same, so that their meat and
drink fell under the prohibition of Idolothyts. This is the reason, which is
given by the most part of the Interpreters, for Daniels fearing to pollute
himself, with the kings meat, and wine: and it has also the approbation of G.
Sanctius com. ibid.
a Papist.

Fifthly, our proposition is backed with a twofold reason, for things which have
been notoriously abused to Idolatry, should be quia monent, 2. quia movent:
first then, they are monitory, and preserve the memory of Idols, monumentum in
good things, is both monimentum and munimentum, but monumentum in evil things,
(such as Idolatry,) is only monimentum, which monet mentem to remember upon
such things as ought not to be once named among Saints, but should lie buried
in the eternal darkness of silent oblivion. Those relics therefore of
Idolatry, quibus quasi monumentis posterit as admoneatur (as com. in 2 Reg. 23.
6.
Wolphius rightly says,) are to be quite defaced and destroyed, because they
serve to honor the memory of cursed Idols. God Exodus 23. 13. Deuteronomy. 12. 3.
Ios, 23. 7.
would not have, so much as the name of an Idol, to be remembered among his
people, but commanded to destroy their names, as well as themselves. Whereby we
are admonished, as com in Isa. 27. 9.
Calvine says, how detestable Idolatry is before God, cujus memoriam vult
penitus deleri, ne posthac ullum ejus vesligium appareat, Calv. com. in Exodus
23. 24.
yea he requires, eorum omnium memoriam deleri, quae semel dicata sunt idolis.
If Esther. 3. 2.
Mordecay would not give his countenance, nor do any reverence to a living
monument of that nation, whose name God had ordained Deuteronomy. 25. 19.
to be blotted out from under heaven; much less should we give connivence, and
far less countenance, but least of all reverence to the dead and dumb
monuments of those Idols which God has devoted to utter destruction, with all
their naughty appurtenances, so that he will not have their names to be once
mentioned or remembered again. But secoundly, movent too: such Idolothyous
remainders move us to turn back to Idolatry. For usu compertum habemus,
superstitiones etiam postquam explosae essent, si qua relicta fuissent earum
monumenta, cum memoriam sui ipsarum apud homines, tum id tandem ut revocarentur
obtinuisse, says ubi supra
Wolphius. Who here upon thinks it behovefull, to destroy funditus such
vestigies of superstition, for this cause, if there were no more; ut and*
aspirantibus ad revocandam idololatriam spes frangatur, and res novas
molientibus ansa pariter ac materia praecipiatur. God would have Israel to
overthrow all idolotrous monuments, lest thereby they should be snared, Deuteronomy.
7. 25. and 12. 30. And if the Exodus 21. 33.
law command to cover a pit, lest an ox or an ass should fall therein: shall
we suffer a pit to be open, wherein the precious souls of men and women, which
all the world can not ransone, are likely to fall? Did God command Deuteronomy. 22. 8.
to make a battlement for the roof of a house, and that for the safety of men's
bodies? And shall we not only not put up a battlement, or object some bar for
the safety of men's souls, but also leave the way sl^pty and full of snares?
Read we not that the Lord, who knew what was in man, and saw how propense he
was to Idolatry, did not only remove out of his peoples way, all such things as
might any way allure or induce them to Idolatry, (even to the cutting of the
names of the Idols out of the land, Zecbar. 13. 2.) but also hedge up their
way with thorns, that they might not find their paths, nor overtake their
Idol-Gods, when they should seek after them, Hos. 2. 6. 7? And shall we by the
very contrary course, not only not hedge up the way of Idolatry with thorns,
which may stop and stay such as have an inclination aiming forward, but also
lay before them, the inciting and entising occasions, which add to their own
propension, such delectation as spurreth forward with a swift facility?

Thus having both explained and confirmed the proposition N fratri and amico
art. 17.
Saravia will not have pium crucis usum to be abolished cum abusu, but holds it
enough that the abuse and superstition be taken away. Iren. lib. 1. cap. 7. 9.
6.
Dr Forbesse his answer is, that not only things instituted by God, are not to
be taken away for the abuse of them, but further, neque res mediae ab hominibus
prudenter introductae, propter sequentem abusum semper tollendae sunt. Abusi
sunt Papistae Templis, and Oratoriis, and Cathedris, and sacris Vasis, and
Campanis, and benedictione Matrimoniali: nec tamen res istas, censuerunt
prudentes reformatores abjiciendas. Ans. 1. resp. ad versipel. page 41. 4.
Calvine answering that which Cassander alleged out of an Italian writer,
abusu non tolli bonum usum; he admits it only to be true, in things which are
institute by God himself: not so in things ordained by men: for the very use of
such things, or rites, as have no necessary use in Gods worship, and which men
have devised, only at their own pleasure, is taken away by Idolatrous abuse.
Pars tutior here, is to put them wholly away, and there is by a great deal
more danger in retaining; then in removing them. 2. The proofs which I have
produced for the proposition, about which now we debate, do not only infer
that things and Rites, which have been notoriously abused to Idolatry, should
be abolished, in case they be not restored to a right use, but simply and
absolutely that in any wise they are to be abolished. e God commanded (b) Isa.
30. 22.
to say to the coverings, and the ornaments of Idols get you hence. It is not
enough they be purged from the abuse, but simpliciter, they themselves must
pack them, and be gone. How did Jacob with the ear rings of the Idols; Elijah
with Baals Altar; Iehu with his vestments; Josiah with his houses; Manasseh
with his Altars; Moses with the golden Calfe; Joshua with the Temples of Canaan;
Hezekiah with the Brazen Serpent? did they retain the things themselves, and
only purge them from the abuse? belike if these our Opposites had been their
counselors, they had advised them to be contented with such a moderation: yet
we see they were better counseled, when they destroyed utterly the things
themselves: whereby we know, that they were of the same mind with us, and
thought that things abused to Idolatry, if they have no necessary use, are
far better away then aplace. Did Daniel refuse Bells meat, because it was not
restored to the right use? Nay, if that had been all, it might have been
quickly helped, and the meat sanctified by the word of God and prayer.
Finally, were the Churches of Pergamos and Theatyra, reprooved, because they
did not restore things sacrificed to Idols, to their right use? or, were they
not rather reprooved for having any thing at all a do with the things
themselves?

3. As for that which Dr. Forbesse objecteth to us, we answer, that Genesis 1.
28. So that all those examples do except themselves from the argument in hand.
But ubi supra
the Dr. intends to bring those things within the category of things
indifferent, and to this purpose he alleges, that it is indifferent to use
this, or that place, for a Temple, or a place of prayer: also to use these
Veshells, and Bells, or others; And of Matrimonial benediction to be performed
by a Pastor, he says, there is nothing commanded in scripture. Ans. Though it
be indifferent to choose this place, or that place, etc. also to use these
Veshells, or other Veshells, etc. yet the Dr (I trust) will not deny that
Temples, houses of prayer, Veshels, and Bells are of a necessary use, (which
exeemeth them from the touch of our present argument:) whereas beside, that it
is not necessary to kneel in the communion in this place, more then in that
place, neither to keep the feasts of Christ's Nativity, Passion, etc. upon these
days more then upon other days, etc. the things themselves are not necessary
in their kind, and it is not necessary to keep any festuall day, nor to kneel
at all in the act of receiving the communion. There is also another respect
which hinders Temples, Veshells, etc. from coming within the compass of
this our argument: but neither does it agree to the controverted Ceremonies.
Temples, houses of Prayer, Veshells for the ministration of the Sacraments, and
Bells, are not used by us in Divine worship, as things Sacred; or as holier
then other houses, Veshells, and Bells; But we use them only for natural
necessity, partly for that common decency, which has no less place in the
actions of Civil, then of sacred assemblies: yea in some cases, they may be
applied to Civil uses, as supra cap. 1. sect. 11.
has been said. Whereas the controverted Ceremonies are respected and used, as
sacred Rites, and as holier then any circumstance, which is alike common to
civil and sacred actions, neither are they used at all, out of the case of
worship. We see now a double respect, wherefore our argument infers not the
necessity of abolishing and destroying such Temples, Veshells and Bells, as
have been abused to Idolatry, viz. because it can neither be said, that they
are not things necessary, nor yet that they are things sacred.

Nevertheless (to add this by the way) howbeit for those reasons, Com. in
Deuteronomy. 12. 2.
Calvine also and In 4. praec. Col. 709.
Zanchius do plainly insinuate. Whereby I mean to defend (though not as in it
self necessary, yet as expedient pro tunc, that which the Reformators of the
Church of Scotland did in casting down some of those Churches, which had been
consecrate to Popish Idols, and of a long time polluted with Idolatrous
worship. As on the one part the Reformators (not without great probability)
feared, that so long as these Churches were not made even with the ground, the
memory of that superstition, whereunto they had been employed and accustomed,
should have been in them preserved, and with some sort of respect, recognized:
so on the other part they saw it expedient to demolish them, for strengthening
the hands of such as adhered to the Reformation, for putting Papists out of all
hope of the reentry of Popery, and for hedging up the way with thorns, that
the Idolatrously minded, might not find their paths. And since the pulling
down of those Churches wanted neither this pious intent, nor happy event, I
must say, that the bitter invectives given forth against it, by some who carry
a favorable eye to the pompous bravery of the Romish whore, and have deformed
to much of that which was by them reformed, are to be detested by all such, as
wish the eternal exile of Idolatrous monuments, out of the Lords land: yet let
these Momus-like spirits understand, that their censorius verdicts do also
reflexe upon those ancient Christians Magdeb. Cent. 4. cap. 15. Col. 1538.
1539.
of whom we read, that with their own hands they destroyed the Temples of
Idols. And upon Chrysostom, who stirred up some Monks, and sent them into
Phaenicia, together with workmen, and sustained them on the expenses and
charges of certain godly women, that they might destroy the Temples of Idols,
as the Cent 5. cap. 15. Col. 1511.
Magdeburgians have marked out of Theodoret: Likewise upon them of the Religion
in France, of whom Thuanus records, that templa confractis ac disjectis
statuis and altaribus, expilaverant. Lastly, upon Daneus Polit. Christ. lib. 3
p. 229 Polan. synt. Theol. lib. 10 cap. 65.
fortaine Divines, who teach, that not only Idola, but Idolia also, and omnia
Idololatriae instrumenta should be abolished. Moreover, what was it else, but
reasons light which made Cambyses to fear, that the superstition of Egypt
could not be well rooted out, if the Temples wherein it was seated were not
taken away; so that offensus superstitionibus Aegyptiorum, Apis caeterorumque
Deorum aedes dirui jubet: ad Ammonis quoque nobilissimum templum expugnandum,
exercitum mittit, says Epit. Hist. lib. 1.
Justinius. And is not the danger of retaining Idolatrous Churches, thus pointed
at by P. Martyr. Curavit etc. Iehu (says Com. in 2 Reg. 10. 27.
he) took care to have the Temples of Baall overthrown, lest they should
return any more to their wonted use Wherefore it appears, that many do not
rightly, who having embraced the Gospel of the Son of God, yet
notwithstanding keep still the instruments of Popery. And they have far
better looked to piety who have taken care, to have Popish Images, statues, and
ornaments, utterly cut off, for as we read in the Ecclesiastical Histories,
Constantine the great, after he had given his name to Christ, by an edict
provided and took order, that the Temples of the Idols might be closed and
shut up. But because they did still remain, Julian the Apostate did easily
open and unlock them, and thereafter did prostitute the Idols of old
superstition to be worshipped in them: which Theodosius the best and commended
Prince, animadverting, commanded to pull them down, lest they should again
any more be restored. But because I suppose no sober spirit will deny that
sometimes and in some cases, it may be expedient to raze and pull down some
Temples polluted with Idols, where other Temples may be had to serve
sufficiently the assemblies of Christian congregations, (which is all I plead
for:) Therefore I leave this purpose, and return to D. Forbesse.

As touching matrimonial benediction, it also is exeemed out of Number. 6.
God has commanded his Ministers, to bless his people, which by just Analogy
belongs to the Ministers of the Gospel; neither is there any ground for
making herein a difference, betwixt them and the Ministers of the Law, but we
must conceive the commandment, to the both alike to the blessing of Gods
People. Unto which Ministerial duty of blessing, because no such limits can be
set, as may exclude Matrimonial blessing; therefore they are bound to the
performance of it also. And if further we consider Hebr 6. 7.
that the duty of blessing was performed by the Minister of the Lord, even
before the law of Moses, we are yet more confirmed, to think that the blessing
of the people, was not commanded in the Law as a thing peculiar and proper to
the Leviticall Priesthood, but as a Moral and perpetual duty, belonging to
the Lords Ministers for ever. Wherefore notwithstanding of any abuse of
Matrimonial benediction among Papists, yet forasmuch as it has a necessary
use in the Church, and may not (as the controverted Ceremonies may) be well
spared; It is manifest, that it comes not under the respect and account of
those things, whereof our Argument speaks.

Lastly, whereas the Dr. would bear his Reader in hand, that in the Calv. Res.
ad Versipel. p. 413.
Reformators speak for themselves. Nos quoque priscos ritus, quibus
indifferenter uti licet, quia verbo Dei consentanei sunt non reijcimus, modo ne
superstitio and pravus abusus cos abolere cogat. This was the judgment of the
wisest Reformators; that Rites which were both ancient, and lawful, and
agreeable to Gods Word, were notwithstanding of necessity to be abolished,
because of their superstition and wicked abuse.

Secondly, our Opposites answer us, that beside the purging of things and Rites
abused by Idolators, from their Idolatrous pollution, and the restoring of them
to a right use, preaching and teaching against the superstition, and abuse
which has followed upon them, is another means to avoid that harm, which we
fear to ensue upon the retaining of them. Ans. 1. This is upon as good ground
pretended for the keeping of images in Churches. At inquiunt statim docemus has
imagines non esse adorandas. Quasi vero says de imagine, Col. 402.
Zanchius, non idem olim fecerit diligentius Deus, per Mosen and Prophetas,
quam nos faciamus. Cur igitur etiam volebat tolli imagines omnes? quia non
satis est verbo docere non esse faciendum malum: sed tollenda etiam sunt
malorum offendicula, irritamenta, causae, occasiones. It is not enough with the
Scribes and Pharisees to teach out of Moses Chair, what the people should do,
but all occasions, yea appearances of evil, are to be taken out of their
sight. Efficacius enim and plus movent, quae in oculos quam quae in aures
incidunt. Potuerat and Hezekias populum monere, ne Serpentem adorarent, sed
maluit confringere and penitus e conspectu auferre, and rectius fecit faith
Tho. N^o. georgus in 1 10. 5. 21.
one well to this purpose. 2. Experience has taught, to how little purpose
such admonitions do serve. Ioh. Calv. Epist. and resp. page 86.
Calvine writing to the Lord Protector of England, of some Popish Ceremonies
which did still remain in that Church, after the Reformation of the same,
desires, that they may be abolished, because of their former abuse, in time of
Popery. Quid enim (says h) illae Ceremoniae aliud fuerunt, quam totidem
lenocinia quae miseras animas ad malum perducerent, etc. But because he saw,
that some might answer, that which our Formalists answer now to us, and say, it
were enough to warn and teach men that they abuse not these Ceremonies, and
that the abolishing of the Ceremonies themselves were not necessary. Therefore
immediately he subjoyneth these words. Iam si decautione agitur, monebuntur
homines scilicet, ne ad illas nunc impingant, etc. Quis tamen non videt
obdurari ipsos nihilominus, nihil ut infaelici illa cautione obtineri possit.
Whereupon he concludes, that if such Ceremonies were suffered to remain, this
should be a mean to nourish a greater hardness and obfirmation in evil, and
a veil drawn, so that the sincere doctrine which is propounded, should not be
admitted as it ought to be. Ibid. Col. 136.
Inanother Epistle to Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, he complains, that
external superstitions were so corrected in the Church of England, ut residui
maneant innumeri surculi, qui assidue pollulent. And what good then was done by
their admonitions, whereby they did in some sort snedde the reviving twigs of
old superstition, since forasmuch as they were not wholly eradicat, they did
still shoot forth again. If a man should dig a pit by the way side, for
some commodity of his own, and then admonish the travelers to take heed to
themselves, if they go that way in the darkness of the night, who would hold
him excusable? How then shall they be excused, who dig a most dangerous pit,
which is like to ruin many souls, and yet will have us to think that they
are blameless, for that they warn men to beware of it?

Thirdly, we are told, that if these answers which our Opposites comm. in Col.
2. 17.
Zanchius answer for us, that these things are by themselves necessary, so that
it is enough they be purged from the abuse. And de imagine. Col. 403.
elsewhere he resolves, that things which are by themselves both good and
necessary, may not for any abuse be put away. Si vero res sint adiaphorae sua
natura and per legem Dei, eoque tales quae citra jacturam salutis omitti
possunt, etiamsi ad bonos usus initio fuerunt institutae: si tamen postea
videamus illas in abusus pernitiosos esse conversas: pietas in Deum, and
charitas erga proximum, postulant ut tollantur, etc. He adds for proof of
that which he says, the example of Hezekiah in breaking down that Brazen
Serpent, which example does indeed most pregnantly enforce the abolishing of
all things or rites, notouriously abused to Idolatry, when they are not of any
necessary use, but it warranteth not the abolishing of any thing which has a
necessary use, because the Brazen Serpent is not contained in the number of
those things quibus carere non possumus, says com. in 2 Reg. 18. 4.
Wolphius, answering to the same objection, which presently I have in hand. Now
that the Ceremonies have not in themselves, nor by the Law of God any necessary
use, and that without hazard of Salvation, they may be omitted, is aknowledged
by Formalists themselves, wherefore I need not stay to prove it.

Beside these answers which are common in our adversaries We must consider
says r B. Lindsey, the Ceremony (b) Proc. in Perth assemb part. 2. page 120.
it self (dedicated to, and polluted with Idolatry), (whether it be of humane,
or Divine institution; If it be of humane institution, it may be removed, etc.
but if the Ceremony be of Divine institution, such as kneeling is; for the same
is commended by God unto us in his word; then we ought to consider whether the
abuse of that Ceremony, has proceeded from the nature of the action wherein it
was used: for if it be so, it ought to be abolished, etc but if the abuse
proceed not from the nature of the action, but from the opinion of the agent;
then the opinion being removed, the religious Ceremony may be used without any
profanation of Idolatry. For example, the abuse of kneeling in elevation, etc.
proceeded not only from the opinion of the agent, but from the nature of the
action which is idolatrous and superstitious, etc. and therefore both the
action, and gesture ought to be abolished. But the Sacrament of the Supper,
being an action instituted by God, and kneeling being of the own nature an
holy and religious Ceremony, it can never receive contagion of idolatry from
it, but only from the opinion of the agent: then remove the opinion, both the
action it self may be rightly used, and kneeling therein, etc. Ans. 1. since
he grants that a Ceremony dedicated to, and polluted with Idolatry; may (he
answers not the argument which there he propounds, except he say must) be
abolished, if it be of humane Institution: he must grant from this ground, if
there were no more, that the Cross, Surplice, kneeling at the communion, etc.
having been so notoriously abused to Idolatry, must be abolished, because they
have no institution except from men only. But, 2. Why says he, that kneeling
is a Ceremony of Divine institution? Which he pronounces not of kneeling, as
it is actuated by some individual case, or clothed with certain particular
circumstances, (for he makes this kneeling whereof he speaks, to be found in
two most different actions, the one Idolatrous, the other holy,) but of
kneeling in the general, per se, and praecise ab omnibus circumstantijs. Let
him now tell, where kneeling thus considered is commended unto us in Gods word.
He would possibly allege that place. Psalm 95, 6. O come, let us worship and
bow down: let us kneel before the Lord our maker. Which is cited in the Canon
of Perth about kneeling. But I answer; whether one expound that place with
sCalvin, ((...)) com. in illum locum
in this sense, ut scilicet ante arcam faederis populus se prosternat, quia
sermo de legali cultu habetur: Whereupon (...) should follow, that it
commends kneeling, only to the Jews in that particular case: or whether it
be taken more generally, to commend kneeling, (though not as necessary, yet as
laudable and beseeming,) in the solemn acts of Gods immediate worship, such as
that, praise and thanksgiving, whereof the beginning of the Psalm speaks,
whether I say it be taken in this, or that sense, yet it commends not
kneeling, except in a certain kind of worship only. And as for kneeling in
the general nature of it, it is not of Divine institution, but in it self
indifferent, even as sitting, standing, etc. all which gestures are then only
made good, or evil, when in actu exercito they are actuated and individualized
by particular circumstances. 3. If so be, the Ceremony be abused to Idolatry,
it skills not how, for as I have showed before, the reasons and proofs which I
have produced for the proposition of our present Argument, hold good against
the retaining of any thing which has been known to be abused to Idolatry,
and only such things as have a necessary use are to be excepted. 4. The nature
of an action, wherein a Ceremony is used, can not be the cause of the abuse of
that Ceremony, neither can the abuse of a Ceremony proceed from the nature of
the action wherein it is used, as one effect from the cause, for Aquin. 2. 2a.
q. 43. art. 1.
nihil potest esse homini causa sufficiens peccati, except only propria
voluntas. 5. The abuse of kneeling in the Idolatrous action of elevation,
proceeds not from the nature of the action, but from the opinion of the
agent, or rather from his will, (for principium actionum humanarum, is not
opinion, but will chosing that which opinion conceiteth to be chosen, or
voluntas praeeunte luce intellectus.) It is the will of the agent only, which
both makes the action of elevation to be Idolatrous, and likewise kneeling in
this action to receive the contagion of Idolatry. For the elevation of the
bread materialiter, is not Idolatrous, (more then the lifting up of the bread
among us by Elders or Deacons, when in taking it off the table, or setting it
on, they lift it above the heads of the communicants;) but formaliter only, as
it is elevated with a will and intention to place it in state of worship. So
likewise kneeling to the bread, materialiter, is not Idolatry, (else a man were
a Idolater, who should be against his will thrust down, and holden by violence
kneeling on his knees, when the bread is elevated,) but formaliter, as it
proceeds from a will and intention in men, to give to the bread elevated, a
state in that worship, and out of that respect to kneel before it. 6. What can
he gain by this device, that the abuse of kneeling in the Lords Supper
proceeded not from the nature of the action, but from the will of the agent?
Can he hereupon infer, that kneeling in that action is to be retained,
notwithstanding of any contagion of Idolatry, which it has received? Nay then,
let him say, that Hezekiah did not rightly, in breaking down the Brazen
Serpent, which was set up at Gods command, and the abuse whereof proceeded not
from the thing it self, which had a most lawful, profitable, and holy use, but
only from the perverse opinion and will of them who abused it to Idolatry.

But the comparing of kneeling to the Brazen Serpent, is very The Brazen
Serpent says he, in the time it was abolished, had no use: that ceased with
the virtue of the cure, that the Israelites received by looking upon it; the
act of kneeling continues allwise in a necessary use, for the better
expressing of our thankfulness to God. Ans. 1. Both kneeling, and all the rest
of the Popish Ceremonies, may well be compared to the Brazen Serpent. And
Divines do commonly allege this example, as most pregnant, to prove that
things or rites polluted with I dolls, and abused to Idolatry, may not be
retained, if they have no necessary use, and I have cited before the B. of
Winchester, aknowledging that this argument holds good against all things
which are taken up, not at Gods prescription, but at men's injunction. Confer.
with 1. Heart cap. 8. divis. 4. page 509.
I. Rainoldes argumenteth, from Hezekiah his breaking down of the Brazen
Serpent, to the plucking down of the sign of the Cross. 2. Why says he,
that the Brazen Serpent in the time it was abolished had no use? the use of it
ceased not with the cure, but it was still kept for a most pious and profitable
use, even to be a monument of that mercy, which the Israelites received in the
wilderness, and it served for the better expressing of their thankfulness to
God, which the B. here calls a necessary use. 3. When he says that kneeling
continues always in a necessary use, we must understand him to speak of
kneeling in the act of receiving the Communion, else he runs at randone, for
it is not kneeling in the general, but kneeling in this particular case which
is compared to the Brazen Serpent. Now to say, that this gesture in this action
is necessary, for our better expressing of our thankfulness to God, imports
that the Church of Scotland, and many famous Churches in Europe, for so many
years, have omitted that which was necessary, for the better expressing of
their thankfulness to God, and that they have not well enough expressed it.
And moreover, if kneeling be necessary in the Lords Supper, for our better
expressing of our thankfulness to God, then is it also necessary at our own
common tables. Though we be bound to be more thankful at the Lords Table, and
that because we receive a benefit of infinite more vvorth. Yet we are bound to
be tam grati, as well thankful, at our own tables, albeit not tanta
gratitudine. If then the same kind of thankfulness be required of us at our
own Tables, (for intentio and remissio graduum secundum magis and minus, non
variant speciem rei;) that which is necessary for expressing of our
thankfulness, at the Lords Table, must be necessary also for the expressing of
it, at our own. When I see the B. sitting at his Table, I shall tell him,
that he omitteth that gesture which is necessary, for the expressing of his
thankfulness to God. 4. Did not the Apostles receiving this Sacrament from
Christ himself, well enough express their thankfulness to God? yet they
kneeled not, but sat, as is evident, and shall be afterward prooven against
them who contradict every thing which crosses them. 5. God will never take
a Ceremony of men's devising, for a better expressing of our thankfulness, then
a gesture which is commended to us by the example of his own Son and his
Apostles, together with the Celebration of this Sacrament in all points
according to his institution. 6. How shall we know where we have the B.
and his fellows? it seems they know not where they have themselves: for
sometimes they tell us, that it is indifferent to take the Communion sitting,
or standing, or passing, or kneeling, yet here the B. tells, that kneeling is
necessary. 7. I see the B. perceives, that no answer can take kneeling at the
Communion, out of the compass of the Brazen Serpent, except to say, it has a
necessary use, this is the dead lift, which yet helps not, as I have showed.
All things then which are not necessary, (where of kneeling is one,) being
notoriously abused to Idolatry, fall under the Brazen Serpen^.

Paybody also will here talk with us, therefore we will talk with apol. part.
3. cap. 4. sect. 15. 16. 17.
says, that God did not absolutely condemn things abused to Idolatry, and
tells us of three conditions on which it was lawful to spare Idolatrous
appurtenances: 1. If there were a needful use of them in Gods worship: 2 In
case they were so altered and disposed, as that they tended not to the honor
of the Idol, and his damnable worship, 3. If they were without certain
danger, of insnaring people into Idolatry. Ans. 1. Either he requires all these
conditiones, in every Idolothyte and Idolatrous appurtenance which may be
retained, or else he thinks, that any one of them suffices: If he require all
these, the last two are superfluous; for that which has a needful use in Gods
worship, can neither tend to the honor of the Idol, nor yet can have in it
any danger of insnaring people into Idolatry: If he think any one of those
conditions enough, then let us go through them. The first I admit, but it will
not help his cause, for while the world stands, they shall never prove that
kneeling in the act of receiving the Communion, and the other controverted
Ceremonies, have either a needful, or a profitable, or a lawful use in Gods
worship. As for his secound condition, it is all one with that which supra
sect. 9.
I have already confuted: namely, that things abused to Idolatry may be kept,
if they be purged from their abuse, and restored to the right use. But he
alleges for it a passage of Parker, of the Cross, cap. 1. sect. 7. page 10.
Where he shows out of Augustine, that an Idolothyte may not be kept for
private use, except 1. Omnis honor Idoli, cum apertissima destructione
subvertatur. 2 That not only his honor be despoysed, but also all show
thereof. How does this place (now would I know,) make any thing for Paybody?
Do they keep kneeling for private use? Do they destroy most openly all honor
of the Idol, to which kneeling was dedicated? Has their kneeling not so much
as any show of the breaden-Gods honor? who will say so? and if any will say
it, who will believe it? who knows not that kneeling is kept for a public,
and not for a private use, and that the breaden Idol receives very great show
of honor from it? He was scarce of warrants, when he had no better, then
Parker could affoorde him. His third condition rests, and touching it I ask,
what if those Idolatrous appurtenances, be not without apparent danger of
insnaring people into Idolatry? are we not commanded to abstain from all
appearance of evil? Will he correct the Apostle, and teach us, that we need
not care for apparent, but for certain dangers? What more apparent danger of
insnaring people into Idolatry, then unnecessarie Ceremonies, which have been
dedicated to, and polluted with Idols, and which being retained, do both
admonish us to remember upon old Idolatry, and move us to return to the same,
as I have supr^ sect. 6.
before made evident?

Now as for the assumption of our present Argument, it can not Epist. ad Regin.
Elisab. Epistolar. lib. 1. page 112.
Zanchius condemn the Surplice, and such like Popish Ceremonies, left in
England, because the Whore of Rome has abused, and does yet abuse them, ad
alliciendos homines ad scortandum. Sunt enim pompae istae omnes, and Ceremoniae
Papisticae, nihil aliud quam fuci Meretricij, ad hoc excogitati, ut homines ad
spiritualem scortationem alliciantur. O golden sentence, and worthy to be
engraven with a pen of Iron, and the point of a Diamond! For most needful it
is to consider, that those Ceremonies, are the very meretricious bravery, and
inveagling trinkets, wherewith the Romish Whore does faird and paint her self,
whiles she propineth to the world the cup of her fornications. This makes Ibid.
page 111.
Zanchius, to call those Ceremonies, the Relics and Symboles of Popish
Idolatry and Superstition. When Queen Mary set up Popery in England, and
restored all of it, which King Henry had overthrown, she considered, that
Popery could not stand well favouredly, without the Ceremonies. Whereupon
Sleid. comm. lib. 25. p. 48^.
she ordained, ut dies omnes festi celebrentur, superioris aetatis Ceremoniae
restituantur, pueri adultiores ante baptisati, ab Episcopis confirmentur. So
that not in remote regions, but in his Majesty's dominions, not in a time past
memory, but about fourscore years ago, not by peoples practice only, but by
the laws and edicts of the Supreme Magistrate; the Ceremonies have been
abused, to the reinducing and upholding of Popery and Idolatry. Both far and
near then, both long since and lately, it is more then notorious, how grossly
and grievously the Ceremonies have been polluted with Idolatry and Superstition.

I can not choose but marvel much, how Apol. part. 3. cap. 4.
Paybody was not ashamed Proc. in Perth. assemb. part. 2. p. 118. 119
B. Lindsey seems also to hold, that kneeling has been abused by the
Papists, only in the elevation and circumgestation of the Host, but not in
the participation; and that Honorius, did not command kneeling in the
participation; but only in the elevation and circumgestation. Ans. 1. Saltem
mendacem oportet esse memorem. Says not the Ibid. page 22.
B. himself elsewhere of the Papists, In the Sacrament they kneel to the
sign, whereby he would prove a disconformity between their kneeling and ours:
for we kneel, says he, by the Sacrament to the thing signified. Now if the
Papists in the Sacrament kneel to the sign, then they have Idolatrously abused
kneeling, even in the participation, for the B. dare not say, that in the
elevation, or circumgestation, there is either Sacrament or sign. 2. Why do
our Divines controvert with the Papists, de adoratione Eucharistiae, if Papists
adore it not in the participation? for the Host carried about in a box, is not
the Sacrament of the Eucharist. 3. In the participation, Papists think that the
Bread is already transubstantiate into the body of Christ, by virtue of the
words of consecration. Now if in the participation they kneel to that which
they falsely conceit to be the body of Christ, (but is indeed corruptible
bread) with an intention to give it Latria or Divine worship: then in the
participation they abuse it to Idolatry. But that is true. ergo. 4. Ration.
lib. 5. tit. de prima and lib. 6. tit. de die sancta pasche.
Durand shows, that though in the holy days of Easter and Pentecost, and the
festivities of the blessed Virgin, and in the Lords days, they kneel not in
the Church, but only stand (because of the joy of the festivity,) and at the
most do but bovv or incline their heads at prayer; yet in presentia corporis
and sanguinis Christi, in presence of the bread and wine, which they think
to be the body and blood of Christ, they cease not to kneel. And how will the
B. make their participation free of this Idolatrous kneeling? The annot. on
Math. 8. sect. 3. and on 1 Cor. 11. sect. 18.
Rhemists show us, that when they are eating and drinking the body and blood
of our Lord, they adore the Sacrament, and humbling themselves they say to it,
Domine non sum dignus, Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori. 5. As for that which
Honorius the 3 decreed, Way to the Church, answer to sect. 51.
Dr. White calls it, the adoration of the Sacrament. Which if it be so, then
we must say, that he decreed adoration in the participation it self: because
extra usum Sacramenti, the bread can not be called a Sacrament. Honorius
commanded, that the Priest should frequently teach his people, to bow down
devoutly, when the host is elevated in the celebration of the Mass, and that
they should do the same, when it is carried to the sick. All this was
ordained, in reference to the participation. Ad usum illa instituta sunt, says
exam. conc. trit de Euchar. can. 6. page 86.
Chemnitius, speaking of this decrec, quando scilicet panis consecratur, and
quando ad infirmos defertur, ut exhibeatur and sumatur. So that that which was
specially respected in the decree, was adoring in the participation.

Lastly, here we have to do with Dr. Burgess, who will have us to think, of
the lawful, of kneeling, cap* 21. p. 65.
that adoration in receiving the Sacrament, has not been Idolatrously intended
to the Sacrament in the Church of Rome, neither by decree nor custom: not by
decree; because albeit Honorius appointed adoration to be used in the elevation
and circumgestation, yet not in the act of receiving. And albeit the Roman
Rituall do appoint, that Clergy men coming to receive the Sacrament, do it
kneeling, yet Ibid. p. 69.
this was done in veneration of the Altar, or of that which stands thereupon,
and not for adoration of the Host put into their mouths. Not by custom* for
^he will not have it said, that kneeling in the time of receiving, was ever in
the Church of Rome, any rite of or for adoration of the Sacrament, because
albeit the people kneel in the act of receiving, yet I deny, says he, that
they ever intended adoration of the species, at that moment of time when they
took it in their mouths, but the turned themselves to God etc. Ans. 1. As for
the decree of Honorius, I have all ready answered with Chemnitius, that it had
reference specially to the receiving. 2. When Clergy men are appointed in the
Roman Rituall, to receive the Sacrament at the Altar kneeling, this was not
for veneration of the Altar, to which they did reverence at all times when they
approached to it, but this was required particularly in their receiving of the
Sacrament, for adoration of it Neither is there mention made of the Altar, as
conferring any thing to their kneeling in receiving the Sacrament, for the
Sacrament was not used the more reverently, because it stood upon the Altar,
but by the contrary, for the Sacraments sake reverence was done to the Altar,
which was esteemed the Seat of the body of Christ. It appears therefore, that
the Altar is mentioned, not as concerning the kneeling of the Clergy men in
their communicating, but simply as concerning their communicating, because none
but they were wont to communicate at the Altar, according to that received
Council. Laodicaen. can. 19. See also Conc. Tolet. 4. can. 17.
Canon. Solis autem Ministris Altaris liceat ingredi ad Altar, and ibidem
communicare. The one of the Doctors own conjectures, is, that they kneeled for
reverence of that which stood upon the Altar. But I would know what that was,
which standing upon the Altar, made them to kneel in the participation; if it
was not the Host it self? Now whereas he denies, as touching custom, that
people did ever intend the adoration of the species: I answer. 1. How knows he
what people in the Roman Church did intend in their minds? 2. What warrant
has he for this, that they did not in the participation adore the Host, which
was then put into their mouths? 3. Though this which he says, were true, he
gains nothing by it; for put the case they did not intend the adoration of
the species, dare he say, that they intended not the adoration of that which
was under the species? I trow not. Now that which was under the species, though
in their conceit it was Christ's body, yet it was indeed Bread. So that in the
very participation, they were worshipping the Bread. But, 4. What needs any
more? he makes himself a liar, and says ubi supra page 71.
plainly, that after transubstantiation was embraced, and when all the
substance of the visible Creature was held to be gone, they did intend the
adoration of the visible things, as if there had been now no substance of any
creature left therein. Whereby he destroys all which he has said, of their
not intending the adoration of the species.

Last of all, for the other part of my assumption, that the Ceremonies ubi
supra page 118 (a) ubi supra.
B. of Edimbrugh, and a Paybody, have turned their (...) bravery, and chosed
rather to say any thing against us, then nothing. They spare not to answer,
that kneeling has a necessary use. They are most certainly speaking of
kneeling in the act of receiving the Communion; for they, and their Opposites
in those places, are disputing of no other kneeling, but this only. Now we may
easily perceive, they are in a evil taking, when they are driven to such an
unadvised and desperate answer. For. 1. If kneeling in the act of receiving the
Lords Supper be necessary, why have themselves two, written so much for the
indifferency of it? O desultorious levity, that knows not where to hold it
self! 2. If it be necessary, what makes it to be so? what law? what example?
what reason? 3. If it be necessary, not only many reformed Churches, and many
ancient too; but Christ himself and his Apostles, have in this Sacrament
omitted something that was necessary. 4. If it be necessary, why do many of
their own Disciples take the Communion, sitting in places where sitting is
used? what need I to say more? In the first part of this dispute, I have proven
that the Ceremonies are not necessary, in respect of the Churches ordinance,
howbeit if it were answered in this place, that they are in this respect
necessary, it helps not, since the Argument proceeds against all things
notoriously abused to Idolatry, which neither God nor nature has made
necessary. And for any necessity of the Ceremonies in themselves, either our
Opposites must repudiat, what has unadvisedly fallen from their pens
hereanent, or else forsake their beaten ground of indifferency, and say
plainly, that the Ceremonies are urged by them, to be observed with an opinion
of necessity, as worship of God, and as things in themselves necessary. Look to
your selves, o Formalists, for you stand here upon such slippery places, that
you can not hold both your feet.

CHAP. III.
That the Ceremonies are unlawful, because they sort us with Idolaters, being
the badges of present Idolatry among the Papists.

IT follows according to the order, which I have proposed, to show next, that
the Ceremonies are Idolatrous, participative. 2 Kings 16, 10.
Ahaz was an Idolater, eo ipso, that he took the Pattern of an Altar from
Idolaters. Forasmuch then, as kneeling before the consecrated Bread, the Sign
of the Cross, Surplice, Festival days, Bishopping, bowing to the Altar,
administration of the Sacraments in private places, etc. Are the wares of Rome,
the baggage of Babylon, the trinkets of the Whore, the badges of Popery, the
ensigns of Christ's enemies, and the very Trophies of Antichrist: we can not
conform, communicate, and symbolize with the Idolatrous Papists, in the use of
the same, without making our selves Idolaters by participation. Shall the Chaste
Spouse of Christ take upon her the ornaments of the Whore? Shall the Israel
of God symbolize with her, who is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt? Shall
the Lords redeemed people wear the ensigns of their captivity? Shall the
Saints be seen with the mark of the beast? Shall the Christian Church be like
the Antichristian, the Holy like the Profane, Religion like Superstition, the
Temple of God like the Synagogue of Satan? Our Opposites are so far from
being moved with these things, that both in Pulpits, and private places, they
use to plead for the Ceremonies by this very Argument, that we should not run
so far away from Papists, but come as near them, as we can. But for proof of
that which we say, namely, that it is not lawful to symbolize with Idolaters,
(and by consequence with Papists) or to be like them in their Rites or
Ceremonies, we have more to allege, then they can answer.

For, 1. We have Scripture for us. Lev. 18. 3. After the doings of the land of
Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not do: and after the doings of the land of
Canaan, whether I bring you, shall ye not do, neither shall ye walk in their
ordinances. Deuteronomy. 12. 30. Take heed to thy self, that thou be not snared by
following them, etc. Saying, how did these Nations serve their Gods: even so
will I do likewise. Thou shall not do so unto the Lord thy God, Exodus 23 24.
Thou shall not do after their works. Yea, they were straightly forbidden, to
round the corners of their Heads, or to make any cuttings in the flesh for the
dead, or to print any mark upon them, or to make baldenesse upon their Heads,
or between their eyes, for as much as God had chosen them to be a holy and a
peculiar people, and it behoved them not to be framed nor fashioned like the
Nations, Levit. 19. 27. 28. and 21, 5. and Deuteronomy. 14. 1. And whit else was meant
by these laws, which forbade them to suffer their cattle to gender with a
diverse kind, to sow their field with diverse seed, to wear a garment of
diverse sorts, as of Woollen and Linen, to plow with an ox and an ass
together, Levit. 19. 19. Deuteronomy. 22. 9. 10. 11? This was to hold that people in
simplicity and purity, ne hinc inde accersat ritus alienos says Calvine upon
these places. Besides, find we not, that they were sharply reprooved, when they
made themselves like other Nations? 2 Chronicles. 13. 9. Ye have made you Priests
after the manner of the Nations of other lands, 2 Kings. 17. 15. They followed
vanity and became vain, and went after the Heathen, that were round about
them, concerning whom the Lord had charged them, that they should not do like
them. The Gospel commends the same to us which the Law did to them. 2 Cor.
6. 14. 15. 16. 17. Be not ye unequally yoked with unbeleevers: for, what fellow
ship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has light
with darkness? and what concord has Christ with Belial? and what agreement
has the Temple of God with Idols? etc. Wherefore come out from among them,
and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, Revel.
14. 9. If any man worship the beast, and his image, and receive his mark in
his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of
God. And the Apostle Jude v. 12. will have us to hate the very garment, spotted
with the flesh, importing, that as under the Law men were made unclean, not
only by leprosy, but by the garments, veshels, and houses of leprous men: so
do we contract the contagion of Idolatry, by communicating with the unclean
things of Idolaters.

Before we go further, we will see what our Opposites have said to those
Scriptures which we allege, Eccl. pol. lib. 4. s. 6.
Hooker says, that the reason Egyptians, and the Canaanites, was not because
it behoved his people to be framed of set purpose, to an utter dissimilitude
with those Nations, but his meaning was to bar Israel, from similitude with
those Nations, in such things as were repugnant to his ordinances and laws.
Ans. 1. Let it be so: he has said enough against himself. For we have the same
reason to make us abstain from all the Rites and Customs of Idolaters, that
we may be barred from similitude with them in such things, as are flatly
repugnant to Gods word, because dissimilitude in Ceremonies, is a bar to stop
similitude in substance, and on the contrary, similitude in Ceremonies opens
a way to similitude in greater substance. 2. His answer is but a begging of
that which is in question, for as much as we allege those laws and
prohibitions, to prove that all the Rites and Customs of those Nations, were
repugnant to the Ordinances and Laws of God, and that Israel was simply
forbidden to use them. 3. Yet this was not a framing of Israel of set purpose
to an utter dissimilitude with those Nations, for Israel used food and raiment,
sowing and reaping, sitting, standing, lying, walking, talking, trading, laws,
government, etc: notwithstanding that the Egyptians, and Canaanites used so.
They were only forbidden to be like those Nations in such unnecessary Rites and
Customs, as had neither institution from God nor nature, but were the
inventions and devices of men only. In things and rites of this kind alone, it
is, that we plead for dissimilitude with the Idolatrous Papists. For the
Ceremonies in controversy are not only proven to be under the compass of such,
but are besides made by the Papists, badges and marks of their religion, as we
shall see afterward.

To that place, 2 Cor. 6. apol. part. 3. cap. 4. s. 5.
Paybody answers, that nothing else is Ans. 1. When the Apostle there
forbids the Corinthians, to be unequally yoked with unbeleevers, or to have
any communion or fellowship with Idolaters, and requires them so to come out
from among them, that they touch none of their unclean things. Why may we not
understand his meaning to be, that not only they should not partake with
Pagans in their Idolatries, but that they should not marry with them, not
frequent their feasts, nor go to the theater to behold their plays, nor go
to Law before their Judges, nor use any of their Rites? for with such Idolaters
we ought not to have any fellowship, as in pr^. 2. page 543.
Zanchius resolves, but only in so far as necessity compels, and Charity
requires. 2. All the Rites and Customs of Idolaters, which have neither
institution from God nor nature, are to be reckoned among those sins, wherein
we may not partake with them, for they are the improfitable works of
darkness, all which com in illum locum.
Calvin judges to be in that place generally forbidden, before the Apostle
descend particularly, to forbid partaking with them in their Idolatry. As for
the prohibition of diverse mixtures, ubi supra.
Paybody says, the Jews were taught thereby to make no mixture of true and
false worship. Ans 1. According to his Tenets, it follows upon this answer,
that no mixture is to be made betwixt holy, and Idolatrous Ceremonies, for he
calls kneeling, a bodily worship, and a worship gesture more then once or
twice. And we have seen before, how Dr. Burgess calls the Ceremonies,
worship of God. 2. If mixture of true and false worship be not lawful, then
for as much as the Ceremonies of Gods ordinance, namely, the Sacraments of the
New Testament, are true worship. And the Ceremonies of Popery, namely Cross,
Kneeling, Holy Days, etc. are false worship, therefore there ought to be no
mixture of them together. 3. If the Jews were taught to make no mixture of
true and false worship, then by the self same instruction, if there had been
no more, they were taught also to shun all such occasions as might any way
produce such a mixture, and by consequence all symbolizing with Idolaters in
their Rites and Ceremonies.

As touching these Laws which forbade the Israelites to make round the corners
of their heads, or to mar the corners of their Eccl. pol. lib. 4. s. 6.
Hooker answers, that the cutting round of the corners of the head, and the
tearing of the tufts of the beard, howbeit they were in themselves indifferent,
yet they are not indifferent being used as signs of immoderat and hopeless
lamentation for the dead; in which sense it is, that the law forbids them.
To the same purpose says ubi supra
Paybody, that the Lord did not forbid his people, to mar and abuse their
heads and beards for the dead, because the Heathen did so, but because the
practice does not agree to the Faith and Hope of a Christian, if the Heathen
had never used it. Ans. 1. How much surer and sounder is com. in Levit. 19. 27.
28.
Calvines Judgment, non aliud fuisse Dei concilium, quam ut interposito
obstaculo populum suum a prophanis Gentibus dirimeret? for albeit the cutting
of the hair be a thing in it self indifferent, yet because the Gentiles did
use it superstitiously, therefore says Calvin, albeit it was per se medium,
Deus tamen noluit populo suo liberum esse, ut tanquam pueri diseerent ex parvis
rudimentis, se non aliter Deo fore gratos, nisi exteris and praeputiatis essent
prorsus dissimiles, ac longissime abessent ab eorum exemplis, praesertim vero
ritus omnes fugerent, quibus testata fuerit religio. So that from this law, it
does most manifestly appear, that we may not be like Idolaters, no not in
things which are in themselves indifferent, when we know that they do use them
superstitiously. 2. What warrant is there for this gloss, that the Law
forbids the cutting round of the corners of the head, and the marring of the
corners of the beard, to be used as signs of immoderat and hopeless
lamentation for the dead, and that in no other sense, they are forbidden?
Albeit the cutting of the flesh may be expounded, to proceed from immoderat
grief, and to be a sign of hopeless Lamentation, yet this can not be said of
rounding the hair, marring the beard, and making of baldenesse: which might
have been used in moderat and hopeful lamentation, as well as our putting on
of mourning apparel for the dead. The law says nothing of the immoderat use
of these things, but simply forbids to round the head, or mar the beard
for the dead; and that because this was one of the Rites, which the Idolatrous
and superstitious Gentiles did use, concerning whom the Lord commmanded his
people, that they should not do like them, because he had chosen them to be a
holy and peculiar people, above all people upon the earth. So that the thing
which was fordidden, if the Gentiles had not used it, should have been
otherwise lawful enough to Gods people, as we have seen out of Calvines
commentary.

Secondly, we have reason for that which we say, for by partaking Ceremoniae
omnes sunt quaedam protestationes fidei, says 2. 2. q. 103. art 4.
Aquinas. Therefore Communio rituum est quasi symbolum communionis in
religione, says de cas. consc. lib. 2. cap. 14. cas. 7.
Balduine. They who did eat of the Jewish sacrifices were partakers of the
Altar, 1 Cor: 10. 18. that is, says com. in illum locum
Pareus, socios Iudaicae religionis and cultus se profitebantur. For the Jews
by their sacrifices mutuam in una eademque religione copulationem sanciunt,
says annot. ibid.
Beza. Whereupon ag. the Rhem. ann. on 1. Cor. 10. s. 8.
Dr. Fulk notes, that the Apostle in that place, does compare our Sacraments
with the Altars, Hosts. Sacrifices or immolations of the Jews, and Gentiles,
in that point which is common to all Ceremonies, to declare them that use them,
to be pertakers of that religion, whereof they be Ceremonies. If then apud
Gratian. decr. part. 1. did. 37. c. 15.
Isidore thought it unlawful for Christians to take pleasure in the fables of
Heathen Poets, because non solum thura offerendo Daemonibus immolatur, sed
etiam little dicta libentius capiendo; much more have we reason to think, that
by taking part in the Ceremonies of Idolaters, we do but offer to Devils, and
join our selves to the service of Idols.

Thirdly, as by Scripture, and reason, so by Antiquity we strengthen our
Argument. Of old, Christians did so shun to be like the Pagans, Tertullian,
it was thought that Christians might not wear a Garland because thereby they
had been made conform to the Pagans. Hence de Corona militis
Tertullian justifies the Soldier, who refused to wear a Garland as the
Pagans did. partic. des. cap. 1. sect. 1.
Dr. Mortone himself alleges another cafe out of Tertullian, which makes to
this purpose, namely, that Christian Proselytes did distinguish themselves from
Roman Pagans, by casting away their gowns and wearing of cloakes. But these
things we are not to urge, because we plead not for dissimilitude with the
Papists, in civil fashions, but in Sacred and Religious Ceremonies. For this
point then at which we hold us, we allege Magd. cent. 3. cap. 6. Col 147.
that which is marked in the third Centurie out of Origin, namely, that it was
held unlawful for Christians, to observe the feasts and Solemnities, either of
the Jews, or of the Gentiles. Nay we find Council. Laodicaen. can. 37.
a whole Council determining thus Non opportet a Iudaeis vel Haereticis,
feriatica quae mittuntur accipere, nec cum eis dies agere feriatos. The
Council of Nice also condemned those who kept Easter upon the fourteenth day
of the month. That which made them pronounce so, (as is clear from apud
Theod. lib 1. cap. 10.
Constantines Epistle to the Churches,) was, because they held it unbeseeming
for Christians to have any thing common with the Jews in their rites and
observances. epist. 86. ad Casulan.
Augustine condemns fasting upon the Sabbath day, as scandalous, because the
Manichees used so, and fasting upon that day had been a conformity with them.
And wherefore did Gregory advise Leander, to abolish the Ceremony of
trin-immersion? his lib. 1. epist. 41.
words ar plain. Quia nunc huc usque ab Haereticis infans in Baptismate tertio
mergebatur, fiendum apud vos esse non censeo. Why does apud Bellar. de effect.
sacr. lib. 2. c. 31.
Epiphanius in the end of his books contra haereses, rehearse all the
Ceremonies of the Church, as marks whereby the Church is discerned from all
other sects? If the Church did symbolize in Ceremonies with other sects, he
could not have done so. And Moreover find we not in the Conc. African. can. 27.
Conc. Tolet. 4. can. 5. and 10. Conc. Brac. 2. can. 73.
Canons of the ancient Councels, that Christians were forbidden to deck their
houses with green boughs and bay leaves, to observe the Calends of January,
to keep the first day of every month, etc. Because the Pagans used so to do?
Last of all, read we not, in Magd. cent 4. cap. 6. col. 458.
the fourth century of the Ecclesiastical history, that the frame of
Christians in that age, was such, that nec cum haereticis commune quicquam
habere voluerunt?

One would think that nothing could be answered to any of these things, by such
as pretend no less, then that they have devoted eccl. pol. lib. 4. s. 7.
Hooker can coin a conjecture, to frustrate all which we allege. In things
(says he) of their own nature indifferent, if either Counsels, or particular
men, have at any time with sound Judgment misliked conformity between the
Church of God and Infidells, the cause thereof has not been affectation, of
dissimilitude, but some special accident which the Church not being always
subject unto, has not still cause to do the like. For example (says he) in
the dangerous days of trial, wherein there was no way for the truth of Jesus
Christ to triumph over infidelity, but through the constancy of his Saints,
whom yet a natural desire to save themselves from the flame, might
peradve^ture cause to join with the Pagans in external Customs, too far
using the same as a cloak to conceal themselves in, and a mist to darken the
eyes of Infidels withal; for remedy hereof, it might be, those laws were
provided. Ans. 1. This answer is altogether doubtful, and conjecturall, made
up of If, and peradventure, and it might be. Neither is any thing found which
can make such a conjecture probable. 2. The true reason, why Christians were
forbidden to use the Rites and Customs of Pagans, was neither a bare
affectation of dissimilitude, nor yet any special accident which the Church is
not always subject unto; but because it was held unlawful, to symbolize with
Idolaters in the use of such rites, as they placed any religion in. For in the
Fathers and Counsels, which we have cited to this purpose, there is no other
reason mentioned, why it behoved Christians to abstain from those forbidden
customs, but only because the Pagans and Infidels used so. 3. And what if
Hookers divination shall have place? does it not agree to us, so as it should
make us unlike the Papists? yes sure, and more properly. For put the case, that
those ancient Christians had not avoided conformity with Pagans, in those
Rites and Customs, which we read to have been forbidden them, yet for all
that, there had been remaining betwixt them and the Pagans, by a great deal
more difference, then will remain betwixt us and the Papists, if we avoid not
conformity with them in the controverted Ceremonies: for the Pagans had not the
Word, Sacraments, etc. which the Papists do retain, so that we may far more
easily use the Ceremonies, as a mist to darken the eyes of the Papists, then
they could have used those forbidden Rites, as a mist to darken the eyes of
Pagans. Much more then, Protestants should not be permitted to conform
themselves unto Papists, in Rites and Ceremonies, lest in the dangerous days
of trial (which some Reformed Churches in Europe do presently feel, and
which seem to be faster approaching to our selves, then the most part are
aware of,) they join themselves to Papists in these external things, too
far using the same as a cloak to conceal themselves in, etc. 4. We find
that the reason, why the fourth Council of Toledo, Can. 5.
forbade the Ceremony of thrice dipping in water to be used in baptism, was,
lest Christians should seem to assent to Heretics who divide the Trinity. And
the reason why the same Council Can. 40.
forbade Clergy men to conform themselves unto the custom of Heretics, in
the sheaving of the hair of their head, is mentioned to have been, the
removing of conformity with the Custom of Heretics, from the Churches of
Spain, as being a great dishonor unto the same. And we have heard before,
that Augustine condemns conformity with the Manichees, in fasting upon the
Lords day, as scandalous. And whereas afterward the Council of Caesaraugusta
forbade fasting upon the Lords day, Sims. hist. of the Church. lib. 4. cent. 6.
a grave Writer lays out the reason of this prohibition, thus, It would
appear that this Council had a desire to abolish the Rites and Customs of
the Manichean Heretics, who were accustomed to fast upon the Lords day.
Lastly, we have seen from Constantines Epistle to the Churches, that
dissimilitude with the Jews was one (though not the only one) reason, why it
was not thought beseeming to keep Easter upon the fourteenth day of the month.
Who then can think that any such special accident, as Hooker imagines, was
the reason why the Rites and Customs of Pagans were forbidden to Christians?
Were not the Customs of the Pagans to be held unbeseeming for Christians, as
well as the Customs of the Jews? Nay, if Conformity with Heretics (whom eccl
pol. lib. 3. s. 1.
Hooker aknowledgeth to be a part of the visible Church,) in their Customs and
Ceremonies, was condemned as a scandal, a dishonor to the Church, and an
assenting unto their Heresies; might he not have much more thought, that
conformity with the Customs of Pagans was forbidden as a greater scandal, and
dishonor to the Church, and as an assenting to the Paganism and Idolatry of
those that were without?

But to proceed. In the fourth place, the Canon Law it self speaks decr.
part. 2. causa. 26. quaest, 7. c. 13.
Non licet iniquas observationes agere Calendarum, and otiis vacare Gentilibus,
neque lauro, aut viriditate arborum, cingere domos: omnis enim haec observatio
Paganismi est. And again, ib. c. 14.
Anathema sit qui ritum Paganorum and Calendarum observat. And after, ib. c. 17.
dies Aegyptiaci and Ianuarij Calendae non sunt observandae.

Fifthly, our assertion will find place in the School too, which holds,
Aquin. 1. 2a. q. 102. art. 6. resp. ad 6m.
that Jews were forbidden to we are a garment of diverse sorts, as of Linen
and Woollen together, and that their women were forbidden to wear men's
clothes, or their men Women's clothes; because the Gentiles used so, in the
worshipping of their Gods. In like manner, ibid. resp. ad 11m.
that the Priests were forbidden to round their heads, or mar their beards,
or make incision in their flesh, because Baruch. 6. 3. Reg. 18.
the Idolatrous Priests did so. And ibid. resp. ad 8m.
that the prohibition which forbade the commixtion of beasts of diverse kynds
among the Jews, has a figurative sense, in that we are forbidden to make
People of one kind of Religion, to have any conjunction with those of another
kind.

Sixthly, Rhem. annot. on 2 Cor. 6. 14.
Papists themselves teach, that it is generally forbidden to communicate with
Infidells and Heretics, but especially in any act of Religion. Yea Rhem. on 1 Timothy 6. sect. 4.
they think, that Christian men are bound to abhor the very phrases and words
of Heretics, which they use. Yea Rhem. on Apoc. 1. 10.
they condemn the very Heathenish names of the days of the week, imposed
after the names of the planets, Sunday, Moneday, etc. Rhem. on 2. 10. 10
They hold it altogether a great and damnable sin, to deal with Heretics in
matter of Religion, or any way to communicate with them in spiritual things.
de effect. sacr. lib. 2. cap. 31.
Bellarmine is plain, who will have Catholics to be discerned from Heretics,
and other sects of all sorts, even by Ceremonies, because as Heretics have
hated the Ceremonies of the Church, so the Church has ever abstained from the
observances of Heretics.

Seaventhly, our own Writers do sufficiently confirm us in Magd. Cent. 4. c.
6 col. 406.
them, yea Hospin. de orig. te^pl. l. 2. cap. 7. page 115.
though the Customs and Rites of the Heathen, be received into the Church for
gaining them, and drawing them to the true Religion, yet is it condemned, as
proceeding ex (...) seu prava Ethnicorum imitatione. Confer. with. I. Heart.
divis. 4. cap. 8.
I. Rainoldes rejects the Popish Ceremonies, partly because they are Jewish,
and partly because they are Heathnish. The same Argument, Antith. Pap. and
Christ. art 9.
Th. Biza uses against them. In the secound command, as in 2. praec. col. 363.
Zanchius expounds it, we are forbidden to borrow any thing ex ritibus
idololatrarum Gentium. Fidelibus says com. in Ps. 16. 4.
Calvin fas non est ullo symbolo ostendere, sibi cum superstitiosis esse
consensum. To conclude then, since not only Idolatry is forbidden, but also as
c Pareus notes, every sort of communicating with the occasions, appearances,
or instruments of the same, and since as synops. purior. Theol. disp 19.
our Divines have declared, the Papists are in many respects gross Idolaters,
let us choose to have the commendation, which Usher of the relig. prof. by the
aunc. Irish. cap. 4.
was given to the ancient Britons, () com. in 1. Cor. 10. 14.
for being enemies to the Roman Customs, rather then as apud Hosp. de orig.
imag. page 200.
Pope Pius the 5. was forced to say of Rome, that it did more Gentilizare, quam
Christianizare; so they who would gladly wish, they could give a better
commendation to our Church, be forced to say, that it does not only more
Anglizare, quam Scotizare, but also more Romanizare, quam Evangelizare.

But our Argument is made by a great deal more strong, if yet further Pius the
4. to be taken of Bishops at their creation, as de vit. pii. 4.
Onuphrius writteth, they are appointed to swear, Apostolicas and
Ecclesiasticas traditiones, reliquasque ejusdem Ecclesiae observationes and
constitutiones firmissime admitto and amplector. And after. Receptos quoque and
approbatos Ecclesiae Catholicae ritus, in supra dictorum Sacramentorum solemni
administratione, recipio and admitto. We see Bishops are not created by this
ordinance, except they not only believe with the Church of Rome, but also
receive her Ceremonies, by which as by the badges of her Faith and Religion,
cognizance may be had, that they are indeed her Children. And further, h
Papists give it forth plainly, that as he Church has ever abstained from the
observances of Heretics, ((...)) Bell. de effect. sacr. lib. 2. c. 31.
so now also Ca holikes (they mean Romanists) are very we I distinguished from
Heretics (hey mean those of the Reformed Religion) by the Sign of the Cross,
abstinence from flesh on Friday, etc. And how do our own Divines understand
the Mark of the Beast; spoken of Revel. 13. 16. 17? annot. in illum locum.
Iunius comprehends confirmation under this mark: annot. ib.
Cartwright also refers the Sign of the Cross to the mark of the Beast. l
Pareus approves the Bishop of Sarisbury his exposition, and places the common
mark of the Beast in the observation of Antichrist his festival days, and
the rest of his () com. ibi.
Ceremonies which are not commanded by God. It seems this much has been
plain to Joseph Hall, so that he could not deny it. For whereas the Brownists
allege, that not only after their separation, but before they separated also,
they were, and are verily persuaded, that the Ceremonies are but the badges and
liveries of that man of sin, whereof the Pope is the head, and the Prelates
the shoulders: he in this sect. 48
Apology against them, says nothing to this point.

As for any other of our Opposites; who have made such answers Ans. 1. Elencis.
Relig. Papist. in praefat.
Ioh. Bastwick, propounding the same objection, Si quis obijciat nos ipsos
pertinaci Ceremoniarum Papalium contemptu, Papistis offendiculum posuisse, quo
minus se nostris Ecclesiis associent, he answers out of the Romans 15. 2.
Apostle, that we are to please every one his neighbor only in good things to
edification, and that we may not wink at absurd or wicked things, nor at any
thing in Gods worship, which is not found in Scripture. 2. part. 2. cap. 6.
I have showed, that Papists are but more and more hardened in evil, by this
our conformity with them in Ceremonies. 3. supra cap. 1.
I have showed also the superstition of the Ceremonies, even as they are
retained by us, and that it is as impossible to purge the Ceremonies from
superstition, as to purge superstition from it self.

There are others, who go about to sow a cloak of fig leaves, de imag.
Sanct. cap. 29.
Bellarmine holds, venerabile esse signum Crucis quod effingitur in front,
aere, etc. And though they did not make an Idol of it, yet forasmuch as
Papists put it to a Religious use, and make it one of the marks of
Romane-Catholikes (as we have seen before) we may not be conformed to them in
the use of the same. The Fathers of such a difference between the Popish
Cross, and the English, have not succeeded in this their way, yet their
posterity approve their sayings, and follow their footsteps. Proc. in Perth
assmb part. 2. page 22.
B. Lindsey by name will trade in the same way, and will have us to think, that
kneeling in the act of receiving the Communion, and keeping of Holy Days, do
not sort us with Papists, for that, as touching the former, there is a
disconformity in the object, because they kneel to the Sign, we to the thing
signified. And as for the latter, the difference is in the employing of the
time, and in the exercise and worship for which the cessation is commanded.
What is his Verdict then, wherewith he sends us away? Verily, that people
should be taught, that the disconformity between the Papists and us, is not so
much in any external use of Ceremonies, as in the substance of the service,
and object, whereunto they are applied. But, good man, he seeks a knot in the
Bulrush. For, 1. There is no such difference betwixt our Ceremonies and those
of the Papists, in respect of the object and worship, whereunto the same is
applied, as he pretends. For as touching the exercise and worship whereunto
holy days are applied, Rhem. annot. on Act. 2. (...).
Papists tell us, that they keep Pasche and Pentecost yearly, for memory of
Christ's Resurrection, and the sending down of the Holy Ghost; And I pray, to
what other employment do Formalists profess, that they apply these Feasts,
but to the commemoration of the same benefits? And as touching kneeling in the
Sacrament, it shall be proven in the next Chapter, that they do kneel to the
Sign, even as the Papists do. In the mean while it may be questioned,
whether the B. meant some such matter, even here where professedly he makes a
difference betwixt the Papists their kneeling, and ours. His words wherein I
apprehend this much, are these: The Papists in prayer kneel to an Idol, and in
the Sacrament they kneel to the Sign, we kneel in our prayer to God, and by
the Sacrament to the thing signified. The Analogy of the Antithesis required
him to say, that we kneel in the Sacrament to the thing signified: but changing
his Phrase, he says, that we kneel by the Sacrament to the thing signified.
Now if we kneel by the Sacrament to Christ, then we adore the Sacrament as
objectum materiale, and Christ as objectum formale. Just so the Papists adore
their Images, because per imaginem they adore prototypon. 2. What if we should
yield to the B. that Kneeling and Holy Days, are with us applied to another
Service, and used with another meaning, then they are with the Papists? does
that excuse our conformity with Papists in the external use of these
Ceremonies? If so I. Rain. confer. with 1. Heart cap. 8. divis. 4. page 496.
I. Heart did rigtly Argument, out of Pope Innocentius, that the Church does not
judaize by the Sacrament of unction or anointing, because it does figure and
work another thing in the New Testament, then it did in the Old. Rainoldes
answers, that though it were so, yet is the Ceremony Jewish: and mark his
reason, (which carries a fit proportion to our present purpose,) I trust says
he, you will not maintain, but it were Iudaisme for your Church to sacrifice a
Lamb in burnt offering, though you did it to signify, not Christ, that was to
come, as the Jews did, but that Christ is come, etc Saint Peter did
constrain the Gentiles to Iudaize, when they were induced by his example and
auctoxity, to follow the Jewish Rite in choice of meats; yet neither he nor
they allowed it in that meaning, which it was given to the Jews in. For it was
given them to betoken that holiness, and train them up unto it, which Christ
by his grace should bring to the faithful. And Peter knew that Christ had do^
this in truth, and taken away that Figure, yea the whole yoke of the Law of
Moses: which point he taught the Gentiles also Wherefore although your Church
do keep the Jewish Rites, with another meaning then God ordained them for the
Jews, etc. yet this of Peter shows, that the thing is Jewish, and you to
Iudaize who keep them. By the very same reasons prove we, that Formalists do
Romanize, by keeping the Popish Ceremonies, though with another meaning, and to
another use then the Romanists do. The very external use therefore, of any
sacred Ceremony of humane Institution, is not to be suffered in the matter of
worship, when in respect of this external use, we are sorted with Idolaters.
3. If conformity with Idolaters in the external use of their Ceremonies be
lawful, if so be there be a difference in the substance of the Worship and
Object whereunto they are applied, then why were Christians forbidden of old,
(as we have heard before) to keep the Calends of January, and the first day of
every month, forasmuch as the Pagans used so? Why was trin-immersion in
Baptism, and fasting upon the Lords day forbidden, for that the Heretics did
so? Why did the Nicen Fathers inhibite the keeping of Easter upon the
fourteenth day of the month, Zanch. lib. 1. in 4. praec. Col. 674.
so much the rather, because the Jews kept it on that day? The B. must say,
there was no need of shunning conformity with Pagans, Jews, Heretics, in the
external use of their Rites and Customs, and that a difference ought to have
been made, only in the Object and use, whereunto the same was applied. Nay,
why did God forbid Israel, to cut their hair as the Gentiles did? had it not
been enough, not to apply this Rite to a superstitious use, as 1a. 2a. q. 102.
art. 6. resp. ad 11 Sect. 14.
Aquinas shows the Gentiles did? why was the very external use of it
forbidden?

There is yet another piece brought against us, but we will abide the proof of
it, as of the rest. Nobis says N. Fratri and amico resp. ad art. 12^^.
Saravia, satis est, modestis and piis Christianis satisfacere, qui ita
recesserunt a superstitionibus and Idololatriae Romanae Ecclesiae, ut probatos
ab Orthodoxis Patribus mores, non reijciant. So have some thought to escape by
this posterne, that they use the Ceremonies, not for Conformity with Papists,
but for Conformity with the ancient Fathers. Ans. 1. When ubi supra Page 510.
Rainoldes speaks of the abolishing of Popish Ceremonies, he answers this
subtilty. But if you say therefore, that we be against the ancient Fathers in
Religion, because we pluck down that, which they did set up. Take heed lest
your speech do touch the Holy Ghost, who says that 2 Reg. 18. 6.
Hezekias (in breaking down the Brazen Serpent) did keep Gods commandments
which he commanded Moses. And yet withal says, 2 Reg. 18 4.
that he brake in pieces the Serpent of Brass which Moses had made. 2. There
are some of the Ceremonies which the Fathers used not, as the Surplice (which
we have seen supra part. 2. cap. 9. s. 14.
before) and kneeling in the act of receiving the Eucharist, (as we shall see
infra cap. 4. sect. 26. 27. 28.
afterward) 3. Yielding by concession, not by confession, that all the
Ceremonies about which there is controversy now among us, were of old used by
the Fathers, yet that which these Formalists say, is, (as of the Cross cap. 2
sect. 10.
Parker shows) even as if a Servant should be covered before his Master, not
as covering is a late sign of praeeminence, but as it was of old a sign of
subjection, or as if one should preach, that the Prelates are Tyranni to their
Brethren, Fures to the Church, Sophistae to the Truth, and excuse himself
thus. I use these words, as of old they signified, a Ruler, a Servant, a
Student of Wisdom. All men know, that words and actions must be interpreted,
used and received, according to their modern use, and not as they have been of
old.

CHAP. IV.
That the Ceremonies are Idols among Formalists themselves; and that kneeling
in the Lords Supper before the Bread and Wine in the act of receiving them, is
formally Idolatry.

MY fourth Argument against the lawfulness of the Ceremonies, follows: by
which I am to evince that they are reductive, because monuments of bypast, and
participative, because badges of present Idolatry, but that likewise they make
Formalists themselves, to be formally, and in respect of their own using of
them, Idolaters, consideration not had of the bypast, or present abusing of
them by others. This I will make good: first, of all the Ceremonies in
general; then, of kneeling in particular. And I wish our Opposites here, look
to themselves, for this Argument proves to them the Box of Pandora, and
contains that which undoeth them, though this much be not seen, before the
opening.

First then, the Ceremonies are Idols to Formalists. It had been good to have
remembered that which upon Genesis 35. 4.
Ainsworth notes, that Idolothyts and monuments of Idolatry should be
destroyed, lest themselves at length become Idols. The Idolothyous Ceremonies,
we se now, are become Idols to those who have retained them. The ground which
the Bishop of Winchester takes for his Sermon of the worshipping of
imaginations, to wit, that the Devil seeing that Idolatrous Images would
down, he bent his whole device, in place of them to erect and set up diverse
imaginations, to be adored and magnified in stead of the former; is, in some
things abused and misapplied by him. But well may I apply it to the point in
hand. For that the Ceremonies are the imaginations which are magnified, adored,
and Idolized, in stead of the Idolatrous Images which were put down, thus we
instruct and qualify.

First, they are so erected and extolled, that they are more looked Expos. in
Col. 3. 5.
Davenant notes, because he neglects the service which he owes to God, and is
wholly taken up with the gathering of money. And I suppose every one will think,
that those Mark. 7. 8. 9.
Traditions, which the Pharisees kept and held, with the laying aside of the
commandments of God, might well be called Idols. Shall we not then call the
Ceremonies Idols, which are observed, with the neglecting of Gods
commandments, and which are advanced above many substantial points of
Religion? Idolatry, Blasphemy, Profanation of the Sabbath, Perjury, Adultery,
etc. are over looked and not corrected nor reprooved, nay, not so much as
discountenanced, in these who favor and follow the Ceremonies; and if in the
fellows, and favorites, much more in the Fathers. What if order be taken with
some of those abominations, in certain abject poor bodies? Dat veniam corvis,
vexat censura columbas. What will not a Episcopal conformitane pass away
with, if there be no more had against him, then the breaking of Gods
Commandments, by open and gross wickedness? But, O what narrow notice is
taken of Nonconformity! How mercilesly is it menaced? How cruelly corrected?
Well! the Ceremonies are more made of, then the Substance. And this is so
evident, that of the lawful. of kneel. cap. 18. page 62 Sect. 3.
D. Burgess him self lamenteth the pressure of conformity, and denies not
that which is objected to him, namely, that more grievous penalties are
inflicted upon the refusal of the Ceremonies, then upon Adultery and
Drunkenness.

Secoundly, did not 1 Samuel (...). 29.
Eli make Idols of his Sons, when he spared them and bare with them, though
with the prejudice of Gods worship? And may not we call the Ceremonies, Idols,
which are not only spared and borne with, to the prejudice of Gods worship,
but are likewise so erected, that the most faithful Laborers in Gods House
for their sake are depressed, the Teachers and Maintainers of Gods true
worship, cast out? For their sake many Learned and Godly men are envied,
contemned, hated, and nothing set by, because they pass under the name (I
should say the Nickname) of Puritans. For their sake, many dear Christians
have been imprisoned, fined, banished, etc. For their sake, many qualified and
well gifted men, are holden out of the Ministry, and a door of entrance
denied to those, to whom God has granted a door of utterance. For their
sake, those whose faithful and painful Labors in the Lords Harvest, have
greatly benefited the Church, have been thrust from their charges, so that they
could not fulfill the Ministry, which they have received of the Lord, to
testify of the Gospel of the grace of God. The best Builders, the wise
Masterbuilders, have been by them overturned. This is objected to m Joseph
Hall, by the Brownists: and what can he say to it? forsooth, that not so much
the Ceremonies are stood upon, as obedience. If God please to try Adam but with
an apple, it is enough. What do we quarrel at the value of the fruit, when we
have a probition? Shemei is slain: what? merely for going out of the City?
the act was little, the bond was great: What is commanded matters, not so much,
as by whom? Ans. 1. If obedience be the chief thing stood upon, why are not
other Laws and Statutes urged as strictly, as those which concern the
Ceremonies? 2. But what means he? what would he say of those Scottish
Protestants, imprisoned in the Cast of Scherisburgh in France, who Histor. of
the Church of Scotl. lib. 1. page 181.
being commanded by the Captain to come to the Mass, answered, that to do
any thing that was against their conscience, they would not, neither for him
nor yet for the King? If he approve this answer of theirs, he must allow us to
say, that we will do nothing which is against our consciences. We submit our
selves, and all which we have to the King, and to inferior Governors we render
all due subjection, which we owe to them. But no mortal man has domination
over our consciences, which are subject to one only Lawgiver, and ruled by
his Law. I have showed in the first Part of this Dispute, how conscience is
sought to be bound by the Law of the Ceremonies, and here by the way, no less
may be drawn from Hals words, which now I examine. For he implies in them,
that we are bound to obey the Statutes about the Ceremonies, merely for their
Auctorities sake who command us, though there be no other thing in the
Ceremonies themselves, which can commend them to us. But I have also proven
before, that humane Laws do not bind to obedience, but only in this case,
when the things which they prescribe, do agree and serve to those things which
Gods Law prescribes: so that, as humane Laws, they bind not, neither have
they any force to bind, but only by Participation with Gods Law. This ground
has seemed to part. 1. quest. 3.
P. Bayne, so necessary to be known, that he has inserted it in his brief
exposition of the fondamentall points of Religion. And beside all that, which I
have said for it before, I may not here pass over in silence, this one thing,
that lib. 2. Charact. of the superstit.
Hall himself calls it superstition to make any more sins, then the ten
commandments. Either then, let it be showed out of Gods word, that
Nonconformity and the refusing of the English Popish Ceremonies, is a fault, or
else let us not be thought bound by men's laws, where Gods Law has left us
free. Yet we deal more liberally with our Opposites, for if we prove not the
unlawfulness of the Ceremonies, both by Gods Word, and sound reason, let us be
then bound to use them for Ordinances sake. 3. His comparisons are far wide:
they are so far from running upon four feet, that they have indeed no feet
at all: whether we consider the commandments, or the breach of them, he is
altogether extravagant. God might have commanded Adam to eat the Apple, which
he forbade him to eat, and so the eating of it had been good, the not eating
of it evil: whereas the Will and Commandment of men is not regula regulans,
but regula regulata. Neither can they make good or evil, beseeming or not
beseeming, what they list, but their commandments are to be examined by a
higher rule. When Solomon commanded Shemei to dwell at Jerusalem, and not to
go over the brook Kidron, he had good reason for that which he required: for
as comm. in 1 Reg. 2.
Peter Martyr notes, he 2 Samuel 16 5.
was a man of the family of the house of Saul, and hated the Kingdom and
Throne of David, so that relictus liber multa fuisset molitus, vel cum
Israelitis, vel cum Palesthinis. But what reason is there, for charging us with
the Law of the Ceremonies, except the sole will of the Lawmakers? yet say,
that Solomon had no reason for this his commandment, except his own will and
pleasure, for trying the obedience of Schemei, who will say, that Princes have
as great liberty and power of commanding at their pleasure, in matters of
Religion, as in civil matters? If we consider the breach of the commandments,
he is still at randone. Though God tried Adam but with an apple, yet A. Polan.
synt. Theol. lib. 6. cap. 3. D. Pareus explic. catechet. part. 1. quest. 7. 1.
Scharpius curs. Theolog. de peccato cap. 8
Divines mark in his eating of that forbidden fruit, many gross and horrible
sins, as, Infidelity, Idolatry, Pride, Ambition, Self-love, Theft,
Covetousness, Contempt of God, Profanation of Gods name, Ingratitude,
Apostasy, murdering of his posterity, etc. But I pray, what exorbitant evils
are found in our modest and Christian-like denial of obedience to the Law of
the Ceremonies? When Schemei transgressed King Solomon's commandment, besides 1
Reg. 2. 43.
the violation of this oath, and the disobeying of the charge wherewith Solomon
(by the special direction and inspiration of God) had charged him, (that ib.
v. 44
his former wickedness, and that which he had done to David, might be returned
upon his Head, the Divine providence so fitly furnishing another occasion and
cause of his punishment;) there was also a great contempt and misregard showed
to the King, in that Schemei knowing his own evil deservings, aknowledged (as
the truth was,) he had received no small favor, and therefore consented to
the Kings word as good, and promised obedience. Yet for all that, upon such a
petty and small occasion, as the seeking of two runnagat servants, he reckoned
not to despise the Kings mercy and lenity, and to set at naught his most just
commandment. What? is Nonconformity no less piacular? If any will dare to
say so, he is bound to show that it is so. And thus have we pulled down the
untempered mortar, wherewith Hall would hide the Idolizing of the Ceremonies.

But thirdly, did not Rachel make Jacob an Idol, when she ascribed Am I in
Gods stead says Genesis 30. 1. 2.
Jacob? And how much more reason have we to say, that the Ceremonies are Idols,
and are set up in Gods stead, since an operative virtue is placed in them, for
giving stay and strength against sin and tentation, and for working of other
spiritual and supernatural effects? Thus is the Sign of the Cross an Idol,
to those who conform to Papists in the use of it. de Rep. Eccl. lib. 7. cap.
12. number. 88.
M. Ant. de Dominis holds, Crucis signum, contra Daemones esse praesidium.
And Ib. number. 89.
that even ex opere operato, effectus mirabiles signi Crucis, etiam apud
Infideles, aliquando enituerint. Shall I say, says Eccl Pol. lib. 5. sect. 65.
Mr. Hooker, that the Sign of the Cross (as we use it) is a mean in some
sort to work our preservation from reproach? Surely the mind which as yet
has not hardened it self in sin, is seldom provoked thereunto in any
gross and grievous manner, but natures secret suggestion, objecteth against it
ignominy, as a bar. Which conceit being entered into that palace of man's
fancy (the Forehead) the Gates whereof have imprinted in them that Holy Sign
(the Cross) which brings forthwith to mind whatsoever Christ has wrought,
and we vowed against sin; it comes hereby to pass, that Christian men
never want a most effectual, though a silent Teacher, to avoid whatsoever may
deservedly procure shame. What more do Papists ascribe to the Sign of the
Cross, when they say, Cornel. a Lapide com. in Hag. 2. 24.
that by it Christ keeps his own faithful ones contra omnes tentationes and
hosts? Now if Ephesians. (...). 5.
the covetous man be called a Idolater, because, though he think not his money
to be God, yet he trusts to live and prosper by it, (which confidence and
hope Ier. 17. 7.
we should repose in God only) as confer with Heart. chap. 8. div. 5. p. 509.
Rainoldes marketh, then do they make the Sign of the Cross an Idol, who
trust by it to be preserved from Sin, Shame, and Reproach, and to have their
minds stayed in the instant of Tentation. For, who has given such a virtue to
that dumb and idle Sign, as to work that which God only can work? and how
have these goodfellowes imagined, that not by knocking at their brains, as
Jupiter, but by only signing their Foreheads, they can procreate some menacing
Minerva, or armed Pallas, to put to flight the Devil himself.

The same kind of operative virtue is ascribed to the Ceremony Eccl. Pol. lib.
5 sect. 66
Hooker has told us, that albeit the Successors of the Apostles, had but only
for a time such power as by Prayer and imposition of hands to bestow the Holy
Ghost, yet Confirmation has continued hitherto for very special benefits;
and that the Fathers impute every where unto it, that Gift or Grace of the Holy
Ghost, not which makes us first Christian men, but when we are made such,
assisteth us in all virtue, armeth us against Tentation and Sin. Moreover,
whiles he is a showing why this Ceremony of Confirmation was separated from
Baptism, having been long joined with it, one of his reasons which he gives
for the Separation, is, that sometimes the parties who received Baptism were
Infants, at which age they might well be admitted to live in the family, but to
fight in the army of God, to bring forth the fruits, and to do the works of
the Holy Ghost, their time of hability was not yet come, which implie^h, that
by Confirmation men receive this hability, else there is no sense in that which
he says. What is Idolatry, if this be not, to ascribe to Rites of man's
devising, the power and virtue of doing that which none but he to whom all
power in heaven and earth belonges, can do? And howbeit Hooker would strike us
dead at once, with the high-sounding name of the Fathers, yet it is not
unknown, that the first Fathers from whom this Idolatry has descended, were
those ancient Heretics, the Montanists. for as Exam. part. 2. de rit in
admin. sacr page 32. Sect 6.
Chemnitius marketh out of Tertullian and Cyprian, the Montanists were the
first, who began to ascribe any spiritual efficacy or operation to Rites and
Ceremonies devised by men.

Fourthly, that whereunto more respect and account is given, then God allows
to be given to it, and wherein more excellency is placed, then God has put
into it, or will at all communicate to it, is an Idol exalted against God:
which makes lib. 1. de viti. ext. cult. oppos. Col. 505.
Zanchius to say, Si Luthero vel Calvino tribuas, quod non potuerant errare,
Idola tibi fingis. Now when Eccl. Pol. lib. 5. sect. 69.
Hooker accounte^h festival days, for Gods extraordinary works wrought upon
them, to be holyer then other days, What man of sound Judgment, will not
perceive that these days are Idolized, since such an eminency and excellency
is put in them, whereas God has made no difference betwixt them, and any other
days? supra part. 1. cap. 1
We have seen also, that the Ceremonies are urged as necessary, but did ever
God allow, that things Indifferent should be so highly advanced, at the
pleasure of men? And moreover, supra cap. 1.
I have showed, that worship is placed in them; in which respect, needs they
must be Idols, being thus exalted against Gods Word, at which we are commanded
to hold us, in the matter of worship. Last of all, they are Idolatrously
advanced and dignified, in so much as holy mystical significations are given
them, which are a great dea^e more then Gods word allows in any Ri^es of
humane institution, as shall be showed Infra. cap. 5.
afterward. And so it appears, how the Ceremonies, as now urged and used,
are Idols. Now, to kneeling in the act of receiving the Lords Supper, which I
will prove to be direct and formal Idolatry, and from Idolatry shall it never
be purged, while the world stands, though our Opposi^es strive for it,
tanquam pro aris and focis.

The question about the Idolatry of kneeling, be^wixt them and us, Whether
kneeling at the instant of receiving the Sacrament, before the consecrated
Bread and Wine, purposely placed in our sight, in the act of kneeling, as
Signs standing in Christ's stead before which we the receivers are to exhibit
outwardly religious adoration; be formally idolatry, or not? No man can pick a
quarrel at the stating of the question thus. For, 1. We dispute only about
kneeling at the instant of receiving he Sacramental Elements, as all know. 2.
No man denies inward adoration, in the act of receiving, for in our minds we
then adore, by the inward graces of Faith, Love, Thankfulness, etc. by the
holy and Heavenly exercise whereof we glorify God; so that the controversy is
about outward adoration. 3. No man will deny h^t the consecrated Elements are
purposely placed in our sight, when we kneel, except he say, that they are in
that action only accidentally present before us, no otherwise then the
Tabble-cloth, or the walls of the Church are. 4. That the Sacramental
Elements, are in our sight (when we knee^l) as Signs standing in Christ's
stead; it is most undeniable. For if these Signs stand not in Christ's stead to
us, the Bread bearing vicem corporis Christi, and the Wine vicem sanguinis; it
follows, that when we eat the bread, and drink the wine, we are no more
eating the flesh, and drinking the blood of Christ, spiritual^y and
sacramentally, then if we were receiving any other Bread and Wine not
consecrated. I stay not now upon this head, because our Opposites aknowledge
it, for Of the lawf. of kneel. page 115, 116.
Dr. Burgess calls the Sacraments the Lords images and deputies. And the De
Rep. Eccl. lib. 5. cap. 6. number. 126.
Archbishop of Spalato says, that when we take the Sacrament of Christ's body,
we adore Christum sub hac figura figuratum. 5. That kneelers at the instant of
receiving, have the consecrated Bread an Wine in the eyes both of their bodies
and minds, as things so stated in that action, that before them, they are to
exhibit outward religious adoration, as well as inward; it is also most
plain. For otherwise they should fall down and kneel, only out of
incogitancy, having no such purpose in their minds, nor choice in their wills,
as to kneel before these Sacramental Signs.

The question thus stated, Formalists deny, we affirm. Their negative

First, the kneelers worship Christ in or by the Elements, as their own
confessions declare. When we take the Eucharist, we adore the body of Christ,
per suum signum says De rep. eccl. lib. 5. cap. 6. number. 138.
the Archbishop of Spalato. We kneel by the Sacrament to the thing signified,
says the Pr^ in Perth. assem. part. 2. page 22.
Bishop of Edinbrugh. Sermon. at Perth. assemb.
The Archbishop of Sanct-Andrewes, and Of the lawful. of kneel. cap. 10. p. 17.
Dr. Burgess, profess the adoring of Christ in the Sacrament. Dr. Mortoune
mantaineth such an adoration in the Sacrament, as he calls relative from the
Sign to Christ. And Apol. part. 3. cap. 3. sect. 16.
Paybody defends him herein. But Cap. 1. sect. 35.
the replier to Dr. Mortoune particular defense, infers well, that if the
adoration be relative from the Sign, it must first be carried to the Sign as
a means of convoyance unto Christ. Of the lawf. of kneel. cap. 22. page 85.
Dr. Bourgesse allows adoration, or Divine worship, (as he calls it,) to be
given to the Sacrament respectively: and ibid. cap. 23.
he alleges a place of Theodoret, to prove that such an adoration as he there
takes for Divine worship, is done to the Sacrament in relation to Christ, and
that this adoration performed to the mysteries as types, is to be passed over
to the Architype, which is the body and blood of Christ. Since then, that
kneeling, about which our question is, by the confession of kneelers
themselves, is Divine worship given by the sign to the thing signified, and
done to the Sacrament respectively or in relation to Christ; he that will say,
that it is not Idolatry, must acquit the Papists of Idolatry also, in
worshipping before their Images: for they do in like manner profess, that
they adore prototypon per imaginem, ad imaginem, or in imagine, and that they
give no more to the image, but relative or respective worship. Annot. on Hebr.
11. 21.
The Rhemists tell us, that they do no more but kneel before the creatures, at
or by them adoring God. It avails not here to excogitate some differences
betwixt the Sacramental Elements and the Popish Images, for what difference
soever be betwixt them, when they are considered in their own natural being,
yet as objects of adoration they differ not, because when they are considered
in esse adorabili, we see the same kind of adoration is exhibited by
Formalists before the Elements, which is by Papists before their Images. To
come nearer the point, Papists profess, that they give to the outward Signs
in the Sacrament, no other adoration, then the same which Formalists give to
them. Expos. artio. confess. Angl. Art. 28.
Franciscus a Sancta Clara says, that Divine worship does not agree to the
Signs per se, but only per accidens, and he alleges for himself, that the
Council of Trent Can. 6. de Euch. says not that the Sacrament, but that
Christ in the Sacrament, is to be adored with latria. To the same purpose I
observe, that De sacr. Euchar. lib. 4. cap. 29.
Bellarmine will not take upon him to mantaine any adoration of the Sacrament
with latria, holding only that Christ in the Eucharist is to be thus adored,
and that symbola externa per se and proprie non sunt adoranda. Whereupon he
determines, status questionis non est, nisi an Christus in Eucharistia sit
adorandus cultu l^triae. Now, albeit Papists understand by the outward sign of
Christ's body in the Eucharist, nothing else but the species or accidents of the
Bread; yet Zanch. lib. 1. de viti. ext. cult. oppos. col. 504.
since they a^tribute to the same, quod sub illis accidentibus ut vocant sit
substantialiter corpus Christi vivum, cum sua Deitate conjunctum, and since
Bell. ubi supra.
they give adoration or latria to the species, though not per se, yet as quid
unum with the body of Christ which they contain; hereby it is evident, that
they worship Idolatrously those very accidents. And I would understand, if any
of our Opposites dare say, that Papists commit no such Idolatry, as here I
impute to them? Or, if they aknowledge this Idolatry of Papists, how make they
hemselvs clean? for we see, that the worship which Papists give to the species
of the Bread, is only relative to Christ, and of the same kind with that which
Formalists give to the Bread and Wine.

Secondly, religious kneeling before the Bread which is set before Cartwr. on 1
Cor. 11. Sect. 18.
Image representing Christ; is the very bowing down and worshipping forbidden
in the secound commandment. The Eucharist is called by the Fathers, Imago,
Signum, Figura, Similitudo, as De orig. imag. page 245.
Hospinian instanceth out of Origin, Nazianzen, Augustine, Hilarious,
Tertullian, Ambrose. Ans. to the Ies. chall. of the real pres. p. 74.
The Archbishop of Armagh has also observed, that the Fathers expressly call
the Sacrament, an Image of Christ's body: and well might they call it so, since
the Sacramental Elements do not only represent Christ to us, but also stand
in Christ's stead, in such sort, that by the worthy receiving of them, we are
assured that we receive Christ himself, and in eating of this Bread and
drinking of this Wine, we eat the flesh and drink the blood of Christ
spiritually and by faith. Neither could the consecrated Elements make a
Sacrament, if they were not such Images, standing in Christ's stead. But what
needs any more? of the lauf: of kneeling, page 116.
Dr. Burgess himself calls the Sacraments the Lords Images. Now that a man
who adoreth before the painted or graven Image of Christ, though he profess
that he intends his wholle adoration to Christ, and that he places the Image
before him only to represent Christ, and to stir up his mind to worship
Christ, does nevertheless commit Idolatry, I trust, none of our Opposites will
deny. Nay, Proc. i^ Perth. assemb. part. 2 page 92.
B. Lindsey teaches plainly, that it is Idolatry to set before the eyes of our
minds, or bodies, any Image as a mean or motive of adoration, even though the
worship should be abstracted from the Image and not given unto it. Well then:
will it please him to let us see, that kneeling before the actual Images of
Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament, even though these Images should be no
otherwise considered in the act of adoration, but as active objects, motives,
and occasions which stir up the mind of the kneeler to worship Christ, (for
this is the best face which himself puts upon kneeling, thoug falsely, as we
shall se afterward,) is not so great Idolatry as the other. All the difference
which ubi supra.
he makes, is, that no true worship can be properly occasioned by an Image,
which is a Doctor of lies teaching nothing of God, but falsehood and vanities:
but the blessed Sacrament being instituted by Christ, to call to our
remembrance his death, etc. gives us, so often as we receive it, a most powerful
and pregnant occasion of thanksgiving and praise. ubi supra.
Dr. Burgess intermedling with the same differencemaking, will not have the
Sacraments, which are Images of Gods making and institution, to be compared
with Images made by the lust of men. Two differences then are given us. 1. That
the Sacramental Elements have their institution from God, Images not so. 2.
That the Sacrament is an occasion of worship, an Image not so. The first
difference makes them no help; for though the ordinance and institution of God,
makes the use of Sacramental Images to be no will worship, yet does it noth
any whit avail to show, that adoration before them is no Idolatry. May I not
commit Idolatry with Images of Gods institution, no less then with those
invented by men, when (Caeteris paribus) there is no other difference betwixt
them, considered as objects of adoration, but that of the ordinance and
institution which they have? What if I fall down at the hearing of a Sermon,
and religiously adore before the Pastor, as the Vicarius sign of Christ
himself, who stands there 2 Cor. 5. 20.
in Christ's stead, referring my adoration to Christ only, yet in or by that
Ambassad out who stands in Christ's stead? If this my adoration should be called
so great Idolatry, as if I should fall down before a graven Image, to worship
God in or by it, (for it is indeed as great every way,) our kneelers I perceive
would permit me to answer for my self, that my worshipping of God by the
minister, can not be called Idolatrous, by this reason, (because the
worshipping of God by a graven Image, is such, therefore also the worshipping
of him by a living Image, is no other,) since Images of Gods institution must
not be paralelled with those of men's invention. As to the secound difference,
I answer, 1. Though the B. muttereth here, that no true worship can be
occasioned by an Image, yet belike he and his fellows will not stand to it,
for many of them allow the historical use of Images, and the B. has not
denied this though his Antagonist, objecteth it. g^er. def. cap. 3. sect. 3.
Dr. Mortoune plainly allows of Images for historical commemoration. And
herein he is followed by Rejoind. page 296.
Dr. Burgess. 2. Whereas he says, that the blessed Sacrament is instituted by
Christ to call to our rememberance his death, this infers not that it is an
occasion of thanksgiving and praise in the very act of receiving, as we shall
see afterward. Our question is only about kneeling in the act of receiving. 3.
We confess, that the Sacrament is an occasion of Inward worship, in the
receiving of it. For Cornel. a lapide com. in Mal. c, 11.
in Eucharistia exercetur summa Fides, Spes, Charitas, Religio, caeteraeque
virtutes, quibus Deum colimus and glorificamus. but the outward adoration of
kneelling down upon our knees, can be no more occasioned by the blessed
Sacrament, in the act of receiving it, then by a graven Image in the act of
beholding it. The point which the B. had to prove, is, that whereas an Image
can not be the occasion of outward adoration and kneeling to God before it, in
the act of looking upon it; the Sacrament may be, and is an occasion of
kneeling, when it is set before us in the act of receiving. This neither he,
nor any for him, shall ever make good.

Thirdly, kneeling in the act of receiving the Sacrament, before the making up
of Idolatry, neither of which is found in their kneeling. First, they say,
except there be an intention in the worshipper, to adore the creature which is
before his eyes, his kneeling before it is no Idolatry. What shall I say, says
part. 3. cap. 3. sect. 29.
Paybody? What need I say in this place, but to profess and likewise avouch,
that we intend only to worship the Lord our God, when we kneel in the act of
receiving? we worship not the Bread and Wine, we intend not our adoring and
kneeling unto them. Give us leave to avouch our sincerity in this matter, and
it will take away the respect of Idolatry in Gods worship. Answ. I showed
before, that Paybody defends Dr Mortone his adoration, which he calls
relative from the Sign to Christ: yet let it be so, as here he pretends,
that no adoration is intended to the Sign; will this save their kneeling from
Idolatry? Nay then, the three Children should not have been Idolaters, if they
had kneeled before Nebuchadnezars image, intending their worship to God only,
and not to the Image. Our Opposites here, take the Nicodemites by the hand. But
what says De f^giend. idololat. homil. 1.
Calvine? Si isti boni sapientesque Sophistae, ibi tum fuissent, simplicitatem
illorum trium servorum Dei irrisissent. Nam hujusmodi credo cos verbis
objurgassent: miseri homines istud quidem Homines qui ex corpore and Spiritis
sunt co^stituti, corpore colunt materialiter: Spiritu formaliter, as Iunius
says upon Deuteronomy. 12.
non est adorare, quum vos in rebus nullam fidem adhibetis: nulla est
Idololatria nisi ubi est devotio, hoc est quaedam animi ad idola colenda
venerandasque adjunctio atque applicatio, etc. If Paybody had been in Calvines
place, he could not have called the Nicodemites Idolaters, forasmuch as they
have no intention to worship the Popish Images, when they kneel and worship
before them. Nay, the grossest Idolaters that ever were, shall by this doctrine
be no Idolaters, and 1 Cor. 10. 20.
Paul shall be censured for teaching that the Gentiles did worship Devils,
since they did not intend to worship Devils. Idololatrae nec olim in Paganismo
intendebant, nec hodie in Papatu intendunt, Daemonibus offerre. Quid tum?
Apostolus contrarium pronuntiat, quicquid illi intendant, says Com. in illum
locum. Sect. 11.
Pareus.

The other thing which our kneelers require to the making up of Idolatry, is,
that the creature before which we adore, be a passive object of the adoration;
whereas Lindsey ubi supra page 81.
say they, the Sacramental Elements are no manner of way the passive object of
our adoration, but the active only of that adoration, which at the Sacrament
is given to Christ, that is, such an Object and Sign as moves us upon the
sight, or by the signification thereof, to lift up our hearts, and adore the
only Object of our faith, the Lord Jesus: such as the holy Word of God, his
works, and benefits are, by meditation and consideration whereof, we are
moved and stirred up to adore him. Answ. 1. That which he affirms is false,
and out of one page of his own book I draw an Argument, which destroys it,
thus: If the Sacramental Elements, were only the active object of their
adoration who kneel before them in the receiving, then their real presence
should be but accidental to the kneelers. But the real presence of the
Elements, in the act of receiving, is not accidental to the kneelers. Ergo.
The proposition I draw from his own words: We can neither (says Ibid. page
92.
he) pray to God, nor thank him nor praise him, but ever there must be, before
the eyes of our minds at least, something of his Works, Word, or Sacraments,
if not before our external senses. He confesses it will be enough, that these
active objects of worship, be before the eyes of our minds, and that their
real presence before our external senses is not necessary, but accidental to
us whose minds are by their means stirred up to worship. And so it is indeed.
For esse scibile or rememorativum of an active object of adoration, is that
which stirs up the mind to worship, so that the real presence of such an
object is but accidental to the worshipper. The assumption I likewise draw out
of the Bishops own words. For Ibid.
he says, that we kneel before the Elements, having them in our sight, or
object to our senses, as ordinary Signs, means, and memorialls, to stir us
up, to worship, etc. Now if we have them in our sight, and before our senses,
for this purpose, that they may be means, signs, and memorialls to stir us
up to worship, then (sure) their being really before our senses, is not
accidental to us when we kneel. Since Of the lawf. of kneell. cap. 32. page
115.
Dr. Burgess has been so dull and sottish, as to write that the Signs are
but accidentally before the Communicants, when they receive, he is to be
ignominiously exsibilat; for making the Sacred Sacramental Signs to be no
otherwise present, then the walls of the Church, the nails and timber of the
material Table whereupon the Elements are set, or any thing else accidentally
before the Communicants. But, 2. put the case they did make the Elements only
active objects of worship, when they kneel in the act of receiving them: What
do some Papists make more of their Images, when they worship before them? they
hold, as De rep. Eccl. lib. 7. cap. 12. number. 42.
the Archbishop of Spalato notes, that Imago est medium duntaxat seu
instrumentum quo exemplar occurrit suo honoratori, cultori, adoratori: imago
excitat tantummodo memoriam, ut in exemplar feratur. Will we have them to
speak for themselves? Com. 1. disp. 54. sect. 3.
Suarez will have Imagines esse occasiones vel Signa excitantia hominem ad
adorandum prototypa. (c) Friar Pedro de Cabrera a Spanjard, takes the opinion
of Durand and his followers, to be this, That Images are adored only
improperly, because they put men in mind See Dr Usher. ^ans. to the Jesus. chall
of Images page 499.
of the persons represented by them: and he reasons against them, thus: If
Images were only to be worshipped by way of rememoration and recordation,
because they make us remember the samplares, which we do so worship, as if
they had been then present, It would follow that all creatures should be
adored with the same adoration, wherewith we worship God: seeing all of them
do lead us unto the knowledge and remembrance of God. Whereby it is evident
Aliud est picturam a dorare: aliud per picturae historiam, quid sit adorandum
addiscere, says Durand Ration lib. 1. tit. de pictur.
that in the opinion of Durand; and those who are of his mind. Images are b^t
active objects of adoration. Lastly, what says manual. lib. 3. cap. 2. quast:
5:
Becane the Jesuit? Imago autem Christi non est occasio Idololatriae apud nos
Catholicos, quia non alium ob finem eam retinemus, quam ut nobis Christum
Salvatorem, and beneficia ejus representet. More particularly, he will have the
Image of Christ to be honored for two reasons. 1. Quia honor qui exhibetur
Imagini redundat in eum cujus est Imago. 2. Quia illud in pretio haberi potest,
quod per se revocat nobis in memoriam beneficia Dei, and est occasio ut pro e^
acceptis grati existamus. At Imago Christi per serevocat nobis in memoriam
beneficium nostrae Redemptionis, etc. That for this respect the Image of Christ
is honored, he confirmed by this simile. Quia ob eandem causam apud nos in
pretio ac honor sunt Sacra Biblia, itemque Festa Paschatis, Pentecostes,
Nativitatis, and Passionis Christi. What higher accoumpt is here made of Images
then to be active Objects of Worship? for even whiles it is said, that the
Honor done to the Image, resulteth to him whose Image it is, there is no
Honor ascribed to the Image, as a Passive Object: but they who honor an Image
for this respect, and with this meaning, have it only for an Active Object
which represents and calls to their mind the first samplar, as the ubi supra.
Archbishop of Spalato also observes. Neither the Papists only, but some also
of the very Heathen Idolaters, Zanch. lib. 1. de viti ext. cult. Oppos. Col.
510.
Norunt in Imaginibus nihil Deitatis inesse, meras autem esse rerum absentium
repraesentationes, etc. And what if neither Heathens, nor Papists had been of
this Opinion, that Images are but Active Objects of worship? yet I have before
observed, that the B. himself aknowledgeth, it were Idolatry to set before us
an Image, as the Active Object of our Adoration: though the worship should be
abstracted from the Image.

Finally, to shut up this point, it is to be noted, that the using of ubi supra
page 88.
he says, this is not necessary, because when by the sight of the Creatures of
God, we are moved privately to worship, our external Gesture of Adoration is
Arbitrary, and sometimes no Gesture at all is required. But in the ordinary
Ministry, when the works of God, or his benefits are propounded, or applied
publicly, to stir us up to worship in the Assemblies of the Church, then our
Gesture cease to be Arbitrary: for it must be such as is prescribed and
received in the Church where we worship. Ans. 1. He shuffeleth the point
deceitfully, for when he speaks of being moved to worship at the sight of any
Creature, he means of inward worship, as is evident by these words, sometime no
Gesture at all is required; but when he speaks of being moved to worship in
the Assemblies of the Church, by the benefits of God propounded publicly,
(for example, by the blessed Sacrament,) then he means of outward worship, as
is evident by his requiring necessarily a Gesture. He should have spoken of one
kind of worship in both cases, namely, of that which is outward, for of no
other do we dispute. When we are moved by the Sacrament to adore God in the
act of receiving, this can be no other but that which is inward, and thus we
adore God by Faith, Hope, and Love, though neither the heart be praying, nor
the body kneeling. That which we deny (whereof himself could not be ignorant,)
is, that the Sacramental Elements may be to us, in the receiving, active
objects of outward adoration? or because they move us to worship inwardly, that
therefore we should adore outwardly. 2. Whereas he teaches, that kneeling
before any Creature, when thereby we are moved to worship privately, is
lawful, but kneeling before the Sacramental Elements, when thereby we are
moved to worship in the Assemblies of the Church, is necessary; that we may
kneel there, but we must kneel here: he knew; or else he made himself
ignorant, that both these should be denied by us. Why then did he not make them
good? kneeling before those active objects, which stir up our hearts to
worship, if it be necessary in the Church, it must first be proven lawful,
both in the Church, and out of it. Now, if a man meeting his L. riding up the
street upon his blake Horse, have his heart stirred up to worship God, by
something which he sees either in himself or his Horse, should fall down and
kneel before him, or his Horse, as the active object of his worship: I
marvel, whether the B. would give the man leave to kneel, and stand still as
the active object, before the man's senses? As for us, we hold, that we may
not kneel before every Creature, which stirs up our hearts to worship God,
kneel I say, whiles the eyes both of body and mind are fastened upon it as
the active object of our Adoration.

The fourth Reason, whereby I prove the kneeling in question, to be Idolatry,
proceeds thus. Kneeling in the act of receiving, Ergo. The Proposition is
necessary. For if they exhibit Divine Adoration (such as their kneeling is
confessed to be,) for reverence of the Sacrament, they do not only give, but
also intend to give Divine Adoration to the same. This is so undeniable, that
it dasheth ubi supra page 69.
B. Lindsey, and makes him give a broad Confession, that it is Idolatry to
kneel at the Sacrament, for reverence to the Elements. The Assumption I prove
from the Confession of Formalists. King Edwards Book of common Prayer
teaches, that kneeling at the Communion is enjoined for this purpose, that the
Sacrament might not be profaned, but held in a reverent and holy estimation.
So does partic. def. cap 3. sect. 20.
Dr. Mortone tell us, that the reason wherefore the Church of England has
institute kneeling in the act of receiving the Sacrament, is, that thereby we
might testify our due estimation of such holy Rites. part 3. cap. 3. sect. 45.
Paybody makes one of the respects of kneeling, to be the reverent handling and
using of the Sacrament. The Sermon. on Luke 1. 74 p. 991.
B. of Winchester exclaimeth against such as do not kneel, for not regarding
the Table of the Lord, which has ever been thought of all holies the most
holy, and for denying reverence to the holy Symboles, and precious memorials of
our greatest delivery, even that reverence which is given to Prayer. Where, by
the way I observe, that, when we kneel at Prayer, it is not to give reverence
to Prayer, but to God whom then most immediately we adore, so that kneeling for
reverence of the Sacrament, receives no commendatio^ from kneeling at Prayer.
The act of Perth about kneeling, when B. Lindsey had pollished and refined it
as well as he could, ordained us to kneel at the Sacrament, in due regard of
so Divine a Mystery. And what think we is understood by this Mystery, for
reverence whereof we are commanded to kneel? The ubi supra page 72. 73.
B. expounds this Mystery, to be the receiving of the body and blood of
Christ. But here, he either means the spiritual receiving of the body and
blood of Christ, or the Sacramental. If the spiritual: why did not the Synod
ordain us to kneel in hearing the Gospel? for therein we receive spiritually
the body and blood of Christ, and that as truly and really as in the Sacrament.
Whereupon the Ans. to the chall. of the real pres. page 50. 51
Archbishop of Armagh shows, that the spiritual and inward feeding upon the
body and blood of Christ, is to be found out of the Sacrament, and that diverse
of the Fathers do apply the sixth of John, to the hearing of the Word also;
as Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Eusebius Caesariensis, and others. Epist. 141.
ad Caesarian.
Basilius Magnus likewise teaches plainly, that we eat the flesh of Christ in
his Word and Doctrine. This I am sure no man dare deny. The B^ then must mean
by this mystery, the Sacramental receiving of the body and blood of Christ.
Now, the Sacramental receiving of the body and blood of Christ, is the
receiving of the Sacramental Signs of his body and blood. And as the ubi
supra page 55.
Archbishop of Armagh also observes, the substance which is outwardly
delivered in the Sacrament, is not really the body and blood of Christ. Again
ibid page 61.
he says, that the Bread and Wine are not really the body and blood of Christ,
but Figuratively and Sacramentally: thus he opposes the Sacramental presence
of the body and blood of Christ, not only to bodily, but also to Real
presence: and by just Analogy Sacramental receiving of the body and blood of
Christ, is not only to be opposed to a receiving of his body and blood, into
the hands and mouths of our bodies, but likewise to the real receiving of the
same spiritually into our souls. It remains therefore, that kneeling in due
regard of the Sacramental receiving of the body and blood of Christ, must be
expounded to be kneeling in reverence of the Sacramental Signs of Christ's
body and blood. And so Perths Canon, and the Bishops Commentary upon it, fall
in with the rest of those Formalists cited before, avouching and defending
kneeling for reverence to the Sacrament.

Those who speak out more plainly then Bishop Lindsey, do here alt. dam.
page 809.
Didoclavius does well distinguish betwixt Veneration and Adoration, because in
civility we use to be uncovered, even to inferiors and equals for the regard
which we bear to them, yet do we not worship them, as we worship the King on
our knees. Ea (veneratio) potest esse etiam sine cultu says Scaliger de
subtle. ad Card. exerc. 317. did 3.
As then, in civility there is a respect and reverence different from
Adoration, so it is in Religion also. Yea de sacram. confirm. cap. 13
Bellarmine himself distinguishes the reverence which is due to holy things
from Adoration. (t) Paybody, and Of the lawful. of kneel. cap. 8.
Dr. Burgess will by no means admit this distinction betwixt Veneration and
Adoration. But since neither of them has alleged any reason against it, I
hope they will be weighed down, by the Auctority of the de rep. Eccl. lib. 5.
cap. 6. number. 137. and lib. 7. cap. 12. number. 48.
Archbishop of Spalato, and ubi supra page 70.
the Bishop of Edimbrugh, both of which agree to this distinction. ((...))
part. 3. cap. 3. sect. 50.
So then, we give no Adoration at all to the Sacrament, because neither by any
outward nor inward action, do we perform any worship for the honor of the
same. ubi supra cap. 21. p. 73.
Burgess himself has noted to us, that the first Nicene Council exhorts,
that men should not be humiliter intenti to the things before them. We neither
submit our minds, nor humble our bodies to the Sacrament, yet (a) do we
render to it Veneration, for as much as we esteem highly of it, as a most holy
thing, and meddle reverently with it, without all contempt or unworthy usage.
Res profecto inanimatae says the de rep. Eccl lib. 7. cap. 12. n. 50.
Archb. of Spalato, sint sacrae quantum placet, alium honorem a nobis non
merentur, nisi in sensu negativo, as that they be not contemned, nor unworthily
handled. If it be said, that we ought not to contemn the Word, yet has it not
that respect given to it, which the Sacrament has, at which we are uncovered,
so that this veneration given to the Sacrament, must be somewhat more then non
Prophanatio: I answer, as honor in the Positive sense, so also in the
Negative, has various degrees: and according to the more or less immediate
manifestation of Divine Ordinances to us, so ought the degrees (1) Cartwr. on 1
Cor. 11. sect. 18.
of our Veneration to be intended or remitted; which is not so to be
understood, as if one part of Gods sacred worship, were to be less contemned
then another, (for none of Gods most Holy Ordinances, may be in any sort
contemned,) but that for the greater regard of those things which are more
immediately Divine, we are not in the usage of them, to take to our selves so
much Scope and Liberty, as otherwise we may lawfully allow to our selves, in
meddling with such things, as are not merely, but mixedly Divine, and which are
not from God so immediately as the other, but more by the intervention of
means. And thus a higher degree of Veneration is due to the Sacrament, then to
the Word preached, not by taking ought from the Word, but by adding more
respect to the Sacrament then the Word has. The reason hereof is Didoclav. ubt
supra page 808.
given to be this, because when we come to the Sacrament, nihil hic humanum,
sed Divina omnia, for Christ's own Words are, or at least should be spoken to
us, when we receive the Sacrament, and the Elements also are by Christ's own
Institution, holy Symboles of his blessed body and blood. Whereas the Word
preached to us, is but mixedly and mediately Divine, and because of this
intervention of the Ministry of men, and mixture of their conceptions with the
holy Scriptures of God, we are bidden try the Spirits, and are required after
the Example of the Baereans to search the Scriptures daily, whether these
things which we hear preached, be so or not. Now we are not in like sort to
try the Elements, and the Words of the Institution, whether they be of God or
not, because this is sure to all, who know out of Scripture the first
Principles of the Oracles of God. The consideration hereof warns us, that the
Sacrament given according to Christ's Institution, is more merely and
immediately Divine then is the Word preached. But others (I hear) object, that
if a man should uncover his Head at the sight of a Graven Image, we would
account this to be an adoring of the Image; and why then shall not we call our
uncovering at the Sacrament Adoration also? Ans. Though Veneration and
Adoration be distinguished in holy things, to show that Adoration given to them
is Idolatry, but Veneration given to them is not Idolatry, yet in profane
things, such as Images are, Veneration given to them is Idolatry, as well as
Adoration: and we are Idolaters for doing so much, as to respect and reverence
them, as things sacred or holy. For as I touched before, and as Lib. 1. de
viti. ext. cult. oppos. Col. 504. 505.
Zanchius evidenceth by sundry instances, Idolatry is committed, when more
estimation is had of any thing, more dignity and excellency placed in it, and
more regard had to it, then God allows, or then can stand with Gods revealed
will. For a thing thus regarded, though it be not exalted, ut Deus simpliciter,
yet it is set up, tanquam Deus ex part.

Now fifthly, if the kneeling in question be not Idolatrously referred to the
Sacrament, I demand, whereunto is it specially intended? Perth (in due regard
whereof, we are ordained to kneel,) be any other nor the Sacrament. Yet because
B. Lindsey, and some of his kind, who desire to hide the foul shape of their
Idolatry, with the trimmest fairding they can; will not take with kneeling in
reverence of the Sacrament: let them show us, which is the object, which they
do specially adore, when they kneel in the receiving of the same, for this
their kneeling at this time, arises from another respect, then that which they
consider in other parts of Gods worship, let two of our Prelates tell it out?
The Sermon. at Perth Assemb.
Archbishop of Sainctandrewes would teach us out of Mouline, that we ought to
adore the flesh of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist. The ubi supra page 142.
B. of Edinbrugh also, will have us to worship the flesh and blood of Christ in
the Sacrament, because the humanity of Christ is there present, being ever and
every where joined with the Divinity. But a twofold Idolatry may be here
deprehended. 1. In that they worship the flesh and blood of Christ. 2. In that
they worship the same in the Sacrament. As touching the first, albeit we may
and should adore the man Christ with Divine worship, yet we may not adore his
manhood, or his flesh and blood. 1. Because though the man Christ be God, yet
his manhood is not God, and by consequence can not be honored with Divine
worship. 2. If adorability agree to the humanity of Christ, then may his
humanity help and save us: Idolaters are mocket by the spirit of God, for
worshipping things which can not help nor save them. But the humanity of
Christ, can not save us nor help us, because omnis actio est suppositi:
whereas the humane nature of Christ is not suppositum. 3. None of those who
defend the adoring of the humanity of Christ with Divine worship, do well and
warrantably express their opinion. First, some of the Aquin. 3. q. 25. art. 2.
Schoolmen have found no other respect, wherefore the manhood of Christ can be
said to be adored, except this, that the flesh of Christ is adored by him who
adores the word incarnate, even as the Kings clothes are adored by him who
adores the King. And thus they make the flesh of Christ to be adored only per
accidens. Ego vero, says the De rep. Eccl. lib. 7. c. 12. ^. 43.
Archbishop of Spalato, non puto a quoquam regis vestimenta quibus est indutus,
adorari. And I pray, why does he that worshippes the King, worship his clothes,
more then any other thing which is about him, or beside him, perhaps a Hawk
upon his hand, or a little dog upon his knee? There is no more but the Kings
own person, set by the worshipper to have any state in the worship, and
therefore no more worshipped by him. Franc. a S. Clara expos. artic. confess.
Angl. art. 28.
Others devise another respect wherefore the manhood of Christ may be said to
be worshipped, namely, that as Divine worship agrees only to the Godhead, and
not personis Divinis praecise sumptis. i. e. sub ratione formali constitutiva
personarum, quae est relatio: but only as these relations identificantur with
the essence of the Godhead: so the manhood of Christ is to be adored non per se
praecise, sed pro ut suppositatur a Deo. I Answer, if by suppositatur they
mean, (as they must mean) that the manhood is assumed into the unity of the
person of the Son of God. (for otherwise if they mean, that the manhood is
made a person, they are Nestorians,) that which they say, can not warrant the
worshipping of the manhood with Divine worship: because the manhood even after
this assumption and hypostaticall union, and being considered by us as now
assumed into this personal union, is still for all that, a creature and a
distinct nature from the Godhead. (except we will be Eutychians;) so that it
cannot yet be said to be worshipped with Divine worship. Of the Church lib. 5.
cap. 15.
Dr. Field lays out a third way. For whiles he admitteh the phrase of the
Lutherans, who say not only concretively, that the man Christ is omnipresent
but the humanity also; he forgeth a strange distinction. When we speak, says
he, of the humanity of Christ, sometimes we understand only that humane created
essence of a man that was in him; sometimes all that, that is implied in the
being of a man, as well subsistence as essence. By the same distinction would
Field defend the attributing of the other Divine properties (and adorability
among the rest) to the humane nature. But this distinction is no better, then
if a man should say: by blackness sometimes we understand blackness, and
sometimes whytenesse. Who ever confounded abstractum and Concretum, before that
in Fields field they were made to stand for one? It is the Tenet of the
School, that though in God Concretum and abstractum differ not, because Deus
and Deit as are the same, yet in creatures (whereof the manhood of Christ, is
one,) they are realy differenced. For Aquin. 1. q 13. art. 1.
Concretum signifies aliquid completum subsistens, and abstractum (such as
humanity,) signifies something, non ut subsistens, sed ut quo aliquid est, as
whiteness does not signify that thing which is white, but that whereby it is
white. How comes it then, that Field makes humanity in the abstract to have a
subsistence. Cent. Flosc. Tur. disput. Flosc. 26.
Antonius Sadeel censures Turrianus, for saying that albedo cum pariete, idem
est atque paries albus: his reason is, because albedo dicitur esse, non cum
pariete, sed in pariete. An abstract is no more an abstract, if it have a
subsistence.

There is yet a fourth sense remaining, which is Augustines, and theirs who
speak with him. His sentence which our Opposites cite for them, is, that it is
sin not to adore the flesh of Christ: howbeit very erroneously he groundeth
that which he says upon those words of the Psalm, worship at his footstool,
taking this footstool to be the flesh of Christ: Yet that his meaning was
better then his expression and that he meant not that adoration should be given
to the flesh of Christ, but to the Godhead, whose footstool the flesh is; it
is plain from those words which Burgess Of the lawf. of kneel. cap. 23 p. 88.
himself cites out of him. To whatsoever earth i. e. flesh of Christ, thou
bowest and prostratest thy self: look not on it as earth, i. e as flesh, but
look at that holy one whose footstool it is that thou do adore, i. e.
look to the Godhead of Christ, whose flesh thou do adore in the mysteries.
Wherefore if we would give any sound sense to their words, who say that the
flesh of Christ is to be adored, we must note with Synt. l. 6. c. 16. col. 125.
A. Polanus, that cum dicitur carnem Christi adorari: non est propria, sed
figurata enunciatio; quia non adoratur proprie caro secundum se, quia creatura
est, sed Deus in carne manifestatus, seu Deus carne vestitus. But two things I
will here advertise my Reader of.

1. That though this form of speaking, which says that the flesh of Christ is
to be adored, being thus expounded, receives a sound sense, yet the expression
is very bad, and violence is done to the phrase, when such a meaning is drawn
out of it. For how can we by the flesh of Christ understand his Godhead? the
communion of properties, admits us to put the man Christ for God, but not
his manhood. And Eccl. pol. lib. 5. s. 55.
Hooker teaches rightly, that by force of union, the properties of both
natures (and by consequence, adorability, which is a property of the Divine
nature,) are imputed to the person only, in whom they are, and not what
belongs to the one nature, really conveyed or translated into the other.

2. Yet our Kneelers who say they adore the flesh of Christ in the Sacrament,
have no such Orthodox (though forced) meaning, whereby to expound themselves.
For Vbi supra.
B. Lindsey will have us in receiving the Sacrament, to bow our knees and adore
the humanity of Christ, by reason of the personal union that it has with the
Godhead. Ergo, he means that we should, and may adore with Divine worship,
that which is personally united with the Godhead. And what is that? not the
Godhead sure: but the created nature of the manhood: (which not being God, but
a creature only, can not without I dolatry be worshipped with Divine worship.)
I conclude therefore, that by the flesh of Christ, which he will have to be
adored in the Sacrament, he understands not the Godhead, as Augustine does, but
that created nature which is united with the Godhead.

But 2. as we have seen what is to be thought of worshipping the flesh of
Christ, so let us next consider, what may be thought flesh in the Sacrament, to
those who worthily receive; nor yet can it make any thing for the adoration of
the flesh. Not the former; for in respect of the ubiquity of the flesh in the
person of the word, it is ever and alike present with the Communicants, whether
they receive worthily, or not, and with the Bread and Wine, whether they be
consecrated to be signs of his body and blood or not. Therefore Divines
rightly hold Zanch. tom. 8. col. 521.
presentiam corporis Christi in coena, non ab ubiquitate, sed a verbis Christi
pendere. Not the latter neither; for (as I have showed already) notwithstanding
of the personal union, yet the flesh of Christ remains a creature, and is
not God, and so can not at all be worshipped with Divine worship. And if his
flesh could be at all so worshipped, We adore Christ as well in the preaching
of the Gospel and Sacrament of Baptism, as in the Sacrament of the Supper,
says Cartwright on 1. Cor. 11. sect. 18.
yet were there no reason for worshipping it in the Sacrament, (in respect of
its personal union with the Word,) more then in all other actions, and at all
other times. For ever and always, is the flesh of Christ personally united
with the Word, and in that respect present to us. There remains therefore
nothing but that other respect of the Sacrame^tall union of the flesh of Christ
with the Sacramental Sign, which they can have for worshipping his flesh in
the Sacrament. Whereas Vbi supra.
B. Lindsey says, that it is no error, to believe the spiritual powerful
and personal presence of Christ's body at the Sacrament, and in that respect to
worship his flesh and blood there. He means (sure) some special respect, for
which it may be said, that Christ's body is present at the Sacrament, (so as it
is not present out of the Sacrament,) and in that respect to be there adored.
Now Christ's body is spiritually and powerfully present to us in the Word (as I
showed before,) yea as often as looking by faith upon his body broken, and
blood shed for us, we receive the sense and assurance of the remission of our
sins through his merits: and as for this personal presence of Christ's body,
which he speaks of, I have showed also, that the adoring of the flesh of
Christ in the Sacrament, can not be inferred upon it; Wherefore he can tell us
nothing, which may be thought to infer the presence of Christ's flesh in the
Sacrament, and the adoration of it in that respect, save only the Sacramental
union of it with the outward Sign. Now adoration in this respect and for this
reason, must suppose the bodily presence of Christ's flesh in the Sacrament.
Whereupon De rep. Eccl. lib. 7. cap. 11. number. 7.
the Archb. of Spalato says, that the Papists adore the body of Christ in the
Sacrament, only because of the supposition of the bodily presence of it; and if
they knew, that the true body of Christ is not under the species of the Bread
and Wine, they would exhibit no adoration. And Ostens. error. Fr. Suarez. cap.
2. (...). 13.
elsewhere he shows, that the mystery of the Eucharist can not make the
manhood of Christ to be adored, quia in pane corporalis Christi presentia non
est: implying, that if the flesh of Christ be adored in respect of the mystery
of the Eucharist, then must it be bodily present in the Sign, which is false;
and hereupon he gathers truly, that it can not be adored in respect of the
mystery of the Eucharist.

Further, it is to be remembered (which I have also before Supra Sect. 13.
noted out of Dr. Usher) that the Sacramental presence of the body of Christ,
or that presence of it which is inferred upon the Sacramental union which is
betwixt it and the outward Sign, is not the real or spiritual presence of
it, (for in this manner, it is present to us out of the Sacrament, even as often
as by faith we apprehend it and the virtue thereof,) but it is figuratively
only so called, the sense being this, that the body of Christ is present and
given to us in the Sacrament, meaning by his body the Sign of his body. These
things being so, whosoever worshippeth Christ's body in the Eucharist, and that
in respect of the Sacramental presence of it in the same, can not choose but
hold that Christ's body is bodily and really under the species of the bread, and
so fall into the Idolatry of bread-worship; or else Zanch. lib. 1. de viti.
ext. cult. oppos. col. 504.
our Divines have not rightly convinced the Papists, as Idolatrous worishppers
of the bread in the Eucharist, for as much as they attribute to it, that which
it is not, nor has not, to wit, that under the accidents thereof is contained
substantially the true and living body of Christ, joined and united to his
Godhead. What can B. Lindsey now answer for himself, except he say with Marc
Ant. de Dom. oste^s. error Fr. Suarez, c. 2. n. 13.
one of his brethren, that we should adore the flesh of Christ in the
Sacrament, because Corporalis praesentia Christi, sed non modo corporali,
comitatur Sacramentum Eucharistiae: And Christ is there present corporaliter,
modo spirituali? But this man contradicts himself miserably; For we had him a
little before, ackowledging that in pane, corporalis Christi presentia non est.
How shall we then reconcile him with himself? he would say that Christ is not
bodily present in the Sacrament after a bodily manner; but he is bodily present
after a spiritual manner. Why should I blot paper with such a vanity, which
implies a contradiction, bodily and not bodily, spiritually and not
spiritually?

The sixth and last Argument, whereby I prove the kneeling in question to be
Idolatry, is taken from the nature and kind of the worship is Idolatry to kneel
before such a creature, whiles both our minds and senses are fastened upon it.
Our Opposites have raked many things together, to infringe this Argument. First
Burg. of the lawf. of kneel. cap. 32. p. 113. Paybody part. 3. cap. 3. Sect. 4.
they allege the bowing of Gods people before the ark, the Temple, the holy
Mountain, the Altar, the Bush, the Cloud, the Fire which came from heaven.
Answ. 1. Where they have read that the people bowed before the Altar of God, I
know not. Vbi supra. p. 94.
B. Lindsey indeed would prove from 2. Chron. 6. 12, 13, and Mic. 6, 6. that
the people bowed before the Altar and the Offering. But the first of those
places, speaks nothing of kneeling before the Altar, but only of kneeling
before the Congregation, that is, in sight of the Congregation. And if Solomon
had then kneeled before the Altar, yet the Altar had been but occasionally and
accidentally before him in his adoration, for to what end and use could he have
purposely set the Altar before him, whiles he was kneeling and praying? The
place of Micah can not prove, that Gods people did kneel before the offerings
at all, (for it speaks only of bowing before God,) far less, that they
kneeled before them in the very act of offering, and that with their minds and
senses fixed upon them, as we kneel in the very act of receiving the Sacrament,
and at that instant when our minds and senses are fastened upon the signs,
that we may discern the things signified by them, for the exercising of our
hearts in a thankful meditation upon the Lords death. 2. As for the other
examples here alleged, God was immediately present, in and-with the Arc, the
Temple, the holy Mountain, the Bush, the Cloud, and the Fire which came from
Heaven, speaking and manifesting himself to his people by his own immediate
voice, and miraculous extraordinary presence: So that worshipping before these
things had the same reason which makes Apoc. 4. 10.
the 24 Elders in Heaven worship before the Throne. For in these things, God
did immediately manifest his presence, as well as in heaven. Though there be a
difference in the degrees of the immediate manifestation of his presence in
Earth, and in Heaven, yet magn and minus non variant speciem. Now God is
present in the Sacrament, not extraordinarily, but in the way of an ordinary
dispensation, not immediately but mediatly. They must therefore allege some
commendable examples of such a kneeling as we dispute about, in a mediate and
ordinary worship, else they say nothing to the point.

Yet to no better purpose B. Linds. ubi supra, page 76.
they tell us, that when God spoke, Abraham fell on his face. And when the fire
came down at Elijas prayen, the people fell on their faces. What is this to
the purpose? And how shall kneeling in a mediat and ordinary worship, be
warranted by kneeling in the hearing of Gods own immediate voice, or in seeing
the miraculous signs of his extraordinary presence? Howbeit it can not be
proved, neither, that the people fell on their faces in the very act of seeing
the fire fall, (when their eyes and their minds were fastened upon it,) but
that after they had seen the miracle wrought, they so considered of it, as to
fall down and worship God.

But further, it is objected, Ibid. page 91.
that a poenitentiary kneels to God purposely before the Congregation, and with
a respect to the Congregation, etc. When we come to our common Tables before we
eat, tither fitting with our heads discovered, or standing, or kneeling, we
give thanks and bless, with a respect to the meat, which is purposely set on
Table, etc. The Pastor when he begins the holy action, has the bread and the
cup set before him, purposely, upon the Table, and with respect to them, he
gives thanks, etc.

Answ. Though a poenitentiary kneel to God purposely in the presence and sight
of the congregation, that he may make known to them his repentance for the
sin whereby he has scandalized them; yet is the confessing of his sin to
God kneeling there upon his knees, a immediate worship, neither does the
Congregation come betwixt him and God, as belonging to the substance of this
worship, for he kneeleth to God, as well, and makes confession of his sin,
when the Congregation is not before him. But I suppose our kneelers themselves
will confess, that the Elements come so betwixt God and them, when they
kneel, that they belong to the essence of the worship in hand, and that they
would not, nor could not worship the flesh and blood of Christ in the
Sacrament, if the Elements were not before them.

To be short, the case of a poenitentiary stands thus, that not in his
kneeling simpliciter, but in his kneeling publicly and in sight of the
Congregation, he sets them before him, purposely, and with a respect to
them: Whereas our kneelers do kneel in such sort, that their kneeling
simpliciter, and without an adjection or adjunct, has a respect to the
Elements purposely set before them, neither would they at all kneel, for that
end and purpose for which they do kneel, namely, Vbi supra, sect. 15.
for worshipping the flesh and blood of Christ in the Sacrament, except the
Elements were before the eyes both of their minds and bodies; as the
poenitentiary does kneel, for making confession of his sin to God, when the
Congregation is not before him.

And if one would say, that in kneeling at the Sacrament he worshippeth not the
flesh and blood of Christ, but the Lord his God only, yet is the same
difference to be put betwixt his kneeling before the Elements, and the kneeling
of a poenitentiary before the Congregation: For the very kneeling it self
(simply considered) before the Elements, respects them as then purposely set
in our sight, that we may kneel before the^: whereas in the case of the
poenitentiary, it is not his kneeling to confess his sin to God, which has
a respect to the Congregation as set in his sight for that purpose; But some
cirumstances of his kneeling only, to wit, When? At that time when the
Congregation is assembled; And where? Publicly in sight of the Congregation.
In regard of these circumstances, he has the Congregation purposely in his
sight, and so respects them; But in regard of the kneeling it self simply,
the presence of the Congregation is but accidental to him who kneeleth, and
confesses his sin before God. As touching giving thanks before the meat
set on our common Tables, though a man should do it kneeling, yet this
speaks not home to the point now in controversy, except a man so kneel
before his meat, that he have a religious respect to it, as a thing separated
from a common use and made holy, and likewise have both his mind and his
external senses of seeing, touching, and tasting fastened upon it in the act
of his kneeling. And if a man should thus kneel before his meat, he were an
Idolater.

Lastly, giving thanks before the Elements of Bread and Wine, in the beginning
of the holy action, is as far from the purpose: For this giving of thanks, is
an immediate worship of God, wherein we have our minds and senses not upon the
Bread and Wine, as upon things which have a state in that worship of the
Lords Supper, and belong to the substance of the same, (for the very
consecration of them to this use, is but then in fieri,) but we worship God
immediately by prayer and giving of thanks: Which is all otherwise in the act
of receiving.

Moreover Paybody part. 3. cap. 3. Sect. 4.
it is objected out of Levit. 9. 24. 2. Chron. 7. 3. Mie. 6. 6. 2 Chronicles. 29.
28. 29. 30. that all the people fell on their faces, before the legal
Sacrifices, when the fire consumed the burnt-offering.

Whereunto it may be answered, that the fire which came from God, and consumed
the burnt offerings, was one of the miraculous Signs of Gods extraordinary and
immediate presence, (as I have said before,) and therefore kneeling before the
same, has nothing to do with the present purpose.

But if we will particularly consider all these places, we find in the first
two, that beside the fire, the glory of the Lord did also appear in a more
miraculous and extraordinary manner, Levit. 9. 23. The glory of the Lord
appeared to all the people. 2 Chronicles. 7. 1. 12. The glory of the Lord filled the
house. They are therefore running at random, who take hold of those places, to
drawout of them the lawfulness of kneeling in a mediate and ordinary worship.

The place of Micah I have answered before: And here I add, that though it
could be proved from that place, (as it cannot,) that the people both bowed
before the offerings, and that in the very act of offering, yet how shall it be
proved, that in the act of their kneeling, they had the offerings purposely
before them, and their minds and senses fixed upon them, in the very instant of
their worshipping.

This I make clearer by the last place, 2. Chron. 29. out of which no more can
be drawn, but that the people worshipped, whiles the Priests were yet offering
the burnt-offering. Now the burnt-offering was but accidentally before the
people in their worshipping, and only because it was offered at the same time
when the song of the Lord was soung. Verse. 27. Such was the forewardnesse of
zeal in restoring Religion, and in purging the Temple, that it admitted no
stay, but eagerly prosecuted the work, till it was perfected, therefore the
thing was done suddenly, Verse. 36. Since then the Song and the Sacrifice were
performed at the same time, we must note that the people worshipped at that
time, not because of the Sacrifice which was a mediate worship, but because of
the Song of the Lord, which was an immediate worship. Now we all commend
kneeling in an immediate worship. But this can not content our Opposites, they
will needs have it lawful to kneel in the hearing of the Word, purposely and
with a respect to the Word preached, (though this be a mediat worship only.
Paybody ibid. Sect. 5.
Their warrants are taken out of Exodus 4. 30. 31. Exodus 12. 27. 2 Chronicles. 20.
18. Matthew. 17. 6. From the first three places no more can be inferred, but that
these hearers bowed their heads and worshipped, after that they had heard the
Word of the Lord; Neither shall they ever warrant bowing and worshipping in the
act of hearing.

In the fourth place we read, that the Disciples fell on their faces when they
heard Gods own immediate voice out of the Cloud: What makes this for falling
down to worship at the hearing of the Word preached by men? How long shall our
Opposites not distinguish betwixt mediate and immediate worship?

Lastly, Id part. 2 cap. 1. Sect. 7.
it is alleged, that God in his Word allows not only kneeling at Prayer, but
also at Circumcision, Passover, and Baptism. The reason of this assertion* is
given to be this, that a bodily gesture being necessary, God not determining
man upon any one, leaves him at plain liberty. Ans Whether we be left at
plain liberty in all things which being in the general necessary, and are not
particularly determined in Gods Word; it shall betreated of elsewhere in this
Dispute. In the mean time, whatsoever liberty God leaves man in bodily
gestures, he leaves him no liberty of an unlawful and Idolatrous gesture, such
as kneeling in the instant of receiving a Sacrament, when not only we have the
outward Sign purposely before us, and our minds and senses fastened upon it,
for discerning the signification thereof, and the Analogy betwixt it and the
thing signified; but also look upon it as an Image of Christ, or as a
vicatious sign standing there in Christ's stead. The Indifferency of such a
gesture, in such a mediate worship, should have been proved, before such a
rule (as this here given us for a reason,) had been applied to it.

But the kneelers would yet make more ado to us, and be still Dr. (...) Iren.
lib. 1. cap. 1.
one of our Doctors objecteth, that we lift up our eyes and our hands to
heaven, and worship God, yet do not worship the heaven: that a man going to
bed, prays before his bed: that David, offered the Sacrifices of
thanksgiving, in the presence of all the people, Psalm. 116. that Paul having
taken bread gave thanks, before all them who were in the ship Act. 27. 35.
that the Israelits worshipped before Moses and Aaron, Exodus 4, 31. Hereupon
Ios. Hall. Apol. against Brown Sect. 36.
another Dr. harping on the same string, tells us, that when we kneel in the
act of receiving the Sacrament, We kneel no more to bread, then to the pulpit,
when we join our prayers with the ministers. Oh, unworthy instances, and
reproachful to Doctors! All these things were and are accidentally present to
the worshippers, and not purposely before them, not respected as having a
religious state in the worship. What? do we worship before the bread in the
Sacrament, even as before a Pulpit, a bed, etc? Nay, graduate men should
understand better what they speak off.

Another objection is, D. Forb. ubi supra.
what a man who is admitted to the office of a Pastor, and receives in
position of hands, kneeleth still on his knees, till the ordination be ended
the rest about him being standing or sitting.

Answ. Kneeling in receiving imposition of hands, which is joined with prayer
and invocation, has nothing ado with kneeling in a mediate worship, for in
this case a man kneels, because of the immediate worship of invocation: But
when there is no prayer, I suppose no man will kneel religiously, and with a
religious respect to those persons or things which are before him, as there
purposely in his sight, that before them he may adore, which is the kind of
kneeling now in Question,) or if any did so, there were more need to give him
instruction then ordination.

It is further told us, that D. Forb. ibid.
he who is baptized, or he who offers him that is to be baptized, humbles
himself and prays that the baptism may be saving unto life eternal, yet
worshippeth not the basen, nor the water. But how long shall simple ones love
simplicity, or rather, scorners hate knowledge? Why is kneeling in the
immediate worship of prayer, wherein our minds do purposely respect no Earthly
thing, (but the Psalm. 25. 1.
soul, Lament. 3. 41. Psalm. ^23. 1.
the heart, the hands, [q] the eyes, Psalm. 5. 3
the voice all directed immediately to Heaven,) paralelled with kneeling in the
mediate worship of receiving the Sacrament, wherein we respect purposely the
outward sign, which is then in our sight, that both our minds and our
external senses may be fastened upon it: Our minds by meditation, and
attentive consideration of that which is signified, and of the representation
thereof by the sign: Our senses by seeing, handling, breaking, tasting,
eating, drinking?

Thus we see that in all these examples alleged by our Opposites, there is
nothing to prove the lawfullnesse of kneeling, in such

What then will they say next to us? Forsooth, that when they kneel in the act
of receiving they are praying and praising, and so worshipping God immediately.
And if we would know, what a man does then pray for, it is told us, Dr. Forb.
ubi supra.
that he is praying and earnestly crying to God vt eum faciat dignum convivam.
To us it seems very strange how a man when he is actually a banqueter, and at
the instant of his communicating, can be made in any other sort a banqueter,
then he is, for quicquid est, dum est non potest non esse. Wherefore if a man
in the instant of his receiving, be an unworthy banqueter, he can not at that
instant, be made any other then he is.

The truth is, we can not lawfully be either praying or praising in the very
act of receiving, because our hearts and minds should Cor. 11. 24. Do this in
remembrance of me.

This remembrance is described verse. 26. Ye do show the Lords death. Now one
of the special ways, whereby we remember Christ and so do show forth his
death, is by private meditation upon his death, as Com. in 1 Cor. 1^. 26.
Pareus resolves.

This meditation is a speech of the soul to it self: and though it may stand
with short ejaculations, which may and should have place in all our actions,
yet can it not stand with an ordinary and continued prayer purposely conceived,
as Vbi supra. (...). 104.
B. Lindsey would maintain. For how can we orderly both speak to God by
prayer, and to our selves by meditation at one instant of time? If therefore
prayer be purposely and orderly conceived, it banisheth away meditation, which
should be the souls exercise, in the receiving of the Sacrament. And by the
contrary, if meditation be entertained, as it should be, it admits not
prayer to have place at that time. For it is well Didect. Alt. Dam. page 803.
said, that Dum auribus, oculis, manibus, dentibus exterius; auribus, oculis,
manibus, dentibus fidei interius occupamur, orationem ceontinuam and durabilem,
absque mentis diragatione ab opere praecepto and imperato, instruere non
possumus.

But let us hear, how the B. proves that we should be praying and praising,
in the act of receiving the Sacrament. Whatsoever spiritual benefit Vbi supra,
p. 112
says he, we should receive with a spiritual hunger and thirst, and with a
spiritual appetite and desire after the grace and virtue that is therein to
salvation: The same we should receive with prayer, which is nothing else, but
such an appetite and desire. But the body and blood of Christ is such a
benefit, etc.

Answ. 1. Why did he not prove his proposition? Thought he his bare assertion
should suffice? Gods Word is a spiritual benefit, which we should receive with
spiritual hunger and thirst, yet the B. will not say, that we should be
praying all the while we are hearing and receiving it, for then could not our
minds be attentive. His proposition therefore is false. For though prayer
should go before the receiving of such a spiritual benefit as the Word or the
Sacrament, yet we should not pray in the act of receiving. For how can the
heart attend by serious consideration, what we hear in the Word, or what is
signified and given to us in the Sacrament, if in the actions of hearing the
Word, and receiving the Sacrament, it should be elevated out of the world by
prayer?

2. Why says he, that prayer is nothing else but a Spiritual appetite or
desire? He thought hereby to strengthen his proposition, but we deny all. Ibid.
p. 101.
He said before, that every prayer is a meditation and here he says, that
prayer is nothing else but a spiritual desire. These are uncouth descriptions
of Prayer. Prayer is not meditation, because meditation is a communing with our
own souls, Prayer a communing with God: Nor yet can it be said, that Prayer
is nothing else; but a spiritual desire; for Prayer is the sending up of our
desires to God, being put in order.

He speeds no better in proving that we should receive the Sacrament Whatsoever
benefit; says he, we should receive by extolling and preaching, and magnifying
and praising the inaestimable worth and excellency thereof, the same we ought
to receive with thanksgiving. But in the Sacrament we should receive the blood
of Christ with extolling and preaching, etc. The assumption he confirms by the
words of our Savior: Do this in remembrance of me. And by the words of S.
Paul: So often as ye shall eat this Bread and drink this Cup, ye shall declare,
that is extell, magnify, and praise the Lords death, till he come again. Answ.
His assumption is false, neither can his proofs make it true.

First, we remember Christ in the act of receiving, by meditation, and not by
praise.

2. We show forth the Lords death in the act of receiving, by using the Signs
and Symboles of his body broken and his blood shed for us, and by meditating
upon his death thereby represented.

3. We deny not that by praise we show forth the Lords death also, but this is
not in the act of receiving. It is to be marked with Vbi sup^.
Pareus, that the showing forth of the Lords death, must not be restricted to
the act of receiving the Sacrament, because we do also show forth his death,
by the preaching of the Gospel, and by private and public celebration of it,
yea by a perpetual study of sanctification and thankfulness. So that the
showing forth of the Lords death, by extolling, preaching, magnifying and
praising the same, according to the 23. Sect. Of the Confession of faith, to
which his Argument has reference, may not be expounded of the very act of
receiving the Sacrament. Neither do the words of the Institution refuse, but
easily admit another showing forth of the Lords death, then that which is in
the very act of receiving. For the word is not quando, but quoties. It is only
said, as often as ye eat this breed and drink this cup ye do show etc. Which
words can not be taken, only of the instant of eating and drinking.

Now having so strongly proved the unlawfulness and Idolatry of kneeling in
the act of receiving the holy Communion, let me add, corolarij loco, that the
reader needs not to be moved with that which B. Lindsey in the tail of his
dispute about the head of kneeling, offers at a dead lift, namely, the
testimonies of some modern Doctors. For 1. What can humane testimony avail
against such clear truth? 2. We have more testimonies of Dwines against
kneeling, then he has for it. And here, I perceiye Partic. def. cap. 3. Sect.
38.
Dr. Morton fearing we should come to good speed this way would hold in our
travel. We are not ignorant, says he, that many Protestant Authors are most
frequent in condemning the gesture of Kneeling, at the receiving of the holy
Communion.

3. Testimonies against kneeling are gathered out of those very same Divines
whom the B. alleges for it. Alt. Da^. page 756. 782. 794. Sect. 26.
For Didoclavius has clear testimonies against it, out of Calvine, Beza, and
Martyr, whom yet the B. takes to be for it.

Neither yet need we here, to be moved with Of the lauf. of kneel. cap. 22.
D. Burgess his adventurous undertaking to prove, that in the most ancient
times, before corruption of the Doctrine of the Sacrament began, the
Sacrament was received with an adoring gesture.

He shoots short of his proofs, and hits not the mark. One place in Tertullian
de oratione, he hammers upon: Similiter de Stationum. Diebus non putant
plerique sacraficiorum orationibus interveniendum quod statio solvenda sit
accepto corpore Domini. Ergo devotum Deo obsequium Eucharistiae resolvit, an
magis Deo obligat? Nonne solennior erit statio ^ua, si and ad aram dei
steteris? Accepto corpore Domini and reservato, vtrumque salvum est, and
participatio Sacrificij, and executio officij.

To these words the D. gives this sense; That many withdrew themselves, when
they came to the celebration of the Supper, because the body of our Lord, that
is, the Sacramental Bread, being taken of the Ministers hand, the station. i.
e. standing must be dissolved and ^elf: and because standing on those days
might not be left (as they thought,) therefore they rather left the Sacrament
on these days, the^ they would break the rule of standing on those days:
therefore they forbore:

Which can have no reason but this, that taking the holy things at the Table
standing, yet they used not to partake them. i. e. eat the Bread or drink the
Wine, in any other gesture, then what was on the Station days then forbidden,
kneeling: And that Tertullian wishes them to come, though they might not then
kneel, and to take the Bread in public, standing at the Table, and reserve
it, and carry it away with them, and receive it at their own howses, as they
desired, kneeling.

Answ. The D. by this gloss puts a weapon in our hands against himself, for if
when they had taken the Bread of the Ministers hand, their standing was to be
left and dissolved, and Tertullian, by commending to them another gesture in
eating of the Bread, not standing, then whether urges he that other gesture to
be used in the public eating of the bread, or in the private? Not in the
private: for his advice of reserving and eating it in private, comes after,
and is only put for a remedy or next best, in case they would not condeseend to
this course in public, quod statio Solvenda sit accepto corpore Domini. Needs
then, it must be understood of the public. Now, if in the public eating of
the bread, Standing was to be left; Which gesture was to come in place of it?
Not Kneeling.

For 1. Tertullian says De corona militis.
elsewhere: Diebus dominicis Iejunare nefas ducimus, vel de geniculis adorare:
eadem immunitate a die Paschae ad Pentecosten usque gaudemus.

2. The Dr. himself says, that upon these Station-dayes, Kneeling was
restrained, not only in prayer, but in all Divine service.

Wherefore if according to the Doctors gloss, the gesture of standing was
left or dissolved, that gesture which had come in place of it, to be used in
the partaking of the Sacrament, can hardly be imagined to have been any other
nor sitting. well, the D. has unhappily raised this spirit, to disquiet
himself: let him bethink how to lay him again. If he can not, J will assay to
make some help, and to lay him in this fashion. The station days were not the
Lords days, together with those 50 betwixt Easter and Pentecost, (on which
both fasting and kneeling were forbidden,) as the D. thinks, but they were
certain set days of fasting. For they appointed the fourth and fixed day of
the week, (that is wednesday and friday) for their Stations, as de Iejun. cap.
2. and 14.
Tertulian says: whose words we may understand, by another place of Haeres. 75.
Epiphanius, who writes that the Fast of the fourth, and the sixth day, was
kept throughout all the Churches, and held to be an Apostolical constitution.
Howbeit herein they did err: for to appoint a certain time of fasting to be
kept by the wholle Church, agrees not with Christian liberty, and wants the
example of Christ and his Apostles, as hist. eccl. cent. 4. lib. 2 cap. 22. p.
150.
Osiander notes. Always we see, what was meant by Station days, to wit,
their set days of 150 fasting, which were called Station days, by a speech
borrowed from a military custom, as Tertullian teaches. For as Soldiers kept
those times and places, which were appointed for their watches, and fasted all
the while they continued in these watches: so did Christians upon their station
days, resort and meet in the place appointed, and there remained falting till
their station dissolved. The Dr. takes upon him to confute those, who
understand by the Station days set days of fasting. But all which he
alleges to the contrary, is that he finds some where in Tertullian, Statio
and Iejunia put for different things. Now this helps him not, except he could
find that Statio, and Stata Iejunia are put for different things. For no man
takes the Stations to have been occasional, but only set fasts. Touching the
meaning then of the words alleged by the D. (to give him his own reading of
them, howbeit some read otherwise,) thus we take it. There were many who came
not to the Sacrament upon the Station days, because (in their opin^o^) the
receiving thereof should break the Station i. e. the service of the day, and
that because it should break their Fast, a principal duty of the same.
Tertullian shows, they were in an error, because their partaking of the
Sacrament should not break their Station, but make it the more solemn and
remarkable. But if they could not be drawn from that false persuasion of
theirs, that the Sacrament should break their Fast, yet he wishes them at
least to come, and stand at the Table, and receive the Sacrament into their
hands, and take it away to eat it after, (for permitting whereof he had no
warrant,) So should they both partake the Sacrament, and also (according to
their mind, and to their full contentment,) keep their Stations; which were
often prorogated Magd. cent. 3. cap. 6. col. 135.
till even, but ever and at least Epiphan. vbi supra.
till the ninth hour. Finally from this place, which the D. perverteth for
kneeling, it appears that the gesture or posture in receiving the Sacrament,
used in that place, where Tertullian lived, was standing because speaking of
the receiving of the Sacrament, he says, si and ad aram Dei Steteris.

As for the rest of the testimonies, Vbi supra cap. 22 and 23.
D. Burgess produces out of Adoration, we may not understand any Divine
worship, inward or outward, but a reverence of another nature, called
Veneration. That this (which we deny not neither,) and no more is meant by the
Fathers, when they speak of the adoration of the Sacrament. Rep. Eccl. lib. 5.
cap. 6.
Antonius de Dominis shows more copiously. And thus we have suffered the
impetuous current of the Doctors audacious promises, backed with a verbal
discourse, to go softly by us Quid dignum tanto tulit hic promissor hiatu.

Finally, if any be curious to know what gesture the ancient Church did use in
the receiving of the Eucharist. To such I say, first Alt. Da^. p. 784.
Didoclavius maintains, that which none of our Opposites are able to
infringe, namely, that no testimony can be produced which may evince, that ever
kneeling was used before the time of Honorius the 3. neither is it less truly
observed by the Author of Lib. 1. cap. 1.
the History of the Waldenses, that bowing of the knees before the Host, was
then only enjoined, when the opinion of transubstantiation got place.

Next I say, the ancient gesture, where of we read most frequently, was
standing. In Ephesians. 1 Sermon. 3.
Chrysostom complaining of few communicants, says: Frustra habetur quotidiana
oblatio: Frustra stamus ad altar: nemo est qui simul participet. Cent. Magd.
3. cap. 6. col. 133.
The Centurie-writers make out of Dionysius Alexandrinus his Epistle to Xi^us
Bishop of Rome, that the custom of the Church of Alexandria in receiving the
Sacrament, was, ut mensae assisterent. It is also noted by De Orig. Templ. lib.
2. cap. 28.
Hospinian, that in the days of Tertullian, the Christians stantes Sacramenta
percipiebant.

Thirdly, I say, since we all know, that the Primitive Christians did take the
holy Communion, mixedly and together with their Love Feasts, Pareus in 1 Cor.
11. 21. and Calb. ibid.
in imitation of Christ, who whileas he did eat his other Supper, did also
institute the Eucharist. And since (as Cartwr. in 1. Cor. 11. Sect. 6
it is observed from 1. Cor. 11. 21. 33.) there was a twofold abuse in the
Church of Corinth: One in their Love Feasts, whileas that which should have
served for the knitting of the knot of love, was used to out the cords there
of, in that every one (as him best liked) made choice of such as he would have
to sit at Table with him (the other either not tarried for, or shut out when
they came, especially the Poor,) The other abuse (pulled in by the former,)
was, for that those which were companions at one Table in the common Feast,
communicated also in the sacred, with the same separation, and severally from
the rest of the Church (and the poor especially,) which was in their former
Banquets.

Since also we read; that the same custom of joining the Lord's Supper
together with common Feasts continued long after. For Lib. 5. cap. 22.
Socrates reports, that the Egyptians adjoining unto Alexandria, together
with the inhabitants of Thebais, used to celebrate the Communion upon the
Sunday Quia Paulus has epulas sacram C^nam vocarit: Et quia scriptum est apud
Lucam. Similiter and calicem postquam Coenavit. Quae etia^ fuerunt ut arbitror
causae, cur illi Aegyptij de quibus loquitur Socrates Lib. 5. priusquam ad
misteria accederent laute coenarent, faith Casaubone. Exerc. 16. 31.
, after this manner: When they have banqueted, filled themselves with sundry
delicate dishes in the evening after Service, they use to communicate. How then
can any man think that the gesture then used in the Lords Supper was any
other, nor the same which was used in the Love-Feast or common Supper? And what
was that, but the ordinary fashion of fitting at Table? Since, the Conc. Laod.
can. 28.
Laodicean Canon which did discharge the Love Feasts, about the year 368,
imports no less, then that the gesture used in them, was sitting. Non
opportet in Ba^ilicis seu Ecclesijs Agapen facere, and intus manducare, vel
accubitus sternere. Now, if not only Divines of our side, but Papists also put
it out of doubt, that Christ gave the Eucharist to his Apostles sitting,
because being set down to the preceding Supper, it is said, whileas they did
eat, he took bread, etc. (Of which things I am to speak afterward;) What
does hinder us to gather in like manner, that for as much as those Primitive
Christians, did take the Lords Supper, whiles they did eat their own
Love Feasts, therefore they sat at the one as well as at the other? And so I
close with this collection. Whatsoever gesture in process of time, crept into
the Lords Supper, otherwise the^ sitting, of it we may truly say, from the
beginning it was not so.

CHAP. V.
The fifth Argument against the Lavvfulnesse of the Ceremonies, taken from the
mystical and significant nature of them.

THat mystical significations are placed in the controverted Ceremonies, and
should be in them; it is confessed and avouched by our Opposites. N^fratri and
amico art. 17.
Saravia holds that by the sign of the Cross we profess our selves to be
Christians. Partic. def. cap. 1. sect. 6.
B. Morton calls the Cross, a sign of constant profession of Christianity.
Eccl. pol. lib. 5. s. 65.
Hooker calls it Christ his mark, applied unto that part, where
bashfullnesse appears, in token that they which are Christians should be at
no time ashamed of his ignominy. Of the lawf. of kneel. cap. 17. p. 52.
Dr. Burgess mantaineth the using of the Surplice, to signify the pureness
that ought to be in the Minister of God. Paybody will have Kneeling at the
Lords Supper to be a signification of the humble and grateful acknowledging of
the benefits of Christ. The prayer which the English Service Book appoints
Bishops to use, after the confirming of Children by the imposition of hands,
avoucheth that Ceremony of confirmation for a sign whereby those children are
certificed of Gods favor and goodwill toward, them. In the general, Sarav.
de diverse. grad. Minist. Evan. cap. 24. sect. 25. Dr. Field of the Church lib
4. cap. 31. p. 396. Ant. ded^m Rep. Eccl. lib. 5. cap. number. 48.
Our Opposites defend that c Apol. for kneel. part. 3. cap. 2. sect. 15.
the Church has pover to ordain such Ceremonies, as by admonishing men of
their duty, and by expressing such spiritual and heavenly affections,
dispositions, motions, or desires, as should be in men, do thereby stir them
up to greater fervor and devotion.

But against the lawfullnesse of such mystical and significant Ceremonies,
thus we dispute, first, a chief part of the nature of Sacraments is given unto
those Ceremonies, when they are in this manner appointed to teach by their
signification. This reason being alleged by the abridgment of the Lincoln
Ministers, 4 pol. part 3. cap. 2.
Paybody answers, that it is not a bare signification that makes a thing
participate of the Sacraments nature, but such a signification as is
Sacramental, both in what is signified and how. Ans. 1. This is but to beg
the question, for what other thing is alleged by us, but that a Sacramental
signification is placed in those Ceremonies we speak of? 2. What calls he a
Sacramental signification, if a mystical resemblance and representation of
some spiritual grace which God has promised in his Word, be not it. And that
such a signification as this is placed in the Ceremonies, I have already made
it plain; from the testimonies of our Opposites. This (sure) makes those
Ceremonies, so to encroach upon the confines and Eccl pol. lib. 4. sect. 1.
Hooker, they are as Sacraments. But in Augustines Dialect, they are not only
as Sacraments, but they themselves are Sacraments. Signa (says the Father) cum
ad res divinas pertinent Samenta appellantur. Which Testimony so masters Dr.
Burgess that he breaks out into this witless answer, Ames. fresh. suit p.
223.
that the meaning of Augustine was to show, that the name of Sacraments,
belongs properly to Divine things, and not to all Signs of holy things. J
take, he would have said, belongs properly to the Signs of Divine things.

And here, beside that which Ames has said against him, J add that these two
things, 1. That this distinction can not be conceived, which the Dr. makes
betwixt the Signs of Divine things, and the Signs of Holy things.

2. That his other distinction can as little be conceived, which imports that
the name of Sacraments, belongs to Divine things properly, and to all Signs
of Holy things unproperly.

Lastly, if we call to mind that which has been evinced before, namely, that
the Ceremonies are not only thought, to be mistically significant, for setting
forth and expressing certain spiritual graces, but also operative and
availeable to the begetting of those graces in us, if not by the work wrought,
at least by the work of the worker; for example that the Sign of the Cross,
is not only thought by our Opposites, to signify that at no time we should be
ashamed of the ignominy of Christ, but is also esteemed Supra cap. 4. Sect. 4.
to be a mean to work our preservation from shame, and a most effectual
teacher, to avoid that which may deservedly procure shame: And that Bishopping
is not only thought, to be a Sign for certifying young children of Gods
favor, and good will toward them; but also an exhibitive Sign, whereby Ibid.
Sect. 5.
they receive strength against sin and tentation, and are assisted in all
virtue.

If these things, I say, we call to mind, it will be more manifest, that the
Ceremonies are given out for sacred Signs of the very same nature that
Sacraments are off. For the Sacraments are called by Divines, commemorative,
representative, and exhibitive Signs; and such Signs are also the Ceremonies
we have spoken of in the opinion of Formalites.

Mystical and significant Ceremonies, (to proceed to a second reason) ordained
by men, can be no other but mere delusions, and Signa instituta serve, if it
be not in the power of him who gives them institution, to give, or to work
that which is signified by them?

Now, it is not in the power of Prelates, nor of any man living, to give us
these graces, or to work them in us, which they will have to be signified by
their Mystical and Symbolicall Ceremonies. Wherefore Antith. Papat. and
Christian. art. 11.
Beza says well of such humane rites as are thought to be significant; Quum
nulla res signis illis subsit, propterea quod vnius Dei est promittere, and
suis promissionibus sigillum suum opponere: consequitur omnia illa commenta;
inanes esse larvas, and vana opinione miseros homines, illis propositis signis
deludi. On Luke 24. 50.
D. Fulk thinks he has alleged enough against the significative and
commemorative use of the Sign of the Cross, when he has said, that it is not
ordained of Christ nor taught by his Apostles: from which sort of reasoning it
follows, that all siginficant Signs which are not ordained of Christ, nor
taught by his Apostles, must be vain, false, and superstitious.

Thirdly, to introduce significant sacred Ceremonies into the

Upon this ground does Synt. Theol. lib. 9. cap. 38.
Amandus Polanus reprehend the Popish Clergy, for that they would be
distinguished from Laics by their Preistly apparel, in their holy actions,
especially in the Mass. Illa vestium sacerdotalium distinctio and varietas,
erat in veteri Testamento typica: Veritate autem exhibita, quid amplius typos
requirunt.

Upon this ground also does Com. on Gal. 3. 24.
Perkines condemn all humane significant Ceremonies. Ceremonies, says he, are
either of figure and signification, or of order. The first are abrogated at the
coming of Christ, etc.

Upon the same ground does Exam. part. 2. de rit. in admin. sacram. p. 32
Chemnitius condemn them, Quod vero praetenditur, etc. But whereas, says he,
it is pretended that by those Rites of men's addition, many things are
profitably signified, admonished, and taught: Hereto it may be answered, that
figures do properly belong to the Old Testament: but those things which Christ
would have to be taught in the New Testament, he would have them delivered and
propounded, not by shadows, but by the light of the Word. And we have a
promise of the efficacy of the Word, but not of figures invented by men.

Upon the same ground Aminad. in Bell. de cult. sanct. cap. 5.
Iunius finds fault with Ceremonies used for signification. Istis elementis
mundi (and vocantur Col. 2.) Dominus and Servator noluit nec docuit, Ecclesiam
suam infermari.

Lastly, we will consider the purpose of Christ, whiles he said to the
Pharisees, Luc. 16. 16.
The Law and the Prophets were until John: from that time the Kingdom of God
is preached. He had in the Parable of the unjust Steward, and in the
application of the same, spoken somewhat contemptibly of riches: Which when the
Pharisees heard, they derided him, and that for this pretended reason (as is
evident from the answer which is returned unto them,) because the Law promises
the worlds goods, as rewards and blessings to the people of God, that by the
temporal things, which are set forth for types and shadows of aeternall
things, they might be instructed, helped and led as it were by the hand, to
the contemplation, desire and exspectation of those heavenly and aeternall
things, which are not seen. Now, Christ did not only rip up the hypocrisy of
their hearts, Verse. 15. but also gave a formal answer to their praetended
reason, by showing them how the Law is by him perfected, Verse. 16. yet not
destroyed, Verse. 17. Then, will we observe how he teaches, that the Law and
the Prophets are perfected, and so our point shall be plain. The Law and the
Prophets were until John. i. e. they did typifie and prophecy concerning the
things of the Kingdom of God until John, for before that time the faithful
only saw those things afar off, and by types, shadows, and figures, and the
rudiments of the world were taught to know them; But from that time the
Kingdom of God is preached. i. e. the people of God are no longer to be
instructed concerning the things of the Kingdom of God, by outward Signs, or
visible shadows and figure, but only by the plain Word of the Gospel, for
now the Kingdom of God (...), is not typified as before, but plainly preached,
as a thing exhibited to us, and present with us. Thus we see, that to us, in
the days of the Gospel, the word only is appointed, to teach the things
belonging to the Kingdom of God.

If any man reply, that though after the coming of Christ, we

I answer. 1. That which has been said in this Argument, holds good against
significant Ceremonies in general. Otherwise when we read of the abrogation
of the Ceremonial Law, we should only understand the abrogation of those
particular ordinances, which Moses delivered to the Jews, concerning the
Ceremonies that were to endure to the coming of Christ; and so notwithstanding
all this, the Church should still have power to set up new Ceremonial Laws in
stead of the old, even which and how many she lists.

2. What can be answered to Ames fresh suite Page 266.
that which the Abridgement propounds touching this matter? It is much less
Lawful, (say those Ministers,) for man to bring significant Ceremonies into
Gods worship, now, then it was under the Law. For God has abrogateth his own
(not only such as prefigured Christ, but such also as served by their
signification, to teach moral duties,) so as now (without great sin) none of
them can be continued in the Church, no not for signification. Whereupon they
infer: If those Ceremonies which God himself ordained, to teach his Church
by their signification, may not now be used, much less may those which man
has devised.

Fourthly, sacred significant Ceremonies devised by man, are to Synt. Theol.
lib. 6. cap. 10. page 58. 59
Polanus says, that omnis figura illicita is forbidden in the second
Commandment. Synop. pur. Theol. disp. 19. these. 4.
The Professors of Leyden call call it Imaginem quamlibet, sive mente
conceptam, sive manu effictam.

I have showed Supra cap. 4. Sect. 9.
elsewhere, that both in the writings of the Fathers, and of Formalists
themselves, Sacraments get the name of Images; and why then are not all
significant and holy Ceromonies to be accounted Images? Now, the 2.
Commandment forbids Images made by the Lust of man (that I may use Of the
lawf. of kneel. page 116.
Dr. Burgess his phrase,) therefore it forbids also, all religious
similitudes, which are homogeneal unto them. This is the inference of the
Abridgement; whereat Apol. Part. 3. cap. 2. Sect. 4.
Paybody starteth, and replieth that the gestures which the people of God used
in circumcision and Baptism, the renting of the garment used in humiliation
and prayer Ezra. 9. 5. 2 Kings 22. 19. Ier. 36. 24. lifting up the hands,
kneeling with the knees, uncovering the head in the Sacrament, standing and
sitting at the Sacrament; were and are significant in worshipping, yet are not
forbidden by the 2. Commandment.

Answ. There are three sorts of Signs here to be distinguished. 1. Natural
Signs: so smoke is a sign of fire, and the dawning of the day a sign of the
rising of the Sun. 2. Customable signs, and so the uncovering of the head,
which of old was a sign of preeminence, has through custom become a sign of
subjection. 3. Voluntary signs, which are called Signa instituta; these are
either Sacred or Civil. To appoint Sacred Signs of heavenly mysteries or
spiritual graces, is Gods own peculiar, and of this kind are the holy
Sacraments. Civil Signs for civil and moral uses, may be and are
commendably appointed by men, both in Church and Commonwealth, and thus the
colling of a Bell, is a sign given for assembling, and has the same
signification both in Ecclesiastical and Secular assemblings. Now, besides the
Sacred Signs of Gods own institution, we know that natural Signs have also
place in Divine worship; thus kneeling in time of Prayer signifies the
submission of our hearts and minds, the lifting up of our eyes and hands,
signifies the elevation of our affections, the renting of the garments
signified the renting of the heart by sorrow, standing with a religious respect
to that which is before us, signifies veneration or reverence, sitting at
table signifies familiarity and fellowship. For which of you, Luc. 17. 7.
says our Master, having a servant plowing or feeding cattle, will say unto
him by and by, when he is come from the field, go and sit down to meat. All
these signs have their significations from nature. And if it be said that
howbeit sitting at our common-tables be a sign natural, to signify
familiarity amongst us, yet nature has not given such a signification to
sitting at the Lords-Table; I answer, that fitting is a natural sign of
familiarity, at what Table soever it be used. At the Heavenly Table in the
Kingdom of Glory, familiarly is expressed and signified by sitting Math 8. 11.
Many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, etc.
Much more then at the Spiritual Table in the Kingdom of Grace.

The difference betwixt other common tables, and the Lords Table, ca^ infer
no more, but that with great humility we ought to address our selves unto it:
yet still we are to make use of our familiarity with Christ ut tanquam in eodem
toro accumbentes, as says Homil. 27. in 1. Cor.
Chrysostom. Wherefore we do not there so look to Christ, in his Princely
Throne and glorious Majesty, exalted far above all principalities and powers,
as to forget that he is our loving and kind Banqueter, who has admitted us to
that familiar fellowship with him which is signified by our sitting at his
table.

Secondly, customable Signs have likewise place in Divine Service, for so a
man coming into one of our Churches, in time of public Worship, if he see the
hearers covered, he knows by this customeable sign, that Sermon is begun.

Thirdly, civil or moral Signs instituted by men, for that common order and
decency, which is, respect both in civil and sacred actions, have also place
in the acts of Gods worship. Thus a Basen and a Lauer set before a Pulpit, are
signs of Baptism to be ministered: but common decency teaches us to make the
same use of Basen and a Lauer in civility, which a minister makes of them in
the action of Baptising. All our Question is about Sacred Mystical Signs.
Every Sign of this kind, which is not ordained of God, we refer to the
Imagerie forbidden in the 2. Commandment. So that in the tossing of this
Argument Paybody is twice naught: neither has he said ought, for evincing the
lawfullnesse of sac^ed significant Ceremonies ordained of men, which we impugn.

Fifthly, the significancy and teaching office of mystical Ceremonies invented
by men, must be drawn under those Doctrines of men In vain, Mark. 7. 7.
says he, do they worship me teaching for Doctrines, the Commandments of
men.

The diverse washings commanded in the Law were foresignifying to the people,
and for teaching them, what true and inward holiness God required of them.
Now, the Pharisees when they multiplied their washings of Hands, of Cups and
Pots, Brazen Vessels and Tables, had the same respect of significancy before
their eyes. Neque enim alio spectabant (that I may use the words Camer.
praelect. Tom. 3. p. 37.
of a Formalist) quam ut se sanctitatis studios^s hoc externo ritu probarent.
Neither have we any warrant to think that they had another respect then this.
But the error was in their addition to the Law, and in that they made their
own Ceremonial washings, which were only the commandments of men, to serve
for Doctrines, Instructions and Significations. For those washings, as they
were significant and taught what holiness or cleanness should be among the
people of God, they are called by the name of worship: and as they were such
significant Ceremonies as were only commanded by men, they are reckoned for
vain worship.

And further I demand, why are the Colossians Col. 2. 20. 21. 22.
rebuked, for subjecting themselves to those ordinances, Touch not, Taste not,
Handle not? We see that those ordinances were not bare commandments, but
commandments under the color of Doctrines; To wit, as the law commanded a
difference of meats, for signifying that holiness which God would have his
people formed unto: so these false teachers would have the same to be signified
and taught by that difference of meats and abstinence, which they of themselves
and without the commandment of God, had ordanied.

Moreover, if we consider how that the Word of God is given unto us, 2. Tim. 3
16. 17.
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness,
that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works:
It can not but be evident, how superfluously, how superstitiously, the office
of sacred teaching and mystical signification, is given to dumb and lifelesse
Ceremonies, ordained of men, and consequently how justly they are taxed as
vain worship. We hold therefore with the worthiest I. Calv. in Matthew. 21. 25.
Sect. 8.
of our Divines, nullam Doctrinam, nullum saorum signum debere inter pios
admitti, nisi a Deo profecta esse constet.

To these reasons, which I have put in order against men's significant
Ceremonies, I will add a pretty History before I go further.

Hist. of the Church of Scotl. l. 1. p. 157. 158. 159.
When the Superior of the Abbey of Saint Andrews was disputing with John Knox,
about the lawfullnesse of Ceremonies devised by the Church, to decore the
Sacraments and other service of God: Knox answered, The Church ought to do
nothing but in faith, and ought not to go before, but is bound to follow the
voice of the true Pastor. The Superior replied, that every one of the
Ceremonies has a Godly signification, and therefore they both proceed from
faith, and are done in faith. Knox replyeth, it is not enough, that man invent
a Ceremony, and then give it a signification according to his pleasure; for so
might the Ceremonies of the Gentiles and this day the Ceremonies of Mahomet be
maintained. But if that any thing proceed from faith, it must have the Word of
God for the assurance, etc. The Superior answers, will ye bind us so strait,
that we may do nothing without the express Word of God. What and I ask
drink? think ye that I sin? and yet I have not Gods Word for me.

Knox here tells him, first, that if he should either eat or drink without
the assurance of Gods Word, he sinned, for says not the Apostle, speaking even
of meat and drink, that the creatures are sanctified unto men by the Word and
Prayer? The Word is this: all things are clean to the clean: Now let me hear
thus much of your Ceremonies, and I shall give you the argument?

But secondly, he tells him that he compared indiscreetly together Profane
things with Holy, and that the Question was not of meat and drink, wherein
the Kingdom of God consists not, but of matters of religion, and that we may
not take the same freedom in the using of Christ's Sacraments, that we may do
in eating and drinking, because Moses commanded, all that the Lord thy God
commands thee to do, that do thou to the Lord thy God; add nothing to it,
diminish nothing from it. The Supprior now says, that he was dry, and
thereupon desires the gray friar Arbugkill to follow the Argument. But he was
so pressed with the same, that he was confounded in himself, and the Supprior
ashamed of him. Dicite Io Paean, and Io bis dicite paean.


As for the examples alleged by our Opposites out of Scripture, Purim, and
Feast of Dedication I am to speak afterward. In the mean while, our Opposites
can not by these examples, strengthen themselves in this present Argument,
except they could prove that the feast of Dedication was lawfully instituted,
and that the days of Purim were appointed for a religious festivity, and that
upon no such extraordinary warrant as the Church has not ever and always.
The rite which Abraham commanded his servant to use, when he swear to him
namely the putting of his hand under his thigh, Genesis 24. 2. makes them as
little help: for it was but a moral sign of that civil subjection, reverence,
and fidelity, which Inferiors owe unto Superiors, according to the judgment of
Calvine, Iunius, Pareus, and Tremellius, all upon that place. That Altar which
was built by the Reubenites Gadites, and half Tribe of Manassch, Ios. 22. had
(as some think) not a religious, but a moral use, and was not a sacred, but a
civil sign to witness that those two Tribes and the half, were of the
stock and lineage of Israel: which if it were once called in question, then,
their fear (deducing the connection of causes and consequents,) led them in end
to forecast this issue, Jn time to come, your children might speak unto our
children, saying, what have you to do with the Lord God of Jsraell, for the
Lord has made Jordan a border betwixt us and you, etc. Therefore to prevent
all apparent occasions of such doolfull events, they erected the pattern of
the Lords Altar, Calv. in Ios. 22.
vt vinculum sit fraternae conjunctionis.

And besides all this, there is nothing which can urge us to say, that the two
Tribes and the half, did commendably, in the erecting of this Altar Ibid.
Calvine finds 2 faults in their proceeding. 1. In that they attempted such a
notable and important innovation, without advising with their brethren of the
other Tribes, and especially without enquiring the will of God by the high
Priest. 2. Where as the Law of God commanded only to make one Altar,
forasmuchas God would be worshipped only in one place; they did inordinatly,
scandalously, and with appearance of evil, erect another Altar, for every one
who should look upon it, could not but presently think, that they had
forsaken the Law, and were setting up a strange and degenerate Rite. Whether
also, that Altar which they set up for a pattern of the Lords Altar, was one
of the Images forbidden in the. 2. Commandment, I leave it to the Judicious
reader, to ruminate upon. But if one would gather from verse. 33. that the
Priest, and the Princes, and the children of Israel, did allow of that which
the two Tribes and the half had done, because it is said, the thing pleased
the children of Israel, and the children of Israel blessed God, and did not
intend to go up against them in battle.

I answer, the Hebrew text has it thus. And the word was good in the eyes of
the children of Israel etc. That is, the children of Israel blessed God, for
the word which Phinehas and the ten Princes brought to them, because thereby
they understood that the two Tribes and the half, had not turned away from
following the Lord, nor made them an Altar for burnt offerings or Sacrifice;
which was enough to make them (the nine Trybes and a half) desist from their
purpose, of going up to war against their brethren, to shed their blood.
Again when Phinehas and the ten Princes say to the Reubenites, Gadites, and
the half Tribe of Manasseh; this day we perceive that the Lord is among us,
because ye have not committed this trespass against the Lord, verse. 31. they
do not exempt the^ from all preuarication; only they say signanter, this
trespass, to wit of turning away from the Lord, and building an Altar for
Sacrifice, whereof they were accused. Thus we see, that no approbation of that
which the two Tribes and the half did, in erecting the Altar, can be drawn
from the text.

But to proceed our Opposites allege for another example against Solomon 1.
Kings. 8. 64. In which place there is no such thing to be found, as a new Altar
built by Solomon: but only that he sanctified the pavement of the inner Court,
that the wholle Court might be as an Altar, necessity so requiring, because the
Brazen Altar of the Lord was notable to contain so many Sacrifices, as then
were offered. The building of Synagougs can make as little against us.

For. 1. After the Tribes were settled in the land of promise, Synagougs were
built, in the case of an urgent necessity, because all Israel could not come
every Sabbath day, to the reading and expounding of the Law, in the place which
God had chosen, that his Name might dwell there. what has that case to do
with the addition of our unnecessary Ceremonies?

2. Jf Formalists will make any advantage of the building of Synagogus they
must prove that they were founded, not upon the extraordinary warrant of
Prophets, but upon that ordinary power which the Church retains still. As for
the Love Feasts used in the primitive Church. 1. They had no religious state in
Divine worship, but were used only as moral signs of mutual Charity. On. 1.
Cor. 11. sect. 6.
The Rhemists will have them called C^nas dominicas. But what-saith Cartwright
against them? We grant that there were such feasts used in times past, but they
were called by the name of (...) or Love Feasts, not by the name of the Lords
Supper: neither could one without Sacrilege give so holy a name to a common
Feast, which never had ground out of the Word, and which after for just cause
was thrust out by the word of God. 2. If it be thought, that they were used as
Sacred Signs of Christian Charity, because they were eaten in the Church. I
answer, the eating of them in the Church is forbidden by 1. Cor. 11. 22.
the Apostle. what? says he, have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or
despise ye the Church of God? Aperte vetat says com. in illum locum.
Pareus, commessationes in Ecclesia, quocunque fueo pingantur. Vocabant (...)
charitates: sed nihil minus erant. Erant schismatum fomenta. Singulae enim
sectae suas instituebant. And alitle after. Aliquae Ecclesiae obtemperasse
videntur. Nam Iustini temporibus Romana Ecclesia (...) non habuit. Concerning
the kiss of charity used in those times, 2. Cor 13, 22. we say in like manner,
that it was but a moral sign of that reconciliation, friendship, and amity,
which show it self as well at holy assemblies, as other meetings, in that kind
and courtisie, but with all chaste salutation, which was then in use.

As for the vails wherewith the Apostle would have women covered Sam. 10. 10.
1. Chron. 25. 1.) they are worthy to be covered with shame as with a garment,
who allege this example for sacred significant Ceremonies of humane
Institution. This covering was a moral sign, for that comely and orderly
distinction of men and women, which civil decency required in all their
meetings: wherefore, that distinction of habits, which they used for decency
and comeliness in their common behavior and conversation, the Apostle will
have them, for the same decency and comeliness, still to retain, in their
holy Assemblies. And further the Apostle shows, that it is also a natural
sign, and that nature it self teachet it: therefore he urges it both by the
inferiority or subjection of the woman verse. 3. 8. 9. (For covering was then a
sign of subjection,) and by the long hair which nature gives to a woman verse.
15. Where he would have the artificial covering, to be fashioned in imitation
of the natural. What need we any more? Let us see natures institution, or the
Apostles recommendation for the controverted Ceremonies, (as we have seen them
for vvomens vails) and we yield the Argument.

Last of all, the sign of imposition of hands, helps not the cause of our
Opposites, because it the example of Christ, and the Apostles, and their
disciples, which our Ceremonies have not: yet we think not imposition of hands
to be any sacred or mystical sign, but only a moral, for designation of a
person: let them who think more highly or honorably of it, look to their
Warrants.

Thus have I thought it enough to take a passing view of these objected
instances, without marking narrowly all the impertinencies and falsehoods, which
here we find in the reasoning of our Opposites. One word more, and so an end,
(n) D. Burgess would comprehend the significancy of sacred Ecclesiastical
Ceremonies, for stirring men up to the rememberance of some mystery of piety
or duty to God, under that edification which is required in things that
concern order and decency by all Divines.

Alas! what a sorry conceit is this? Divines indeed do rightly require, that
those alterable Circumstances of Divine worship, which are left to the
determination of the Church, be so ordered and disposed, as they may be
profitable to this edification. But this edification they speak of, is no
other then that which is common to all our actions and speeches: are we not
required to do all things unto edifying, yea so to speak as that our speech
may be profitable unto edifying? Now, such significations, as we have showed to
be given to the Ceremonies in Question, as namely, to certify a child of Gods
favor and good will toward him; To betoken that at no time Christians should
be ashamed of the ignominy of Christ; to signify the pureness that ought to be
in the Minister of God: To express the the humble and grateful
acknowledgement of the benefits of Christ, etc. belong not to that
edification; Which Divines require in things prescribed by the Church
concerning order and decency; except of every private and ordinary action, i^
the whole course of our conversation, we either deny that it should be done
unto edifying, or else affirmethat it is a sacred significant Ceremony.

CHAP. VI.
That the lavvfulnesse of the Ceremonies is falsely grounded upon the holy
Scripture: where such places as are alleged by our Opposites, either for all
the Ceremonies in general, or for any one of them in particular, are
vindicated from them.

IT remains now, to examine the warrants which our Opposites pretend for the
lawfullnesse of the Ceremonies. But I perceive Eccl. Pol. lib. 5. S. 69.
Hooker defends the lawfulness of Festival days, by the law of nature. On
praec. 4.
D. Douname groundeth the lawfulness of them on the law of God, making the
observation of the Sabbaths of rest appointed by the Church, such as the Feasts
of Christ's Nativity, Passion, etc. to be a duty commanded in the Law of God,
and the not observing of them, to be a thing forbidden by the same Law. But
Epist. to the past. of the Church of Scotl.
B. Lindsey proves the lawfulnes of those Holy days, from the power of the
Church to make laws in such matters. As for the Lords day says he, which has
succeeded to the Jewish Sabbath, albeit God has commanded to sanctify it, yet
neither is the whole public worship nor any part of it appropriated to that
time, but lawfully the same may be performed upon any other convenient day of
the week, of the month, or of the year, as the Church shall think expedient.
Upon this ground Zanchius affirmed: Ecclesiae Christi liberum esse quos velit
preter dominicos dies sibi sanctificandos deligere. And by this warrant did the
Primitive Church sanctify these five anniversary days of Christ's Nativity, etc.

Nay, let us observe, how one of them wavereth from himself, in seeking here
some ground to rest upon. Paybody groundeth the lawfulness of kneeling at the
Sacrament, on nature, part. 2. cap. 4, Sect. 1. On the act of Parliament, part.
3. cap. 1. Sect. 31. On an Ecclesiastical Canon, part. 3. cap. 1. Sect. 33. On
the Kings sovereign authority, part. 3. cap. 1. Sect. 36. Yet again he says,
that this kneeling is grounded upon the commandment of God, part. 3. cap. 3.
Sect. 11.

Well. I see our Opposites sometimes warrant the lawfulness of the Ceremonies
from the Law of God, sometimes from the Law of Man, and sometimes from the Law
of Nature. But I will prove that the lawfullnesse of those Ceremonies we speak
of, can neither be grounded upon the Law of God, nor the Law of Man, nor the
Law of Nature, and by consequence that they are not lawful at all: So that
besides the answering of what our Opposites allege for the lawfulness of
them, we shall have a new Argument to prove them unlawful.

I begin with the Law of God. And first, let us see what is alleged Medusa,
and it they still object to us for all their Ceremonies: even that 1. Cor. 14.
40.
the Apostle, Let all things be done decently and in order: What they have
drawn out of this place, Of the law^. of kneel. page 3.
D. Burgess has refined in this manner. He distinguishes betwixt praeceptum
and probatum; and will have the controverted Ceremonies to be allowed of God,
though not commanded. And if we would learn how these Ceremonies are allowed
of God, Ibid. page 11.
he gives us to understand, that it is by commanding the general kind to which
these particulars do belong. If we ask, what is this general kind commanded
of God to which these Ceremonies do belong? Ibid. page 4.
He resolves us, that it is order and decency: And if further we demand, how
such Ceremonies as are instituted and used to stir up men in respect of their
signification unto the devoute remembrance of their duties to God, are in such
an institution and use matters of mere order? As a Magisteriall Dictatour of
Quodlibets; Ibid. page 14.
he tells us that they are matters of mere order sensu largo, in a large
sense. But lastly, if we doubt where he reads of any worship commanded in
the general, and not commanded but only allowed in the particular Ibid. page
6. 7.
he informs us, that in the free-will-offrings, when a man was left at
liberty to offer a Bullock, Goat, or Sheep at his pleasure, if he chose a
Bullock to offer, that Sacrifice in that particular, was not commanded, but
only allowed. What should I do, but he surd^ contra absurdum? Nevertheless
least this Jolly fellow think himself more Jolly then he is, I answer 1. How
absurd a tenet is this which holds that there is some particular worship of
God allowed and not commanded? What new Light is this which makes all our
divines to have been in the mist, who have acknowledged no worship of God, but
that which God has commanded? Who ever heard of commanded and allowed worship?
As for the instances of the free-will-offerings, Fresh suite, page 153.
Ames has answered sufficiently, that though the particulars were not nor
could not be determined, by a distinct rule in general, yet they were
determined by the circumstances, as our Divines are wont to answer the Papists,
about their Vows, Counsels, Supererogations: NOT BY A GENERAL LAW, BUT BY
CONCVRRENCE OF CIRCVMSTANCES. So Deuteronomy. 16. 10. Moses shows that the freist
offerings were to be according as God had blessed them; From whence it
follows, it had been sin for any Israelite, whom God had plentifully
blessed, to offer a pair of Pigeons in stead of a Bullock or two, upon his
own mere pleasure. Where that proportion was observed, the choice of a Goat
before a Sheep, or a Sheep before a Goat was no formal worship.

2. How will D. Burgess make it appear, that the English Ceremonies De
effect. Sacr. lib. 2 cap. 31.
Bellarmine would have all the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome comprehended
under order and decency, and therefore warranteth them by that Praecept of the
Apostle. Let all things be done decently and in order. The one shall as soon
prove his point as the other, and that shall be never.

For 1. The Apostle only commands that each action and Ceremony of Gods worship
be decently and orderly performed, but gives us no leave to excogitate or
devise new Ceremonies, which have not been instituted before. He has spoken in
that Chapter of assembling in the Church, Prophesying and Preaching, Praying
and Praising there.

Now let all these things, and every other action of Gods worship Ceremonies
and all be done decently and in order. Licet ergo, Paulus, etc, Albeit
therefore says In praefat. elench. relig. Papistic.
Ioh. Bastwick, Paul has committed to the Church, the judging both of decency
and order, yet hat he not granted any liberty of such mystical Ceremonies, as
by their more inward signification do teach the duty of piety: For since the
whole liberty of the Church in the matter of Divine worship, is exercised only
in order and decency; it follows that they do impudently scorn both God and
the Scriptures, who do extend this liberty to greater things, and such as are
placed above us. Most certain it is, that Christ the Doctor of the Church
has by his own written and sealed Word, abundantly expounded unto us the
will of God; neither is there further need of any Ceremonies, which by a secret
virtue may instruct us: neither is it less evident, that order consists not
its the institution or use of new things, but only in the right placing of
things which have been instituted before. Decency, says De cas. consc. lib. 4.
cap. 11.
Baldwine, is opposed to levitie, and order to confusion. Spectat autem hic
ordo potissimum ad Ritus Ecclesia in officijs Sacris in quibus nullum debet
esse scand^um, nulla confusio.

Then, in his Judgment, order is not to the Rites of the Church a general
kind, but only a concomitant circumstance; neither are the Rites of the Church
comprehended under order, as particulars under the general kind to which they
belong, but order belongs to the Rites of the Church, as an adjunct to the
Subject. And I pray, must not the Rites of the Church be managed with decency
and order? If so; then must our Opposites either say, that order is managed
with order, which is to speak nonsense, or else that the Rites of the Church
are not comprehended under order. But if not; then it follows that the Rites
of the Church are to be managed with levity; confusion, and scandal, for every
action that is not done indecently and in order, must needs be done
scandalously and confusedly. 2. Order and decency, whether taken largo, or
stricto sensu, always signify such a thing as ought to be in all humane
actions, as well civil as sacred; for will any man say that the civil actions
of men are not to be done decently and in order? Ames. Bell. enerv iom. 1. lib.
3. crp. 7.
The directions of order and decency, are not (we see) propria religionis. But
as Vbi supra.
Balduine shows out Gregory Nazianzen, order is in all other things, as well
as is in the Church. Wherefore sacred significant Ceremonies shallnever be
warranted, by the precept of order and decency, which have place no less in
civility then in religion.

Now to the particulars. And first, that which Christ did Matthew. Com. in illum
locum.
Maldonat says rightly, Haebre orum consuetudinem fuisse, ut qui majores erant
and aliqua pollebant divina gratia, manuum impositione inferioribus
benedicerent, constat ex Genesis 48. 14. 15. hac ergo ratione adducti parents,
Infantes ad Christum afferebant, ut impossit is manibus illis benediceret. And
as touching this blessing of children and imposition of hands upon them, says
on Mat 19. sect. 9.
Cartwright, it is peculiar unto our Savior Christ: used neither by his
disciples, nor his Apostles, either before or after his Ascension. Whereunto
makes that the Children being brought, that he should pray over them, he did
not pray for them, but blessed them, that is to say commended them to be
blessed, thereby to show his Divine power. These being also yet Infants, and in
their suatheling cloutes, as by the Word which the Evangelist uses, and as by
our Savior Christ's taking them into his arms, does appear; being also in
all likelihood unbaptised. Last of all, their confirmation is a notable
derogation unto the holy Sacrament of Baptism, not alone in that it presumes
the sealing of that which was sealed sufficiently by it: but also in that both
by asseueration of words; and by specialty of the Minister that gives it, it
is even preferred unto it.

The act of Perth about kneeling, would draw some commendation Psalm. 95. 6.
Psalm, O come let us worship and bow down. let us kneel before the Lord our
maker. Which is as if one should argue thus. We may worship before the lord.
Ergo before a creature. We may kneel in an immediate worship of God, Ergo in a
mediate. For who sees not, that the kneeling there spoken of, is a kneeling in
the action of solemn praise, and Joyful noise of singing unto the Lord? I
wish you, my Masters, more sober spirits, that ye may fear to take Gods name
in vain, even his word which he has magnified above all his name. Iren. lib.
1. cap. 7, 6. 7.
Dr. Forbesse goes about to warrant private Baptism, by Philips baptising the
Eunuch, there being no greater company present, so far as we can gather from
the narration of Luke, Act. 8. As lykwise by Paul and Silas their baptising the
Jailer and all his, in his own private house, Act. 16. Touching the first of
those places, we answer. 1. How thinks he that a man of so great auctority and
charge, was alone in his Iourny? we suppose a great man traveling in a
charret, must have some number of attendants, especially having come to a
solemn worship at Jerusalem. 2. What Philip then did, the extraordinary
direction of the Spirit guided him unto it, Verse. 29. 39. As to the other
place, there was in that time of persecution no liberty for Christians to meet
together in Temples and public places as now there is. Wherefore the example
of Paul and Silas does prove the lawfulness of the like deed in the like case.

Eccles. Pol. lib. 5. S. 65.
Hooker muttereth some such matter, as a commendation of the Ezech. 9 4 Revel.
7. 3. alleging that because in the forehead nothing is more plain to be
seen then the fear of contumely and disgrace: therefore the Scripture
describes them marked of God in the forehead, whom his mercy has undertaken
to keep from final confusion and shame. De lmag. sanct. cap. 29.
Bellarmine alleges for the Cross the same two places. But for answer to the
first, we say that neither the sign whereof we read in that place, nor yet the
use of it can make ought for them. As for the sign itself. Albeit the
Ancients did interpret this sign of the letter Tau, to have been the sign of
the Cross, yet says Com. in illum locum.
Junius, Bona illorum venia; T quidem Graecorum, latinorumque majusculum,
crucis qoudammodo signum videtur effingere, verum hoc ad literam Haebreorum Tau
non potest pertinere. Deinde ne ipsum quidem Graecorum latinorumque T, formam
Crucis quae apud veteres in usu erat quum sumebantur supplicia, representat.

Whereupon dissenting from the Ancients, he delivers his own Judgment, that
Tau in this place is taken Technikos, for that sign or mark of the le^ter
wherewith the Lord commanded to mark the elect for their safety and
preservation. And so there was no mystery to be sought in that letter more then
in any other. As for the use of that mark, wherewith the elect in Jerusalem
were at hat time sealed, it was only for distinction and separation. It had the
same use which that sprinkling of the posts of the doors had, Exodus 12. 7.
only the foreheads of men and women, and not the posts of doors were here
marked, because only the remnant according to election, and not whole families
promiscously were at this time to be spared, as Iunius notes.

But the use of the sign of the Cross pretended by Formalists, is not to
separate us in the time of Judgment, but to teach that at no time we ought to
be ashamed of the ignominy of Christ.

Shortly, the sign wherewith they in Jerusalem were marked, was for
preservation from Judgment, but the sign of the Cross is used for
preservation from sin. Thus we see, that neither the sign nor the use of it,
had any affinity with the Cross. Now, the surest interpreation of that place
Ezech. 9 4. is to take Tau for an apellative noune, signifying generally and
indefinitly a Mark or a Sign, so that there is no make determined by this
word: only there was a commandment given te set a certain mark, some sign
or other, upon the foreheads of the elect. So have our English Translatours
taken the place.

This exposition is confessed by Com. in Ezech. 9. 4
Gasper Sanctius, to be followed almost by all the Hebrew masters, and by the
most Ancient Interpreters, to wit, the Septuagints, Aquila, and Symachus. The
word bears this gloss, even according to the confession of those, who
expound it otherwise in this place, to wit, for an Image or representation of
the Cross. Tau says Ibid.
Sanctius commune nomen est, quod signum indefinite significat. Tau is
expounded by Gram. Hebr. part. 1. cap. 1.
Bellarmine, to signify Signum or Terminus. Well then: our Adversaries
themselves can say nothing against our interpretation of the word Tau. We have
also Buxtorf for us, who in his Hebrew Lexicon, turns Tau to be Signum, and
for this signification he cites both this place Ezech. 9. 4, and Job. 31. 35.
Taui signum meum.

Lastly, if Tau be not put for a common appellative noune signifying a mark or
sign, but for the figure or character of the letter Tau as an Image of the
Cross, by all likelihood this character only should have been put in the
Hebrew text, and not the noune fully written; Vehithvitha tau, and mark a
mark. As to the other place, Revel. 7. 3. Comm. i^ illum locum.
Pareus observes, that there is no figure or form of any sign there
expressed, and he thinks that seal was not outward and visible, but the same
whereof we read 2. Tim. 2. 19. and Revel. 14. 1. Which can no be interpreted de
signo transeunte: nam Christianum semper nomen filij and patris in front
opportet gerere, says Animad. ad Bell. de imag. sanct cap. 29.
Iunius.

D. Fulk on Revel. 7, 3. says, that the sign here spoken of is proper to Gods
elect, therefore not the sign of the Cross, which many reprobates have
received.

Sermon. on that place.
B. Andrews will have the feast of Easter drawn from that John, and the other
S. Peter, it was acknowledged by both, that the feast was Apostolical.

J answer, the Testimony of Socrates deserves more creditthen the Bishops
naked conclusion.

I am of opinion says Lib. 5. cap. 22.
Socrates, that as many other things crept in of custom in sundry places, so
the Feast of Easter to have prevailed among all people, of a certain private
custom and observation.

But whereas B. Lindsy in defense of B. Andrews, replyeth that Socrates
propounds this for his own opinion only.

I answer, that Socrates in that Chapter proves his opinion from the very
same ground, which B. Andrews wresteth, to prove that this Feast is
Apostolical. For while as in that hot controversy about the keeping of Easter,
they of the East alleged John the Apostle for their Author, and they o* the
west alleged Peter and Paul for themselves; Yet (says Socrates, there is
none that can show in writing any testimony of theirs, for confirmation and
proof of their custom. And hereby I do gather, that the celebration of the
Feast of Easter, came up more of custom then by any Law or Canon.

Douname (as I touched before) alleges the fourth commandment In Epist. ad
quenda qui a reform. relig. ad Papism. defecerat.
D. Bastwick alleges more truly the fourth commandment against them, Six
days shall thou labor. This Argument I have made good elsewhere, so that now
I need not insist upon it. There are further two examples alleged against us,
for holy days, out of Esther 9. 17. 18. 17. 28. and Jo. 10. 22.

Whereunto we answer. 1. That both those feasts were appointed to be kept with
the consent of the whole Congregation of Jsrael, and body of the people, as is
plain from Esther. 9. 31. and 1. Maccab. 4. 59. therefore they have no show of
making ought for such feasts as ours, which are tyrannically urged upon such as
in their consciences do condemn them.

2. It appears, that the days of Purim were only appointed to be days of
civil mirth and gladness, such as are in use with us, when we set out
bone-fires, and other tokens of civil joy for some memorable benefit which
the Kingdom or Commonwealth has received, For they are not called the holy
days of Purim, but simply the days of Purim, a day of feasting and of sending
portions one to another, Esther. 9. 19. 22. no word of any worship of God on
those days. And whereas it seems to Proc. in Perth. assemb. part, 3. p. 30.
B. Lindsey, that those days were holy, because of that rest which was
observed upon them: He must know that the text interprets itself, and it is
evident from Verse. 16. and 22. that this rest was not a rest from labor, for
waiting upon the worshipping of God, but only a rest from their enemies.

But B. Andrews goes about to prove by six reasons, that the days of Purim
were holy days, and not days of civil joy and Solemnity p Sermon. on Esther.
9. 31.


First, says he, it is plain by Verse. 31. they took it in animas, upon their
souls, a soule-matter they made of it: there needs no soul for feria or
festum, play or feasting. They bound themselves super animas suas, which is
more then upon themselves, and would not have been put in the margent, but
stood in the text: thus he reprehendeth the English Translatours, as you may
perceive.

Answ. The B. could not be ignorant that nephesch signifies corpus animatum,
as well as anima, and that the Hebrews do not always put this word for our
souls, but very often for ourselves. So Psalm. 7. 2, and Psalm. 59. 3. we read
naphschi: my soul: for me; and Psalm. 44. 25. naphschenu: our soul: for we;
and Genesis 46, 26. col-nephesch: omnes animae: for omnes homines.

What have we any further need of Testimonies. Six hundredth such are in the
holy te^t. And in this place Esth. 9, 31. what can be more plain, then that
nghal-naphscham: upon their soul: is put for nghalehem: upon themselves,
especially since nghalehem is found to the same purpose both in Verse. 27. and
31.

Jf we will make the text agree well with it self, how can we but take both
these for one? But proceed we with the Bishop. Secondly, says he, the bond of
it reaches to all that religioni eorum voluerunt copulari verse. 27. then, a
matter of religion it was, had reference to that: what need any Joining in
religion for a matter of good fellowship?

Answ. there is no word in the text of religion. our English translation reads
it, all such as joined them selves unto them. Montanus, omnes adjunctos.
Tremellius, omnes qui essent se adjuncturi eis. The old latin version reads it
indeed as the Bishop does.

But no such thing can be drawn out of the word hannilvim, which is taken from
the radix lava, signifying simply and without any any adjection, adhaesit, or
adjunxit se. But let it be so, that the text means only such as were to
adjoyne themselves to the religion of the Jews; yet why might not the Jews
have taken upon them a matter of civility, not only for themselves, but for
such also as were to be joined with them in religion? Could there be nothing
promised for Proselytes but only a matter of religion?

Alas! Is this our Antagonists great Achilles, who is thus falling down and
succumbing to me a silly Stripling. Yet let us see, if there be any more force
in the remnant of his reasons.

For a third, he tells us, that it is expressly termed a Rite and a Ceremony,
at the 23. and 28. Verses, as the Fathers read them.

Answ. If some of the Fathers through ignorance of the Hebrew tongue, have put
into their versiones more then the original bears, shall we therefore err
with them.

In the 23. Verse. we have no more but Susceperunt, as Pagnime, or Re^eperunt,
as Tremellius reads it: But to read, Susceperunt in solemnem ritum, is to make
an addition to the text.

The 28. Verse. calls not this Feast a Rite, but only dies memorati, or
celebres. And what if we grant that this Feast was a rite? might it not, for
all that, be merely civil? No, says the Bishop, Rites, I trust, and
Ceremonies, pertain to the Church, and to the service of God.

Answ. The version which the Bishop followed, has a Rite, not a Ceremony. Now,
of Rites is certain, that they belong to the commonwealth, as well as to the
Church. For injure Politico, sui sunt, imperati and solemnes ritus, says De
Pol. Mosis cap. 7.
Iunius.

Fourthly, says the B. they fast and pray here in this Verse; (meaning the
31.) fast the eve, the fourteenth, and so then, the day following, to be holy
day of course.

Answ. The latin version, which the B. follows, and whereupon he builds
this reason, reads the 31. Verse very corruptly, and no ways according to
the original, as will easily appear to any who can compare them together.
Wherefore the best interpreters take the fasting and prayer spoken of Verse. 31.
to be meant of the time before their delivery. Now, after they were delivered,
they decreed that the matters of their fasting and crying, should be remembered
upon the days of Purim; which were to solemnize that preservation, quam
Iejunio and precibus fuerant a Deo consequuti, as says Tremellius.

But fifthly, says he, with fasting and prayer (here) alms also is enjoined,
(at the 22. Verse) these three will make it past a day of revels or m^r^h.

I have answered already, that their fasting and praying are not to be referred
to the days of Purim, which were memorialls of their delivery, but to the time
past, when by the means of fasting and prayer they did impetrate their
delivery, before ever the days of Purim were heard of: and as touching alms,
it can make no holy day; because much alms may be, and has been given upon
days of civil joy and solemnity.

If the B. help not himself with his sixth reason^, he is like to come off with
no great credit. May we then know what that is?

Lastly, says he, as a holy day the Jews ever kept it, have a peculiar set
service for it in their Seders; set Psalms to sing, set lesson, to read, set
prayers to say, good and godly all: None, but as they have used from all
antiquity.

Answ. 1. The B. could not have made this word good, that the Jews did ever
and from all antiquity keep the days of Purim, in this fashion.

2. This manner of holding that Feast, whenever it began, had no warrant
from the first institution, but was (as many other things) taken up by the
Jews in after ages: and so the B. proves not the p^nt which he takes in
hand, namely, that the days spoken of in this text were enacted or appointed
to be kept as holy days.

3. The service which the Jews in latter times use upon the days of Purim, is
not much to be regarded. For as Mos. and Aaron, lib. 3. cap. 11.
Godwyn notes out of Hospinian, they read the history of Esther in their
Synagogues, and so often as they here mention of Haman, they do with their
fists and hammers beat upon the benches and boords, as if they did knock upon
Hamans head.

When thus they have behaved themselves, in the very time of their Lyturgie,
like furious and drunken people, the rest of the day they pass over in
outrageous revelling. And here I take leave of the Bishop.

Thirdly, we say, whether the days of Purim were instituted to be Mordecai, by
whose advice and direction they were appointed to be kept, was a Prophet by the
instinct and revelation of the Spirit, Esther. 4. 13. Non multum fortasse
aberraverimus, says De Origfestor. cap. 2. ad. finem.
Hospinian, si dicamut hoc a Mordochao and Hesthera, ex peculiari Spiritus
Sancti instinctu factum.

Vbi supra page 31.
B. Lindsey believes, that they had only a general warrant such as the Church
has still to put order to the circumstances belonging to Gods worship, and all
his reason is because if the Jews had received any other particular warrant,
the Sacred story should not have passed it over in silence.

Answ. Thus much we understand from the Sacred Story, that the Jews had the
direction of a Prophet for the days of Purim; and that was a warrant more then
ordinary, because Prophets were the extraordinary Ministers of God.

Fourthly, as touching the Feast of the dedication of the Altar by Judas
Machabeus. 1. Let us hear what Annot. on Io. 10. Sect. 4.
Cartwright very gravely and judiciously propounds.

That this Feast was unduely instituted and ungroundedly, it may appear by
conference of the dedication of the first Temple under Solomon, and of the
secund, after the captivity returned from Babylon. In which dedication seeing
there was no yearly rememberance by solemnity of Feast, not so much as one day,
it is evident that the yearly celebrtion of this Feast for eight days, was not
compassed by that Spirit that Solomon and the captivity were directed by: Which
Spirit when it dwelt more plentifully in Solomon, and in the Prophets that
stood at the stearne of the captivities dedication, then it did in Judas, it
was in him so much the more presumptuous, as having a shorter leg then they,
he du^ in that matter overstride them. And his rashness is so much the more
aggravated, as each of them for the building of the whole Temple, with all the
implements and furniture thereof, made no Feast to renew the annual memory,
where Judas only for renewment of the Altar, and of certain other decayed
places of the Temple, instituted this great solemnity.

2. The Feast of the dedication was not free of Pharisaicall invention: For as
Annot. in Jo. 1^. 22.
Tremellius observes out of the Talmud, statuerunt Sapientes illius seculi, ut
recurrentibus annis, ^cto illi dies, etc. Yet albeit the Pharisees were called
Sapientes Israelis. Vbi supra, p. 31.
B. Lindsey will not grant, that they were the wisemen of whom the Talmud
speaks; for (says he) it behoved these who appointed festivities, not only
to be wisemen, but men of authority also.

But what do we hear? were not the Pharisees men of authority? Why? Math. 23.
2.
Says not Christ they sat in Moses Chair? Says not Com. in illum locu^.
Calvine, In Ecclesia regimine and Scripturae interpretatione, haec sect^
primatum tenebat? Says not Praelect. in Math. 19. 3. de Pharis.
Ca^ero, Cum Pharisaeorum pr^cipua esset authoritas (ut ubique docet Iesephus.)
etc.

Does not Josephus speak so much of their authority, that in one Antiq. Iud.
lib. 13 cap. 24.
place he says, Nome^ igitur regni, erat penes reginam (Alexandram) pen^
Phariseos vero administratio. And in Antiq. Iud. lib. 17 cap. 3.
another place, Erat* enim quadam Iudaeorum Secta exactiorem Patri^ legis
cognitionem sibi vendicans, etc. Hi Pharisaei vocatur, genus hominum astutum,
arrogans, and interdum regibus quoque infestum, ut eos etiam aperte impuguare
non vereatur?

3. There is nothing alleged which can prove the lawfulness of this Feast of
the dedication.

It is but barely and boldy affirmed by Vbi supra page 32.
B. Lindsey, that the Pharisees were not rebuked by Christ for this feast,
because we read not so much in Scripture. For there were very many things
which Jesus did and said, that Jo. 21. 25.
are not written in Scripture. And whereas it seems to some, that Christ did
countenance and approve this feast, because Jo. 10. 22. 23.
he gave his presence unto the same, we must remember, that the circumstances
only, of time and place, are noted by the Evangelist, for evidence to the
story, and not for any mystery. Christ had come up to the feast of
Tabernacles, Io. 7. and tarried still all that while, because then there was a
great confluence of people in Jerusalem. Whereupon he took occasion to spread
the ^t of the Gospel for catching of many souls And whileas John says, It
was at Jerusalem the feast of the Dedication he gives a reason, only of the
confluence of many people at Jerusalem, and shows how it came to pass that
Christ had occasion to preach to such a great multitude. And whileas he adds,
And it was Winter, he gives a reason of Christ's walking in Solomon's porch,
whether the Jews resort was; it was not thought beseeming to walk in the
Temple it self, but in the porch men used to conveene either for talking or
walking, because in summer the porch shaddowed them from the heat of the sun,
and in Winter it lay open to the sun shine and to heat. Others think that
whileas he says, it was winter, imports that therefore Christ was the more
frequently in the Temple, knowing that his time was short which he had then for
his preaching, for in the entry of the nex Spring he was to suffer. Howsoever,
it is not certain of what feast of dedication John speaks; In Io. 10. 22.
B^llinger leaves it Doubtful: and Maldonat says, that this opinion which
takes the dedication, of the Altar by Judas Machabeus to be meant by John,
has sewest Comm, ibid.
authors. But to let this pass, whereas the Annot. ibid.
Rhemists allege that Christ approved this feast, because he was present at
it: Cartwright and Fulke answer them that Christ's being present at it proves
not his approving of it. Non festum proprie honoravit Christus says Animad in
Bell contr. 3. lib. 4. cap. 17. nota. 6.
Iunius, sed caetum piorum convenientum festo: nam omnes ejusmodi occasiones
seminandi Euangelii sui observabat and capiebat Christus.

Quasi vero (says De orig. Temp lib. 4. cap. 2.
Hospinian) Christus Encaeniorum causa Hierosolymam abierit. Nay, but he saw he
had a convenient occasion, ad instituendam hominum multitudinem, ad ill^d
festum confluentium.

Even as Paul choosed to be preseut at certain Jewish feasts, Calv. in act.
18. 21.
not for any respect to the feasts themselves, nor for any honor which he
meant to give them, but for the multitudes cause, who resorted to the same,
among whom he had a more plentiful occasion to spread the Gospel at those
festivities, them at other times in the year.

I had thought here to close this chapter; but finding that as the Parret which
other while uses the form of a man's voice, yet being Canaan against us,
finding themselves pressed and perplexed in such a way of reasoning, have
quickly changed their tune, and begin to talk to us of warrants of another
nature nor the word of God: I am therefore to digress with them. And I
perceive ere we know well where they are, they are passed from Scripture to
custom. For if we will listen, thus says one of te greatest note among hem,
Sermon. on. 1. Cor. 11. 16.
B. Andrews I trow they call him. We do but make our selves to be pitied
otherwhile, (well said) when we stand wringing the Scriptures, (well said) to
strain that out of them which is not in them (well said) and so can never come
Liquide from them, (well said:) when yet we have for the same point the
Churches custom, clear enough. And that is enough by virtue of this text;
(meaning. 1. Cor. 11. 16.) And after he says, that we are taught by the
Apostles example in points of this nature, of Ceremony or Circumstance, ever to
pitch upon habemus, or non habemus talem consuetudinem.

Answ. 1. The text gives him no ground for this doctrine, that in matters of
Ceremony we are to pitch upon habemus or non habemus talem consuetudinem, so
that he is wide away while as he spends the greatest part of his Sermon, in
the pressing of this point, that the custom of the Church should be enough to
us in matters of Ceremony, and particularly in the keeping of Easter: for the
custom of the Church there spoken of, is not concerning a point of
circumstance, but concerning a very substantial and necessary point, namely,
not to be contentious: neither does the Apostle urge those orders of the men's
praying uncovered, and the women's praying veiled, from this ground, because so
was the Churches custom, (as the B. Would have it.) but only he is warning the
Corinthians not to be contentious about those matters, because the Churches
have no such custom as to be contentious. So is the place expounded by
Chrysostom, Ambrose, Calvine, Martyr, Bullinger. Marlorat, Beza, Fulcke,
Cartwright, Pareus, and our own Archbischop of Saint Andrews in his sermon
upon that text. And for this exposition it makes, that the Apostle in the
praeceding part of the Chapter has given sufficient reasons for that order of
covering or veiling the women: wherefore if any would contend about the matter,
he tells them they must contend with themselves, for they not the Churches of
God would not contend with them, they had no such custom. But if we admit B.
Andrews gloss, then why does the Apostle, after he has given good reasons
for the veiling of Women, subjoyne, If any man seem to be contentious, etc.
The B. resolves us, that the Apostle saw that a wrangling wit would elude
these reasons which he had given, and he had no other reasons to give,
therefore he resolves all into the Churches practice, enough of it self to
suffice any that will be wise to fobriety.

Answ If any man seem to be blasphemous, we have no such custom, neither the
Churches of God. What? shall a wrangling wit elude the reasons given by the
Spirit of God, in such sort, that he must give some other more sufficient
proof for that which he reaches? Then the whole Scriptures of God must yet be
better proved, because the unstable do wrest them, as 2. Pet. 3. 16.
Peter speaks.

2. The custom of the Church is not enough to pitch on, and

Epist. 80. ad Euslath. meddle.
Basilius Magnus does flatly refuse to admit the authority of custom:
Consuetudo sine veritate, says Ad Pompeium contra Epist Stephani.
Cyprian, vetustas erroris est. Frustra enim qui ratione vincuntur, says De
Bapt. contra Donatist. l. 4. cap. 5.
Augustine, consuetudinem nobis objiciunt, quasi consuetudo major sit veritate,
etc. N^ pudor est ad meliora transire, says Ep. 31.
Ambrose to the Emperor Valentinian: Quaelibet consuetudo, Decr. part. 1.
did. 8. c. 7.
says Gratia^, veritati est postponenda.

And again: Decr. part. 2. cause. 35. q. 9. c. 3.
Corrigendum est quod illicite admi^itur, aut a praed^cessoribus admissum
invenitur. I. Lips. lib. de una relig. advers. Dialogistam
A Politic Writer admonishes retinere antiqua, only with this caution: Si
proba.

Ioh. Calv. Epist. and resp. col. 484. 485.
Calvine (speaking against human Ceremonies) faith: Si objiciatur, etc. If.
says he, antiquity be objected (albeit they who are too much addicted to
custom and to received fashions, de boldly use this buckler, to defend all
their corruptions,) the refutation is easy: For the Auncienes also themselves
with heavy complaints, have abundantly testified, that they did not approve
of any thing which was devised by the will of men. In the end of the Epistle he
alleges this testimony of Cyprian. If Christ alone be to be heard, then we
ought not to give heed what any man before us has thought fit to be done, but
what Christ (who is before all) has done, for we must not follow the custom
of man, but the truth of God.

What can be more plain, then that antiquity cannot be a confirmation to
error, nor custom a prejudice to truth?

Wherefore Iren. lib. 1. c. 8.. 3.
D. Forbesse also despises such Arguments as are taken from the custom of the
Church.

3. There was a custom in the Churches of God, to give the about Easter and
Pentecost: Sundry such abuses got place in the Church.

If then it be enough to pitch upon custom, why ought not those customs to
have been commended and continued? But if they were commendably changed, then
ought we not to follow blindly the bare custom of the Church, but examine the
equity of the same, and demand grounds of reason for it.

S. Paul, (says Annot. on 1 Cor. 11. 16.
D. Fulke,) does give reasons for that order of covering Women's heads: By whose
example the Preachers are likewise to endeavor to satisfy by reason both men
and women, that humbly desire their resolution for quiet of their conscience,
and not to beat them down with the club of custom only.

4. Whereas the custom of some Churches is alleged for the Ceremonies, we
have objected the custom of other Churches against them: Neither shall ever
our Opposites prove them to be the customs of the Church universal.

5. A great part of that Ecclesiastical custom which is alleged for the
Ceremonies, resolves into that Idolatrous and superstitious use of them, which
has long continued in the kingdom of Antichrist: But that such a custom
makes against them, it has been proved Supra cap. 2.
before.

6. If it were so that we ought to pitch upon the Churches custom, yet (that I
may speak with Mr. Hooker) the Law of common indulgence permits us to think
of our own customs, as half a thought better then the customs of others.

But why was there such a change made in the Discipline Policy and Orders of
the Church of Scotland, which were agreeable to the Word of God, confirmed and
ratified by general Assemblies and Parliaments, used and enjoyed with so great
peace and purity? Our, custom should have holden the Ceremonies out of
Scotland, hold them in elsewhere as it may.

CHAP. VII.
That the Lawfulness of the Ceremonies can not be warranted by any
Ecclesiastical Law, nor by any power which the Church has to put order to
things belonging to Divine Worship.

WE have proved that the Ceremonies cannot be warranted by

We will begin with Laws Ecclesiastical: where first of all, it must be
considered well, what power the Church has to make laws about things
pertaining to Religion and the Worship of God, and how far the same does
extend it self. D. Fields resolution, touching this Question, is as follows.
Thus, says Of the Church, lib. 4. cap. 31.
he, we see our Adversaries cannot prove that the Church has power to annex
unto such Ceremonies and observations as she devises, the remission of sins,
and the working of other Spiritual and supernatural effects, which is the
only thing questioned between them and us about the power of the Church. So
that all the power the Church has, more then by her power to publish the
Commandments of Christ the Son of God, and by her censures to punish the
offenders against the same, is only in prescribing things that pertain to
comeliness and order. Comeliness requires that not only that gravity and
modesty do appear in the performance of the works of Gods service, that
beseems actions of that nature, but also that such Rites and Ceremonies be
used, as may cause a due respect unto and regard of the things performed, and
thereby stir men up to greater fervor and devotion.

And after: Order requires that there be set hours for prayer, preaching, and
ministering the Sacraments, that there be silence and attention when the things
are performed, that Women be silent in the Church, that all things be
administrate according to the rules of Discipline.

This his discourse is but a bundle of incongruities: For. 1. he says, that
the Churches power to annex unto the Ceremonies which she devises the working
of Spiritual and supernatural effects, is the only thing questioned between
our adversaries and us, about the power of Church. Now, our Adversaries contend
with us also about the power of the Church to make new Articles of Faith; and
her power to make Laws binding the conscience: both which controversies are
touched by lib. 4. cap. 6. and cap. 34.
himself.

2. He isath, that comeliness requires the use of such Ceremonies, as may
cause a due respect unto, and regard of the works of Gods service, and thereby
stir men up to greater fervor and devotion. But it has been already showed,
that Supra cap. 6. sect. 3
the comeliness which the Apostle requires in the Church and service of God,
cannot comprehend such Ceremonies under it, and that it is no other then that
very common external decency, which is beseeming for all the Assemblies of
men, as well civil as sacred.

3. Whileas he is discoursing of the Churches power to prescribe things
pertaining to order, contra-distinguished from her power which she has to
publish the Commandments of Christ, he reckons forth, among his other
examples, Women's silence in the Church, as if the Church did prescribe this as
a matter of order left to her determination, and not publish it as the
Commandment of Christ in his Word.

4. Whereas he says, that the Church has power to prescribe such Rites and
Ceremonies, as may cause a due respect unto, and regard of the works of Gods
service, and thereby stir men up to greater fervor and devotion: by his own
words shall he be condemned. For a little before, he reprehendeth the Romanists
for maintaining that the Church has power to annex unto the Ceremonies which
she devises, the working of Spiritual and supernatural effects. And a little
after, he says, that the Church has no power to ordain such Ceremonies as
serve to signify, assure and convey unto men, such benefits of saving grace,
as God in Christ is pleased to bestow on them. Now, to cause a regard of, and a
respect unto the works of Gods service, and thereby to stir up men to ^ervour
and devotion, what is it but the working of a Spiritual and supernatural
effect, and the conveying unto men such a benefit of saving grace, as God in
Christ is pleased to bestow on them? In like manner, whereas he holds, that
the Church has power to ordain such Ceremonies, as serve to express those
Spiritual and Heavenly affections, dispositions, motions or desires, which are
or should be in men; In the very same place he confuteth himself, whileas he
affirms that the Church has no power to ordain such Ceremonies as serve to
signify unto men those benefits of saving grace, which God in Christ is
pleased to bestow on them. Now, to express such Heavenly and Spiritual
affections, dispositions, motions, or desires, as should be in men; is (I
suppose) to signify unto men such benefits of saving grace, as God in Christ
is pleased to bestow on them. Who dare deny it?

Epist. to the Past. of the Church of Scotland.
B. Lindsey's opinion touching this power of the Church, determine the
circumstances, which are in the general necessary to be used in Divine
worship, but not defined particularly in the Word.

I know the Church can determine nothing, which is not of this kind and
quality. But the Prelates meaning (as may be seen in that same Epistle of his,)
is, that whatsoever the Church determines, if it be such a circumstance as is
in the general necessary, but not particularly defined in the word, then we
can not say, that the Church had no power to determine and enjoin the same,
nor be led by the judgment of our own consciences, Judging it not expedient,
but that in this case we must take the Churches Law to be the rule of our
consciences. Now, by this ground which the Prelat holds, the Church may
prescribe to the Ministers of the Gospel, the whole habit and apparel of the
Leviticall high Priest, (which were to Iudaize.) For apparel is a
circumstance in the general necessary, yet it is not particularly defined in
the Word. By this ground, the Church may determine that I should ever pray with
my face to the East, preach kneeling on my knees, sing the Psalms lying on my
back, and hear Sermon standing only upon one foot. For in all these actions a
gesture is necessary; but there is no gesture particularly defined in the Word,
to which we are adstricted in any of these exercises.

And further, because uno absurdo dato, mill sequuntur: By this ground the
Prelate must say, that the Church has power to ordain three or four holy
days every week, (which ordinance, as he himself has told us, could not
stand with charity, the inseparable companion of piety) for time is a
circumstance in the general necessary in divine worship: yet in his Judgment
we are not bound by the Word to any particular time, for the performance of
the duties of Gods worship.

By this ground we were to say, that Pope Innocent the third held him within
the bounds of Ecclesiastical power, when in the great Lateran Council, Anno
1215, he made a Decree, that all the faithful of both sexes should once in the
year atleast, to wit, upon Easter Day, receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist.
From whence it has come to pass, that the common people in the Church of Rome
receive the Sacrament only upon Easter. Now, the time of receiving the
Sacrament is a circumstance in the general necssary, for a time it must have,
but it is not particularly defined in the Word, It is left indefinite 1. Cor.
11. 26. yet the Church has no power to determine Easter Day, either as the
only time, or as the fittest time, for all the faithful of both sexes to
receive the Eucharist. What if faithful men and women cannot have time to
prepare themselves (as becomes,) being avocated and distracted by the no
less necessary then honest adoes of their particular callings?

What if they can not have the Sacrament upon that day administered according
to our Lords institution? What if they see Papists confirming themselves in
their Easter-superstition, by our unnecessary practice? Shall they swallow
these and such like soul destroying Camels, and all for straining out the
gnate of communicating precisely upon Easter day? But since time is a necessary
circumstance, and no time is particularly defined, the B. must say more also,
that the Church may determine Easter day, for the only day whereupon we may
receive the Lords Supper.

Last of all, if the Church have power to determine all circumstances in the
general necessary, but not particularly defined in the Word, what could be
said against that ancient order of solemn baptising only at the holy days
of Easter and Pentecost, (whereby it came to pass, that very many died
unbaptised, as Lib. 5. cap. 22.
Socrates writes?) Or what shall be said against Lib. de Baptismo.
Tertullian his opinion which allows laymen, yea women, to baptize. May the
Churches determination make all this good, for as much as these circumstances of
the time when, and the persons by whom baptism should be ministered, are in the
general necessary, but not particularly defined in the Word? Ite leves nugae.

Prael. tom. 1. de potest. Eccl. contr. 2.
Camero, as learned a Formalist as any of the former, expresses exserte
plainly, but not one way, because such things as pertain unto Faith and
manners, are in the Word of God particularly commanded, whereas those things
which conduce to Faith and manners are but generally commended unto us. Of
things that pertain to Faith and manners, he says, that they are most
constant and certain, and such as can admit no change, but as for things
conducing to Faith and manners, he says, that they depend upon the
circumstances of persons, place and time, which being almost infinite, there
could not be particular precepts delivered unto us concerning such things.
Only this is from God commended unto the Church, that whatsoever is done
publicly, be done with order; and what privately, be decent.

These things he so applies to his purpose, that he determines, in neither of
these kinds the Church has power to make Laws, because in things pertaining
to Faith and manners, the Law of our Lord Jesus Christ is plainly expressed:
and in those things, wherein neither Faith nor manners are placed, but which
conduce to Faith and manners, we have indeed a general Law, not having further
any particular Law, for that reason alleged, namely, because this depends
upon the circumstances.

Thereafter he adds. Quid sit fides, quid sit pietas, quid sit charitas,
verbo Dei demonstratur. Quid ad haec conducat, seu reputando rem in universum,
seu reputando rem quatenus singulis competit, pendet ex cognitione
circumstantiarum. Iam id definire Deus voluit esse penes Ecclesiam, hac tamen
lege, ut quod definit Ecclesia conveniat general definitioni Dei.

The matter he illustrates with this one Example: Gods Word does define in the
general, that we are to fast, and that publicly, But in the particular we
could not have the definition of the Word, because there are infinite occasions
of a public Fast, as it is said in the Schools individua esse infinita: so
that it is the Churches part, to look to the occasion, and this depends upon
the consideration of the circumstances. This discourse of his cannot satisfy
the attentive Reader, but deserves certain animadversions.

First then, it is to be observed, how he is drawn into a manifest exserte and
diserte commend unto us generatim, such things as conduce to Faith and manners,
and that concerning things of this nature we have a general Law in Scripture,
how can this stand with that which he adds, namely, that it is in the
Churches power to define what things do conduce to faith, piety, and charity,
even reputando rem in universum?

2. Whereas he says, that the Church has no power to make Laws, neither in
things belonging to faith and manners, nor in things conducing to the same; I
would also see how this agrees with that other position, namely, that it is in
the power of the Church to define what things conduce to faith, piety and
charity.

3. What means he by his application of order to public, and decency to
private actions? As if the Apostle did not require both these in the public
works of Gods service, performed in the Church.

4. Whereas he says, that such things as conduce to Faith and manners, do
depend upon the circumstances, and so could not be particularly defined in the
Word, either he speaks of those things, as they are defined in the general,
or as they are defined in the particular. Not the first, for as they are
defined in the general, they cannot depend upon changeable circumstances, and
that because according to his own tenet, the Word defines them in the general,
and this definition of the Word is most certain and constant, neither can any
change happen unto it. Wherefore (without doubt) he must pronounce this, of the
definition of such things in the particular. Now to say, that things conducing
to faith and manners, as they are particularly defined, do depend upon
circumstan^, is as much as to say that circumstances depend upon circumstances.
For things conducing to Faith and manners, which the Church has power to
determine particularly, what are they other then circumstances? Surely, he who
takes not Cameroes Judgment to be, that the Church has power to determine
somewhat more then the circumstances (and by consequence a part of the
substance) of Gods worship, shall give no sense to his words. Yet if one would
take his meaning so, I see not how he can be saved from contradicting himself;
for as much as he holds, that such things as pertain to Faith and manners
are particularly defined in the Word. To say no more, I smell such a thing in
Cameroes opinion as can neither stand with reason nor with himself.

5. Gods Word does not only define things pertaining to Faith and manners, but
also things conducing to the same, and that not only generally but in some
respects, and sometimes particularly. And we take for example his own Instance
of fasting. For the Scripture defines very many occasions of fasting, Ezra 8.
21. 2 Chronicles. 20. Iona 3. Joel 2. Act. 13. 3. Ios. 7. 6. Iud. 20. 16. Esther 4.
16. Ezra 9. and 10. Zach. 7. From which places we gather, that the Scripture
defines fasting to be used.

1. For Supplication, when we want some necessary or expedient good thing.

2. For Deprecation, when we fear some evil.

3. For Humiliation, when by our sins we have provoked Gods wrath. Neither
can there be any occasion of fasting, whereof I may not say that either it is
particularly defined in Scripture, or else that it may be by necessary
consequence defined out of Scripture, or lastly, that it is of that sort of
things which were not determinable by Scripture, because circumstances are
infinite, as Camero has told us.

Thus having sailed by those rocks of offense: I direct my

Three conditions I find necessarily requisite, in such a thing as the Church
has power to prescribe by her Laws.

1. It must be only a circumstance of Divine Worship, no substantial part of
it, no sacred significant and efficacious Ceremony. For the order and decency
left to the definition of the Church, as concerning the particulars of it,
comprehends no more, but mere circumstances. Epist. to the Past. of the
Church of Scotland.
B. Lindsey, does but unskilfully confound things different, when he talks of
the Ceremonies and Circumstances left to the determination of the Church. Now
by his leave, though Circumstances be left to the determination of the Church,
yet Ceremonies (if we speak properly) are not.

Sermon. on E^her. 9. 31.
B Andreues avoucheth, that Ceremonies pertain to the Church only and to the
service of God, not to civil solemnities. But so much (I trust) he would not
have said of circumstances, which have place in all moral actions, and that to
the same end and purpose, for which they serve in religious actions, namely,
for beautifying them with that decent demeanor which the very light and law of
natural reason requires, as a thing beseeming all humane actions. For the
Church of Christ being a society of men and women, must either observe order
and decency in all the circumstances of their holy actions, time, place,
person, form, etc. or else be deformed with that misorder and and confusion,
which common reason and civility abhors. Ceremonies therefore, which are
sacred observances, and serve only to a religious and holy use, and which may
not without Sacrilege be applied to another use, must be sorted with things of
another nature then circumstances. Ceremoniae, Ceremonies (says Of the Church,
lib. 4. cap. 31.
D. Field) are so named as Livie thinks from a town called Caere, in the
which the Romans did hide their sacred things when the Gauls invaded Rome.
Other think that Ceremonies are so named a carendo, of abstaining from
certain things, as the Jews abstained from Swines flesh, and sundry other
things forbidden by God as unclean. Ceremonies are outward acts of Religion,
etc. Qua propter etiam, says De polit. Mos. cap. 7.
Iunius Ritus and Ceremonias inter se distinximus, quia in Iure politico sui
sunt imperati and (...) ritus: Ceremonia vero non nisi sacra observationes in
cultis dirin^ appellant^. Ceremonia, says De Saram. lib. 2. cap. 29.
Bellarmine, proprie and simpliciter sic vocata, est externa actio qua non
aliunde est bona and landabilis, nisi quia fit ad Deum colendum. From which
words Bell. enerv. to^. 3 lib. 1. cap. 8.
Amesius concludes against him, that he and others with him do absurdly
confound order, decency and the like, which have the same use and praise in
civil things, which they have in the worship of God, with religious and sacred
Cemonies. Yet Man^duct. page 33.
D. Burgess rejects this distinction betwixt circumstances and Ceremonies,
as a mere nicitie or fiction. And would ye know his reason? For that, says
he, all circumstances (I mean extrinsecall) which incur not the substance of
the action, when they are once designed or observed purposely, in reference to
such a matter, of whose substance they are not, they are then Ceremonies. If
this be not a nicitie or fiction, I know not what is. For what means he here
by a matter? An action, sure, or else a nicitie. Well then: we shall have now a
world of Ceremonies. When I appoint to meet with another man at Barwick upon
the tenth day of May, because the place and the day are purposely designed in
refere^ce to such a matter, of whose substance they are not, namely, to my
meeting with the other man, for talking of our business, therefore the town
of Barwick, and the tenth day of May, must be accounted Ceremonies. To me its
nice, that the D. made it not nice, to let such a nicitie fall from his pen.

When I put on my shoes in reference to walking or wash my hands in reference
to eating, am I using Ceremonies all the while? The Doctor could not choose
but say so, for as much as these circumstances are purposely designed and
observed in reference to such matters, of whose substance they are not.

2. That which the Church may lawfully prescribe by her Laws Camero has given
us, namely, because Individua are Infinita. We mean not in any wise to
circumcribe the infinite power and wisdom of God: only we speak upon
upposition o^ the bounds and limits which God did set to his written word,
within which he would have it contained, and over which he thought fi^t that it
should not exceed. The case being thus put, as it is, we say truly of those
several and changeable circumstances, which are left to the determination of
the Church, that being almost infinite, they were no^ particularly determinable
in Scripture; for the partic lar definition o^ those occurring circumstances,
which were to be rightly ordered in the works of Gods service, to the end of
the World, and that ever according to the exigency o^ every present occasion
and different case, should have filled the whole world w^h b^okes. But as for
other things pertaining to Gods worship, which are not to be reckoned among the
circumstances of it, they being neither in number many, nor in change various,
were most easily and conveniently determinable in Scripture. Now, since God
would have his word, (which is our rule in the works o^ his service) not to be
delivered by tradition, but to be written and sealed un o us, that by this
means, for obviating Satanicall subtilty, and ^uccouring humane imbecility,
we might have a more certain way for conservation of true religion, and for
the instauration of it when it fails among men: how cab we but assure our
selves, that every such acceptable thing pertaining a^y way to religion, which
was particularly and conveniently determinable in Scripture, is indeed
determined in it, and consequently hat no such thing as is not a mere
alterable circumstance, is left to the determination of the Church?

3. If the Church prescribe any thing lawfully, so that she prescribe Lex quam
vis ratio Ciceroni summa ^ocetur,
Et been laudetur lex quae ratione (...)*
Invenies inter logistas raro logistas:
More and exempli leges sunt ^raque Templi.


But this fa^hien we leave to them who will have all their Anomalies taken for
Analogies. It (...) meth not the ^pouse of Christ endued with the Spirit of
meekness, to command any thing impe^iously, and without a reason given.

Ecclesiae enim est docere primum, tum praescribere, says Israele^ Tom. 1.
page 367.
Camer^. And again: Non enim domina^uy cleris, nec agit cum ijs quos Christus
redemit, ac si non possent capere qu d sit religiosum, quid minus.

In apologet.
Tertullians Testimony is known. Nulla lex, etc. No Law, says he, owes to
itself alone the conscience of its equity, but to these from whom it expects
obedience. Moreover, it is a suspected Law which will not have itself to be
proved, but a wicked Law, which not being proved yet bears rule.

It is well said by our Divines, Chemnit. exam. part. 2. p. 121.
that in Rites and Ceremonies the Church has no power to destruction but to
edification. And Calv. instit. lib. 4. cap. 10. f. 32.
that the observations of our Ecclesiastical Canons, must carry before them a
manifest utility. Joh. Calv. Epist. and resp. col. 478.
Pijs vero ^ratribus durum est, subjicere se rebus illis quas nec rectas esse
nec utiles animadvertunt. (...) here it ^e objected, that some things are
convenient to be done, therefore because they are prescribed by the Church, and
for no other reason. For example, in two things which are alike lawful and
convenient in themselves, I am bound to do the one and not the other, because
of the Churches prescription. So that in such cases it seems there can be no
other reason given for the ordinance of the Church, but only her own power and
authority, to put order to things of th^s nature.

I answer, that even in such a case as this the convenience of the thing itself
is anterior to the Churches determination, anterior I say de congruo, though
not de facto, that is to say, before ever the Church pre scribe it, it is such
a thing as (when it falls out to be done at all) may be done conveniently;
though it be not (before the Churches prescribing of it,) such a thing as
should and ought to be done as convenient. Which being so, we do still hold,
that the convenience of a thing must always go before the Churches
prescribing of it, go before I mean, at least de congruo. Neither can the
Church prescribe any thing lawfully, which she shows not to have been
convenient, even before her determination.

These things being permitted, I come to extract my projection, and to make it
evident, that the lawfulnes of the controverted Ceremonies, can not be
warranted by any Ecclesiastical Law. And this I prove by three Arguments.

First, those conditions which I have showed to be required in that thing which
the Church may lawfully prescribe by a Law, are not quadrant nor competent to
the Cross, Kneeling, Surplice, Holy Days, etc.

For 1. they are not mere circumstances, such as have place in all moral
actions, but sacred, mystical, significant, efficacious Ceremonies, as has
been abundantly showed in this dispute already. For example: Manuduct, page 37.
D. Burgess calls the Surplice a religious or sacred Ceremony. And again,
Of the kawf. of 5 neel. page 2.
he places in it a mystical signification of the pureness of the minister of
God. Wherefore Cap. 1.
the replier to D. Mortons particular defense says well, that there is great
difference betwixt a grave civil habit and a mystical garment.

2. It cannot be said, that these Ceremonies are of that kind of things, which
were not determinab^ by Scripture: neither will our Opposites, for very shame,
adventure to say, that things of this kind to which Cross, Kneeling, etc. do
belong, viz. sacred significant Ceremonies left (in their Judgment) to the
definition of the Church, are almost infinite, and therefore could not be well
and easily determined in Scripture.

Since then, such things as are not mere circumstances of worship, can neither
be many nor various (as I said before,) it is manifest that all such things
were easily determinable in Scripture.

3. Our Ceremonial Laws are not backed with such grounds and reasons, as
might be for the satisfying and quieting of tender consciences, but we are
borne down with will and authority: whereof I have said enough Supra part. 1.
cap. 4. and 6
elsewhere.

2. If the Ceremonies be lawful to us, because the Law and Ordinance Fr. Iun.
de polit. Mos. cap. 1
Divines hold, legem humanam ferri ab hominibus, cum ratione procedunt ab illis
alijs antegressis legibus. Nam legis humanae regula proxima est duplex. Una
innata quam legem naturalem dicimus altera inspirat^, quam divinam, etc. Ex his
ergo fontibus lex humana procedit: haec incunabula illius, a quibus se aberr^,
lex degener est; indigna legis nomine. We have also the testimony of an
Adversary. For says not Apol. part. 3. cap. 1. Sect. 25.
Paybody himself: I grant it is unlawful to do in Gods worship any thing
upon the mere pleasure of man.

If they take them, (as needs they must,) to the latter part, then let them
either say, that the Ceremonies are lawful unto us, because the Church judges
them to be agreeable to the Law of God and nature, or because the Church proves
unto us by evident reasons, that they are indeed agreeable to these Laws. If
they yield us the latter, then it is not the Churches Law, but the Churches
reasons given for her Law, which can warrant the lawfulness of the^ ^to us:
which does elude and elide all that which they allege for the lawfulness of
them from the power and authority of the Church.

And further, if any such reasons be to be given forth for the Ceremonies, why
are they so long kept up from us? But if they hold them at the former,
thereupon it will follow, that it shall be lawful for us to do every thing
which the Church shall Judge to be agreeable to the Law of God and nature, and
consequently to use all the Jewish, Popish and Heathnish Ceremonies, yea to
worship Images; If it happen that the Church judge these things to be agreeable
to the Law of God and nature.

It will be answered (I know) that if the Church command any thing repugnant to
Gods Word, we are not bound to do it, nor to receive it as lawful, though the
Church judge so of it: But otherwise, if that which the Church judges to be
agreeable to the Law of God and nature, (and in that respect prescribes) be
not repugnant to the Word of God, but in itself indifferent, then are we to
embrace it as convenient, and consonant to the Law of God and nature, neither
ought we to call in Question the lawfulness of it.

But I reply, that either we must judge a thing to be repugnant or not
repugnant to the Word, to be indifferent or not indifferent in itself, because
the Church judges so of it, or else because the Church proves unto us by an
evident reason that it is so. If the latter; we have what we would. If the
former; we are just where we were; The argument is still set a foot: then we
must receive every thing (be it never so bad,) as indifferent, if only the
Church happen so to judge of it. For quod competit alicui qua tali, etc. So
that if we receive any thing as indifferent, for this respect, because the
Church judges it to be so, then shall we receive every thing for indifferent;
which the Church shall so judge of.

3. The Church is forbidden to add any thing to the commandments Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
and 12, 32. Prove. 30. 6. therefore she may not lawfully prescribe any thing in
the works of Divine worship, if it be not a mere circumstance, belonging to
that kind of things which were not determinable by Scripture.

Our Opposites have no other distinctions, which they make any use of against
this argument, but the very same which Papists use in defense of their
unwritten dogmaticall traditions; namely, that additio corrumpens is forbidden,
but not additio perficiens: that there is not alike reason of the Christian
Church, and of the Jewish: that the Church may not add to the essential parts
of Gods worship, but to the accidentary she may add.

To the first of those distinctions we Answer, 1. That the distinction itself
is an addition to the word, and so does but beg the Question.

2. It is blasphemous, for it argues, that the commandments of God are
imperfect, and that by addition they are made perfect.

3. Since our Opposites will speak in this dialect, let them resolve us,
whether the washings of the Pharisees, condemned by Christ, were corrupting or
perfecting additions. They cannot say, they were corrupting; for there was no
commandment of God, which those washings did corrupt or destroy, except that
commandment which forbids men's additions. But for this respect, our
Opposites dare not call them corrupting additions, for so they should condemn
all additions whatsoever. Except therefore, they can show us that those
washings were not added by the Pharisees, for perfecting, but for corrupting the
Law of God, let them consider how they rank their own Ceremonial additions,
with those of the Pharisees. We read of no other reason wherefore Christ
condemned the^, but because they were Doctrines, which had no other warrant
then the commandments of men. Math. 15. 9. For as the Law ordained diverse
washings, for teaching and signifying that true holiness and cleanesse, which
ought to be among Gods people; so the Pharisees would have per^ected the Law by
adding other washings (and more then God had commanded,) for the same end and
purpose.

To the second distinction, we say that the Christian Church has Inst. lib. 4.
cap. 10. f. 17.
Calvine notes, much more are we forbidden to add unto Gods Word, the^ they
were. Before the coming of his wel-beloved Son in the flesh, says Letter to
the Regent of Scotland.
John Knox, severely he punished all such as durst interprise to alter or
change his Ceremonies and Statutes, as in 1. Reg. 13. and 15
Saul, 2. Paral. 26.
Uziias, Levit. 10.
Nadab, Absha, is to be read. And will he now, after that he has opened his
Counsel to the World by his only Son, whom Math. 17.
he commands to be heard, and after that Act. 1. (, and 3. 2. Cor. 11. 1
Col. 2.
by his holy Spirit, speaking by his Apostles, he has established the religion
in which he will his true worshippers abide to the end, will he now I say
admit (o) men's inventions in the matter of Religion, etc.? For this sentence
he prouounceth: Deuteronomy. 4. 12.
Not that which seems good in thy eyes, shall thou do to the Lord thy God,
but that which the Lord thy God commanded thee, that do thou: Add nothing
unto it, diminish nothing from it. Which sealing up his New Testament he
rep^ateth in these words: Apoc. 2
That which ye have, hold till I come, etc.

Wherefore whileas Eccl. pol. lib. 2.
Hooker says, tha^ Christ has not by positive laws so far descended into
particularities with us, as Moses with the jews: Whileas Prael^ct. tom. 1. page
369.
Camero says, non esse disputandum ita, ^t quoniam in vetere Testament^, de
rebus alioqui adiaphoris certa fuit lex, and ^id in novo Testamento habere
locum: And whiles Epist. to the Past. of the Church of Scotland.
B. Lindsey says, that in the particular circumstances of persons ^y whom,
place where, time when, and o^ the form and order how the worship and work of
the ministry should be performed h^ Church has power to define whatsoever is
most expedient, and that this is a prerogative wherein the Christian Church
differs from the Jewish Synagogue: They do but speak their pleasure in
vain, and cannot make it appear, that the Christian Church has any more
power to add to the commandments of God, then the Synagogue had of old.

It is ^ell said by Course of conforformity, page 155.
one: There were many points of service, as Sacrifices, washings, anniversary
days and^. which ^e have not: but the determination of such as we have, is as
particular as theirs, except wherein the national circumstances make
impediment. For one place not be appointed for the worship of God, nor one
Tribe o^ the work of the ministry, among us, as among them, not because more
power was left to the Christian Church, for determining things that pertain to
the worship of God, then was to the Jewish, but because the Christian Church
was to spread it self over the, whole Earth, and not to be confined within the
bo^ds of one nation as the Synagogue was.

Let us then here call to mind the distinction which has been showed betwixt
religious Ceremonies and moral circumstances:

But as for Ceremonies which are proper to Gods holy worship, Hebr. 3. 2.
shall we say, tat the fidelity of Christ the Son has been less, then the
fidelity of Moses the servant? which were to be said, if Christ had not by as
plain, plentiful, and particular directions and ordinances, provided for all
the necessities of the Christian Church in the matter of religion, as Moses for
the Jewish. Or if the least pin, and the meanest appurtenance of the
Tabernacle, and all the service thereof, behooved to be ordered according to
the express commandment of God by the hand of Moses, how shall we think,
that in the rearing, framing, ordering, and beautifying of the church the house
of the living God, he would have less honor and prerogative give^ to his own
well-beloved Son, by whom he has spoken to us in these last days, and whom
he has commanded us to hear in all things; Or that he will accept at our
hands any sacred Ceremony, which men have presumed to bring into his holy and
pure worship, without the appointment of his own word and will revealed unto
us? Albeit the worship of God and religion in the Church of the new Testament,
be accompanied without Ceremonies numero paucissimis observatione facillimis,
significatione praestantissimis, (as Epist. 118.
Augustine speaks of our Sacraments) yet we have in Scripture no less
particular determination and distinct direction, for our fevve, easy and
plain Ceremonies, then the Jews had for their many heavy, and obscure ones.

As for the third distinction, of adding to the accidentary parts of it, pars
essentialis or Phisica, and pars integralis or mathematica; of pars similaris,
and pars dissimilaris; of pars c^ua and pars discreta. But of pars accide^taria
heard I never till now. There is (I know) such a distinction of Pars
integralis, that it is either pr^alis and necessaria, or minus principalis and
non necessaria. But w^ cannot understand their pars cultus accidentaria, to be
pars integ^alis non necessaria, because then their distribution of worship into
e^entiall and accidentary parts, could not answer to the rul^s of a just
dist^bution: of which one is, that distributio debet exhauri^e totum
distributu^. Now, there are some parts of worship, which cannot be comp^hended
in the foresaid distribution, namely, parts integrales necessar^ What then?
Shall we let this vvilde Distinction pass, because it cannot (...) well nor
formally interpreted? Nay, but we will observe their mean^ who make use of it,
For unto all such parts of worship as are not ess^iall (and which they are
pleased to call accidentarie) they hold, (...) Church may make addition.
Whereunto I answer, 1. Let them m^ us understand, what they mean by those
essential parts, to which the Church may add nothing: and let them beware
least they give us a^ ^ticall description of the same.

2. There are many parts of Gods worship, which are not essential, yet such as
will not suffer any addition of the Church. For proof whereof, J demand,
were all the Ceremonies commanded to be ^sed in the legal Sacraments and
Sacrifices, essential parts o^ those worships? No man will say so. Yet the
Synagogue was tied to observe those (and no other then those) Ceremonies, which
the Word prescribed. When Israel was again to keep the Passover, Number. 9 3.
it was said; In the fourteenth day of this month at even, ye shall keep it in
his appoinded season: according to all the Rites of it and according to all the
Ceremonies of it, shall ye keep it. And ib. verse. 5.
again: According to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so did the Children of
Israel. Ritibus and Ceremonijs divinitus institutis, non licuit homini suo
arbitrio aliquid adijcere aut detrahere, Com. in 1. Reg, 8. 65.
says P. Martyr.

3. If those accidentarie parts of worship, which are commanded necessitate
praecepti, and likewise sufficient means fully adequate and proportioned to
that end, for which God has destinated such parts of his worship as are not
essential, (which must be granted by every one who will not accuse the
Scripture of some defect and imperfection:) then it follows that other
accidentarie parts of worship, which the Church adds thereto, are but
superfluous and superstitious.

4. I call to mind another Logical maxim: Sublata una part, tollitur totum.
An essential part being taken away, totum essentiale is taken away also. In
like manner, an integrant part being taken away, totum integrum cannot remain
behind. When a man has lost his hand or is foot, though he be still a man
Phisically, totum essentiale, yet he is not a man mathematically, he is no
longer totum integrale. Just so, if we reckon any additions (as the Cross,
Kneeling, Holy Days, etc.) among the parts of Gods worship, then put the case
that those additions were taken away, it follows that all the worship which
remains still, will not be the whole and entire worship of God, but only a
part of it, or at the best, a defective, wanting, lame, and maimed worship.

5. I have made it evident, Supra Cap. 1. Sect. 6.
that our Opposites make the controverted Ceremonies to be worship, in as
proper and peculiar sense as any thing can be; and that they are equalled to
the chief and principal parts of worship, not ranked among the secondary or
less principal parts of it.

6. Do not our Divines condemn the addition of Rites and Ceremonies, to that
worship which the Word prescribes, as well as the addition of other things,
which are thought more essential? We have heard Martyrs words to this purpose.

In (...). praec Col. 363.
Zanchius will have us to learn from the second commandment, in externo cultu
qui Deo debetur, seu in Ceremoniis nihil nobis esse ex nostro capite
comminiscendum, wether in Sacraments or Sacrifices, or other sacred things,
such as Temples, Altars, Clothes and Vessels, necessary for the external
worship; but that we ought to be contented with those Ceremonies which God
has prescribed.

And in Ib. col. 502.
another place, he condemns the addition of any other rite whatsoever, to
those rites of every Sacrament which have been ordained of Christ. Si
Ceremonijs cujusvis Sacramenti, alios addas ritus, etc.

Annot. on Phil. 2. 10.
D. Fulke pronounces even of signs and rites, that we must do in Religion
and Gods service, not that which seems good to us, but that only which he
commands. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. c. 12. 32.

And Epist ad protect. Angl.
Calvine pronounces generally, Caenam Domini rem adeo sacrosanctam esse, ut
ullis hominum additamentis eam conspurcare sit nefas.

And thus have we made good our Argument, that the lawfulnsse of the Ceremonies
cannot be warranted by any Ecclesiastical Law. Nadab and Abihu offered strange
fire before the Lord, and when the Jews burnt their Sons and their Daughters
in the Valley of the Son of Hinnon; howsoever manifold wickedness might have
been challenged in that which they did, yet if any would dispute with God upon
the matter, he stops their mouths with this one Answer, Levit. 10. 1. ler.
7. 31.
I commanded it not, neither came it into my heart. May we last of all hear
what the Causa. 11. q. 3. v. 101.
Canon Law it self decrees? Is qui praeest, fi praeter voluntatem Dei, vel
praeter quod in sanctis Scripturis evidenter praecipitur, vel dicit aliquid,
vel imperat, tanquam falsus testis Dei, aut Sacrilegus habeatur.

CHAP. VIII.
That the lavvfulnesse of the Ceremonies can not be warranted by any Ordinance
of the Civil Magistrate: whose power in things Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical, is explained.

NOw are we fallen upon the strong hold of our Opposites, which is the Kings
Majesty's Supermacy in things Ecclesiastical. And if they meant to justify
them by the Laws and Constitutions of the Church, why did they not study to an
orderly peaceable proceeding, and to have things concluded in a lawful
National Synod, after free reasoning and mature advisement? Why did they
carry matters so factiously and violently? The truth is, they would have us to
acquiesce and to say no more against the Ceremonies, when once we hear that
they are enjoined by his Majesty, our only supreme Governor. What I am here
to say, shall not derogate any thing from his Highness Supremacy, because it
includes no such thing as a nomotheticall power, to prescribe and appoint such
sacred and significant Ceremonies as he shall think good.

The Archbishop of Armagh, in his Speech which he delivered concerning the
Kings Supremacy, (for which King James returned him in a Letter his Princely
and gracious thanks, for that he had defended his just and lawful power, with
so much learning and reason,) whiles he treats of the Supremacy, and
expounds that Title of The only Supreme Governor of all his Highness
Dominions and Countries, as well in all spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or
causes, as temporal; mentions no such thing, as any power to dispose by his
Laws and ordinances, of things external in the worship of God. Neither yet
shall this following Discourse tend to the cooling and abating of that care and
zeal which Princes owe to the oversight and promotion of Religion. For alas!
the corruptions which have stepped into Religion, and the decays which it has
felt since Princes began to take small thought of it, and to leave the care
of it to Popes, Bishops, Monks, etc. can never be enough bewailed. Nihil enim,
etc. For there is nothing (says In 4. praec. col. 791.
Zanchius) more pernicious, either to the Commonwealth or to the Church, then
if a Prince do all things by the judgment of others, and he himself
understand not those things which are propounded to be done.

Nor lastly, are we to sound an alarm of Rebellion. For to say that Subjects
are not bound to obey such Laws and Statutes of their Prince, as impose upon
them a Yoke of Ceremonies, which he has no power to impose, is one thing; and
to say, that they are not bound to subject themselves unto him faithfully and
loyally, is another thing. Recte Gerson; Qui abusui potestatis resistit, non
resistit divinae ordinationi, says DeIud. controv. cap. 14. p. 76
the Bishop of Sarisburie. Subjection, says Of the Church, lib. 4. c. 34. p.
400.
D. Field, is required generally and absolutely, where obedience is not. If we
have leave to speak with Gerard. loc. theol. tom. 6. p. 1280. Polan. Synt.
lib. 10. cap. 62. col. 960.
Divines, the bond and sign of subjection, is only Homage, or the oath of
fidelity, whereby Subjects bind themselves to be faithful to their Prince.
And we take the judge of all flesh to witness, before whose dreadful
Tribunal we must stand at that great day, how free we are of thoughts of
Rebellion, and how uprightly we mean to be his Majesty's most true and loy all
Subjects to the end of our lives, and to devote our selves, our bodies, lives,
goods and estates, and all that we have in the world, to his Highness service,
and to the honor of his Royal Crown.

Now for the purpose in hand, we will first examine what the Archbishop of
Spalato says, for he discourses much of the jurisdiction de Rep Eccl.
holds; That it is the duty of Princes super Ecclesiastica invigilare. But in
the body of the Chapter, he labors to prove, that the power of governing
Ecclesiastical things belongs to Princes (which is far more then to watch
carefully over them.) This the Reader will easily perceive. Nay, he himself,
Number. 115. and 174. professes he has been proving, that Divine and
Ecclesiastical things, are to be ruled and governed by the authority and Laws
of Princes. The Title prefixed to the sixth Chapter of that same Book, is this:
Legibus and edictis Principum Laicorum, and Ecclesiastica and Ecclesiasticos
gubernari. So that in both Chapters, he treats of one and the same office of
Princes about things Ecclesiastical.

Now, if we would learn what he means by those Ecclesiastica, which he will
have to be governed by Princes, Lib 6. Cap. 5. number. 3. and 17.
he resolves us that he means not things internal, such as the deciding of
controversies in matters of faith, feeding with the Word of God, binding and
loosing, and ministering of the Sacraments: (for in pure spiritualibus, (as he
speaks in Summa Cap. 5.) he yields the^ not the power of judging and
defining:) but only things external, which pertain to the external worship
of God, or which concern external Ecclesiastical Discipline. Such things
Ostens. error. Fr. Suarez. Cap. 3. Nmu. 23. Sect. 3.
he acknowledges to be res Spirituales. But vera Spiritualia, he will have to
comprehend only things internal, which he removes from the power of
Princes. Thus we have his judgment as plain as himself has delivered it
unto us.

But I demand, 1. Why yields he the same power to Princes in governing
Ecclesiastica, which he yeldeth them in governing Ecclesiasticos? For
Ecclesiastical Persons, being members of the commonwealth no less then
Laickes, have the same King and Governor with them. For which reason it is (as
De Rep. Eccl. Cap. 6. Number. 38.
the B. himself shows out of Molina) that they are bound to be subject to
their Princes Laws, which pertain to the whole commonwealth. But the like
cannot be alleged for the power of Princes to govern Ecclesiastica: for the
B. (I trust) would not have said, that things Ecclesiastical and things civil
do equally and alike belong to their power and Jurisdiction.

2. Why confounds he the governing of things and causes Ecclesiastical, with
watching over and taking care for the same? Let us only call to mind the native
signification of the word: (...) Guberno signifies properly to rule or govern
the course of a S^p: And in a Ship there may be many watchful and careful
eyes over her course, and yet but one Governor directing the same.

3. Why holds he, that things external in the worship of God are not vera
spiritualia? For if they be Ecclesiastical and sacred Ceremonies (not fleshly
and wordly) why will he not also acknowledge them for true spiritual things?
And if they be not vera spiritualia, why calls he them res spirituales? For are
not Res and Verum reciprocal, as well as Ens and Verum?

4. Even as a Prince in his Sea-voyage is supreme Governor of all which are in
the Ship with him, end by consequence of the Governor, who directs her course,
yet does he not govern the action of governing or directing the course of the
Ship: So though a Prince be the only supreme Governor of all his Dominions,
and by consequence of Ecclesiastical persons in his Dominions, yet he can not
be said to Govern all their Ecclesiastical actions and causes. And as the
Governor of a Ship acknowledges his Prince for his only supreme Governor,
even then whiles he is governing and directing the course of the ship,
(otherwise whiles he is governing her course, he should not be his Princes
Subject) yet he does not thereby acknowledge that his Prince governs his
action of directing the course of the Ship, (for then should the Prince be the
Pilot:) So when one has acknowledged the Prince to be the only supreme
Governor upon Earth, of all Ecclesiastical persons in his Dominions, even
whiles they are ordering and determining Ecclesiastical causes; yet he has
not thereby acknowledged that the Prince governs the Ecclesiastical causes.
Wherefore whiles Ostens. error Fr. Suarez. Cap. 3. n. 23.
the B. takes the English Oath of Supremacy, to acknowledge the same which he
teaches touching the Princes power, he gives it another sense then the words
of it can bear. For it says not that the Kings Majesty is the only supreme
Governor of all his Highness Dominions, and OF all things and causes therein,
as well Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, as Temporal. But it says, that he is
the only Supreme Governor of all his Highness Dominions IN all things or
causes, etc. Now, the spiritual Guides of the Church substituted by Christ, as
Deputies in his stead, who is the most supreme Governor of his own Church,
and Isa. 96.
on whose shoulder the Government rests as his Royal prorogative; even then
whiles they are governing and putting order to Ecclesiastical or spiritual
causes, they acknowledge their Prince to be their only supreme Governor upon
Earth: yet hereby they implie not that he governs their Governing of
Ecclesiastical causes, as has been showed by that Simele of governing a Ship.

5. Whereas the B. leaves all things external, which pertain to the worship
of God, to be governed by Princes, I object that the version

6. Whereas he yields to Princes the power of governing in spiritualibus, but
not in pure spiritualibus, I cannot comprehend this Distinction. All sacred and
Ecclesiastical things belonging to the worship of God are spiritual things.

What then understands he by things purely spiritual? If he mean things which
are in such sort spiritual, that they have nothing earthly not external in
them; in this sense the Sacraments are not purely spiritual, because they
consist of two parts; one earthly, and another heavenly, as Ireneus says of
the Eucharist. And so the Sacraments not being things purely spiritual, shall
be left to the power and government of Princes. If it be said, that by things
purely spiritual, he means things which concern our Spirits only, and not
the outward man; I still urge the same Instance: For the Sacraments are not in
this sense spiritual, because a part of the Sacraments, to wit, the
Sacramental Signs or Elements, concern our external and bodily senses of
seeing, touching, and tasting.

7. The B. also contradicts himself unawares: For in Lib. 6. cap. 5. n. 174.
one place he reserveth and excepteth from the power of Princes, the judging
and deciding of controversies and questions of faith. Yet in Ibid. number. 177.
another place he exhorts Kings and Princes, to compel the Divines of both
sides (of the Roman and Reformed Churches) to come to a free conference, and to
debate the matters controverted betwixt them; in which conference, he
requires the Princes themselves to be Judges.

It remains to try what force of reason the B. has to back his opinion. As
for the ragged rabble of humane Testimonies, which

1. That some of those things whereunto the power of Princes was applied, were
unlawful.

2. There were many of them things Temporal or Civil, not Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual, nor such as pertain to the worship of God.

3. There were some of them Ecclesiastical or spiritual things, but then
Princes did only ratify that which had been determined by Counsels, and
punish with the civil sword such as did stubbornly disobey the Churches
lawful constitutions. Neither were Princes allowed to do any more.

4. Sometimes they interposed their authority and meddled in causes spiritual
or Ecclesiastical, even before the definition of Counsels: yet did they not
judge nor decide those matters, but did only convocate Counsels, and urge the
Clergy to see to the misordered and troubled estate of the Church, and by
their wholesome Laws and ordinances to provide the best remedies for the same
which they could.

5. At other times Princes have done somewhat more in Ecclesiastical matters:
but this was only in extraordinary cases, when the Clergy was so corrupted,
that either through ignorance they were unable, or through malice and
perverseness unwilling to do their duty in deciding of controversies, making
of Canons, using the keys, and managing of other Ecclesiastical matters: in
which case Princes might and did by their coactive temporal Jurisdiction,
avoid disorder, error and superstition, and cause a Reformation of the Church.

6. Princes have likewise in rightly constituted and well reformed Churches, by
their own Regal authority, straightly enjoined things pertaining to the worship
of God: but those things were the very same which Gods own written Word had
expressly commanded.

7. When Princes went beyond these limits and bounds, they took upon them to
judge and command more then God has put within the compass of their power

But as touching the passages of holy Sripture whichthe B. alleges, Deuteronomy.
Chap. 17. verse. 19. where the King was appointed to have the Book of the Law
of God with him, that he might learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep
all the words of this Law and these Statutes to do them. What Logic (I pray)
can from this place infer that Princes have the supreme power of governing
all Ecclesiastical causes? Next, the B. tells us of David's appointing of the
offices of the Levites, and dividing of their courses, 1 Chronicles. 23. and his
commending of the same to Solomon, 1. Chron 28. But he might have observed,
that David did not this as a King, but as a Prophet or man of God. 2. Chron. 8.
14. yea those orders and courses of the Levites, were also commanded by other
Prophets of the Lord. 2. Chron 29. 25. As touching Solomon's appointing of the
courses and charges of the Priests, Levites, and Porters, he did it not of
himself, nor by his own Princely authority, but because David the man of God
had so commanded, 2. Chron. 8 14. For Solomon received from David, a pattern
for all that which he was to do in the work of the house of the Lord, and
also for the courses of the Priests and Levites, 1. Chron. 28. 11. 12 13.

The B^comes on and tells us that Hezekiah did apply his Regal 2. Chro^ 29. 5.
saying: Hear me ye Levites, sanctify now your selves and sanctify the house
of the Lord God of your fathers, and carry forth the filthiness out of the
holy place.

Ans. He exhorted them to no more then Gods Law required of them. For the Law
ordained them to sanctify themselves, and to do the service of the house of
the Lord, Number. 8. 6. 11. 15. and 18. 32. So that Hezekiah did here constitute
nothing by his own arbitrament and authority, but plainly shows his warrant,
verse. 11. The Lord has chosen you to stand before him, to serve him, and that
you should minister unto him. But the B, further alleges out of 2 Chronicles. 31.
that Hezekiah appointed the courses of the Priests and Levites, every man
according to his service.

Answ. He might have read 2. Chron. 29. 25. that Hezekiah did all this
according to the commandment of David and of God the Kings Seer, and Nathan
the Prophet: for so was the commandment of the Lord by his Prophets. And who
doubts but Kings may command such things as God has commanded before them.

The next example which the B. alleges, is out of 2. Chron. 35. Josias did
set the Priests and Levites again in their charges. Which example cannot prove
that Kings have the supreme power of governing Ecclesiastical causes, unless
it be evinced that Josias changed those orders and courses of the Levites and
Priests, which the Lord had commanded by his Prophets 2 Chronicles. 29. 25. and that
he did institute other orders by his own Regal authority. Whereas the
contrary is manifest from the Text. For Josias did only set the Priests and
Levites those charges and courses, which had been assigned unto them after the
writing of David and Solomon verse. 4. and by the commandment of David, and
Asaph, and Heman, and Ieduthun the Kings Seer, verse 15. Neither did Josias
command the Priests and Levites, any other service then that which was written
in the book of Moses verse. 12. So that from his example it only follows,
that when Princes see the state of Ecclesiastical persons corrupted, they
ought to interpose their authority for reducing them to those orders and
functions, which Gods Word commands.

Moreover, the B. objecteth the example of Ioash: who, while he Iehojada the
Priest, 2. Chro^ 24.
sent the Priests and Levites, to gather from all Israel, money for repairing
the house of the Lord: and when they dealt negligently in this business, he
transferred the charge of the same unto others, and making himself the Keeper
of the holy money, did both prescribe how it was to be ^eboursed, and likewise
take from good Iehojada the Priest the administration of the same. Now, where
he has read that Ioash made himself the keeper of the money and prescribed
how it should be deboursed, also that he took the administration from
Iehojada; I can not guess, or the Text has no such thing in it, but the
contrary, viz. that the Kings Scri^e, and the High Priests Officer, kept the
money and deboursed the same, as the King and Iehojada prescribed unto them. As
to that which he truly alleges out of the holy Text, I answer, 1. The
collection for repairing the house of the Lord was no humane ordinance, for
Ioash shows the Commandment of Moses for it, Verse. 6. having reference to
Exodus 30. 12. 13. 14. No other collections did Ioash impose, I. Wolph. in 2.
Reg. 12.
but those quae divino sure debebantur. 2. As for the taking of the charge of
this collection from the Priests, he behooved to do so, because they had still
neglected the work, when the three and twenty year of his reign was come.
And so say we, that when the ministers of the Church fail to do their duty,
in providing that which is necessary for the service of God, Princes ought by
some other means to cause these things be redressed. 3. Joash did nothing with
these money^s without Iehojada, but Id. I. bid.
Pontifex eas primum laborantibus tribuit, tum in aedis s^crae restoration em
maxim converti^. 4. And what if he had done this by himself? I suppose no man
will reckon the hiring of Masons and Carpenters, with such as wrought Iron and
Brass, or the gathering of money for this purpose, among spiritual things or
causes. 5. And if these employments about Solomon's Temple were not to be called
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, far less about our material Churches, which
are not holy nor consecrated as Solomon's was for a typical use. Wherefore
without all prejudice to our cause, we may and do commend the building and
repairing of Churches by Christian Princes.

But the B. returns to another Example in Solemon, which is the Abjathar the
chief Priest from his Office, and surrogating of another in his place. Answ.
Abjathar was civilly dead, as the Lawyers use to speak, and it was only by
accident or by consequent that Solomon put him from his Office: he sent him
away to Anathoth, because of his treasonable following and aiding of Adonijah,
whereupon necessarily followed his falling away from the honor, dignity and
Office of the High Priest: whence it only follows, that if a Minister be
found guilty of l^se Majesty, the King may punish him either with banishment or
proscription, or some such civil punishment, whereupon by consequence will
follow his falling from his Ecclesiastical office and dignity. 2. As for
Solomon's putting of Zadok in the room of Abjathar, it makes as little against
us, for Zadok did fall to the place jure divino.

The honor and office of the High Priesthood was given to Eliazer the Elder
Son of Aaron, and was to remain in his family. How it came to pass that it
was transferred to Eli, who was of the family of Ithamar, we read not. Always
after that Abjathar, who was of the family of Ithamar, and descended of Eli,
had by a capital crime fallen from it, it did of very right belong to Zadoke,
who was the chief of the family of Eliazer. And so all this flowed, not from
Solomon's, but from Gods own authority.

The B. remembers another example in Hezekiah to, telling us Exodus 33 13. and
34. 13. 14. Deuteronomy 7 5. Isa. 30. 22.
which commands to abolish such monuments, and to root out the very names of
Idols: which commandment is to be executed by the coaction of temporal power.

Finally, says the B. the Kings of the Jews 1. Kings 23. and 2^ Chron. 19
have in the Temple propounded the Law of the Lord to the people, renewed the
covenant 2 Chro^. 34 and 35.
proclaimed the keeping of the passover, and of the Feast of the Dedication,
Esther. 9. 26.
and have also instituted new Feasts. For all which things they are in 2.
Chro^. 29. 2 and 34. 2. etc.
the Scriptures much praised by the Holy Spirit. x 1. Maccab. 4. 59.


Answ. True it is, Josias did read the Law of the Lord to the people in the
Temple, and made a covenant before the Lord, but 1. He prescribed nothing at
his own pleasure, only he required of the people to walk after the Lord, and
to keep his commandments.

2. Neither yet did he this work by himself, but did convocate a Counsel of
the Prophets Priests and Elders of Israel, for the advancing of that
reformation, 2. Kings. 23. 1.

3. And if he had done it by himself, yet we are to remember that the
reformation of a Church generally and greatly corrupted, craveth the more
immediate intermedling of Princes, and a great deal more then can be
ordinarily and orderly done by them, in a Church already reformed. The slaying
of the Idolatrous Priests had also the warrant and authority of the Law of God,
which appointed a capital punishment for blasphemers, Zanch. in 3. praec. 575.
576. 577. 578.
or such as in contempt of God, and to rub some ignominy upon his name, did
traduce his doctrine and religion, and either detract from him and attribute to
Idols that which appertained properly unto him, or else attributed unto him
either by enunciation or imprecation, such things as could not stand with the
glory of the Godhead. Concerning the abolishing of Idolatry and all the
relics thereof, we have answered that it was commanded by God. The keeping
of the passover was also commanded in the Law: so that when Hezekiah enjoined
it, he did but publish Gods own express ordinance.

Last of all touching the two remanent examples. 1. The Feast of the Dedication
was not ordained by the sole authority of Judas, but 1. Mac. 4. 59.
by his brethren and by the whole Congregation of Israel: and the days of
Purim Est. 9. 20. 21.
were established by Mordecai a Prophet.

2. We have elsewhere made it evident, that the days of Purim by their first
Institution were only days of civil joy and solemnity: and that the Feast of
the Dedication was not lawfully instituted. d Supra Cap. 6.


Thus having dismissed the B. we will make us for clearing the purpose in hand.
But before we come to show particularly what Princes

1. Whatsoever the power of Princes be in things and causes Ecclesiastical, it
is not (sure) absolute nor unbounded. Solius Dei est, says Promp^. moral. in
Domin. 1. quadrag. text. 10.
Stapleton, juxta suam sanctissimam voluntatem, action^ suas omn^ dirigere, and
omnia facere quaecunque voluit. And again: Vis tuam voluntatem esse regulam
rerum omnium, ut omnia siant pro tuo beneplacito? Whether we respect the
persons or the places of Princes, their power is confined within certain
limits, so that they may not enjoyne whatsoever they list. As touching their
persons: Bishop Spotswood would do no less then warrant the Articles of
Perth, by King James his personal qualities. His person Sermon. in Perth. assemb.
says he, were he not our Sovereign, gives them sufficient authority, being
recommended by him: For he knows the nature of things, and the consequences of
them, what is fit for a Church to have, and what not, better then we do all.

I mean not to derogate any thing from King James his due deserved praise, nor
to obscure his never dying memory. Only I say, that such a Prince as the B.
speaks of, who knows what is fit for a Church to have, and what not, better
then many learned and godly Pastors assembled in a Synod, is Rara a^is in
terris nigroque simillima Cygno. For a Prince being but a man, and so subject
to error: being but one man, and so in the greater hazard of error, for plus
vident oculi, quam oculus; and woe to him that (...) alone, when he falls,
for he has not another to help him up says Eccl. 4. 10.
the wisest of mortal Kings: being also compassed and assailed with so many
and so mighty tentations, which other men are free of: and lastly, being so
taken up and distracted with secular affairs and cares, that very seldom is
he found well versed or singularly learned in the controversies of Religion:
may not such a one in the common sense of Christians, be thought more like to
fail and miscarry, in his judgment about things Ecclesiastical, then a whole
Synod, wherein there are many of the learned, judicious and godly Ministers of
the Church. Papists tell us, that they will not defend the personal actions of
the Pope, Onuphr de. vit. Hadr. 6.
quasi ipse solus omnibus horis sapore potuerit, id quod recte nemini concessum
perhibetur. Their own records let the world know the abominable vices and
impieties of Popes. Witness Platina, in the life of John the 10. Benedict the
4. John the 13. Boniface the 7. John the 20: -- John the 22. Paul the 2. etc.
And further when our Adversaries dispute of the Popes infallability, they
grant, for his own person, he may be an Heriticke: only they hold that he
cannot err e Cathedra.

And shall we now Idolize the persons of Princes more then Papists do the
persons of Popes? Or shall Papists object to us, that we extol the judgment
of our Princes to a higher degree of authority and infallibility, then they
yield to the judgment of their Popes? Alas, why would we put Weapons in the
hands of our Adversaries?

But what say we of Princes in respect of their place and Recte quidam, says
De imper. aut. lib. 2. cap. 55.
Saravia, illiberalis and inverecundi censet esse ingenij, de Principum
potestate and rebus gestis questionem movere, quando and Imperator sacrilegium
esse scribit, de eo quod a Principe factum est disputare. praelect. tom. 1. pa.
370. 372. and tom. 2. page 41.
Camero holds that in things pertaining to external order in religion, Kings
may command what they will pr^ authoritate, and forbid to seek another
reason beside the Majesty of their authority: yea that when they command
frivola, dura, and iniqua respectu nostri, our consciences are bound by those
their frivolous and unjust commandments, not only in respect of the end,
because scandal should possibly follovv in case we obey them not, but also
Iubentis respectu, because the Apostle bids us, obey the Magistrate for
conscience sake. At the reading of these Passages in Sarauia and Camero,
horror and amazement have taken hold on me. O wisdom of God, by whom Kings
do reign and Princes decree Justice upon whose thigh and vesture is written
King of Kings and Lord of Lords; make the Kings of the Earth to know that their
Laws are but Regulae regulatae, and mensurae mensuratae. Be wise now
therefore. O ye Kings: Be instructed ye Judges of the Earth. Serve the Lord
with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, and lay down your
Crowns at he feet of the Lamb Calv. in Psalm. 2.
that sits upon the Throne, discite justitiam moniti, and remember that this is
the beginning of wisdom, by casting pride away, to addict yourselves to the
Dominion of Christ: Who albeit he has given the Kingdoms of this world unto
your hands, and Non a^feret mortalia, Qui regna dat caelestia; Psalm. 9. 6, and
22. 21.
yet has he kept the government of his Church upon his own shoulder. So that
Rex non est proprie Rector Ecclesiae, sed Reipublicae: Ecclesiae vero Defensor
est. O all ye Subjects of Kings and Princes understand that in things
pertaining to the Church and Kingdom of Christ, 1. Cor. 7. 23.
ye are not the Servants of men; to do what they list, and that for their
listing. The Apostle Romans 13. (o) urges not obedience to Magistrates for
conscience sake, but only subjection for conscience (a) Tailor. on Tit. 3. 1.
page 543.
sake. For Pareus in illum locum.
he concludes his whole purpose Verse. 7. Render therefore to all their dues,
tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear,
honor to whom honor. There is not in all that Chapter one word of obedience
to Magistrates.

And as touching the binding power of their Laws, be they never so just they
cannot bind you any other way nor in respect of the general end of them: For
per se they cannot bind more then the Churches Laws can. Which things Iren.
lib 2. cap. 4.. 3.
D. Forbesse also has told you out of Calvine.

And hence it follows, that whenever you may omit that which Princes
enjoyne, without violating the Law of Charity, you are not holden to obey them,
for the Majesty of Princely authority. Be ashamed O ye Formalists of your
ascribing to Princes a Jurisdiction so absolute. Bury it in the grave of
eternal silence. Tell it not in Rome: publish it not among the Vashals of
Antichrist, lest the daughters of Babylon rejoice, lest the worshippers of the
Beast triumph. O how small confidence have the Cardinals, I say not now into
the Popes person, but even into his chair, when being entered in the
Conclave, for the election of a new Pope, they spend the whole day following in
the making of Laws, belonging to the administration and handling of all things
by him. who shall be adva^ced to the Popedom: which laws every one of them
subscribeth, and swareth to observe, if he be made Pope, as Onuphrius writes.
Though the Popes own creatures the Jesuits in their Schools and Books, must
dispute for his infallibility e Cathedra, yet we see what trust the wise
Cardinals shut up in the Conclave, do put in him, with what bound they tie
him and within what bounds they confine his power. Albeit the Pope after he is
created observes not strictly this oath, as Lib. 1.
that wise writer of the History of the Council of Trent notes: yet let me
say once again; shall we set up the power of Princes higher, or make their
power less limited, then Papists do the power of Popes? Or shall they set
bounds, to Popes, and we set none to Princes.

But I find my self a little digressed, after the roving absurdities

For Pareus in Romans 13. 4.
1. The very ground and reason wherefore we ought to obey the Magistrate, is,
for that he is the Minister of God, or a Deputy set in Gods stead to us. Now,
he is the Minister of God, only for our good, Romans 13 4. Neither were he Gods
Minister, but his own Master, if he should rule at his pleasure^, and command
things which serve not for the good of the Subjects. Since therefore the
commandments of Princes bind only so far as they are the Ministers of God
for our good: and Gods Ministers they are not, in commanding such things as are
either in their nature unlawful, or in their use inconvenient: it follows
that such commandments of theirs cannot bind.

2. Princes cannot claim any greater power in matters Ecclesiastical, then
the Apostle Paul had, or the Church her self yet has: that is to say, Princes
may not by any Temporal or Regal Jurisdiction urge any Ceremony or form of
Ecclesiastical Policy, which the Apostle once might not, and the Church yet
may not urge by a Spiritual Jurisdiction. But neither had the Apostle of old,
nor has the Church now power to urge either a Ceremony or any thing else,
which is not profitable for edifying. Paul could do nothing against the truth
but for the truth, and his power was given him to edification and not to
destruction, 2. Cor. 13. 8 10. Neither shall Ecclesiastical persons to the
worlds end receive any other power, beside that which is for the perfecting of
the Saints, and for the edifying of the body of Christ. Ephesians. 4. 12. Therefore
as D. Forb. Iren. lib 2 cap 4s. 10.
the Churches power is only to prescribe that which may edify, so the power of
Princes is in like sort given to them for edification, and not for destruction,
neither can they do ought against the truth, but only for the truth.

3. We are bound by the Law of God, to do nothing which is not good and
profitable or edifying, 1. Cor. 6. 12. and 14. 26. This Law of Charity is of a
higher and straiter bound then the Law of any Prince in the World.

The general rule of all indifferent things, is, let all things be done to
edification: And Ro^. 15. 1. 2. let every man please his neighbor to
edification, even as Christ pleased not himself, but others. Whatsoever then is
of this rank, which either would weaken or not edify our brother, he it never
so lawful, never so profitable to our selves, never so powerfully by earthly
authority enjoined; Christians who are not borne unto themselves, but unto
Christ, unto his Church, and fellow members, must not dare to m^ddle with it,
says Tailor on Tit. 1. 15. page 295.
one well to our purpose.

A third Proposition I premit, which is this. Since the power

For 1. The word teaches us, that the spiritual man judges all things 1.
Cor. 2. 15. tries the things that are different. Phil. 1. 10. has his senses
exercised to discern both good and evil. Hebr. 5. 14. and that every one who
would hold fast that which is good, and abstain from all appearance of evil,
must first prove all things. 1. Thessal. 5. 21.

2. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin Romans 14. 23. But whatsoever a man does
without the trial, Knowledge, and persuasion of the lawfullnesse of it, by the
word of God, that is not of faith. Ergo a sin. It is the word of God, and not
the arbitrament of Princes wehereupon faith is grounded. And though the word
may be withoutfaith, yet faith can not be without the word. By it therefore
must a man try and know assuredly the lawfullnesse of that which he does.

3. Every one of us shall give account of himself to God. But as we cannot
give an account to God of those actions which we have done in obedience to our
Prince, except we have examined^ considered, and understood the lawfullnesse of
the same: so an account could not be required of us for them, if we were bound
to obey and to keep all his ordinances, in such sort that we might not try and
examine them, with full liberty to refuse those which we judge out of the word
to be unlawful or inconvenient: for then Princes ordinances were a most
sufficient warrant to us: we needed try no more* let him make an account to
God of his command: we have acount to make of our obedience.

4. If we be bound to receive and obey the laws of Princes, without making a
free trial and examining of the equity of the same, then we could not be
punished for doing (...)* willingly and in ignorance, things unlawful
prescribed by them. Whereas every soul that sins shall dye; and when the
blind leads the blind, he who is led falls in the ditch as well as his leader.

5. No man is permitted to do every thing which seems right in his eyes, and
to follow every conceit which takes him in the head: but every man is bound
Gal. 6. 16.
to walk by a rule: But the Law of a Prince cannot be a rule, except it be
examined, whether it, be consonant to the Word of God. Index secundum legem,
and his Law is only such a rule as is ruled by a higher rule: In so far as it
is ruled by the own rule of it, in as far it is a rule to us: and in so
far as it is not ruled by the own rule of it, in as far it is not a rule
to us. Quid ergo? an non licebit Christiano cuique convenientiam regula and
regulati (ut vocant observare? says Animad. in Bell. cont. 1. lib. 3. cap. 10.
Iunius.

6. The rule whereby we ought to walk in all our ways, and according to which
we ought to frame all our actions, is provided of God Psalm. 9. 7.
a stable and sure rule, that it being observed and taken heed unto, may guide
and direct our practice aright, about all those things which it prescribes.
But the Law of a Prince (if we should without trial and examination take it
for our rule,) cannot be such a stable and sure rule. For put the case that a
Prince enjoyne two things which sometimes fall out to be incompatible, and
cannot stand together, in that case his Law cannot direct our practice, nor
resol^ (...) what to do. Whereas God has so provided for us, that the case
can never occur, wherein we may not be resolved what to do, if we observe
the rule which he has appointed us to walk by.

7. Except this Judgment of discretion which we plead for, be permitted unto
us, it will follow that in the point of obedience we ought to give no less,
but as much honor unto Princes, as unto God himself: For when God publishes
his Commandments unto us, what greater honor could we give him by our
obedience, then to do that which he commands, for his own sole will and
authority, without making further enquiry for any other reason.

8. The Apostle, 1. Cor. 7. 23. forbids us to be the servant of men, that
is, to do things for which we have no other warrant, beside the pleasure and
will of men. Which interpretation is grounded upon other places of Scripture,
that teach us, we are not bound to obey men in any thing, which we know not to
be according to the will of God, Ephesians. 6 6. 7. that we ought not to live to the
lusts of men but to the will of God, 1. Pet. 4. 2. and that therefore we ought
in every thing to prove what is acceptable unto the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 20.

9. They who cleanse their way, must take heed thereto according to the Word,
Psalm. 119. 9. Therefore if we take not heed to our way according to the Word,
we do not cleanse it. They who would walk as the Children of light, must have
the Word for a lamp unto their feet, and a light unto their path, Psalm. 119.
105. Therefore if we go in any path, without the light of the Word to direct
us, we walk in darkness and stumble, because we see not where we go. They
who would not be unwise, but walk circumspectly, must understand, what the
will of the Lord is, Ephesians. 5. 17. Therefore, if we understand not what the Will
of the Lord is concerning that which we do, we are unwise, and walk not
circumspectly.

10. Zanch. in Phil. 1. 10.
Dona Dei in Sanctis non sunt otiosa. Whatsoever Grace God gives us, it ought
to be used and exercised, and not to lie idle in us. But Id. ibid.
God gives us actionem cognoscendi, (...) discernendi, etc. a certain measure
of the Spirit of Discretion, to teach us what to choose as good, and what to
refuse as evil, 1 Ioh. 2. 27. The same anointing teaches you of all things, 1
Cor. 2. 15. He that is Spiritual judges all things. Therefore God would have
us to exercise that measure of the gift of discretion, which he has bestowed
on us, in discerning of things which are propounded to us, whether they ought
to be done or not.

11. Do not our Divines plead for this judgment of private discretion, which
ought to be permitted to Christians, when any thing is propounded to be
believed or done by them? And this their judgment is to be seen in their
writings against Papists about the Controversies de interpretatione Scripturae,
deside implicita, etc.

12. The Bishop of Sarisburie in his Prelections de judice controversiarum,
does often and in many places commend unto Christians, the same judgment of
discretion which we stand upon, and holds it necessary for them to try and
examine whatsoever either Princes or Prelates command them to do. Coactiva,
etc. The coactive Power of a Prince cap. 14. page 77.
says he, does not absolutely bind the Subject, but only with this condition,
except he would compel him to that which is unlawful. Therefore there is ever
left unto Subjects a Power of proving and judging in their own mind, whether
that which is propounded be ungodly and unlawful or not: and if it be ungodly,
that which the King threatens should be suffered, rather then that which he
commands be done. This Augustine has taught etc. And whereas it might be
objected, that this makes a Subject to be his Princes Judge, Ibid. c. 26. p.
152.
he answers thus. Non se etc, He makes not himself another Judge, who
pondereth and examineth a Sentence published by another, in so far as it
contains something either to be done or to be believed by him; but only he
makes himself the Judge of his own actions. For, howsoever he who plays
the Judge, is truly said to judge, yet every one who judges is not properly
said to play the Judge. He plays the Judge, who in a external Court
pronounces a Sentence, which by force of Jurisdiction touches another: but he
judges, who in the inferior Court of his own private Conscience conceives
such a Sentence of the things to be believed or done, as pertains to himself
alone: This latter way private men both may and ought to judge of the Sentences
and Decrees of Magistrates, neither by so doing do they constitute themselves
Judges of the Magistrates, but Judges of their own actions.

Finally, there is none of our Opposites, but says so much as infers
Heraclitus himself to fall a lauging with Democritus. What then remains?
Surely our Opposites must either say nothing, or else say with us, that it is
not only a Liberty but a duty of Inferiors, not to receive for a thing
lawful that which is enjoined by Superiors, because they account it and call
it such, but by the judgment of their own discretion following the rules of
the Word, to try and examine, whether the same be lawful or unlawful.

These Praecognita being now made good, come we to speak among this kind of
mere circumstances, sacred signifiant Ceremonies can not be reckoned, we have
otherwhere made it evident. Now therefore of things pertaining to the substance
of Gods worship, whether they be sacred Ceremonies, or greater and more
necessary duties, we say that Princes have not power to injoyne any thing of
this kind, which has not the plain and particular Institution of God himself
in Scripture. They may indeed and ought to publish Gods own ordinances and
commandments, and by their coactive temporal power urge and enforce the
observation of the same. Notwithstanding it is a Princes duty, Danaus pol.
Christ. lib. 6. Cap. 3.
that in the worship of God, whether internal or external, he move nothing,
he prescribe nothing, except that which is expressly delivered in Gods own
written Word. We must beware we confound not things which have the plain
warrant of Gods Word, with things devised by the will of man. David,
Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, and other Kings among the people of God, did as
well laudably as lawfully, injoyne and command that worship and for me of
Religion, which God in his Law and by his Prophets commanded; and forbid,
avoid, and abolish such corruptions, as God had for bidden before them, and
appointed to be abobished: whence it follows not that Kings may in join
things which want the warrant of the word, but only this much, which we all
commend, viz. Zanch. in 4. praec. col. 791. Polan. synt. lib. 10. cap. 65.
That a Christian Princes office in Religion, is diligently to take care that
in his Dominion or kingdom, Religion out of the pure word of God, expounded by
the word of God it self, and understood according to the first Principles of
faith (which others call the analogy of faith) either be instituted; or being
instituted be kept pure; or being corrupted be restored and reformed: that
false doctrines, abuses, Idols, and superstitions, be taken away to the glory
of God, and to his own and his Subjects salvation.

But in all the Scripture Princes have neither a commendable example, Jeroboam
caused a change to be made in the Ceremonies and form of Gods worship. Whereas
God ordained the Arc of the Covenant to be the sign of his presence, and that
his glory should dwell between the Cherubims. Jeroboam set up two Calves to be
the signs representative of that God who brought Israel out of Egypt. And this
he means while he says, 1. King 12. 28.
Behold thy Gods, etc. giving to the signs the thing signified. Whereas God
ordained Jerusalem to be the place of worship, and all the sacrifices to be
brought to the Temple of Solomon, Jeroboam made, Dan and Bethel to be places of
worship, and built there Altars and high places for the sacrifices. Whereas God
ordained the sons of Aaron only to be his Priests, Jeroboam made Priests of
the lowest of the people, which were not of the sons of Levi. Whereas God
ordained the feast of Tabernacles to be kept on the fifteenth day of the
seventh month, Jeroboam appointed it on the sisteenth day of the eight
month. Now, if any Prince in the world might have fair pretenses for the
making of such innovations in Religion. Jeroboam much more. He might allege
for his changing of the signs of Gods presence, and of the place of worship,
that since Rehoboams wrath was incensed against him, and against the ten Tribes
which adhered unto him, (as appears by 2. Chron. 13. 6.
the accounting of them to be rebels, and by 2. Chron 11. 1.
the gathering of a huge army, for bringing the kingdom again to Rehoboam)
it was no longer safe for his subjects to go up to Jerusalem to worsh p, in
which case God who required mercy more then sacrifice, would bear with their
changing of a few Ceremonies, for the safety of men's lives. For his putting
down of the Priests and Levites, and his ordaining of other Priests which were
not of the sons of Levi: he might pretend that they were rebellious to him,
in that Martyr. in 1. Reg. 8. 31.
hey would not assent unto his new ordinances, which he had enacted for the
safety and security of his Subjects, and that they did not only simply refuse
obedience to these his ordinances, but in their refusal show themselves so
steadfastly minded, that they wolud refuse and with stand even to the suffering
of deprivation and deposition; and not only so, but likewy se 2. Chron. 11. 16.
drew after them many others of the rest of the Tribes, to be of their
judgment, and to adhere to that manner of worship which was retained in
Jerusalem. Lastly, for the change which he made about the season of the feast
of Tabernacles, he might have this pretense, that as it was expedient for the
strengthening of his kingdom, Martyr. in 1. Reg. 8. 32.
to draw and allure as many as could be had, to associat and join themselves
with him in his form of worship, (which could not be done if he should keep
that feast, at the same time when it was kept at Jerusalem;) so there was no
less (if not more) order and decency in keeping it in the eight month, Id.
ibid.
when the fruits of the ground were perfectly gathered in (for thankful
remembrance whereof, that feast was celebrated) then in the seventh, when they
were not so fully collected.

These pretenses he might have made yet more plausible, by professing and
avouching, that he intended to worship no Idols, but the Lord only; that he
had not fallen from any thing which was fundamental and essential in divine
Faith and Religion; that the changes which he had made, were only about some
alterable Ceremonies, which were not essential to the worship of God; and that
even in these Ceremonies he had not made any change for his own will and
pleasure, but for important reasons which concerned the good of his Kingdom
and saffety of his Subjects. Notwithstanding of all this, the innovations which
he made about these Ceremonies of sacred Signs, sacred Places, sacred Persons,
sacred Times, are condemned for this very reason, because 1. Kings 22. 33.
he devised them of his own heart, which was enough to convince him of
horrible impiety in making Israel to sin. Moreover, when king Ahaz took a
pattern of the Altar of Damascus and sent it to Vrijah the Priest, though we
can not gather from the Text, that he either intended or pretended any other
respect beside 2. Kings 16. 10. 18.
the honoring and pleasuring of his Patron and Protector the king of
Assyria, (for of his appointing that new altar, for his own and all the
peoples sacrifices, there was nothing heard till after his return from
Damascus, at which time he began to fall back, from one degree of defection
to a greater:) yet this very innovation of taking the pattern of an Altar from
Idolaters, is marked as a sin and a snare. Last of all, whereas many of the
kings of Judah and Israel, did either themselves worship in the groves and the
high places, or else at least suffer the people to do so: housoever Hospin. de
orig Te^pl. lib. 1. Cap. 1. 10. Wolph. in 2. Reg. 12. 4.
they might have alleged specious reasons for excusing themselves, as namely,
that they gave not this honor to any strange Gods, but to the Lord only; that
they choosed these places only to worship in, wherein God was of old seen and
worshipped by the Patriarchs; that the groves and the high places added a most
amiable splendour and beauty, to the worship of God; and that they did
consecratethese places for divine worship, in a good meaning, and with minds
wholly devoted to the honor of God: yet notwithstanding, because this thing
was not commanded of God, neither came it in to his heart, he would admit no
excuses, but ever challenges it as a grievous fault in the government of
those Kings, that the high places were not taken away, and that the people
still sacrificed in the high places. From all which examples, we learn how
higly God was and is displeased with men, Hospin. ibid. page 3.
for adding any other sacred Ceremonies to those which he himself has
appointed.

Now as touching the other sort of things which we consider in

Of these Rules I am to speak in the fourth part of the Dispute. And here I
say no more but this: Since the Word commands us 1 Cor. 10. 31.
to do all things to the Glory of God, 1 Cor. 14. 26.
to do all things to edifying, and Romans 14. 5. 23.
to do all things in Faith, and full persuasion of the lawfulness of that
which we do: therefore there is no Prince in the world who has Power to
command his Subjects, to do that which should either dishonor God, or not
honor him; or that which should either offend their brother, or not edify him,
or lastly, that which their conscience either condemns, or doubts of. For
how may a Prince command that which his Subjects may not do? But a wonder it
were, if any man should so far refuse to be ashamed, that he would dare to
say, we are not bound to order whatsoever we do according to these Rules of
the Word, but only such matters of private action, wherein we are lest at full
liberty, there being no Ordinance of Superiors to determine our practi^; and
that it such an Ordinance be published and propounded unto us, we should take
it alone for our Rule, and no longer think to examine and order ourpractise by
the Rules of the Word.

For, 1. This were as much as to say, that in the circumstances of Gods
Worship, we are bound to take heed unto Gods Rules, then only and in that
case, when men give us none of their Rules, which if they do, Gods Rules must
give place to men's Rules, and not theirs to his.

2. If it were so, then we should never make reckoning to God, whether that
which we have done in obedience to Superiors, was right or wrong, good or
bad: and we should only make reckoning of such things done by us, as were not
determined by a humane Law.

3. The Law of Superiors in never the supreme, but ever a subordinate Rule,
and (as we said before) it can never be a Rule to us, except in so far only,
as it is ruled by a higher Rule. Therefore we have ^ver another Rule to take
heed unto, beside their Law.

4. The Scripture speaks most generally, and admits no exception from the
Rules which it gives. Whatsoever ye do (though commanded by Superiors) do
all to the Glory of God. Let all things (though commanded by Superiors) be
done to edifying. Whatsoever is not of Faith (though commanded by Superiors)
is sin.

5. We may do nothing for the sole will and pleasure of men: for this were to
be the Servants of men, as has been showed de justit. actual. cap. 41.
The Bishop of Sarisburie also assenteth hereunto. Non enim (says he) Deus
vult, ut hominis alicujus voluntatem regulam nostrae voluntatis atque vitae
faciams: sed hoc privilegium sibi ac verbo suo reservatum voluit. And again
Pio itaqu^ animo haec consideratio semper adesse debet, utrum id quod (u)
dejudice controv. cap. 26. page 153
praecipitur sit divino mandato contrarium, necne: atque ne ex hac part
fallantur, adhibedum est illud judicium discretionis, quod nos tantopere
urgemus.

These things if de imper. author. lib. 2. c. 52.
Saravia had considered, he had not so absolutely may make Constitutions of the
places and times, when and where the exercises of Piety may be conveniently
had: also with what Order, what Rite, what Gesture, what Habit, the Mysteries
shall be more decently celebrated. But what? thought he, this Power of Kings
is not a st^cted to the Rules of the Word? have they any Power which is to
destruction, and not to edification? Can they command their Subjects to do
any thing in the circumstances of Divine Worship, which is not for the Glory of
God, which is not profitable for edifying, and which they can not do in Faith?
Nay, that all the Princes in the world have not such Power as this, will easily
appear to him who attends unto the reasons, which we have propounded. And
because men do easily and ordinarily pretend, that their constitutions are
according to the Rules of the Word, when they are indeed repugnant to the same,
therefore we have also proven, that Inferiors may and must try and examine
every ordinance of their Superiors, and that by the judgment of private
discretion, following the Rules of the Word. I say, following the Rules of the
Word, because we will never allow a man to follow Anabaptisticall or
Swenckfeldian-like enthysiasmes and inspirations.

Touching the application of what has been said, unto the controverted

But if any man will needs have these Ceremonies in question, to go under the
name of mere circumstances, let us put the case they were no other, yet our
conforming unto them, which is urged, can not stand with the Rules of the Word.

It could not be for the Glory of God, not only for that it is offensive to
many of Christ's little ones, but likewise for that it ministers occasion to the
enemies of the Lord to blaspheme; to Atheists, because by these naughty
observances they see the Commandments of God made of little or no effect, and
many godly both Persons and Purposes despised and depressed, whereat they laugh
in their sleeve, and say, Aha, so would we have it; to Papists, because as by
this our Conformity, they confirm themselves in sundry of their errors and
superstitions, so perceiving us so little to abhor the Pomp and Bravery of
their Mother of Harlots, that we care not to borrow from her some of her
meretricious trinckets, they promise to themselves, that in the end we shall
take as great a draught of the Cup of the Wine of her Fornications, as they
themselves

Neither yet can our conforming unto the Ceremonies pressed on us, be
profitable for edifying, for we have given sufficient demonstration of manifold
hurts and inconveniences ensuing thereon.

Nor lastly can we conform to them in Faith, for as our Consciences can not
find, so the Word can not afford any warrant for them. Of all which things now
I only make mention, because I have spoken of them enough otherwhere.

The second distinction, which may help our light in this question For (says
^nimad. in Bell. co^tr. 4. lib. 1. cap. 12. and 18.
Iunius) both the Church, when the joining of the Magistrate fails, may
extraordinarily do something, which ordinarily she can not: and again, when
the Church fails of her duty, the Magistrate may extraordinarily procure,
that the Church return to her duty: that is, in such a case extraordinarily
happening, these (Ecclesiastical Persons) and those (Magistrates) may
extraordinarily do something, which ordinarily they can not. For this
belongs to common Law and Equity, that unto extraordinary evils,
extraordinary remedies must also be applied. We aknowledge, that it belongs
to Princes, Cartwr. on Math. 22. sect. 3.
to reform things in the Church as often as the Ecclesiastical Persons shall
either through ignorance or disorder of the affection of covetousness or
ambition, defile the Lords Sanctuary. At such extraordinary times, Princes by
their coactive temporal Power, ought to procure and cause a Reformation of a
buses, and the avoiding of misorders in the Church, though with the discontent
of the Clergy: for which end and purpose they may not only injoyne and
command the Profession of that Faith, and the Practice of that Religion which
Gods Word appoints, but also prescribe such an order and policy in the
circumstances of Divine Worship, as they in their judgment of Christian
Discretion, observing and following the Rules of the Word, shall judge and try
to be convenient for the present time and case, and all this under the
commination of such temporal losses, pains, or punishments, as they shall
deprehend to be reasonable. But at other ordinary times, when Ecclesiastical
Persons are neither through ignorance unable, nor through malice and
perverseness of affection unwilling, to put order to whatsoever requires any
mutation to be made in the Church and Service of God, in that case without
their advice and consent, Princes may not make an innovation of any
Ecclesiastical Rite, nor publish any Ecclesiastical Law.

When of the Church. lib. 5. cap. 53.
D. Field speaks of the Power of Princes, to prescribe James had not Power by
himself to impose the controverted Ceremonies upon the Church of Scotland, at
that time, when as no free assent (much less the direction) of the Clergy,
was had for them, so neither had they been formerly decreed, but Laws and
Decrees were formerly made against them. If the D. would have answered
affirmatively, that he had this Power, then why did he in a scornful
dissimulation, so circumscribe and limit the Power of Princes, by requiring a
former decree, and the free assent of the Clergy? If he would have answered
negatively, that he had not such Power, we should have rendered him thanks for
his answer. 2. Whether may the Clergy make any laws about things pertaining
to the Service of GOD which the Prince may not as well by himself and without
them, constitute and authorize? If the affirmative part be granted unto us,
we gladly take it. But we suppose D. Field did, and our Opposites yet do hold
the negative. Whereupon it follows, that the Prince has as much, yea the
very same Power of making laws in all Ecclesiastical things which the
Clergy themselves have when they are conveened in a lawful and free
Assembly, yet I guess from the D. words, what he would have replied, namely,
that the difference is great betwixt the Power of making Laws about things
Ecclesiastical, in the Prince, and the same Power in the Clergy assembled
together: for he describes the making of a Law, to be the prescribing of
something, under some pain or punishment, which he that so prescribes has
Power to inflict. Whereby he would make it appear, that he yields not unto
Princes, the same power of Spiritual Jurisdiction, in making of
Ecclesiastical Laws, which agrees to the Clergy: because whereas a
Council of the Clergy may frame Canons about things which concern the
Worship of God, and prescribe them under the pain of excommunication and other
Ecclesiastical censures, the Ordinance of Princes about such matters, is only
under the pain of some external or bodily punishment. But I answer Potestas
(...) is one thing, and Potest^ (...) is another thing. When the making of a
Law is joined either with the intention, or with the commination of a
Punishment, in case of transgression, this is but accidental and adventitious
to the Law, not naturally or necessarily belonging to the essence of the same.
For many Laws there has been, and may be, which prescribe not that which they
contain under the same pain or punishment. decr. part. 1. did. 3. c. 4.
Gratian distinguishes three sorts of Laws. Omnis etc. Fvery Law says he,
either permits something, for example, let a valorous man seek a reward: or
forbids, for example, let it be lawful to no man to seek the marriage of holy
Virgins: or punishes, for example, He who commits Murder, let him be
capitally punished. And in this third kind only, there is something
prescribed under a pain or punishment. It is likewise holden by Aquin. 1^ 2^
q. 92. art. 2.
Schoolmen, that it is a Law which permits some indifferent thing, as well,
as it which commands some virtue, or forbids some vice. When a Prince does
statute and ordain, that whosoever out of a generous and magnanimous Spirit,
will adventure to imbarke and hazard in a certain military exploit, against a
foreign enemy whom he intends to subdue, shall be allowed to take for
himself in propriety, all the rich spoil which he can lay hold on: there is
nothing here prescribed under some pain or punishment, yet is it a Law; and
properly so termed. And might not the name of a Law be given unto that Edict
of King Darius, whereby Dan. 6.
he decreed that all they of his Dominions, should fear the God of Daniel,
forasmuch as he is the living and eternal God, who reigns for ever: yet it
prescribed nothing under some pain or punishment to be inflicted by him who so
prescribed. Wherefore though the Princ^ publishes Ecclesiastical Laws under
other pains and punishments, then the Clergy does, this shows only that
Potest^s (...) is not the same, but different in the one and in the other: yet
if it be granted, that whatsoever Ecclesiastical Law, a Synod of the Clergy
has Power to make and publish, the Prince has Power to make and publish
without them, by his own sole Auctority, it follows, that that Power of the
Church to make Laws which is called Potest^ (...), does agree as much, as
properly, and as directly to the Prince, as to a whole Synod of the Church.

Now therefore we firmly hold, 1. That the Prince may not innovate and duties:
yea further, that so far as is possible, the consent of the whole Church
ought to be had, whenever any change is to be made of some order or custom
in the Church. For that which touches the whole Church, and is to be used by
the whole Church Bald de cas. consc lib. 4. cap. 11. c^s. 1.
ab omnibus etiam merito curatur. Therefore I Would. ibid.
when there is any change to be made in the Rites of the Church, merito fit hoc
eum omnium ordinum Ecclesiae consensu. Neither was there ever a rightly
reformed Church, which was helped and not hurt, by such Rites and Customs, as
to their grief and miscontentment Princes did impose upon them. Whence it was,
that Ibid, cas. 2
they who were orthodoxe did ever withstand such a Magistrate, as would have by
his commandments tied the Church, to that which was burdensome to their
consciences. That such inconveniencie^ may be shunned, it is fit, that when any
change is to be made in the Policy of a Church, not the Clergy alone, but the
Elders also, and men of understanding among the Laytie, in a lawful Assembly,
freely give their voices, and consent thereunto. Good reason have our Writers
to hold against Papists, that Laymen ought to have place in Counsels, wherein
things which concern the whole Church are to be deliberated upon. 2. Lest it
be thought enough that Princes devyse, frame, and establish Ecclesiastical
laws, as them best likes, and then for more show of orderly proceeding, some
secret and sinistrous way extort and procure the assent of the Synod of the
Church; therefore we add, that it belongs to the Synod (the Clergy having
the chief place therein to give direction and advice,) not to receave and
approve the definition of the Prince, in things which concern the worship of
God, but it self to define and determine what orders and customs are fittest
to be observed, in such things, that thereafter the Prince may approve and
ratify the same, and press them upon his Subjects by his regal coactive
Power. To me, it is no less then a matter of admiration; how Pralect. tom. 2.
page 50.
Camero could so far forget himself as to say, that in things pertaining unto
Religion, dirigere atque disponere penes magistratum est proprie, penes
Ecclesiasticos ministerium atque executio proprie, telling us further, that the
directing and disposing of such things, does then only belong to
Ecclesiastical Persons, when the Church suffers persecution, or when the
Magistrate permits, that the matter be judged by the Church.

Our Writers have said much of the power of the Church to make laws. But this
man (I perceive) will correct them all, and will not aknowledge, that the
Church has any power of making laws, about things pertaining to Religon,
(except by accident, because of persecution, or permission) but only a power of
executing what Princes pl^ase to direct. More fully to deliver our mind, we
say; that in the making of Laws about things which concern the worship of
God, the Prince may do much (...) act^ i^os, but nothing p^r act^ ^licitos.
For the more full explanation of which distinction, I liken the Prince to the
will of man: the Ministers of the Church, to man's particular senses: a Synod of
the Church, to that internal sense which is called Sensus communis, the
fontaine and original of all the external: things and actions
Ecclesiastical, or such as concern the worship of God, to the objects and
actions of the particular senses: and the power of making Ecclesiastical
laws, to that power and virtue of the common sense, whereby it perceives,
discerns, and judges of the objects and actions of all the particular
senses. Now as the will commands the common sense to discern and judge of
the actions and objects of all the particular senses, thereafter commands the
eye to see, the ear to hear, the nose to smell, etc yet it has not power by
it self to exercice or bring forth any of these actions; for the will can
neither see, nor yet judge of the object and action of sight, etc. So the
Prince may command a Synod of the Church, to judge of Ecclesiastical things
and actions, and to define what order and form of policy is most convenient to
be observed, in things pertaining to divine worship, and thereafter he may
command the particular Ministers of the Church to exercise the works of their
Ministry, and to apply themselves unto that form of Church regiment and
policy, which the Synod has prescribed, yet he may not by himself define and
direct such matters, nor make any laws thereanent.

For proof of these things I add, 1. Politic government, versatur circa res
terrenas and hominem externum (says Til. synt. part. 2. disp. 32. th. 33.
one of our Writers) Magistratus says Danaeus. pol. christ. lib. 6. cap. 1.
another) instituti sunt a Deo rerum humanarum quae hominum societati
necessariae sunt respectu, and ad earum curam. But they are Ecclesiastical
Ministers, who are Hebr. 5. 1.
ordained for men in thing pertaining to God, that is, in things which pertain
unto Gods worship. It belongs not therefore to Princes to govern and direct
things of this nature, even as it belongs not to Pastors to govern and
direct earthly things, which are necessary for the external, and civil
society of men. I mean, ordinarily and regularly, for of extraordinary cases
we have spoken other wise. But according to the common order and regular form,
we are ever to put this difference, betwixt Civil and Ecclesiastical
government, which Fr. Iun. Ecclesiast. lib. 3. cap. 4.
one of our best learned Divines has excellently conceived after this manner.
Altera differentia, etc. The other difference (says he) taken from the matter
and subject of the administrations. For we have put in our definition humane
things to be the subject of civil administration: but the subject of
Ecclesiastical administration, we have taught to be things divine and sacred:
Things divine and sacred we call, both those which God commands for the
sanctification of our mind and conscience, as things necessary; and also those
which the decency and order of the Church requires to be ordained and
observed, for the profitable and convenient use of the things which are
necessary. For example, Prayers; the administration of the Word and Sacraments,
Ecclesiastical censure; are things necessary, and essentially belonging to the
Communion of Saints: but set days, set hours, set places, fasts, and if
there be any such like, they belong to the decency and order of the Church:
without which the Church can not be well edified, nor any particular member
thereof rightly fashioned, and fitly set in the body. But humane things, we
call, such duties as touch the life, the body, goods, and good name, as they
are expounded in the second table of the Decalogue: for these are the things
in which the wholle civil administration stands. Behold, how the very
circumstances, which pertain to Ecclesiastical order and decency, are
exempted from the compass of civil government.

2. Natural reason (says de Iudice controv. cap. 14 p. 70.
the Bishop of Sarisburie) tells, that to judge of every thing, and to
instruct others, belongs to them who before others take pains and study to
the care and knowledge of the same. So Physicians judge, which meat is
whollesome, which noisome: Lawyers declare, what is just, what unjust: and in
all Arts and Sciences, they who professedly place their labor and study in the
polishing and practicing of the same, both use and ought to direct the
judgments of others. Since therefore Gerard. locor. theol. tom. 6. page 840.
the Ministers of the Church are those quibus Ecclesiae cura incumbit vel
maxim; since they do above and before the civil Magistrate, devote
themselves to the care and knowledge of things pertaining to God and his
worship, where about they profess to bestow their ordinary study and painful
travel; were it not most repugnant to the law of natural reason, to say, that
they ought not to direct, but be directed by the Magistrate in such matters?

3. The Ministers of the Church are appointed to be Watchmen in the City of
God, Mich. 7. 4. and Overseers of the Flock, Acts. 20. v. 28. But when Princes
do without the direction and definition of Ministers establish certain Laws
to be observed in things pertaining to Religion, Ministers are not then
Watchmen and Overseers, because they have not the first sight, and so can not
give the first warning of the change which is to be made in the Church. The
Watchmen are upon the walls: the Prince is within the City. Shall the Prince
now view and consider the breaches and defects of the City, better and sooner
then the Watchmen themselves? Or, shall one within the City tell what should be
righted and helped therein, before them who are upon the walls? Again, the
Prince is one of the flock, and is committed among the rest to the care,
attendance, and guidance of the Overseers. And I pray, shall one of the sheep
direct the Overseers how to govern and lead the whole flock, or prescribe to
them what orders and customs they shall observe for preventing or avoiding any
hurt and inconvenience, which may happen to the flock?

4. Christ has ordained men of Ecclesiastical order, zanch. in Ephesians. 4. 12.
not only for the work of the Ministry, that is, for preaching the Word and
ministering the Sacraments, for warning and rebuking them who sin, for
comforting the afflicted, for confirming the weak, etc. but also for provyding
whatsoever concerns either the private spiritual good of any member of the
Church, which the Apostle calls the perfecting of the Saints, or the public
spiritual good of the whole Church, which he calls the edifying of the body
of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 12. Since therefore the making of Laws, about such things
without which the worship of God can not be orderly nor decently (and so not
rightly) performed, concerns the spiritual good and benefit of the whole
Church, and of all the members thereof; it follows, that Christ has
committed the power of judging, defining, and making laws about those matters,
not to Magistrates, but to the Ministers of the Church.

5. Hebr. 13. 17.
The Apostle speaking of the Church Ministers, says, Obey them that have the
rule over you, and submit your selves: for they watch for your souls as they
that must give account. Whence we gather, that in things pertaining to God, and
which touch the spiritual benefit of the soul, the Ministers of the Church
ought to give direction, and to be obeyed, as those who in things of this
nature have the rule over all others in the Church, (and by consequence over
Princes also,) so that it be in the Lord. And lest this place and power which
is given to Ministers, should either be abused by themselves to the commanding
of what they will, or envied by others, as too great honor and preeminence,
the Apostle shows what a painful charge lies on them, and what a great
reckoning they have to make. They watch for your souls says he, not only by
preaching and warning every one, and by offering up their earnest prayers to
God for you, but likewise by taking such care of Ecclesiastical discipline,
order, and policy, that they must provide and procure whatsoever shall be
expedient for your spiritual good, and direct you in what convenient and
beseeming manner, you are to perform the works of Gods worship, as also to
avoid and shun every scandal and inconveniency, which may hinder your
spiritual good. And of these things, whether they have done them or not, they
must make account before the judgment seat of the great Bishop of your souls.
Surely, if it belong to Princes to define and ordain, what order and policy
should be observed in the Church, what forms and fashiones should be used, for
the orderly and right managing of the exercises of Gods worship, how scandalls
and misorders are to be shunned, how the Church may be most edified, and the
spiritual good of the Saints best helped and advanced, by whollesome and
profitable laws, concerning things which pertain to Religion; then must
Princes take also upon them a great part of that charge of Pastors, to watch
for the souls of men, and must liberat them from being lieable to a reckoning
for the same.

6. (...) the great, Theodosi^ both the one and the other, Martian^, Charles
the great, and other Christian Princes, when there was any change to be made of
Ecclesiastical rites, did not by their own auctority imperiously injoyne the
change, but convocate Synods for deliberating upon the matter, as (...) cas.
consc. lib. 6. c. 11. cas. 2.
Balduine notes. The great Counsel of Nice was assembled by Constantine, not
only because of the Arrian heresy, but also (as lib. 1. cap. 8.
Socrates witnesses) because of the difference about the keeping of Easter.
And though the Bishops, when they were assembled did put up to him libells of
accusation, one against another, so that there could be no great hope of their
agreement upon fit and convenient Laws; yet notwithstanding, he did not
interpone his own definition and decree, for taking up that difference about
Easter, only he exhorted the Bishops conveened in the Council to peace, and so
commended the whole matter to be judged by them.

7. We have for us the judgment of worthy Divines. A notable Testimony of
Iunius we have already cited. pol. Christ. lib. 6. cap. 3.
Dan^ will not allow Princes by themselves to make Laws about Ecclesiastical
rites, but this he will have done by a Synod. Porro quod ad ritus, etc.
Furthermore says he for Rites and Ceremonies, and that external order which
is necessary in the administration of the Church, let a Synod of the Church
conveene; the supreme and Godly Magistrate both giving commandment for the
conveening of it, and being present in it. And let that Synod of the Church
lawfully assembled, define what should be the order and external regiment of
the Church. This decree of the Ecclesiastical Synod, shall the godly and
supreme Magistrate afterward confirm, stablish, and ratify by his edict. In.
2. Reg. 12. 5.
Ioh. Wolphius observes of King Ioash, that he did not by himself take order
for the reparation of the Temple, nor define what was to be done unto every
breach therein, but committed this matter to be directed and cared for by the
Priests, whom it chiefly concerned, commanding them to take course for the
reparation of the breaches of the house, wheresoever any breach should be
found, and allowing them money for the work. Whereupon he further notes, that
as the superior part of man's soul, does not it self, hear, see, touch, walk,
speak, but commands the ears, eyes, hands, feet, and tongue, to do the
same, so the Magistrate should not himself either teach, or make laws, but
command that these things be done by the Doctors and Teachers. Cartwright and
Pareus upon Hebr. 13. 17. tell the Papists, that we aknowledge, Princes are
holden to be obedient unto Pastors, in things that belong unto God, if they
rule according to the Word. Which could not be so, if the making of Laws about
things pertaining to God and his worship, did not of right and due belong unto
Pastors, but unto Princes themselves. Our secound Book of Discipline Chap. 12.
ordains. The Ecclesiastical Assemblies have their place: with power to the
Kirk to appoint times and places convenient* for the same, and all men as
well Magistrates, as inferiors, to be subject to the judgment of the same in
Ecclesiastical causes. ubi supra.
Balduine holds, that a Prince may not by himself injoyne any new
Ecclesiastical rite, but must convocat a Synod, for the deliberation and
definition of such things. And what mean Perk. on Revel. 3. 7.
our Writers, when they say, that Kings have no spiritual, but only a civil
power in the Church? As actions are discerned by the objects, so are powers by
the actions: If therefore Kings do commendably by themselves make laws, about
things pertaining to Gods worship, which is an spiritual action, then have
they also a spiritual power in the Church. But if they have no spiritual
power, that is, no power of spiritual jurisdiction, how can they actually
exerce spiritual jurisdiction? That the making of Laws about things
pertaining to Gods worship, is an action of spiritual jurisdiction, it needs
not great demonstration. For, 1. When a Synod of the Church makes Laws, about
such things, all men know that this is an action of spiritual jur^ction,
flowing from that power of spiritual jurisdiction w^ is called potestas (...).
And how then can the Princes making of such laws, be called an action of
civil, not of spiritual jurisdiction? I see not what can be answered, except
it be said, that the making of those laws by a Synod is an action of
spiritual jurisdiction, because they are made and published with the
commination of spiritual and Ecclesiastical punishments, in case of
transgression; but the making of them by the Prince, is an action of civil
jurisdiction only, because he prescribes and commands, under the pain of
some temporal loss or punishment. But I have already confuted this answer;
because notwithstanding of the different punishments which the one and the
other has power to threaten and inflict, yet at least that part of spiritual
jurisdiction which we call potestas (...) remains the same in both, which
power of making Laws must not (as I show) be confounded with that other power
of judging and punishing offenders. 2. Actions take their species or kind from
the object and the end, when other circumstances hinder not. Now a Prince his
making of Laws about things pertaining to Religion, is such an action of
Jurisdiction, as has both a spiritual end, which is the edification of the
Church and spiritual good of Christians, and likewise a spiritual object, for
that all things pertaining to divine worship, even the very external
circumstances of the same, are rightly called things spiritual and divine, not
civil or human, our Opposites can not deny, except they say, not only that
such things touch the lives, bodies, estates, or names of men, and are not
ordained for the spiritual benefit of their souls, but also that the Synod of
the Church, whose power reaches only to things spiritual, not civil or
human, can never make Laws about those circumstances which are applied unto
and used in the worship of God. And as the Prince his making of Laws about
things of this nature, is in respect of the object and end, an action of
spiritual jurisdiction, so there is no circumstance at all, which varieth the
kind, or makes it an action of civil jurisdiction only. If it be said that
the circumstance of the person changes the kind of the action, so that the
making of Laws about things pertaining to Religion, if they be made by
Ecclesiastical persons, is an action of spiritual jurisdiction, but if by the
civil Magistrate, an action of civil jurisdiction: this were a most extremely
unadvised distinction: for so might 2. Chro^. 26. 18.
Vzziah the King have answered for himself, that in burning incense he did not
take upon him to execute the Priests office, because he was only a civil
person: so may the Pope say, that he takes not upon him the power of Emperors
and Monarchs, because he is an Eccle^sticall person. Many things men may do de
facto, which they can not de jure. Civil persons may exerce a spiritual
jurisdiction and office, and again Ecclesiastical persons may exerce a civil
jurisdiction, de facto, thought not de jure. Wherefore the Prince his making of
Laws about things spiritual, remains still an action of spiritual
jurisdiction, except some other thing can be alleged to the contrary, beside
the circumstance of the Person. But some man peradventure will object, that a
Prince by his civil power may injoyne and command, not only the observation of
those Ecclesiastical rites which a Synod of the Church prescribes, but also
that a Synod (when need is) presribe new orders and rites, all which are things
spiritual and divine: And why then may he not by the same civil power make
laws about the Rites and circumstances of Gods worship, notwithstanding that
they are (in their use and application to the actions of worship) things
spiritual, not civil.

Ans. Aquin. 3^. q. 85. art. 2.
The Schoolmen say, that an action proceeds from charity two ways, either
elicitive, or imperative: and that those actions which are immediately produced
and wrought out by charity, belong not to other virtues distinct from charity,
but are comprehended under the effects of charity it self, such as are the
loving of good, and rejoicing ^o it: other actions say they, which are only
commanded by charity, belong to other special virtues distinct from charity;
So say I, an action may proceed from a civil power either elicitive, or
imperative. Elicitive a civil power can only make Laws about things civil or
human: but imperative, it may command the Ecclesiastical power to make Laws
about things spiritual, which Laws thereafter it may command to be observed
by all who are in

8. Our Opposites themselves aknowledge no less, then that which I have been
pleading for. To devise new rites and Ceremonies says apud Parker ^f th^osse;
c. 5. sect. 6.
D. Bilson, is not the Princes vocation, but to receive and allow such as the
Scriptures and Canons commend, and such as the Bishops and Pastors of the place
shall advise. And says not de Iudice controv. cap. 16. page 92.
the Bishop of Sarisburie, Ceremonias utiles and decoras excogitare, ad
Ecclesiasticos pertinet, tamen easdem comprobare, and toti populo observandas
imponere, ad Reges spectat. praelect. tom. 1. page 25.
Camero says, that it is the part of a Prince to take care for the health of
men's souls, even as he does for the health of their bodies, and that as he
provideth not for the curing or preventing of bodily deseases directly and by
himself, but indirectly and by the Physicians, so he should not by himself
prescribe cures and remedies for men's spiritual maladies. Perinde Principis
est curare salutem animarum, ac ejusdem est saluti corporum prospicere: non est
autem Principis providere ne morbi grassentur direct, esset enim Medicus, at
in direct tamen Princeps id sludere debet. Whence it follows, that even as
when some bodily sickness spreads, a Princes part is not to prescribe a
cure, but to command the Physicians to do it: just so, when any abuse,
misorder, confusion, or scandal in the Church, requires or makes it
neecssary that a mutation be made of some rite or order in the same, and that
wholesome Laws be enacted, which may serve for the order, decency, and
edification of the Church, a Prince may not do this by himself, but may only
command the Pastors and Guides of the Church, who watch for the souls of men,
as they who must give account, to see to the exigency of the present state of
matters Ecclesiastical, and to provide such Laws as they being met together
in the name of the Lord, shall after due and free deliberation, find to be
convenient, and which being once prescribed by them, he shall by his royal
auctority confirm, establish, and press.

Needs now it must be manifest, that the lawfullnesse of our conforming unto
the Ceremonies in question, can be no way warranted

Now of the Churches power we have spoken in the former Chapter. And if we had
not, yet that which has been said in this Chapter, makes out our point. For
it has been proven, that neither King nor Church has power to command any
thing, which is not according to the rules of the Word, that is, which serves
not for the glory of God, which is not profitable for edifying, and which may
not be done in faith, unto which rules whether the things which are commanded
us, be agreeable or not, we must try and examine by the private judgment of
Christian discretion, following the light of Gods Word.

Rests the third distinction, whereof I promised to speak, and that Quaedam
obligatio, etc. Some bond (says locor. theol. tom. 6. p. 963.
Gerard) is absolute, when the Law binds the conscience simply, so that in
no respect, nor in no case, without the offense of God, and vvound of
conscience, one may depart from the prescript thereof: but another bond is
hypotheticall, when it binds not simply, but under a condition, to wit, if
the transgression of the Law be done of contempt; if for the cause of lucre or
some other vicious end; if it have scandal joined with it. The former way he
says that the Law of God and Nature binds, and that the Law of the civil
Magistrate binds the latter way. And with him we hold, that whatsoever a
Prince commands his Subjects in things any way pertaining to Religion, it
binds only this latter way; and that he has never power to make Laws,
binding the former way. For confirmation wherefore we say,

1. The Laws of an Ecclesiastical Synod, to the obedience whereof in things
belonging to the worship of God, we are far more strictly tied, then to the
obedience of any Prince in the world, who (as has been showed) in this sort
of things, has not such a vocation nor power to make Laws: the Laws (I say)
of a Synod can not bind absolutely, but only conditionally, or in case they can
not be transgressed without violating the Law of Charity, by contempt showed,
or scandal given. Which as I have made good in the first part of this Dispute;
so let me now produce for it a plain testimony of de Iudice controv. c. 16.
page 86. 87.
the Bishop of Sarisburie, who holds that the Churches rites and ordinances,
do only bind in such sort, ut si extra, etc. That if out of the case of
scandal or contempt, through imprudence, oblivion, or some reasonable cause
enforcing, they be omitted, no mortal sin is incurred before God. For as
touching these constitutions, I judge the opinion of Gerson to be most true, to
wit, that they remain unviolated, so long as the Law of Charity is not by
men violated about the same. Much less then, can the Laws of Princes about
things Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, bind absolutely, and out of the case of
violating the Law of Charity.

2. If we be not bound to receive and aknowledge the Laws of Princes as good
and equitable, except only in so far, as they are warranted by the Law of God
and Nature, then we are not bound in conscience to obey them, except only
conditionally, in case the violating of them include the violating of the Law
of God and Nature. But the former is true. Therefore the latter. It is Gods
pecuculiar soveraignety, that his will is a rule ruling but not ruled, and that
therefore a thing is good, because God will have it to be good. Man's will is
only such a rule, as is ruled by higher rules, and it must be known to be
norma recta, before it can be to us norma recti.

3. If we be bound te try and examine by the judgment of discretion
(following the rules of the Word,) whether the things which Princes command be
right, and such as ought to be done, and if we find them not to be such, to
neglect them; then their Laws can not bind absolutely and by themselves, (else
what need were there of such trial and examination?) but only conditionally,
and in case they can not be neglected without violating some other Law, which
is of a superior bond. But the former we have proven by strong reasons.
Therefore the latter stands sure.

4. If neither Princes may command, nor we do any thing, which is not lawful
and expedient, and according to the other rules of the Word, then the Laws of
Princes bind not absolutely, but only in case the neglecting of them can not
stand with the Law of Charity, and the rules of the Word. But the former has
been evinced and made good. Therefore the latter necessarily follows.

5. If the Laws of Princes could bind absolutely and simply, so that in no
case without offending God and wounding our conscience, we could neglect them,
this bond should arise either from their own auctority, or from the matter and
thing it self which is commanded. But from neither of these it can arise.
Therefore from nothing. It can not arise from any auctority which they have,
for if by their auctority we mean their Princely preeminence and dignity, they
are Princes, when they command things unlawful, as well, as when they command
things lawful, and so if because of their preeminence their Laws do bind,
then their unlawful ordinances do bind, no less then if they were lawful:
but if by their auctority, we mean the power which they have of God to make
Laws, this power is not absolute, (as has been said,) but limited: therefore
from it no absolute bond can arise, but this much at the most, that Perkins on
Rev. 1. 5.
Kings on earth must be obeyed, so far as they command in Christ. Neither yet
can the bond be absolute in respect of the thing it self which is commanded.

When Princes publish the commandments of God, the things them selves bind,
whether they should command them or not: but we speak of such things as Gods
Word has left in their nature indifferent, and of such things we say, that if
being enjoined by Princes they did absolutely bind, then they should be in
themselves immutably necessary, even secluding, as well the Laws of Princes
which injoyne them, as the end of order, decency, and edification, where unto
they are referred. To say no more, has not Iren. lib. 2. cap. 4.. 3.
D Forbesse told us in Calvines words, Notatu dignum, etc. It is worthy of
observation that human Laws, whether they be made by the Magistrate or by the
Church, howsoever they be necessary to be observed, (I speak of such as are
good and just,) yet they do not therefore by themselves bind the conscience,
because the whole necessity of observing them, looks to the general end,
but consists not in the things commanded.

6. Whatsoever bond of conscience, is not confirmed and warranted by the Word,
is before God no bond at all. But the absolute bond, wherewith conscience is
bound to the obedience of the Laws of Princes, is not confirmed nor warranted
by the Word. Ergo. The Proposition no man can deny who aknowledgeth, that none
can have power or dominion over our consciences, but God only, Ia. 4. 12.
the great Lawgiver, who alone can save and destroy. Neither does any Writer
whom I have seen, hold that Princes have any power over men's consciences, but
only that conscience is bound by the Laws of Princes, for this respect,
because God who has power over our consciences, has tied us to their Laws.
As to the assumption, he who denies it, must give instance to the contrary. If
Romans 23. 5.
those words of the Apostle be objected; Ye must needs be subject, not only
for wrath, but also for conscience sake.

1 Ans. 1. The Apostle says not, that we must obey, but that we must be
subject, for conscience sake. And how often shall we need to tell our Opposites,
that subjection is one thing, and obedience another?

2. If he had said, that we must obey for conscience sake, yet this could not
have been expounded of an absolute bond of conscience, but only of an
hypotheticall bond, in case that which the Magistrate commands, can not be
omitted, without breaking the Law of Charity. If it be said again that we are
not only bidden be subject, Tit. 3. 1^.
but likewise to obey Magistrates. Ans. And who denies this? But still I ask,
are we absolutely and always bound to obey Magistrates? Nay, but only when
they command such things as are according to the rules of the Word, so that
either they must be obeyed, or the Law of Charity shall be broken: in this
case, and no other, we are bidden obey.

Thus have we gained a principal point, Viz, That the laws of propter se, but
propter aliud. Whereupon it follows, that except the breach of those
ceremonial Ordinances wherewith we are pressed, include the breach of the law
of Charity, which is of a superior bond, we are not holden to obey them. Now
that it is not the breach, but the obedience of those ordinances, which
violateth the law of Charity, we have heretofore made manifest, and in this
place we will add only one general. Whenever the laws of Princes about
things Ecclesiastical, do bind the conscience conditionally, and because of
some other law of a superior bond, which can not be observed if they be
transgressed; (which is the only respect for which they bind, when they bind at
all;) then the things which they perscribe belong either to the conservation,
or purgation of Religion. But the controverted Ceremonies belong to neither of
these. Therefore the laws made thereanent bind not, because of some other law
which is of a superior bond. As to the Proposition, will any man say that
Princes have any more power, then that which is expressed in the 25 Article of
the Confession of Faith, ratified in the first Parliament of King James the 6.
which says thus, Moreover, to Kings, Princes, Rulers, and Magistrates, we a^me
that chiefly and most principally, the conservation and the purgation of the
Religion appertains, so that not only they are appointod for civil policy,
but also for maintenance of the true Religion, and for suppressing of Idolatry
and superstition whatsoever. Hoe nomine (says Inst. lib. 4. cap. 20.. 9.
Calvine) maxim laudantur sancti Reges in Scriptura, quod Dei cultum corruptum
vel eversum restituerint, vel curam gesserint Religionis, ut sub illis pura and
incolumis floreree. The 21, Parliament of King James holden at Edinburgh 1612.
in the ratification of the Acts and Conclusions of the general Assembly,
kept in Clasgove 1610. did innovate and change some words of that Oath of
Allegiance, which the general Assembly in reference to the conference kept
1571. ordained to be given to the Person provided to any benefice with cure, in
the time of his admission by the Ordinare. For the form of the Oath set down
by the act of the Assembly, begins thus. I. A. B. now nominat and admitted
to the Kirk of D, utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the right
excellent, right high, and mighty Prince, James 6, by the grace of God King of
Scots, is the only lawful supreme Governor of this Realm, as well in things
temporal, as in the conservation and purgation of Religion, etc. But the form
of the Oath set down by the Act of Parliament, begins thus. I. A. B. now
nominat and admitted to the Kirk of D, testify and declare in my conscience,
that the right excellent etc. is the only lawful supreme Governor of this
Realm, as well in matters Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as in things
temporal etc. Yet I demand, whether or not do those Matters Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, of which the Act of Parliament speaks, or those All
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, of which the English Oath of
Supremacy speaks, comprehend any other thing then is comprehended under the
conservation and purgation of Religion, where of the Act of Assembly speaks?
If it be answered affirmatively, ti will follow that Princes have power to
destruction, and not to edification only, for whatsoever may edify or profit
the Church, pertains either to the conservation, or the purgation of
Religion. If negatively, then it can not be denied that the conservation and
purgation of Religion do comprehend all the power which Princes have in things
Ecclesiastical.

Now to the Assumption. And first, that the controverted Ceremonies the hurt
and prejudice of the same, experience has (alas) made it too manifest. For, o
what a doleful decay of Religion have they drawn with them in this Land! Let
them who have seen Scotland in her first glory, tell how it was then, and how
it is now. Cart^. on Act. 8. sect. 7.
Idle and idole-like Bishopping has shut to the door painful and profitable
Catechizing. The keeping of some Festival days, is set up in stead of the
thankful commemoration of Gods inestimable benefits: howbeit G. B^chan.
hist. (...). Scot. lib. 5. p. 152.
the festivity of Christmasse has hitherto served, more to Bachanalian
lasciviousness, then to the remembrance of the birth of Christ. The kneeling
down upon the knees of the body, has now come in place of that humiliation of
the soul, wherewith worthy communicants addressed temselves unto the holy Table
of the Lord. And generally, the external show of these fruitless observances,
has worn out the very life and power of Religion. Neither have such effects
ensued upon such Ceremonies among us only, but let it be observed every where
else, if there be not least substance and power of godliness, among them who
have most Ceremonies, where unto men have at their pleasure given some sacred
use and signification in the Worship of God, and most substance among them, who
have fewest shows of external rites. No man of sound judgment (says
Confess. cap. 5. art. 20.
Baza) will deny, Iesum Christum quo nudior, etc. that JESUS CHRIST, the more
naked he be, is made the more manifest to us: whereas contrariwise all false
religions use by certain external gesturings to turn away men from divine
things. epist. ad Regin Elisab. epistolar lib. 1. p. 112.
Zanchius says well of the Surplice and other popish Ceremonies, quod haec
nihil ad pietatem accendendam, multum autem ad restinguendam valiant. de
effect. sacr. cap. 31.
Bellarmine indeed pleads for the vtility of Ceremonies, as things belonging
to the conservation of Religion. His reason is, because they set before our
senses such an external majesty and splendour, whereby they cause the more
reverence. This he alleges for the utility of the Ceremonies of the Church
of Rome. And I would know, what better reason can be alleged for the utility
of ours. But if this be all, we throw back the Argument, because the
external majesty and splendour of Ceremonies does greatly prejudge and obscure
the spirit and life of the worship of God, and diverteth the minds of men from
adverting unto the same: which we have offered to be tried by common
experience. Durand himself, for as much as he has written in the defense of
Ceremonies, in his unreasonable Rationale, yet Rat. lib. 1. tit de pietur and
cortin.
he makes this plain confession. Sane in primitiva Ecclesia, Sacrificium
fiebat in vasis ligneis and vestib^ communibus: tune enim evant lignei calices
and aurei Sacerdotes: nunc vero econtra est. Behold what follows upon the
majesty and splendour which Ceremonies carry with them, and how Religion at it is
best and first estate was without the same!

Neither yet do the Ceremonies in question belong to the purgation corrupted
Church, all men know that purgation stands in putting some thing away, not in
keeping it still, in voiding some what, not in retaining it: so that a Church
is not purged, but left unpurged, when the unnecessary monuments of by past
superstition are still preserved and kept in the same. And as for the Church of
Scotland, least of all could there be any purgation of it intended, by the
resuming of those Ceremonies, for such was the most glorious and ever memorable
reformation of Scotland, that it was far better purged then any other
nighbour Church. And of Mr. Hookers jest we may make good earnest, for in very
deed as the reformation of Genevah did pass the reformation of Germany, so the
reformation of Scotland did pass that of Genevah.

Now hitherto we have discoursed of the power of Princes, in making

DIGRESSION I.
Of the vocation of men of Ecclesiastical order.
IN the vocation and calling of Ecclesiastical persons, a Prince ought to
carry himself ad modum procurantis speciem, non designantis individuum. Which
shall be more plainly and particularly understood, in these Propositions which
follow.

PROPOS. I. Princes may and ought to provide and take care, that men of those
Ecclesiastical orders, and those only, which are instituted in the new
Testament, by divine auctority, have vocation and office in the Church.

Now beside the Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, which were not ordained to
be ordinary and perpetual offices in the Church, Fr. I^. animad. in Bell.
cont. 5. l. 1. c. 11.
there are but two Ecclesiastical orders or degrees instituted by Christ in
the new Testament, vix. Elders and Deacons. Excellenter Canones d^os tantum
sacros ordines appellari censent, Diaconatus scilicet and Presbyterat^, quia
hos solos primitiva Ecclesia legitur habuisse, and de hi^ sol^ praeceptum
Apostli habe^, says lib. 4. did. (...).
the Master of Sentences. As for the order and degree of Bishops, superior to
that of Elders, that there is no divine Ordinance nor institution for it, it is
not only holden by Calvine, Beza, Bucer, Martyr, Sadeel, Luther, Chemnitius,
Gerard Balduine, the Magdeburgians, Musculus, Piscator, Hemmingius, Zanchius,
Polanus, Iunius, Pareus, Fennerus, Danaeus, Morney, Whittakers, Willets,
Perkins, Cartwright, the Professors of Leiden, and the far greatest part of
Writters in reformed Churches, but also by Hierome, who upon Tit. 1. and in his
Epistle to Fvagrius speaks so plainly, that de rep. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 3. n. 47.
the Archbishop of Spalato is driven to say, Deserimus in hac part Hieronymum,
neque ei in his dictis assentimur: also by Ambrose on 1. Tim. 3. Augustine in
his book of questions out of both Testaments quest. 101. Chrysostom on 1.
Tim. 3. Isidore did. 21. cap. 1. The Canon Law did. 93. c. 24. and did. 95.
c. 5. Lombard. lib. 4 did. 24. And after him by many Schoolmen, such as
Aquinas, Alensis, Albertus, Bonaventura, Richardus, and Dominicus Soto, all
mentioned by the Archbishop of Spalato lib. 2. cap. 4. n. 25. loc. th^l. tom.
6. page 374. 375. 376.
Gerard cites for the same judgment Anshelmus, Sedulius, Primasius,
Theophylactus, Oecumenius, the Council of Basil, Ardatensis, Ioh. Parisiensis,
Erasmus, Medina, and Cassander. All which Authors have grounded that which they
say upon Scripture: for beside that Scripture makes no difference of order and
degree betwixt Bishops and Elders, it shows also that they are one and the
same order. For in Ephesus and Crete, they who were made Elders were likewise
made Bishops, Act. 20. 17. with 28. Tit. 1. 5. with 7. And the Apostle Phil. 1.
1. divides the wholle ministry in the Church of Philippi into two orders,
Bishops and Deacons. Moreover, 1. Tim. 3. he gives order only for Bishops and
Deacons, but says nothing of a third order. Wherefore it is manifest, that
beside those two orders of Elders and Deacons, there is no other
Ecclesiastical order which has any divine institution, or necessary use in
the Church. And Princes should do well to apply their power and auctority to
the extirpation and rooting out of Popes, Cardinals, Patriarchs, Primats,
Archbishops, Bishops, Suffragans, Abbots, Deanes, Vice-Deans, Priors,
Archdeacons, Subdeacons, Chancellours, Chantours, Subchantours, Exorcists,
Monks, Eremits, Acoluths, and all the whole rabble of Popish orders, which
undo the Church, and work more mischief in the earth, then can be either
soon seen or shortly told.

But contrary wise, Princes ought to establish and mantaine in the Church,
Elders and Deacons, according to the Apostolical institution. Now Elders are
either such as labor in the Word and Doctrine, or else such as are appointed
for Discipline only. They who labor in the Word and Doctrine, are either such
as do only teach, and are ordained for conserving in Schools and Seminaries
of learning, the purity of Christian Doctrine, and the true interpretation of
Scripture, and for detecting and confuting the contrary heresies and errors,
whom the Apostle calls Doctors or Teachers: Or else they are such as do not
only teach, but also have a more particulr charge to watch over the flock, to
seek that which is lost (...) to bring home that which wandereth, to heal that
which is diseased, to bind up that which is broken, to visit every family, to
warn every person, to rebuke, to comfort, etc, whom the Apostle calls
sometines Pastors, and sometimes Bishops, or Overseers. The other sort of
Elders are ordained only for Discipline and Church government, and for
assisting of the Pastors, in ruling the people, overseeing their manners, and
censuring their faults. That this sort of Elders is instituted by the Apostle,
it is put out of doubt, not alone by Calvine, Beza, and the Divines of Genevah,
but also by Chemnitius, exam. part. 2. page 218. Gerard loc. theol. tom. 6.
page 363. 364. Zanchius in 4. praec. col. 727. Martyr in 1. Cor. 12. 28.
Bullinger in 1. Tim. 5. 17. Iunius animad. in Bell. contr. 5. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Polanus Synt. lib. 7. cap. 11. Pareus in Romans 12. 8. and 1. Cor. 12. 28.
Cartwright on 1. Tim. 5. 17. The Professors of Leiden Syn. pur. Theol. disp.
42. These. 20. And many more of our Divines, who teach that the Apostle 1. Tim.
5. 17. directly implies that there were some Elders who ruled well, and yet
labored not in the Word and Doctrine, and those Elders he means by them that
rule, Romans 12. 8. and by Governements 1. Cor. 12. 28. where the Apostle says
not helps in Governements, as our new English Translation corruptly reads,
but helps, governements, etc. plainly putting Governements for a different
order from Helps or Deacons. Tertullian also makes mention of them, Apologet
c. 39. and Clemens epist. 1. ad Jacob.
Of these Elders speaks In 1. Tim. 5. 1.
Ambrose, (as on 1. Tim. 5. 17.
D. Fulke also understands him) showing that with all nations Eldership is
honorable, wherefore the Synagoge also, and afterward the Church, has had
some Elders of the Congregation, without whose counsel and advice nothing was
done in the Church: and that he knew not by what negligence this had grown out
of use, except it had been through the sluggishnesse of the Teachers, or
rather their pride, whiles they seemed to themselves to be somet^ing, and so
did arrogat the doing of all by themselves.

Deacons were instituted by the Ap^stles Zanch. in 4. prac. col. 766. 767.
for collecting, receiving, keeping, and distributing of Ecclesiastical goods,
which were given and dedicated for the maintenance of Ministers, Churches,
Schools, and for the help and relief of the poor, the stranger, the sick and
the weak, also Iun. anim in Bell. cont. 5. l. 1. c. 13.
for furnishing of such things as are necessary to the ministration of the
Sacraments. Beside which ^mployments, the Scripture has assigned neither
Preaching, nor Baptising, nor any other Ecclesiast^ll function to ordinary
Deacons.

PROPOS. II. Princes in their Dominions, ought to procure and effect, that
there be never wanting men qualified and fit for those Ecclesiastical
functions and charges, which Christ has ordained, and that such men only be
called, chosen, and set apart for the same.

There are two things contained in this Proposition. 1. That Princes ought to
procure, that the Church never want men qualilified and gifted for the work
and service of the holy Ministry, for which end and purpose they ought to
provide and mantaine Schools and Colleges, entrusted and committed to the
rule and oversight of orthodoxe, learned, godly, faithful, and diligent
Masters, that so qualified and able men may be still furnished and sent forth
for the Ministry and service of the Church. They ought also to take care that
the Ministers of the Church neither want due reverence 1. Tim. 5. 17. Hebr. 13.
17. Nor sufficient maintenance 1. Cor. 9. that so men be not skarred from the
service of the Ministry, but rather encouraged unto the same 2. Chron. 31. 4.

2. That Princes ought also to take order and course, that well qualified men,
and no others, be advanced and called to bear charge and office in the Church:
for which purpose, they should cause, not one disdainful p^lat, but a whole
Presbytery or company of Elders, to take trial of him who is to be taken into
the number of preaching Elders, and to examine well the piety of his life, the
verity of his Doctrine, and his fitness to teach. And further, that due trial
may be continually had of the growth or decay of the graces and utterance of
every Pastor: it is the part of Princes to injoyne the visitation of particular
Churches, and the keeping of other Presbyteriall meetings, likewise the
assembling of Provincial and National Synods, for putting order to such
things as have not been helped in the particular Presbyteries. And as for the
other sort of Elders, together with Deacons, we judge the ancient order of
this Church, to have been most convenient for provyding of well qualified men
for those functions and offices. For the eight head of the first book of
Discipline, touching the election of Elders and Deacons, ordains that men of
best knowledge and cleanest life, be nominat to be in Election, and that their
names be publicly read to the whole Church by the Minister, giving them
advertisement, that from among them must be chosen Elders and Deacons: that if
any of these nominat be noted with public infamy, he ought to be repelled:
And that if any man know others of better qualities within the Church, then
these that be nominat, they should be put in election, that the Church may have
the choice.

If these courses whereof we have spoken, be followed by Christian Princes,
they shall by the blessing of God procure, that the Church shall be served with
able and fit Ministers. But though thus they may procurare speciem, yet they
may not designare individuum, which now I am to demonstrat.

PROPOS. III. Nevertheless Iun. ubi sup. cap. 7. nota. 17. Bald. de cascons.
lib. 4. cap. 5. caf. 5. Ger. loc. theol. tom. 6. page 835. 132.
Princes may not design nor appoint such or such particular men, to the
charge, of such or such particular Churches, or to the exercing of such or such
Ecclesiastical functions: but ought to provide that such an order and form be
kept in the election and ordination of the Ministers of the Church, as is
warranted by the example of the Apostles, and primitive Church.

The vocation of a Minister in the Church, is either inward or outward. The
inward calling which one must have, in finding himself by the grace of God,
made both able and willing to serve God and his Church faithfully, in the holy
Ministry, lies not open to the vieu of men, and is only manifest to him from
whom nothing can be hid. The outward calling is made up of Election and
Ordination: that, signified in Scripture by (...): this, by (...) Concerning
which things, we say wi^ In. 4. prac. col. 794.
Zanchius, Magistratus, etc. It pertains to a Christian Magistrate and Prince,
to see for Ministers unto his Churches. But how? not out of his own
arbitrament, but as Gods Word teaches. Therefore let the Acts of the Apostles,
and the Epistles of Paul be read, how Ministers were elected and ordained, and
let them follow that form.

The right of Election pertains to the whole Church: which as it is mantained
by foreign Divines, who write of the controversies with Papists; and as it was
the order which this Church prescribed in the books of Discipline; so it is
commended unto us by the example of the Apostles, and of the Churches planted
by them. Joseph and Matthias were chosen and offered to Christ by the whole
Church, being about. 120. persons. Act. 1. 15. 23. The Apostles required the
whole Church and multitude of Disciples, to choose out from among them seven
men to be Deacons Act. 6. 2. 3. The holy Ghost said to the whole Church at
Antioch, being assembled together to minister unto the Lord, Separate me
Barnabas and Saul, Act. 13. 1. 2. The whole Church choosed Judas and Silas to
be sent to Antioch. Act. 15. 22. The brethren who travailed in the Churches
affairs, were chosen by the Church, and are called the Churches Messengers. 2.
Cor. 8. 19. 23. Such men only were ordained Elders by Paul and Barnabas, as
were chosen and approven by the whole Church, their suffrages being signified
by the lifting up of their hands. Act. 14. 23. Albeit Chrysostom and other
Ecclesiastical Writers use the word (...) for ordination by imposition of
hands, yet when they take it in this sense, they speak figuratively and
synegdochically, as anim. in Bell. cont. 5. lib. 1. c. 7. ^ta. 59.
Iunius shows. For these two, Election by most voices, and Ordination by
laying on of hands, were joined together, and did cohere, as an antecedent and
an consequent, whence the use obtained, that the whole action should be
signified by one word, per modum intellectus, collecting the antecedent from
the consequent, and the consequent from the antecedent. Nevertheless according
to the proper and native signification of the word, it notes the signifying of
a suffrage or election by the lifting up of the hand, for (...) is no other
thing, nor (...) or (...), to lift or hold up the hands in sign of a suffrage.
And so Chrysostom himself uses the word, when he speaks properly, for he
says, that the Senate of Rome, took upon him (...), that is (as Charity
mistaken. sect. 5. page 145.
D. Potter turns his words) to make Gods by most voices.

de cleric. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Bellarmine reckons out three significatio^s of the word (...). 1. To choose
by suffrages. 2. Simply to choose, which way soever it be. 3. To ordain by
imposition of hands. ubi supra nota. 55.
Iunius answers him, that the first only is the proper signification: the
second is metaphorical: the third synegdochicall.

Our English Translators, 2. Cor. 1. 19. have followed the metaphorical
signification, and in this place Act. 14. 23. the synegdochicall. But what had
they ado either with a Metaphore or a Synegdoche, when the Text may bear the
proper sense? Now, that Luke in this place uses the word in the proper sense,
and not in the synegdochicall, loc. theol. tom. 6. page 151.
Gerard proves from the words which he subjoyneth, to signify the ordaining of
those Elders by the laying on of hands: for he says that they prayed and
fasted and commended them to the Lord, in which words he implies the laying on
of hands upon them, as may be learned from. Act. 6. 6. When they had prayed
they laid their hands on them. Act. 13. 3. When they had fasted and prayed and
laid their hands on them. So Act. 8. 15. 17. Prayer and laying on of hands went
together. Wherefore by (...) Luke points at the election of those Elders by
voices, being in the following words to make mention of their ordination by
imposition of hands.

(...) Act. 14. 23.
Cartwright has for the same point, other weighty reasons. It is absurd (says
he) to imagine, that the holy Ghost by Luke, speaking with the tongues of men,
that is to say, to their understanding, should use a word in that signification
in which it was never used before his time by any Writer, Holy or Profane. For
how could he then be understood: if using the note and name they used, he
should have fled from the signification whereunto they used it? unless
therefore his purpose was to write that which none should read, it must needs
be that as he wrote, so he meant the election by voices. And if Demosthenes for
knowledge in the tongue would have been ashamed, to have noted the laying
down of hands by a word that signifies the lifting of them up: they do the
holy Ghost (which taught Demosthenes to speak) great injury, in imsing this
unpropriety and strangeness of speech unto himself: which is yet more absurd,
considering that there were both proper words to utter the laying on of hands
by, and the same also used in the translation of the 70: which Luke for the
Gentiles sake did as it may seem (where he conveniently could) most follow.
And it is yet most of all absurd, that Luke which straiteneth himself to keep
the words of the 70. Interpreters, when as he could have otherwise uttered
things in better terms then they did, should here forsake the phrase
vvherevvith they noted the laying on of hands, being most proper and natural
to signify the same. The Greek Scholiast also, and the Greek Ignatius, do
plainly refer this word to the choice of the Church by voices.

But it is objected that Luke says not of the whole Church, but only of Paul
and Barnabas, that they made them by voices Elders in every city.

Ans. But how can one imagine that betwixt them two alone the matter went to
suffrages? election by most voices, or the lifting up of the hand in token of a
suffrage, had place only among a multitude assembled together. Wherefore we say
with ubi supra (...). 63. 64.
Iunius, that (...) is both a common, and a particular action, whereby a man
chooses by his own suffrage in particular, and likewise with others in
commone, so that in one and the same action we can not divide those things,
which are so joined together.

From that which has been said, it plainly appears, that the election of
Ministers, according to the Apostolic institution, pertains to the whole
body of that Church, where they are to serve; And that this was the Apostolic
and primitive Practice, it is aknowledged even by some of the Papists, such as
Lorinus, Salmeron, and Gaspar (...), all upon. Act. 14. 23. Decr. part. 1.
did. 62.
The Canon Law it self commends this form, and says, Electio Clericorum est
petitio plebis. And was he not a Popish Archbishop, Thuan. hist. lib. 83. page
85.
who condescended that the City of Magdeburg should have (...) (...) ac
constituendi Ecclesiae Ministros? Neither would the City accept of peace,
without this condition.

That in the ancient Church, for a long time, the election of Ministers
remained in the power of the whole Church or Congregation, it is evident from
Cypr. lib. 1. epist. 4 and 68. August. epist. 100. L^o. 1. epist. (...).
Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 30. and lib. 6. cap. 2. Possidon. in vita Aug. cap. 4. The
Testimonies and examples themselves for brevities cause I omit. As for the 13.
Canon of the Council of Laodicea which forbids to permit to the people the
election of such as were to Minister at the Altar: we say with hist. (...).
cent. 4. lib. 3. c. 38.
Osiander that this Canon can not be approven, except only in this respect,
that howbeit the peoples election and consent be necessary, yet the election is
not wholly and solly to be committed to them, excluding the judgment and voice
of the Clergy. And that this is all which the Council meant, we judge with
In Act. 14. 23.
Calvine and ubi sapra page 178.
Gerard. That this is the true interpretation of the Canon, ubi supra nota. 16.
Iunius proves both by the words (...), permittere turbis, for (...)
signifies to quit and leave the whole matter to the fidelity and will of
others; and likewise by the common end and purpose of that Council, which was
to repress certain faults of the People, which had prevailed through custom:
Indeed, if the whoole matter were alltogither left to the people, contentions
and confusions might be feared. But whiles we plead for the election of people
we add.

1. Let the Clergy of the adjacent bounds in their Presbyteriall Assembly,
try and judge who are fit for the Ministry; thereafter let a certain number
of those who are by them approven as fit, be offered and propounded to the
vacand Church, that a free election may be made of some one of that number,
provyding always that if the Church or Congregation have any real reason for
refusing the persons nominat and offered unto them, and for choosing of others,
their lawful desires be herein yielded unto.

2. Even when it comes to the election, yet populus non solus judicat, ((...))
Iun. ubi supra nota. 24.
sed pr^unte and modera^e actionem Clero and Presbyterio, let the Elders of the
Congregation, together with some of the Clergy concurring with them, moderat
the action, and go before the body of the people.

Would to God that these things were observed by all who desire the worthy
office of a Pastor! For neither the Patrons Presentation; nor the Cleargies
Nomination, Examination, and Recommendation, nor the Bishops laying on of
hands, and giving of Institution, nor all these put together, can make up to a
man his calling to be a Pastor to such or such a particular Flock, without
their own free election. Even as in those places where Princes are elected,
the election gives them jus ad rem (as they speak) without which, the
inauguration can never give them jus in re: so a man has from his election
power to be a Pastor, so far as concerns jus ad rem, and Ordination only
applies him to the actual exercing of his pastoral office, which Ordination
ought to be given to him only who is elected, and that because he is elected.
And of him who is obtruded and thrust upon a people, without their own
election, it is well said by (t) Zanehius, that he can neither with a good
conscience exercise his Ministry, nor yet be profitable to the People, because
they will not willingly hear him, nor submit themselves unto him.

Furthermore, because Patronages and Presentations to Benefices, do often
prejudge the free and lawful election which Gods Word craveth, therefore the
second book of Discipline Chap. 12. albeit it permits and allows the
ancient Patrones of Prebendaries and such Benefices as have not curam
animarum, to reserve their Patronages, and to dispone thereupon to Scholars
and Bursers, yet it craveth rightly that presentations to Benefices that have
curam animarum, may have no place in this light of Reformation. Not that we
think, a man presented to a Benefice that has curam animarum, can not be
lawfully elected: But because of the often and ordinary abuse of this
unnecessary custom, we could wish it abolished by Princes.

It follows to speak of Ordination, wherein with In 1: Tim. 4. 14.
Calvin, ubi supra cap. 3.
Iunius, de gab^n. eccl.
Gersomus Bucerus, and other learned men, we distinguish betwixt the act of it,
and the rite of it. The act of Ordination stands in the mission or the
deputation of a man to an Ecclesiastical function, with power and auctority to
perform the same. And thus are Pastors ordained when they are sent to a people
with power to preach the Word, minister the Sacraments, and exerce
Ecclesiastical Discipline among them. For Romans 10. 15.
How shall they Preach except they be sent? unto which mission or ordination,
neither prayer nor imposition of hands, nor any other of the Churches rites, is
essential and necessary, as de rep. (...). lib. 2. cap. 3. (...). ^4. and cap.
4 (...). 13. 19. and lib. 3. cap. 5. (...). 48.
the Archbishop of Spalato shows, who places the essential act of
Ordination in missione potestativa, or a simple deputation and application of a
Minister to his Ministerial function, with power to perform it. This may be
done says he by word alone, without any other Ceremony, in such sort that the
fact should hold, and the ordination thus given should be valid enough. When a
man is elected by the suffrages of the Church, then his Ordination is Quasi
solennis missio in possessionem honoris illius, ex decreto, says ubi supra
cap. 7. nota 59.
Iunius. (...). part. 2. page 221.
Chemnitius notes, that when Christ after he had chosen his twelve Apostles,
ordained them to preach the Gospel, to cast out Devils, and to heal
diseases, we read of no Ceremony used in this Ordination, but only that Christ
gave them power to preach, to heal, and to cast out Devils, and so sent them
away to the work. And howsoever the Church has for order and decency used
some rite in Ordination, yet there is no such rite to be used with opinion of
necessity, or as appointed by Christ or his Apostles. When our Writers prove
against Papists, that Order is no Sacrament, this is one of their Arguments,
that there is no rite instituted in the new Testament, to to be used in the
giving of Orders. Yet because imposition of hands was used in Ordination, not
only by the Apostles who had power to give extraordinarly the gifts of the holy
Ghost, but likewise by the Presbytery or company of Elders, and Timothy did not
only receive the gift that was in him, 2. Tim. 1. 6.
by the laying on of Paul's hands, as the mean, but also 1. Tim. 4. 14.
with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, as the rite and sign of
his Ordination; therefore the Church in the after ages has still kept and used
the same rite in Ordination. Which rite shall with our leave be yet retained in
the Church, provyding, 1. It be not used with opinion of necessity, for that
the Church has full liberty either to use any other decent rite (not being
determined by the Word to any one) or else to use no rite at all, beside a
public declaration, that the person there presented, is called and appointed
to serve the Church in the Pastoral office, together with exhortation to the
said person, and the commending of him to the grace of God, the Church not
being tied by the Word to use any rite at all in the giving of Ordination. 2.
That it be not used as a sacred significant Ceremony to represent and signify,
either the delivering to the person ordained, auctority to Preach and to
Minister the Sacraments, or the consecration and mancipation of him to the holy
Ministry, or lastly Gods bestowing of the gifts of his Spirit upon him,
together with his powerful protection and gracious preservation in the
performing of the works of his caling; but only as a moral sign, solemnly
to design and point out the person ordained: which also was one of the ends
and uses, whereunto this rite of laying on of hands was applied by the Apostles
themselves, as ubi supra
Chemnitius shows. And so Joshua was designed and known to the people of
Israel, as the man appointed to be the successor of Moses, by that very sign,
Deuteronomy 34.
that Moses laid his hands on him.

As a sacred significant Ceremony we may not use it. 1. Because supra cap. 5.
it has been proven, that men may never at their pleasure ascribe to any rite
whatsoever, a holy signification of some mystery of Faith or duty of Piety. The
Apostles indeed by the laying on of their hands, did signify their giving of
the gift of the holy Ghost: but now as the miracle so the mystery has ceased,
and the Church not having such power to make the signification answer to the
sign, if now a sacred or mystical signification be placed in the rite, it is
but an empty and void sign, and rather minicall then mystical. 2. All such
sacred rites, as have been notoriously abused to superstition, if they have no
necessary use, ought to be abolished, as supra cap. 2.
we have also proven. Therefore if imposition of hands in Ordination, be
accounted and used as a sacred rite, and as having a sacred signification, (the
use of it not being necessary,) it becomes unlawful, by reason of the
bygone and present superstitious abuse of the same in Popery.

Now the right and power of giving Ordination to the Ministers of the Church,
belongs primarly and wholly to Christ, who communicates the same with his
Bride the Church. Both the Bridegroom for his part, and the Bride for her
part, have delivered this power of Ordination to the Presbytery jure DIVINO.
Afterward the Presbytry conferred, jure humano, this power upon them, who were
specially called Bishops. Whence the tyrannical usurpation of Bishops, has in
process of time followed, claiming the proper right and the ordinary
possession of that, which at first they had only by free concession. And thus
that great Divine animad. in Bell. cont. 5. l. 1. cap. 3.
Franciscus Iunius, deriveth the power of Ordination. All which, that it may be
plain unto us, let us observe four several passages.

1. Ger. loc. theol. tom. 6. page 135. Bald. de cas. consc. lib. 4. c. 6. cas. 4.
The wholle Church has the power of Ordination communicated to her from
Christ, to whom it wholly pertains. For, 1. It is most certain (and among our
Writers agreed upon,) that to the whole Church collectively taken, Christ has
delivered the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, with power to use the same,
promising Math. 18. 1^.
that whatsoever the Church binds on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and
whatsoever she loses on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. Therefore he has
also delivered unto the whole Church, power to call and ordain Ministers for
using the keys: otherwise the promise might be made void, because the
Ministers which she now has, may fail. 2. Christ has appointed a certain
and a ordinary way, how the Church may provide her self of Ministers, and so
may have ever in her self the means of grace and comfort sufficient to her
self, according to that of 1. Cor. 3. 21. 22.
the Apostle, All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, etc. But if she
had not the power of ordaining Ministers unto her self, when she needs, then
might she some times be deprived of such an ordinary and certain way of
provyding her self. 3. When the Ministry of the Church fails or is wanting,
Christian people have power to exerce that act of ordination, which is
necessary to the making of a Minister. on Romans 10. 15.
D. Fulke shows out of Ruffinus and Theodoret, that Aede^ and ^rumentius,
being but private men, by preaching of the Gospel, converted a great Nation of
the Indians. And that the Nation of the Iberians being converted by a captive
woman, the King and the Queen became Teachers of the Gospel to the people.
And might not then the Church in those places, both elect and ordain Ministers?

2. The Church has by Divine institution delivered the Power of ordaining
ordinary Ministers, to the Preshitery, whereof the Church consists
representative. And so says In Ro^. 10. 15:
Paraus, that the power of mission (which is Ordination) belongs to the
Presbitery- Scriptura says ubi supra.
Balduin, ordinationem tribuit toti Presbyterio, non s^rsim Episcope. With whom
say Syn. pur. Theol. disp. 42. these. 32. 37.
the Professors of Leiden in like manner. Now when the Divines of Germany, and
Belgia, speak of a Presbitery, they understand such a company as has in it
both those two sorts of Elders, which we spoke of, viz. some, who labor in the
Word and Doctrine, whom the Apostle calls Bishops: and others, who labor
only in Discipline. The Apostolic and Primitive times knew neither
Parishionall nor Diocaesan Churches. Christians lived then, in Cities only,
not in Villages, because of the persecution. And it is to be remembered, that in
Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, Colosse, Philippi, Thessalonica, and such other Cities
inhabited by Christians, there were more Pastors then one. Act. 20. 17
The Apostle called unto him the Elders (not Elder) of the Church of Ephesus.
Phil. 1. 1.
He writes to the Bishops (not Bishop) of the Church at Philippi 2 Thessalonians. 5.
12.
He bids the Thessalonians know them (not him) which labored among them.
Now that number of Pastors or Bishops which was in one City, did in common
govern all the Churches within that City, and there was not any one Pastor,
who by himself governed a certain part of the City, peculiarly assigned to
his charge: to which purpose Act. 20. 28.
the Apostle exhorts the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, to take heed to all
the flock (...). And to the same purpose it is said by Com. in Tit. 1.
Hierome, that before schisms and divisions were by the Devils instigation
made in Religion, communi Presbiterorum consilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur.

This number of Preaching Elders in one City, together with those Elders which
in the same City labored for Discipline only, Gerard loc. Theol. tom. 6. page
134 364.
made up that company which the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4. 14. calls a Presbytery,
and which gave Ordination to the Ministers of the Church. To the whole
Presbitery, made up of those two sorts of Elders, belonged the act of
Ordination, which is mission, Iun. ubi sup. not. 5. 12. Syn pur. Theol. disp.
42. these. 37.
howbeit the Rite, which was imposition of hands, belonged to those Elders
alone which labored in the Word and Doctrine. And so we are to understand
that which the Apostle there says, of the Presbiteries laying on of hands upon
Timothy. As for Sermon. on Apoc. 1. 20.
D. Downams two glosses upon that place, which he borrows from Bellarmine,
and whereby he thinks to elude our Argument, we thank Iren. lib. 2. cap. 11.
p. 161.
D. Forbesse for confuting them. Quod autem, etc. But whereas says he, some
have expounded the Presbitery in this place, to be a company of Bishops, except
by Bishops thou would understand simple Presbiters, it is a violent
interpretation, and a insolent meaning. And whereas others have understood the
degree it self of Eldership, this can not sinnd, for the degree has not
hands, but hands are men's. Wherefore the D. himself, by the Presbitery whereof
the Apostle speaks, understands, (as we do) consessus Presbiterorum.

But since we can not find in the Apostles times, any other Presbiterie or
Assembly of Elders, beside that which has been spoken of, how comes it, may
some say, that the Church of Scotland, and other reformed Churches, did appoint
two sorts of Presbiteriall Assemblies, one (which here we call Sessions)
wherein the Pastor of the Parish, together with those Elders within the same,
whom the Apostle calls Governements and Presidents, put order to the
Government of that Congregation; another (which here we call Presbiteries)
wherein the Pastors of sundry Churches lying near together, do assemble
themselves? Which difficulty yet more increases, if it be objected, that
neither of these two, does in all points answer or comforme it self, unto that
primitive form of Presbitery, whereof we spoke. Ans. The division and
multiplication of Parishes, and the appointment of particular Pastors to the
peculiar oversight of particular flocks, together with the Plantation of
Churches in Villages, as well as in Cities, has made it impossible for us to
be served, with that only one form of a Presbitery, which was constitute in
the Apostles times. But this difference of the times being (as it ought to be)
admitted, for a inevitable cause of the difference of the former, both those
two forms of Presbyteriall meetings appointed by the Church of Scotland, do
not only necessarily result from that one Apostolic form, but likewise (the
actions of them both being laid together) do accomplish all these ordinary
Ecclesiastical functions, which were by it performed.

And first, Sessions have a necessary use, because the Pastors and those Elders
who assist them in the governing of their Flocks, must as well conjunctly as
severally, as well publicly and privately, govern, admonish, rebuke, censure,
etc. As for Presbiteries, because the Parishes being divided, in most places
there is but one Pastor in a Parish, except there should be a meeting of a
number of Pastors out of diverse Parishes, neither could trial be well had of
the grows or decay of the Gifts, Graces, and utterance of every Pastor, for
which purpose the ninth head of the first Book of Discipline, appointed the
Ministers of adjacent Churches, to meet together at convenient times in Towns
and public places, for the exercise of Prophesying and interpreting of
Scripture, according to that form commended to the Church of Corinth. 1 Cor.
14. 29. 30. 31. 32. Nor yet could the Churches be governed by the common
counsel and advice of Presbiters, which being necessary by Apostolic
institution, and being the foundation and ground of our Presbiteries, it
makes them necessary too.

3. After that the golden age of the Apostles was spent and away, Presbyteries
finding themselves disturbed with emulations, contentions, and factions; for
unities sake, choosed one of their number, to preside among them, and to
confer, in name of the rest, the rite and sign of initiation (which was
imposition of hands) on them whom they ordained Ministers. This honor did the
Presbytery yield to him who was specially and peculiarly called Bishop, jure
humano: yet the act of Ordination they still reserved in their own power. And
wheresoever the act does thus remain in the power of the whole Presbytery, the
conferring of the outward sign or rite by one in name of the rest, none of us
condemns, as may be seen in Beza, Didoclavius, and Gersonus Bucerus. Neither
is there any more meant by Epist. ad Evagr.
Hierome, whiles he says. What does a Bishop, (ordination being excepted,)
which a Presbyter may not do? For, 1. He speaks not of the act of
ordination, which remained in the power of the Presbytery, but of the outward
sign or rite, Iun ubi sup. nota. 22.
which synegdochically he calls Ordination. 2. He speaks only of the custom
of that time, and not of any Divine institution: for that the imposition of
hands pertained to the Bishop alone, not by Divine institution, but only by
Ecclesiastical custom, ibid. nota. 10.
Iunius proves out of Tertullian, Hierome, and Ambrose.

4. Afterward Bishops began to appropriat to themselves, that power which
pertained unto them jur^ devoluto, as if it had been their own jure proprio.
Yet so, that some vestigies of the ancient order have still remained. For both
Augustine and Ambrose (whose words most plain to this purpose, are cited by
Iren. lib. 2. c. 11. page 165.
D. Forbesse) testify, that in their time, in Alexandria, and all Egypt, the
Presbyters gave Ordination, when a Bishop was not present. did. 23. cap. 8.
The Canon Law ordains, that in giving of Ordination, Presbyters lay on their
hands, together with the Bishops hands. And it is holden by many Papists, (of
whom ubi sup. page 175. and seq.
D. Forbesse alleges some for the same point) that any simple Presbyter,
(whom they call a Priest) may with the Popes commandment or concession, give
valid Ordination. That which makes them grant so much, is, because they dare
not deny that Presbyters have the power of ordination, jure Divino. Yea says
apud Forbes. ubi sup. p. 177.
Panormitanus. Olim Presbyteri in communi regebant Ecclesiam, and ordinabant
Sacerdotes. The Doctor himself holds. that one simple Presbyter, howsoever
having, by virtue of his Presbyteriall order, power to give Ordination, quo ad
actum primum five aptitudinem, yet quo ad exercitium can not validly give
Ordination, without a commission from the Bishop, or from the Presbytery, if
either there be no Bishop, or else he be a Heretic and Wolf. But I would
learn, why may not the Presbytery validly Ordain, either by themselves, or by
any one Presbyter with commission and power from them, even where there is a
Bishop (and he no Heretic) who consents not thereto: for Ibid. p. 194. 195.
196.
the D. acknowledges, that not only quo ad aptitudinem, but even quo ad
plenariam ordinationis executionem, the same power pertains to the Presbytery
collegialiter, which he alleges, (but proves not) that the Apostles gave to
Bishops personaliter.

Now from all these things, Princes may learn how to reform their own and
the Prelates usurpation, and how to reduce the orders and vocation of
Ecclesiastical persons, unto conformity with the Apostolic and Primitive
pattern, from which if they go on either to injoyne, or to permit a
departing, we leave them to be judged by the King of terrors.

DISGRESSION II.
Of the convocation and moderation of Synods.
TOuching the convocation of Synods, we resolve with Disp. 49. these. 20.
the Professors of Leiden; that if a Prince do so much as tollerat the order
and regiment of the Church to be pubpublike, his consent and auctority should
be craved, and he may also design the time, place, and other circumstances.
Ib. These. 21.
But much more, if he be a Christian and Orthodoxe Prince, should his consent,
auctority, help, protection, and saffeguard be sought and granted. These. 22.
And that according to the example, both of godly Kings in the old Testament,
and of Christian Emperors and Kings 111 the New. These. 23.
Chiefly then, and justly, the Magistrate may and ought to urge and require
Synodes, when they of the Ecclesiastical order cease from doing their duty.
These. 24.
Veruntamen si contra, etc. Nevertheless say they, if contrariwise, the
Magistrate be an enemy and persecuter of the Church, and of true Religion, or
cease to do his duty, that is to wit, in a manifest danger of the Church, the
Church notwithstanding ought not to be wanting to her self, but ought to use
the right and auctority of convocation, which first and foremost remains with
the rulers of the Church, as may be seen Act. 15.

But that this be not thought a Tenet of Antiepiscopall Writters alone, let us
heart what is said, by M. Ant. de Dom de rep. eccl. lib 6. cap. 5. number. 89.
one of our greatest Opposites. Neque defendi^s ita, etc. Neither do we so
defend, that this right of convocating Councelle, pertains to Princes, at
that the Ecclesiastical Prelates may no way, either assemble themselves
together by mutual consent, or be convocated by the auctority of the
Metropolitan, Pri^t, or Patriarch. For the Apostles did celebrat Counsels,
without any convocation of Princes. So many Counsels as were celebrate before
the first Ni^ne, were without all doubt gathered together, by the means alone
of Ecclesiastical Persons: for to vuhom directly the Church is fully
committed, they ought to bear the care of the Church. Yet Princes in some
respect, indirectly, for help and aid, chiefly then when the Prelates neglect
to convocat Counsels, or are destitute of power for doing of the same, of
dutymay, and use to convocat them. Where we see his judgment to be, that the
power of convocating Counsels, pertains directly to Ecclesiastical persons,
and to Princes only indirectly, for that they ought to give help and aid, to
the convocation of the same, especially when Church men either will not, or can
not assemble themselves together. His reasons whereupon he groundeth his
judgment, are two, and those strong ones.

1. The Apostolical Counsels, Act. 6. 2. and 15. 6. and so many as were
assembled before the first Council of Nice, were not convocated by Princes,
but by Ecclesiastical persons, without the leave of Princes. Therefore in the
like cases, the Church ought to use the like liberty, that is, when there is
need of Synods, either for preventing, or reforming some corruptions in the
Doctrine or Policy of the Church; and for avoiding such inconveniences as may
impede the course of the Gospel, (Princes in the mean time being hostile
Opposites to the truth of God, and to the purity of Religion,) then to
convocat the same, without their auctority and leave.

2. The Church is fully committed, (and that directly) to the Ministers whom
Christ has set to rule over the same. Therefore they ought to take care and to
provyde for all her necessities, as these who must give a count, and be
answerable to God for any hurt which she receives, in things Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical, for which (when they might) they did not provyde a remedy:
Which being so, it follows, that when Princes will neither convocat Synods,
nor consent to the convocating of the^, yet if the convocating of a Synod, be a
necessary mean for healing of the Churches hurt, and Ecclesiastical Persons
be able, (through the happy occasion of a fit opportunity,) synodically to
assemble themselves, in that case they ought by themselves to come together,
unless one would say, that Princes alone, and not Pastors, must give a count
to God, how it has gone with the Church, in matters Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical.

If it be objected, that our Divines mantaine against Papists, that the right
and power of convocating Synods pertains to Princes. Ans. And so say I, but
for making the purpose more plain I add three distinctions. 1. In ordinary
cases, and when Princes are not enemies to the truth and purity of the
Gospel, Ecclesiastical Persons should not do well to assemble themselves
together in a Synod, except they be convocate with the auctority or consent of
Princes. Yet as ani^ in ^ell. cont. 4. lib. 1. cap. 12. not. 4. 18.
Iunius shows, in extraordinary cases, and when the Magistrate will not
concur not join with the Church, the Church may well assemble and come
together beside his knowledge; and without his consent, for that extraordinary
evils must have extraordinary remedies. 2. Ecclesiastical persons may
convocat Counsels, simply and by a spiritual power and jurisdiction: but to
convocat them by a temporal and coactive power, pertains to Princes only.
Ecclesiastical Power (says de Rep. Eccl lib. 6. cap. 5. number. 16.
the Archb. of Spalato), may appoint and convocate Councels: but yet the
Ecclesiastical Power it self cannot with any effect or working compel
Bishops, especially if the Bishops of another Province, or Kingdom, or
Patriarchship, be to be convocated. For because the Church can works by her
censures and deprive them who refuse of her Communion, if they come not; yet
they shall not therefore come to the Council if they contemn the censure
Therefore that no man may be able to resist, it is necessary that they be
called by a coactive auctority, which can constrain them who gainestand both
with banishments, and bodily punishments, and compel the Bishops, not only of
one Province, but also of the whole Kingdom or Empire, to conveene. 3. In the
maine and substantial respects, the convocation of Councels pertains to the
Ministers of the Church, that is, as Councels are Ecclesiastical meetings, for
putting order to Ecclesiastical matters, they ought to be assembled by the
Spiritual Power of the Ministers, whose part it is, to epsy and note all the
misorders and abuses in the Church, which must be righted. But because
Councels are such meetings, as must have a certain place designed for them, in
the Dommions and Territories of Princes, needing further, for their safe
assembling, a certification of their Princely protection; and finally, it
being expedient for the better success of Councels, that Christian Princes be
present therein, either personally, or by their Commissioners, that they may
understand the Councels, Conclusions, and Decrees, and assenting unto the same,
ratify and establish them by their Regal and Royal Auctority; because of
these circumstances it is, that the consent and auctority of Christian Princes,
is, and ought to be sought and exspected for the assembling of Synods.

As for the right of presidency and moderation, we distinguish with animad. in
Bell. cent. 4. lib. 1. cap. 19. nota 12.
Iunius two sorts of it, both which have place in Councels; vix. the moderation
of the Ecclesiastical action, and the moderation of the humane order; and with
him we say, that in Councels, the whole Ecclesiastical action ought to be
moderated by such a President, as is elected for the purpose, even as Hosius
Bishop of Corduba was chosen to preside in the first Council of Nice: Which
office agrees not to Princes: for in the point of propounding rightly the
state of questions and things to be handled, and of containing the disputations
in good order, Certe praefidere debet persona Ecclesiastica, in sacris literis
erudita says de rep. Eccl. leb. 7. cap. 3. n. 43
the Archb. of Spalato. The presiding and moderating in the humane order, that
is, by a coactive power to compesce the turbulent, to avoid all confusion and
contention, and to cause a peaceable proceeding and free deliberation,
pertains indeed to Princes, and so did Constantine preside in the same
Council of Nice.

DIGRESSION III.
Of the judging of Controversies and Questions of Faith.
THere is a twofold judgment which discerns and judges of Faith. The one
absolute, whereby the most high God, whose supreme Auctority alone, binds us
to believe whatsoever he propounds to be believed by us, has in his written
Word pronounced, declared, and established; what he would have us to believe
concerning himself, or his worship. The other limited and subordinate: which is
either public or private. That which is public, is either ordinary or
extraordinary. The Ministerial or subordinate public judgment, which I call
ordinary, is the judgment of every Pastor or Doctor; who by reason of his
public vocation and office, ought by his public Ministry to direct and
instruct the judgments of other men, in matters of Faith. Which judgment of
Pastors and Doctors, is limited and restricted to the plain warrants and
testimonies of Holy Scripture, Iun. cont, 1. lib. 3. cap 4. nota 17.
they themselves being only the Ambassadors of the judge, to preach and
publish the sentence which he has established, so that a Pastor is not
properly judex but Index. The subordinate public judgment, which is
extraordinary, is the judgment of a Council, assembled for the more public
and effectual establishment and declaration of one or more points of Faith, and
heads of Christian Doctrine, and that in Opposition to all contrary heresy, or
error, which is broached and set a foot in the Church. M. Ant. de Dom. de rep.
Eccl. lib. 7. c. 3. n. 32.
From which Council, no Christian man who is learned in the Scriptures, may be
excluded, but ought to be admitted to utter his judgment in the same. For in
the indagation or searching out of a matter of Faith, they are not the persons
of men, which give auctority to their sayings, but the reasons and documents
which every one brings for his judgment. The subordinate judgment, which I
call private, is the judgment of Discretion, Davena^t de jud. controv. cap.
25. Iun. ubi supra.
whereby every Christian, for the certain information of his own mind, and
the satisfaction of his own conscience, may and ought to try and examine, as
well the Decrees of Councels', as the Doctrines of particular Pastors, and in
so far to receive and believe the same, as he understands them to agree
with the Scriptures.

Beside these, there is no other kind of judgment, which God has allowed to
men, in matters of Faith. Which being first observed, we say next concerning
the part of Princes, that when questions and controversies of Faith, are tossed
in the Church, that which pertains to them, is, to convocate a Council for
the Decision of the matter, civilly to moderate the same, by causing such an
orderly and peaceable proceeding, as is alike necessary in every grave
Assembly, whether of the Church or of the Commonwealth; and finally, by their
coactive temporal power, to urge and procure, that the decrees of the Council
be received, and the Faith therein contained, professed by their subjects.

But neither may they, by their own Auctority, and without a Council, decide
any controverted matter of Faith, nor yet having convocate a Council, may they
take upon them to command, rule, order, and dispose the disputes and
deliberations according to their arbitrament; nor lastly, may they, by virtue
of their Regal Dignity, claim any power to examine the Decrees concluded in
the Council, otherwise, then by the judgment of private discretion, which is
common to every Christian.

First, I say, they may not by themselves presume, publicly and judicially, to
decide and define any matter of Faith, which is questioned in the Church: but
this definition they ought to remit unto a lawful and free Council. Ambrose
would not come to the Court to be judged by the Emperor Valentinian, in a
matter of Faith, and asked, when ever he heard that Emperors judged Bishops in
matters of Faith, seeing, if that were granted, it would follow that Laymen
should dispute and deba^e matters, and Bishops hear, yea that Bishops should
learn of Laymen.

The true ground of which refusal (clear enough in it self) is darkened by
of the Church lib. 5. cap. 53.
D. Field, who alleges, 1. That the thing which Valentinian took on him,
was, to judge of a thing already resolved in a general Council called by
Constantine, as if it had been free, and not yet judged of at all. 2. That
Valentinian was known to be partial; that he was but a Novice; and the other
Judges which he meant to associate to himself suspected. But howsoever these
circumstances might serve the more to justify Ambrose his not compearing, to be
judged in a matter of Faith by Valentinian, yet the D. touches not that which
is most considerable, namely, the reason which he alleged for his not
compearing, because it has been at no time heard of, that Emperors judged
Bishops in matters of Faith, and if that were granted, it would follow, that
Bishops should learn of Laymen. Which reason holds ever good, even though
the thing has not been formerly judged by a Council.

And furthermore, if these (which the D. mentions) were the true reasons of
his refusing to be judged by Valentinian, then why did he pretend another
reason, (whereof we have heard) and not rather defend himself with the real
and true reasons? Wherefore we gather, that the reason which made Ambrose
refuse to be judged by him, was no other then this, because he considered, that
Princes neither by themselves, nor by any whom they please to choose, may,
without a lawfully assembled and free Council, usurp a public judgment and
decisive sentence in controversies of Faith: which if they arrogate to
themselves, they far exceed the bounds of their vocation For it is not said
of Princes, but of Priests, Mal. 2. 7.
that their lips should preserve knowledge, and that they should seek the
Law from their mouths. And 2 Chronicles. 19. 8. 10.
the Priests did Iehosaphat set in Jerusalem, for the judgment of the Lord,
and for controversies, and for judging betwixt Law and Commandment, statutes
and judgments.

In the mean while, we deny not, but that in extraordinary cases, when
lawful Councels can not be had, and when the Clergy is universally
corrupted, through gross ignorance, perverse affections, and incorrigible
negligence, in such a case, the Prince notwithstanding the defect of the
ordinary and regular Judges, may yet by the Power of he civil sword, repress
and punish so many as publish and spread such Doctrines, as both he and other
Christians by the judgment of discretion, plainly understand from Scripture,
to be heretical.

Next I say, that the Prince having assembled a Council, may not take so much
upon him, as imperiously to command what he thinks good, in the disputes and
deliberations, and to have every thing ordered, disposed, and handled according
to his mind. To debate and define Theological controversies, and to teach
what is Orthodoxall, what Heretical, is the office of Divines; yet by a
coactive auctority to judge this Orthodoxe Faith to be received by all, and
Heretical pravity to be rejected is the office of Kings, or the supreme
Magistrates in every Commonwealth, says de Iud. controv. cap. 16. page 92:
the Bishop of Sarisburie. And ibid. cap. 14. p. 75,
again, in Searching, Directing, Teaching; Divines, ordinarily and by reason
of their calling, ought to go be fore Kings themselves: but in commanding,
establishing, compelling; Kings do far excel. Where he shows, how in
defining of the Controversies of Religion, in one respect Ecclesiastical
persons, and in another respect Kings have the first place.

In the debating of a question of Faith, Kings have not, by virtue of their
Princely vocation, any precedencie or chief place, the action being merely
Ecclesiastical. For, howbeit Kings may convocate a Council, preside also and
govern the same as concerning the humane and political order, yet says
animad. in Bell. cont. 4. lib. 1. cap. 12. nota 15
Iunius, Actiones, deliberationes, and definitiones, ad substantiam rei
Ecclesiasticae pertinentes, a Sacerdotio sunt, a caetu servorum Dei, quibus rei
suae administrationem mandavit Deus. And with him the Archb. of Spalato says
in like manner, that howbeit Christian Princes have convocated Councels, and
civilly governed the same, yet they had no power nor auctority (g) de rep.
Eccl. lib 6. cap. 5. number. 8. 30.
in the very discussing, handling, and deciding of matters of Faith.

What then? In the handling of controversies of Faith, have Princes no place
nor power at all, beside that of Political government only? Surely by virtue
of their Princely auctority, they have no other place in the ha^dling of these
matters. Yet, what if they be men of singular learning and understanding in the
Scriptures? Then let them propound their own suffrage, with the grounds and
reasons of it, even as other learned men in the Council do. But neither as
Princes, nor as men singularly learned, may they require that others in the
Council shall dispute and debate matters, and that they themselves shall sit
as Judges having judicial power of a negative voice. For in a Council, no
man's voice has any greater strength, then his reasons and probations have. Non
enim admitto, etc. For I admit not in a Council (says de Rep. number, 33.
the same Prelate) some as Judges, others as Disputators, for I have showed
that a conciliarie judgment, consists in the approbation of that sentence,
which above others has been showed to have most weight, and to which no man
could enough oppose. Wherefore no man in the Council ought to have a
judiciarie voice, unless he be withal a Disputator, and assign a reason
wherefore he adheres to that judgment, and repels another, and that reason,
such a one, as is drawn from the Scriptures only, and from Antiquity.

Lastly, I hold, that after the definition and decision of a Council, Princes
may not take upon them, by any judicial power or public vocation, to examine
the same, as if they had auctority to pronounce yet another decisive sentence,
either ratifying or reversing what the Council has decreed. Most certain it
is, that before Princes give their Royal assent, unto the Decrees of any
Council whatsoever, and compel men to receive and aknowledge the same, they
ought first of all carefully to try and examine them, whether they agree with
the Scriptures or not, and if they find them not to agree with the Scriptures,
then to deny their assent and auctority thereto. But all this Princes do not
by any judicial power, or public auctority, but only by that judgment of
private discretion, which they have as Christians, and which together with them
is common also to their subjects: for neither may a Master of a Family commend,
to his children and servants, the profession of that Faith, which is published
by the Decrees of a Council, except in like manner he examine the same by the
Scriptures.

DIGRESSION IV.
Of the power of the Keys and Ecclesiastical censures.
Ecclesiastical censures and punishments, wherewith Delinquents are bound, and
from which when they turn penitents they are loosed, are of two sorts: either
such as are common, and agree unto all, as Excommunication and Absolution; or
such as are peculiar, and agree only to men of Ecclesiastical order, as
Suspension, Deprivation, etc.

As touching the power of the Keys, to bindand loose, Excommunicate and
absolve: first of all, Princes are to remember, that neither they may, by
themselves exerce this power, (for Decr. part, 2. causa 2. q. 7. c. 41.
Regum est Corporalem irrogare paenam; Sacerdotum Spiritualem infer
vindictam;) nor yet by their Deputes or Commissioners in their name, and with
auctority from them, because as they have not themselves the power of the
Keys, so neither can they communicate the same unto others. Secondly,
forasmuch as Princes are the wardens, defenders, and revengers of both the
Tables, they ought therefore to provide and take course, that neither Laymen be
permitted to have and exerce the power of Excommunication, nor yet that the
Prelates themselves be suffered in their particular Dioceses, to appropriate
this power and external jurisdiction, as peculiar to themselves: but that it
remain in their hands to whom it pertains by Divine institution. What a
woeful abuse is it, that in our neighbor Churches of England, and Ireland,
the Bishops Vicar general, or Official, or Commissarie, being oftentimes
such a one as has never entered into any holy Orders, shall sit in his Courts,
to use (I should have said to abuse) the power of Excommunication and
Absolution? And what though some silly Presbiter be present in the Court? Does
not the Bishops Substitute, being a Layman, examine and judge the whole
matter, decree, and give sentence what is to be done? Has he not the
Presbiters tongue tied to his belt? And what does the Presbiter more, but only
pronounce the sentence according to that which he who sits judge in the
Court, has decreed and decerned? As touching the Prelates themselves, I pray,
by what warrant have they appropriate to themselves, the whole external
jurisdiction of Binding and Loosing, Excommunicating, and Absolving? But that
we may a little scan this their usurpation, and discover the iniquity thereof to
the view of Princes, whose part it is, to cause the same to be reformed, let us
consider to whom Christ himself, Rev. 3. (...)
who has the Key of David, who opens and no man shuts, and shuts, and
no man opens, has committed this power of the Keys to be used upon earth.
And first, let us distinguish betwixt the power it self, and the execution of
it.

The power and auctority of Binding and Loosing, Christ has delivered to the
whole Church, that is, to every particular Church collectively taken. The
auctority of Excommunication pertains to the whole Church says on 1. Cor. 5.
4.
D. Fulke. Ius excommunicandi (says de cas. consc. lib. 4. cap. 10. cas. 9.
Balduine) non est penes quemvis privatum, five ex ordine fit Ecclesiastico,
five Politico, etc. Sed hoc jus pertinet ad totam Ecclesiam. So say Zanchius in
4. praec. col. 756. Polanus Synt. lib. 7. cap. 18. Pareus in 1. Cor. 5. de
Excom. Cartwright, on 1. Cor. 5. 4. Perkins on Jude verse. 3. and generally all
our sound Writers. Cent. 5. cap. 4. col. 383.
The Magdeburgians cite for the same judgment, Augustine and Primasius. loc.
theol. tom. 6. p. 136. 137.
Gerard cites also some Popish Writers assenting hereunto. The reasons which
we give for confirmation hereof, are these.

1. It pertains to the whole Church, collectively taken, to deny her
Christian Communion, to such wicked persons as add contumacie to their
disobedience; Therefore it pertains to the whole Church to Excommunicat them.
Again, it pertains to the whole Church, to admit and receive one into her
communion and familiar fellowship. Therefore to the whole Church it likewise
pertains, to cast one out of her communion. Sure, the sentence of
Excommunication is pronounced in vain, except the whole Church out of the
person thus judged, from all communion with her. And the sentence of Absolution
is to as little purpose pronounced, except the whole Church admit one again to
have communion with her. Shortly, the whole Church has the power of punishing
a man, by denying her communion unto him. Therefore the whole Church has the
power of judging, that he ought to be so punished. The whole Church has the
power of remitting this punishment again. Therefore the whole Church has the
power of judging that it ought to be remitted.

2. The Apostle 1. Cor. 5. shows the Israelits their purging away of leaven
out of all their dwellings in the time of the Passover, to be a figure of
Excommunication, whereby disobedient and obstinat sinners, who are as leaven to
infect other men, are to be voided, and thurst out of the Church. Now as the
purging away of the leaven, did not peculiarly belong unto any one or some few
among the Israelits, but unto the whole Congregation of Israel: so the Apostle
writting to the whole Church of Corinth. even to as many as should take care to
have the whole lump kept unleavened, 1. Cor. 5. 6. 7. ^3.
says to them all. Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump?
Purge out therefore the old leaven. Put away from among your selves that wicked
person.

3. Christ has delivered the power of binding and loosing, to every particular
Church or Congregation, collectively taken, which thus we demonstrat. If our
brother who trespasseth against us, will neither be reclaimed by private
admonition, nor yet by a rebuke given him before some more witnesses: then Math.
18. 17. 18.
says Christ, Tell it unto the Church: but if he neglect to hear the Church,
let him be unto thee as an Heathen man and a Publican. Verily I say unto you,
whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever ye
shall loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven. Where he shows, that in the
Christian Church (which he was to plant by the Ministry of his Apostles)
Excommunication was to be used, as the last remedy for curing of the most
deadly and desperate evils: which Excommunication he sets forth, by allusion
unto the order and custom of the Jews in his time, among whom they who were
cast out, and excommunicat from the Synagogue, were accounted as Heathens and
Publicans. And so when he says, Let him be unto thee as an Heathen man and a
Publican, he presupposes, that the Church has Excommunicat him for his
contumacie which he has added to his disobedience. For as In Math. 18. 17.
Pareus says, If by me, and thee, and every one, he is to be accounted for
such a man, it must needs be, that the judgment of the Church be by public
declaration made known to me, and thee; and every one. And this meaning is
thoroughly drawn out of the following verse. For whatsoever ye shall bind on
Earth, etc. Therefore the Church ought first to bind him, before he ought to
be accounted by me or thee for one bound, that is, Excommunicat. Now what
means Christ by the Church, to which he gives the power of binding and
loosing? Not the Church universal, sure: for I can not tell the Church
universal (whether it be understood collective, or repraesentative) whenever
my brother trespasseth against me, and will not be reformed. He means
therefore the particular Church, whereof for the time it shall happen one to be
a Member. The power of the Keys (says on Jude verse. 3.
Perkins, ^is given to all Ministers, Churches, and Congregations. Neither
could there otherwise an ordinary, perpetual, and ready course be had, for the
correcting of all public contumacie and scandal, by the means of
Ecclesiastical Discipline. But it will be said, when he bids us tell that
particular Church, whereof we are Members, he means not that we should tell
the whole body of that Church collective, but that we should tell the
Governors of the Church, who are the Church representative.

How then is this place alleged, to prove, that the whole Church, collective,
has Power and Auctority to bind and loose?

Ans. Christ means indeed, that we should tell those Governors who
represent the Church: but whiles he calls them by the name of the Church, and
sends us to them as to those who represent the Church, he plainly in
sinuateth, that they exerce the power of the Keys (as in his name, so) in the
name of the Church, and that this power and auctority pertains to the whole
Church: even as when one man represents another man's person, whatsoever power
he exerceth ^o nomine, does first of all agree, to the man who is represented,
in his own proper person.

4. 1. Cor. 5. 4. 5.
The Apostle writing to the whole Church of Corinth, will have them (being
gathered together) to deliver that incestuous person to Satan. Therefore every
particular Church or Congregation, has power to Excommunicat such a
contumacious sinner, as that incestuous person was. It is the common answer of
Papists, that albeit the Apostle commanded the act should be done in face of
the Church, yet the judgment and auctority of giving sentence, was in himself
alone, land not in the Church of Corinth; whereupon they would make it to
follow, that the power of Excommunication pertains to the Bishop alone, and
not the Church. And the same answer does de tripl. episc. genesis page 42. 43.
Saravia return to Beza. But howsoever verse. 3.
the Apostle says, that he had already judged concerning the incestuous
person, yet he did not hereby seclude the Church of Corinth, from the auctority
of excommunicating him. It is to be observed says In 1. Cor. 5. 4.
Calvine, that Paul, albeit he was an Apostle, does not for his own will
excommunicat alone: but communicates his counsel with the Church, that the
thing may be done by common auctority. Himself indeed goes before and shows
the way: but whiles he adjoyneth to himself other partakers, he signifies
sufficiently, that it is not the private power of one man. Nay, let us further
observe with animad. in Bell. cont. 4. lib. 2. cap. 16. nota 6.
Iunius, that the Apostles has a two fold power: one, commonto them with other
Presbyters, 1. Pet. 5. 1. another, singular proper, and extraordinary, which
they had as Apostles. By this singular power. Paul says: 1. Cor. 4. 21.
What will ye? shall I come unto you with a rod? but by the common power it
was that he said: I^. 5.
When ye are gathered together, and my Spirit, etc. By no other power, then
that which was common to him with the rest of the Presbyters or Bishops in
Corinth, did he judge the incestuous person to be excommunicated: and thus, as
though he had been present in body, among the other Presbyters of that Church,
and assembled together with them, in their ordinary Council or Consistory (in
which Iun ubi supra nota. 7.
fuerunt libere Apostoli, alij vero Presbyteri ex ^ocatione propria, and
necessitate officii;) so Id. cont. 3. lib. 4. c. 16. nota. 37.
he both pronounces his own judgment, and likewise goes before, by
pronouncing that judgment which was to be in common by them pronounced,
Furthermore, that the Apostle would not have, that incestuous man to be
excommunicat by his own auctority alone, but by the auctority of the Church of
Corinth, thus it appears.

1. 1. Cor. 5. ^. 6. 9.
The Apostle challenges and condemns the Corinthians, because they had not
excommunicat him, before his writting unto them: which he would never have
done, if that Church had not had power and auctority of Excommunication.

2. Howbeit the Apostle gave his judgment, that he should be excommunicat,
because he ought not to have been tolerated in the Church, yet for all that,
he should not have been indeed excommunicat and thrust out of the Church of
Corinth, except the Ministers and Elders of that Church, had in name of the
whole body of the same, judicially cast him forth and delivered him to Satan.
Which plainly argues, that he should not have been excommunicat by the
Apostles auctority alone, but by the auctority of the Church of Corinth.

3. The Apostle only shows, that he should be excommunicat, but refers
the giving of sentence and judgment upon him, to the Corinthians. For he says
not, that the Corinthians being gathered together, should declare or witness,
that such a one was delivered to Satan, by Paul's own power and auctority, but,
that they themselves should deliver him to Satan verse. 4. 5. And again, Purge
out therefore the old leaven. Put away from among your selves that wicked
person, v. 7. 13. But says ubi supra.
Saravia, parts Apostoli in illa action fuerunt authoritatis, Ecclesiae vero
Corinthiacae, obedientiae. Ans. That the action was done by the auctority of
the Church of Corinth, it is manifest both from that which has been said, and
likewise if further we consider, that the Apostle ascribes to the Corinthians,
as much auctority in this action, as he assumeth to himself. For he says of
himself, that he had judged concerning him that had done this deed v. 3. and so
he says of them, Do not ye judge them that are within? verse. 12. Where he
speaks not of the judgment of private discretion, (for so they might have
judged them that were without also,) but even of the external and
authoritative judgment of Ecclesiastical Discipline. 2. Cor. 2. 9.
The Apostle indeed says, that he wrote to the Corinthians to excommunicat
that person, that he might know them, whether they were obedient in all things:
but this proves not, that the auctority of the excommunication was not theirs:
for their part in this action proceeded both from auctority and from obedience:
from auctority, absolutely: from obedience, in some respect. De jure, they had
no liberty nor power not to excommunicate him, but were bound to do that which
Paul pointed out to be their duty, and in that respect he calls them
obedient: yet absolutely, and de facto it was free to them, (notwithstanding of
Paul's writing to them) either to excommunicate him, or not to excommunicate
him, and if they had not by their auctority excommunicate him, he had not been
at all excommunicate by any virtue of Paul's judging of him.

4. When the Corinthians proceeded to excommunicate him, Ib. verse. 6.
the Apostle calls this a censure which was inflicted of many: which could
not be said if he was to be excommunicate by the Apostles auctority alone.

5. verse. 7.
The Apostle writes again to the Corinthians, to forgive the incestuous man,
to receive him into their communion, and to remit the punishment of his
excommunication, because he was win to repentance. And verse. 10
he adds: To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive also. Now, who can remit
the punishment, and save one from underlying the censure, except such as have
the power and auctority of judgment?

Hitherto we have proven, that the power of binding and loosing, pertains to
every particular Church collectively taken. But the execution and judicial
exercing of this power, pertains to that company and assembly of Elders in
every Church, which the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4. 14. calls a Presbitery. In
Scotland we call it a Session. In France it is called a Consistory. In Germany
and Belgia according to the Scripture phrase it is termed a Presbitery. It is
made up of the Pastor or Pastors of every Congregation, together with those
governing Elders which labor there (not in Doctrine, but) in Discipline only:
Of which things, we have spoken supra Digr. 1.
before. That unto this Company or Consistory of Elders, pertains the power
of binding and loosing, it is averred by the best Divines. Calvine on Math 18.
17. 18. and lib. Epistol. Col. 168. 169. Beza contra Saraviam de diverse.
Minist. grad. Zanchius in 4. praec. col. 756. Iunius animad. in Bell. cont. 5.
lib. 1. cap. 14. nota 28. Polanus Synt. lib. 7. cap. 18 Tilen Synt. part. 2.
disp. 28. The Professors of Leiden Syn. Pur. Theol. disp. 48. Gerard. loc.
Theol. tom. 6. page 137. 138. Balduin de cas. consc. lib. 4. cap. 11. cas. 11.
Pareus in Math. 18. 17. 18. and in 1 Cor. 5. Cartwright on Math. 18. sect. 7.
Fennerus Theol. lib. 7. cap. 7. p. 152. 153. Alstedius Theol. casuum cap. 27.
Danaeus Pol. Christ lib. 6 page 452. 464. He^mingius Enchirid. class. 3. cap.
11. page 388. Martyr in 1 Cor. 5. and sundry others. apud. Zanch. in 4, praec.
col. 745.
Bullinger records, that this was the manner of the particular Churches in
Helvetia, to choose unto themselves a certain Senate of Elders, or company of
the best men in the Church, which might according to the Canon of Holy
Scripture, exerce the Discipline of Excommunication. Which form is well
warranted by the Scriptures. For when Christ commits the auctority of
binding and loosing unto the Church, Math, 18. 17. 18. Howsoever the power and
auctority it self pertain to any particular Church collectively taken, as
has been said, yet the execution of the same is committed to the Consistory or
Senate of Elders, which represents that Church, and which Paul calls a
Presbitery. in 4. praec. col. 741.
Zanchius says, that Chrysostom, Bullinger, and all good Interpreters,
understand the Presbitery to be there meant by Christ, when he says, Tell the
Church. Chrysostom says (...), that is, says cont. 3. lib. 1 cap. 6. nota 19.
Iunius, the Ecclesiastical Synedrium made up of Pastors and Elders. Thus
praelect. tom. 1. page 23.
Camero likewise expounds the place. Ecclesiae nomine says he, videtur
Christus significasse Collegium Presbiterorum qui Ecclesiae Christianae erant
praefuturi, cujus Presbyterij mentio fit, 1 Timothy 4. Now if Christ has
committed the power of Excommunication unto the Church, what have Bishops to
say for themselves, who appropriate the power unto themselves, each one in his
own Diocie? Calv. and Cartwr. on Math. 18. ^7. Par. in 1 Cor. 5
for we can not give the name of the Church unto a Bishop: because he is but
one man, and the Church is a company of many men. Nay, nor yet can we give the
name of the Church unto a company of Bishops; for if they might be called the
Church, it should be for this respect alone, because they represent the Church.
But soli Episcopi, etc. Bishops alone says loc. Theol. tom. 6 page 137.
Gerard, or they who teach, can not represent the Church, since hearers also
pertain to the definition thereof, but the Presbitery can represent the
Church, whereunto not only they pertain who labor in the Word, but also
Elders or Governors, put in auctority, for expeding of Ecclesiastical matters
in name of the whole Church. We grant then, Trelcat Inst Theol. lib. 1. page
291.
that by the Church, Christ means that company of Church Gouvernours, whereby
a certain particular Church is represented, but for as much as the Church
consists of two integrant parts, viz. Pastors and Sheep, Teachers and
Hearers, we therefore deny, that the representative Church whereof Christ
speaks, can be any other, then that Ecclesiastical Consistory, whereof we
have spoken.

Moreover, albeit the Apostle wrote to the whole Church of Corinth to deliver
the incestuous man to Satan, because the matter could not be otherwise done,
but only in the name, and with the consent of that whole Church, yet he never
meant, that the common promiscuous multitude should by their suffrages and
voices examine and judge that cause. But says in 1 Cor. 5. 4.
Calvine because the multitude unless it be governed by council, never does
any thing moderately, nor gravely, there was ordained in the ancient Church
(meaning the Apostolic Church) a Presbytery, that is, a company of Elders,
which by the consent of all, had the first judgment and examination of things:
from it the matter was carried to the people, but being already determined
before. Again, when the Apostle writes to them in his second Epistle, that
they should forgive him, because he had repented, thus he reasons; 2 Cor. 2.
6.
Sufficient to such a man is this censure which was inflicted of many. Which
words that we may the better understand, it is worthy of observation, (which
not com. in illum locum
Calvin's only, but de diverse minist. grad cap. 8. p. 85.
Saravia also notes) that it appears from this place, he was not
excommunicate, but by sharp rebukes tymously win to repentance, whereby the
Apostle shows it to be needless, yea most inconvenient to proceed against
him, to the extremity of Discipline. The Word (...), there used by the Apostle,
signifies rebuke, reprehension, or chiding, says D. Fulke. And so Scapula
takes it to be the same with (...) and (z) on 2 Cor. 2. 6.
to signify another thing then (...) or (...). Beza and Tremellius turn (...)
by increpatio. Ar. Montanus reads, objurgatio. This chiding or threatening of
the man, proceeded not from the whole Church of Corinth, but only from many
therein, as is plain from the Text, and as ubi supra.
Saravia also grants. And who were the (...), those ma^y of whom the Apostle
speaks? Not such as from Christian and brotherly charity did privately chide
and rebuke him, for the matter was not then depending in private rebukes, but
by the Apostles direction it was brought to the Churches part, and to public
Discipline, the scandal it self being so public and notoriously manifest.
They were therefore such as had public office and auctority to chide him. And
who were those, but the Consistory of Pastors and Elders, which represented the
whole Church, and were set in auctority for judging and managing of things
pertaining to Ecclesiastical Discipline? They (no doubt) being met together,
called the man before them, and did most sharply rebuke him and chide with
him, and threatened that they would not only debar him from the Lords Table,
(which is called lesser Excommunication, but more properly, a step or degree
tending next to Excommunication:) but also wholly cast him out of the Church,
and deliver him to Satan. Whereupon the man being made to see the
grievousnesse of his sin, and the terrible punishment which was to follow
upon it, becomes most sorrowful, humble and penitent. And this moved the
Apostle to say, Sufficient to such a man, etc. as if he would say: what needs
him now to be excommunicate, and so to be corrected and put to shame by you
all, when every one of you shall deny to him your Christian communion, as one
wholly cast out of the Church? Is it not enough, that many among you, even your
whole Presbitery, has put him to such public shame by their sharp
reprehensions, and to so great fear by their dreadful threatenings? and since,
through the blessing of God upon these means, he is already w^nne to
repentance, why would you have him yet more publicly corrected and rejected by
all and every one?

And further, the Apostle adds, that now they should not only forgive him
and comfort him verse. 7. but also confirm, ((...)) their love toward him
verse. 8. Now (...) signifies to confirm or ratify by auctority, and so exam.
part 4 de indulg p. 53.
Chemnitius, Bullinger, and Cartwright expound it in this place. It comes
from (...) Auctority, whence comes also (...) a Lord or one having auctority,
As therefore the Presbitery or company of Pastors and Elders, had (c) com in
hunc locum.
by their auctority established, that he was to be excommunicate, and
determined to proceed to the execution of extreme Discipline (d) annot. ibid.
against him, so now the Apostle would have them by the same auctority, to
ratify and establish the remission of this punishment unto (e) Par. in 1 Cor.
5. 4.
him, and to decree that the Church should not deny her communion unto him.
For this auctority of binding and loosing, though it pertained to the whole
Church, in actu primo sive in esse, yet it pertained to the Presbitery alone,
in actu secun^ sive in operari: and even as the act of speaking, pertains to
a man, as Principium quod, but to the tongue alone, as Principium quo; so
albeit the power of the Keys, does primarly and principally belong to the
Church collectively taken, yet the actual execution of this power, belongs
only to the Presbitery which represents the Church, and unto which the
Church has committed her auctority to bind and loose. Wherefore, since the
Apostle writes to the whole Church of Corinth, to confirm by auctority their
love to the penitent man, and since this auctority in the actual execution of
it (which the Apostle craveth) did not agree to that whole Church collectively
taken, we must needs understand his meaning to be, that their love toward that
man, and their forgiving of him, should be ratified and confirmed by the
auctority of those Church Governors, qui Ecclesiae nomen ad caetum
repraesentant, totius nimirum Presbiterij authoritate atque consensu.

Thus have we showed, that the actual use of the Keys, or the execution of
the auctority of binding and loosing, pertains to that Ecclesiastical Sena^e
in every particular Church, which the Apostle calls a Presbitery. For further
illustration of the truth whereof, I add these four observations.

1. We must distinguish Trelcat. Inst. theol. lib. 2. page 287. 288. Pareus in
1. Cor. 5. de excom.
a twofold power of the keys: the one is execute in Doctrine: the other in
Discipline: the one Concionalis: the other Iudicialis. Touching the former, we
grant it is proper for Pastors alone, whose office and vocation it is, by the
Preaching and Publishing of Gods Word, to shut the Kingdom of Heaven against
impenitent and disobedient men, and to open it unto penitent sinners, to bind
Gods heavy wrath upon the former, and (by application of the promises of
mercy) to loose the lat^er from the sentence and fear of Condemnation. When we
ascribe the power of binding and loosing to that whole Consistory, wherein
governing Elders are joined together with Pastors, we mean only of the Keys
of external Discipline, which are used in Ecclesiastical Courts and
Iudicatories.

2. When we teach, that the Pastor or Pastors of every particular Church and
Congregation, with the Elders of the same, being met together, have power to
bind and loose, we understand this, only of such places wherein a competent
number of understanding and qualified men, may be had to make up an Eldership:
otherwise let there be one Eldership made up of two or three of the next
adjacent Parishes, according as was ordained by the Church of Scotland, in the
seventh Chapter of the second book of Discipline. Sine totius, etc. Without
the consent of some whole Church says In. 4. praec. col. 756.
Zanchius, no man ought to be excommunicat. Yea I add, if it be a small
Church, and not consisting of many learned and skillfull men, Excommunication
ought not to be done, except the nighbour Churches be asked counsel of. And
as touching the Pastors part, lib. epistolar. col. 180.
Calvine says well, Nunquam, etc. I never thought it expedient, that the
liberty of excommunicating should be permitted to every Pastor. The fear of
great inconveniences, which he thought likely to follow upon such a custom, if
once it were permitted, makes him profess in that Epistle, that he durst not
advise Liserus, to excommunicate any man, without taking counsel of other
Pastors. Now I much marvel what Butt Iren. lib. 2. cap. 12.
D. Forbesse shot at, when he entitleth one of his Chapters, De potestate
Excommunicandi, and then in the body of the Chapter does no more at all, but
only quote those two Testimonies of Zanchius and Calvine: Both of which, do
utterly condemn the usurpation of Bishops, who appropriat to themselves the
power of Excommunication, and ascribe this power to the Consistory of Pastors
and Elders in every particular Church: and in the forequotted places, do only
(for preventing of abuses) set some bounds to the execution of their power:
which bounds we also think good to be kept, Viz. that if a Church be so small,
that it has not so many well qualified men, as may be sufficient to assist the
Pastor in the government thereof, then let one commone Eldership be made up
out of it, and some other nighbour Churches: By which means it shall moreover
come to pass, (which is the other caution to be given) that not every Pastor
(no not with the Elders of his Congregation) shall be permitted to have full
liberty of binding and loosing, but shall in those matters receive counsel and
advice from other Pastors. Howbeit for this latter purpose, the Church of
Scotland has profitably provided another remedy also, namely, that in certain
chief places, all the Pastors in the adjacent bounds, shall at set and ordinary
times assemble themselves, (which Assemblies in this Nation we call
Presbyteries) that so the Churches may be governed Communi Presbyterorum
consilio, as Hierome speaks of the Primitive times of the Church.

3. Though the execution of the Discipline of Excommunication and Absolution,
pertain to the Consistory of the Pastor and Elders in every Church, yet this
Discipline is to be by them execute Zanch. in 4. praec. col. 756. D. Fulke on
1. Cor. 5. 4.
in name of the whole Church. de tripl. Episc. gencr. page 43.
Saravia is bold to affirm, that he who receives a sinner, or casts him out
of the Church, does this in the name and auctority of God alone. We have proven
by strong Arguments, that the auctority of Excommunication pertains to the
whole Church: which though he contradicts, yet in de diverse. minist. grad. p.
85. 86.
one place forgetting himself he aknowledgeth, that the auctority of the Church
of Corinth, was to interveene in the Excommunication of the incestuous man.
Wherefore, as in the name of God, so in the name and auctority of the whole
Church, must one be cast our, or received.

4. To the right execution of this Discipline, Zanch. ubi supra. Synop. pur.
theol. disp. 48. these. 9.
the manifest consent of the whole Church is also necessary: The truth whereof
beside that it appears from that which has been said concerning the
Churches auctority, it is further confirmed, if we consider, either the
importance of the thing, or the good of the person. Touching the importance of
the thing, Gravissima, etc. Most weighty matters in the Church says loc.
theol. tom. 6. page 463.
Gerard, (and the same says ubi supra.
Zanchius also,) ought not to be undertaken without the consent of the whole
Ecclesiastical body, and as Pope Leo writes, Such thing as pertain unto all,
ought to be done with the consent of all. But what can be more weighty, and
what does more pertain to the body of the Church, then to cut off some member
from the body? And touching the good of the person, lib. 3. contra epist.
Parmen.
Augustine shows that then only a Sinner is both stricken with fear, and
healed with shame, when seeing himself Anathematized by the whole Church, he
can not find a fellow multitude, together wherewith he may rejoice in his
sin, and insult upon good men. And that otherwise, if the tares grow so
rank, that they can not be pulled up, and if the same evil disease take hold
of so very many, that the consent of the Church can not be had to the
excommunication of a wicked person, then good men must grieve and groan, and
endure what they can not help. Therefore, that Excommunication may fruitfully
succeed, the consent of the people is necessary: Ant. de Dom. de rep eccl. lib.
5. cap. 12. n. 67.
Frustra enim ejicitur ex Ecclesia, and consortio fidelium privatur, quem
populus abigere, and a quo abstinere recuset. Howbei^ even in such cases, when
the consent of the Church can not be had to the execution of this Discipline,
faithful Pastors and Professors must, every one for his own part, take heed
that he haveno fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but even
reprove them; yea they ought, in sensu negativo, excommunicat those who should
be (but are not) excommunicat positively: which negative Excommunication, is
not an Ecclesiastical censure' but either a bare punishment, or a cautell and
animadversion; And so says Ib. cap. 9. number. 8.
the Archbishop of Spalato, not only one brother may refuse to communicate with
another, but a people also may refuse to communicate with their Pastor, which he
confirms by certain examples. But the public censure of positive
Excommunication should not be inflicted without the Churches consent, for the
reasons forsaid. Cyprian writteth to Cornelius Bishop of Rome, that he had much
labored with the people, that peace might be given to them who had fallen,
that is, that they might be again received into the communion of the Church:
which if he might have done by himself, why did he labor and deal so much
with the people in that business? And as they were not received into the
Churches communion, without the peoples consent, so neither were they, with out
their consent, excommunicat. In 2. Cor. hom. 18.
Chrysostom shows concerning his time, that when one was to be excommunicat,
the whole Church was humbled in prayer to God for him, and whenhe was again
released, they did all kindly salute him, and wish him peace. apologet. cap.
39. See Rhenanus his annotation upon that place, and M. Ant. de Dom. de rep.
eccl. (...). 5. cap. 12. n. 67.
Tertullian also writteth, that he who was to be excommunicat, in the public
Assembly of the Church, was by the common consent of all, stricken with
judgment, and that all the approven and well liked off Elders, had the
presidence or direction of the rest of the Church in these Matters.

Now from all this, which has been said of the power and auctority to
excommunicat and absolve, it is manifest how unjustly usurping Prelates do
arrogat and appropriat to themselves this power, which Christ has committed to
every particular Church or Congregation, and ordained to be execute by the
Ecclesiastical Consistory within the same. Which Episcopal usurpation, as it
has been showed to be most contrary to Divine Institution, so does it also
depart from the manner of the ancient Church: For it may be seen in lib. 3.
epist. 14. 15. 16. and lib. 5. epist. 12.
Cyprian, that the auctority of reconciling and receiving into the Church, such
as had fallen, was not proper to the Bishop, but with him common to his
Clergy and Presbytery, and that jus communicationis was given them by the
Clergy, as well as by the Bishop. We have heard out of epist. ad Evagr.
Hierome, that a Bishop did nothing, which a Presbyter did not also, except
only that he gave the rite or sig^e of Ordination, that is, imposition of
hands. Whereby we understand, that as all other things, beside Ordination, so
the power of Excommunication among the rest, was alike common to Bishops and
Presbyters. Whence it is, that the same Hierome writting to Demetriades,
calls excommunication, Episcoporum and Presbyterorum censura. And In Math. 16.
elsewhere. Alligat vel solvit Episcopus and Presbyter. Justinian Novel. 123.
cap. ^1. says, Omnibus autem Episcopis and Presbyteris interdicimus segregare
aliquem a sacra communione, antequam causa monstretur, etc. certifying them, if
they do otherwise, that he whom they excommunicat, should be loosed from
Excommunication a majore Sacerdote. Whence we see, that Presbyters also were
wont to excommunicat, and that this power was common to them with the Bishops.
The first Council of Carthage Can. 23. decrees that a Bishop hear no man's
cause without the presence of his Clergy: and that otherwise his sentence
shall be void, except it be confirmed by the presence of his Clergy. The
Canon Law it self has some vestigies of the ancient order: for Decr. part. 2.
causa. 11. q. 3. c. 108. 110.
it ordains, that when a Bishop either excommunicateth or absolveth any man,
twelve of the Clergy be present and concur with him. Iren. lib. 2. cap. 11.
p. 195.
D* Forbesse now also aknowledgeth, that it is not lawful for a Bishop to
exerce the power of public jurisdiction by himself, and without the
Presbytery; and under this power of Jurisdiction whereof he speaks, Ib. page
191.
he comprehends, the Visitation of Churches, Ordination, Suspension, and
Deposition of Ministers, the Excommunicating of contumacious persons, and the
Reconciling of them when they become penitent, the calling of the fellow
Presbyters to a Synod, the making of Ecclesiastical Canons, etc. which power
of Jurisdiction p. 195. number. 25.
says he, remains one and the same, whole and entire, both in the Bishop,
and in the Presbytery, in him personally, in it collegially. His confession of
the Presbyteries power and auctority, we catch and lay hold on: but whereas he
would have this power any way proper and personal to Bishops, he is confuted
by our former Arguments.

And thus far have we demonstrat to Princes, who be they, to whom Christ has
committed the power of Excommunication, that with them they may cause it to
remain, and correct the usurpation of Prelates, who bereave them of it. Let us
next consider, what Princes may, or should do, after that the sentence of any
man's Excommunication, or Reconciliation, is given forth by them, to whom the
power of this Discipline pertains. lib. 6. cap. 9.
The Archbishop of Spalato is of opinion, that, not only it is free to Princes
to communicate with excommunicat persons, but also, that if they shall happen to
communicate with them, the Church (for the reverence she owes to Princes)
should straight absolve them, and that her sentence of Excommunication should
no longer have any strength. What? Shall the Church draw, and put up again,
the Spiritual Sword, at the pleasure of Princes? Or because Pr^ces will
perhaps cast holy things to Dogs: must others do so likewise? O prodigious
licentiousness, and hellish misorder, worthy to be drowned in the lake of
Lethe! But what then is the part of the Prince, after that the Church has
given judgment? Surely, whenever need is, he ought by the private judgment
of Christian discretion, to try and examine, whether this Discipline be
rightly execute, or not. If he find the execution thereof to be unreproveable,
and that yet the sinner goes on in his contumacy, Calv. lib. Epistolar. col.
169 Gratian. cause. 11. q. 1. c. 20.
then by his Civil power he ought further to punish him in his person, or
wordly estate, that he may either reform or repress, such a one as has not
been terrified by the Churches censures. But if after trial, he understand
that the sentence given forth is unjust and erroneous, either through the
ignorance or the malice of the Ecclesiastical and regular Judges, then he
ought to interpone his auctority, and cause a due proceeding, for in such
extraordinary cases of the failing of Ecclesiastical persons, Princes may do
much in things and causes Spiritual, which ordinarily they can not.

It remains to show, who have the power of those censures and punishments
which are proper to Ecclesiastical persons. Where first we are to consider,
that there are two sorts of faults which make Ecclesiastical men worthy to be
punished, viz. either such as violate sacred, or such as violate civil and
humane duties: the one is to be judged by Ecclesiastical Judges alone, and
that according to the Laws of God and the Church: the other by civil Judges
alone, and that according to the civil and municipall Laws of the
Commonwealth. This latter sort again is twofold, for either the fault is
such, that though a man be condignely punished for it by the civil Magistrate,
yet he does not therefore fall from his Ecclesiastical office or dignity; of
which sort experience shows many: or else such as being punished according
to their quality and demerit, a man by necessary consequence falls from the
Ecclesiastical function and dignity which before he had; this was Abiathars
case, and the case of so many as being justly punished by Proscription,
Incarceration or Banishment, are secundario and ex consequenti shut from their
bearing office in the Church. If Abiather had sinned in a sacred matter, the
cognition thereof says contr. 4. lib. 1. e. 20. nota 8.
Iunius, had pertained to the Priests: but because he sinned against the
Commonwealth and the Kings Majesty, it was necessary to deal with him
Civilly, and not Ecclesiastically. What? are not Ecclesiastical men in this
time also thought to be lawfully judged by the Civil Magistrate, if at any
time they be found guilty of appaired Majesty? As for the other sorts of
saults, whereby (as we have said) Sacred and Ecclesiastical duties are
violate, such as the teaching of False and Heretical Doctrine, neglecting of
Discipline, unbeseeming and scandalous conversation, etc. which things (if they
be not amended) they who have the execution of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
committed to them, ought to punish by Suspension, Deposition, etc. Now as when
one is called to the work of the Ministry, his fitness and qualification for
that work, should be tried and judged by the Clergy of the adjacent bounds
assembled in their Classical Presbitery, to whom it also pertains (after
that he is by them tried and approven, and after that he is elected by that
Church where he is to serve) to send him out from them with power to exercise
the office of a Pastor: so when there is just cause of Suspending or Depriving
him, it belongs to the same Presbitery to consider and judge hereof, and
according to his offense to give judgment against him. For who should recall
him, but they who sent him? Or who should discharge him his Ministerial
function, except they who ordained him to exerce the same? And who may take the
power from him, but they who gave the power unto him? That Ordination
perraineth to the whole Presbitery, and not to the Bishop alone, we have
showed before: and now by the same reason we say, Suspension and Deposition
pertain to the Presbitery also, and are not in the power of the Bishop. And
that in the ancient Church, as Bishops gave not Ordination, so neither did
they Suspend nor Depose any man without the common Council, Advice, and
concurrence of the Presbitery, yea and sometimes of a Synod, it is clear from
Cypr. lib. 1. Epist. 9. lib. 3. Epist. 2. and 10. Council. Carthag. 3. can. 8.
Council. Carthag. 4. can. 22. 23. Council. African. can 20. Council. Hispal. 2
can. 6. Justin Novel. 42. cap. 1. Hieron. comment. ad Isa. 3. Siricius Epist.
ad Ambros. inter Ambr. epist. 80. Touching the Suspension and Deposition of
Ministers, the Assembly at Glosgowe anno 1610. ordained, that the Bishop should
associate to himself the Ministry of these bounds where the Delinquent
served, that is, the Presbitery whereof he has been a Member, and together
with them there take trial of the fact, and upon just cause found, to Deprive
or Suspend. Which act was ratified in the 21 Parliament of King James anno
1612. Nevertheless, if any man think the sentence of the Bishop and the
Presbitery given forth against him, to be unjust, he ought to have liberty of
recourse to the Synod, and there to be heard, according as it was decreed by
the fourth Council of Carthage Can. 66. But oftimes the matter is of such
difficulty or importance, that the Bishop and the Presbitery may not giveout an
peremptory sentence of Suspension or Deprivation, Fenner. Theol. lib. 7 c. 7.
p. 153.
till the matter be brought to the Synod of the province, Hemming enchir.
class. 3. cap. 11. p. 39^, 91
where according to the ancient order the matter is to be handled, not by the
censure of one Bishop, but by the judgment of the whole Clergy gathered
together.

Princes therefore may not suffer Bishops to usurp the power of Suspending and
Depriving at their pleasure, and whenever they commit any such tyranny in
smiting of their fellow servants, it is the part of Princes to cause these
things to be redressed, and for this end graciously to receive the grievances
of oppressed Ministers. The Arians of old being assembled in a Council at
Antioch, Can. 11.
decreed, that if any Ecclesiastical Person, should without the advice and the
letters of the Bishops of the Province, and chiefly of the Metropolitan, go to
the Emperor to put up any grievance unto him, he should be cast out, not only
from the holy Communion, but from his proper dignity which he had in the
Church. Whereupon Hist. Eccl. cent. 4 l. 2. c. 48. p. 242.
Osiander has this observation: This Canon also was composed against holy
Athanasius: for Attanasius being expelled by the Arrians, had fled to the
Emperor Constantine the younger, and had from him obtained a return to his
own Church. Now this Canon is very unjust, which forbids that a Bishop or any
other Minister of the Church, being unjustly oppressed, flee to his godly
Civil Magistrate: since it was lawful to the Apostle Paul to appeal to the
Roman Emperor, wicked Nero, as the acts of the Apostles witness. But it may
be seen in this place, that Bishops were very soon seeking dominion, yea
tyranny over the Church, and over their Colleags. Besides all this, there is
yet another thing which ought to have a very principal consideration in the
Deposition of a Minister, and that is the consent of the Church and
Congregation where he has served. Let the Magistrate know says loc. Theol.
tom. 6. p. 838.
Gerard, that as the vocation of Ministers pertains to the whole Church, so
to the same also pertains the removing of Ministers, therefore as a Minister
ought not to be obtruded upon a unwilling Church, so the Hearers being
unwilling and striving against it, a fit Minister ought not to be plucked away
from them. The Deposing of a Minister whom the Church loves and willingly
hears, de cas. consc. l 4. cap. 5. cas. 12.
Balduin accounts to be high Sacrilege, and holds, that as the calling, so
the dismissing of Ministers pertains to the whole Church. And so teaches
Ecclesiast. lib. 3. cap. 3.
Iunius. Shortly, as a man is rightly called to the ministerial office and
dignity, when he is elected by the Church, and ordained by the Presbitery, so
is he rightly deposed and put from the same, when he is rejected by the Church,
and discharged by the Presbitery.

Now there was brought forth in Scotland, anno 1610. a certain Amphibian
brood, sprung out of the stem of Neronian tyranny, and in manners like to his
nearest Kinsman the Spanish Inquisition. It is armed with a transcendent power,
and called by the dreadful name of the HIGH COMMISSION. Among other things, it
arrogateth to it self, the power of Deposing Ministers. But how unjustly, thus
it appears.

1. If those Commissioners have any power at all to depose Ministers, they have
it from the King whose Commissioners they are. But from him they have it not.
Therefore they have none at all. The proposition is most certain: for they sit
not in that Commission to judge in their own name, nor by their own auctority
quum nihil exerceat delegatus nomine proprio, as apud Forb. Iren lib. 2. cap.
11. p. 177.
Panormitan says,) but by virtue only of the Commission and Delegation which
they have of the King. Yea, Bishops themselves exerce not any Jurisdiction in
the High Commission as Bishops, but only as the Kings Commissioners, as
Defens. lib. 1. p. 8.
D. Downame aknowledgeth. The Assumption is gronnded upon this reason: The King
has not power to depose Ministers. Ergo he can not give this power to others.
For Bonifae. 8. de regul. Iuris reg. 79.
Nemo potest plus juris transfer in alium quam sibi competere dignoscatur.
The King may sometimes inflict such a civil punishment upon Ministers,
whereupon secondarily and accidentally will follow their falling away from
their Ecclesiastical office and function, (in which sense it is said, that
Solomon deposed Abiathar, as we heard before,) but to depose them directly and
formally (which the High Commission usurpeth to do) he has no power, and that
because this deposition is an act of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: Whereas the
power of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction does no more agree to the King, then the
power of Ecclesiastical order: his power is Civil and Temporal, not
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical. of the Church. lib. 5. cap. 53. p. 682.
D. Field also confesses, that none may judicially degrade or put any one
lawfully admitted, from his degree and order, but the Spiritual Guides of the
Church alone.

2. The deposing of Ministers pertains to Classical Presbiteries, or (if the
matter be doubtful and difficille) to Synods, as has been showed. And who
then can give the High Commission such auctority as to take this power from
them, and to assume it unto it self. These Commissioners profess, that they
have auctority to discharge other Ecclesiastical Iudicatories within the
Kingdom from meddling with the judging of any thing which they shall think
impertinent for them, and which they shall think good to judge and decide by
themselves in their Commission. Which if it be so, then (when it pleases them)
they may make other Ecclesiastical Iudicatories to be altogether useless and
of no effect in the Church.

3. In this Commission, Ecclesiastical and Temporal men are joined together,
and both armed with the same power. Therefore it is not right nor regular, nor
in any wise allowable. For even as when a Minister has offended in a Civil
matter, his fault is to be judged by Civil Judges according to the Civil
Laws, and by no other: so when he offends in an Ecclesiastical matter, his
fault is to be judged only by Ecclesiastical persons according to
Ecclesiastical Laws: and in such a case Novell. 83. cap. 1.
Justinian forbids Civil men to be joined with Ecclesiastical men in
judgment. They are Ecclesiastical things or causes which are handled and
examined by the High Commission in the process of deposing Ministers: and a
shame it is to Ecclesiastical men, if they can without the help and joining of
Temporal men, judge and decide things of this quality.

4. As in the matters to be judged, so in the censures and punishments to be
inflicted, Ecclesiastical and Civil men have in this Commission alike power
and auctority: for Ecclesiastical men therein have power of Fining, Confining,
Warding etc. common to them with the Temporal men: and again, the Temporal
men have power of Excommunication, Suspension, Deprivation, etc. common to them
with the Ecclesiastical men. For they all sit there as the Kings
Commissioners, and co nomine they exerce this Jurisdiction: which Commission
being alike discharged by them all, it is manifest that both Temporal men
take hold of the keys, and Ecclesiastical men take hold of the Civil sword.
And this monstrous confusion and mixeture, gives sufficient demonstration
that such a form of Judgment is not from the God of order.

Of the abuses and inregularities of the High Commission, we may not now
speak at greater length, but are hasted to make foreward.

CHAP. IX.
That the lawfullnesse of the Ceremonies, can not be warranted by the Law of
Nature.

WHat our Opposites have alleged for the Ceremonies, either from the Law of
God, or the Law of man, we have supra cap. 6. s. 1.
the Law of Nature also alleged for Holy days, and for kneeling at the
Communion. And when Eccl. pol. lib. 4. s. 1.
Hooker goes about to commend and defend such visible signs, which being used
in performance of holy actions, are undoubtedly most effectual to open such
matter, as men when they know and remember carefully, must needs be a great
deal the better informed to what effect such duties serve: He subjoyneth: We
must not think, but that there some ground of reason even in Nature, etc. This
is a smoke to blind the eyes of the unlearned. Our Opposites have taken no
pains nor travel to make us see any deduction of those Ceremonies, from the
Law of Nature: We desire proofs, not words. In the mean while, for giving
further evidence to the Truth, we will express our own mind, touching
things warranted by the Law of Nature.

And first we must understand aright, what is meant by the Law of Nature. To
wit, that Law Zanch. lib. 1. de lege Dei. these. 8. col. 190.
which God writteth and imprinteth A. Pol. synt. lib. 6. cap. 9. col. 49. D.
Pau. explic. catech. part. 3. q. 92. page 503.
other then the Decalogue or the Moral Law. But the Law which we are here to
enquire of, is that Law, which after the Fall, God still writteth in the heart
of every man: which (we all know) comes far short, and wants much of that
which was written in the heart of man before his fall. That we may understand,
what this Law of Nature is, which is written in all men's hearts, since the
Fall, we must distinguish jus natural from jus Divinum natural. For that Law
which is simply called jus natural is innatum, and lays before the minds of
men, that way, wherein Fr. Iun. de pol. Mos.
by the guidance and conduct of nature, they may be led to that good, which
is in the end proportionat to nature. Whereas Ius Divinum is inspiratum, and
lays before us another way, wherein Idi bid.
by a supernatural guidance, we may be led to a supernatural good, which is
an end exceeding the proportion of nature. As for that part of the Law of God,
which is called Ius divinum natural, it is so called in opposition to jus
divinum positivum.

Ius natural (says Instit. lib. 1. tit. 2.
Iustitian,) est quod natura omnia animalia doeuit. de rep. Eccl. lib. 6. cap.
2. n. 35.
The Arch Bishop of Spalato likes to speak with the Lawyers, Ius natural
says he simpliciter ponitur in omnibus animalibus. Videntur autem (says
Schol. in Instit. lib. 1. tit. 2.
Ioachinus Mynsingerus) Iurisconsulti, valde in hoc abuti vocabulo Iuris, cum
exempla praedicta sint potius affectus and inclinationes naturales, quae cum
quibusque animantibus enascuntur: quas Philosophi (...) appellant. In brutis
enim cum nulla sit ratio, igitur nec ullum jus esse potest.

1a. 2a. q. 91. art. 2.
Aquinas also shows, that beasts are not properly governed by the Law of
Nature, because Lex is aliquid rationis. Wherefore they err, who would make
the Law of Nature to differ in kind, from Ius gentium, which natural reason
has taught to all Nations. For this Law of Nations per se speciem non facit,
as says ubi supra.
Mynsingerus. And the Law of Nature is also by the Heathen Writters, often
called Ius gentium, as antiquit. Romans lib. 8. cap. 1.
Rosinus notes. If any will needs have the Law of Nature distinguished from
the Law of Nations, let them either take ubi supra. q. 95. art. 4.
Aquinas his distinction, who makes the Law of Nature to contain certain
principles, having the same place in practical reason, which the principles of
scientifike demonstrations have in speculative reason: and the Law of Nations
to contain certane conclusions drawn from the said principles. Or otherwise
embrace the difference which is put betwixt those laws by Schol. in instit.
lib. 1. tit. 2.
Mattheus Wesenbecius. Quae bestiae, naturali concitatione; ea (says he)
homines ex eodem sensu ac affectione, cum moderatione tamen rationis si
faciant, jure naturae faciunt. Quae bruta non faciunt. sed sola ratione hominis
propria, non affectione communis naturae, omnes homines faciunt, fierique
opportere intelligunt, hoc fit jure gentium.

For my part, I take the Law of Nature, and the Law of Nations, Rosin. ubi
supra. Synops pur. theol disp. 18. these. 16. Til. synt. part. 1. disp. 35.
these. 16. Iun. de pol. Mos. cap. 1.
who comprehend under the Law of Nature, both the common principles of good and
evil, virtue and vice, right and wrong, things beseeming and things not
beseeming; and likewise the general conclusions which by necessary
consequences are drawn from the said principles. To come to the particulars,
there are three sorts of things which the Law of Nature requires of man, as
both Aquin. ubi supra q. 94. art. 2.
Schoolmen, and Zanch. ubi supra. col. 1889 189. Iun. ubi supra. Sharp. curse
theol. de lege Dei p. 299.
Modern Doctors have rightly taught. The first, it requires as he is Ens; The
second, as he is Animal. And the third, as he is Homo ratione praeditus. First,
as he is Ens, the Law of Nature requires him to seek the conservation of his
own being, and to shun or repel such things as may destroy the same. For so
has Nature framed, not only all living creaturs, but other things also which
are without life, that they seek their own conservation, and flee (if they
can) from appearant destruction. Let us take one example out of subtle de
subtle. exerc. 5. did. 8.
Scaliger, which is this. If a small quantity of oil, be poured upon a sound
board, let a burning coal be put in the midst of it, and the oil will quickly
flee back from its enemy, and seek the conservation of it self. This is
therefore the first precept of the Law of Nature, that man seek his own
conservation, and avoyde his own destruction. Whereupon this conclusion
necessarily follows, that he may repel violence with violence. Secondly, as
man is a living creature, the Law of Nature teaches him to propagate and to
conserve his kind. Whereupon these conclusions do follow, Viz. the commixtion
of Male and Female, the procreation of Children, the educating of them, and
provyding for them. This Nature has taught to man, as a thing common to him
with other living creatures.

Thirdly, as man is a creature endued with reason, the Law of Nature teaches
him, 1. Something concerning God. 2. Something Romans 2. 15.
he says, that the Gentiles show the work of the Law written in their
hearts. First then, the Law of Nature teaches man, to know that there is a
God, and that this God is to be worshipped. Whereupon it follows, that man
should seek to know God, and the manner of his worship. Now that which may be
known of God, is showed even unto the Gentiles. Romans 1. 19.
The Apostle says signanter. (...), meaning those few and small sparkles of
the knowledge of God, which natures imbredde light discovered unto the
Gentiles, for making them inexcusable, namely, that there is a eternal power
and Godhead, which men ought to reverence and to worship. 2. The Law of Nature
teaches man to hold fast friendship and amiti with his Neighbors, for as much
as he is Animal sociale. Violare alterum says lib. 3. offic.
Cicero, naturae lege prohibemur. For the Law of Nature bids us Luc. 6. 31.
do to others as we would have them to do unto us. And from these precepts it
follows, that we should not offend other men, that we should keep promises,
stand to bargains, give to every man his own, etc. 3. As touching a man's
self, the Law of Nature teaches him, that he should not live as a reasonlesse
creature, but that all his actions should be such, as may be congrous and
beseeming for a creature endued with reason. Whereupon it follows, that he
should live honestly and virtuously, that he should observe order and decency
in all his actions, etc. Hence Cor. 11. 14.
the Apostle says, that nature it self teaches, that it is a shame for a man
to have long hair, because it is repugnant to that decency and comeliness
which the Law of Nature requires. For Par. com. in illum locum.
among other differences which Nature has put betwixt men and women, this is
one, that it has given to women thicker and longer hair, then to men, that it
might be as a veil to adorn and cover them. The reason whereof, Nature has
hid in the complexion of a woman, which is more humide then the complexion of a
man. So that if a man should take him to this womanish ornament, he should but
against Nature transform himself (in so far) into a woman.

These things being premitted, I will add four reasons to prove, Iun. de pol.
Mos. cap. 1. Par. com. in Romans 1. 19.
our Divines, but by 1a. 2a. 91. art. 4.
Aquinas also. It only teaches us, to seek and to do Iun. ubi supra.
bonum, velut finem naturae, such a good as is a end proportioned to Nature.
All those precepts of the Law of Nature which ^e have spoken of, could never
lead men to a supernatural good. Iun. ibid.
It is only the Divine Law, revealed from God, which informs the minds of
men, with such notions, as are supra naturam, and which may guide them ad finem
supernaturalem. But all sacred significant Ceremonies, which by their holy and
spiritual significations, express to us some mysteries of grace, and of the
Kingdom of God; must be thought, to direct us unto a supernatural good;
Therefore they are not of that sort of things, which the Law of Nature
requires. For this Law goes no higher, then to teach men that there is a God,
and that this God is to be worshipped, the knowledge of which things is not a
good exceeding the proportion of Nature. For it was found in the Gentiles
themselves, who knew no other good then that which was proportioned to Nature.
Let me now conclude this reason with de subtle. exerc. 77. did 2.
Scaligers words. Neque enim quae supra naturae leges sunt, ex naturae legibus
judicanda censeo.

2. As the Ceremonies by their sacred spiritual and mystical significations,
which natures light could never discover unto men. But in the Law of Nature, as
we are directed unto no other good then such as is proportioned to nature, so
are we guided unto the same, Iun ubi supra.
Natura duce, that is to say, by such common notions, as God has imprinted in
the Nature of all men. Now I suppose our Opposites will not unwillingly reckon
their sacred significant Ceremonies, among those things of the Spirit of God,
1. Cor. 2. 14.
which a natural man can not receive, because they are spiritually discerned.
What then have they to do with the Law of Nature? If it be said, that they
necessarily follow upon those first principles and conclusions, which a
natural man receives; I answer, this shall never be proven. They will say
perhaps, that nature teaches us to use certain rites in the worship of God,
to observe set times for his worship, also to kneel down in reverence of God
whom we worship. Ans. Be it so: but how make they up a necessary connection
betwixt certain Rites, and significant Ceremonies of human institution?
betwixt set times, and some more days then one of seven: betwixt kneeling in
the worship of God in genere, and kneeling at the Sacrament in Specie; unless
they say., that Nature requires us to kneel in every act of worship, and never
to worship God, without kneeling on our knees.

3. Ius naturae is ubique idem, as ubi supra.
Rosinus: It is approven communi omnium gentium judicio atque assensu, as disp.
18. these. 26.
the Professors of Leiden: It is one and the same among all Nations, in respect
of the principles of it, as 1a. 2^. q. 94. art. 4.
Aquinas and ubi supra these. 9.
Zanchius: The Law of Nature fixa est cordibus nostris, as in Luc. 6. 31.
Stella. Yea it is so written in our hearts, that iniquity it self can not blot
it out, as lib. 2. confess c. 4.
Augustine says. And we learn from the Romans 1. 19.
Apostle, that the Law of Nature is manifest in the Gentiles, for God has
showed it unto them. Ergo non ignorant says com in illum locum.
Pareus. Wha^soever then the Law of Nature requires, it does clearly and
necessarily follow upon those principles which are written in every man's
conscience, unless we set up new Divinity, and either say that the principles
of the Law of Nature are not written in every man's conscience, or else that
they may be at some time abolished and razed out of the consciences of men,
which were to leave men without a witness. Nay, says lib. 10. confess. cap. 6.
Augustine, the Heaven and the Earth and all that is in them, on every side
cease not to bid all men love God, that they may be made inexcusable. Now if
all the principles of the Law of Nature* be fir^ly and clearly written in every
man's conscience, and can not but be known to every man who has the use of
natural judgment and r^ason; it follows, that they who will prove or
warrant any thing by the Law of Nature, must only take their premises from
evey ^ans conscience, and say as 1 Cor. 11. 13. 14.
the Apostle says, Judge in your selves, etc. does not even Nature it self
teach you? etc. As if the Apostle said, This principle of Nature is fixed in
all your hearts, that men should affect honesty and comeliness. Go to;
reason in your selves from the Judgment of Nature whether it follow not upon
this principle, that a man should not wear long hair, for as much as his
wearing of long hair, is repugnant to the principle of nature. Committit ipsis
judicium says com. in illum locum.
Pareus: ipsos testes, imo judices appellat. So that if the Ceremonies be
warranted unto us by the Law of Nature; the judg^ment must be committed to
every man's conscience, and so should every man be convinced in himself, by such
a principle of Nature, from which the Ceremonies have a necessary and manifest
deduction. Yet we attest the searcher of all hearts, that we have never been
convinced in our selves, by such a principle of Nature, no not after diligent
search and enquiry.

4. Let our Opposites say to us, once for all, upon what praecept of Ens; and
as he is Animal, belongs not to our purpose. As for that which it requires
of him, as he is a creature endued with reason; there is one part of it that
concerns our selves; Viz. that we should live honestly, and secundum modum
rationis, that we should observe order and decency in all our actions. This
order and decency, do not respect our holy duties to Godward, not comprehend
any sacred Ceremony in his worship: but they look to us ward, and are referred
only to such beseeming qualities, as are congrous and convenient to a
reasonable Nature in all its actions. Yea even generally we may say with de
subtle. ex^rc 2.
Scaliger. Ordinem dico sine quo natura constare non potest. Nihil enim absque
ordine vel meditata est vel effecit illa. Another part of that which Nature
requires of man, as he is a creature endued with reason, concerns (as we
showed) our Neighbors, whom it teaches us, not to harm nor offend, etc. And
if our Opposites would reckon with us here, their Ceremonies will appear
repugnant to Nature, because of the detriment and offense which they offer unto
us, whereof we have spoken in our Argument of Scandal. But there was a third
part concerning God and his worship: and here must our Opposites seek a
warrant for the Ceremonies. Now albeit Nature (as was said) teach all men, that
there is a eternal and mighty God, who should be worshipped and honored by
them. Yet it descends not unto such particular precepts, as can have any show
of making ought for significant Ceremonies Omnibus enim innatum est and in
animo quasi insculptum, esse deos: but yet quales sint says lib 2. de not.
Deor.
Cicero, varium est. And as Nature has not taught men to know the Nature and
the attributs of the Godhead, together with the sacred Trinity of persons in
the same: so neither has it taught, what sort or manner of worship should be
given unto God Iun ubi supra.
Lex naturalis rerum communium est, and does only inform us with those common
notions called (...). Concerning the worship of God, it speaks only de genere,
not de specie. Wherefore there can be no inference from that worship which the
Law of Nature require h, either of any distinct kind of worship, or of any
Ceremony in that kind. No more then it follows. Si est animal, est Asinuc:
for a genere ad speciem non valet consequentia affirmando.

The fourth part Against the Indifferency of the Ceremonies.
CHAP. 1.
Of our Opposites pleading for the Indifferency of the Ceremonies.

IF it seem to any, that it is a strange Method to speak now of
Indifferency, in the end of this Dispute, which ought rather to have been
handled in the beginning of it: they may consider, that the Method is not
ours, but our Opposites. For they have been fleeing upon Icarus wings, and
soaring so high that their wings could not but melt from them: so have they
from necessity fallen down to expediency; from it to lawfulness; and from
thence to indifferency.

I knew certain of them, who after reasoning about the Ceremonies, with some
of our side, required in the end no more, but that they would only aknowledge
the indifferency of the things in themselves. And so being wo'ed and
solicitously importuned by our former Arguments against the Ceremonies, they
take them to the weaving of Penelopes web, thereby to suspend us, and to gain
time against us: this indifferency I mean, which they shall never make out,
and which themselves otherwhiles unweave again. Always, so long as they
think to get any place for higher notions about the Ceremonies, they speak
not so meanly of them, as of things indifferent. But when all their forces of
Arguments, and answers are spent in vain: then are our ears filled with
uncouth outcries and declamations, which tend to make themselves appear
blameless for receiving, and us blameworthy for refusing matters of Rite and
indifferency.

Upon this string they harp over and over again, in Books, in Sermons, in
private discourses. M G. Powell, in his book De Adiaphoris, and Tilen, in the
12 and 17 Chapters of his Paraenefis, condemn those who make ought ado about
the controverted English Ceremonies, for so much as they are things
indifferent. Paybody in his Apology for kneeling at the Communion, stands
much upon the indifferency of this gesture, both in every worship of God, and
in that Sacrament namely. The Arch Bishop of Sainctandrewes in his Sermon at
Perth Assembly, because he could not prove this indifferency, he choosed to
suppone it. Of the indifferency of these Articles (says he) I think there is
little or no question amongst us. Whether he spoke this of Ignorance or of
Policy, I leave it to be guessed at. Howsoever, if we should thus compose our
controversy about the Ceremonies; embrace them and practice them, so being
that they be only called things indifferent: this were to cure our Church, as
L. Sulla cured his Country, durioribus remediis, quam pericula erant says, de
benef. lib. 5. cap. 16.
Seneca. Wherefore we will debate this question of Indifferency also.

CHAP. II.
Of the nature of things Indifferent.

TO say nothing here of the Homonomy of the word Indifferent, Indifferens says
Calepine, is that quod sua natura neque bonum est neque malum. 1. 2a q. 18.
art. 9.
Aquinas calls that an indifferent action, which is neither good nor evil.
Rem indifferentem voco quae neque bona neque mala in se est, says Bald. de
cas. consc. lib. 2. cap. 9. cas. 9.
a later Writer.

But Iren. lib. 1. cap. 13.. 7.
D. Forbesse likes to speak in another language. He will have that which is
indifferent, to be opponed to that which is necessary: and a thing indifferent
he takes to be such a thing, as is neither necessarily to be done, nor yet
necessarily to be omitted, in respect of any necessity of the commandment of
God: or such a thing as is neither remunerable with eternal life, and
commends a man unto the reward of God, nor yet is punishable with eternal
death, and polluteth a man with guiltiness. Now because he knew, that Divines
define a thing indifferent to be that which is neither good nor evil. Ibid..
10.
He therefore distinguishes a twofold goodness of an individual action. The
one he calls bonitas generalis, concomitans, and sine qua non. By which
goodness is meant the doing of an action in Faith, and the doing of it for the
right end, as he expounds himself. This goodness, he says, is necessary
to every humane action, and hinders not an action to be indifferent. The other
he calls bonitas specialis, causans, and propter quam. This goodness he
calls legal, and says, that it makes an action necessary; In which respect
indifferent actions are not good, but those only which God in his Law has
commanded, and which are remunerable with eternal life.

But that we may have the vanity of these quiddities discovered to ubi supra.
says, that the general goodness which accompanies the action, is
remunerable, because it is necessary; but the action it self is not necessary,
because that general goodness may be had as well in the omission of it, or in
the doing of the contrary, as in the doing of it. Whereupon he would have it to
follow, that the action it self is not remunerable.

Ans. 1. The D. had done well to have remembered, that he is speaking only of
individual actions, and that actus individuatur a circumstantiis and adjecto
modo: so that whiles all that he says, turns to this, that one action
considered in it self, without the circumstances and concomitant goodness, is
not remunerable, he makes not out his point: for he says no more in effect,
but that actus quo ad speciem, is not remunerable, which none of us denies.

2. An individual good action of that kind, which the D. calls necessary, is
no otherwise remunerable and laudable, then an individual good action of that
kind which he calls indifferent, for example; when I go to hear Gods Word
upon the Lord's Day; let this action of mine be considered quo ad individuum: is
it any otherwise remunerable, then in respect of the goodness which
accompanies it? whence it is, that the hearing of Hypocrites, not being
accompanied with such goodness, is not remunerable: yet the hearing of the
Word is an action necessary, because commanded. Now may we know wherein
stands the difference betwixt the remunerable good of this action of hearing,
and the remunerable good of one of those actions which the D. calls
indifferent; for example, a woman's action of marrying?

I perceave what the D. would answer. For he ubi supra cap. 13.. 7.
says; if a woman marry in the Lord, this action is good respectu adjecti
modi, quamvis in se sit media and libera, etiam quo ad individuum. Implying,
that if on the other part an individual action be necessary, (as for example
the action of hearing the Word,) then it is in it self good, etiam quo ad
individuum.

But I reply, what means he by these words, in se? means he the individual
nature of the action? Nay; then the sense shall be no other then this, quo ad
individuum, etiam quo ad individuum, And besides the D. can not define to us,
any other nature in a individual thing, then the nature of the species or
kind.

Quaestio, quid est? de quolibet individuo contento sub spe cie, non petit
quidditatem ejus singularem, sed communem totius speciei, says P. Fonseca,
com. in Metaph. Arist. lib. 7. cap. 15 quest. unic. sect. 2.
Is it not holden individuum non posse definiri, nisi definitione speciei?
Sure, a perfect definition expressing the nature of the thing defined, can not
be given to any individual thing, other then the definition of the species.
Needs therefore must the D. by in se, understand the specificall nature: and
indeed when Divines speak of things indifferent in se, per se, or, sua natura;
they mean only things indifferent quo ad speciem. Yet thus also the D. has
said none sense. For so should we take his words, quamvis quo ad speciem sit
media and libera, etiam quo ad individuum.

But to let his manner of speaking pass, we will consider what quo ad speciem,
and likewise respectu adjecti modi: whereas a woman's action of marrying (when
she marries in the Lord) is only good and remunerable in the last respect,
namely, respectu modi, for, in se, or, quo ad speciem; it has no remunerable
goodness in it.

Ans. What do we hear of any difference betwixt these actions quo ad speciem?
That which we crave, is, that a difference may be showed betwixt the
remunerable goodness of the one, and of the other, both being considered quo
ad individuum.

That whereby the D. either was deceived, or would deceive, appears to be
this; that he takes every thing which agrees to a individual thing, to agree
to it quo ad individuum: as if to speak of Peter quatenus est homo; and to
speak of him quatenus est individuum signatum, or, res singularis sub specie
hominis, were all one thing. Even so, to say of my individual action of
hearing the Word, that it is necessary because of the commandment of God, (and
in that respect remunerable;) is not to speak of it quo ad individuum; but as
the specificall nature of that action of hearing the Word,) which God has
commanded,) is found in it. For if we speak of this individual action, quo ad
individuum, we can not consider it otherwise then respectu adjecti modi:
because in moral actions, modus adjectus is principium individuationis, and
nothing else, does individualize a moral action.

Thus shall my Position stand good, namely, that those individual species is
not commanded, both being considered quo ad inviduum; the former has no other
remunerable good in them, then the latter; and the whole renumerable good which
is in either of them, stands only in adjecto modo. Which being so, it is all
one, when we speak of any individual moral action quo ad individuum, whether
we say that it is good, or that it is remunerable and laudable, both are one.
For as is well said by 1a. 2a. q. 21. art. 2.
Aquinas, necessarium est omnem actum hominis, ut bonum vel malum, culpabilis
vel laudabilis rationem habere. And again. Nihil enim est aliud laudari vel
culpari, quam imputari alicui malitiam vel bonitatem sui actus. Wherefore that
distinction of a twofold goodness, causans and concomitans, which the D. has
given us, has no use in this question, because every action is laudable and
remunerable, which is morally good, whether it be necessary or not. Now moral
goodness de subtle. exerc. 307. did. 27.
says Scaliger, est perfectio actus cum recta ratione. Humane moral actions
are called good or evil, in ordine ad rationem, quae est proprium principium
humanorum actuum, says 1a. 2a. q. 100. art. 1.
Aquinas, thereupon inferring, that illi mores dieuntur boni, qui rationi
congruunt: mali autem, qui a ratione discordant. D. Forbesse does therefore
pervert the question, whiles he ubi supra cap. 13.. 7.
says, in hac cum fratribus quaestione, hoc bonum est quod necessarium. Nay,
those actions we call morally good, which are agreeable to right reason,
whether they be necessary, or not. Since then, those actions are laudable and
remunerable, which are morally good; and those are morally good which are
agreeable to right reason: it follows, that forasmuch as those actions which
the D. calls indifferent, are agreeable to right reason, they are therefore
not only morally good, but also laudable and remunerable, and so not
indifferent. Yea those actions which he calls necessary, being considered
quo ad individuum, are no otherwise laudable and remunerable, then those which
he calls indifferent, being considered in like manner quo ad individuum, as
has been showed.

And besides all this, we have somewhat more to say, of the D^^.

For, 1. the D. makes that which is indifferent, to be opponed to that which
is necessary, and yet he makes both those to be morally good. Now albeit in
natural things, one good is opponed to another good, as that which is hot, to
that which is cold, yet, Aquin. 1. 2a q. 31. art. 8.
bonum bono non contrariatur in moralibus. The reason of the difference is,
because Bonitas Physica or relativa est congruentia naturae quaedam says ubi
supra.
Scaliger: and because two natures may be contrary one to another, therefore
the good which is congruous to the one, may be contrary to the good which is
congruous to the other, bu^ bonum virtutis says ubi supra.
Aquinas, non accipitur nisi per convenientiam ad aliquid unum, scilicet
rationem: so that it is impossible for one moral good to be opponed to another.

2. Since Divines take a thing indifferent, to be medium inter bonum and malum
morale: and since (as the very notation of the word shows,) it is such a
mean, as comes not nearer to the one extreme, then to the other, but is
alike distant from both: how comes it, that the D. so far departs both from
the tenet of Divines, and from the notation of the word, as to call some such
actions indifferent, as have a moral remunerable goodness, and yet not evil
in them? or where learned he such a Dialect, as gives to some good things, the
name of the things indifferent?

3. Why does he also waver from himself? for ubi supra lib. 2. c. 5. number. 1.
he cites out of the Helvetike Confession Hierome his definition of a thing
indifferent, and approves it. Indifferens (says he,) illud est, quod nec
bonum nec malum est, ut sive feceris sive non feceris, nec justitiam habeas nec
injustitiam. Behold the goonesse which is excluded from the nature of a thing
indifferent, is not only necessity, but righteousness also; yet has the D.
excluded only the good of necessity from things indifferent, making the other
good of righteousness to stand with them. For things which are done in faith
and done for the right end (such as he acknowledges these things to be, which
he calls indifferent,) have righteousness in them, as all men know.

CHAP. III.
Whether there be any thing indifferent In actu exercito.

FOr our better light in this question, I will premit these consirations,
Schol. in lib. 2. de Ben^f.
Fed. Morellus upon those words of Seneca, Refert quid, cui, quando, quare,
ubi, etc. says, that without those circumstances of things, persons, times,
places, facti ratio non constat. Circumstances sometimes constituunt rerum
earum quae aguntur speciem, Iun. de pol. mos. cap. 7.
say our Divines, meaning that circumstances do make an action good or bad.
Humani actus say the Schoolmen, non solum ex objectis, verum ex circumstantiis
boni vel mali esse dicuntur. It is not every man's part, (says Camer. prael
tom. 2. page 49.
one of our (s) Aquin. 1a 2a. q. 18. art. 3.
Opposites) to judge de circumstantia, quae reddit actionem vel bonam vel
malam. Some circumstances says D. Burgess of the lauf of kneel. c. 1.
another of them, are intrinsecall and essential to actions, and specially
making up their nature. The principal circumstances which here we speak of,
are comprehended in this versicle. Quis, Quid, Vbi, Quibus auxiliis, Cur,
Quomodo, Quando.


The first circumstance which makes an action good or bad, is, Quis, which
designeth the person: If a Magistrate put to death a malefactor, the action is
good, but if a private person put him to death, it is evil.

The second is, Quid, which notes the quality or condition of the object: If a
man take sua, the action is good; If aliena, it is evil.

The third is, Vbi: If men banquet in their own houses, the action is good: If
in the Church, it is evil.

The fourth is, Quibus auxiliis: If men seek health by lawful means, the
action is good; If by the Divill, or his instruments, it is evil.

The fifth is, Cur: If I rebuke my brother for his fault, out of my love to
him, and desire to reclaine him, the action is good: If out of hatred and
spl^ne, the action is evil.

The sixth is, Quomodo: for he who does the work of the Lord carefully does
well, but he who does it negligently, does evil.

The seventh is, Quando: To do servile work upon the six days of labor,
is good: but to do it upon the Lords Sabbath, is evil.

2. There is another consideration which follows upon the former, viz. either
in actu signato, and, quo ad speciem; or in actu exercito, and quo ad
individuum. For an action is said to be specificated by its object, and
individuated by its circumstances. So that when an action is good or evil in
respect of the object of it, then it is called good or evil quo ad speciem.
When it is good or evil in respect of the circumstances of it, then it is said
to be good or evil quo ad individuum.

3 Humane actions whether considered quo ad speciem, or quo ad individuum, are
either such as proceed from the deliberation of reason, or from bare
imagination only. To this latter kind we refer such actions, as are done
through incogitancy, whiles the mind is taken up with other thoughts; for
example, to clawe the head, to handle the beard, to move the foot, etc. which
sort of things proceed only from a certain stirring or fleeting of the
imagination.

4. Let it be remembered, that those things we call morally good, which agree to
right reason: those morally evil, which disagree from right reason: and those
indifferent, which include nothing belonging to the order of reason, and so are
neither consonant unto nor dissonant from the same.

5. When we speak of the indifferency of an individual action, it may be
conceived two ways, either absolute and sine respectu ad aliud, or, comparate
and cum respectu ad aliud. In the free will offerings, if so be a man offered
according as God had blessed and prospered his estaite, it was indifferent to
offer either a bullock, or a sheep, or a goat; but if he choosed to offer any
of them, his action of offering could not be indifferent, but either good or
evil. When we speak of the indifferency of an action comparate, the sense is
only this, that it is neither better not worse then an other action, and that
there is no reason to make us choose to do it, more then another thing. But
when we speak of the indifferency of an action, considered absolutely and by
it self, the simple meaning is whether it be either good or evil, and whether
the doing of the same must needs be either sin or evil doing.

6. Every thing which is indifferent in the nature of it, is not by and by
indifferent in the use of it. But the use of a thing indifferent ought evermore
to be either choosed or refused, followed or forsaken, according to these three
rules, delivered to us in Gods Word. 1. The rule of Piety. 2. The rule of
Charity. 3. The rule of Purity.

The first of these rules we find 1. Cor. 10. 31. Whether therefore ye eat, or
drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. And Romans 14. 7. 8.
For none of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself. For whether we
live, we live unto the Lord, and whether we die, we die unto the Lord. Where
the Apostle (as com. in illum locum.
Calvine notes) reasons from the whole to the part. Our whole life, and by
consequence all the particular actions of it ought to be referred to Gods
glory, and ordered according to his will. Again, Col. 3. 17. And whatsoever ye
do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus. In the expounding of
which words. Dr. Davenant says well, that Etiam illae actiones quae sunt sua
natura adiaphorae, debent tamen a Christianis fieri in nomine Christi, hoc est,
juxta voluntatem Christi, and ad gloriam Christi.

The second rule is the rule of Charity: which teaches us, not to use any
thing indifferent, when scandal rises out of it. Romans 14. 21. It is good
neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother
stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak; yea, though it do not weaken, if it
be not expedient for edifying our brother, be it never so lawful or
indifferent in it is own nature, the Law of Charity binds us to abstain from
it. Romans 14. 19. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for
peace, and the things wherewith one may edify another, Romans 15. 2. Let every
one of us please his nighbour for his good to edification, 1. Cor. 10. 23. All
things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient: All things are
lawful for me, but all things edify not. Where the Apostle teaches Pareus
com. in illum locum.
that, In cibo, etc. In meat, drink, and the whole kind of things indifferent,
it is not enough to look whether they be lawful: but that further, we are to
look, whether to do or omit the same, be expedient and may edify. The Bishop
of Winchester preaching upon Ioh. 16. 7. I tell you the truth, it is expedient
for you that I go away, etc. marketh, that Christ would not go away, without
acquanting his Disciples with the reason of it: and that reason was, because it
was for their good. Whereupon he infers, 1. That we should avoid 1. Sam. 2.
15.
Hophni's non vult enim, and make our vult our enim: that is, that we should
not give our will for a reason, but a reason for our will. 2. That we should
not with the Cor. 6. 13. and 10. 23.
Corinthians stand upon licet, it is lawful; but frame our rule by expedit, it
is expedient. 3. That our rule should not be 10. 1^. 50.
Cajaphas expedit nobis, but Christ's expedit vobis: for you it is good; you,
the disciples: and make that, the rule of our going out, and our coming in.
The heathens themselves co^d say, that we are borne, partly for God, partly for
our Country, partly for our friends, etc. How much more ought Christians to
understand, that we are not borne for our selves, but for Christ and his
Church? And as in the whole course of our life, so especially in the policy of
the Church, we may do nothing (be it never so indifferent in it self) which is
not profitable for edification, 1. Cor. 13. 26. Let all things be done to
edifying. From which precept Pareus infers, that nothing ought to be done in
the Church, which does not manifestly make for the utility of all and every
one: and that therefore not only unknowen toungs, but cold Ceremonies, and
idle gestures should be exploded out of the Church.

The third Rule is the rule of Purity, which respects our peace and
plerophorie of conscience, without which any thing is unclean to us, though it
be clean and lawful in it is own nature. Romans 14. 14. To him that esteems
any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean. Therefore Calv. com. in illum
locum.
Si quis aliquam in cibo immunditiem imaginetur, eo libere uti non potest.
Whatsoever indifferent thing a man judges in his conscience to be unlawful,
he may not lawfully do it. Romans 14. 5. Let every man be fully persuaded in his
own mind. And verse. 23. He that doubts is damned, if he eat, because he
eats not of faith: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Nefas est omnino
faith In Romans 14. 7. 8.
Calvine, quippiam aggredi quod putes illi (domino) displicere, imo quod non
persuasus sis illi placere. Now, if a thing indifferent be used according to
these three rules, the use of it is not only lawful, but expedient also. But
if it be not used according to these rules, the use of it is altogether
unlawful.

And since a thing indifferent in the nature of it, can never be lawfully

Iun. lib. 1. cap. 12.. 16.
D. Forbesse speaks unadvisedly, whiles he says, Evenit nonnunquam, etc. It
falls out sometimes, that that which was expedient for thee to do yesterday,
and to omit this day, thou may notwithstanding afterward either do it or not
do it, according to thy arbitriment. As if forsooth, our using of things
indifferent, should not evermore be determined by the rule of expediency, which
Gods Word gives us, but sometimes by our own will. expos in. Col. 3. 17.
Dr. Davenant could not dream that any except the ignorant common people,
could be of this opinion, which D. Forbesse holds. Fallitur vulgus says he,
dum judicat licere sibi, u^ i^victu, vestitu, sermon, aut quacunquere
adiaphora pro arbitrio suo: nam haec omnia ad regulam adhibenda sunt.

Moreover, as we may not use any indifferent thing, at our own pleasure; so
neither may the Church at her will and pleasure, command the us^ of it: but as
our practice, so the Churches injunction, must be determined and squared
according to the former rules. And if any man think, that in the use of things
indifferent, he may be led and ruled by the Churches determination, without
examining any further; let him understand, that the Churches determination, is
but a subordinate rule, or a rule ruled by higher rules.

D. Forbesse perceiving how these rules of Scripture may subvert his cause,
desires to subject them to the Churches determination, and to make it our
highest rule. Iam autem ubi supra cap. 11. sect. ^6.
says he, in talium rerum usu, id edificat, quod pacificum, illud est
pacificum quod est ordinatum; is autem decens ordo est in Ecclesia ab ipso
Christo constitutus, ut in talibus non suo quisque se gerat arbitratu, sed
audiatur Ecclesia, and exhibeatur praepositis obedientia.

He has been speaking of the rules which Gods Word gives us, concerning the
use of things indifferent, and all of them he comprehends under this rule,
that we should hear the Church, and obey them who are set over us, as if Gods
rules were subordinate to men's rules, and not theirs to his. We say not that
every man may use things indifferent suo arbitratu: but we say withal, that
neither may the Church command the use of things indifferent, suo arbitratu.
Both she in commanding, and we in obeying, must be guided by the rules of
Scripture.

They who are set over us in the Church, have no power given them of Christ,
which is not for edifying, Ephesians. 4. 12. The Council of the Apostles and Elders
at Jerusalem, (which is a lively pattern of a lawful Synod to the worlds
end) Act. 15. 28.
professed they would lay no other burden upon the Disciples, except such
things as the law of Charity made necessary for shunning of Scandal: and so
that which they decreed, had force and strength to bind, a Charitate propter
Scandalum, says In Act. 15. n. 18.
Sanctius. But suo arbitratu they enjoined nothing. It appears by this place
(says Annot. on Act. 15 sect. 10.
Cartwright) that there may be no abridgment of liberty simply decreed, but in
regard of circumstance, according to the rule of Edification. And if the
Churches decrees and Canons, be not according to the rules of the Word, yet
forasmuch as Romans 14. 1^.
every one of us shall give account of himself and his own deed, we must
look, that whatsoever the Church decree, yet our practice in the use or
omission of a thing indifferent, be according to the foresaid rules.

We may not for the commandment of men transgress the rule of Piety, by doing
any thing which is not for Gods glory, and ordered according to his will;
neither ought any of us to obey men, except 1 Pet. 2. 13.
For the Lords sake; and Ephesians. 6. 6.
as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God; which teaches us the manner
how we ought to obey men, namely, Zanch. in Ephesians. 6. 5. 6.
propter Christum and sicut Christus praecipit. For if we should know no more
but the will of man for that which we do, then we should be the 1 Cor. 7. 23^
servants of men, not the servants of Christ. Neither yet may we for any humane
ordinance, break the rule of Charity: but Tailor on Tit. 1. 15. p. 295.
whatsoever either would weaken, or not edify our brother; be it never so
lawful; never so profitable to our selves; never so powerfully by earthly
auctority enjoined; Christians who are not borne unto themselves, but unto
Christ; unto his Church; and unto the fellow members; must not dare to meddle
with it.

Nor lastly, may we obey men, so as to break the law of Purity, and Id. ibid.
p. 289.
perform any action with a doubtful conscience, that is, whereof either the
Word has not, or we out of it have no warrant: in which case tender
consciences must be tendered, rather then be racked by auctority: for be the
things in themselves never so lawful, etc. they are utterly unlawful to me,
without such information. Whereas therefore some say, that in the use of
matters indifferent, the laws of those who are set over us ought to rule us;
we still answer that our practice may not be ruled by any law of man, except it
be according to the rules of the Word; whereof one is this: Calv. in Romans 14. 5.
Tantum oportere esse obedientiae studium in Christianis, ut nihil agant, quod
non existiment vel potius certi sint placere Deo.

These considerations being premitted, for resolution of the quo ad speciem,
for so much as the imagination from which they have their original, does not in
those actions subject it self to the conduct and moderation of reason, but is
like Gchazi, running away without his masters leave, let the learned give their
judgment. Howsoever, it can not be denied, Ames. lib 3 de consc. cap. 8. q. 5.
that such actions may be and are of en evil quo ad individuum, or in respect
of the circumstances, which show forth in them reproveable temerity,
incogitancy, levity, and undecency. But such actions belong not to our purpose.

2. As for those actions which proceed from the deliberation of reason, howbeit
many of them be indifferent quo ad speciem, yet none of them is, nor can be
indifferent quo ad individuum. The reason of this difference and distinction
is, Aquin. 1a. 2a. q. 18. art 8.
because every action has it is species or kind from the object; and a humane
moral action, has it is species or kind, from the object referred to the
original of humane actions, which is reason. Whereupon it comes, that if the
object of the action include something that agrees to the order of reason, it
shall be a good action, according to it is kind: for example, to give alms to
an indigent man. But if it include something that is repugnant to the order of
reason, it shall be an evil action according to it is kind; as, to steal or
take away another man's goods. Now sometimes it happens, that the object of an
action does not include something that belongs to the order of reason; as, to
lift a strave from the ground, to go to the field etc. such actions are
indifferent, according to their kind. But we must pronounce far otherwise of
them, when we speak of them quo ad individuum, because as they are
individuated by their circumstances, so in their individual being, they have
their goodness or badnesse from the same circumstances, as has been showed.
So that no such action as is deliberated upon, can be indifferent quo ad
individuum; because oportet says ibid. art. 9.
Thomas quod quilibet individualis actus habeat aliquam circumstantiam, per
quam trahetur ad bonum, vel malum, ad minus ex part intentionis finis.

Friar Ambrosius Catarinus, following the Doctrine of Thomas, Hist. of the
counc. of Trent. lib. 2 p. 196.
maintained in the Council of Trent, that to do a good work, the concurrance
of all circumstances is necessary, but the want of one only is sufficient for
an evil: so that howsoever among the works considered in general, some are
indifferent, yet in the singular, there is no medium between having all the
circumstances and wantimg some; therefore every particular action is good or
evil. And because among the circumstances, the end is one, all works referred
to a bad end are infected. He further alleged S. Augustine, that it is sin
not only to refer the action to a bad end, but also not to refer it to a
good end. Thus spoke the learned Friar very appositly. And the same is the
judgment of our own Divines. De his rebus indifferentibus says Com. in 1 Cor.
6. 12.
Martyr, statuendum est, quod tantummodo ex genere atque natura sua.
indifferentiam habeant, sed qnando ad electionem descenditur nihil est
indifferens. And so says in Ro^. 14. dub. 1.
Pareus likewise.

These things are so plain and undeniable, that Iren. lib. 1. cap. 13.. 7. 9.
10.
D. Forbesse quo ad individuum, called indifferent, for this respect, because
they are neither commanded of God, and so necessary to be done, nor yet
forbidden, and so necessary to be omitted.

Of an individual action of this kind, he says: manet homini respectu istius
actus plena arbitrij libertas moralis, tum ea quae exercitij seu
contradictionis dicitur, tum etiam ea quae specificationis seu contrarietatis
libertas appellatur. He holds, that though such an action be done in Faith,
and for the right end (which general goodness, he says, is necessary to the
action, and commends a man to God) yet the action it self is indifferent,
because it is not necessary: for a man has liberty to omit the same, or to do
another thing, which he illustrateth by this example.

If the widow Sempronia marry at all, it is necessary that she marry in the
Lord, yet it is not necessary that she marry. If she marry Titius, it is
necessary that she marry him in the Lord, yet it is not necessary that she
marry Titius, but she has liberty to marry either him, or Caius, or
Pomponius. If she marry not at all, but live a single life, it is necessary
that she live a single life in the Lord, yet it is not necessary that she live
a single life. And so still it is indifferent and free for her, either to
marry, or not to marry, or if she marry, it is free to her to marry either
Titius, or Caius, or Pomponius.

Ans. the D. either mistaketh, or misseth the mark many ways:

1. Our question is only of individual actions, considered both in respect of
their original, which is deliberation and election, and in respect of all
their circumstances, none excepted. When In Romans 14. dub. 1.
Pareus disputes this question, whether there be any action indifferent; he
resolves that things indifferent are considered three ways. 1. In se, or, quo
ad substantiam operis, in themselves, or, in respect of the substance of the
work: and so many things are indifferent. 2. Ratione s^i principij, h^e.
electionis and intentionis qua fiunt, in respect of their original, which is
the election and the intention, wherewith they are done: and so there is no
action indifferent, says he, but either good or evil, according as it
proceeds from a good or evil election and intention. 3. Ratione effectus, in
respect of the effect; and so he acknowledges no action indifferent neither:
for if Scandal follow upon it; it is evil: now if it edify not, it
scandalizeth and destryeth, which In Ro^. 14. 20.
he proves from Christ's words, He that gathers not with me, scatters. And
indeed, for so much as that which is impeditivum boni spiritualis, is confessed
to be scandalous, and every action which edifyeth not, hinders our spiritual
good, in that it should edify, but does not; it follows, that every action
which edifyeth not, does certainly scandalize; which shall be yet more plain,
if we consider, that every action that is done to the notice and knowledge of a
man, if it yield him no matter of profitable thoughts, it gives him occasion of
vain, idle, and hurtful thoughts: for the thoughts and cogitations of man's
mind, being stirred and set aworke by the view of some object, are like the
upper and nether milstones, which, when they have no grain to grind, wear
and spend themselves away, till at last one of them break another. If then
every action, which is done to the notice of other men, either edify or
scandalize them, and every one of our actions (without exception) either edify
or scandalize our selves, that is, either make us the better or the worse, it
must needs follow, that there is not one of our actions indifferent, but either
good or evil, in respect of the effect. Now all that the D. has said,
evinceth no more but the indifferency of some actions considered only in
respect of the work, not in respect of all the circumstances, (and by
consequence, not quo ad individuum.) If he had considered Sempronia, her act
of marrying, either in respect of the original of it, or in respect of the
effect of it, (much more if he had (as he ought to have) considered it in both
these respects) he might easily have seen, that it can not be called
indifferent, because it either proceeds from a good election and intention,
or from a bad; and it has either a good effect or a bad, I mean, it either
edifyeth or scandalizeth. In which two respects (we see) neither it nor any
action is indifferent, in Pareus his judgment.

2. Our question is of the indifferency of things considered absolutely
Sempronia her marrying, with her living a single life, and her marrying of
Titius, with her marrying of Caius or Pomponius. But if he had considered any
one of all these things absolutely and by it self, and proven it to be in that
respect indifferent, he had said something to the purpose. Nothing follows
upon that which he has said, but that (these things being compared among
themselves) Sempronia her marrying of Titius, is neither better nor worse, then
her marrying of Caius or Pomponius. Yet for all that, if she marry any of
them, her act of marrying that man, shall be either according to the rules of
the Word, or not, and so either good or evil, not ind^ffere^t. Which purpose
lib. 3. de conss. cap. 18.
Amesius illustrateth by this apposite simile. A statuarie or a graver of
images oftimes has no reason, wherefore he should make this Image, more then
another; yet if he make any Image at all, he must needs either make it good, by
following the rules of his art, or else evil, by departing from the said rules.

3. Though in genere naturae a man has liberty of contradiction, to in genere
moris, it is otherwise: a man has not such moral liberty in the use of
things, which are in their nature indifferent, as the D. alleges. For those
things which are in their nature indifferent, are never indifferent in their
use; and that because the use of them, is either according to the rules of the
Word, and then it is expedient; or not; and then it is unlawful. The D.
distinguishes not betwixt the nature of things indifferent and the use of
them: but so he reasons as if every thing indifferent in the nature of it,
were also indifferent in the use of it. Which how false it is, men of lower
degree then Doctors can easily judge.

Go to then; let us see how the D. reasons. He says, it is indifferent and
free to the widow Sempronia either to marry or not to marry; and if she marry,
she has liberty to marry either this man or that man: and that because none of
all these things is either commanded or forbidden of God. Just so, might the
strong among the Romans and Corinthians, have reasoned against Paul. Why do
you go about to adstrict or limite our use of such things, as God has neither
commanded nor forbidden? it is indifferent and free to us, either to eat flesh
or not to eat flesh, and if we eat flesh, either to eat this kind, or that.
Nay, but the Apostle will not have the indifferency of the thing it self, in
its own nature, to be ground enough for the use of it: but he will have their
practice and use of it, to be ever either expedient or unlawful, in respect of
the circumstances, and according as these rules of Piety, Charity, and Purity
(which Gods Word gives concerning the use of things indifferent,) are observed
or not observed. And so do we answer the D. That if a widows act of
marrying be according to the rules of the Word, that is, if it tend to Gods
glory, if it be expedient for edifying, and if she be rightly persuaded in her
conscience that she has a warrant from the Word for that which she does, (of
whioh rules, I have said enough before) then is it good, not indifferent. If it
be not according to these rules, then is it evil, not indifferent.

More plainly; her act of marrying, is either according to the rules of the
Word, or not. If it be according to the rules, then it is expedient that she
marry, therefore not indifferent; If it be not according to the rules, then it
is unlawful, therefore not indifferent. If it be said that the best man who
lives tieth not himself to these rules, in the use of every indifferent thing,
but oftimes uses or omitteth a thing of that nature, at his own pleasure. I
answer, Ia. 3. 2.
In many things we offend all. And, Psalm. 19. 12.
who can understand his errors? But in the mean time, the rules of the Word
limit us so strictly, that we may never use a thing in it is own nature
indifferent, at our arbitrament and pleasure, and that the use of it is never
lawful to us, except it be done piously for Gods glory, profitably for man's
edification, and purely with full assurance that that which we do is approved
of God. And as all this has been proven from Scripture heretofore, so now let
us try whether we can make it to follow upon that which the D. himself has
said.

ubi supra.. 7.
If a widow marry; he holds it necessary that she marry in the Lord, because
to her that marries it is commanded that she marry in the Lord. Now when 1.
Cor. 7. 39.
the Apostle commands that she who marries marry in the Lord, he means,
that she marry according to the will of the Lord, saecundum voluntatem Domini,
as (o) Zanchius ((...)) com. in Ephesians. 6 1.
expounds him. And what is that, but that she marry according to the rules
of the Word? neither does the Apostle allow her to marry, except she marry
according to these rules. So he Ephesians. 6. 1.
bids children obey their parents in the Lord, that is, according to the
will of the Lord.

Again, ubi supra.
the D^holdes it necessary, that whatsoever thing we do, we do it in faith,
because as the Apostle teaches, whatso^ is not of faith is sin. Now whiles
every thing is condemned which is not of faith, two sorts of actions are
rejected, as com. in Romans 14. 23.
Calvine observes. 1. Such actions as are not grounded upon, nor approven by
the Word of God. 2. Such actions as though they be approven by the Word of God,
yet the mind wanting this persuasion, does not cheerfully address it self to
the doing of them. But I pray, does the Word underprope or approve the use of
any thing indifferent, if it be not used according to the foresaid rules, and
by consequence conveniently and profitably?

The D. thinks it enough, that in the use of a thing indifferent,

1. We have sufficiently proven, that it is never lawful for us to do any
thing which is in the nature of it indifferent, except we be persuaded not only
of the lawfullnesse of the thing, but of the expediency of doing it.

2. Of his comparing of things indifferent together, and not considering them
positively and by themselves, we have also said enough before.

3. The doing of a thing in faith, infers the expediency and profit of doing
it; and that is enough to take away the indifferency of doing it; for since
every indifferent thing is either expedient to be done, or else unlawful to be
done, (as has been showed,) it follows, that either it ought to be done, or
else it ought to be left undone: therefore it is never indifferent nor free to
us, to do it, or leave it undone, at our pleasure.

4. Because the D. (I perceive) sticks upon the term of necessity; and will
have every thing which is not necessary to be indifferent: therefore to remove
this scruple, beside that Chrysostom, and the Author of the interlineary
gloss upon Math. 18. 7. take the meaning of those words, It must needs be that
offenses come, to be this, It is profitable that offenses come. Which gloss,
though it be not to be received, yet as prael. Tom. 2. page 345.
Camero notes, it is ordinary to call that necessary, which is very profitable
and expedient. Beside this (I say,) we further mantaine, that in the use of
things indifferent, that which we deliberat upon to do, is never lawful to be
done, except it be also necessary, though not necessitate absoluta seu
consequentis, yet necessitate consequentiae seu ex suppositione. Paul's
c^rcumcising of Timothy was lawful: only because it was necessary, for G.
^anct. in Act. 16. 3.
he behooved by this means to win the good will of the people of Lystra who
had once stoned him, otherwise he could not safely have preached the Gospel
among them. Therefore he had done wrong, if he had not circumcised Timothy,
since the circumcising of him was according to the rules of the Word, and it
was expedient to circumcise him, and unexpedient to do otherwise. And (because
de paribus idem est judicium) whenever the use of any indifferent thing is
according to the rules of the Word, that is, when it is profitable for Gods
glory and man's edification, and the doer is persuaded of so much, I say,
putting this case, then (for so much as not only it may, but ought to be done,)
the use of it is not only lawful, but necessary: and (for so much as not only
it needs not, but ought not to be omitted,) the omission of it is not only
unnecessary, but also unlawful.

Again, put the case, that the use of a thing indifferent be either against,
or not according to the said rules, then (for so much as not only it may, but
ought to be omitted, the omission of it is not only lawful but necessary: and
(for so much as not only it needs not, but may not, neither ought to be done)
the doing of it, is not only unnecessary, but also unlawful. For which it
makes, that the Apostles in Act. 1^. 28.
their decree, allege no other ground for abstinence from blood and things
strangled (which were in their nature indifferent,) but the necessity of
abstaining caused and induced by the foresaid rules.

The Apostle shows that that measure of liberality whereunto he exhorts
the Corinthians, was not by any Divine commandment necessary, yet he advises
it as a thing expedient. 2 Cor. 8, 8. 10. And were not the Corinthians
thereunto bound because of this expediency of the matter, though it was not
necessary? Iuxta verbum, etc. According to Gods Word (says de Instit. actual.
cap. 42. p. 490.
the Bishop of Sarisburie,) we are obliged to glorify God by our good works,
not only when necessity requires, but also when ability furnishes, and
opportunity occurreth, Gal: 6. 10. Tit. 2. 14.

As touching the scope of all this Dispute, which is the indiffenrency of the
controverted Ceremonies, we shall hear sundry reasons

But I marvel, why D: Forbesse, discourses so much for the indifferency of
the Ceremonies, for lib. 1. cap. 7. He holds, that there were just reasons in
the things them selves, why the pretended Assembly of Perth, should injoyne the
five Articles; so me of which he calls very convenient and profitable, and
others of them necessary in themselves. Sure, if he stand to that which he has
there written, he can not choose but say, that it is unlawful both for us, and
for all Christians any where, to omit the controverted Ceremonies, and that all
such as have at any time omitted them, have thereby sinned in leaving that
undone which they ought to have done: for the convenience and necessity of them
which he pretends, is perpetual and universal.

CHAP. IV.
Of the rule by which we are to measure and try, what things are
indifferent.

THat the Word of God is the only rule, whereby we must Of things indifferent
says Apol. Part. 1. cap. (...). sect. 1.
Paybody, I lay down this ground, that they be such, and they only, which
Gods Word has left free unto us.

Now these things which Gods Word leaves free and indifferent (in respect of
their nature and kind) are such things as it neither shows to be good nor
evil. Where we are further to consider, that the Word of God shows unto us
the lawfulness or unlawfulness, goodness or badnesse of things, not only by
precepts and prohibitions, but sometimes also, and more plainly by examples. So
that not only from the precepts and prohibitions of the Word, but likewise
from the examples recorded in the same, we may find out that goodness or
badnesse of humane actions, which takes away the indifferency of them.

And as for those who will have such things called indifferent, as are neither
commanded nor forbidden in the Word of Cod, I ask of them, whether they speak
of plain and particular precepts and prohibitions, or of general only? If
they speak of particular precepts and prohibitions, then by their rule; the
baptising of young children; the taking of water for the Element of Baptism; A
lectors public reading of Scripture in the Church upon the Sabbath day; the
assembling of Synods for putting order to the confusions of the Church; the
writing and publication of the decrees of the same; and sundry other things
which the Word has commended unto us by examples, should all be things
indifferent, because there are not in the Word of God, either particular
precepts for them, or particular prohibitions against them. But if they speak
of general precepts and prohibitions, then are those things commanded in the
Word of God, for which we have the allowed and commended examples of such as we
ought to follow, (for in the general we are commanded to be followers of such
examples, Phil. 4. 8. 9. 1 Cor. 11. 1. Ephesians. 5. 1.) Though there be no
particular precept for the things themselves thus examplified.

To come therefore to the ground which shall give us here some we are bound to
imitate Christ, and the commendable example of his Apostles, in all things
wherein it is not evident, they had special reasons moving them thereto, which
do not concern us. Which ground as it has been of a long time holden and
confirmed by them of our side, so never could, nor ever shall, our Opposites
subvert it. It Is long since the Abridgment confirmed and strengthened it, out
of these places of Scripture. Ephesians. 5. 1, Be ye therefore followers of God. as
dear children. 1 Cor. 11, 1. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of
Christ. 1 Thessalonians 1. 6. And ye became followers of us and of the Lord, Phil. 3.
17, Brethren be followers together of me.

This ground is also at length pressed by lib. 2. Epist. 3.
Cyprian, who shows that in the holy Supper of the Lord, Christ alone is to
be followed by us: that we are to do what he did: and that we ought not to
take heed, what any man has done before us, but what Christ did, who is before
all.

But Bishop Proc. in Perth. Assemb. part. (...). (...). 38. and 40.
Lindsey asks of us, if we hold this rule, what is

Ans. 1. Beside the common blessing of the Elements in the beginning of the
action, we give thanks also in the several actions of distribution, saying
after this or the like manner. The Lord Jesus, the same night he was betrayed,
took Bread* and when he had given thanks (as we also give thanks to God who
gave his Son to die for us) he break it etc.

In like manner also after Supper, he took the Cup, and when he had given
thanks (as we also give thanks to God who gave his Son to shed his blood
for us) he gave it, etc. Which form (we conceive) may be construed to be an
imitation of the example of Chrict.

2. Though we did not observe such a form, yet there were two reasons to move
Christ to give thanks severally both at the giving of the Bread, and at the
giving of the Cup, neither of which concerns us.

1. The Eucharisticall Supper was one continued action with the other Supper
which went before it, for it is said, That whiles they di^ eat, he took Bread,
etc. Wherefore for more distinction of it from that Supper which immediately
proceeded, it was fit that he should give thanks severally at the giving of
each Element.

2. He had to do with the twelve Apostles, (y) whose hearts being ((...)) Io.
16. 6.
so greatly troubled with sorrow, and (z) whose minds not well comprehending
that which they heard concerning the death of ((...)) Io. 16. 12.
Christ, much less those Mystical Symboles of it, especially at the first
hearing, seeing, and using of the same, it was be^ofefull for their cause,
distinctly and severally to bliss those Elements, thereby to help the
weakness of their understanding, and to make them the more capable of so
Heavenly Mysteries.

Now having heard that which the B^ had to say against our rule, (a) He
holds, That in the actions of Christ ((...)) ubi supra.
his Apostles, or the Customs of the Church, there is nothing exemplary and
left to be imitated of us, but that which either being moral is generally
commanded in the Deealouge, or being Ceremonial and circumstantiall is
particularly commanded by some constant precept in the Gospel.

Ans. 1. This rule is most false, for it follows from it, that the example of
the Apostles making choice of the Element of Water in Baptism, and requiring a
Confession of Faith from the person who was to be baptized; the example also
both of Christ and his Apostles, using the Elements of Bread and Wine in the
Holy Supper: a Table at which they did communicate, and the breaking of the
Bread, are not left to be imitated of us; because these things are ceremonial,
but not particularly commanded in the Gospel. So that according to the rule
which the Bishop holds, we sin in imitating Christ and his Apostles in
those things, for as much as they are not exemplary, nor left to be imitated of
us.

2. His weapons fight against his own fellows, who allege (as we have showed
supra part. 3. cap. 6. sect. 12.
elsewhere) the Custom of the Church, is a sufficient warrant for certain
Ceremonies questioned betwixt them and us, which are not particularly commanded
by any precept in the Gospel. These the B. does unwittingly stricke at, whiles
he holds, that such Customs of the Church are not exemplary, nor left to be
imitated of us.

Wherefore we hold still our own rule for sure and certain. Amanda, as the
works of Redemption, or Admiranda, as his miracles; or Notanda, as many things
done by him for some particular reason, proper to that time and case, and not
belonging to us, which things notwithstanding are well worthy of our
observation; or Imitanda, and such are all his actions, which had no such
special reason moving him thereto as do not concern us.

Calvine upon 1 Cor. 11. 1. says well, that the Apostle there, calls back both
himself and others to Christ. Tanquam unicum recte agendi exemplar. And
Policarpus Lycerus, upon Math. 16. 24. Under that command of following Christ,
comprehends the imitation of Christ's actions.

Most certainly, it is inexcusable presumption, to leave the example of Christ,
and to do that which seems right in our own eyes, as if we were wiser then
he. And now having laid down this ground, we are to build certain positions
upon it, as follows.

CHAP. V.
The first Position which we build upon the ground confirmed in the former
Chapter.

FRom that which has been said, of following Christ and the Our first
inference is this: That it is not indifferent for a Minister to give the
Sacramental Elements of Bread and Wine, out of his own hand, to every
communicant; for as much as our Lord commanded his Apostles to divide the Cup
among them, that is, to reach it one to another, Luk 22. 17. Some of the
interpreters are of opinion; that the Cup spoken of by the Evangelist in that
place, is not the same whereof he speaks after verse. 20. but they are
greatly mistaken: for if it were as they think, then Christ did again drink
before his death, of that fruit of the Wine, whereof we read verse 17. 18. which
is manifestly repugnant to his own words. Wherefore as com. in Math. 26. 27.
Maldonat observes out of Augustine and Euthimius, there was but one Cup,
whereof Luke speaks first by anticipation, and afterward in its own proper
place.

But ubi supra page 62.
B. Lindsey falls here upon a very strange speculation, Scotland, every one
of them takes his part, but dare not say (though) that they have divided these
lands and revenues among themselves. Cane 20. or 40. beggars, when an alms is
distributed among them, because every one of them gets his part, say
therefore that they themselves have parted it among them: what then shall be
said of the distributer, who gives to every one his part feverally and by
himself? That a man who required, Luke 12. 13.
that his brother should divide the inheritance with him, did not (I trow)
desire Christ to cause his brother to take his own part of the inheritance:
(there was no fear, that he would not take his part) but he desired, that his
brother might give to him his part. So that to divide any thing among men, is
not to take it, but to give it. And who did ever confound parting and
partaking, dividing a Cup and drinking a Cup, which differ as much as giving
and rec^iving: Thus we conclude, that when Christ commanded the Apostles to
divide the Cup among them, the meaning of the words can be no other then this,
that they should give the Cup one to another, which is so plain, that Maldon.
ubi supra.
a Jesuit also makes it to follow upon this command, that Christ did reach
the Cup, non singulis sed uni, qui proximo, proximus sequenti, and deinceps
daret. Hence it is that de re Sacram. lib. 2. page 31.
Hospinian thinks it most likely, that Christ brake the Bread into two parts,
earumque alteram dederit illi qui proximus ei ad dextram accumbebat, alteram
vero ei qui ad sinistram, ut isti deinceps proxime accumbentibus porrigirent,
donec singuli particulam sibi decerpsissent.

CHAP. VI.
Another Position, built upon the same ground.

Our next position which we infer, is this: that it is not indifferent Ioh.
13. 12. from Math. 26. 20. with 26. Mark 14. 18. with 22.

Our Opposites here bestirre themselvers, and move every stone against us.
Three answers they give us, which we will now consider.

First, they tell us, that it is not certain that the Apostles were sitting
when they received this Sacrament from Christ, and that adhuc sub Iudice lis
est. Yet let us see, what they have to say against the certainty hereof.

B. Lindsey objecteth, that between their eating of the Paschall Supper, and
the administration of the Sacrament to the Disciples, five acts interveened. 1.
The taking of the Bread. 2. The Thanksgiving. 3. The Breaking. 4. The Precept,
Take ye, eat ye. (...). The Word, whereby the Element was made the
Sacrament. In which time (says he) the gesture of sitting might have been
changed.

Ans. It is first of all to be noted, that the Apostles were sitting, at that
instant when Christ took the Bread: for it is said, that he took Bread,
whiles they did eat, that is (as com. in Math. 26. 26.
Maldonat rightly expounds it) Antequam surgerent, antequam mensae and
ciborum reliquiae removerentun: and so we use to say, that men are dyning or
supping, so long as they sit at Table, and the meat is not removed from before
them. To Christ's ministering of the Eucharisticall Supper together with the
preceding Supper, Christians had respect when they celebrated the Lords Supper
together with the Love Feasts. Probabile est eos ad Christi exemplum
respexisse, qui Eucharistiam inter caenandum instituit (says com. in 1. Cor.
11 21.
Pareus.) But of this we need say no more, for the B. himself has here
acknowledged no less, then that they were sitting at that time when Christ
took the Bread. Only he says, that there were five acts which interveened
before the administration of the Sacrament to the Disciples (whereof the taking
of the Bread was the first) and that in this while the gesture of sitting might
have been changed: which is as much as to say; when ^e took the Bread they
were sitting, but they might have changed this gesture, either in the time of
taking the bread, or in the time of thanksgiving, or in the time of breaking
the Bread, or whiles he said, Take ye, eat ye, or lastly, in the time of
pronouncing those words; This is my body. (for this is the Word w^ereby (in the
Bishops judgment) the Element was made the Sacrament, as we shall see
afterward.)

Now but by his leave, we will reduce his fyve acts to three: for thus soeaketh
the Math. 26. 26. Mark 14. 22.
text. And as they did eat. Jesus took bread and blessed it and brake it, and
gave it to the Disciples, and said, take, eat, this is my body. Whence it is
manifest, that the giving of the Bread to the Disciples, which no man (I
suppose) will deny to have been the administration of it, went before the two
last acts, which the B. reckons out. Nothing therefore is left to him, but to
say, that their gesture of Sitting might have been changed, either in the
taking, or in the blessing, or in the breaking, or else between the taking and
the blessing, or between the blessing and the breaking; yet does the text knit
all the three together by such a contiguity and connection, as shows unto us,
that they all did make up but one continued action, which could not admit any
interruption.

I saw a Prelate sit down to his breakefast, and as he did eat, he Instit.
lib. 4. cap. 17. 35.
Calvine gathers out of the Text, that the Apostles did both take, and eat
he Sacramentale Bread^. whiles they were sitting. Non legimus says he,
prostratos adorasse, sed ut erant discumbentes accepisse and manducasse.
Christus says apud Didcclav. p. 794.
Martyr, Eucharistiam Apostolis una secum sedentibus aut discumbentibus
distribuit. disp. 3. de symb. canae dom. these 4.
G. I. Vossius puts it out of doubt, that Christ was still sitting, at the
giving of the Bread to the Apostles. And that the Apostles were still sitting,
when they recived the Bread vbi supra
Hospinian thinks it no less certain. They made no doubt of the certainty
hereof, who composed that old verse which we find in 3. q. 81. art. 1.
Aquinas, Rex sedet in caena, turla cinctus duodena:
Se tenet in manibus: se cibat ipse cibus.
Papists also put it out of controversy: for de sacr. Euchar. lib. 4. cap. 30.
Bellarmine aknowledgeth. that the Apostles could not externally adore Christ
by prostrating themselves in the last Supper quando recumbere cum eo illis
necesse erat. Where we see, he could guess nothing of the change of their
gesture. Intelligendum est says concord. Evang. cap. 129.
C. Iansenius, Dominum in novissima hac caena, discubuisse and sedisse ante and
post comestum agnum. In Luke 22. 19.
D. Stella sticks not to say, distribuit Salvator mundi panem discumbentibus.

But now having heard B. Lindsey; let us hear what Apol. part 2. cap. 3. sect
5.
Paybody will As they did eat, is expounded by Luke 22. 20.
Luke and 1 Cor. 11. 25.
Paul, to be After they bad done eating, or after Supper. Thus is their
language divided. B. Lindsey did yield to us, that when Christ took Bread,
they were sitting, and his conjecture was, that this gesture of sitting might
have been changed after the taking of the Bread. Paybody saw that he had done
with the Argument, if he should grant, that they were sitting when Christ
took Bread, therefore he calls that in question. Vulcans own gimmers could
not make his answer and the Bishops to stick together.

But let us examine the ground which Paybody takes for his opinion. He would
prove from Luke and Paul, that when Matthew and Mark say, As they were eating,
Jesus took Bread: the meaning is only this: After Supper Jesus took Bread:
importing, that Christ's taking of Bread did not make up one continued action
with their eating, and that therefore their gesture of sitting might have been
changed between their eating of the preceding Supper, and his taking of the
Sacramental Bread.

Whereunto we answer, that there are two opinions touching the Suppers which
Christ did eat with his Disciples, that night wherein he was betrayed: And
whichsoever of them the reader please to follow, it shall be most easy to
break all the strength of the Argument, which Paybody opposes unto us.

First then, there are some who think that Christ having kept the Passover
according to the Law, (which is not particularly related, Calvine and Beza upon
Math. 26. 20. Pareus upon Math. 26. 21. Fulke and Cartwright against the
Rhemists upon 1 Cor. 11. 23. Tolet and Maldonat upon Ioh. 13. 2. Cornelius
Iansenius Conc. Evang. cap. 131. Balthazar Meisnerus, Tractat die fest virid
page 256. Johannes Forsterus conc. 4. de pass. p. 538. Chrystophorus Pelargus
in Ioh. 13. quaest. 2. and others. The reasons whereby their judgment is
confirmed are these,

1. Joseph. lib. 7. de bello Iud. cap. 17.
Many societies conveened to the eating of the Paschall Supper by Twenties. And
if Twenty was often the number of them who conveened to the eating of the
same, (which also confirms their opinion, who think that other men and women
in the Inn, did eat both the Paschall and Evangelicall Supper, together with
the Apostles in Christ's company:) it is not very likely (say some) that all
those were sufficiently satisfied and fed with one lamb, which after it was
eight days old, was allowed to be offered for the Passover, as Mos. and Aaron
lib. 3. c. 4.
Godwyn notes. com. in Math. 26. 21.
Neque esus unius agni says Pareus, toti familiae sedandae fami sufficere
poterat.

2. The Paschall Supper was not for banqueting or filling of the belly, as ubi
supra.
Josephus also writteth. Non tam exsatiendae nutriendieque naturae says com.
in 10. 13. 2.
Maldonat, quam fervandae legalis Ceremoniae causa sumebatur. Non ventri says
ubi supra.
Pareus, sed religionn causa fiebat. But as for that Supper which Christ and
his Apostles did eat, immediately before the Eucharisticall; annot. on. 1 Cor.
11. 23.
Cartwright doubts not to call it a carnal Supper; an earthly repast; a Feast
for the belly: which lets us know, that the Sacramental Bread and Wine was
ordained, not for feeding their bodies which were already satisfied by the
ordinary and daily supper, but for the nourishment of the soul.

3. That beside the Paschall and Evangelicall Suppers, Christ and his Apostles,
had also that night another ordinary Supper, ubi supra.
Fulke proves by the broth wherein the Sop was dipped 10. 13. 26. Where as
there was no such broth, ordained by the Divine institution, to be used in the
Paschall Supper.

4. That there were two Suppers before the Eucharisticall, they gather from
Ioh. 13. For first, the Paschall Supper was ended verse. 2. after which Christ
washed his Disciples feet. And thereafter we read verse. 12. par. ubi supra.
Resumptis vestibus rursum ad caenam ordinariam consedisse. The dividing of the
Passover into two services or two Suppers, had no warrant at all from the
first institution of that Sacrament: for which cause, they think it not
likely, that Christ would have thus Dividedit, according to the device and
custom of the Jews in later times; for so much as in Marriage, (and much more
in the Pesseover) he did not allow of that which from the beginning was not so.
Neither seems it to them any way probable, that Christ would have interrupted
the eating of the Passover with the washing of his Disciples feet, before the
whole Paschall Supper was ended, and they had done eating of it.

But others (and those very judicious too) are of opinion, that that second
course whereunto Christ sat down after the washing they prove, that so the
custom was, to divide the Passover into two courses or services. As for that
wherein Christ dipped the sop, they take it to have been the sauce which was
used in the Paschall Supper, called Charoseth: of which the Hebrews writ, that
it was made of the palm tree branches, or of dry figs, or of raysens, which
they stamped and mixed with vinegar, till it was thick as mustard, and made
like clay, in memory of the clay wherein they wrought in Egypt; and that they
used to dip both the unleavened bread and the bitter herbs into this sauce.
And as touching that place Io. 13. they expound it by the custom of the Jews,
which was to have two services or two Suppers in the Passover: And take those
words verse. 2. Supper being ended, to be meant of the first service: and
sitting down again to Supper verse. 12. to be meant of the second service.

If those two opinions could be reconciled and drawn together

If the first opinion be followed, then it will be most easily answered to
Paybody, that Iansen. conc. Evang. cap. 131.
Inter caenamdum instituta fuit Eucharistia, cum jam rursum mensae
accubuissent. Sed post caenam Paschalem, and usum agni legalis. When Mathewe
and Mark say, As they did eat, Jesus took bread, they speak of the commone
or ordinary Supper. But when Luke and Paul say, that he took the Cup after
Supper, they speak of the Paschall Supper, which was eaten before the commone
Supper.

Again, if the reader follow the other opinion, which holds that Christ had
no other Supper that night before the Evangelicall, except the Paschall only;
yet sti'l the answer to Paybody, shall be easy; for whereas he would prove
from those words of Luke and Paul, Likewise also the Cup after Supper, that
when Matthew and Mark say, As they did eat, Jesus took Bread, their meaning is
only this, After Supper, Jesus took Bread: he reasons very inconsideratly:
forasmuch as Luke and Paul lay not of the Bread, but of the Cup only, that
Jesus took it after Supper. And will Paybody say, that he took the Cup so
soon as he took the Bread? If we will speak with Scripture, we must say,
that as they did eat the preceding Supper, (to which we read they sat
down,) Jesus took Bread: for nothing at all interveened betwixt their eating
of that other preceding Supper, and his taking of the Eucharisticall Cup,
there interveened the Taking, Blessing, Breaking, Distributing, and Eating of
the Bread.

Now therefore, from that which has been said, we may well conclude, that our
Opposites have no reason which they do or can object, against the certanty of
that received tenet that the Apostles received from Christ the Sacramental
Bread and Wine, whiles they were sitting. Iren. lib. 2. page 5 5. 361. 362.
Dr. Forbesse himself sets down some Testimonies of Musculus, Chamier, and
the Professors of Leiden, all acknowledging, that the Apostles, when they
received the Lords Supper, were still sitting.

The second answer which our Opposites have given us, follows. Sedere and
Iacere.

Ans. 1. Put the case it were so, yet it has been often answered them, that
the Apostles kept the Tablegesture, used in that Nation, and so are we bound
herein to follow their example, by keeping the tablegesture used in this
Nation. For this keeping of the usual tablegesture of the Nation wherein we
live, is not a forsaking, but a following of the commendable example of the
Apostles: even as whereas they drank the Wine which was drunk in that place,
and we drink the Wine which is drunk in this place, yet do we not hereby
differ from that which they did.

2. The words used by the Evangelists, signify our form of sitting, no less
then the Jewish. Calepine, Scapula, and Thomasius, in their Dictionories, take
(...), and the Latin words Discumbo, Recumbo, Accumbo (used by Arias Montanus,
Beza, Marlorat, Tremellius, etc, in their versions) not only for lying, but
also for such sitting, as is opponed to lying; even for sitting up right at
Table, after our custom.

3. There is not so great a difference betwixt our form of sitting, and that
which the Jews used, as our Opposites allege. For as Alt. dam. page 739.
Didoclavius shows out of Casaubone; their sitting at banquets was only with
a leaning upon the left arm, and so not lying, but sitting with a certain
inclination. When therefore we read of Hadr. ^ua. in nomen^lat.
Lecti discubitorij tricliniares, in quibus inter caenandum, discumbebant, we
must understand them to have been seats, which compassed three sides of the
Table (the fourth side being left open and void for them who served) and
wherein they did sit, with some sort of inclination.

Yet ubi supra page 46.
B. Lindsey is bold to aver, that the usual tablegesture of the Jews, was
lying along: and this he would prove from Amos 6. 4. They lie upon beds of
yvorie, they stretch themselves out upon their couches.

Ans. 1. If we should yield to this Prelate his own meaning wherein he takes
these words, yet how thinks he that the gesture of Drunkards and Gluttons,
which they used when they were pampering themselves in all excess of riot, and
for which also they are upbraided by the Spirit of God, was either the ordinary
table gesture of the Jews, or the gesture used by Christ and his Apostles in
their last Supper?

2. If any gesture at all be touched in those words, which he Prelate cites,
it was their gesture they used when they lay down to sleep, and not their
table gesture when they did eat. For Mitta and Ngheres, (the two words which
Amos uses,) signify a Bed or a Couch wherein a man uses to lay himself down
to sleep. And in this sense we find both these words Psalm. 6. 7. All the night
make I my bed (mittathi) to swim: I water my Couch (Ngharsi) with my tears.
The Shunnamite prepared for Elisha a chamber, and there in set for him a bed
(Mitta) and a Table, and a Stool, and a Candlestick, 2. Kings 4. 10. The
Stool or Chair was for sitting at Table, but Mitta the Bed was for lying
down to sleep. Now the Prelate I hope will not say, that the Lecti
tricliniares, wherein the Jews used to sit at Table, and which compassed three
sides of the same, (as has been said,) were their beds wherein they did lie
and sleep all night.

But, 3. the place must be yet more exactly opened up. That word which is
turned in our English books, they lie, comes from the Radix Schachav, which
in Pagnins Lexic on is turned dormire. We find Ruth 3. 7. Lischcav, which Arias
Montanus turns Ad dormiendum, to sleep Our own English translation. 2. Sam.
11. 9. says, Vriah sleept, where the original has Vajischcav. And the very
same word is put most frequently in the books of the Kings and the Chronicles,
where they speak of the death of the Kings of Judah and Israel. Pagnine
turns it, and dormivit: and our English translators every where, And he
sleept with his Fathers, etc. These things being considered, we must with
Calvine read the place of Amos, thus; Qui decumbunt vel dormiunt in lectis. The
other word which the Prophet uses, is Seruchim. Our English version turns,
They stretch themselves out. But Pagnine, Buxtorf, Tremellius, and Tarnovius,
come nearer the sense, who read Redundantes, Superstuentes, or Luxuriantes.
Which sense the English translation also has in the margen. The Septuagints
followed the same sense, for they read (...) i. e. Living in pleasure. So, 1 Timothy 5. 6. she that lives in pleasure (...). And Iam. 5. 5. Yea have lived in
pleasure (...). The Radix is Sarach, Redundavit, or Luxuriavit. So Exodus 26.
12. Sarach, and verse. 13. Saruach, is put for a surplusage or superfluous
remainder, redundans and supersluum, as Tremellius reads. Now then, it is
evident, that the thing which Amos lays to the charge of those who were at
ease in Zion, in the words which the Prelat cites against us, is, that they
slept upon beds of yvorie (such was their softness and superfluity,) and
swimmed in excessive pleasures upon their couches. And incontinent this filthy
and muddie stream of carnal delicacie and excessive voluptousnesse, which
defiled their beds, led him back to the unclean fountain out of which it
ishued, even their riotous pampering of themselves at Table: Therefore he
subjoyneth, And eat the lambs out of the flock, etc. For Ex mensis itur ad
cubilia, ex gula in venerem says Cornelius a lapide commenting upon the same
Text. Thus have I cleared he place in such sort, that the B. can not but shoot
short of his aims. Wherefore I go on to other replies.

4. If the Apostles when they received the Lords Supper, or the Jews, when
they did eat at Table, were lying all along, how could their mouths receive
drink unspilt? Or how could they have the use of both their arms? which the
B. himself would not (I am sure) gainesay, if he would once try the matter in
his own person, and assay to eat and drink, whiles he is lying along.

5. The words used by Matthew 26. 20. Mark 14. 18. Where they speak of Christ's
sitting down with the twelve, is also used by John. 6. 11. where he speaks
of the peoples sitting down upon the grass, to eat the loaves and fishes: and
will any man think that the people did eat lying along upon the grass, where
they might far better sit upright?

6. If our Opposites like to speak with others, then let them look back upon
the Testimonies which I have alleged before. Iansenius puts discubuisse and
sedisse: Martyr, sedentibus aut discumbentibus. Pareus uses the word
Consedisse. Tractat. die festo virid. p. 256.
M^isuerus, consedendo. Evangelista (says In Luke. 22. 14.
D. Stella,) dicit dominum discubuisse, id est sedisse ad mensam.

7. If they like to speak with themselves: praelect. Tom. 3. page 27.
Camero speaking of Ihone his leaning on Christ's bosom at Supper, says,
Christus autem sedebat medius. partic. def. cap. 3. sect. 4.
D. Mortone says, it can not be denied, that the gesture of Christ and his
Apostles, at the last Supper, was sitting: only says he, the Evangelists leave
it uncertain, whether this sitting was upright or somewhat leaning. It entered
not in his mind to guess any thing of lying. The English Translaters also,
say not that Christ lay down, but that he sat down.

Their third answer is, that Christ's sitting at the last Supper, is no more
examplary and imitable, then the upper chamber, or the night season, or the
sex and number of communicants, etc.

Ans. As for the sex and number of communicants, annot. (...). 1 Cor. 11. 23.
Dr. Fulke rightly observes, that it is not certain from Scripture, that
twelve men only and no women did communicate (as ubi supra p. 11.
B. Lindsey would have us certainly to believe) But put the case it were
certain, See Alt. Da^. p. 742.
yet for this and all those other circumstances, which are not examplary; there
were special reasons either in the urgency of the legal necessity, or in the
exigency of present and accidental occasions, which do not concern us:
whereas the gesture of sitting, was freely and purposely chosen, and so
intended to be examplary, especially since there was no such reason moving
Christ to use this gesture of sitting, as does not concern us.

ubi supra p. 40.
The B. says, that his sitting, at the former Supper, might have been the
reason which moved him to sit at the Eucharisticall Supper. But if Christ had
not purposely made choice of the gesture of sitting, as the fittest and most
convenient for the Eucharisticall Supper, his sitting at the former Supper,
could be no reason to move him, as may appear by this example. There are some
Gentlemen standing in a noble man's waiting room, and after they have stood a
while there, the Noble man comes forth: they begin to speak to him, and as
they speak, still they stand. Now can any man say, that the reason which
moves them to stand, when they speak to the Nobleman, is, because they were
standing before he came to them? So does the B. come short of giving any
special reason for Christ's sitting, which concerns not us. He can allege no
more but Christ's sitting at the former Supper; which could be no reason; else
he should have also risen from the Eucharisticall Supper, to wash the Disciples
feet, even as he rose from the former Supper, for that effect. Wherefore we
conclude, that Christ did voluntarily and of set purpose, choose sitting as the
fittest and best beseeming gesture for that holy Banquet.

Finally, Eccl. Pol. lib. 5 sect. 6.
Hookers verdict of the gesture of Christ and his Apostles in this Holy
Sacrament, is, That our Lord himself did that, which custom and long usage
had made fit: we, that which fitness and great decency has made usual. In
which words, because he imports, that they have better warrants for their
kneeling, then Christ had for his sitting (which is blasphemy) I leave them as
not worthy of an answer. Howsoever, let it be noted, that he aknowledgeth, by
kneeling they depart from the example of Christ.

CHAP. VII.
Other Positions built upon the former ground.

THe third consequence which we infer upon our former This is my body,
enunciatively and demonstratively, in the act of distributing the
Eucharisticall Bread: and far less is it indifferent, so to omit this
demonstrative speech in the distribution, as in place of it to surrogate a
Prayer, to preserve the soul and body of the communicant unto everlasting
life. Our reason is, because Christ (whose example herein we ought to follow,
used no prayer in the distribution, but that demonstrative enunciation, This is
my body. But we go forward.

The fourth Position, which we draw from the same rule, is, that Pareus in 1
Cor. 11. 24.
manibus comminuendo panem acceptum in parts: but had it not ^arved in small
pieces, before it was brought to the Table. Hence de symb. caenae dom. disp. 2.
these. 5.
G. I. Vossius does rightly condemn those, who, though they break the Bread
in multas minutias, yet they break it not in actu sacramentali. Such a breaking
as this, (he says well,) is not Mistica but conquinaria.

The fifth Position drawn from the very same ground, is, that it Take thou,
eat thou, drink thou: because he should follow the example of Christ, who in
the distribution spoke in the plural number, Take ye, eat ye, drink ye. And
he who follows not Christ's example herein, by his speaking in the singular to
one, he makes that to be a private action betwixt himself and the
communicant, which Christ made public and common by his speaking to all at one
time.

How idly Part. 2. page 55. 56. 57.
B. Lindsey answers to these things, it can not but appear to every one who
considers, that we do not challenge This is my body, or for never
pronouncing at all, those speeches in the plural, take ye, eat ye, drink ye;
but for not breaking the Bread in the very act of distribution: for not
propouncing demonstratively those words, This is my body, in the very act of
distribution: for not speaking in the plural number, Take ye. etc. In the very
act of distribution, as Christ did, having no other reasons to move him, then
such as concern us. Why then did not the B. say something to the point, which
we press him with? or shall we excuse him, because he had nothing to say to it?

Now last of all, we find yet another point, whereby the Ibid.
B. departs from the example and mind of Christ. He says, that by the
Sacramental word, This is my body, the Bread is made the Sacrament, etc. And
that without this word, etc. all our Prayers and wishes should serve to no use.
Where he will have the Bread to be otherwise consecrated by us, then it was
consecrated by Christ: for that Christ did not consecrate the Bread to be the
Sacrament of his body, by those words, This is my body, it is manifest, because
the Bread was consecrated before his pronouncing of those words: or else what
means the blessing of it, before he brake it? It was both blessed and broken,
and he was also distributing it to the Disciples, before ever he said, This is
my body Beza, benedictionem express ad panis consecrationem and quidem
singularem, refert:: and omnes nostri referunt, consecrationem intelligentes,
etc, Qua ex communi cibo, in spiritualis alimoniae sacramentum transmutetur,
says com. in Math. 26. 26.
Pareus. Wherefore we must not think, to sanctify the Bread, by this prescript
word, This is my body, but by Prayer and Thansgiving, as Christ did. Our
Divines hold against the Papists, Ames. Bell. ener. Tom. 3. l. 1. c. 2. q. 2.
Verba illa quae in Sacramento sunt consecratoria, non esse paucula quaedam
praescripta; sed praecipue verba orationis, quae non sunt praescripta; And that
Cartwr. on Math. 26. s 6.
through use of the Prayers of the Church, there is a change in the Elements.
defense of the English translation cap. 17. n. 5
D Fulk objecteth against Gregory Ma^tin, Your Popish Church does not either as
the Greek Liturgies, or (...) the Churches in Ambrose and Augustines time: for
they hold that the Elements are consecrated by Prayer and Thanksgiving. I know
none who will speak with B. Lindsey, in this point, except Papists. Yet com.
in Mal. 1. 11.
Cornelius a Lapide could also say, Eucharistiaconficitur and conditur sacris
precibus.

I say not, that these words, This is my body, have no use at all, in

1. That the B. makes not the Word and Prayer together, but the Word alone; to
sanctify the Bread and Wine. ^ow if 1 Timothy 4. 5.
both the Word and Prayer be necessary, to sanctify the creatures for the food
of our bodies, much more are they necessar to sanctify them for the food of our
souls. G. I. Voss. de symb caenae dom. disp. 2. these. 2.
Neque enim solis domini verbis consecratio fit, sed etiam precibus. The
Fathers (says Instit. Theol. lib. 2. p. 258.
Trelcatius) had not only respect to those five words. For this is my body,
dum Eucharistiam fieri dixerunt, mistica prece, invocatione nominis divini,
solemni benedictione, gratiarum action. 2. That he makes not the whole word of
the Institution, to sanctify the Bread, but only that one sentence, This is my
body. Whereas Christ's will is declared, and consequently the Elements
sanctisyed, Ames. ubi supra.
by the whole word of the institution: Jesus took the Bread, and when he had
given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take eat, this is my body which is
broken for you, this do in remembrance of me, etc.

3. That he aknowledgeth not the Bread, though sanctified by Prayer, to be the
Sacrament, except that very word be pronounced, This is my body. Now when a
Minister has from Christ's will and institution declared, that he has
appointed Bread and Wine, to be the Elements of his body and blood: when he
has also declared the essential rites of this Sacrament.

And lastly, when by the Prayer of consecration he has sanctified the Bread
and Wine which are present: put the case, that all this while, those prescript
sentences, This is my body, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood, have not
been pronounced; yet what hinders the Bread and Wine, from being the
Sacramental Elements of the Lords body and blood? It is sounder Divinity to
say, Ames. ubi supra. lib 4. cap. 6.
that the consecration of a Sacrament, does not depend ex certa aliqua formula
verborum. For it is evident, that in Baptism there is not a certain form of
words prescribed, as apud. Ames. ibid. lib. 1 cap. 2.
Bellarmine also proves: because Christ says not: Say, I baptize thee in the
name, etc. But only he says, Baptizing them in the name, etc. So that he
prescribes not what should be said, but what should be done. 3. q. 60. art. 8.
Aquinas likewise holds, that the consecration of a Sacrament is not
absolutely tied to a certain form of words. And so says in Enchir. contr.
inter Evang. and Pontif.
Conradus Vorstius, speaking of the Eucharist. Wherefore ubi supra,
Vossius does rightly condemn the Papists, quod consecrationem non aliis
verbis fieri putant, quam istis, hoc est corpus meum, and hic est sanguis meus.

CHAP. VIII.
That the Ceremonies are not things indifferent to the Church of Scotland:
because she did abjure and repudiat them, by a most solemn and general Oath.

HAving spoken of the nature of things indifferent, and showed which things be
such; also of the rule whereby to try the embraced and used by the Church of
Scotland, which has not only once cast them forth, but also given her great
Oath solemnly to the God of heaven; both witnessing her detestation of the
Roman Antichrist his five bastard Sacraments, with all his Rites, Ceremonies,
and false doctrine, added to the ministration of the true Sacraments, without
the Word of God: all his vain allegories, Rites, Signs, and Traditions,
brought in the Kirk without or against the Word of God. And likewise,
Promising and swearing to continue, as well in the Discipline and use of the
Holy Sacraments, as in the Doctrine of this Reformed Church of Scotland, which
then first she embraced and used, after she was truly reformed from Popery and
Popish abuses. And this which I say, may be seen in the general Confession of
Faith, sworn and subscribed by his Majesty's Father of everlasting memory,
anno 1580, and by the several Parochines in the Land, at his Majesty's strait
command: which also, was renewed and sworn again anno 1596. by the general
Assembly, by provincial Assemblies, by Presbiteries, and particular Parish
Churches.

No Reformed Church in Europe, is so strictly tied by the bond of Scotland. And
who knows not that an Oath does always oblige and bind, Alsted. Theol. cas.
cap. 15. p. 270.
quando est factum de rebus certis and possibilibus, vere de sine dolo
praemeditate, ac cum judicio, just, ad gloriam Dei, and bonum proximi? What
one of all those conditions, was here wanting? Can we then say any less, then
a Decret. Greg. lib. 2. tit. 24. cap. 8
Pope said before us, Non est tutum quemlibet contra juramentum suum venire,
nisi tale sit, quod servatum vergat in interitum salutis aeternae? O damnable
impiety! which makes so small account of the violation of the foresaid Oath,
which has as great power to bind us, as Ios. 9.
that Oath of the Princes of Israel, made to the Gibeonites, had to bind their
posterity, 2 Samuel 21. 1. 2. For it was made by the whole incorporation of this
Land, and has no term at which it may cease to bind. Nay, (in some respects)
it binds more straightly, then that Oath of the Princes of Israel. For, 1.
That was made by the Princes only: this, by Prince, Pastors, and People. 2.
That was made rashly: (for the text shows, that they asked not council from
the mouth of the Lord:) this, with most religious and due deliberation. 3. That
was made to men: this, to the great God. 4. That sworn but once: this, once
and again.

Some of our Opposites go about to derogate somewhat from Iren. lib. 1. cap.
9.. 2.
D. Forbesse speaks to the purpose thus: Iuramentum Gibeonitis praestitum
contra ipsius Dei mandatum, and inconsulto Deo, non potuissent Iosuae and
Israelitae opere persicere, nisi Deus extraordinary de suo mandato
dispensasset, compassione paenitentis illius populi Gibeonitici, and prop ^r
honorem sui nominis, ut neque faedifragorum fautor, neque supplicium
poenitentium aspernator esse videretur.

Ans 1. If the Oath was against the Commandment of God, what dishonor had
come to the name of God, though he had not patronized the swearers of it, but
hindered them from fulfilling their Oath? If a Christian swear to kill a
Pagan, and hereafter repent of his Oath, and not perform it; can there any
dishonor redound thereby to the name of Christ? The D. forsooth must say so.

2. Where has he read of the Repentance of the Gibeonites, which God would not
despise?

3. If an Oath made against the Commandment of God, (the breach of the
commandment being despenced with,) binds so strictly and inviolably, as
that Oath of the Princes of Israel did: how much more ought we to think our
selves strictly and inviolably bound, by the solemn Oath of the Church of
Scotland, which was not repugnant, but most consonant to the Word of God, even
our Adversaries themselves being judges? for thus speaks D. Forb. ibid.. 3.
one of them. Quod autem jurarunt nostrates, non erat illicitum, sed a nobic
omnibus jure praestari potest ac debet. So that the D. has gained nothing, but
loosed much, by that which he says of the Isralites Oath. He has even fanged
himself faster in the snare which he though to escape.

O! but says the D. that which they did either in swearing, or in performing
their Oath, against the express Commandment of God, we may not draw into an
ordinary example.

Ans. It was against the Commandment of God; no man will say, that we should
follow either their swearing or their performing of their Oath. Yet in the
mean time the D. is pressed with this Argument: that if their unlawful Oath
(in the case of Gods dispensation) did bind their posterity, much more does
that Oath of the Church of Scotland (which the D. has aknowledged lawful and
commendable,) bind us this day.

But, 4. Albeit the D. has hereby given us scope and advantage In Ios. 9. 19.
Tremellius has it noted, that Commandment Deuteronomy 20. Whereby the Israelites
were commanded, to save alive nothing in the Cities of the Canaanites, was to
be only understood of such Cities among them, as should make war with them,
and be besieged by them. But the Gibeonites were not of this sort, for they
sought their lives, before the Israelites came to them: and by the same means,
Ios. 2.
Rahab and her Fathers house got their life, because they sought it. com. in
Ios. 9.
Calvine also observes, Iussos fuisse Israelitas pacem omnibus offerre. And
Iunius upon Deuteronomy. 20. distinguishes well two Laws of war given to Israel.

The first is concerning offering peace to all: which law is general and
common, as well to the Canaanites, as to foreign Nations. When thou come
night unto a City to fight against it, then proclaim peace unto it. And it
shall be, if it make thee answer of peace, then it shall be that all the people
that is found therein shall be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve
thee. Which Commandment was afterward observed by Israel, of whom we read.
Ios. 17. 13. and Judge. 1. ^8.
That when Israel was strong, they put the Canaanites to tribute, and did not
utterly drive them out. By ^2 Chronicles. 8. 7. 8.
Solomon also, who did not cut off the people that were left of the Hittites,
and the Amorites, but only made them to pay tribute. That which I say, is
further confirmed by Ios. 11. 19. 20.
another place, where it is said, There was not a City that made peace with the
children of Israel, save the Hivites the inhabitants of Gibeon: all other they
took in Battle. For it was of the Lord to harden their hearts, that they
should come against Israel in battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and
that they might have no favor: but that he might destroy them, as the Lord
commanded Moses. From which words it appears, that if the Canaanites had made
peace with the children of Israel, they were to show them favor; and that they
were bound by the Commandment of the Lord to destroy them, then only and in
that case, if they would not accept peace, but make war; whence it comes,
that the cause of the destruction of the Canaanites, is imputed to their own
hardness and contumacy in not accepting of peace; and not to any Commandment
which God had given to Israel, for destroying them. In a word, it was voluntas
signi, which in Deuteronomy. 20, 10.
one place showed the Israelites, what was their duty, namely to offer peace to
all, even to the Canaanites, and not to cut them off, if they should accept the
peace. But it was, voluntas beneplaciti, which (as we read in Deuteronomy. 7. 2.
another place) decreed to deliver the Canaanites, before the Israelites, that
is, to harden their hearts to come against them in B^ttell, and so to overrule
the matter by a secret and inscrutable providence, that the Israelites might
lawfully and should certainly destroy them, and show them no mercy. Even as
that same God, who by one word showed unto Abraham, what was his duty Genesis 22.
2.
bidding him offer up his son Isaac, by another Word signified unto him,
what he had decreed to be done, Ibid. verse. 12.
forbidding him to lay his hand upon the Lad, or to do any thing unto him. But
this (I know,) will be very unsavory language, to many Arminianized
Conformitans.

The other law of war which Iunius upon Deuteronomy. 20. observes, prescribed to
the Israelites, how they should deal with them who refused their peace. And
here only was the difference made betwixt the Cities which were very far
off, and the Cities of the Canaanites, Deuteronomy. 20. 15. 16. But the first law was
common; as has been proven.

Joseph Hall seems to deny, that the Oath of the Princes of Israel, had any
power to bind, but upon another ground then D Forbesse took to himself. It
would seem very questionable, says contempl. lib. 8. of the Gibeon.
Hall, Whether Joshua needed to hold himself bound to this Oath: for fraudulent
conventions obliege not: and Israel had put in a direct caveat of their
vicinity.

Ans. I marvel how it could enter in his mind to think this matter
questionable, since the violation of that Oath 2. Sam. 21. 1. 2.
was afterward punished with three years famine. Yet let us hearken to his
reasons. One of them is forged: for the Princes of Israel who swear unto them,
put in no caveat at all. Ios. 9. 15.
The Text says only in the general, that they swear unto them. As touching
his other reason, it is answered by com. in Ios. 9.
Calvine. Iurisjurandi religio says he, cousque sancta apud nos esse debet, ne
erroris praetextu a pactis discedamus, etiam in quibus fuimus decepti. Which
that it may be made more plain unto us, let us with the Casuists distinguish
Ames. lib. 4. de consc. cap. 22. q 9.
a twofold error in swearing. For if the error be about the very substance of
the thing, (as when a man contracts marriage with one particular person, taking
her to be another person,) the oath binds not. But if the error be only about
some extrinsecall or accidental circumstance, (such as was the error of the
Israelites, taking the Gibeonites to dwell a far off, when they dweit a
hand,) the Oath cease not to bind.

This much being said for the binding power of that Oath of the Church of
Scotland: let us now consider what shifts our Opposits use Edinbrug does every
where beat upon, in the trace of this Argument: taken out of the 21. Article of
the Confession of Faith, wherein we find these words. Not that we think that
any Policy and an order in Ceremonies, can be appointed for all ages, times,
and places: for as Ceremonies, such as men have devised, are but temporal, so
may and ought they to be changed, when they rather foster superstition, then
that they edify the Kirk using the same. Whereu^on the B. concludes, part. 2.
page 5.
that none who swear the foresaid Article, could without breach of this Oath,
swear that the Ceremony of sitting at the receiving of the Sacrament, could be
appointed for all ages, times, and places.

Ans. None of us denies that Article, we all stand to it. For that which it
pronounces of Ceremonies, must be understoode of alterable circumstances, unto
which the name of Ceremonies is but generally and improperly applied, as we
have showed supra part. 3. c. 7. sect. 5.
elsewhere. Neither can we, for professing our selves bound by an oath, ever to
retain sitting at the receiving of the Sacrament, in this National Church of
Scotland, be therefore thought to transgress the said Article.

For, 1. The Article speaks of Ceremonies devised by men, whereof sitting at
the Sacrament is none, being warranted (as has been showed) by Christ's own
example, and not by man's device.

2. The Article speaks of such Ceremonies, as rather foster superstition,
then edify the Church using the same: whereas it is well known, that sitting
at the Communion did never yet foster superstition in this Church. So that the
B. did very unadvisedly reckon sitting at the Communion among those Ceremonies
whereof the Article speaks.

But the B. has a further aim, and attempteth no less then both to put the
blot of perjurie off himself and his fellows, and likewise (s) telling us,
That no man did by the Oath oblige (r) ubi supra page 16.
himself to obey and defend that part of Discipline, which concerns these
alterable things, all the days of his life; but only, that Discipline which is
unchangeable and commanded in the Word. Yea (says he,) we further affirm,
that every man who swear to the Discipline of the Church in general, by virtue
of that Oath stands obliged, not only to obey and defend the constitutions of
the Church, that were in force at the time of making his Oath; but also to obey
and defend whatsoever the Church thereafter has ordained, or shall ordain,
etc. Whether thereby the former constitutions be established or altered, etc.
The same answer does Iren. lib. 1. c. 9.. 3. 4. 6.
D. Forbesse also return us.

Ans. 1. Here is a manifest contradiction, for the B. says that every man did
by this Oath oblige himself, only to obey and defend that Discipline which is
unchangeable and commanded in the Word. And yet again he seems to import,
(that which Ibid.. 4. and 6.
D Forbesse plainly avoucheth,) that every man obliged himself by the same
Oath, to obey and defend, all that the Church should afterward ordain, though
thereby the former constitutions be altered. The B. therefore does apparently
contradict himself, or at the best, he contradicts his fellow-pleader for
the Ceremonies.

2. That ancient Discipline and policy of this Church, which is contrary to
the Articles of Perth, and whereunto we a^e bound by the Oath, was well
grounded upon Gods Word, and therefore should not have been ranked among other
alterable things.

3. Whereas the B. is of opinion, that a man may by his Oath tie himself to
things which a Church shall afterward ordain: he may consider, that such an
oath were unlawful, because not sworn in judgment, Ier. 4. 2. Now this
judgment which is required, as one of the inseparable companions of a lawful
Oath, is not Executio justitiae, but Iudicium discretionis, as 2a. 2a. q. 49.
art. 3.
Thomas teaches, whom Bullinger and Zanchius Zanch. in 3 um. praec. p. 599.
do herein follow. But there is no judgment of discretion, in his oath who
swears to that he knows not what, even to that which may fall out as readily
wrong as right.

4. Whereas the B. and the D. allege, that every man who swear to the
Discipline of this Church, stands obliged to obey all that the Church
ordained afterward, they greatly deceive themselves:

For, 1. The Discipline spoken of in the promissorie part of the Oath, must be
the same which was spoken of in the assertorie part. Now that which is
mentioned in the assertorie part, can not be imagined to be any other, but that
which was then presently used in this Church, at the time of giving the Oath.
For polan. synt. theol. l 9. cap. 23. page 802. Zanch. in 3. um. praec. p. 599.
an assertorie Oath is either of that which is past, or of that which is
present. And the assertorie part of the Oath whereof we speak, was not of any
Discipline past and away: Ergo. of that which was present. Moreover, 2a ^a. q.
89. art. 9.
Thomas does rightly put this difference betwixt an assertorie and a
promissorie Oath; that the matter of a promissorie Oath is a thing to come,
which is alterable, as concerning the event. Materia autem juramenti assertorii
quod est de praeterito vel praesenti, in quandam necessitatem jam transiit, and
immutabilis facta est. Since then the Discip^ine spoken of in the asseriorie
part, was no other then that which was used in this Church, when the Oath was
sworn: and since the promissorie part is illative upon and relative unto the
matter of the assertorie part: Therefore we conclude, the Discipline spoken of
in the promissory part, could be no other, then that which was then presently
used in this Church, at the swearing of the Oath.

2. Since the doctrine mentioned in that Oath, is said to have been professed
openly by the Kings majesty, and the whole body of this Realm, before the
swearing of the same: why should we not likewise understand the Discipline
mentioned in the Oath, to be that which was practiced in this Realm, before
the swearing of the same?

3. This is further proved by the word Continuing. We are sworn to continue
in the obedience of the Doctrine and Discipline of this Church: but how can
men be said to continue in the obedience of any other Discipline, then that
which they have already begun to obey? This the B. seems to have perceived,
for he speaks only of defending and obeying, but not of continuing to obey,
which is the word of the Oath: and which proves the Discipline there spoken
of, and sworn to, to be no other then that which was practiced in this
Church, when the Oath was sworn. 4. Whiles we hold, that he who svveareth
to the present Discipline of a Church, is no^ by virtue of this Oath, obliged
to obey all which that Church shall ordain afterward; both the School and
the Canon Law do speak for us. The School teaches, Aquin. ubi suprae q.
48. art. 2.
that Canonicus qui jurat se servaturum statuta edita in aliquo Collegio, non
tenetur ex juramento ad servandum futura. The Canon Law judges, decr. Greg.
lib. 2. tit. 24. cap. 35.
that qui jurat servare statuta edita, etc. non tenetur ex juramento ad noviter
edita.

But we are more fully to consider that ground whereby be Bishop ubi supra
page 9.
He still alleges, that the points of Discipline for which we contend, are
not contained in the matter of the Oath. Now as touching the Discipline of this
Church which is spoken of in the Oath ibid. page 12.
he questioneth what is meant by it.

Ans. 1. Put the case it were doubtful and questionable, what is meant by the
word Discipline in the Oath; yet pars tutior were to be chosen; The B. nor no
man among us can certainly know, that the Discipline meant and spoken of in the
Oath, by those that swear it, comprehends not under it those points of
Discipline for which we now contend, and which this Church had in use at the
swearing of the Oath. Shall we then put the breach of the Oath in a fair
hazard? God forbid. For as ubi supra.
Joseph Hall notes from the example of Joshua and the Princes, men may not
trust to shifts for the eluding of an Oath: Surely the fear of Gods name
should make us to tremble at an Oath, and to be far from adventuring upon
any such shifts.

2. The B. does but needlessely question, what is meant by the Discipline
whereof the Oath speaks. For howsoever in Ecclesiastical use, it signify
oftentimes that policy which stands in the censuring of manners: yet in the
Oath, it must be taken in the largest sense, namely, for the wholle policy of
the Church. For, 1. Zanchius gives the name of Ecclesiastical Discipline to
the rites and policy of the Church and laws made thereanent. In 4. praec, col.
763.
The wholle policy of this Church, did at that time go under the name of
Discipline: and those two books wherein this policy is contained, were called,
The books of Discipline. And without all doubt, they who swear the Oath meant
by Discipline that whole policy of the Church which is contained in those
books. Howbeit (as the preface of them sheveth) Discipline does also
comprehend other Ecclesiastical ordinances and constitutions, which are not
inseet^d in them. 2. Doctrine and Discipline, in the Oath, do comprehend all
that, to which the Church required, and we promised to perform obedience.
Ergo, the whole policy of the Church was meant by Discipline, forasmuch as it
was not comprehended under Doctrine.

ubi supra page 10.
The B. objecteth three limitations, whereby he thinks to seclude

First, he says, that the matter of the Oath is the Doctrine and Discipline
revealed to the world by the Gospel: and that this limitation excludes all
Ecclesiastical constitutions, which are not expressly, or by a necessary
consequence contained in the written Word.

2. That the matter of the Oath is the Doctrine and Discipline, which is
received, believed, and defended by many notable Churches, etc. and that this
limitation excludes all these things, wherein the Church of Scotland has not
the consent of many notable Churches, etc.

3 That the Doctrine and Discipline which is the matter of the Oath, is
particularly expressed in the Confession of Faith, etc. and that in this
Confession of Faith, established by Parliament, there is no mention made of the
Articles controverted, etc.

Ans. I might here show how he confounds the preaching of the Evangell, with
the written Word: likewise, how falsely he affirms, that the points of
Discipline for which we plead, are neither warranted by the Scripture, nor by
the consent of many notable Churches. But to the point. These words of the
Oath: We believe, etc. that this only is the true Christian Faith and Religion,
pleasing God, and bringing salvation to man, whilk now is by the mercy of God,
revealed to the world, by the preaching of the blessed Evangel. and received,
believed, and defended, by many and sundry notable Kirkes and Realms, but
chiefly by the Kirk of Scotland; the Kings Majesty; and three Estaites., etc.
as more particularly is expressed in the Confession of our Faith, etc. are
altogether perverted by the B. for there is no Discipline spoken of in these
words, but afterward: why then talks he of a Discipline revealed to the world
by the Gospel, having the consent of many notable Churches, and expressed in
the Confession of Faith? And if the B. will have any Discipline to be meant of
in these words, he must comprehend it under the Christian Faith and Religion,
which brings Salvation unto man. But this he can not do, with so much as the
least show of reason. Thus put we an end to the Argument taken from the Oath of
God: wishing every man amongst us, out of the fear of Gods glorious and
fearful name, duly to regard and ponder the same.

CHAP. IX.
A recapitulation of sundry other reasons against the Indifferency of the
Ceremonies.

THat the Ceremonies are not indifferent to us, or such

For, 1. They who plead for the indifferency of the Ceremonies must tell us
whether they call them indifferent in actu signato, or in actu exercito, or in
both these respects. Now supra cap. 3.
we have proven, that there is no action deliberated upon, and wherein we
proceed with the advice of reason, which can be indifferent in actu exercito:
and that because it can not choose, but either have all the circumstances which
it should have, (and so be good,) or else want some of them, one or more, (and
so be evil.) And as for the indifferency of the Ceremonies in actu signato,
though we should acknowledge it, (which we do not,) yet it could be no warrant
for the practice of them: or else the believing Gentiles might have freely
eaten all meats, notwithstanding of the scandal of the Jews: for the eating
of all meats freely was still a thing indifferent in actu signato.

2. The Ceremonies are not indifferent, eo ipso that they are prescribed 1a.
2oe. q. 95. art. 3.
Aquinas resolves out of Isidore, every humane or positive Law, must be both
necessaria ad remotionem malorum, and utilis ad consecutionem bonorum. The
Guides of Gods Church have not power to prescribe any other thing, then that
which is good and profitale for edifying. For they are set not as Lords over
Christ's inheritance, but as Ministers for their good. It seemed good to the
holy Ghost and to us Act. 15. 28.
say the Apostles and Elders to the Churches, to lay upon you no greater burden
then these necessary things. They would not (you see) have enacted a Canon
about those things, howbeit indifferent in their own nature, had they not
found them necessary, for the eshewing of Scandal. And as for the Civil
Magistrate, he also has not power to prescribe any thing which he pleases,
though it be in it self indifferent: for he is the Minister of God unto thee
for good, Romans 13. 4.
says the Apostle: mark that word for good. It lets us see, that the
Magistrate has not power given him, to injoyne any other thing, then that
which may be for our good. Non enim su a causa dominantur says com. in illum
locum.
Calvine: sed publico bono: neque effraeni potentia praediti sunt, sed quae
subditorum saluti sit obstricta. Now the first and chiefest good, which the
Magistrate is bound to see for unto the Subjects, is, (as com. ibid.
Pareus shows) Bonum spirituale. Let us then, either see the good of the
Ceremonies; or else we must account them to be such things, as God never gave
Princes nor Pastors power to injoyne. For howsoever they have power to
prescribe many things which are indifferent, that is to say, neither good nor
evil in their general nature: yet they may not command us to practice any
thing, which in the particular use of it is not necessary or expedient for some
good end.

3. The Ceremonies are not indifferent, because notwithstanding Si vero ad res
sua natura medias accedat coactio, etc. then say cent. 3 cap. 4. col. 86.
the Magdeburgians, Paul teaches, Coloss 2. that it is not lawful to use them
freely. If ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why as
though living in the world are ye subject to ordinances, (Touch not, taste not,
handle not: which are all to perish with the using) after the Commandments and
Doctrines of men? Hence is Ibid.
Tertullian taxed, for inducing a necessity in things indifferent. Now with how
great necessity and coaction the Ceremonies are imposed upon us, we have made
it evident supra part 1. cap. 3. and 4.
elsewhere.

4. Whatsoever be the quality of the Ceremonies in their own nature, they are
not indifferent to us, neither may we freely practice supra part. 2. cap. 6 and
cap. 9. sect. 4.
elsewhere made evident. Now Cum Adiaphora rapiuntur ad confessionem, libera
esse desinunt apud Park of the Cross cap. 3 sect. 6.
says the Harmony of Confessions. Mark Rapiuntur. Though they get no just
occasion, yet if they take occasion, though unjustly, that is enough to make us
abstain from things indifferent. Etiam ea says de cas. consc. lib. 4. c. 11.
cas. 3.
Balduine, quae natura sua sunt liberae observationis, in statu confessionis,
cum ab adversari^s eorum mutatio postulatur, fiunt necessaria.

5. Things which are most indifferent in themselves, become evil cent. 1. lib.
2 cap. 4. col. 441.
the Centurie Writers: So com. in Romans 14. dub. 1.
Pareus: So de imagine. p. 390.
Zanchius: So exam. part. 1. page 179.
Chemnitius: So Epist. 86. ad Casulan.
Augustine: and so has the 1 Cor. 8. 8. 9.
Apostle taught. But that out of the practice of the Ceremonies there grows
active Scandal unto the weak, supra part. 2. cap. 9.
we have most clearly proven. Wherefore let them be in their own nature as
indifferent as any thing can be, yet they are not indifferent to be used and
practiced by us. And whosoever swalloweth this Scandal of Christ's little ones,
and repents not, the heavy millstone of Gods dreadful wrath, shall be hanged
about his neck to sink him down in the bottomless lake: and then shall he
feel that which before he would not understand.

6. It is not enough for warrant of our practice, that we do those Cor. 6. 12.
But supra part. 2.
I have proven that many and weighty inconveniences do follow upon the
Ceremonies; as namely, that they m^ke way and are the Vshers for greater evils:
that they hinder edification; and in their fleshly show and outward splendour,
obscure and prejudge the life and power of Godliness; that they are the
unhappie occasions of much injury and cruelty against the Faithful Servants of
Christ; that they were bellows to blow up, and are still fuel to increase
the Church-consuming fire of woeful dissentions amongst us, etc. Where also
Ibid. cap. 1.
we show, that some of our Opposites themselves aknowledge the inconveniency of
the Ceremonies. Wherefore we can not freely nor indifferently practice them.

7. These Ceremonies are the accursed monuments of Popish Superstition; supra
part. 3. cap. 2.
I have also made good elsewhere. And in this place I only add, that both
lib. 1. de cult. Dei extern. col. 4^6.
Hieronimus, Zanchius, and Synt. Theol. lib. 9. cap. 38.
Amandus Polanus, do apply this Argument to the Surplice, holding, that
though it be in it self indifferent, yet quia in cultu Idololatrico vest
linea utuntur Clerici Papani, and in ea non parum sanctimoniae ponunt
superstitiosi homines: valedicendum est non solum cultui idololatrico, sed
etiam omnibus idololatriae monumentis, instrumentis and adminiculis. Yea Joseph
Hall himself, does herein give testimony unto us: for upon Hezekias pulling
down of the Brazen Serpent, because of the Idolatrous abuse of it: thus lib.
7. contempl. of the Brazen Serpent.
he notes, God commanded the raising of it, God commanded the abolishing of
it. Superstitious use can mar the very institutions of God: how much more the
most wise and well grounded devices of men? And further in the end of this
treatise entitled, The honor of the married Clergy, he adjoyneth a passage
taken out of the Epistle of Erasmus Roterodamus to Christopher Bishop of Basil,
which passage begins thus. For those things which are altogether of humane
constitution, must (like to remedies in diseases) be attempered to the present
estate of matters and times. Those things which were once religiously
instituted, afterward according to occasion, and the changed quality of
manners and times, may be with more Religion and Piety abrogated. Final^y, if
Hezekias be praised for breaking down the Brazen Serpent, (though instituted
by God,) when the Israelites began to abuse it against the honor of God; how
much more s^h ^m. in Ephesians 5. de Bapt. cap. 7.
Zanchius are our Reformers to be praised, for that they did thus (...). R^tes
instituted by men, being found full of Superstitious abuse, though in
themselves they had not been evil.

supra cap. 5. 6. 7. and part. 1. cap. 8. and 9. sect. 2. and part. 3. cap. 1.
sect. 3. and 4. sect. 5. 28: and part. 2. cap. 9. sect. 14.
I have also showed particularly, how ^dry of the Ceremonies are flat contrary
to the example of Christ and his Apostles, and the best times.

9. The Ceremonies make us also too conform, and like to the Ration. lib. 6.
tit. de die sanct. Pasch.
Durand tells us, that they call Easter by the Greek, and not by the Hebrew
name, and that they keep not that Feast upon the same day with the Jews: and
all for this cause, least they should seem to judarze. How much more reason
have we to abstain from the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, lest we seem to
Romanize? But I say no more in this place, because supra part. 3. c. 3.
I have heretofore confirmed this Argument at length.

10. The Ceremonies as urged upon us, are also full of Superstition: Holiness
and Worship are placed in them: as supra part. 3. c. 1.
we have themselves. Therefore were they never so indifferent in their own
general nature, this placing of them in the state of worship, makes them
cease to be indifferent.

11. The Ceremonies against which we dispute, are more then supra part. 3 cap.
5. and 6. sect. 3. and 7. sect. 5. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14.
has been in all the parts of it fully explained and strengthened by us, which
strongly proves that the Ceremonies are not indifferent, so much as quo ad
speciem. Quare doctrina a nobis tradita (these be de cult. Dei extern. Col. 494.
Zanchius words) non licere nobis, aliis externi cultus Ceremoniis Deum colere,
quam quas ipse in sacris literis per Apostolos praescripsit, firma ac certa
manet.

12. Whatsoever indifferency the Ceremonies could be thought Scotland has
once been purged from them, and has spewed them out with detestation, and has
enjoyed the comfortable light and sweet beams of the glorious and bright
shining Gospel of Christ, without shadows and figures; then shall it appear,
that there is no indifferency in (p) turning back to weak and beggarlv
E^ements. (q) Gal. 5. 9.
And thus says (...) Calv. Epist. and resp. col 119
Calvine of the Ceremonies of the Interim, that granting they were things in
themselves indifferent, yet the restitution of them in those Churches, which
were once purged from them, is no indifferent thing. Wherefore o Scotland!
Revel. 3. 2.
strengthen the things which remain, that are read^e to die.

Ibid. 2. 5.
Remember also from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
works: or else thy candlestick will be quickly removed out of this place,
except thou repent.

FINIS.
Soli DEO Victoria and Gloria.
Faults escaped in Part. 3.
Page Lin. Faults Corrections 74 18 shund should 75 15 diragatione divagatione
77 1 Sacrafictorum Sacrificiorum 11 self left 26 not then 78 16 of 150. fasting
of fasting 79 14 more most 81 41 Samenta Sacramenta at Marg. (d) cap. number. 48.
cap. 5. number. 48. 82 29 formalites formalistes 83 28 and ut 85 41 familiarly
familiarity 86 15 respect respected 87 24 Superior Supprior 31 replieth
rejoyndeth 90 26 courtesy courteous 91 5 it the it has for it the 93 at Marg.
(x) page 14. page 19. 95 12 indecently decently 35 commended commanded 96 18
Goalar jailer at Marg. (c) cap. 7. 6. 7. cap. 7.. 7. 97 2 Technikos (...) 98 37
17. 28. 27. 28. 99 26 for me for, ME 27 for we for, WE 100 16 Pagnime Pagnime
17 susceporunt in solemnem susceperunt in solennem 103 34 convenientum
convenientium 104 in Marg. Sect. 11. Sect. 12. 114 44 logistas Legistas 115 at
Marg. (y) f. 32.. 32. 116 at Marg. (b) 5 neel. page 2. kneel. page 52. 119 21
place not place could not 2^ lest she left to at Marg. ((...)) lib. 2. lib. 3.
1 20 15 without with 132 1 sapore sapere 165 5 him them

The Christian reader will correct the rest.


