GUSTAVUS ADOLPHVS KING OF THE SWEDS, GOTHS, and VANDALS, GREAT PRINCE OF
FINLAND and etc.

Behold the beams of this bright Northen starr Enflamed by Mars, but sweetened
more by Jove. He hands, and Lands subdues by dint of war* But far more hearts
by goodness win^ing love. By both before he came, he overcame. Owing of Victory
as swift, as Fame. Etiam juriusquam venj, vicj



MD sculpsit, Sold by R Mylbourne at the Greyhound in Paul's Church yard

THE NEW STAR OF THE NORTH, SHINING UPON the Victorious King of SWEDEN.

LONDON, Printed by AUGUSTINE MATTHEW'S for ROBERT MILBOVRNE, and are to be
sold at the Sign of the Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1631.

THE NEW STAR OF THE NORTH,
Shining upon the Victorious King of Sweden.
IN the year one thousand five hundred seventy two, there appeared in the
heavens a new strange Light, exceeding in the apparent bigness thereof all the
fixed Stars, and showing forth a bright and Maiesticall luster, which was
beheld, not only in the night time, but also by some at Noone day, and became
at that time the gaze of the world, and task of all the Astronomers of Europe:
many of them in diverse Countries publishing their Observations and Opinions
concerning the nature of this Star, and future events fore-signified thereby:
but none comparably with the most famous Astronomer of our time, called Tycho
Brahe, a Nobleman of Denmark: who, by the advantage of his large and curious
By a strange instinct of providence were those admirable Instruments made and
erected by Tycho a little before the appearing of this Star, as if either the
star had stayed for his tools, or he had foreseen the birth of that star.
Instruments, and incessant pains in Astronomicall Observations, more exactly
then any other sets down the true Place, Form, Motion, and Height of this
wondrous heavenly Lamp. Whereunto he adds also his Judgment what events it
portendeth, like to befall in the years near following the said Apparition.
Accordingly he treats of the said Star in above 500 pages of his Book
called by the name of Astronomica Progymnasmata, which Book in the year 1593
was honored by the Attestation of King James our late Sovereign of blessed
memory, in manner following.

James by the grace of God King of Scots, to the Noble Tycho Brahe, Lord of
Knudstrup, the chief Astronomer of this age.
WHereas We have understood as well by your letters written to Us, as also by
Our servant Sir Peter Young sometime Tutor to King James in his minority.
Young, that you intend to publish those Works of yours, which with invincible
pains, and manifold watchings have been composed by you, namely, those your
excellent Astronomicall Exercises, styled by you, Astronomica Progymnasmata:
Toward the publishing whereof you have made suite unto Us, that We would
vouchsafe thereunto our Commendation to be written by us in Verse, as also our
Royal Privilege to the Impression of them. We have thought fit to affoard
both those favors to your singular good Deserts, and admirable Learning:
whereof we are not now to take notice by other men's report, or by the only
view of your Writings, having in presence with our own eyes and ears been
made spectator and hearer, in that very This house is situated in the Island
called Huenna in Denmark and is furnished with exquisite Instruments and
Engines for Astronomy, which King James did behold in his voyage into Denmark,
when he went thither to bring home his Queen Anne.
House or Tower erected and dedicated by you unto Urania the Heavenly Muse,
where We received such content by that goodly spectacle, and by the learned
conference which you had with us, that it is hard to determine whether be
greater, the delight, or the admiration wherewith we now call the same to
remembrance, etc.

Then follows the Tenor of the Kings Privilege, that none for the space of
thirty years, within the Dominions of Scotland, presume to Print the said
Works, without the consent of the said Tycho, or his heirs.

This Letter of Privilege is dated from his Majesty's Court in Halyroodhouse,
that last of July, 1593, in the six and twentieth year of his Reign

Then the Latin Verses, with this Title.

The commendation of Tycho Brahe his Astronomicall Treatises by James the 6.
King of Scots. In which verses, after the description of the artificial model
of the motion of the Planets, and fixed Stars represented in those
incomparable engines erected in that house by Tycho Brahe, follows also the
intent of Astrologicall prediction in these words.

Vt miti, aut torvo aspectu long ante futura
Praemonstrant, Regnisque Tonans quae fata volutet
Tychonis pandunt operae. Lege, disce: videbis
Mira: domi Mundum invenies, Caelumque libello. etc.
Iacobus Rex F. manuque propria scripsit.
Great Tycho's labors also do foreshow
Events, which shall befall on earth below,
And by disasterous, or fair aspects
What destinyes on Kingdoms God directs.
Read here, and learn. If you for wonders look,
Lo here the world at hand, the heavens by book.
Made by King James, and written with his own hand. Tycho in this his book
after general observations of the motions of the heavens, treats at large of
this much admired new Starr, (whereupon that whole Treatise is entitled De
nova Stella anni 1572.) giving the description of the form, place, motion, and
durance thereof, and demonstrating out of his own and other Astronomers
experimental observations, that it was not seated in the air, but above in
the throne of the highest Heavens, being fixed in the very chair of Cassiopeia
(a figure of Stars so called) he very certainly concludes that it could not
possibly be any Comet supposed to arise out of the vapors of the Earth
elevated into the upper Region of the air (according to the vulgar error of
some Philosophers) but that it was a true and proper Starr, made of heavenly
matter, being none of the original first borne lights made by the hand of God
in the Creation (which possess an indefeisible freehold of their station to
the worlds end) but a kind of adopted child of the heavens, admitted only
for a Termer in that habitation, which he possessed about sixteen Months.

This Star, as it was situated in that part of the heavens, which is called
via lactea (the milk white way) so it is not improbably supposed by Tycho to
have been composed of the matter of that part of the heavens. Wherein Tycho
avoweth that he beholds since the vanishing of that Star a kind of vacuity
or diversity of color in that very place where the Star stood, as showing
the consumption and absence of so much white ethereall matter as was used to
the composure of that Star.

By some it was deemed to be the very same Star, which appeared unto the
Sages of the East at the birth of our Savior, and thereupon coniectured to be
the neerefore-runner of the second coming of Christ, as that was the attendant
of his first coming. Accordingly (as Tycho in this book records) Vir
admodum celebris, and de literis tam sacris, quam philosophicis praeclare
meritus, de hac stella eleganti Epigrammate sic lusit. Theodore Beza a man
famous in this age for his great abilities in learning both of Humanity and
Divinity, made an elegant Epigram, which thus ends.

Et, qui nascenti praeluxit, nunciat idem
Ecce redux reducem rursus adesse Deum.
Hinc igitur felix o turba applaude piorum
Tu vero Herodes sanguinolente time.
That lamp, which at our Saviors birth did burn,
By this returning light shows Christ's return.
O therefore now rejoice ye sons of God:
But bloody Herod tremble at this rod.
As then Tycho, so much more we now may say that Master Beza herein did not so
much intend Historical certainty, as moral application in this his pious
Poetical rapture. And therefore well may we take up his conclusion, as
applyable to the event of Gods mercies to his Church, and judgments against
the enemies thereof.

Our learned and noble Tycho Brahe in the conclusion of this his work setting
down his Astrologicall judgment professes the same to be but coniecturall,
ascribing unto God only the certain foreknowledge of all such events upon
earth, as are caused or intimated by extraordinary apparitions of Comets or new
Stars in the Heavens. And in the leading motives to his opinion herein he
proceeds not boldly like a rash heathenish Starre-gazer, but modestly, warily
and in general.

First, he layth this ground, most probable in it self, that, if there be any
certain portending inclination in such rare and admirable apparitions, surely
most in the most rare and extraordinary. But none like this (says Tycho) was
ever testified by any monument of antiquity to have bin seen in the world,
except that which Pliny avoweth to have been seen and observed by Hipparchus,
who lived toward the end of the Grecian Monarchy about 120. years before the
birth of our Savior.

Now if, by interpretation of event, and consent of the learned, that new starr
then appearing ^id foreshew the declining of the Greek Monarchy and the rise
and strength of the Roman Empire, why may not this new Star being of the like
kind, foreshow also rarissimos, ingentes, atque improvis^s ^ffectus, strange,
great, and unexpected effects to come in the near succeeding times in the
estate of Kingdoms or Commonweals Which what they will be in particular
nulli mortalium satis perspectum iudico. Page 802.
I think no mortal man is of counsel.

Then stepping forwarder to the nearer view of the kind of effects to come, he
gathers out of the Ioviall luster of it ending in a more fiery and Martial
glaring redness that it promises prosperous success, Ibidem.
but intermingled with violence and trouble: as also by the place of it in the
Aequinoctiall Colure (vbi sacrorum indicatio) that some great alterations are
like to befall in matter of Religion, Page 803.
so that those devises, which by outward show and Pharisaicall hypocrisy have
long time bewitched ignorant people, shall come to their full point and end.

And because the Star fixed near the Colure, yet possessed the first degree of
Aries being the place of the Spring when the day gets advantage of the
night, thereby is portended some new light which shall abate and vanquish former
darkness. Ibid.


These generals lead but a little way unless some direction follow of quando
and vbi by the maine index of this Dyall pointing unto time and place.

As for the time, Quando.
he proiecteth first by the direction of the Poles of the world, Page 804.
Si ex Astrologicis temporum mensurationibus prima initia quando aliquatenus
huius Stellae significata pullulabunt coniectare licebit ex directione
Coniunctionis maximae (cui Stella haec Prodromus) etc. If we take leave by
Astrological calculation of time, to make conjecture concerning the first
beginning of that which is portended, we guess it will be in the bud about
nine years after the great Conjunction following shortly after the appearing
of this Star. And so in Computation with the place of the new Star, this
designed time will fall out at the accomplishment of the third Septenary of
years, (viz. the 21. year after the first appearing of the Star) being the
year 1592. But if one and twenty years complete, (which Tycho seems to
intend) be added, the time will reach rather to the year of our Lord, 1593.

The second way of this Calculation of the time, Page 805.
is by the Direction of the Zodiaque, from the place of that Great Conjunction
by the Longitude of the new Starr unto the seventh Degree of Taurus, which
Conjunction happens near the end of the seventh Septenary, 48 years after
the first appearing of the New Starr, viz about the year, 1620. About that
time, says Tycho, in all probability will inure the vigor and operation of
this new Starr, Annis praesertim aliquot sequentibus, especially some years
after that time, post, viz. completum a nato Christo annum. 1632. aut circiter,
namely after the year of Christ 1632. or thereabouts.

As for the designing of the place where the influence of this Starr shall
work, Vbi.
first in general it must needs concern the Northern part of the World on
this side of the Equator, because the Starr appeared and dwelt in this
Hemisphere: and consequently must be held to have most operation where it was
most vertical; that is on those parts where the Star was most direct over the
head, and sent forth the beams of his influence most perpendicular. Not that
mutations must needs happen in those places only, or necessarily in those very
places, but (as may well be noted out of the words of Tycho) prae caeteris
aliquid ominis those parts are ominous above the rest: Page 808.
insomuch as INDE mutationum tantarum occasio atque author expectanda: from
thence are to be expected the occasion and author of so great alterations.
Which much conduces to the interpretation hereafter following.

Now because the fixed seat of the new Star was in distance from the Equator
Northward about 62. degrees, that tract of the earth which lies in the Northen
latitude of 62. is to be taken as principally intended: which in our part of
the known world rangeth along from the West through Norvegia, Swedia,
Finlandia, Livonia, Moscovia, and Tartaria. In all which Countries those
parcells which lie under the forenamed latitude, had once every day that new
Star in their Zenith, that is just over the head. But in this Diurnall motion
how and upon what point of this circle to fix the dint of the influence, Hic
labor, hoc opus est. There lies the business.

Learned Tycho guided his Contemplation by the very first New Moon after the
first appearing of the Starr: which New Moon fell upon the fifteenth of
November, seven hours thirteen minutes in the afternoon, accounting the
time by the Meridian of Tycho's Island: at which instant the new Starr was in
the Meridian of 53 Degrees from the West, and so became in that instant
vertical and highest to that place of the earth, which lies in the longitude
of 53, and latitude of 62: being situated in respect of the City of London
twenty Degrees more Easterly, and about ten Degrees more Northerly.

So now, in regard of the aim of this eiaculation of prediction, the parallel
of 62 may be called the Butt, and the Meridian of 53, (where it cutteth that
parallel) the white, or mark designed. For the finding whereof, and touching
it with the finger of Evidence, we need no other guidance, then Cogimur e
tabula pictos ediscere Mundos.
Of all the world the several parts by name,
We cannot choose but learn by tabled frame.


View we therefore our most approved and current Mapps, whether Universal, or
National and particular, wherein the several Countries are Geographically
distinguished by the regular lines of latitude (which is the situation from
South to North) and of longitude (being the respect unto West and East) and
therein shall we find, that the very place of this forenamed posture is either
a part of Finicus Sinus, the Bay or Gulf of Finland, or some border of the
Land and Towns seated upon that Gulf.

If we take counsel of Gerad Mercator in his Atlas Major either by viewing his
Mapps or reading the numbers designed in his Alphabeticall tables, he affords
us at least 4 degrees to spare, whereby the verge of Finland is extended
Eastward in the parallele of 62. beyond the Meridian of 53. as evidently
appears by the situation of Kinaveb Egrepe, Iegaborg, and other Towns near
bordering. Some other Mapps draw those parts a little more to the West: which
is not to be accounted strange, when as in many parts of the world (especially
those that are less frequented by travelers, or less furnished with
inhabitant Astronomers) the true longitude is not so certainly known, as the
latitude. And therefore a small diversity of this kind occurring in variouse
Mapps is not much to be stood upon.

True it is that our Tycho expresses that designed concurrence of longitude
and latitude, as lighting upon Illam Moscoviae plagam, qua cum Boreali and
ortum simul respiciente Finlandiae part coniu^gitur: That coast of Muscovy,
which bordereth upon the Northerly and Easterly part of Finland. Whether ledd
thereto by the composure of Mapps in his time, pulling Moscouy more West: or
thinking that huge continent of Moscovy and other Eastern parts more fit for
the title of Magna septentrionis domus, The great house of the North hereafter
mentioned in Sybills prophecy: or lastly (which is most likely) for that diverse
distasts and quarrels happening between his Sovereign the King of Denmark,
Tycho once was feign to hide his head for bringing too nere home a praediction,
which afterward proved true.
and the neighboring King of Sweden, it had bin over open to envy and
iealousies to have devoted in direct terms any part of the Dominions of the
Sw^de for the seminary of great and violent alterations: and so he chose rather
to express the place by the phrase of Russia bordering upon Finland, then of
Finland bordering upon Russia.

Suitable heereunto is that his modest or cautelouse demurre, wherewith the
events of this sign are by his penn tenderly tacked upon the designed place,
with submission to other men's judgments, in these words. An igitur HINC
tantarum turbarum and mutationum, Page 810.
quae per hoc insolens ostentum innuebantur, primae occasiones pullulabunt,
atque post-modum in alias Mundi Plagas late magna and diuturna vi
disseminabuntur, aliis expendendum decidendumque relinquo. I leave it to be
weighed and determined by other men's judgments, whether or no the first
occasions of those great turmoyles and alterations employed by this
extraordinary wondrous Starr, shall budd forth out of this place designed by
me, and shortly after be shed abroad thence into other Regions of the world
far and wide, with great and durable forces. Thus Tycho Brahe.

It is a true saying, that in predictions (especially humane, and coniecturall)
event, and experience is the best Comment. If therefore about a place and time
thus decyphered there now appear evidence of unexpected immutations, being the
streams issuing from a fountain lately breaking forth and getting more
strength with full Tide of prosperous success, why may not we acknowledge
herein Gods extraordinary handiwork as performed in the event, so also
fore-described in the heavenly Characters of such miraculous signs?

If Eclipses of the two great lights, and conjunction of Planets under some
portions of fixed star, have at any time, or may portend events upon earth,
much more may new Stars molded by the hand of God in the highest heavens
challenge the like prophetical language. Those Eclipses and conjunctions are
merely natural, and have their certain revolution, and concurrence, which
many years before their apparition may be infallably set down by the
observation of Gods ordinary Power in the motion of the creature: but this
admirable Sarr in the essence, and place thereof shows the finger of God,
reaching higher then to the support of Natural agents: and therefore much more
probably may be presumed to be an object, not only of the eye by beauty and
luster, but also of the understanding, in being a messenger of Divine future
operation.

In the times now mentioned by the learned Tycho, and in and about the places,
whereupon he especially fixes the influence of this new Herald of Heaven, we
can find no other fit subject of application then the new risen Starr radiant
in virtue and goodness, sparkeling with the beams of Martial Valor, the
prosperous and admired Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, who by his manifold
and sudden Conquests is now made the spectacle of the Christian World, beheld
and spoken of with no less admiration, then that new Starr of the North, which
seems to be his forerunner.

As for the time, the three terms of revolution intended by Tycho, viz. the
years 1593. 1620. 1632. or therabouts may decipher him, the first (well near)
his Birth, the second his Ingresse, the third his Progress in successful
Conquests.

Then likewise the place pointed at by the Heavens, or rather appointed by the
God of heaven to be the Seminary or Nest, which shall send forth the Author of
great alterations is found to be the Country of Finland, a part of his
Dominions belonging to the Kingdom of Sweden, and recited in his Title, Great
Prince of Finland

Seeing that time and place so conveniently concur with incomparable success
in his Victories, (wherein he deporteth himself so admirably, that it is hard
to say, whether be greater his Valor in subduing, or his Justice in the
undertaking, and well using his Victories to the relief of the oppressed we
shall not need here to describe the particulars of his Atchiuements blown
abroad by the Trumpet of public Fame, and ecchoed unto us by the weekly
tell-tale Corantoes Such clear beams of Virtue and Glory Envy it self can
neither outface nor suppress.

Yet to set under one view some part of that, which otherwise may dispersedly
be gathered by certain Information, we will take leave to shadow out some few
lineaments of his worth and happiness.

Gustavus Ericus King of Sweden (the first crowned Protestant of our Age) was
his Grandfather: to whom that Kingdom owes their liberty from the yoke of
the Danes: whose son Charles likewise freed them from the pressures of the
Polacks. This Charles married the daughter of Adolph Duke of Holstein, and by
her begat this Gustavus Adolphus, borne at Stockholm the last of November
1594, stilo vet. Who thus by two descents is in blood and generous disposition
qualified to be a Restorer of Liberties.

About the seventeenth year of his age, Anno 1611, he was by his Father
Charles made Colonel of a Troop of Horse in the Wars against Denmark.

When he had settled Peace in his own Country, by composing of differences
and quarrels risen between him and the King of Denmark, about the year 1614,
upon refusal made unto him of re-imbursment of l^rge sums of money laid out
by the State and Subjects of his Kingdom, and lent to the Emp^rour of Muscovy,
he undertook upon that just quarrel to make an Inroad upon the adjacent
Dominions of that potent Emperor, and taking his March from Finland with
prosperous success he in a short time conquered the mighty Province of Ingria,
or Ingerland: and among the rest he took the famous strong ^ort of Kexholm,
and shortly after by the med^^tion of King James our late Sovereign concluded
a Peace between himself and the Emperor of Muscovy upon very good and
honorable Conditions: whereby he not only held that Country which he had
seized on, but also received of the Moscovite a great sum of money for his
expense in that war. So that now he is possessed of some part of that vast
Continent of Moscovia, whitherward our Tycho Brahe (as before is noted) would
seem to extend more Easterly the point designed by this Calculation.

And consequently if (supposing, but not granting) we should stretch the
foreinstanced longitude of 53* into this border of Muscovy, then may we thus
understand these words of Tycho, inde initia mutationum, thence or from that
place shall issue out the beginnings of alterations, namely, that other
alterations shall be produced in other places and regions, but by him, who
shall very there in Russia make the Commencement of his exploits and Conquests.
For that footing and ground gained there may well be accounted the first stepp
to his greatness, In this construction Finland may be the place a quo whence,
and Russia the place both in quo and a quo where, and whence great alterations
may be said to have their cruption.
and foundation of his other conquests, not only in order of time, but also in
the inhabling him and fleshing his hardy Finlanders for further undertakings.

About the beginning of the year 1618. he entered Livonia against the Polonian,
and proceeded in that invasion so prosperously by several conquests, in diverse
places, that by the year 1624. that whole country was made subject unto him.

About the year 1626. he entered Prussia, and surprised the Fort of Pelavia, at
once making himself Master of all the trade of the rich Cities of Coningsberg
and Elbing: The Finlanders and other Sweds are his toughest helps, being best
able to endure the cold and hardship of Winter-warfare.
which enterprise he undertook with his own native Sweds and Finlanders (who
in that employment did not exceed the number of 9000. men) but with so
wonderful success, that this achieuement may rightly be counted the rise and
growth of his greatness.

With this small force he marched toward Elbing, and whilst the Burgers of
that Town were treating a neutrality with his Counsel in the Tents, he, with
some few Musketers attending him, boldly entered the city, which with fear and
amazement admitted him upon the only command of his word, and confident
Majesty of his countenance: the walls thereof being at that instant laden with
armed men well appointed for defense against him, who then beholding his
entrance durst not discharge a bullet, or make any other resistance against him.

This City he made his Magazin for the war, and departing thence he took the
great Castle of Mariburg, being the seat of the Teutonique Order of Knighthood.
Where not having eight thousand foot he entrenched himself, fighting in the
face of forty thousand Polonians, and ten thousand Imperialls: and so tired and
wore out the great army of the enemy, that they not only by the mediation of
our dread Soueraign King Charles, in the year 1629, submitted unto his
conditions of Peace very honorable on his part, but also yielded unto him a
great part of that Territory of Prussia.

The Emperor having thus made war against him in Prussia, and oppressed the
King of Denmark, the Duke of Pomerania, and Mechlenburg, and the King of Swedes
enemies being likely to make themselves Master of the Baltique Sea, not only to
his ruin, but also to the endangering of Denmark, and endammaging of Great
Britain and Holland, the King of Swedens subjects being unjustly spoiled of
their goods, and forbid coming on the German shore to trade, the Town of
Stralsond having formerly grievously complained unto him of the wrongs and
danger wherewith they were encompassed; upon these and other necessary causes
(as by his published Manifesto may appear) he entered Germany in the year
1630, and took from the invading Imperials the Isle of Rugia, a place of great
importance, which serves him for a safe station for his shipping. And then
winning a strong Fort on the maine land (on purpose by the oppressors of the
liberties of Germany then built against him,) himself landed at Stralsond in
June, 1630.

In December following he took the Towns of Griffenhagen, and the Fort of
Gartz in the face of the enemies Army, and following the Victory chased the
Army of Walensteine Duke of Frieland, which having possessed the City of
Franckford on the Oder, and Lantz-bergh, he took the one by assault in the open
day, when it had 6000 old Soldiers in Garrison, and the King not above seven
thousand to attempt it.

From thence marching without delay the very next day to Lantzbergh with two
thousand foot and a thousand horse he took that strong pass by composition
yielding to him upon the only motive of his reputation, out of which Marched
four thousand foot, with shame and astonishment beholding so small a number,
to whom they had yielded themselves.

In this present year 1631. the defeat given by him (joining with the Duke of
Saxony) in open field and pitched Camp, may be called the down weight of his
valor, casting on his side the balance of predominant success: which was
achieved upon the seventh of September last near Lipsich in Saxony, in a
field called Godsacre, being the self same plot of ground wherein the Emperor
Charles 5. took Frederick Duke of Saxony, and Philip Lantgraue of Hessen
prisoners in battle, devesting thereupon the Duke of Sax. of his Duchy and
Electorat; which is now by revolution of Time repayed by this Defeat upon the
very same place.

Tillies Army consisting of 44000 fighting men, the King of Swedens and the
Duke of Saxonies Army in all of 38000. In which battle the Duke of Holstein
leading the left wing of Tillyes Army, gave the onset upon the Kings Army, and
was taken prisoner within short time; the Duke of Sax. being hotly charged by
Tilly, left him elbowroom in the field together with three of the Saxon
Regiments that stood to it. And so the King having now not above 18000 fighting
men, set courageously upon Tilly, putting him to flight, entered upon his
Ordnance, Wagons, and Tents as they stood furnished with meat upon the Tables
prepared by them, who now had no list to return to that Supper, but rather
left it to those for whom God had provided it.

The flying enemy was shrouded by the black mantle of the night, so that the
conquering King could not further pursue his Victory till the next morning,
when drawing out a thousand horse he in person followed them eight Dutch miles,
cutting off 1000 of the foot, and taking prisoners 3000 more.

The loss on Tyllies part is esteemed at 18000, whereof slain 8000, and taken
prisoners 10000. The loss on the other part not above 1200 men as by the more
strange and truer Computation is avowed. The Kings Motto or Word was Deus
nobiscum, God on our side. Tillies Word, Sancta Maria, Saint Marie.

I think more foreboading conjecture might have been made out of the unequal
counterpoise between these two tutelary Patrons or protectors, then out of the
auspicious flying of a great troop of birds in that field, by some observed
upon that very morning, instantly before the Armies set up their rest in the
place, namely overflying the place of Tillyes army, and lighting in the place
of the King of Swedens army.

The ancient Latins called that augustum, which was bonis avibus gestum,
acheived according to the foresignification made by the lucky and prosperous
flying of birds, and in that sense may this victory be called augusta, though
contra ipsum Augustum in his principal commander of his forces defeated, and
ruined.

Some have observed the symbolizing and easy transmutation between the names
Augustus and Gustavus, inferring thence that whereby his friends would heap
upon him more glory, and perhaps his enemies more envy. But those that look up
higher to read Characters written in the Heavens, and gilded with the beams
of new Stars, will not so low, and upon so light ground, as Anagrams are, lay
the foundation of predictions: and therefore neither will we insist upon that
menacing sentence, Te debellabit aversus DEVS, denoting the SVED.

And because the late conjunction and association between him and the Duke of
Saxony, has bin and is a strong means of the late further growth of his
strength and progress in Victories, it is here to be observed and accounted no
small part of the fore-spoken alterations, that the said Duke, (formerly being
a kind of dormant Neutral, and thereby giving way to the encroachments of the
enemy) is now awaked, and not only sees the danger whereunto the Liberties of
Germany were cast, but also reaches forth his helping hand and ingageth his
strength toward the recovery of the ancient and just Liberties, therein
commenting by action upon the Prognosticall speculations written about sixty
years ago by Paulus Grebnerus, a man of the same Astronomicall profession
with our Tycho Brah^; but what authority or reputation his writings deserve, I
leave to the judgment of others Penes authorem esto fides

This Grebner wrote a l^rge book of predictions which he is said to have given
to Queen Elizabeth, our late Sovereign of blessed memory. The original whereof
written by the hand of the Author, was by the worthy and Reverend Doctor Nevil
given and put into the Library of ^rinitie College in Cambridge, whereof he
was Master, and a most generous and edifying Benefactor unto it. In the 261
page of that Book he thus, Bohemia Tumultus et bellicosos strepitus magna cum
defectione suorum sentit. Tempore ill Caesar Electoris Saxoniae naso Hispanica,
fraudulenta, dolosa, blanda, insidiosa imponit conspicilla, quorum natural
tandem ipse pern^scit, proprioque edocetur experimento, quod haec Austriaca
conspicilla poppysmata et phalerata verba sceleratae et proditoriae sint
practicae: quibus si vltra fidem habere duceret, seipsum, conjugem, natos, and
vniversos Christianismi confederatos in perniciosum praecipita et exitium.

What revolt of Bohemia may here be intended, let others make construction: but
sure this present Duke of Saxony being now himself a grand agent both in
opposing Tilly, and also since that in vnyoaking the chief City Prague, with
other Towns in Bohemia, demonstrateth that he has recovered the right use of
his eyes, by casting away those false Spectacles, which were put upon his nose
by some cunning hand.

Out of this Grebner diverse other parcells have bin transcribed and much
enquired after, as applyable to these times and to the mutations present or
probably expected in Germany and other countries. But I forbear inserting
them, because they contain confused and ambiguous matter, and may happily
seem as well to point at other times, Greb. Page 173.
as this, in which S^ecus felicisimo successu class and suo populo terra
marique in hostem vtetur, The Swed shall with most happy success employ his
Navy and people by sea and land against the enemy. Yet verily the attribute of
felicissimus successus may by this Gustavus, for the unmatchable prosperity of
his attempts, be challenged as a proper Character, in which neither any other
Swed, nor man for many ages can pretend partnership with him, much less
eminency above him.

Whilst these things are under the pen, the further process of his victories
comes to our ears, and, among the rest, his entering of Franc^ford upon the
Mein being the chiefest Mart-town of Europe, and the seat of the Crown of the
Emperor. Which Town he rather won by love, and respect to his honor, then
subdued by force; The gates whereof willingly opening to admit him, he made
entrance thereinto the seventeeth of November, Through which Town he passed
with all his army in array; but with so good order and discipline, without
violence or wrong to any of the inhabitants, that it seemed rather a pomp of a
native King, then an enforcement by a foreiner.

Of this, and the like his seisures, or entries into the many other yiedling
cities and towns it may be said, that he speaks by action, what formerly was
uttered by the pen of one of his predecessors, Theoderick King of the Goths
(and sharer in Roman Empire with Justinian) He in one of his Rescripts, or
letters Missiue thus, Vide Aurel. Cassiodorum variarum lib. 3. Ep. 43.
Aliorum forte Regum praelia captarum civitatum aut praedas appetunt, aut
ruinas: nobis propositum est (Deo iuvante) sic vincere, vt subiecti se doleant
nostrum dominium tardius acquisisse Wars undertaken by other Kings for the
most part tend to the destruction, or sackage of those cities, whereof they get
the mastery: but our purpose is, by Gods assistance, to conquer in that manner,
that the subdued may think themselves ill apayed, that they did no sooner cast
themselves into our hands.

Add we hereunto, for conclusion of this present application, the happy
protection which has accompanied him in the midds of extreme dangers, which
argues that the hand of Gods providence has both appointed and safe conducted
him to become an instrument of great mutatio^s in melius for the bettering the
estate of some parts of Christendom.

Warfare is to all militant men a perpetual contexture of the netts of danger,
but most to Princes undertaking in person: With this enemy has this King often
grappled.

First in the ru^iments of his prowess, and budd of his strength, when he was
but seventeene years old, in the wars between his father and the King of
Denmark he was hard put to it, fighting upon the ice, when he very hardly
escaped drowning: and being then put to the worse, has made good that
observation of an ancient warrier, that none can be a good leader in the wars
that has not sometime bin well beaten by the enemy. This hans^ll therefore may
well be accounted the apprentisage of hardship to him.

Some of the Indian people distinguish their Noble from the Vulgar by raced
marks and figures imprinted in the skin; Surely more proper marks of
nobleness in warriors are the scarrs of wounds casually inscribed on the body.

Namque Sidonius Apollinaris Carm 23.
in corpore fortium virorum
Laus est amplior amplior cicatrix.
The sum of honor in the Wars
Is scor'd by characters of Scarrs.
The badge of this acquired honor this King bears in his Royal limbs,
peirced with shot more then once: such rude messengers from the enemy having
dared to make forcible entry in his belly, and shoulder, where they yet
continue their lodging, and have the honor to enter with him into many a
surprised or yiedling City and Castle, like the dull bittle, that mounted high
by cleaving to the Eagles wing. These uneasy guests cannot by their gravity
slack his Martial motion, but rather by the sense of them add a spur to his
valor, and more force to the bullets, which he sends back in requital.

In his wars in Prussia at Darsaw he was surprised by some that issued out
from an ambuscado, and so twice within a few hours fell into the hand of the
enemy: and was again as often rescued by his own, partly valor, partly
ingenious and nimble slight, as also by the casual approach and assistance of
one of his soldiers, by whom, for concealment of his person, he was in the
action called Brother. And this soldier presently after being himself taken
by the enemy, was by the Kings own hand mutually rescued: who thereupon by the
rescuing King was saluted in these friendly words, Quit brother, now you and I
are even.

Of which accid^nt may be made this typical construction, that he is ordained
to relieve those that defend and assist him: and that his abiding the adventure
of captivity, tends to the redeeming of others out of bondage.

Moreover, in this or some other conflict audacious danger aspired so high, as
to strike at his head: but missing the aim it hit his Hat: which being
stricken off it came into the hand of the enemy, and being known, was
afterward sent to Vienna the chief City in Austria, and received there with
joy and congratulation, as a Trophey of victory against him, and pledge of
fu^ure getting the head that wore it.

Quo nunc Turnus ovat spolio, gaudetque potitus.
When Turnus gat young Pallas in his power, Virg. Aeneid. 10.

He from him hent the b^ssed belt he wore.
And thus possess of that hostile spoil
In triumph bears it about a while.
But what follows hereupon?
Turno tempus erit etc.
The time will come, when he shall curse the day
Wherein he took and bare that spoil away.
That Hat is like to be purchased at a dearer rate, then some Kings have sold
their Crowns.

Ille oculis postquam saevi monumenta doloris
Exuviasque Aeneid. 12. ad finem.
hausit, surijs accensus, and ira
Terribilis, Tune hinc spolijs indute meorum
Eripiare mihi?
Aeneas, when he spyed that well known Belt,
Revived grief, and anger inly felt:
And flaming with revenge, Shall thou (quoth he
Clad with my friends array escape from me?
The blood of heroical Aeneas boiled at the triumphant possession of a piece of
furniture surprised from, not himself, but his friend; not living, but slain;
How much more may a generous victorious Spirit resolute by strong hand and
Martial inroad to recover that upper couerture of his own head?

It has bin reported that thence it is transported into Italy, and bestowed on
the wooden Lady of Loretto, for whose wear it is as fit, as the Gown
bequeathed to her by that Father of Critiques, of whom it is fitly said, that

Criticus virilem Virgini togam legans
In morte fecit Lipsius soloecismum.
A dying Latinist of great renown
Unto the Virgin Mary gave his Gown.
And was not this false Latin so to join
With Female gender that case Masculine?
But now leaving this digression concerning his Hat, and returning to the
Crowned head that wore it, we referr to the contemplation of judicious men,
whether a man thus armed with protection for escape of many more capital
hazards, then here are, or can be, recited, admired unto astonishment for his
great and sudde^ Victories beloved for his virtues both Christian, Moral, and
Military, justly styled the releever of the wronged, and restorer of oppressed
Princes and Liberties, concurring so near in time and place with this
fore-described Celestial calculation, be not to be accounted that Stellae
filius, and aureus Coeli partus, the child of that privileged Starr, and the
golden issue of Heaven, glittering with the beams of high attempts and
matchless Honor.

Do not these present alterations make way to a fuller accomplishment in the
time now by computation approaching, namely the year 1632. and the years
instantly following after the same? wherein may be made good not only the
general predictions of our Astronomer, but also in particular (among other
redresses befitting this Conquerors greatness, and goodness) the restitution
of some other divested and dejected Princes to their native dignity, and
undoubted inheritance.

But (may some say) do all the hopes or fears of the future success of these
great alterations depend upon the weak string of such Apparitions, whose
activity in such events perhaps is either none at all, or utterly unsearchable
by the wit of man? And if searchable, why not rather fetched from some later
Comets or pretending Stars, which since this have appeared within our Horizon?

Respon. 1.
Not merely on such farfetched and coniecturall premises relyeth the
expectation of the consequents betyding these times. For if, abstracting all
conjectures from above, and supposing there were no such fore-significations,
we confine our thoughts only to the consideration of near by-passed, and now
present events, and thereby in the balance of humane probability weight out the
expectation of the future, we shall need none other bond of assurance then the
pledge of Gods providence, whereon we are to rely: and whereunto all forenamed
conjectures are but accessory and supernumerary.

Joel 2. 30.
In which sense it is no impiety literally to interpret those words I will show
wonders in the heavens and in the earth, partly of that flaming sword-like
Comet, that appeared, as a forewarner of the destruction of Jerusalem. Sutably
hereto why may not some significant power be granted to this high heavenly,
more then ordinary, spectacle? Why not thence modest, and sober collection, and
probable inference be made? The principles whereof, and manner of deduction
from them are not here suppressed, but, according to our authors process,
laid out fairly above board: To which way of inference the Christian Reader
may affoard what parcel of credit he shall think fit to meat out by the rule
of piety, and liberty of opinion. Valeat vt valere poterit. Let it float as
far as this water will bear it.

Lastly concerning other later Comets, comparison whereto they may be content
to be called, as puisnees, and afterlings, so also minorum gentium, petits of a
lower form.

Diverse of them were observed by our Tycho in his life time, and surnamed by
him rather Comets, then stars. But this especially he judged to be forespoken
of by one of the Sibylls in that prediction, Sibylla Tiburtina.
which in the year 1520. was found under ground in Suitzerland engraven in a
marble stone in very ancient latin characters, Vide Cornel. Gemmam de divinis
characterismis.
in this manner of Orthography Orietour sydous in Europa soupra Yberos ad
magnam septentrionis domum: colus radii orbem terrarum ex impreviso
illoustrabunt: etc. A starr shall arise in Europe over the Iberi at the great
house of the North: whose beams shall suddenly (or unexpectedly) enlighten the
whole world.

In regard of the heavens the seat of this admirable starr (whereof we have
treated) is evidently domus Septentrionis, being in Cassiopeia, not above
eighteen degrees distant from the North Pole: to which neernesse none of the
later did approach: and in respect of the subject place in the earth,
correspondent thereto, that tract, whereof formerly we have discoursed, is by as
good right magna domus Septentrionis, the great house of the North.

It befits not (nor is it easy) to determine who are these Iberi, and
accordingly how supra may be diversely construed, nor what is meant by the other
words of Sibyll, Eodem fere tempore, hoc demorso sydere, coaevum quoddam eious
loumen long ardentioribous Mavortis ignibus exardescens Antipodum finibus
occludet Imperium. But undoubtedly in this Sibylline prediction must be
intended (as the following parts show) not so much (or not only) portentum
coeleste, a bright visible in the heaven, as Stella Moralis a radiant,
admirable, potent atcheiver on the earth. Which who, what, when, or where he
is, or shall be is certainly known only Stellarum domino, stellificique Deo.

to him that framed this new great light in the heavens, and ordained the same
unto ends best known to his heavenly Wisdom.

Prase him all ye Stars, Psalm. 148. 3.
and Light.

Theodahadus Rex.
COgnoscite arma nostra pro salute vestra destinata, Cassiodorus Variarum. lib.
13. ep. 18.
vt, qui vos tentaverint appetere, divino auxilio manus eis Gothorum-debeat
obviare. Be it known to you, that our Army is ordained for your safety: So
that whosoever shall be so bold as to set upon you, shall find that the
warrlike troops of the Goths are pressed and ready by Gods help to encounter
them.

FINIS.

